ARUNDELL OF WARDOUR, THOMAS ARUNDELL, 1ST BARON (c. 1562-1639), son of
Sir Mathew Arundell of Wardour Castle in Wiltshire, a member of the
ancient family of Arundells of Lanherne in Cornwall, and of Margaret,
daughter of Sir Henry Willoughby, was born about 1562. In 1579 he was
personally recommended by Queen Elizabeth to the emperor Rudolph II. He
greatly distinguished himself while serving with the imperial troops
against the Turks in Hungary, and at the siege of Gran or Esztergom on
the 13th of August 1595, he captured the enemy's banner with his own
hand. He was created by Rudolph II. a count of the Holy Roman Empire in
December 1595, and returned to England after suffering shipwreck and
barely preserving his life in January 1596. His assumption of the
foreign title created great jealousy among the English peers, who were
wont to give a precedence by courtesy to foreign nobles, and he incurred
the resentment of his father, who objected to his superior rank and
promptly disinherited him. The queen, moreover, was seriously
displeased, declared that "as chaste wives should have no glances but
for their own spouses, so should faithful subjects keep their eyes at
home and not gaze upon foreign crowns," and committed him to the Fleet
immediately on his arrival, while she addressed a long letter of
remonstrance on the subject to the emperor. Arundell remained under
arrest till April, when he was liberated after an examination. In April
1597, however, he was again confined, but declared innocent of any
charge save that of "practising to contrive the justification of his
vain title with Ministers beyond the seas." In December he was liberated
and placed under the care of his father, but next year he was again
arrested and accused of a conspiracy against the government. His
petitions for a licence to undertake an expedition by sea, wherein he
declared "his end was honour which some base minds call ambition," were
refused, but in 1599 he was apparently again restored to favour. On the
4th of May 1605 he was created by James I. Baron Arundell of Wardour,
but fell again under temporary suspicion at the time of the Gunpowder
Plot. In 1623 he once more got into trouble by championing the cause of
the recusants, of whom he was himself one, on the occasion of the visit
of the Spanish envoys, and he was committed to custody, and in 1625 all
the arms were removed by the government from Wardour Castle. After the
accession of Charles I. he was pardoned, and attended the sittings of
the House of Lords. He was indicted in the king's bench about the year
1627 for not paying some contribution, and in 1632 he was accused of
harbouring a priest. In 1637 he was declared exempt from the recusancy
laws by the king's order, but in 1639 he again petitioned for relief.
The same year he paid £500 in lieu of attending the king at York. He
died on the 7th of November 1639. Arundell was an earnest Roman
Catholic, but the suspicions of the government as to his loyalty were
probably unfounded and stifled a career destined by nature for
successful adventure. He married (1) Mary, daughter of Henry
Wriothesley, 2nd earl of Southampton, by whom besides other children he
had Thomas, who succeeded him as 2nd baron; and (2) Anne, daughter of
Miles Philipson, by whom he had several daughters.

HENRY ARUNDELL, 3rd Baron Arundell of Wardour (c. 1607-1694), son of
Thomas, 2nd baron, and of Blanche, daughter of Edward, earl of
Worcester, was born on the 21st of July 1607, and succeeded on his
father's death in 1643 to the family title and estates. A strong
royalist and Roman Catholic, he supported the king's cause, and
distinguished himself in 1644 by the recapture of his castle at Wardour
from the parliamentarians, who had taken it in the previous year in
spite of his mother's brave defence of the place. In 1648 he was one of
the delinquents exempted from pardon in the proposals sent to Charles in
the Isle of Wight. His estates had been confiscated, but he was
permitted about 1653 to compound for them in the sum of £35,000. In
1652, in consequence of his being second at a duel in which one of the
combatants was killed, he was arrested, and tried in 1653; he pleaded
his peerage, but the privilege was disallowed as the House of Lords had
been abolished. At the Restoration he regained possession of the family
estates, and in 1663 was made master of the horse to Henrietta Maria. He
was one of the few admitted to the king's confidence concerning the
projects for the restoration of the Roman Catholic religion and the
alliance with France. In 1669 he took part in the secret council
assembled by Charles II., and in October was sent to France, ostensibly
for the funeral of Henrietta Maria, but in reality to negotiate with
Louis XIV. the agreement which took shape in 1670 in the treaties of
Dover (see CHARLES II.). In 1676 he was privy to James's negotiations
with Rome through Coleman. He was accused in 1678 by Titus Oates of
participation in the popish plot, and was one of the five Roman Catholic
peers arrested and imprisoned in the Tower in October, found guilty by
the Middlesex grand jury of high treason, and impeached subsequently by
the parliament. Lord Stafford was found guilty and executed in December
1680, but after the perpetration of this injustice the proceedings were
interrupted, and the three surviving peers were released on bail on the
12th of February 1684. On the 22nd of May 1685, after James II.'s
accession, the charge was annulled, and on the 1st of June 1685 they
obtained their full liberty. In February 1686, with other Roman
Catholics, Arundell urged upon the king the removal of his mistress,
Lady Dorchester, on account of her strong Protestantism. In spite of his
religion he was made a privy councillor in August 1686, and keeper of
the privy seal in 1687, being excused from taking the oaths by the
king's dispensation. He presented the thanks of the Roman Catholics to
James in June 1687 for the declaration of indulgence. His public career
ended with the abdication of the king, and he retired to Breamore, the
family residence since the destruction of Wardour Castle. He died on the
28th of December 1694. He was the author of five religious poems said to
be composed during his confinement in the Tower in 1679, published the
same year and reprinted in _A Collection of Eighty-six Loyal Poems_ in
1685. His piety and benevolence to his unfortunate co-religionists were
conspicuous. Evelyn calls him "very good company" and he was a noted
sportsman, the Quorn pack being descended from his pack of hounds at
Breamore. He married Cecily, daughter of Sir Henry Compton, by whom
besides other children he had Thomas, who succeeded him as 4th baron.

The barony is still held in the Arundell family, which has never ceased
to be Roman Catholic. The 14th baron (b. 1859) was a direct descendent
of the 6th.