ARUNDEL, THOMAS (1353-1414), archbishop of Canterbury, was the third son
of Richard Fitzalan, earl of Arundel and Warenne, by his second wife,
Eleanor, daughter of Henry Plantagenet, earl of Lancaster. His family
was an old and influential one, and when Thomas entered the church his
preferment was rapid. In 1373 he became archdeacon of Taunton, and in
April 1374 was consecrated bishop of Ely. During the early years of the
reign of King Richard II. he was associated with the party led by
Thomas, duke of Gloucester, Henry, earl of Derby, afterwards King Henry
IV., and his own brother Richard, earl of Arundel, and in 1386 he was
sent with Gloucester to Eltham to persuade Richard to return to
parliament. This mission was successful, and Arundel was made lord
chancellor in place of Michael de la Pole, duke of Suffolk, and assisted
to make peace between the king and the supporters of the commission of
regency. In April 1388 he was made archbishop of York, and, when Richard
declared himself of age in 1389, he gave up the office of chancellor, to
which, however, he returned in 1391. During his second tenure of this
office he removed the courts of justice from London to York, but they
were soon brought back to the metropolis. In September 1396 he was
translated from York to Canterbury, and again resigned the office of
chancellor. He began his new rule by a vigorous attempt to assert his
rights, warned the citizens of London not to withhold tithes, and
decided appeals from the judgments of his suffragans during a thorough
visitation of his province. In November 1396 he had officiated at the
marriage of Richard and Isabella, daughter of Charles VI., king of
France, and his fall was the sequel of the king's sudden attack upon the
lords appellant in 1397. After the arrest of Gloucester, Warwick and
Arundel, the archbishop was impeached by the Commons with the king's
consent, although Richard, who had not yet revealed his hostility, held
out hopes of safety to him. He was charged with assisting to procure the
commission of regency in derogation of the royal authority, and sentence
of banishment was passed, forty days being given him during which to
leave the realm. Towards the end of 1397 he started for Rome, and Pope
Boniface IX., at the urgent request of the king, translated him to the
see of St Andrews, a step which the pope afterwards confessed he
repented bitterly. This translation virtually deprived Arundel of all
authority, as St Andrews did not acknowledge Boniface. He then became
associated with Henry of Lancaster, but did not return to England before
1399, and the account which Froissart gives telling how he was sent by
the Londoners to urge Henry to come and assume the crown is thought to
refer to his nephew and namesake, Thomas, earl of Arundel. Landing with
Henry at Ravenspur, he accompanied him to the west. He took his place at
once as archbishop of Canterbury, witnessed the abdication of Richard in
the Tower of London, led the new king, Henry IV., to his throne in
presence of the peers, and crowned him on the 13th of October 1399.

The main work of his later years was the defence of the church, and the
suppression of heresy. To put down the Lollards, he called a meeting of
the clergy, pressed on the statute _de haeretico comburendo_, and passed
sentence of degradation upon William Sawtrey. He resisted the attempt of
the parliament of 1404 to disendow the church, but failed to induce
Henry to pardon Archbishop Scrope in 1405. In 1407 he became chancellor
for the fourth time, and in 1408 summoned a council at Oxford, which
drew up constitutions against the Lollards. These he published in
January 1409, and among them was one forbidding the translation of the
Bible into English without the consent of the bishop of the diocese, or
of a provincial synod. In 1411 he went on an embassy abroad, and in 1412
became chancellor again, his return to power being accompanied by a
change in the foreign policy of Henry IV. In 1397 he had sought to
vindicate his right of visitation over the university of Oxford, but the
dispute remained unsettled until 1411 when a bull was issued by Pope
John XXIII. recalling one issued by Pope Boniface IX., which had
exempted the university from the archbishop's authority. In 1413 he took
a leading part in the proceedings against Sir John Oldcastle, Lord
Cobham, and in the following year he died on the 19th of February, and
was buried at Canterbury. A legend of a later age tells how, just before
his death, he was struck dumb for preventing the preaching of the word
of God.

  The chief authorities are T. Walsingham, _Historia Anglicana_, ed. by
  H.T. Riley (London, 1863-1864); _Eulogium historiarum sive temporis_,
  ed. by F.S. Haydon (London, 1858-1863); the Monk of Evesham, _Historia
  vitae et regni Ricardi II._, ed. by T. Hearne (Oxford, 1729); W.F.
  Hook, _Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury_, vol. iv. (London,
  1860-1876).