ARVAL BROTHERS (Fratres Arvales), in Roman antiquities, a college or
priesthood, consisting of twelve members, elected for life from the
highest ranks in Rome, and always apparently, during the empire,
including the emperor. Their chief duty was to offer annually public
sacrifice for the fertility of the fields (Varro, _L. L_. v. 85). It is
generally held that the college was founded by Romulus (see ACCA
LARENTIA). This legend probably arose from the connexion of Acca
Larentia, as _mater Larum_, with the Lares who had a part in the
religious ceremonies of the Arvales. But apart from this, there is proof
of the high antiquity of the college, which was said to have been older
than Rome itself, in the verbal forms of the song with which, down to
late times, a part of the ceremonies was accompanied, and which is still
preserved. It is clear also that, while the members were themselves
always persons of distinction, the duties of their office were held in
high respect. And yet it is singular that no mention of them occurs in
Cicero or Livy, and that altogether literary allusions to them are very
scarce. On the other hand, we possess a long series of the _acta_ or
minutes of their proceedings, drawn up by themselves, and inscribed on
stone. Excavations, commenced in the 16th century and continued to the
19th, in the grove of the Dea Dia about 5 m. from Rome, have yielded 96
of these records from A.D. 14 to 241. The brotherhood appears to have
languished in obscurity during the republic, and to have been revived by
Augustus. In his time the college consisted of a master (_magister_), a
vice-master (_promagister_), a _flamen_, and a _praetor_, with eight
ordinary members, attended by various servants, and in particular by
four chorus boys, sons of senators, having both parents alive. Each wore
a wreath of corn, a white fillet and the praetexta. The election of
members was by co-optation on the motion of the president, who, with a
flamen, was himself elected for one year. The great annual festival
which they had to conduct was held in honour of the anonymous Dea Dia,
who was probably identical with Ceres. It occupied three days in May.
The ceremony of the first day took place in Rome itself, in the house of
the magister or his deputy, or on the Palatine in the temple of the
emperors, where at sunrise fruits and incense were offered to the
goddess. A sumptuous banquet took place, followed by a distribution of
doles and garlands. On the second and principal day of the festival the
ceremonies were conducted in the grove of the Dea Dia. They included a
dance in the temple of the goddess, at which the song of the brotherhood
was sung, in language so antiquated that it was hardly intelligible (see
the text and translation in Mommsen, _Hist, of Rome_, bk. i. ch. xv.)
even to Romans of the time of Augustus, who regarded it as the oldest
existing document in their mother-tongue. Especial mention should be
made of the ceremony of purifying the grove, which was held to be
defiled by the felling of trees, the breaking of a bough or the presence
of any iron tools, such as those used by the lapidary who engraved the
records of the proceedings on stone. The song and dance were followed by
the election of officers for the next year, a banquet and races. On the
third day the sacrifice took place in Rome, and was of the same nature
as that offered on the first day. The Arvales also offered sacrifice and
solemn vows on behalf of the imperial family on the 3rd of January and
on other extraordinary occasions. The brotherhood is said to have lasted
till the time of Theodosius. The British Museum contains a bust of
Marcus Aurelius in the dress of a Frater Arvalis.

  Marini, _Atti e Monumenti de' Fratri Arvali_ (1795); Hoffmann, _Die
  A._ (1858): Oldenberg, _De Sacris Fratrum A_. (1875); Bergk, _Das Lied
  der Arvalbrüder_ (1856); Bréal, "Le Chant des Arvals" in _Mém. de la
  Soc. de Linguistique_ (1881); Edon, _Nouvelle Étude sur le Chant
  Lémural_ (1884); _Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum_, vi. 2023-2119;
  Henzen, _Acta Fratrum Arvalium_ (1874).