ARYA SAMAJ, a Hindu religious association with reforming tendencies,
which was founded by a Guzerati Brahman named Dayanand Saraswati. This
man was born of a Saivite family about 1825, but in early manhood grew
dissatisfied with idol-worship. He undertook many pilgrim-ages and
studied the Vedic philosophy in the hope of solving the old problem of
the Buddha,--how to alleviate human misery and attain final liberation.
About 1866, when he had begun to teach and to gather disciples, he first
saw the Christian scriptures, which he vehemently assailed, and the _Rig
Veda_, which he correspondingly exalted, though in the conception which
he ultimately formed of God the former was much more influential than
the latter. Dayanand's treatment of the Vedas was peculiar, and
consisted of reading into them his own beliefs and modern scientific
discoveries. Thus he explains the _Yajna_ (sacrificial cult) as "the
entertainment of the learned in proportion to their worth, the business
of manufacture, the experiment and application of chemistry, physics and
the arts of peace; the instruction of the people, the purification of
the air, the nourishment of vegetables by the employment of the
principles of meteorology, called _Agni-Notri_ in Sanskrit." He denied
that the _Vedas_ warranted the caste system, but wished to retain the
four grades as orders of learning to which admission should be won by
examination.

These views naturally met with scanty acceptance among the Brahmans to
whom he introduced them, and Dayanand turned to the masses and
established _Samajes_ in various parts of India, the first being at
Bombay in 1875. He chose the epithet Arya as being more dignified than
the slightly contemptuous term Hindu. After a successful series of
tours, during which he debated publicly with orthodox pundits and with
Christian missionaries, he died at Ajmere in 1883.

The Arya Samaj is not an eclectic system like the Brahma Samaj, which
strives to find the common basis underlying all the great religions, and
its narrower scope and corresponding intensity of conviction have won it
a greater strength. It seemed to meet the feeling of many educated
natives whose faith in current Hinduism was undermined, but who were
predisposed against any foreign religious influence. Their patriotic
ardour gladly seized on "a view of the original faith of India that
seemed to harmonize with all the discoveries of modern science and the
ethics of European civilization," and they cheerfully supported their
leader's strange polemic with the agnostic and rationalist literature of
Europe. By 1890 their numbers had increased to 40,000, by 1900 to over
92,000. Divisions had, however, set in, especially a cleavage into the
_Ghasi_ or vegetarian, and the _Mansi_ or flesh-eating sections. To the
latter belong those Rajputs who though generally in sympathy with the
movement declined to adhere to the tenet of the _Samaj_ which forbade
the destruction of animal life and the consumption of animal food. The
age of admission to the Samaj is eighteen, and members are expected to
contribute to its funds at least 1% of their income.

The ten articles of their creed may be summarized thus:--

   1. The source of all true knowledge is God.
   2. God is "all truth, all knowledge, all bliss, boundless, almighty,
        just, merciful, unbegotten, without a beginning, incomparable,
        the support and Lord of all, all-pervading, omniscient,
        imperishable, immortal, eternal, holy, and the cause of the
        universe; worship is due to him alone."
   3. The medium of true knowledge is the _Vedas_.
   4. and 5. The truth is to be accepted and to become the guiding
        principle.
   6. The object of the Samaj is to benefit the world by improving
        its physical, social, intellectual and moral conditions.
   7. Love and justice are the right guides of conduct.
   8. Knowledge must be spread.
   9. The good of others must be sought.
  10. In general interests members must subordinate themselves to
        the good of others; in personal interests they should retain
        independence.

The sixth clause comprehends a wide programme of reform, including
abstinence from spirituous liquors and animal food, physical cleanliness
and exercise, marriage reform, the promotion of female education, the
abolition of caste and of idolatry.