ASAFETIDA (_asa_, Lat. form of Persian _aza_ = mastic, and fetidus,
stinking, so called in distinction to _asa dulcis_, which was a drug
highly esteemed among the ancients as _laser cyrenaicum_, and is
supposed to have been a gummy exudation from _Thapsis garganica_), a
gum-resin obtained principally from the root of _Ferula fetida_, and
probably also from one or two other closely allied species of
umbelliferous plants. It is produced in eastern Persia and Afghanistan,
Herat and Kandahar being centres of the trade. _Ferula fetida_ grows to
a height of from 5 to 6 ft., and when the plant has attained the age of
four years it is ready for yielding asafetida. The stems are cut down
close to the root, and the juice flows out, at first of a milky
appearance, but quickly setting into a solid resinous mass. Fresh
incisions are made as long as the sap continues to flow, a period which
varies according to the size and strength of the plant. A
freshly-exposed surface of asafetida has a translucent, pearly-white
appearance, but it soon darkens in the air, becoming first pink and
finally reddish-brown. In taste it is acrid and bitter; but what
peculiarly characterizes it is the strong alliaceous odour it emits,
from which it has obtained the name asafetida, as well as its German
name _Teufelsdreck_ (devil's dung). Its odour is due to the presence of
organic sulphur compounds. Asafetida is found in commerce in "lump" or
in "tear," the latter being the purer form. Medicinally, asafetida is
given in doses of 5 to 15 grains and acts as a stimulant to the
intestinal and respiratory tracts and to the nervous system. An enema
containing it is useful in relieving flatus. It is sometimes useful in
hysteria, which is essentially a lack of inhibitory power, as its nasty
properties induce sufficient inhibitory power to render its
readministration superfluous. It may also be used in an effervescing
draught in cases of malingering, the drug "repeating" in the mouth and
making the malingering not worth while. The gum-resin is relished as a
condiment in India and Persia, and is in demand in France for use in
cookery. In the regions of its growth the whole plant is used as a fresh
vegetable, the inner portion of the full-grown stem being regarded as a
luxury.