ASBESTOS, a fibrous mineral from Gr. [Greek: asbestos], unquenchable, by
transference, incombustible, in allusion to its power of resisting the
action of fire. The word was applied by Dioscorides and other Greek
authors to quicklime, but Pliny evidently used it in its modern sense.
It was occasionally woven by the ancients into handkerchiefs, and, it
has been said, into shrouds which were used in cremation to prevent the
ashes of the corpse from mingling with the wood-ashes of the pyre.

In different varieties of asbestos the fibres vary greatly in character.
When silky and flexible they are sometimes known as mountain flax. The
finer kinds are often termed amianthus (q.v.). When the fibres are
naturally interwoven, so as to form a felted mass, the mineral passes
under such trivial names as mountain leather, mountain cork, mountain
paper, &c. The asbestos formerly used in the arts was generally a
fibrous form of some kind of amphibole, like tremolite, or
anthophyllite, though occasionally perhaps a pyroxene. In recent years,
however, most of the asbestos in the market is a fibrous variety of
serpentine, known mineralogically as chrysotile, and probably some of
the ancient asbestos was of this character (see AMIANTHUS). Both
minerals possess similar properties, so far as resistance to heat is
concerned. The amphibole-asbestos, or hornblende-asbestos, is usually
white or grey in colour, and may present great length of fibre, some of
the Italian asbestos reaching exceptionally a length of 5 or 6 ft., but
it is often harsh and brittle. The serpentine-asbestos occurs in narrow
veins, yielding fibres of only 2 or 3 in. in length, but of great
tensile strength: they are usually of a delicate silky lustre, very
flexible and elastic, and of yellowish or greenish colour.

The Canadian asbestos, which of all kinds is at present the most
important industrially, occurs in a small belt of serpentine in the
province of Quebec, principally near Black Lake and Thetford, where it
was first recognized as commercially valuable about 1877. The rock is
generally quarried, cobbed by hand, dried if necessary, crushed in
rock-breakers, and then passed between rollers; it is reduced to a finer
state of division by so-called fiberizers, and graded on a shaking
screen, where the loosened fibres are sorted. The process varies in
different mills.

In the United States asbestos is worked only to a very limited extent.
An amphibole-asbestos is obtained from Sall Mountain, Georgia; and
asbestos has also been worked in the serpentine of Vermont. It occurs
also in South Carolina, Virginia, Massachusetts, Arizona and elsewhere.
Dr G.P. Merrill has shown that some asbestos results from a process of
shearing in the rocks.

Formerly asbestos was obtained almost exclusively from Italy and
Corsica, and a large quantity is still yielded by Italian workings. This
is mostly an amphibole. It is in some cases associated with nodules of
green garnet known as "seeds"--_Semenze dell' amianto._ Asbestos is
widely distributed, but only in a few localities does it occur in
sufficient abundance and purity to be worked commercially; it is found,
for example, to a limited extent, at many localities in Tirol, Hungary
and Russia; Queensland, New South Wales and New Zealand. In the British
Isles it is not unknown, being found among the old rocks of North Wales
and in parts of Ireland. Byssolite or asbestoid is a blue or green
fibrous amphibole from Dauphiny.

The Asbestos Mountains in Griqualand West, Cape Colony, yield a blue
fibrous mineral which is worked under the name of Cape asbestos. This is
referable to the variety of amphibole called crocidolite (q.v.). It
occurs in veins in slaty rocks, associated with jaspers and quartzites
rich in magnetite and brown iron-ore. Their geological position is in
the Griqua Town series, belonging to what are known in South Africa as
the Pre-Cape rocks.

Asbestos was formerly spun and woven into fabrics as a rare curiosity.
Charlemagne is said to have possessed a tablecloth of this material,
which when soiled was purified by being thrown into the fire. At a
meeting of the Royal Society in 1676 a merchant from China exhibited a
handkerchief of "salamander's wool," or _linum asbesti._ By the Eskimos
of Labrador asbestos has been used as a lamp-wick, and it received a
similar application in some of the sacred lamps of antiquity. In recent
times asbestos has been applied to a great variety of uses in the
industrial arts, and its applications are constantly increasing. Its
economic value depends not only on its power of withstanding a high
temperature, but also on its low thermal conductivity and its partial
resistance to the attack of acids: hence it is used for jacketing
boilers and steam-pipes, and as a filtering medium for corrosive
liquids. It has also come into use as an electric insulator. It is made
into yarn, felt, millboard, &c., and is largely employed as packing for
joints, glands and stopcocks in machinery. Fire-proof sheathing and felt
are used for flooring and roofing; fire-proof curtains have been made
for the stage, and even clothing for firemen. Asbestos enters into the
composition of fire-proof cements, plasters and paints: it is used for
packing safes; and is made into balls with fire-clay for gas-stoves.
Various preparations of asbestos with other materials pass in trade
under such names as uralite, salamandrite, asbestolith, gypsine, &c.
"Asbestic" is the name given to a Canadian product formed by crushing
the serpentine rock containing thin seams of asbestos, and mixing the
result with lime so as to form a plaster.

  REFERENCES.--Fritz Cirkel, _Asbestos, its Occurrence, Exploitation and
  Uses_ (Ottawa, 1905); J.H. Pratt and J.S. Diller in Annual Reports on
  Mineral Resources, U.S. Geol. Survey; G.P. Merrill, _The Non-metallic
  Minerals_ (New York, 1904); R.H. Jones, _Asbestos and Asbestic_
  (London, 1897).     (F. W. R.*)