ASBJÖRNSEN, PETER CHRISTEN (1812-1885), and MOE, JÖRGEN ENGEBRETSEN
(1813-1882), collectors of Norwegian folklore, so closely united in
their life's work that it is unusual to name them apart. Asbjörnsen was
born in Christiania on the 15th of January 1812; he belonged to an
ancient family of the Gudbrandsdal, which is believed to have died with
him. He became a student at the university in 1833, but as early as
1832, in his twentieth year, he had begun to collect and write down all
the fairy stories and legends which he could meet with. Later he began
to wander on foot through the length and breadth of Norway, adding to
his stores. Moe, who was born at Mo i Hole parsonage, in Sigdal
Ringerike, on the 22nd of April 1813, met Asbjörnsen first when he was
fourteen years of age. A close friendship began between them, and lasted
to the end of their lives. In 1834 Asbjörnsen discovered that Moe had
started independently on a search for the relics of national folklore;
the friends eagerly compared results, and determined for the future to
work in concert. By this time, Asbjörnsen had become by profession a
zoologist, and with the aid of the university made a series of
investigating voyages along the coasts of Norway, particularly in the
Hardanger fjord. Moe, meanwhile, having left Christiania University in
1839, had devoted himself to the study of theology, and was making a
living as a tutor in Christiania. In his holidays he wandered through
the mountains, in the most remote districts, collecting stories. In
1842-1843 appeared the first instalment of the great work of the two
friends, under the title of _Norwegian Popular Stories (Norske
Folkeeventyr)_, which was received at once all over Europe as a most
valuable contribution to comparative mythology as well as literature. A
second volume was published in 1844, and a new collection in 1871. Many
of the _Folkeeventyr_ were translated into English by Sir George Dasent
in 1859. In 1845 Asbjörnsen published, without help from Moe, a
collection of Norwegian fairy tales (_huldreeventyr og folkesagn_). In
1856 the attention of Asbjörnsen was called to the deforestation of
Norway, and he induced the government to take up this important
question. He was appointed forest-master, and was sent by Norway to
examine in various countries of the north of Europe the methods observed
for the preservation of timber. From these duties, in 1876, he withdrew
with a pension; he died in Christiania on the 6th of January 1885. From
1841 to 1852 Moe travelled almost every summer through the southern
parts of Norway, collecting traditions in the mountains. In 1845 he was
appointed professor of theology in the Military School of Norway. He
had, however, long intended to take holy orders, and in 1853 he did so,
becoming for ten years a resident chaplain in Sigdal, and then (1863)
parish priest of Bragernes. He was moved in 1870 to the parish of Vestre
Aker, near Christiania, and in 1875 he was appointed bishop of
Christiansand. In January 1882 he resigned his diocese on account of
failing health, and died on the following 27th of March. Moe has a
special claim on critical attention in regard to his lyrical poems, of
which a small collection appeared in 1850. He wrote little original
verse, but in his slender volume are to be found many pieces of
exquisite delicacy and freshness. Moe also published a delightful
collection of prose stories for children, _In the Well and the Churn (_I
Bronde og i Kjærnet), 1851; and _A Little Christmas Present (En liden
Juleegave)_, 1860. Asbjörnsen and Moe had the advantage of an admirable
style in narrative prose. It was usually said that the vigour came from
Asbjörnsen and the charm from Moe, but the fact seems to be that from
the long habit of writing in unison they had come to adopt almost
precisely identical modes of literary expression.     (E. G.)