ASBURY, FRANCIS (1745-1816), American clergyman, was born at Hamstead
Bridge in the parish of Handsworth, near Birmingham, in Staffordshire,
England, on the 20th of August 1745. His parents were poor, and after a
brief period of study in the village school of Barre, he was apprenticed
at the age of fourteen to a maker of "buckle chapes," or tongues. It
seems probable that his parents were among the early converts of Wesley;
at any rate, Francis became converted to Methodism in his thirteenth
year, and at sixteen became a local preacher. He was a simple, fluent
speaker, and was so successful that in 1767 he was enrolled, by John
Wesley himself, as a regular itinerant minister. In 1771 he volunteered
for missionary work in the American colonies. When he landed in
Philadelphia in October 1771, the converts to Methodism, which had been
introduced into the colonies only three years before, numbered scarcely
300. Asbury infused new life into the movement, and within a year the
membership of the several congregations was more than doubled. In 1772
he was appointed by Wesley "general assistant" in charge of the work in
America, and although superseded by an older preacher, Thomas Rankin
(1738-1810), in 1773, he remained practically in control. After the
outbreak of the War of Independence, the Methodists, who then numbered
several thousands, fell, unjustly, under suspicion of Loyalism,
principally because of their refusal to take the prescribed oath; and
many of their ministers, including Rankin, returned to England. Asbury,
however, feeling his sympathies and duties to be with the colonies,
remained at his post, and although often threatened, and once arrested,
continued his itinerant preaching. The hostility of the Maryland
authorities, however, eventually drove him into exile in Delaware, where
he remained quietly, but not in idleness, for two years. In 1782 he was
reappointed to supervise the affairs of the Methodist congregations in
America. In 1784 John Wesley, in disregard of the authority of the
Established Church, took the radical step of appointing the Rev. Thomas
Coke (1747-1814) and Francis Asbury superintendents or "bishops" of the
church in the United States. Dr Coke was ordained at Bristol, England,
in September, and in the following December, in a conference of the
churches in America at Baltimore, he ordained and consecrated Asbury,
who refused to accept the position until Wesley's choice had been
ratified by the conference. From this conference dates the actual
beginning of the "Methodist Episcopal Church of the United States of
America." To the upbuilding of this church Asbury gave the rest of his
life, working with tireless devotion and wonderful energy. In 1785, at
Abingdon, Maryland, he laid the corner-stone of Cokesbury College, the
project of Dr Coke and the first Methodist Episcopal college in America;
the college building was burned in 1795, and the college was then
removed to Baltimore, where in 1796, after another fire, it closed, and
in 1816 was succeeded by Asbury College, which lived for about fifteen
years. Every year Asbury traversed a large area, mostly on horseback.
The greatest testimony to the work that earned for him the title of the
"Father of American Methodism" was the growth of the denomination from a
few scattered bands of about 300 converts and 4 preachers in 1771, to a
thoroughly organized church of 214,000 members and more than 2000
ministers at his death, which occurred at Spottsylvania, Virginia, on
the 31st of March 1816.

  His _Journals_ (3 vols., New York, 1852), apart from their importance
  as a history of his life work, constitute a valuable commentary on the
  social and industrial history of the United States during the first
  forty years of their existence. Consult also F.W. Briggs, _Bishop
  Asbury_ (London, 1874); W.P. Strickland, _The Pioneer Bishop; or, The
  Life and Times of Francis Asbury_ (New York, 1858); J.B. Wakeley,
  _Heroes of Methodism_ (New York, 1856): W.C. Larrabee, _Asbury and His
  Co-Laborers_ (2 vols., Cincinnati, 1853); H.M. Du Bose, _Francis
  Asbury_ (Nashville, Tenn., 1909); see also under METHODISM.