ASCALON, now 'ASKALAN, one of the five chief cities of the Philistines,
on the coast of the Mediterranean, 12 m. N. of Gaza. The place is
mentioned several times in the Tell el-Amarna correspondence. It
revolted from Egypt on two occasions, but was reconquered, and a
sculpture at Thebes depicts the storming of the city. Ascalon was a
well-fortified town, and the seat of the worship of the fish-goddess
Derketo. Though situated in the nominal territory of the tribe of Judah,
it was never for any length of time in the possession of the Israelites.
The only incident in its history recorded in the Bible (the spoliation
by Samson, Judg. xiv. 19) may possibly have actually occurred at another
place of the same name, in the hill country of Judaea. Sennacherib took
it in 701 B.C. The conquest of Alexander hellenized its civilization,
and after his time it became tributary alternately to Syria and Egypt.
Herod the Great was a native of the city, and added greatly to its
beauty; but it suffered severely in the later wars of the Romans and
Jews. In the 4th century it again rose to importance; and till the 7th
century, when it was conquered by the Moslems, it was the seat of a
bishopric and a centre of learning. During the first crusade a signal
victory was gained by the Christians in the neighbouring plain on the
15th of August 1099; but the city remained in the hands of the caliphs
till 1157, when it was taken by Baldwin III., king of Jerusalem, after a
siege of five months. By Baldwin IV. it was given to his sister Sibylla,
on her marriage with William of Montferrat in 1178. When Saladin (1187)
had almost annihilated the Christian army in the plain of Tiberias,
Ascalon offered but a feeble resistance to the victor. At first he
repaired and strengthened its fortifications, but afterwards, alarmed at
the capture of St Jean d'Acre (Acre) by Richard Coeur de Lion in 1191,
he caused it to be dismantled. It was restored in the following year by
the English king, but only to be again abandoned. From this time Ascalon
lost much of its importance, and at length, in 1270, its fortifications
were almost totally destroyed by Sultan Bibars, and its port was filled
up with stones. The place is now a desolate heap of ruins, with remains
of its walls and fragments of granite pillars. The surrounding country
is well watered and very fertile.

  See a paper by Guthe, "Die Ruinen Ascalons," in the _Zeitschrift_ of
  the Deutsche Palastina-Verein, ii. 164 (translated in Palestine
  Exploration Fund _Quarterly Statement_, 1880, p. 182). See also C.R.
  Conder in the latter journal, 1875, p. 152.     (R. A. S. M.)