ASCETICISM, the theory and practice of bodily abstinence and
self-mortification, generally religious. The word is derived from the
Gr. verb [Greek: askeo], "I practise," whence the noun [Greek: askaesis]
and the adjective [Greek: askaetikos]; and it embodies a metaphor taken
from the ancient wrestling-place or palaestra, where victory rewarded
those who had best trained their bodies. Not a few other technical terms
of Greek philosophic asceticism, used in the first instance by Cynics
and Neo-pythagoreans, and then continued among the Greek Jews and
Christians, were metaphors taken from athletic contests--but only
metaphors, for all asceticism, worthy of the name, has a moral purport,
and is based on the eternal contrast of the proposition, "This is
right," with the proposition, "That is pleasant." The ascetic instinct
is probably as old as humanity, yet we must not forget that early
religious practices are apt to be deficient in lofty spiritual meaning,
many things being esteemed holy that are from a modern point of view
trifling and even obscene. We may therefore expect in primitive
asceticism to find many abstentions and much self-torture apparently
valueless for the training of character and discipline of the feelings,
which are the essence of any healthy asceticism. Nevertheless these
non-moral _taboos_ or restraints may have played a part in building up
in us that faculty of preferring the larger good to the impulse of the
moment which is the note of real civilization. Aristotle in his _Ethics_
defines, as the barbarian's ideal of life, "the living as one likes."
Yet nothing is less true; for the savage, more than the civilized man,
is tied down at every step with superstitious scruples and restrictions
barely traceable in higher civilizations except as primitive survivals.
It is not that savages are devoid of the ascetic instinct. It is on the
contrary over-developed in them, but ill-informed and working in ways
unessential or even morally harmful. It is the note of every great
religious reformer, Moses, Buddha, Paul, Mani, Mahomet, St Francis,
Luther, to enlighten and direct it to higher aims, substituting a true
personal holiness for a ritual purity or _taboo_, which at the best was
viewed as a kind of physical condition and contagion, inherent as well
in things and animals as in man.

It is useful, therefore, in a summary sketch of asceticism, to begin
with the facts as they can be observed among less advanced races, or as
mere survivals among people who have reached the level of genuine moral
reflection; and from this basis to proceed to a consideration of
self-denial consciously pursued as a method of ethical perfection. The
latter is as a rule less cruel and rigorous than primitive forms of
asceticism. Under this head fall the following:--Fasting, or abstention
from certain meats and drinks; denial of sexual instinct; subjection of
the body to physical discomforts, such as nakedness, vigils, sleeping on
the bare ground, tattooing, deformation of skull, teeth, feet, &c., vows
of silence to be observed throughout life or during pilgrimages,
avoidance of baths, of hair-cutting and of clean raiment, living in a
cave; actual self-infliction of pain, by scourging, branding, cutting
with knives, wearing of hair shirts, fire-walking, burial alive, hanging
up of oneself by hooks plunged into the skin, suspension of weights by
such hooks to the tenderer parts of the body, self-mutilation and
numerous other, often ingenious, modes of torture. Such customs repose
on various superstitions; for example, the self-mutilation of the Galli
or priests of Cybele was probably a magical ceremony intended to
fertilize the soil and stimulate the crops. Others of the practices
enumerated, probably the greater part of them, spring from demonological
beliefs.

Fasting (q.v.) is used in primitive asceticism for a variety of reasons,
among which the following deserve notice. Certain animals and vegetables
are _taboo_, i.e. too holy, or--what among Semites and others was the
same thing--too defiling and unclean, to be eaten. Thus in Leviticus xi.
the Jews are forbidden to eat animals other than cloven-footed
ruminants; thus the camel, coney, hare and swine were forbidden; so also
any water organisms that had not fins and scales, and a large choice of
birds, including swan, pelican, stork, heron and hoopoe. All winged
creeping things that have four feet were equally abominable. Lastly, the
weasel, mouse and most lizards were _taboo_. All or nearly all of these
were at one time totem animals among one or another of the Semitic
tribes, and were not eaten because primitive men will not eat animals
between which and themselves and their gods they believe a peculiar tie
of kinship to exist. Men do not eat an animal for which they have a
reverential dread, or if they eat it at all, it is only in a sacramental
feast and in order to absorb into themselves its life and holy
properties. Such abstinences as the above, though based on _taboo_, that
is, on a reluctance to eat the totem or sacred animal, are yet ascetic
in so far as they involve much self-denial. No flesh is more wholesome
or succulent than beef, yet the Egyptians and Phoenicians, says Porphyry
(_de Abst._ ii. 11), would rather eat human flesh than that of the cow,
and so would two hundred and fifty millions of modern Hindus. The
privation involved in abstention from the flesh of the swine, a _taboo_
hardly less widespread, is obvious.

Similar prohibitions are common in Africa, where fetish priests are
often reduced to a diet of herbs and roots. That such dietary
restrictions were merely ceremonial and superstitious, and not intended
to prevent the consumption of meats which would revolt modern tastes, is
certain from the fact that the Levitical law freely allowed the eating
of locusts, grasshoppers, crickets and cockroaches, while forbidding the
consumption of rabbits, hares, storks, swine, &c. The Pythagoreans were
forbidden to eat beans.

Another widespread reason for avoiding flesh diet altogether was the
fear of absorbing the irrational soul of the animal, which especially
resided in the blood. Hence the rule not to eat meats strangled, except
in sacramental meals when the god inherent in the animal was partaken
of. It is equally a soul or spirit in wine which inspires the
intoxicated; the old Egyptian kings avoided wine at table and in
libations, because it was the blood of rebels who had fought with the
gods, and out of whose rotting bodies grew the vines; to drink the blood
was to imbibe the soul of these rebels, and the frenzy of intoxication
which followed was held to be possession by their spirits. The medieval
Jews also held that there is a cardiac demon in wine which takes
possession of drunken men; and the Mahommedan prohibition of
wine-drinking is based on a similar superstition. The avoidance of wine,
therefore, by Rechabites, Nazirites, Arab dervishes and Pythagoreans,
and also of leaven in bread, is parallel to and explicable in the same
way as abstention from flesh. Porphyry (_de Abst._ i. 19) acquaints us
with another widespread scruple against flesh diet. It was this, that
the souls of men transmigrated into animals, so that if you ate these,
you might consume your own kind, cannibal-wise. Contemporary meat-eaters
set themselves to combat this prejudice, and argued that it was a pious
duty to kill animals and so release the human souls imprisoned. In the
same tract Porphyry relates (ii. 48) how wizards acquired the mantic
powers of certain birds, such as ravens and hawks, by swallowing their
hearts. The soul of the bird, he explains, enters them with its flesh,
and endows them with power of divination. The lover of wisdom, who is
priest of the universal God, rather than risk the taking into himself of
inferior souls and polluting demons, will abstain from eating animals.
Such is Porphyry's argument.

The same fear of imbibing the irrational soul of animals, and thereby
reinforcing the lower appetites and instincts of the human being,
inspired the vegetarianism of Apollonius of Tyana and of the Jewish
Therapeutae, who in their sacred meals were careful to have a table free
from blood-containing meats; and the fear of absorbing the animal's
psychic qualities equally motived the Jewish and early Christian rule
against eating things strangled. It was an early belief, which long
survived among the Manichaean sects, that fish, being born in and of the
waters, and without any sexual connexion on the part of other fishes are
free from the taint which pollutes all animals _quae copulatione
generantur_. Fish, therefore, unlike flesh, could be safely eaten. Here
we have the origin of the Catholic rule of fasting, seldom understood by
those who observe it. The same scruple against flesh-eating is conveyed
in the beautiful confession, in the _Cretans_ of Euripides, of one who
had been initiated in the mysteries of Orpheus and became a "Bacchos."
The last lines of this, as rendered by Dr Gilbert Murray, are as
follows:--

  "Robed in pure white, I have borne me clean
   From man's vile birth and coffined clay,
   And exiled from my lips alway
   Touch of all meat where life hath been."

This Orphic fast from meat was only broken by an annual sacramental
banquet, originally, perhaps, of human, but later of raw bovine flesh.

The Manichaeans held that in every act of begetting, human or otherwise,
a soul is condemned afresh to a cycle of misery by imprisonment in
flesh--a thoroughly Indian notion, under the influence of which their
perfect or elect ones scrupulously abstained from flesh. The prohibition
of taking life, which they took over from the Farther East, in itself
entailed fasting from flesh. A fully initiated Manichaean would not even
cut his own salad, but employed a catechumen to commit on his behalf
this act of murder, for which he subsequently shrived him.

We come to a third widespread reason for fasting, common among savages.
Famished persons are liable to morbid excitement, and fall into
imaginative ecstasies, in the course of which they see visions and
spectres, converse with gods and angels, and are the recipients of
supernatural revelations. Accordingly King Saul "ate no bread all the
day nor all the night" in which the witch of Endor revealed to him the
ghost of Samuel. Weak and famished, he hardly wanted to eat the fatted
calf when the vision was over. Among the North American Indians ecstatic
fasting is regularly practised. A faster writes down his visions and
revelations for a whole season. They are then examined by the elders of
the tribe, and if events have verified them, he is recognized as a
supernaturally gifted being, and rewarded with chieftaincy. All over the
world fasting is a recognized mode of evoking, consulting and also of
overcoming the spirit world. This is why the Zulus and other primitive
races distrust a medicine man who is not an ascetic and lean with
fasting. In the Semitic East it is an old belief that a successful fast
in the wilderness of forty days and nights gives power over the Djinns.
The Indian _yogi_ fasts till he sees face to face all the gods of his
Pantheon; the Indian magician fasts twelve days before producing rain or
working any cure. The Bogomils fasted till they saw the Trinity face to
face. From the first, fasting was practised in the church for similar
reason. In the _Shepherd of Hermas_ a vision of the church rewards
frequent fasts and prayer; and it is related in extra-canonical sources
that James the Less vowed that he would fast until he too was vouchsafed
a vision of the risen Lord. After a long and rigorous fast the Lord
appeared to him. Not a few saints were rewarded for their fasting by
glimpses of the beatific vision. Dr Tylor writes on this point as
follows (_Prim. Cult._ ii. 415): "Bread and meat would have robbed the
ascetic of many an angel's visit: the opening of the refectory door must
many a time have closed the gates of heaven to his gaze."

Among the Semites and Tatars worshippers lacerate themselves before the
god. So in I Kings xviii. 28 the priests of Baal engaged in a
rain-making ceremony, gashed themselves with knives and lances till the
blood gushed out upon them. The Syriac word _ethkashshaph_, which means
literally to "cut oneself," is the regular equivalent of to "make
supplication." Among Greeks and Arabs, mourners also cut themselves with
knives and scratched their faces; the Hebrew law forbade such mourning,
and we find the prohibition repeated in many canons of the Eastern
churches. At first sight these rites seem intended to call down the pity
of heaven on man, but as Robertson Smith points out, their real import
was by shedding blood on a holy stone or in a holy place to tie or renew
a blood-bond between the God and his faithful ones. We have no clear
information about the mind of the Flagellants, who in 1259, and again in
1349, swarmed through the streets of European cities, naked and
thrashing themselves, till the blood ran, with leather thongs and iron
whips. They were penitents, and no doubt imbued with the ancient belief
that without the shedding of blood there is no remission of sins.

Asceticism then in its origin was usually not ascetic in a modern sense,
that is, not ethical. It was rather of the nature of the savage _taboo_
(q.v.), the outcome of totemistic beliefs or a mode of averting the
contaminating presence of djinns and demons. Above all, fasting was a
mode of preparing oneself for the sacramental eating of a sacred animal,
and as such often assisted by use of purgatives and aperients. It was
essential in the old Greek rites of averting the _Kêres_ or djinns, the
ill regulated ghosts who return to earth and molest the living, to
abstain from flesh. The Pythagoreans and Orphic _mystae_ so abstained
all their life long, and Porphyry eloquently insists on such a
discipline for all who "are not content merely to talk about Reason, but
are really intent on casting aside the body and living through Reason
with Truth. Naked and without the tunic of the flesh these will enter
the arena and strive in the Olympic contest of the soul."

It is time to pass on to Buddhist asceticism, in its essence a more
ethical and philosophical product than some of the forms so far
considered. The keynote of Buddhist asceticism is deliverance from life
and its inevitable suffering. Once at a village where he rested the
Blessed One (Buddha) addressed his brethren and said: "It is through not
understanding and grasping four Noble Truths, O brethren, that we have
had to run so long, to wander so long in this weary path of
transmigration, both you and I." These noble truths were about sorrow,
its cause, its cessation and the path which leads to that cessation.
Once they are grasped the craving for existence is rooted out, that
which leads to renewed existence is destroyed, and there is no more
birth. The Buddha believed he had a way of Truth, which if an elect
disciple possessed he might say of himself, "Hell is destroyed for me,
and rebirth as an animal, or a ghost, or in any place of woe. I am
converted, I am no longer liable to be reborn in a state of suffering,
and am assured of final salvation."

Suffering, said the sage in his great sermon at Benares, is inseparable
from birth and old age. Sickness is suffering, so is death, so is union
with the unloved, and separation from the loved; not to obtain what one
desires is suffering; the entire fivefold clinging to the earthly is
suffering. Its origin is the thirst for being which leads from birth to
birth, together with lust and desire, which find gratification here and
there; the thirst for pleasures, for being, for power. This thirst must
be extinguished by complete annihilation of desire, by letting it go,
expelling it, separating oneself from it, giving it no room. This
extinction is achieved in eight ways, namely rectitude of faith,
resolve, speech, action, living, effort, thought, self-concentration.

In this gospel we must be done with the outer world, participation in
which is not the self, yet means for the self birth and death,
appetites, longings, emotions, change and suffering, pleasure and pain.
He that has put off all lust and desire, all hope and fear, all will to
exist as a sinful, because a sentient, being, has won to the heaven of
extinction or Nirvana. He may still tread the earth, but he is a saint
or Brahman, is in heaven, has quitted the transient and enjoys eternity.

Such was the Buddha's gospel, as his most ancient scriptures enunciate
it. Nirvana is constantly defined in them as supreme happiness. It is
not even clear how far, if we interpret it strictly, this philosophy
leaves any self to be happy. However this be, its practical expression
is the life of the monk who has separated himself from the world. Five
commandments must be observed by him who would even approach the higher
life of saint and ascetic. They are these: to kill no living thing; not
to lay hands on another's property; not to touch another's wife; not to
speak what is untrue; not to drink intoxicating drinks.

Though couched in the negative, these rules must be interpreted in the
amplest and widest sense by all believers. The Order, however, which the
would-be ascetic can enter by regular initiation, when he is twenty
years of age, entails a discipline much more severe. He has gone forth
from home into homelessness, and has not where to lay his head. He must
eat only the morsels he gets by begging; must dress in such rags as he
can pick up; must sleep under trees. Mendicancy is his recognized way of
life. Furthermore, he must abstain all his life from sexual intercourse;
he may not take even a blade of grass without permission of the owner;
he must not kill even a worm or ant; he must not boast of his
perfection. In practice the lives of Buddhist monks are not so squalid
as these rules would lead us to suppose. Thanks to the reverent charity
of the laymen, they do not live much worse than Benedictine monks; and
the prohibition to live in houses does not extend to caves. Everywhere
in India and Ceylon they hollowed out cells and churches in the cliffs
and rocks, which are the wonder of the European tourist.

But long before the advent of Buddhism, the hermit, or wandering beggar,
was a familiar figure in India. No formal initiation was imposed on the
would-be ascetic, save (in the case of young men) the duty to live at
first in his teacher's house. One who had thus fulfilled the duties of
the student order must "go forth remaining chaste," says the
_Apastamba_, ii. 9. 8. He shall then "live without a fire, without a
house, without pleasures, without protection; remaining silent and
uttering speech only on the occasion of the daily recitation of the
Veda; begging so much food only in the village as will sustain his life,
he shall wander about, neither caring for this world nor for heaven. He
shall only wear clothes thrown away by others. Some declare that he
shall even go naked. Abandoning truth and falsehood, pleasure and pain,
the Vedas, this world and the next, he shall seek the Universal Soul, in
knowledge of which standeth eternal salvation."

Such a life was specially recommended for one who has lived the life of
a householder, and, having begotten sons according to the sacred law and
offered sacrifices, desires in his old age to abandon worldly objects
and direct his mind to final liberation. He leaves his wife, if she will
not accompany him, and goes forth into the forest, committing her and
his house to his sons. He must indeed take with him the sacred fire and
implements for domestic sacrifice, but until death overtakes him he must
wander silent, alone, possessing no hearth nor dwelling, begging his
food in the villages, firm of purpose, with a potsherd for an alms bowl,
the roots of trees for a dwelling, and clad in coarse worn out garments.
"Let him not desire to die, let him not desire to live; let him wait for
his appointed time, as a servant waits for the payment of his wages. Let
him drink water purified by straining with a cloth, let him utter speech
purified by truth, let him keep his heart pure. Let him patiently bear
hard words, let him not insult anybody, let him not become any one's
enemy for the sake of this perishable body.... Let him reflect on the
transmigrations of men, caused by their sinful deeds, on their falling
into hell, and on their torments in the world of Yama.... A twice-born
man who becomes an ascetic thus shakes off sin here below and reaches
the highest Brahman" (_Laws of Manu_, by G. Bühler, vi. 85).

This old-world wisdom of the Hindus, a thousand years before our era, is
worthily to be paralleled from the Manichaeism of about the year 400.
Augustine has preserved (_contra Faustum_, v. 1) the portraiture of a
Manichaean elect as drawn by himself:--

  "I have given up father and mother, wife, children and all else that
  the gospel bids us, and do you ask if I accept the gospel? Are you
  then still ignorant of what the word gospel means? It is nothing else
  than the preaching and precept of Christ. I have cast away gold and
  silver, and have ceased to carry even copper in my belt, being content
  with my daily bread, nor caring for the morrow, nor anxious how my
  belly shall be filled or my body clothed; and do you ask me if I
  accept the gospel? You behold in me those beatitudes of Christ which
  make up the gospel, and you ask me if I accept it. You behold me
  gentle, a peacemaker, pure of heart, a mourner, hungering, thirsting,
  bearing persecutions and hatreds for righteousness' sake, and do you
  doubt whether I accept the gospel.... All that was mine I have given
  up, father, mother, wife, children, gold, silver, eating, drinking,
  delights, pleasures. Deem this a sufficient answer to your question
  and deem yourself on the way to be blessed, if you have not been
  scandalized in me."

The Greek Cynics (see CYNICS) played a great part in the history of
Asceticism, and they were so much the precursors of the Christian
hermits that descriptions of them in profane literature have been
mistaken for pictures of early monasticism. In striving to imitate the
rugged strength and independence of their master Socrates, they went to
such extremes as rather to caricature him. They affected to live like
beggars, bearing staff and wallet, owning nothing, renouncing pleasures,
riches, honours. For older thinkers like Plato and Aristotle the perfect
life was that of the citizen and householder; but the Cynics were
individualists, citizens of the world without loyalty or respect for the
ancient city state, the decay of which was coincident with their rise.
Their zeal for renunciation often extended not to pleasures, marriage
and property alone, but to cleanliness, knowledge and good manners as
well, and in this respect also they were the forerunners of later monks.

Philo (20 B.C.-A.D. 40) has left us many pictures of the life which to
his mind impersonated the highest wisdom, and they are all inspired by
the more respectable sort of cynicism, which had taken deep root among
Greek Jews of the day. One such picture merits citation from his tract
_On Change of Names_ (vol. i. 583, ed. Mangey): "All this company of the
good and wise have of their own free will divested themselves of too
copious wealth; nay, have spurned the things dear to the flesh. For of
good habit and lusty are athletes, since they have fortified against
the soul the body which should be its servant; but the disciples of
wisdom are pale and wasted, and in a manner reduced to skeletons,
because they have sacrificed the whole of their bodily strength to the
faculties of the soul."

His own favourite ascetics, the Therapeutae, whose chief centre was in
Egypt, had renounced property and all its temptations, and fled,
irrevocably abandoning brothers, children, wives, parents, throngs of
kinsmen, intimacy of friends, the fatherlands where they were born and
bred (see THERAPEUTAE). Here we have the ideal of early Christian
renunciation at work, but apart from the influence of Jesus. In the
pages of Epictetus the same ideal is constantly held up to us.

In the Christian Church there was from the earliest age a leaning to
excessive asceticism, and it needed a severe struggle on the part of
Paul, and of the Catholic teachers who followed him, to secure for the
baptized the right to be married, to own property, to engage in war and
commerce, or to assume public office. One and all of the permanent
institutions of society were condemned by the early enthusiasts,
especially by those who looked forward to a speedy advent of the
millennium, as alien to the kingdom of God and as impediments to the
life of grace.

Marriage and property had already been eschewed in the Jewish Essene and
Therapeutic sects, and in Christianity the name of Encratite was given
to those who repudiated marriage and the use of wine. They did not form
a sect, but represented an impulse felt everywhere. In early and popular
apocryphal histories the apostles are represented as insisting that
their converts should either not contract wedlock or should dissolve the
tie if already formed. This is the plot of the _Acts of Thecla_, a story
which probably goes back to the first century. Repudiation of the tie by
fervent women, betrothed or already wives, occasioned much domestic
friction and popular persecution. In the Syriac churches, even as late
as the 4th century, the married state seems to have been regarded as
incompatible with the perfection of the initiated. Renunciation of the
state of wedlock was anyhow imposed on the faithful during the lengthy,
often lifelong, terms of penance imposed upon them for sins committed;
and later, when monkery took the place, in a church become worldly,
partly of the primitive baptism and partly of that rigorous penance
which was the rebaptism and medicine of the lapsed, celibacy and
virginity were held essential thereto, no less than renunciation of
property and money-making.

Together with the rage for virginity went the institution of _virgines
subintroductae_, or of spiritual wives; for it was often assumed that
the grace of baptism restored the original purity of life led by Adam
and Eve in common before the Fall. Such rigours are encouraged in the
_Shepherd of Hermas_, a book which emanated from Rome and up to the 4th
century was read in church. They were common in the African churches,
where they led to abuses which taxed the energy even of a Cyprian. They
were still rife in Antioch in 260. We detect them in the Celtic church
of St Patrick, and, as late as the 7th century, among the Celtic elders
of the north of France. In the Syriac church as late as 340, such
relations prevailed between the "Sons and daughters of the
Resurrection." It continued among the Albigenses and other dissident
sects of the middle ages, among whom it served a double purpose; for
their elders were thus not only able to prove their own chastity, but to
elude the inquisitors, who were less inclined to suspect a man of the
catharism which regarded marriage as the "greater adultery" (_maius
adulterium_) if they found him cohabiting (in appearance at least) with
a woman. There was hardly an early council, great or small, that did not
condemn this custom, as well as the other one, still more painful to
think of, of self-emasculation. In the Catholic church, however, common
sense prevailed, and those who desired to follow the Encratite ideal
repaired to the monasteries.

  AUTHORITIES.--E.B. Tylor, _Primitive Culture_ (London, 1903);
  Robertson Smith, _Religion of the Semites_ (London, 1901); J.E.
  Harrison, _Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion_; F. Max Müller,
  _The Sacred Books of the East_; Victor Henry, _La Magie dans l'Inde
  antique_; J.G. Frazer, _The Golden Bough_ (London, 1900), and _Adonis,
  Attis, Osiris_ (London, 1906); Georges Lafay, _Culte des divinitês
  d'Alexandrie_ (Paris, 1884); Döllinger, _Sectengeschichte des
  Mittelalters_ (Munich, 1890); Fr. Cumont, _Mysteries of Mithra_
  (Chicago, 1903); Zöckler, _Gesch. der Ascese_ (1863). See also under
  PURIFICATION. Goldziher, "De l'ascetisme aux premiers temps de
  l'Islam," in _Revue de l'histoire des religions_ (1898), p. 314;
  Muratori, _De Synisactis et Agapetis_ (Pavia, 1709); Jas. Martineau,
  _Types of Ethical Theory_ (Oxford, 1885); T.H. Green, _Prolegomena to
  Ethics_ (Oxford, 1883); Franz Cumont, _Les Religions orientales dans
  le paganisme romain_ (Paris, 1907); Porphyrius, _De Abstinentia_;
  Plutarchus, _De Carnium Esu_.     (F. C. C.)