ASCENSION, FEAST OF THE, one of the oecumenical festivals of the
Christian Church, ranking in solemnity with those of Christmas, of
Easter and of Pentecost. It is held forty days after Easter, or ten days
before Whitsunday, in celebration of Christ's ascension into heaven
forty days after the resurrection. It always falls on a Thursday, and
the day is known as Ascension Day, or Holy Thursday. The festival is of
great antiquity; and though there is no discoverable trace of it before
the middle of the 4th century, subsequent references to it assume its
long establishment. Thus St Augustine (_Ep. 54 ad Januar._) mentions it
as having been kept from time immemorial and as probably instituted by
the apostles. Chrysostom, in his homily on the ascension, mentions a
celebration of the festival in the church of Romanesia outside Antioch,
and Socrates (_Hist. eccles._ vii. 26) records that in the year 390 the
people of Constantinople "of old custom" ([Greek: ex ethous]) celebrated
the feast in a suburb of the city. As these two references suggest, the
festival was associated with a professional pilgrimage, in commemoration
of the passing of Christ and his apostles to the Mount of Olives; such a
procession is described by Adamnan, abbot of Iona, as taking place at
Jerusalem in the 7th century, when the feast was celebrated in the
church on Mount Olivet (_de loc. sanct._ i. 22). The _Peregrinatio_ of
Etheria (Silvia), which dates from c. A.D. 385, says that the festival
was held in the Church of the Nativity at Bethlehem (Duchesne, _Chr.
Worship_, p. 515). In the West, however, in the middle ages, the
procession with candles and banners outside the church was taken as
symbolical of Christ's triumphant entry into heaven.

In the East the festival is known as the [Greek: analaepsis], "taking
up," or [Greek: episozomenae], a term first used in the Cappadocian
church, and of which the meaning has been disputed, but which probably
signifies the feast "of completed salvation." The word _ascensio_,
adopted in the West, implies the ascension of Christ by his own power,
in contradistinction to the _assumptio_, or taking up into heaven of the
Virgin Mary by the power of God.

In the Roman Catholic Church the most characteristic ritual feature of
the festival is now the solemn extinction of the paschal candle after
the Gospel at high mass. This candle, lighted at every mass for the
forty days after Easter, symbolizes the presence of Christ with his
disciples, and its extinction his parting from them. The custom dates
from 1263, and was formerly confined to the Franciscans; it was
prescribed for the universal church by the Congregation of Rites on the
19th of May 1697. Other customs, now obsolete, were formerly associated
with the liturgy of this feast; e.g. the blessing of the new beans after
the Commemoration of the Dead in the canon of the mass (Duchesne, p.
183). In some churches, during the middle ages, an image of Christ was
raised from the altar through a hole in the roof, through which a
burning straw figure representing Satan was immediately thrown down.

In the Anglican Church Ascension Day and its octave continue to be
observed as a great festival, for which a special preface to the
consecration prayer in the communion service is provided, as in the case
of Christmas, Easter, Whitsunday, and Trinity Sunday. The celebration of
the Feast of the Ascension was also retained in the Lutheran churches as
warranted by Holy Scripture.

  See Herzog-Hauck, _Realencyklopädie_ (1900), s. _"Himmelfahrtsfest"_;
  L. Duchesne, _Christian Worship_ (2nd Eng. ed., London, 1904); _The
  Catholic Encyclopaedia_ (London and New York, 1907).