ASCHAM, ROGER (c. 1515-1568), English scholar and writer, was born at
Kirby Wiske, a village in the North Riding of Yorkshire, near
Northallerton, about the year 1515. His name would be more properly
spelt Askham, being derived, doubtless, from Askham in the West Riding.
He was the third son of John Ascham, steward to Lord Scrope of Bolton.
The family name of his mother Margaret is unknown, but she is said to
have been well connected. The authority for this statement, as for most
others concerning Ascham's early life, is Edward Grant, headmaster of
Westminster, who collected and edited his letters and delivered a
panegyrical oration on his life in 1576.

Ascham was educated not at school, but in the house of Sir Humphry
Wingfield, a barrister, and in 1533 speaker of the House of Commons, as
Ascham himself tells us, in the _Toxophilus_, p. 120 (not, as by a
mistake which originated with Grant and has been repeated ever since,
Sir Anthony Wingfield, who was nephew of the speaker). Sir Humphry
"ever loved and used to have many children brought up in his house,"
where they were under a tutor named R. Bond. Their sport was archery,
and Sir Humphry "himself would at term times bring down from London both
bows and shafts and go with them himself to the field and see them
shoot." Hence Ascham's earliest English work, the _Toxophilus_, the
importance which he attributed to archery in educational establishments,
and probably the provision for archery in the statutes of St Albans,
Harrow and other Elizabethan schools. From this private tuition Ascham
was sent "about 1530," at the age, it is said, of fifteen, to St John's
College, Cambridge, then the largest and most learned college in either
university. Here he fell under the influence of John Cheke, who was
admitted a fellow in Ascham's first year, and Sir Thomas Smith. His
guide and friend was Robert Pember, "a man of the greatest learning and
with an admirable facility in the Greek tongue." On his advice he
practised seriously the precept embodied in the saying, "I know nothing
about the subject, I have not even lectured on it," and "to learn Greek
more quickly, while still a boy, taught Greek to boys." In Latin he
specially studied Cicero and Caesar. He became B.A. on the 18th of
February 1534/5. Dr Nicholas Metcalfe was then master of the college, "a
papist, indeed, and yet if any young man given to the new learning as
they termed it, went beyond his fellows," he "lacked neither open
praise, nor private exhibition." He procured Ascham's election to a
fellowship, "though being a new bachelor of arts, I chanced among my
companions to speak against the Pope ... after grievous rebuke and some
punishment, open warning was given to all the fellows, none to be so
hardy, as to give me his voice at that election." The day of election
Ascham regarded as his "birthday," and "the whole foundation of the poor
learning I have and of all the furtherance that hitherto elsewhere I
have obtained." He took his M.A. degree on the 3rd of July 1537. He
stayed for some time at Cambridge taking pupils, among whom was William
Grindal, who in 1544 became tutor to Princess Elizabeth. Ascham himself
cultivated music, acquired fame for a beautiful handwriting, and
lectured on mathematics. Before 1540, when the Regius professorship of
Greek was established, Ascham "was paid a handsome salary to profess the
Greek tongue in public," and held also lectures in St John's College. He
obtained from Edward Lee, then archbishop of York, a pension of £2 a
year, in return for which Ascham translated Oecumenius' Commentaries on
the Pauline Epistles. But the archbishop, scenting heresy in some
passage relating to the marriage of the clergy, sent it back to him,
with a present indeed, but with something like a reprimand, to which
Ascham answered with an assurance that he was "no seeker after
novelties," as his lectures showed. He was on safer ground in writing in
1542-1543 a book, which he told Sir William Paget in the summer of 1544
was in the press, "on the art of Shooting." This was no doubt suggested
partly by the act of parliament 33 Henry VIII. c. 9, "an acte for
mayntenaunce of Artyllarie and debarringe of unlawful games," requiring
every one under sixty, of good health, the clergy, judges, &c.,
excepted, "to use shooting in the long bow," and fixing the price at
which bows were to be sold. Under the title of _Toxophilus_ he presented
it to Henry VIII. at Greenwich soon after his triumphant return from the
capture of Boulogne, and promptly received a grant of a pension of £10 a
year, equal to some £200 a year of our money. A novelty of the book was
that the author had "written this Englishe matter in the Englishe tongue
for Englishe men," though he thought it necessary to defend himself by
the argument that what "the best of the realm think it honest to use" he
"ought not to suppose it vile for him to write." It is a Platonic
dialogue between Toxophilus and Philologus, and nowadays its chief
interest lies in its incidental remarks. It may probably claim to have
been the model for Izaak Walton's _Compleat Angler._

From 1541, or earlier, Ascham acted as letter-writer to the university
and also to his college. Perhaps the best specimen of his skill was the
letter written to the protector Somerset in 1548 on behalf of Sedbergh
school, which was attached to St John's College by the founder, Dr
Lupton, in 1525, and the endowment of which had been confiscated under
the Chantries Act. In 1546 Ascham was elected public orator by the
university on Sir John Cheke's retirement.

Shortly after the beginning of the reign of Edward VI., Ascham made
public profession of Protestant opinions in a disputation on the
doctrine of the Mass, begun in his own college and then removed for
greater publicity to the public schools of the university, where it was
stopped by the vice-chancellor. Thereon Ascham wrote a letter of
complaint to Sir William Cecil. This stood him in good stead. In January
1548, Grindal, the princess Elizabeth's tutor, died. Ascham had already
corresponded with the princess, and in one of his letters says that he
returns her pen which he has mended. Through Cecil and at the princess's
own wish he was selected as her tutor against another candidate pressed
by Admiral Seymour and Queen Katherine. Ascham taught Elizabeth--then
sixteen years old--for two years, chiefly at Cheshunt. In a letter to
Sturm, the Strassburg schoolmaster, he praises her "beauty, stature,
wisdom and industry. She talks French and Italian as well as English:
she has often talked to me readily and well in Latin and moderately so
in Greek. When she writes Greek and Latin nothing is more beautiful than
her handwriting ... she read with me almost all Cicero and great part of
Titus Livius: for she drew all her knowledge of Latin from those two
authors. She used to give the morning to the Greek Testament and
afterwards read select orations of Isocrates and the tragedies of
Sophocles. To these I added St Cyprian and Melanchthon's Commonplaces."
In 1550 Ascham quarrelled with Elizabeth's steward and returned to
Cambridge. Cheke then procured him the secretaryship to Sir Richard
Morrison (Moryson), appointed ambassador to Charles V. It was on his way
to join Morrison that he paid his celebrated morning call on Lady Jane
Grey at Bradgate, where he found her reading Plato's _Phaedo_, while
every one else was out hunting.

The embassy went to Louvain, where he found the university very inferior
to Cambridge, then to Innsbruck and Venice. Ascham read Greek with the
ambassador four or five days a week. His letters during the embassy,
which was recalled on Mary's accession, were published in English in
1553, as a "Report" on Germany. Through Bishop Gardiner he was appointed
Latin secretary to Queen Mary with a pension of £20 a year. His
Protestantism he must have quietly sunk, though he told Sturm that "some
endeavoured to hinder the flow of Gardiner's benevolence on account of
his religion." Probably his never having been in orders tended to his
safety. On the 1st of June 1554 he married Margaret Howe, whom he
described as niece of Sir R. (? J., certainly not, as has been said,
Henry) Wallop. By her he had two sons. From his frequent complaints of
his poverty then and later, he seems to have lived beyond his income,
though, like most courtiers, he obtained divers lucrative leases of
ecclesiastical and crown property. In 1555 he resumed his studies with
Princess Elizabeth, reading in Greek the orations of Aeschines and
Demosthenes' _De Corona_. Soon after Elizabeth's accession, on the 5th
of October 1559, he was given, though a layman, the canonry and prebend
of Wetwang in York minster. In 1563 he began the work which has made him
famous, _The Scholemaster_. The occasion of it was, he tells us (though
he is perhaps merely imitating Boccaccio), that during the "great
plague" at London in 1563 the court was at Windsor, and there on the
10th of December he was dining with Sir William Cecil, secretary of
state, and other ministers. Cecil said he had "strange news; that divers
scholars of Eaton be run away from the schole for fear of beating"; and
expressed his wish that "more discretion was used by schoolmasters in
correction than commonly is." A debate took place, the party being
pretty evenly divided between floggers and anti-floggers, with Ascham as
the champion of the latter. Afterwards Sir Richard Sackville, the
treasurer, came up to Ascham and told him that "a fond schoolmaster"
had, by his brutality, made him hate learning, much to his loss, and as
he had now a young son, whom he wished to be learned, he offered, if
Ascham would name a tutor, to pay for the education of their respective
sons under Ascham's orders, and invited Ascham to write a treatise on
"the right order of teaching." _The Scholemaster_ was the result. It is
not, as might be supposed, a general treatise on educational method, but
"a plaine and perfite way of teachyng children to understand, write and
speake in Latin tong"; and it was not intended for schools, but
"specially prepared for the private brynging up of youth in gentlemen
and noblemens houses." The perfect way simply consisted in "the double
translation of a model book"; the book recommended by this professional
letter-writer being "Sturmius' _Select Letters of Cicero_." As a method
of learning a language by a single pupil, this method might be useful;
as a method of education in school nothing more deadening could be
conceived. The method itself seems to have been taken from Cicero. Nor
was the famous plea for the substitution of gentleness and persuasion
for coercion and flogging in schools, which has been one of the main
attractions of the book, novel. It was being practised and preached at
that very time by Christopher Jonson (c. 1536-1597) at Winchester; it
had been enforced at length by Wolsey in his statutes for his Ipswich
College in 1528, following Robert Sherborne, bishop of Chichester, in
founding Rolleston school; and had been repeatedly urged by Erasmus and
others, to say nothing of William of Wykeham himself in the statutes of
Winchester College in 1400. But Ascham's was the first definite
demonstration in favour of humanity in the vulgar tongue and in an easy
style by a well-known "educationist," though not one who had any actual
experience as a schoolmaster. What largely contributed to its fame was
its picture of Lady Jane Grey, whose love of learning was due to her
finding her tutor a refuge from pinching, ear-boxing and bullying
parents; some exceedingly good criticisms of various authors, and a
spirited defence of English as a vehicle of thought and literature, of
which it was itself an excellent example. The book was not published
till after Ascham's death, which took place on the 23rd of December
1568, owing to a chill caught by sitting up all night to finish a New
Year's poem to the queen.

  His letters were collected and published in 1576, and went through
  several editions, the latest at Nuremberg in 1611; they were re-edited
  by William Elstob in 1703. His English works were edited by James
  Bennett with a life by Dr Johnson in 1771, reprinted in 8vo in 1815.
  Dr Giles in 1864-1865 published in 4 vols. select letters with the
  _Toxophilus_ and _Scholemaster_ and the life by Edward Grant. _The
  Scholemaster_ was reprinted in 1571 and 1589. It was edited by the
  Rev. J. Upton in 1711 and in 1743, by Prof. J.E.B. Mayor in 1863, and
  by Prof. Edward Arber in 1870. The _Toxophilus_ was republished in
  1571, 1589 and 1788, and by Prof. Edward Arber in 1868 and 1902.
       (A. F. L.)