ASCHAFFENBURG, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Bavaria, on the
right bank of the Main, at its confluence with the Aschaff, near the
foot of the Spessart, 26 m. by rail S.E. of Frankfort-On-Main. Pop.
(1900) 18,091; (1905) 25,275. Its chief buildings are the Johannisburg,
built (1605-1614) by Archbishop Schweikard of Cronberg, which contains a
library with a number of _incunabula_, a collection of engravings and
paintings; the _Stiftskirche_, or cathedral, founded in 980 by Otto of
Bavaria, but dating in the main from the early 12th and the 13th
centuries, in which are preserved various monuments by the Vischers, and
a sarcophagus, with the relics of St Margaret (1540); the Capuchin
hospital; a theatre, which was formerly the house of the Teutonic order;
and several mansions of the German nobility. The town, which has been
remarkable for its educational establishments since the 10th century,
has a gymnasium, lyceum, seminarium and other schools. There is an
archaeological museum in the old abbey buildings. The graves of Klemens
Brentano and his brother Christian (d. 1851) are in the churchyard; and
Wilhelm Heinse is buried in the town. Coloured and white paper,
ready-made clothing, cellulose, tobacco, lime and liqueurs are the chief
manufactures, while a considerable export trade is done down the Main in
wood, cattle and wine.

Aschaffenburg, called in the middle ages Aschafaburg and also Askenburg,
was originally a Roman settlement. The 10th and 23rd Roman legions had
their station here, and on the ruins of their _castrum_ the Frankish
mayors of the palace built a castle. Bonifacius erected a chapel to St
Martin, and founded a Benedictine monastery. A stone bridge over the
Main was built by Archbishop Willigis in 989. Adalbert increased the
importance of the town in various ways about 1122. In 1292 a synod was
held here, and in 1474 an imperial diet, preliminary to that of Vienna,
in which the concordat was decided which has therefore been sometimes
called the _Aschaffenburg Concordat_.

The town suffered greatly during the Thirty Years' War, being held in
turn by the various belligerents. In 1842-1849, King Louis built himself
to the west of the town a country house, called the _Pompeianum_, from
its being an imitation of the house of Castor and Pollux at Pompeii. In
1866 the Prussians inflicted a severe defeat on the Austrians in the
neighbourhood.

The principality of Aschaffenburg, deriving its name from the city,
comprehended an area of 654 English sq. m. It formed part of the
electorate of Mainz, and in 1803 was made over to the archchancellor,
Archbishop Charles of Dalberg. In 1806 it was annexed to the grand-duchy
of Frankfort; and in 1814 was transferred to Bavaria, in virtue of a
treaty concluded on the 19th of June between that power and Austria.
With lower Franconia, it now forms a district of the kingdom of Bavaria.