ASCONIUS PEDIANUS, QUINTUS (9 B.C.-A.D. 76; or A.D. 3-88), Roman
grammarian and historian, was probably a native of Patavium (Padua). In
his later years he resided at Rome, where he died, after having been
blind for twelve years, at the age of eighty-five. During the reigns of
Claudius and Nero he compiled for his sons, from various sources--e.g.
the Gazette (_Acta Publica_), shorthand reports or "skeletons"
(_commentarii_) of Cicero's unpublished speeches, Tiro's life of Cicero,
speeches and letters of Cicero's contemporaries, various historical
writers, e.g. Varro, Atticus, Antias, Tuditanus and Fenestella (a
contemporary of Livy whom he often criticizes)--historical commentaries
on Cicero's speeches, of which only five, viz. _in Pisonem_, _pro
Scauro_, _pro Milone_, _pro Cornelio_ and _in toga Candida_, in a very
mutilated condition, are preserved. In a note upon the speech _pro
Scauro_, he speaks of Longus Caecina (d. A.D. 57) as still living, while
his words imply that Claudius (d. 54) was not alive. This statement,
therefore, must have been written between A.D. 54 and 57. These valuable
notes, written in good Latin, relate chiefly to legal, historical and
antiquarian matters. A commentary, of inferior Latinity and mainly of a
grammatical character, on Cicero's Verrine orations, is universally
regarded as spurious. Both works were found by Poggio in a MS. at St
Gallen in 1416. This MS. is lost, but three transcripts were made by
Poggio, Zomini (Sozomenus) of Pistoia and Bartolommeo da Montpulciano.
That of Poggio is now at Madrid (Matritensis x. 81), and that of Zomini
is in the Forteguerri library at Pistoia (No. 37). A copy of
Bartolommeo's transcript exists in Florence (Laur. liv. 5). The later
MSS. are derived from Poggio's copy. Other works attributed to Asconius
were: a life of Sallust, a defence of Virgil against his detractors, and
a treatise (perhaps a symposium in imitation of Plato) on health and
long life.

  Editions by Kiessling-Schöll (1875), and A.C. Clark (Oxford, 1906),
  which contains a previously unpublished collation of Poggio's
  transcript. See also Madvig, _De Asconio Pediano_ (1828).