ASH WEDNESDAY, in the Western Church, the first day of Lent (q.v.), so
called from the ceremonial use of ashes, as a symbol of penitence, in
the service prescribed for the day. The custom, which is ultimately
based on the penance of "sackcloth and ashes" spoken of by the prophets
of the Old Testament, has been dropped in those of the reformed Churches
which still observe the fast; but it is retained in the Roman Catholic
Church, the day being known as _dies cinerum_ (day of ashes) or _dies
cineris et cilicii_ (day of ash and sackcloth). The ashes, obtained by
burning the palms or their substitutes used in the ceremonial of the
previous Palm Sunday, are placed in a vessel on the altar before High
Mass. The priest, vested in a violet cope, prays that God may send His
angel to hallow the ash, that it become a _remedium salubre_ for all
penitents. After another prayer the ashes are thrice sprinkled with holy
water and thrice censed. Then the priest invites those present to
approach and, dipping his thumb in the ashes, marks them as they kneel
with the sign of the cross on the forehead (or in the case of clerics on
the place of tonsure), with the words: _Memento, homo, quid pulvis es et
in pulverem reverteris_ (Remember, man, that thou art dust and unto dust
thou shall return). The celebrant himself either sprinkles the ash on
his own head in silence, or receives it from the priest of highest
dignity present.

This ceremony is derived from the custom of public penance in the early
Church, when the sinner to be reconciled had to appear in the
congregation clad in sackcloth and covered with ashes (cf. Tertullian,
_De Pudicitia_, 13). At what date this use was extended to the whole
congregation is not known. The phrase _dies cinerum_ appears in the
earliest extant copies of the Gregorian Sacramentary, and it is probable
that the custom was already established by the 8th century. The
Anglo-Saxon homilist Aelfric, in his _Lives of the Saints_ (996 or 997),
refers to it as in common use; but the earliest evidence of its
authoritative prescription is a decree of the synod of Beneventum in
1091.

Of the reformed Churches the Anglican Church alone marks the day by any
special service. This is known as the Commination service, its
distinctive element being the solemn reading of "the general sentences
of God's cursing against sinners, gathered out of the seven and
twentieth chapter of Deuteronomy, and other places of Scripture." The
lections for the day are the same as in the Roman Church (Joel ii. 12,
&c., and Matt. vi. 16, &c.). In the American Prayer Book the office of
Commination is omitted, with the exception of the three concluding
prayers, which are derived from the prayers and anthems said or sung
during the blessing and distribution of the ashes according to the Sarum
Missal. The ceremonial of the ashes was not proscribed in England at the
Reformation; it was indeed enjoined by a proclamation of Henry VIII.
(February 26, 1538) and again in 1550 under Edward VI.; but it had
fallen into complete disuse by the beginning of the 17th century.

  See Wetzer and Welte, _Kirchenlexikon_, and Herzog-Hauck,
  _Realencyklopädie_ (3rd ed.), s. "_Aschermittuoch_"; L. Duchesne,
  _Christian Worship_, trans. by M.L. McClure (London, 1904).