ASHBURTON, a market-town in the Ashburton parliamentary division of
Devonshire, England, 24 m. N.W. by W. of Plymouth, on a branch of the
Great Western railway. Pop. of urban district (1901) 2628. It lies in a
valley surrounded by hills, at a short distance from the river Dart; the
scenery, towards Dartmoor and in the neighbourhood of Buckland and Holne
Chase, being unsurpassed in the county. The church of St. Andrew is
cruciform with a lofty tower. It was built early in the 15th century,
and contains a fine old oak roof over the north aisle, and a tablet in
memory of John Dunning, solicitor-general and 1st Baron Ashburton
(1731-1783). The inscription is by Dr Johnson. Lord Ashburton was
educated at the grammar school, which was founded as a chantry in 1314.
Serge is manufactured in Ashburton, and there are breweries, paint
factories and saw-mills. A large deposit of umber is worked in the
neighbourhood. Slate quarries and copper and tin mines were formerly
valuable. A neighbouring centre of the serge industry is the urban
district of BUCKFASTLEIGH (pop. 2520), 3 m. S S.W. Between the two towns
is Buckfast Abbey, said to have been, before the Conquest, a Benedictine
house, and refounded for Cistercians in 1137. It was restored to use in
1882 by a French Benedictine community, the fine Perpendicular abbot's
tower remaining, while other parts have been rebuilt on the original
lines.

  Ashburton (Essebretona, Asperton, Ashperton) is a borough by
  prescription and an ancient stannary town. It was governed by a
  portreeve and bailiff, elected annually at the court leet held by the
  lord of the manor. According to Domesday, Ashburton was held in chief
  by Osbern, bishop of Exeter, and rendered geld for six hides. In 1552,
  as the two manors of Ashburton Borough and Ashburton Foreign, it was
  sold by the bishop, and subsequently became crown property. Finally,
  it was acquired in moieties by the Clinton family, and the present
  Lord Clinton is joint lord of the manor with Sir Robert Jardine. In
  1298 and 1407 Ashburton returned two members, from 1407 until 1640 one
  member only, and then again two members, until deprived of one by the
  Reform Act of 1832 and of the other by the Reform Act of 1885. In the
  reign of Edward II. Bishop Stapledon obtained a Saturday market, and
  two annual fairs lasting three days at the feasts of St Laurence
  (August 10) and St Martin in winter (November 11). In 1672 John Ford
  was granted a Tuesday market for the sale of wool and woollen goods
  made from English yarn, and in 1705 Andrew Quicke obtained two annual
  fairs, on the first Thursdays in March and June, for the sale of
  cattle, corn and merchandise.