ASHBY-DE-LA-ZOUCH, a market-town in the Bosworth parliamentary division
of Leicestershire, England; 118 m. N.W. by N. from London by the Midland
railway, on the Leicester-Burton branch. Pop. of urban district (1901)
4726. The church of St Helen is a fine Perpendicular building, restored
and enlarged (1880); it contains monuments of the Huntingdon family, and
an old finger-pillory for the punishment of misbehaviour in church. The
Ivanhoe baths, erected in 1826, are frequented for their saline waters,
which, as containing bromine, are found useful in scrofulous and
rheumatic complaints. The springs are at Moira, 3 m. west. There is a
Queen Eleanor cross commemorating the countess of Loudoun, by Sir
Gilbert Scott. To the south of the town are the extensive remains of
Ashby Castle. There are extensive coal-mines in the neighbouring
district, as at Moira, whence the Ashby-de-la-Zouch canal runs south to
the Coventry canal.

  At the time of the Domesday survey Ashby-de-la-Zouch formed part of
  the estates of Hugh de Grentmaisnel. Soon after it was held by Robert
  Beaumeis, from whom it passed by female descent to the family of la
  Zouch, whence it derived the adjunct to its name, having been hitherto
  known as Ashby or Essebi. The earliest record of a grant of market
  rights is in 1219, when Roger la Zouch obtained a grant of a weekly
  market and a two days' fair at the feast of St Helen, in consideration
  of a fine of one palfrey. In the 15th century the manor was held by
  James Butler, earl of Ormond, after whose attainder it was granted in
  1461 to Lord Hastings, who in 1474 obtained royal licence to empark
  3000 acres and to build and fortify a castle. At this castle Mary
  queen of Scots was detained in 1569 under the custody of the earls of
  Huntingdon and Shrewsbury. During the Civil War Colonel Henry Hastings
  fortified and held it for the king, and it was visited by Charles in
  1645. In 1648, at the close of the war, it was dismantled by order of
  parliament. It plays a great part in Sir Walter Scott's _Ivanhoe_. In
  the 18th century Ashby was celebrated as one of the best markets for
  horses in England, and had besides prosperous factories for woollen
  and cotton stockings and for hats.

  See _Victoria County History--Leicestershire; History of
  Ashby-de-la-Zouch_ (Ashby-de-la-Zouch, 1852).