ASHFORD, a market-town in the Southern or Ashford parliamentary division
of Kent, England, 56 m. S.E. of London by the South-Eastern & Chatham
railway. Pop. of urban district (1901) 12,808. It is pleasantly situated
on a gentle eminence near the confluence of the upper branches of the
river Stour. It has a fine Perpendicular church dedicated to St Mary,
with a lofty, well-proportioned tower and many interesting monuments.
The grammar school was founded by Sir Norman Knatchbull in the reign of
Charles I. Ashford has agricultural implement works and breweries; and
the large locomotive and carriage works of the South-Eastern & Chatham
railway are here. At Bethersden, between Ashford and Tenterden, marble
quarries were formerly worked extensively, supplying material to the
cathedrals of Canterbury and Rochester, and to many local churches. At
Charing, north-west of Ashford, the archbishops of Canterbury had a
residence from pre-Conquest times, and ruins of a palace, mainly of the
Decorated period, remain. On the south-eastern outskirts of Ashford is
the populous village of Willesborough (3602).

  Ashford (Esselesford, Asshatisforde, Essheford) was held at the time
  of the Domesday survey by Hugh de Montfort, who came to England with
  William the Conqueror. A Saturday market and an annual fair were
  granted to the lord of the manor by Henry III. in 1243. Further annual
  fairs were granted by Edward III. in 1349 and by Edward IV. in 1466.
  In 1672 Charles II. granted a market on every second Tuesday, with a
  court of pie-powder. James I. in 1607, at the petition of the
  inhabitants of Ashford, gave Sir John Smith, Kt., the right of holding
  a court of record in the town on every third Tuesday. The fertility of
  the pasture-land in Romney Marsh to the south and east of Ashford
  caused the cattle trade to increase in the latter half of the 18th
  century, and led to the establishment of a stock market in 1784. The
  town has never been incorporated.

  See Edward Hasted, _History and Survey of Kent_ (Canterbury,
  1778-1799, 2nd ed. 1797-1801); _Victoria County History--Kent_.