ASHMOLE, ELIAS (1617-1692), English antiquarian, and founder of the
Ashmolean Museum at Oxford, was born at Lichfield on the 23rd of May
1617, the son of a saddler. In 1638 he became a solicitor, and in 1644
was appointed commissioner of excise. At Oxford, whither this brought
him when the Royalist Parliament was sitting there, he made friends with
Captain (afterwards Sir) George Wharton, through whose influence he
obtained the king's commission as captain of horse and comptroller of
the ordnance. In 1646 he was initiated as a Freemason--the first
gentleman, or amateur, to be "accepted." In 1649 he married Lady
Mainwaring, some twenty years his senior and a relative of his first
wife who had died eight years before. This marriage placed him in a
position of affluence that enabled him to devote his whole time to his
favourite studies. His interest in astrology, aroused by Wharton, and by
William Lilly,--whom with other astrologers he met in London in
1646,--seems, in the following years, to have subsided in favour of
heraldry and antiquarian research. In 1657 his wife petitioned for a
separation, but failing to gain her case returned to live with him.
Between this crisis in his domestic life and the time of her death in
1668, Ashmole was in high favour at court. He was made successively
Windsor herald, commissioner, comptroller and accountant-general of
excise, commissioner for Surinam and comptroller of the White Office. He
afterwards refused the office of Garter king-at-arms in favour of Sir
William Dugdale, whose daughter he had married in 1668. In 1672 he
published his _Institutions, Laws and Ceremonies of the Order of the
Garter_, a work which was practically exhaustive, and is an example of
his diligence and years of patient antiquarian research. Five years
later he presented the Ashmolean Museum, the first public museum of
curiosities in the kingdom, the larger part of which he had inherited
from a friend, John Tradescant, to the university of Oxford. He made it
a condition that a suitable building should be erected for its
reception, and the collection was not finally installed until 1683.
Subsequently he made the further gift to the university of his library.
He died on the 18th of May 1692.