ASIENTO, or ASSIENTO (from the verb _asentar_, to place, or establish),
a Spanish word meaning a farm of the taxes, or contract. The farmer or
contractor is called an _asentista_. The word acquired a considerable
notoriety in English and American history, on account of the "Asiento
Treaty" of 1713. Until 1702 the Spanish government had given the
contract for the supply of negroes to its colonies in America to the
Genoese. But after the establishment of the Bourbon dynasty in 1700, a
French company was formed which received the exclusive privilege of the
Spanish-American slave trade for ten years--from September 1702 to 1712.
When the peace of Utrecht was signed the British government insisted
that the monopoly should be given to its own subjects. By the terms of
the Asiento treaty signed on the 16th of March 1713, it was provided
that British subjects should be authorized to introduce 144,000 slaves
in the course of thirty years, at the rate of 4800 per annum. The
privilege was to expire on the 1st of May 1743. British subjects were
also authorized to send one ship of 500 tons per annum, laden with
manufactured goods, to the fairs of Porto Bello and La Vera Cruz. Import
duties were to be paid for the slaves and goods. This privilege was
conveyed by the British government to the South Sea Company, formed to
work it. The privilege, to which an exaggerated value was attached,
formed the solid basis of the notorious fit of speculative fever called
the South Sea Bubble. Until 1739 the trade in blacks went on without
interruption, but amid increasingly angry disputes between the Spanish
and the British governments. The right to send a single trading ship to
the fairs of Porto Bello or La Vera Cruz was abused. Under pretence of
renewing her provisions she was followed by tenders which in fact
carried goods. Thus there arose what was in fact a vast contraband
trade. The Spanish government established a service of revenue boats
(_guarda costas_) which insisted on searching all English vessels
approaching the shores of the Spanish colonies. There can be no doubt
that the smugglers were guilty of many piratical excesses, and that the
_guarda costas_ often acted with violence on mere suspicion. After many
disputes, in which the claims of the British government were met by
Spanish counterclaims, war ensued in 1739. When peace was made at
Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748 Spain undertook to allow the asiento to be
renewed for the four years which were to run when war broke out in 1739.
But the renewal for so short a period was not considered advantageous,
and by the treaty of El Retiro of 1750, the British government agreed to
the recession of the Asiento treaty altogether on the payment by Spain
of £100,000.

  A very convenient account of the Asiento Treaty, and of the trade
  which arose under it, will be found in Malachy Postlethwayt's
  _Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce_ (London, 1751), s.v.