ASKEW, or ASCUE, ANNE (1521?-1546), English Protestant martyr, born at
Stallingborough about 1521, was the second daughter of Sir William Askew
(d. 1540) of South Kelsey, Lincoln, by his first wife Elizabeth,
daughter of Thomas Wrottesley. Her elder sister, Martha, was betrothed
by her parents to Thomas Kyme, a Lincolnshire justice of the peace, but
she died before marriage, and Anne was induced or compelled to take her
place. She is said to have had two children by Kyme, but religious
differences and incompatibility of temperament soon estranged the
couple. Kyme was apparently an unimaginative man of the world, while
Anne took to Bible-reading with zeal, became convinced of the falsity of
the doctrine of transubstantiation, and created some stir in Lincoln by
her disputations. According to Bale and Foxe her husband turned her out
of doors, but in the privy council register she is said to have "refused
Kyme to be her husband without any honest allegation." She had as good a
reason for repudiating her husband as Henry VIII. for repudiating Anne
of Cleves. In any case, she came to London and made friends with Joan
Bocher, who was already known for heterodoxy, and other Protestants. She
was examined for heresy in March 1545 by the lord mayor, and was
committed to the Counter prison. Then she was examined by Bonner, the
bishop of London, who drew up a form of recantation which he entered in
his register. This fact led Parsons and other Catholic historians to
state that she actually recanted but she refused to sign Bonner's form
without qualification. Two months later, on the 24th of May, the privy
council ordered her arrest. On the 13th of June 1545, she was arraigned
as a sacramentarian under the Six Articles at the Guildhall; but no
witness appeared against her; she was declared not guilty by the jury
and discharged after paying her fees.

The reactionary party, which, owing to the absence of Hertford and Lisle
and to the presence of Gardiner, gained the upper hand in the council in
the summer of 1546, were not satisfied with this repulse; they probably
aimed at the leaders of the reforming party, such as Hertford and
possibly Queen Catherine Parr, who were suspected of favouring Anne, and
on the 18th of June 1546 Anne was again arraigned before a commission
including the lord mayor, the duke of Norfolk, St John, Bonner and
Heath. No jury was empanelled and no witnesses were called; she was
condemned, simply on her confession, to be burnt. On the same day she
was called before the privy council with her husband. Kyme was sent home
into Lincolnshire, but Anne was committed to Newgate, "for that she was
very obstinate and heady in reasoning of matters of religion." On the
following day she was taken to the Tower and racked; according to Anne's
own statement, as recorded by Bale, the lord chancellor, Wriothesley,
and the solicitor-general, Rich, worked the rack themselves; but she
"would not convert for all the pain" (Wriothesley, _Chronicle_ i. 168).
Her torture, disputed by Jardine, Lingard and others, is substantiated
not only by her own narrative, but by two contemporary chronicles, and
by a contemporary letter (_ibid._; _Narratives of the Reformation_, p.
305; Ellis, _Original Letters_, 2nd Ser. ii. 177). For four weeks she
was left in prison, and at length on the 16th of July, she was burnt at
Smithfield in the presence of the same persecuting dignitaries who had
condemned her to death.

  AUTHORITIES.--Bale's two tracts, printed at Marburg in November 1546
  and January 1547, are the basis of Foxe's account. See also _Acts of
  the Privy Council_ (1542-1547), pp. 424-462; Wriothesley's _Chron._
  i. 155, 167-169; _Narratives of the Reformation_, passim; Gough's
  _Index to Parker Soc. Publications_; Burnet's _Hist. of the
  Reformation_; Dixon's _Hist. of the Church of England; Dict. Nat.
  Biogr._     (A. F. P.)