ASKE, ROBERT (d. 1537), English rebel, was a country gentleman who
belonged to an ancient family long settled in Yorkshire, his mother
being a daughter of John, Lord Clifford. When in 1536 the insurrection
called the "Pilgrimage of Grace" broke out in Yorkshire, Aske was made
leader; and marching with the banner of St Cuthbert and with the badge
of the "five wounds," he occupied York on the 16th of October and on the
20th captured Pontefract Castle, with Lord Darcy and the archbishop of
York, who took the oath of the rebels. He caused the monks and nuns to
be reinstated, and refused to allow the king's herald to read the royal
proclamation, announcing his intention of marching to London to declare
the grievances of the commons to the sovereign himself, secure the
expulsion of counsellors of low birth, and obtain restitution for the
church. The whole country was soon in the hands of the rebels, a
military organization with posts from Newcastle to Hull was established,
and Hull was provided with cannon. Subsequently Aske, followed by 30,000
or 40,000 men, proceeded towards Doncaster, where lay the duke of
Norfolk with the royal forces, which, inferior in numbers, would
probably have been overwhelmed had not Aske persuaded his followers to
accept the king's pardon, and the promise of a parliament at York and to
disband. Soon afterwards he received a letter from the king desiring him
to come secretly to London to inform him of the causes of the rebellion.
Aske went under the guarantee of a safe-conduct and was well received by
Henry. He put in writing a full account of the rising and of his own
share in it; and, fully persuaded of the king's good intentions,
returned home on the 8th of January 1537, bringing with him promises of
a visit from the king to Yorkshire, of the holding of a parliament at
York, and of free elections. Shortly afterwards he wrote to the king
warning him of the still unquiet state not only of the north but of the
midlands, and stating his fear that more bloodshed was impending. The
same month he received the king's thanks for his action in pacifying Sir
Francis Bigod's rising. But his position was now a difficult and a
perilous one, and a few weeks later the attitude of the government
towards him was suddenly changed. The new rising had given the court an
excuse for breaking off the treaty and sending another army under
Norfolk into Yorkshire. Possibly in these fresh circumstances Aske may
have given cause for further suspicions of his loyalty, and in his last
confession he acknowledged that communications to obtain aid had been
opened with the imperial ambassador and were contemplated with Flanders.
But it is more probable that the government had from the first
treacherously affected to treat him with confidence to secure the
secrets of the rebels and to effect his destruction. In March Norfolk
congratulated Cromwell on the successful accomplishment of his task,
having persuaded Aske to go to London on false assurances of security.
He was arrested in April, tried before a commission at Westminster, and
sentenced to death for high treason on the 17th of May; and on the 28th
of June he was taken back to Yorkshire, being paraded in the towns and
country through which he passed. He was hanged at York in July,
expressing repentance for breaking the king's laws, but declaring that
he had promise of pardon both from Cromwell and from Henry. It is
related that his servant, Robert Wall, died of grief at the thought of
his master's approaching execution. Aske was a real leader, who gained
the affection and confidence of his followers; and his sudden rise to
greatness and his choice by the people point to abilities that have not
been recorded.

  See _Henry VIII. and the English Monasteries_, by F.A. Gasquet (1906);
  _Letters and Papers of the Reign of Henry VIII._, vols. xi. and xii.;
  _English Histor. Review_, v. 330, 550 (account of the rebellion,
  examination and answers to interrogations); _Chronicle of Henry
  VIII._, tr. by M.A.S. Hume (1889); Whitaker's _Richmondshire_, i. 116
  (pedigree of the Askes).