ASMARA, the capital of the Italian colony of Eritrea, N.E. Africa. It is
built on the Hamasen plateau, near its eastern edge, at an elevation of
7800 ft., and is some 40 m. W.S.W. in a direct line of the seaport of
Massawa. Pop. (1904) about 9000, including the garrison of 300 Italian
soldiers, and some 1000 native troops. The European civil population
numbers over 500; the rest of the inhabitants are chiefly Abyssinians.
There is a small Mahommedan colony. The town is strongly fortified. The
European quarter contains several fine public buildings, including the
residence of the governor, club house, barracks and hospital. Fort
Baldissera is built on a hill to the south-west of the town and is
considered impregnable.

Asmara, an Amharic word signifying "good pasture place," is a town of
considerable antiquity. It was included in the maritime province of
northern Abyssinia, which was governed by a viceroy who bore the title
of Bahar-nagash (ruler of the sea). By the Abyssinians the Hamasen
plateau was known as the plain of the thousand villages. Asmara appears
to have been one of the most prosperous of these villages, and to have
attained commercial importance through being on the high road from Axum
to Massawa. When Werner Munzinger (q.v.) became French consul at
Massawa, he entered into a scheme for annexing the Hamasen (of which
Asmara was then the capital) to France, but the outbreak of the war with
Germany in 1870 brought the project to nought (cf. A.B. Wylde, _Modern
Abyssinia_, 1901). In 1872 Munzinger, now in Egyptian service, annexed
Asmara to the khedivial dominions, but in 1884, owing to the rise of the
mahdi, Egypt evacuated her Abyssinian provinces and Asmara was chosen by
Ras Alula, the representative of the negus Johannes (King John), as his
headquarters. Shortly afterwards the Italians occupied Massawa, and in
1889 Asmara (see ABYSSINIA: _History_). In 1900 the seat of government
was transferred from Massawa to Asmara, which in its modern form is the
creation of the Italians. It is surrounded by rich agricultural lands,
cultivated in part by Italian immigrants, and is a busy trading centre.
A railway from Massawa to Asmara was completed as far as Ghinda, at the
foot of the plateau, in 1904. At Medrizien, 6 m. north of Asmara, are
gold-mines which have been partially worked.

  See G. Dainelli, _In Africa. Lettere dall' Eritrea_ (Bergamo, 1908);
  R. Perini, _Di qua dal Mareb_ (Florence, 1905).