ASOKA, a famous Buddhist emperor of India who reigned from 264 to 228 or
227 B.C. Thirty-five of his inscriptions on rocks or pillars or in caves
still exist (see INSCRIPTIONS: _Indian_), and they are among the most
remarkable and interesting of Buddhist monuments (see BUDDHISM). Asoka
was the grandson of Chandragupta, the founder of the Maurya (Peacock)
dynasty, who had wrested the Indian provinces of Alexander the Great
from the hands of Seleucus, and he was the son of Bindusara, who
succeeded his father Chandragupta, by a lady from Champa. The Greeks do
not mention him and the Brahmin books ignore him, but the Buddhist
chronicles and legends tell us much about him. The inscriptions, which
contain altogether about five thousand words, are entirely of religious
import, and their references to worldly affairs are incidental. They
begin in the thirteenth year of his reign, and tell us that in the ninth
year he had invaded Kalinga, and had been so deeply impressed by the
horrors involved in warfare that he had then given up the desire for
conquest, and devoted himself to conquest by "religion." What the
religion was is explained in the edicts. It is purely ethical,
independent alike of theology and ritual, and is the code of morals as
laid down in the Buddhist sacred books for laymen. He further tells us
that in the ninth year of his reign he formally joined the Buddhist
community as a layman, in the eleventh year he became a member of the
order, and in the thirteenth he "set out for the Great Wisdom" (the
_Sambodhi_), which is the Buddhist technical term for entering upon the
well-known, eightfold path to Nirvana. One of the edicts is addressed to
the order, and urges upon its members and the laity alike the learning
and rehearsal of passages from the Buddhist scriptures. Two others are
proclamations commemorating visits paid by the king, one to the dome
erected over the ashes of Konagamana, the Buddha, another to the
birthplace of Gotama, the Buddha (q.v.). Three very short ones are
dedications of caves to the use of an order of recluses. The rest either
enunciate the religion as explained above, or describe the means adopted
by the king for propagating it, or acting in accordance with it. These
means are such as the digging of wells, planting medicinal herbs, and
trees for shade, sending out of missionaries, appointment of special
officers to supervise charities, and so on. The missionaries were sent
to Kashmir, to the Himalayas, to the border lands on the Indus, to the
coast of Burma, to south India and to Ceylon. And the king claims that
missions sent by him to certain Greek kingdoms that he names had
resulted in the folk there conforming themselves to his religion. The
extent of Asoka's dominion included all India from the thirteenth degree
of latitude up to the Himalayas, Nepal, Kashmir, the Swat valley,
Afghanistan as far as the Hindu Kush, Sind and Baluchistan. It was thus
as large as, or perhaps somewhat larger than, British India before the
conquest of Burma. He was undoubtedly the most powerful sovereign of his
time and the most remarkable and imposing of the native rulers of India.
"If a man's fame," says Köppen, "can be measured by the number of hearts
who revere his memory, by the number of lips who have mentioned, and
still mention him with honour, Asoka is more famous than Charlemagne or
Caesar." At the same time it is probable that, like Constantine's
patronage of Christianity, his patronage of Buddhism, then the most
rising and influential faith in India, was not unalloyed with political
motives, and it is certain that his vast benefactions to the Buddhist
cause were at least one of the causes that led to its decline.

  See also _Asoka_, by Vincent Smith (Oxford, 1901); _Inscriptions de
  Piyadasi_, by E. Senart (Paris, 1891); chapters on Asoka in T.W. Rhys
  Davids's _Buddhism_ (20th ed., London, 1903), and _Buddhist India_
  (London, 1903); V.A. Smith, _Edicts of Asoka_ (1909).     (T. W. R. D.)