ASPARAGUS, a genus of plants (nat. ord. Liliaceae) containing more than
100 species, and widely distributed in the temperate and warmer parts of
the Old World; it was introduced from Europe into America with the early
settlers. The name is derived from the Greek [Greek: asparagos] or
[Greek: aspharagos], the origin of which is obscure. _Sperage_ or
_sparage_ was the form in use from the 16th to 18th centuries, cf. the
modern Italian _sparagio_. The vulgar corruption _sparrow-grass_ or
_sparagrass_ was in accepted popular use during the 18th century,
"asparagus" being considered pedantic. The plants have a short,
creeping, underground stem from which spring slender, branched, aerial
shoots. The leaves are reduced to minute scales bearing in their axils
tufts of green, needle-like branches (the so-called _cladodes_), which
simulate, and perform the functions of, leaves. In one section of the
genus, sometimes regarded as a distinct genus _Myrsiphyllum_, the
cladodes are flattened. The plants often climb or scramble, in which
they are helped by the development of the scale-leaves into persistent
spines. The flowers are small, whitish and pendulous; the fruit is a
berry.

Several of the climbing species are grown in greenhouses for their
delicate, often feathery branches, which are also valuable for cutting;
the South African _Asparagus plumosus_ is an especially elegant species.
The so-called smilax, much used for decoration, is a species of the
_Myrsiphyllum_ section, _A. medeoloides_, also known as _Myrsiphyllum
asparagoides_. The young shoots of _Asparagus officinalis_ have from
very remote times been in high repute as a culinary vegetable, owing to
their delicate flavour and diuretic virtues. The plant, which is a
native of the north temperate zone of the Old World, grows wild on the
south coast of England; and on the waste steppes of Russia it is so
abundant that it is eaten by cattle like grass. In common with the
marsh-mallow and some other plants, it contains asparagine or aspartic
acidamide. The roots of asparagus were formerly used as an aperient
medicine, and the fruits were likewise employed as a diuretic. Under the
name of Prussian asparagus, the spikes of an allied plant, _Ornithogalum
pyrenaicum_, are used in some places. The diuretic action is extremely
feeble, and neither the plant nor asparagine is now used medicinally.

Asparagus is grown extensively in private gardens as well as for market.
The asparagus prefers a loose, light, deep, sandy soil; the depth should
be 3 ft., the soil being well trenched, and all surplus water got away.
A considerable quantity of well-rotted dung or of recent seaweed should
be laid in the bottom of the trench, and another top-dressing of manure
should be dug in preparatory to planting or sowing. The beds should be 3
ft. or 5 ft. wide, with intervening alleys of 2 ft., the narrower beds
taking two rows of plants, the wider ones three rows. The beds should
run east and west, so that the sun's rays may strike against the side of
the bed. In some cases the plants are grown in equidistant rows 3 to 4
ft. apart. Where the beds are made with plants already prepared, either
one-year-old or two-year-old plants may be used, for which a trench
should be cut sufficient to afford room for spreading out the roots, the
crowns being all kept at about 2 in. below the surface. Planting is best
done in April, after the plants have started into growth. To prevent
injury to the roots, it is, however, perhaps the better plan to sow the
seeds in the beds where the plants are to remain. To experience the
finest flavour of asparagus, it should be eaten immediately after having
been gathered; if kept longer than one day, or set into water, its finer
flavour is altogether lost. If properly treated, asparagus beds will
continue to bear well for many years. The asparagus grown at Argenteuil,
near Paris, has acquired much notoriety for its large size and excellent
quality. The French growers plant in trenches instead of raised beds.
The most common method of forcing asparagus is to prepare, early in the
year, a moderate hot-bed of stable litter with a bottom heat of 70°, and
to cover it with a common frame. After the heat of fermentation has
somewhat subsided, the surface of the bed is covered with a layer of
light earth or exhausted tan-bark, and in this the roots of strong
mature plants are closely placed. The crowns of the roots are then
covered with 3 to 6 in. of soil. A common three-light frame may hold 500
or 600 plants, and will afford a supply for several weeks. After
planting, linings are applied when necessary to keep up the heat, but
care must be taken not to scorch the roots; air must be occasionally
admitted. Where there are pits heated by hot water or by the tank
system, they may be advantageously applied to this purpose. A succession
of crops must be maintained by annually sowing or planting new beds.

The "asparagus-beetle" is the popular name for two beetles, the "common
asparagus beetle" (_Crioceris asparagi_) and the "twelve-spotted" (_C.
duodecimpunctata_), which feed on the asparagus plant. _C. asparagi_ has
been known in Europe since early times, and was introduced into America
about 1856; the rarer _C. duodecimpunctata_ (sometimes called the "red"
to distinguish it from the "blue" species) was detected in America in
1881. For an admirable account of these pests see F.H. Chittenden,
_Circular 102 of the U.S. Dep. of Agriculture, Bureau of Entomology_,
May 1908.

The "asparagus-stone" is a form of apatite, simulating asparagus in
colour.