ASPEN, an important section of the poplar genus (_Populus_) of which the
common aspen of Europe, _P. tremula_, may be taken as the type,--a tall
fast-growing tree with rather slender trunk, and grey bark becoming
rugged when old. The roundish leaves, toothed on the margin, are
slightly downy when young, but afterwards smooth, dark green on the
upper and greyish green on the lower surface; the long slender petioles,
much flattened towards the outer end, allow of free lateral motion by
the lightest breeze, giving the foliage its well-known tremulous
character. By their friction on each other the leaves give rise to a
rustling sound. It is supposed that the mulberry trees (_Becaim_)
mentioned in 1 Chronicles xiv. 14, 15 were really aspen trees. The
flowers, which appear in March and April, are borne on pendulous hairy
catkins, 2-3 in. long; male and female catkins are, as in the other
species of the genus, on distinct trees.

The aspen is found in moist places, sometimes at a considerable
elevation, 1600 ft. or more, in Scotland. It is an abundant tree in the
northern parts of Britain, even as far as Sutherland, and is
occasionally found in the coppices of the southern counties, but in
these latter habitats seldom reaches any large size; throughout northern
Europe it abounds in the forests,--in Lapland flourishing even in 70° N.
lat., while in Siberia its range extends to the Arctic Circle; in Norway
its upper limit is said to coincide with that of the pine; trees exist
near the western coast having stems 15 ft. in circumference. The wood of
the aspen is very light and soft, though tough; it is employed by
coopers, chiefly for pails and herring-casks; it is also made into
butchers' trays, pack-saddles, and various articles for which its
lightness recommends it; sabots are also made of it in France, and in
medieval days it was valued for arrows, especially for those used in
target practice; the bark is used for tanning in northern countries;
cattle and deer browse greedily on the young shoots and abundant
suckers. Aspen wood makes but indifferent fuel, but charcoal prepared
from it is light and friable, and has been employed in gunpowder
manufacture. The powdered bark is sometimes given to horses as a
vermifuge; it possesses likewise tonic and febrifugal properties,
containing a considerable amount of salicin. The aspen is readily
propagated either by cuttings or suckers, but has been but little
planted of late years in Britain. _P. trepida_, or _tremuloides_. is
closely allied to the European aspen, being chiefly distinguished by its
more pointed leaves; it is a native of most parts of Canada and the
United States, extending northwards as far as Great Slave Lake. The wood
is soft and neither strong nor durable; it burns better in the green
state than that of most trees, and is often used by the hunters of the
North-West as fuel; split into thin layers, it was formerly employed in
the United States for bonnet and hat making. It is largely manufactured
into wood-pulp for paper-making. The bark is of some value as a tonic
and febrifuge. _P. grandidentata_, the large-leaved American aspen, has
ovate or roundish leaves deeply and irregularly serrated on the margin.
The wood is light, soft and close-grained, but not strong. In northern
New England and Canada it is largely manufactured into wood-pulp; it is
occasionally used in turnery and for wooden-ware.