ASPERN-ESSLING, BATTLE OF (1809), a battle fought on the 21st and 22nd
of May 1809 between the French and their allies under Napoleon and the
Austrians commanded by the archduke Charles (see NAPOLEONIC CAMPAIGNS).
At the time of the battle Napoleon was in possession of Vienna, the
bridges over the Danube had been broken, and the archduke's army was on
and about the Bisamberg, a mountain near Korneuburg, on the left bank of
the river. The first task of the French was the crossing of the Danube.
Lobau, one of the numerous islands which divide the river into minor
channels, was selected as the point of crossing, careful preparations
were made, and on the night of the 19th-20th of May the French bridged
all the channels from the right bank to Lobau and occupied the island.
By the evening of the 20th great masses of men had been collected there
and the last arm of the Danube, between Lobau and the left bank,
bridged. Massena's corps at once crossed to the left bank and dislodged
the Austrian outposts. Undeterred by the news of heavy attacks on his
rear from Tirol and from Bohemia, Napoleon hurried all available troops
to the bridges, and by daybreak on the 21st, 40,000 men were collected
on the Marchfeld, the broad open plain of the left bank, which was also
to be the scene of the battle of Wagram. The archduke did not resist the
passage; it was his intention, as soon as a large enough force had
crossed, to attack it before the rest of the French army could come to
its assistance. Napoleon had, of course, accepted the risk of such an
attack, but he sought at the same time to minimize it by summoning every
available battalion to the scene. His forces on the Marchfeld were drawn
up in front of the bridges facing north, with their left in the village
of Aspern (Gross-Aspern) and their right in Essling (or Esslingen). Both
places lay close to the Danube and could not therefore be turned;
Aspern, indeed, is actually on the bank of one of the river channels.
But the French had to fill the gap between the villages, and also to
move forward to give room for the supports to form up. Whilst they were
thus engaged the archduke moved to the attack with his whole army in
five columns. Three under Hiller, Bellegarde and Hohenzollern were to
converge upon Aspern, the other two, under Rosenberg, to attack Essling.
The Austrian cavalry was in the centre, ready to move out against any
French cavalry which should attack the heads of the columns. During the
21st the bridges became more and more unsafe, owing to the violence of
the current, but the French crossed without intermission all day and
during the night.

The battle began at Aspern; Hiller carried the village at the first
rush, but Masséna recaptured it, and held his ground with the same
tenacity as he had shown at Genoa in 1800. The French infantry, indeed,
fought on this day with the old stubborn bravery which it had failed to
show in the earlier battles of the year. The three Austrian columns
fighting their hardest through the day were unable to capture more than
half the village; the rest was still held by Masséna when night fell. In
the meanwhile nearly all the French infantry posted between the two
villages and in front of the bridges had been drawn into the fight on
either flank. Napoleon therefore, to create a diversion, sent forward
his centre, now consisting only of cavalry, to charge the enemy's
artillery, which was deployed in a long line and firing into Aspern. The
first charge of the French was repulsed, but the second attempt, made by
heavy masses of cuirassiers, was more serious. The French horsemen,
gallantly led, drove off the guns, rode round Hohenzollern's infantry
squares, and routed the cavalry of Lichtenstein, but they were unable to
do more, and in the end they retired to their old position. In the
meanwhile Essling had been the scene of fighting almost as desperate as
that of Aspern. The French cuirassiers made repeated charges on the
flank of Rosenberg's force, and for long delayed the assault, and in the
villages Lannes with a single division made a heroic and successful
resistance, till night ended the battle. The two armies bivouacked on
their ground, and in Aspern the French and Austrians lay within pistol
shot of each other. The latter had fought fully as hard as their
opponents, and Napoleon realized that they were no longer the
professional soldiers of former campaigns. The spirit of the nation was
in them and they fought to kill, not for the honour of their arms. The
emperor was not discouraged, but on the contrary renewed his efforts to
bring up every available man. All through the night more and more French
troops were put across.

At the earliest dawn of the 22nd the battle was resumed. Masséna swiftly
cleared Aspern of the enemy, but at the same time Rosenberg stormed
Essling at last. Lannes, however, resisted desperately, and reinforced
by St Hilaire's division, drove Rosenberg out. In Aspern Masséna had
been less fortunate, the counter-attack of Hiller and Bellegarde being
as completely successful as that of Lannes and St Hilaire. Meantime
Napoleon had launched a great attack on the Austrian centre. The whole
of the French centre, with Lannes on the right and the cavalry in
reserve, moved forward. The Austrian line was broken through, between
Rosenberg's right and Hohenzollern's left, and the French squadrons
poured into the gap. Victory was almost won when the archduke brought up
his last reserve, himself leading on his soldiers with a colour in his
hand. Lannes was checked, and with his repulse the impetus of the attack
died out all along the line. Aspern had been lost, and graver news
reached Napoleon at the critical moment. The Danube bridges, which had
broken down once already, had at last been cut by heavy barges, which
had been set adrift down stream for the purpose by the Austrians.
Napoleon at once suspended the attack. Essling now fell to another
assault of Rosenberg, and though again the French, this time part of the
Guard, drove him out, the Austrian general then directed his efforts on
the flank of the French centre, slowly retiring on the bridges. The
retirement was terribly costly, and but for the steadiness of Lannes the
French must have been driven into the Danube, for the archduke's last
effort to break down their resistance was made with the utmost fury.
Only the complete exhaustion of both sides put an end to the fighting.
The French lost 44,000 out of 90,000 successively engaged, and amongst
the killed were Lannes and St Hilaire. The Austrians, 75,000 strong,
lost 23,360. Even this, the first great defeat of Napoleon, did not
shake his resolution. The beaten forces were at last withdrawn safely
into the island. On the night of the 22nd the great bridge was repaired,
and the army awaited the arrival of reinforcements, not in Vienna, but
in Lobau.

  See sketch map in article WAGRAM.