ASPENDUS (mod. _Balkis Kalé_, or, more anciently in the native language,
ESTVEDYS (whence the adjective _Estvedijys_ on coins), an ancient city
of Pamphylia, very strongly situated on an isolated hill on the right
bank of the Eurymedon at the point where the river issues from the
Taurus. The sea is now about 7 m. distant, and the river is navigable
only for about 2 m. from the mouth; but in the time of Thucydides ships
could anchor off Aspendus. Really of pre-Hellenic date, the place
claimed to be an Argive colony. It derived wealth from great _salines_
and from a trade in oil and wool, to which the wide range of its
admirable coinage bears witness from the 5th century B.C. onwards. There
Alcibiades met the satrap Tissaphernes in 411 B.C., and thence succeeded
in getting the Phoenician fleet, intended to co-operate with Sparta,
sent back home. The Athenian, Thrasybulus, after obtaining contributions
from Aspendus in 389, was murdered by the inhabitants. The city bought
off Alexander in 333, but, not keeping faith, was forcibly occupied by
the conqueror. In due course it passed from Pergamene to Roman dominion,
and according to Cicero, was plundered of many artistic treasures by
Verres. It was ranked by Philostratus the third city of Pamphylia, and
in Byzantine times seems to have been known as Primopolis, under which
name its bishop signed at Ephesus in A.D. 431. In medieval times it was
evidently still a strong place, but it has now sunk, in the general
decay of Pamphylia, to a wretched hamlet.

The ruins still extant are very remarkable, and, with the noble Roman
theatre, the finest in the world, have earned for the place (as is the
case with certain other great monuments) a legendary connexion with
Solomon's Sheban queen. On the summit of the hillock, surrounded by a
wall with three gates, lie the remains of the city. The public buildings
round the forum can all be traced, and parts of them are standing to a
considerable height. They consist of a fine nympheum on the north with a
covered theatre behind it, covered market halls on the west, and a
peristyle hall and a basilica on the east. In the plain below are large
thermae, and ruins of a splendid aqueduct. But all else seems
insignificant beside the huge theatre, half hollowed out of the
north-east flank of the hill. This was first published by C.F.M. Texier
in 1849, and has now been completely planned, &c., by Count
Lanckoronski's expedition in 1884. It is built of local conglomerate and
is in marvellous preservation. Erected to the honour of the emperors
Marcus Aurelius and L. Verus by the architect Zeno, for the heirs of a
local Roman citizen (as an inscription repeated over both portals
attests), its auditorium has a circuit of 313.17 feet. There are forty
tiers of seating, divided by one _diazoma_, and crowned by an arched
gallery of rather later date, repaired in places with brick. This
auditorium held 7500 spectators. The seats are not perfect, but so
nearly so as to appear practically intact. The wooden stage has, of
course, perished, but all its supporting structures are in place, and
the great scena wall stands to its full height, and produces a
magnificent impression whether from within or from without. Inwardly it
was decorated with two orders of columns one above the other, with rich
entablatures, much of which survives. In the _tympanum_ is a relief of
Bacchus (wrongly supposed to be of a female, and called the Bal-Kis,
i.e. "Honey Girl"). The position of the sounding board above the stage
is apparent. Under the forepart of the auditorium, built out from the
hill, are immense vaults. The whole structure was enclosed within one
great wall, pierced with numerous windows. This structure was probably
put to some ecclesiastical Byzantine use, as certain mutilated heads of
saints appear upon it; and later it became a fortress and received
certain additions. It is now under the care of the local _aghá_ and not
allowed to be plundered for building stone.

  See C. Lanckoronski, _Villes de la Pamphylie et de la Pisidie_, i.
  (1890).     (D. G. H.)