ASQUITH, HERBERT HENRY (1852-   ), English statesman, son of Joseph
Dixon Asquith, was born at Morley, Yorkshire, on the 12th of September
1852. He came of a middle-class Yorkshire family of pronounced Liberal
and Nonconformist views, and was educated under Dr Edwin Abbott at the
City of London school, from which he went as a scholar to Balliol,
Oxford; there he had a distinguished career, taking a first-class in
classics, winning the Craven scholarship and being elected a fellow of
his college. He was president of the Union, and impressed all his
contemporaries with his intellectual ability, Dr Jowett himself
confidently predicting his signal success in any career he adopted. On
leaving Oxford he went to the bar, and as early as 1890 became a K.C. In
1887 he unsuccessfully defended Mr R.B. Cunninghame Graham and Mr John
Burns for their share in the riot in Trafalgar Square; and in 1889 he
was junior to Sir Charles (afterwards Lord) Russell as counsel for the
Irish Nationalists before the Parnell Commission--an association
afterwards bitterly commented upon by Mr T. Healy in the House of
Commons (March 30, 1908). But though he attained a fair practice at the
bar, and was recognized as a lawyer of unusual mental distinction and
clarity, his forensic success was not nearly so conspicuous as that of
some of his contemporaries. His ambitions lay rather in the direction of
the House of Commons. He had taken a prominent part in politics as a
Liberal since his university days, especially in work for the Eighty
Club, and in 1886 was elected member of parliament for East Fife, a seat
which he retained in subsequent elections. Mr Gladstone was attracted by
his vigorous ability as a speaker, and his evidence of sound political
judgment; and in August 1892, though comparatively unknown to the
general public, he was selected to move the vote of want of confidence
which overthrew Lord Salisbury's government, and was made home secretary
in the new Liberal ministry. At the Home Office he proved his capacity
as an administrator; he was the first to appoint women as factory
inspectors, and he was responsible for opening Trafalgar Square to
Labour demonstrations; but he firmly refused to sanction the proposed
amnesty for the dynamiters, and he was violently abused by extremists on
account of the shooting of two men by the military at the strike riot at
Featherstone in August 1893. It was he who coined the phrase
(Birmingham, 1894) as to the government's "ploughing the sands" in their
endeavour to pass Liberal legislation with a hostile House of Lords. His
Employers' Liability Bill 1893 was lost because the government refused
to accept the Lords' amendment as to "contracting-out." His suspensory
bill, with a view to the disestablishment of the church in Wales, was
abortive (1895), but it served to recommend him to the Welsh
Nationalists as well as to the disestablishment party in England and
Scotland. During his three years of office he more than confirmed the
high opinion formed of his abilities.

The Liberal defeat in 1895 left him out of office for eleven years. He
had married Miss Helen Melland in 1877, and was left with a family when
she died in 1891; in 1894, however, he had married again, his second
wife being the accomplished Miss Margaret ("Margot") Tennant, daughter
of the wealthy ironmaster, Sir Charles Tennant, Bart., a lady well known
in London society as a member of the coterie known as "Souls," and
commonly identified as the original of Mr E.F. Benson's _Dodo_ (1893).
On leaving the Home Office in 1895, Mr Asquith decided to return to his
work at the bar, a course which excited much comment, since it was
unprecedented that a minister who had exercised judicial functions in
that capacity should take up again the position of an advocate; but it
was obvious that to maintain the tradition was difficult in the case of
a man who had no sufficient independent means. During the years of
Unionist ascendancy Mr Asquith divided his energies between his legal
work and politics; but his adhesion to Lord Rosebery (q.v.) as a Liberal
Imperialist at the time of the Boer War, while it strengthened his
position in the eyes of the public, put him in some difficulty with his
own party, led as it was by Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman (q.v.), who was
identified with the "pro-Boer" policy. He was one of the founders of the
Liberal League, and his courageous definiteness of view and intellectual
vigour marked him out as Lord Rosebery's chief lieutenant if that
statesman should ever return to power. He thus became identified with
the Roseberyite attitude towards Irish Home Rule; and, while he
continued to uphold the Gladstonian policy in theory, in practice the
Irish Nationalists felt that very little could be expected from his
advocacy. In spite of his Imperialist views, however, he did much to
smooth over the party difficulties, and when the tariff-reform movement
began in 1903, he seized the opportunity for rallying the Liberals to
the banner of free-trade and championing the "orthodox" English
political economy, on which indeed he had been a lecturer in his younger
days. During the critical years of Mr Chamberlain's crusade (1903-1906)
he made himself the chief spokesman of the Liberal party, delivering a
series of speeches in answer to those of the tariff-reform leader; and
his persistent following and answering of Mr Chamberlain had undoubted
effect. He also made useful party capital out of the necessity for
financial retrenchment, owing to the large increase in public
expenditure, maintained by the Unionist government even after the Boer
War was over; and his mastery of statistical detail and argument made
his appointment as chancellor of the exchequer part of the natural order
of things when in December 1905 Mr Balfour resigned and Sir Henry
Campbell-Bannerman (q.v.) became prime minister.

During Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman's premiership, Mr Asquith gradually
rose in political importance, and in 1907 the prime minister's
ill-health resulted in much of the leadership in the Commons devolving
on the chancellor of the exchequer. At first the party as a whole had
regarded him somewhat coldly. And his unbending common-sense, and
sobriety of criticism in matters which deeply interested the less
academic Radicals who were enthusiasts for extreme courses, would have
made the parliamentary situation difficult but for the exceptional
popularity of the prime minister. In the autumn of 1907, however, as the
latter's retention of office became more and more improbable, it became
evident that no other possible successor had equal qualifications. The
session of 1908 opened with Mr Asquith acting avowedly as the prime
minister's deputy, and the course of business was itself of a nature to
emphasize his claims. After two rather humdrum budgets he was pledged to
inaugurate a system of old-age pensions (forming the chief feature of
the budget of 1908, personally introduced by him at the beginning of
May), and his speech in April on the Licensing Bill was a triumph of
clear exposition, though later in the year, after passing the Commons,
it was thrown out by the Lords. On the 5th of April it was announced
that Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman had resigned and Mr Asquith been sent
for by the king. As the latter was staying at Biarritz, the
unprecedented course was followed of Mr Asquith journeying there for the
purpose, and on the 8th he resigned the chancellorship of the exchequer
and kissed hands as prime minister. The names of the new cabinet were
announced on the 13th. The new appointments were: Lord Tweedmouth as
lord president of the council (instead of the admiralty); Lord Crewe as
colonial secretary (instead of lord president of the council); Mr D.
Lloyd George, chancellor of the exchequer (transferred from the Board of
Trade); Mr R. McKenna, first lord of the admiralty (instead of minister
of education); Mr Winston Churchill, president of the Board of Trade;
and Mr Walter Runciman, minister of education. Lord Elgin ceased to be
colonial secretary, but Lord Loreburn (lord chancellor), Lord Ripon
(lord privy seal), Mr H. Gladstone (Home Office), Sir E. Grey (foreign
affairs), Mr Haldane (War Office), Mr Sinclair (secretary for Scotland;
created in 1909 Lord Pentland), Mr Burns (Local Government Board), Lord
Carrington (Board of Agriculture), Mr Birrell (Irish secretary), Mr S.
Buxton (postmaster-general), Mr L. Harcourt (commissioner of works), Mr
John Morley (India) and Sir Henry Fowler (duchy of Lancaster) retained
their offices, the two latter being created peers. The Budget (see LLOYD
GEORGE) was the sole feature of political interest in 1909, and its
rejection in December by the Lords led to the general election of
January 1910, which left the Liberals and Unionists practically equal,
with the Labour and Irish parties dominating the situation (L. 275, U.
273, Lab. 40, I. 82). Mr Asquith was in a difficult position, but the
ministry remained in office; and he had developed a concentration of
forces with a view to attacking the veto of the House of Lords (see
PARLIAMENT), when the death of the king in May caused a suspension of
hostilities. A conference between the leaders on both sides was
arranged, to discuss whether any compromise was possible, and
controversy was postponed to an autumn session.     (H. Ch.)