ASSAM, a former province of British India, which was amalgamated in 1905
with "Eastern Bengal and Assam" (q.v.). Area 56,243 sq. m.; pop. (1901)
6,126,343. The province of Assam lies on the N.E. border of Bengal, on
the extreme frontier of the Indian empire, with Bhutan and Tibet beyond
it on the N., and Burma and Manipur on the E. It comprises the valleys
of the Brahmaputra and Surma rivers, together with the mountainous
watershed which intervenes between them. It is situated between 24° 0'
and 28° 17' N. lat., and between 89° 46' and 97° 5' E. long. It is
bounded on the N. by the eastern section of the great Himalayan range,
the frontier tribes from west to east being successively Bhutias, Akas,
Daphlas, Miris, Abors and Mishmis; on the N.E. by the Mishmi hills,
which sweep round the head of the Brahmaputra valley; on the E. by the
unexplored mountains that mark the frontier of Burma, by the hills
occupied by the independent Naga tribes and by the state of Manipur; on
the S. by the Lushai hills, the state of Hill Tippera, and the Bengal
district of Tippera; and on the W. by the Bengal districts of Mymensingh
and Rangpur, the state of Kuch Behar and Jalpaiguri district.

_Natural Divisions._--Assam is naturally divided into three distinct
tracts, the Brahmaputra valley, the Surma valley and the hill ranges
between the two. The Brahmaputra valley is an alluvial plain, about 450
m. in length, with an average breadth of 50 m., lying almost east and
west. To the north is the main chain of the Himalayas, the lower ranges
of which rise abruptly from the plain; to the south is the great
elevated plateau or succession of plateaus known as the Assam range. The
various portions of this range are called by the names of the tribes who
inhabit them--the Garo, the Khasi, the Jaintia, the North Cachar and the
Naga hills. The range as a whole is joined at its eastern extremity by
the Patkai to the Himalayan system, and by the mountains of Manipur to
the Arakan Yoma. The highest points in the range are Nokrek peak (4600
ft.) in the Garo hills, Shillong peak (6450 ft.) in the Khasi-Jaintia
hills, and Japva peak (nearly 10,000 ft.) in the Naga hills. South of
the range comes the third division of the province, the Surma valley,
comprising the two districts of Cachar and Sylhet. The Surma valley is
much smaller than the Brahmaputra valley, covering only 7506 against
24,283 sq. m.; its mean elevation is much lower and its rivers are more
sluggish.

  _Physical Aspects._--Assam is a fertile series of valleys, with the
  great channel of the Brahmaputra (literally, the _Son of Brahma_)
  flowing down its middle, and an infinite number of tributaries and
  watercourses pouring into it from the mountains on either side. The
  Brahmaputra spreads out in a sheet of water several miles broad during
  the rainy season, and in its course through Assam forms a number of
  islands in its bed. Rising in the Tibetan plateau, far to the north of
  the Himalayas, and skirting round their eastern passes not far from
  the Yang-tsze-kiang and the great river of Cambodia, it enters Assam
  by a series of waterfalls and rapids, amid vast boulders and
  accumulations of rocks. The gorge, situated in Lakhimpur district,
  through which the southernmost branch of the Brahmaputra enters, has
  from time immemorial been held in reverence by the Hindus. It is
  called the Brahmakunda or Parasuramkunda; and although the journey to
  it is both difficult and dangerous, it is annually visited by
  thousands of devotees. After a rapid course westwards down the whole
  length of the Assam valley, the Brahmaputra turns sharply to the
  south, spreading itself over the alluvial districts of the Bengal
  delta, and, after several changes of name, ends its course of 1800 m.
  in the Bay of Bengal. Its first tributaries in Assam, after crossing
  the frontier, are the Kundil and the Digaru, flowing from the Mishmi
  hills on the north, and the Tengapani and Dihing, which take their
  rise on the Singpho hills to the south-east. Shortly afterwards it
  receives the Dihang, flowing from the north-east; but its principal
  confluent is the Dihong, which, deriving its origin, under the name of
  the Tsangpo, from a spot in the vicinity of the source of the Sutlej,
  flows in a direction precisely opposite to that river, and traversing
  the table-land of Tibet, at the back of the great Himalaya range,
  falls into the Brahmaputra in 27° 48' N. lat., 95° 26' E. long., after
  a course of nearly 1000 m. Doubts were long entertained whether the
  Dihong could be justly regarded as the continuation of the Tsangpo,
  but these were practically set at rest by the voyage of F.J. Needham
  in 1886. Below the confluence, the united stream flows in a
  south-westerly direction, forming the boundary between the districts
  of Lakhimpur and Darrang, situated on its northern bank, and those of
  Sibsagar and Nowgong on the south; and finally bisecting Kamrup, it
  crosses over the frontier of the province and passes into Bengal. In
  its course it receives on the left side the Dihing, a river having its
  rise at the south-eastern angle of the province; and lower down, on
  the opposite side, it parts with a considerable offset termed the Buri
  Lohir, which, however, reunites with the Brahmaputra 60 m. below the
  point of divergence, bearing with it the additional waters of the
  Subansiri, flowing from Tibet. A second offset, under the name of the
  Kalang river, rejoins the parent stream a short distance above the
  town of Gauhati. The remaining rivers are too numerous to be
  particularized. The streams of the south are not rapid, and have no
  considerable current until May or June. Among the islands formed by
  the intersection and confluence of the rivers is Majuli, or the Great
  Island, as it is called by way of pre-eminence. This island extends 55
  m. in length by about 10 in breadth, and is formed by the Brahmaputra
  on the south-east and the Buri Lohit river on the north-west. In the
  upper part of the valley, towards the gorge where the Brahmaputra
  enters, the country is varied and picturesque, walled in on the north
  and east by the Himalayas, and thickly wooded from the base to the
  snow-line. On either bank of the Brahmaputra a long narrow strip of
  plain rises almost imperceptibly to the foot of the hills. Gigantic
  reeds and grasses occupy the low lands near the banks of the great
  river; expanses of fertile rice-land come next; a little higher up,
  dotted with villages encircled by groves of bamboos and fruit trees of
  great size and beauty, the dark forests succeed, covering the interior
  table-land and mountains. The country in the vicinity of the large
  rivers is flat, and impenetrable from dense tangled jungle, with the
  exception of some very low-lying tracts which are either permanent
  marshes or are covered with water during the rains. Jungle will not
  grow on these depressions, and they are covered either with water,
  reeds, high grasses or rice cultivation. On or near such open spaces
  are collected all the villages. As the traveller proceeds farther down
  the valley, the country gradually opens out into wide plains. In the
  western district of Kamrup the country forms one great expanse, with a
  few elevated tracts here and there, varying from 200 to 800 ft. in
  height.

  _Soils._--The soil is exceedingly rich and well adapted to all kinds
  of agricultural purposes, and for the most part is composed of a rich
  black loam reposing on a grey sandy clay, though occasionally it
  exhibits a light yellow clayey texture. The land may be divided into
  three great classes. The first division is composed of hills, the
  largest group within the valley being that of the Mikir Mountains,
  which stand out upon the plain. Another set of hills project into the
  valley at Gauhati. But these latter are rather prolongations of spurs
  from the Khasi chain than isolated groups belonging to the plains. The
  other hills are all isolated and of small extent. The second division
  of the lands is the well-raised part of the valley whose level lies
  above the ordinary inundations of the Brahmaputra. The channels of
  some of the hill streams, however, are of so little depth that the
  highest lands in their neighbourhood are liable to sudden floods. On
  the north bank of the great river, lands of this sort run down the
  whole length of the valley, except where they are interrupted by the
  beds of the hill streams. The breadth of these plains is in some
  places very trifling, whilst in others they comprise a tract of many
  miles, according to the number and the height of the rocks or hills
  that protect them from the aberrations of the river. The alluvial
  deposits of the Brahmaputra and of its tributary streams may be
  considered as the third general division of lands in Assam. These
  lands are very extensive, and present every degree of fertility and
  elevation, from the vast _chars_ of pure sand, subject to annual
  inundations, to the firm islands, so raised by drift-sand and the
  accumulated remains of rank vegetable matter, as no longer to be
  liable to flood. The rapidity with which wastes, composed entirely of
  sand newly washed forward by the current during floods, become
  converted into rich pasture is astonishing. As the freshets begin to
  lessen and retire into the deeper channels, the currents form natural
  embankments on their edges, preventing the return of a small portion
  of water which is thus left stagnant on the sands, and exposed to the
  action of the sun's rays. It slowly evaporates, leaving a thin crust
  of animal and vegetable matter. This is soon impregnated with the
  seeds of the _Saccharum spontaneum_ and other grasses that have been
  partly brought by the winds and partly deposited by the water. Such
  places are frequented by numerous flocks of aquatic birds, which
  resort thither in search of fish and mollusca. As vegetation begins to
  appear, herds of wild elephants and buffaloes are attracted by the
  supply of food and the solitude of the newly-formed land, and in their
  turn contribute to manure the soil.

  _Geology._--Geographically the Assam hills lie in the angle between
  the Himalayas and the Burmese ranges, but geologically they belong to
  neither. The older rocks are like those of Bengal, and the newer beds
  show no sign of either the Himalayan or the Burmese folding--on the
  top of the plateau they are nearly horizontal, but along the southern
  margin they are bent sharply downwards in a simple monoclinal fold.
  The greater part of the mass is composed of gneiss and schists. The
  Sylhet traps near the southern margin are correlated with the Rajmahal
  traps of Bengal. The older rocks are overlaid unconformably by
  Cretaceous beds, consisting chiefly of sandstones with seams of coal,
  the whole series thinning rapidly towards the north and thus
  indicating the neighbourhood of the old shore-line. The fossils are
  very similar to those of the South Indian Cretaceous, but very
  different from those of the corresponding beds in the Nerbudda valley.
  The overlying Tertiary series includes nummulitic beds and valuable
  seams of coal.

  The border ranges of the east and south of Assam belong to the Burmese
  system of mountain chains (see BURMA), and consist largely of Tertiary
  beds, including the great coal seams of Upper Assam. The Assam valley
  is covered by the alluvial deposits of the Brahmaputra.

  Of the mineral productions by far the most valuable is coal. Compared
  with the Gondwana coal of the peninsula of India the Tertiary coal
  seams of Assam are remarkable for their purity and their extraordinary
  thickness. The "Thick Seam" of Margherita, in Upper Assam, averages 50
  ft., and in some places reaches as much as 80 ft. The average
  percentage of ash in 27 assays of Assam coal was 3.8 as against 16.3
  in 17 assays of Raniganj coal. The coal seams are commonly associated
  with petroleum springs. Gold is found in the alluvial deposits, but
  the results of exploration have not been very promising.

  _Earthquakes_.--Assam is liable to earthquakes. There was a severe
  earthquake in Cachar on the 10th of January 1869, a severe shock in
  Shillong and Gauhati in September 1875, and one in Silchar in October
  1882; but by far the severest shock known is that which occurred on
  the evening of 12th June 1897. The area of this seismic disturbance
  extended over north-eastern India, from Manipur to Sikkim; but the
  focus was in the Khasi and Garo hills. In the station of Shillong
  every masonry building was levelled to the ground. Throughout the
  country bridges were shattered, roads were broken up like ploughed
  fields, and the beds of rivers were dislocated. In the hills there
  were terrible landslips, which wrecked the little Cherrapunji railway
  and caused 600 deaths. The total mortality recorded was 1542,
  including two Europeans at Shillong. The levels of the country were so
  affected that the towns of Goalpara and Barpeta became almost
  uninhabitable during the rains.

  _Fauna._--The zoology of Assam presents some interesting features.
  Wild elephants abound and commit many depredations, entering villages
  in large herds, and consuming everything suitable to their tastes.
  Many are caught by means of female elephants previously tamed, and
  trained to decoy males into the snares prepared for subjecting them to
  captivity. A considerable number are tamed and exported from Assam
  every year. Many are killed every year in the forests for the sake of
  the ivory which they furnish. The government _keddah_ establishment
  from Dacca captures large numbers of elephants in the province, and
  the right of hunting is also sold by auction to private bidders. The
  annual catch of the latter averages about two hundred. The rhinoceros
  is found in the denser parts of the forests and generally in swampy
  places. This animal is hunted and killed for its skin and its horn.
  The skin affords the material for the best shields. The horn is sacred
  in the eyes of the natives. Contrary to the usual belief, it is stated
  that, if caught young, the rhinoceros is easily tamed and becomes
  strongly attached to his keeper. Tigers abound, and though many are
  annually destroyed for the sake of the government reward, their
  numbers seem scarcely, if at all, to diminish. Leopards and bears are
  numerous; and the sand-badger, the _Arctonyx collaris_ of Cuvier, a
  small animal somewhat resembling a bear, but having the snout, eyes
  and tail of a hog, is found. Among the most formidable animals known
  is the wild buffalo or _gaur_ which is of great size, strength and
  fierceness. The fox and the jackal exist, and the wild hog is very
  abundant. Goats, deer of various kinds, hares, and two or three
  species of antelope are found, as are monkeys in great variety. The
  porcupine, the squirrel, the civet cat, the ichneumon and the otter
  are common. The birds are too various to admit of enumeration. Wild
  game is plentiful; pheasants, partridges, snipe and water-fowl of many
  descriptions make the country a tempting field for the sportsman.
  Vultures and other birds of prey are met with. Crocodiles (commonly
  called alligators) swarm in all parts of the Brahmaputra, and are very
  destructive to the fish, of which hundreds of varieties are found, and
  which supply a valuable article of food. The most destructive of the
  _ferae naturae_, as regards human life, are, however, the snakes. Of
  these, several poisonous species exist, including the cobra and karait
  (_Naja tripudians_ and _Bungarus caeruleus_). The bite of a
  fairly-grown healthy serpent of either of these species is deadly; and
  it is ascertained that more deaths occur from snake-bite than from all
  the other wild beasts put together. Among the non-poisonous serpents
  the python ranks first. This is an enormous boa-constrictor of great
  length and weight, which drops upon his prey from the branch of a
  tree, or steals upon it in the thick grass. He kills his victim by
  rolling himself round the body till he breaks its ribs, or suffocates
  it by one irresistible convolution round its throat. He seldom or
  never attacks human beings unless in self-defence, and loss of life
  from this cause is scarcely ever reported.

  _Agriculture._--The principal and almost the only food-grain of the
  plains portion of the province is rice. The production of this staple
  is carried on generally under the same conditions as in Bengal; but
  the times of sowing and reaping and the names given to the several
  crops vary much in different parts of the province. In 1901-1902 out
  of a total cultivated area of 1,736,000 acres, there were 1,194,000
  acres under rice. In addition jute is grown to a considerable extent
  in Goalpara and Sylhet; cotton is grown in large quantities along the
  slopes of the Assam range. Rubber is grown in government plantations
  and is also brought in by the hill tribes; while lac, mustard and
  potatoes are also produced.

  _Tea Plantations._--The most important article of commerce produced in
  Assam is tea. The rice crop covers a very great proportion of the
  cultivated land, but it is used for local consumption, and the
  Brahmaputra valley does not produce enough for its own consumption,
  large quantities being imported for the coolies. The tea plantations
  are the one great source of wealth to the province, and the
  necessities of tea cultivation are the chief stimulants to the
  development of Assam. The plant was discovered in 1823 by Mr Robert
  Bruce, who had proceeded thither on a mercantile exploration. The
  country, however, then formed part of the Burmese dominions. But war
  with this monarchy shortly afterwards broke out, and a brother of the
  first discoverer, happening to be appointed to the command of a
  division of gunboats employed in some part of the operations, followed
  up the pursuit of the subject, and obtained several hundred plants and
  a considerable quantity of seed. Some specimens were ultimately
  forwarded to the superintendent of the botanic garden at Calcutta. In
  1832 Captain F. Jenkins was deputed by the governor-general of India,
  Lord William Bentinck, to report upon the resources of the country,
  and the tea plant was brought to his especial notice by Mr Bruce; in
  1834 a minute was recorded by the governor-general on the subject, in
  which it is stated that his attention had been called to it in 1827
  before his departure from England. In accordance with the views of
  that minute, a committee was appointed to prosecute inquiries, and to
  promote the cultivation of the plant. Communications were opened with
  China with a view to obtain fresh plants and seeds, and a deputation,
  composed of gentlemen versed in botanical studies, was despatched to
  Assam. Some seeds were obtained from China; but they proved to be of
  small importance, as it was clearly ascertained by the members of the
  Assam deputation that both the black and the green tea plants were
  indigenous here, and might be multiplied to any extent; another result
  of the Chinese mission, that of procuring persons skilled in the
  cultivation and manufacture of black tea, was of more material
  benefit. Subsequently, under Lord Auckland, a further supply of
  Chinese cultivators and manufacturers was obtained--men well
  acquainted with the processes necessary for the production of green
  tea, as the former set were with those requisite for black. In 1838
  the first twelve chests of tea from Assam were received in England.
  They had been injured in some degree on the passage, but on samples
  being submitted to brokers, and others of long experience and tried
  judgment, the reports were highly favourable. It was never, however,
  the intention of government to carry on the trade, but to resign it to
  private adventure as soon as the experimental course could be fairly
  completed. Mercantile associations for the culture and manufacture of
  tea in Assam began to be formed as early as 1839; and in 1849 the
  government disposed of their establishment, and relinquished the
  manufacture to the ordinary operation of commercial enterprise. In
  1851 the crop of the principal company was estimated to produce
  280,000 lb. Since then the enterprise has rapidly developed. Tea is
  now cultivated in all the plains district of the provinces. When the
  industry was first established, the land which was supposed to be best
  for the plant was hill or undulating ground; but now it has been found
  in the Surma valley that with good drainage the heaviest crops of tea
  can be raised from low-lying land, even such as formerly supported
  rice cultivation. At the close of the year 1905 there were 942 gardens
  in all, with 422,335 acres, and employing 464,912 coolies. The
  majority of gardens are owned by Europeans, 405,486 acres belonging to
  them as against 16,849 to Indians. The total out-turn for the province
  in 1905 was 193,556,047 lb. Between 1893 and 1898 there was a great
  extension of tea cultivation, with the result that the industry began
  to suffer from the congestion that follows over-production. Also to
  meet the requirements of the industry, an enormous number of coolies
  had to be brought into the province from other parts of India, and in
  recent years the supply of labour has begun to fall off, causing a
  rise in the cost of production. For these reasons there was a crisis
  in the tea industry of Assam, which was relieved to some extent by the
  reduction of the English duty on tea in 1906.

  _Tea-Garden Coolies._--The labour required on the tea gardens is
  almost entirely imported, as the natives of the province are too
  prosperous to do such work. During the decade 1891-1901, 596,856
  coolies were imported, or about a tenth of the total population of the
  province. The importation of coolies is controlled by an elaborate
  system of legislation, which provides for the registration of
  contracts, the medical inspection of coolies during the journey, and
  supervision over rates of pay, &c., on the gardens. The first labour
  act was passed in 1863, and since then the law on the subject has been
  changed by successive enactments. The measure now in force is called
  Act VI. of 1901. Under this act the maximum term of the labour
  contract is fixed at four years, and a minimum monthly wage is laid
  down, the payment of which, however, is contingent on the completion
  of a daily task by the labourer. Labourers under contract deserting
  are liable to fine and imprisonment, and, subject to certain
  restrictions, may be arrested without warrant by their employers. In
  addition to the labourers engaged under this act, a large number are
  employed under contract enforceable by Act XIII, of 1859, which
  provides penalties for breach of the contract, but does not allow of
  the arrest of deserters without warrant. Neither does this act
  regulate in any way the terms of the contract, nor contain any special
  provisions for the protection of the labourer. Many labourers on the
  conclusion of their first engagement under Act VI. of 1901 enter into
  renewed contracts under Act XIII. of 1859. In 1905 there were in all
  664,296 labourers, and 24,209 fresh importations, of whom 62% chose
  the old act.

  _Railways._--The Assam-Bengal railway runs from the seaport of
  Chittagong to the Surma valley, and thence across the hills to
  Dibrugarh, at the head of the Brahmaputra valley, with a branch to
  Gauhati lower down the Brahmaputra. The hill section of this line was
  found exceedingly difficult of construction, and extensive damage was
  done by the earthquake of 1897; but it is now complete. This railway
  is financed by the government, though worked by a company, and
  therefore ranks as a state line. At the end of 1904 its open mileage
  was 576 m. There are several short lines of light railway or tramway
  in the province. The most important is the Dibru-Sadiya railway, at
  the head of the Brahmaputra valley, with a branch to the coal-fields.

  _Trade_.-The external trade of Assam is conducted partly by steamer,
  partly by native boat, and to a small extent by rail. In the
  Brahmaputra valley steamers carry as much as 86% of the exports, and
  94% of the imports. In the Surma valley native boats carry about 43%
  of both. In 1904-1905 the total exports were valued at 726 lakhs of
  rupees. The chief items were tea, rice in the husk, oil-seeds,
  tea-seed, timber, coal and jute. The imports were valued at 457 lakhs
  of rupees. The chief items were cotton piece-goods, rice not in the
  husk, sugar, grain and pulse, salt, iron and steel, tobacco, cotton
  twist and yarn, and brass and copper. No less than two-thirds of the
  total trade is conducted with Calcutta. The trans-frontier trade is
  insignificant; and most of it is conducted with the Bengal state of
  Hill Tippera. The trade through Chittagong is increasing owing to the
  opening of the hill-section of the Assam-Bengal railway, which gives
  direct communication between the districts of Upper Assam and the port
  of Chittagong, and the incorporation of that port in the new province
  of Eastern Bengal and Assam.

_Inhabitants._--The total population of Assam, according to the census
of 1901, was 6,126,343, of whom 3,429,099 were Hindus, 1,581,317
Mahommedans and 1,068,334 Animists. The number of foreigners in the
population due to immigration by the tea-garden coolies was 775,844. But
in spite of this immigration the rate of increase in the population was
only 5.9% in the decade, and with the immigrants deducted 1.36%. Amongst
native-born Assamese during the decade there was a serious decrease in
Nowgong and some other districts, due to _kalaazar_ and other diseases.
The Assamese are an interesting race, of distinct origin from the
neighbouring Bengalis. A large proportion of them derive their origin
from tribes who came from the Himalayan ranges, from Burma or from the
Chinese frontier. The most important of these are the Ahoms or Ahams, an
offshoot of the Shan race of northern Burma. They were the last
conquerors of Assam before the Burmese, and they long preserved their
ancient traditions, habits and institutions. Hinduism first made its
encroachments among their kings and nobility. Several generations ago
they gave up eating beef, and they are now completely Hinduized, except
in a few remote recesses of Assam. Hinduism has also impressed its
language upon the province, and the vernacular Assamese possesses a
close affinity to Bengali, with the substitution of _s_ for the Bengali
_ch_, of a guttural _h_ for the Bengali _h_ or _sh_, and a few other
dialectic changes. Indeed, so close was the resemblance that for a time
Bengali was used as the court and official language of the province
under British rule. But with the development of the country the Assamese
tongue asserted its claims to be treated as a distinct vernacular, and a
resolution of government (1873) re-established it as the language of
official life and public business.

The Assam peasant, living in a half-populated province, and surrounded
by surplus land, is indolent, good-natured and, on the whole,
prosperous. He raises sufficient food for his wants with very little
labour, and, with the exception of a few religious ceremonies, he has no
demand made upon him for money, saving the light rental of his fields.
Under the peaceful influences of British rule, he has completely lost
his ancient warlike instincts, and forgotten his predatory habits. In
complexion he is a shade or two fairer than the Bengali. His person is
in general short and robust, but devoid of the grace and flexibility of
the Hindu. A flat face, with high cheek-bones, presents a physiognomy
resembling the Chinese, and suggests no idea of beauty. His hair is
abundant, black, lank and coarse, but the beard is scanty, and usually
plucked out, which gives him an effeminate appearance. The women form a
striking contrast to the men; there is more of feminine beauty in them
than is commonly seen in the women of Bengal, with a form and feature
somewhat approaching the European. The habits of life of the Assamese
peasantry are pre-eminently domestic. Great respect is paid to old age;
when parents are no longer capable of labour they are supported by their
children, and scarcely any one is allowed to become a burden to the
public. They have also in general a very tender regard for their
offspring, and are generous and kind to their relations. They are
hospitable to people of their own caste, but to no others. The use of
opium is very general.

_Hill Tribes._--The hill and frontier tribes of Assam include the Nagas,
Singphos, Daphlas, Miris, Khamtis, Mishmis, Abors, &c., nearly all of
whom, excepting the Nagas, are found near the frontiers of Lakhimpur
district. The principal of these, in point of numbers, are the Nagas,
who inhabit the hills and forests along the eastern and south-eastern
frontier of Assam. They reside partly in the British district of the
Naga hills and partly in independent territory under the political
control of the deputy-commissioner of the adjoining districts. They
cultivate rice, cotton, yams and Indian corn, and prepare salt from the
brine springs in their hills. The different tribes of Nagas are
independent of and unconnected with one another, and are often at war
with each other. The Singphos are another of the main population of the
same race, who occupy in force the hilly country between the Patkai and
Chindwin rivers, and are nominally subject to Burma. The Akas, Daphlas,
Miris, Abors, Mishmis and Khamtis are described under separate headings.
Under regulation V. of 1873, an inner line has been laid down in certain
districts, up to which the protection of British authority is
guaranteed, and beyond which, except by special permission, it is not
lawful for British subjects to go. This inner line has been laid down in
Darrang towards the Bhutias, Akas and Daphlas; in Lakhimper towards the
Daphlas, Miris, Abors, Mishmis, Khamtis, Singphos and Nagas; and in
Sibsagar towards the Nagas. The inner line formerly maintained along the
Lushai border has since 1895 been allowed to fall into desuetude, but
Lushais visiting Cachar are required to take out passes from the
superintendent of the Lushai hills. The line is marked at intervals by
frontier posts held by military police and commanding the roads of
access to the tract beyond; and any person from the plains who has
received permission to cross the line has to present his pass at these
posts.

_History._--Assam was the province of Bengal which remained most
stubbornly outside the limits of the Mogul empire and of the Mahommedan
polity in India. Indeed, although frequently overrun by Mussulman
armies, and its western districts annexed to the Mahommedan vice-royalty
of Bengal, the province maintained an uncertain independence till its
invasion by the Burmese towards the end of the 18th century, and its
final cession to the British in 1826. It seems to have been originally
included, along with the greater part of north-eastern Bengal, in the
old Hindu territory of Kamrup. Its early legends point to great
religious revolutions between the rival rites of Krishna and Siva as a
source of dynastic changes. Its roll of kings extends deep into
prehistoric times, but the first rajah capable of indentification
flourished about the year 76 A.D. Kamrup, the Pragjotishpur of the
ancient Hindus, was the capital of a legendary king Narak, whose son
Bhagadatta distinguished himself in the great war of the _Mahabharata_.

When Hsüan Tsang visited the country in A.D. 640, a prince named Kumar
Bhaskara Barman was on the throne. The people are described as being of
small stature with dark yellow complexions; they were fierce in
appearance, but upright and studious. Hinduism was the state religion,
and the number of Buddhists was very small. The soil was deep and
fertile, and the towns were surrounded by moats with water brought from
rivers or banked-up lakes. Subsequently we read of Pal rulers in Assam.
It is supposed that these kings were Buddhist and belonged to the Pal
dynasty of Bengal. Although the whole of Kamrup appears from time to
time to have been united into one kingdom under some unusually powerful
monarch, it was more often split up into numerous petty states; and for
several centuries the Koch, the Ahom and the Chutia powers contested for
the Assam valley. In the early part of the 13th century the Ahoms or
Ahams, from northern Burma and the Chinese frontiers, poured into the
eastern districts of Assam, founded a kingdom, and held it firmly for
several centuries. The Ahoms were Shans from the ancient Shan kingdom of
Pong. Their manners, customs, religion and language were, and for a long
time continued to be, different from those of the Hindus; but they found
themselves compelled to respect the superior civilization of this race,
and slowly adopted its customs and language. The conversion of their
king Chuchengpha to Hinduism took place in the year A.D. 1655, and all
the Ahoms of Assam gradually followed his example. In medieval history,
the Assamese were known to the Mussulman population as a warlike,
predatory race, who sailed down the Brahmaputra in fleets of innumerable
canoes, plundered the rich districts of the delta, and retired in safety
to their forests and swamps. As the Mahommedan power consolidated itself
in Bengal, repeated expeditions were sent out against these river
pirates of the north-east. The physical difficulties which an invading
force had to contend with in Assam, however, prevented anything like a
regular subjugation of the country; and after repeated efforts, the
Mussulmans contented themselves with occupying the western districts at
the mouth of the Assam valley. The following details will suffice for
the history of a struggle in which no great political object was
attained, and which left the Assamese still the same wild and piratical
people as when their fleets of canoes first sallied forth against the
Bengal delta. In 1638, during the reign of the emperor Shah Jahan, the
Assamese descended the Brahmaputra, and pillaged the country round the
city of Dacca; they were expelled by the governor of Bengal, who
retaliated upon the plunderers by ravaging Assam. During the civil wars
between the sons of Shah Jahan, the king of Assam renewed his predatory
incursions into Bengal; upon the termination of the contest, Aurangzeb
determined to avenge these repeated insults, and despatched a
considerable force for the regular invasion of the Assamese territory
(1660-1662). His general, Mir Jumla, defeated the rajah, who fled to the
mountains, and most of the chiefs made their submission to the
conqueror. But the rains set in with unusual violence, and Mir Jumla's
army was almost annihilated by famine and sickness. Thus terminated the
last expedition against Assam by the Mahommedans, whose fortunes in this
country were never prosperous. A writer of the Mahommedan faith
says:--"Whenever an invading army has entered their territories, the
Assamese have sheltered themselves in strong posts, and have distressed
the enemy by stratagems, surprises and alarms, and by cutting off their
provisions. If these means failed, they have declined a battle in the
field, but have carried the peasants into the mountains, burned the
grain and left the country desert. But when the rainy season has set in
upon the advancing enemy, they have watched their opportunity to make
excursions and vent their rage; the famished invaders have either become
their prisoners or been put to death. In this manner powerful and
numerous armies have been sunk in that whirlpool of destruction, and not
a soul has escaped." The same writer states that the country was
spacious, populous and hard to be penetrated; that it abounded in
dangers; that the paths and roads were beset with difficulties; and that
the obstacles to conquest were more than could be expressed. The
inhabitants, he says, were enterprising, well-armed and always prepared
for battle. Moreover, they had lofty forts, numerously garrisoned and
plentifully provided with warlike stores; and the approach to them was
opposed by thick and dangerous jungles, and broad and boisterous rivers.
The difficulties in the way of successful invasion are of course not
understated, as it was the object of the writer to exalt the prowess and
perseverance of the faithful. He accounts for their temporary success by
recording that "the Mussulman hordes experienced the comfort of fighting
for their religion, and the blessings of it reverted to the sovereignty
of his just and pious majesty." The short-lived triumph of the
Mussulmans might, however, have warranted a less ambitious tone. About
the middle of the 17th century the chief became a convert to Hinduism.
By what mode the conversion was effected does not clearly appear, but
whatever were the means employed, it seems that the decline of the
country commenced about the same period. Internal dissensions, invasion
and disturbances of every kind convulsed the province, and neither
prince nor people enjoyed security. Late in the 18th century some
interference took place on the part of the British government, then
conducted by Lord Cornwallis; but the successor of that nobleman, Sir
John Shore, adopting the non-intervention policy, withdrew the British
force, and abandoned the country to its fate. Its condition encouraged
the Burmese to depose the rajah, and to make Assam a dependency of Ava.
The extension of their encroachments on a portion of the territory of
the East India Company compelled the British government to take decisive
steps for its own protection. Hence arose the series of hostilities with
Ava known in Indian history as the first Burmese War, on the termination
of which by treaty in February 1826, Assam remained a British
possession. In 1832 that portion of the province denominated Upper Assam
was formed into an independent native state, and conferred upon
Purandhar Singh, the ex-rajah of the country; but the administration of
this chief proved unsatisfactory, and in 1838 his principality was
reunited with the British dominions. After a period of successful
administration and internal development, under the lieutenant-governor
of Bengal, it was erected into a separate chief-commissionership in
1874.

In 1886 the eastern Dwars were annexed from Bhutan; and in 1874 the
district of Goalpara, the eastern Dwars and the Garo hills were
incorporated in Assam. In 1898 the southern Lushai hills were
transferred from Bengal to Assam, and the north and south Lushai hills
were amalgamated as a district of Assam, and placed under the
superintendent of the Lushai hills. Frontier troubles occasionally occur
with the Akas, Daphlas, Abors and Mishmis along the northern border,
arising out of raids from the independent territory into British
districts. In October 1905 the whole province of Assam was incorporated
in the new province of Eastern Bengal and Assam.

  See E.A. Gait, _The History of Assam_ (1906).