ASSAYING. To "assay" (or "essay"; Fr. _essayer_) is in general to try,
or attempt, so to make trial or test. In a restricted sense the term
assaying is applied in metallurgy to the determination of the amount of
gold or silver in ores or alloys; in this article, however, it will be
used in a wider technical signification, and will include a description
of the methods for the quantitative determination of those elements in
ores which affect their value in metallurgical operations. It would be
impossible to give in detail here all the precautions necessary for the
successful use of the methods, and the descriptions will therefore be
confined to the principles involved and the general manner in which they
are applied to secure the desired results.

_Gold and Silver._--Ores containing gold or silver are almost invariably
assayed in the dry way; that is, by fusion with appropriate fluxes and
ultimate separation of the elements in the metallic form. One of the
customs which has grown out of our peculiar system of weights is the
form of statement of the results of such an assay. Instead of expressing
the amounts of gold and silver in percentages of the weight of ore, they
are expressed in ounces to the ton, the ounce being the troy ounce and
the ton that of 2000 avoirdupois pounds. To simplify calculation and to
enable the assayer to use the metric system of weights employed in all
chemical calculations, the "assay ton" ("A.T." = 29.166 grammes) has
been devised, which bears the same relation to the ton of 2000 lb.
avoirdupois that one milligram does to the troy ounce; when one assay
ton of ore is used, each milligram of gold or silver found represents
one ounce to the ton.

The assay of an ore for gold or silver consists of two operations. In
the first the gold or silver is made to combine or alloy with metallic
lead, the other constituents of the ore being separated from the lead as
slag. In the second, the lead button containing the gold or silver is
cupelled and the resulting gold or silver button is weighed. The first
is conducted in one of two ways, known respectively as the crucible
method and the scorification method. The crucible method is generally
used for ores containing gold in small amounts and for certain classes
of silver ores. The amount of ore taken for assay is generally one-half
"A.T.," but in very low-grade ores one, two, and sometimes even four
"A.T.s" are used. In the scorification method one-tenth of an "A.T." is
the amount commonly taken. While in both methods the same result is
sought, the means employed are quite different. In the scorification
method the ore is mixed in the scorifier (a shallow dish of burned clay)
with from ten to twenty times its weight of granulated metallic lead
(test lead) and a little borax glass, and heated in a muffle, the front
of which is at first closed. When the lead melts and begins to oxidize,
the lead oxide, or so-called litharge, combines with or dissolves the
non-metallic and readily oxidizable constituents of the ore, while the
gold and silver alloy with the lead. As the slag thus formed flows off
to the sides of the scorifier, the assay clears and the melted metallic
lead forms an "eye" in the middle. The door of the muffle is then opened
and the current of air which is drawn over the scorifier rapidly
oxidizes the lead, while the melted litharge gradually closes over the
metal. When the "eye" has quite disappeared the door is closed and the
temperature raised to make the slag very liquid. The scorifier is taken
from the muffle in a pair of tongs and the contents poured into a mould,
the lead forming a button in the bottom while the slag floats on top.
When cold, the contents of the mould are taken out and the lead button
hammered into the form of a cube, the slag, which is glassy and brittle,
separating readily from the metal, which is then ready for cupellation.
In the crucible method the ore is mixed with from once to twice its
weight of flux, which varies in composition, but of which the following
may be taken as a type:--

  Sodium bicarbonate  . . . 8 parts.
  Potassium carbonate . . . 3   "
  Powdered borax  . . . . . 4   "
  Flour . . . . . . . . . . 1   "
  Litharge  . . . . . . . . 9   "

The mixture is charged into a round clay crucible from 100 mm. to 125
mm. high, and heated either in a muffle or in a crucible furnace at a
gradually increasing heat for forty or fifty minutes. At the expiration
of this time, when the charge should be perfectly liquid and in a
tranquil state of fusion, the crucible is removed from the furnace and
the contents are poured into a mould. The resulting lead button hammered
into shape and carefully cleansed from slag is ready for the cupel. If
the button is too large for cupellation, or if it is hard, it may be
scorified either alone or mixed with test lead before cupellation. The
character and amount of the flux necessarily depend upon the character
of the ore, the object being to concentrate in the lead button all the
gold and silver while dissolving and carrying off in the slag the other
constituents of the ore. Under the most favourable conditions there is a
slight loss of gold and silver in the fusion, the scorification and the
cupellation, both by absorption in the slag and by actual volatilization
and absorption in the cupel. In ores containing much copper, this metal
is largely concentrated in the lead button, making it hard, and
necessitating repeated scorifications and, in some cases, a preliminary
removal of the copper by solution of the ore in nitric acid. This leaves
the gold in the insoluble residue, which is filtered off, and the silver
in the solution is thrown down by hydrochloric acid. The resulting
precipitate of silver chloride is filtered, and the residue and the
precipitate are scorified together. Ores containing much arsenic or
sulphur are generally roasted at a low heat and the assay is made on the
roasted material.

The process of cupellation is briefly as follows:--The gold alloy is
fused with a quantity of lead, and a little silver if silver is already
present. The resulting alloy, which is called the _lead button_, is then
submitted to fusion on a very porous support, made of bone-ash, and
called a _cupel_. The fusion being effected in a current of air, the
lead oxidizes. The heat is sufficient to keep the resulting lead oxide
fused, and the porous cupel has the property of absorbing melted lead
oxide without taking up any of the metallic globule, exactly in the same
way that blotting-paper will absorb water whilst it will not touch a
globule of mercury. The heat being continued, and the current of air
always passing over the surface of the melted lead button, and the lead
oxide being sucked up by the cupel as fast as it is formed, the metallic
globule rapidly diminishes in size until at last all the lead has been
got rid of. Now, if this were the only action, little good would have
been gained, for we should simply have put lead into the gold alloy, and
then taken it out again; but another action goes on whilst the lead is
oxidizing in the current of air. Other metals, except the silver and
gold, also oxidize, and are carried by the melted litharge into the
cupel. If the lead is therefore rightly proportioned to the standard of
alloy, the resulting button will consist of only gold and silver, and
these are separated by the operation of _parting_, which consists in
boiling the alloy (after rolling it to a thin plate) in strong nitric
acid, which dissolves the silver and leaves the gold as a coherent
sponge. To effect this parting properly, the proportion of silver to
gold should be as 3 to 1. The operation by which the alloy is brought to
this standard is termed _quartation_ or _inquartation_, and consists in
fusing the alloy in a cupel with lead and the quantity of fine silver or
fine gold necessary to bring it to the desired composition.

_Lead._--The "dry" or fire assay for lead is largely used for the
valuation of lead ores, although it is being gradually replaced by
volumetric methods. One part of the ore is mixed with from three to five
parts of a flux of the following composition:--

  Potassium carbonate .  .  .  .  . 40.6 %
  Sodium bicarbonate  .  .  .  .  . 31.3 "
  Borax   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 15.6 "
  Flour   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 12.5 "

The mixture is charged into a clay crucible and heated for twenty
minutes at a good red heat. When the mixture has been in a tranquil
state of fusion for a few minutes it is poured into a mould. When cold,
the button is hammered, cleaned carefully from slag, and weighed. The
proportion is calculated from the amount of ore used, and the result is
expressed in parts in a hundred or percentage of the ore. Various
impurities, such as copper, antimony and sulphur, go into the lead
button, so that the result is generally too high. The most accurate
method for the determination of lead in ores is the gravimetric method,
in which it is weighed as lead sulphate after the various impurities
have been separated. Nearly all lead ores contain more or less sulphur;
and as in the process of solution in nitric acid this is oxidized to
sulphuric acid which unites with the lead to form the very insoluble
lead sulphate, it is simpler to add sulphuric acid to convert all the
lead into sulphate and then evaporate until the nitric acid is expelled.
The salts of iron, copper, &c., are then dissolved in water and filtered
from the insoluble silica, lead sulphate, and calcium sulphate, which
are washed with dilute sulphuric acid. The insoluble matter is treated
with a hot solution of alkaline ammonium acetate, which dissolves the
lead sulphate, the other materials being separated by filtration. The
lead sulphate, re-precipitated in the filtrate by an excess of sulphuric
acid and alcohol, is then filtered on an asbestos felt in a Gooch
crucible, washed with dilute sulphuric acid and alcohol, ignited, and
weighed. Lead sulphate contains 68.30% of metallic lead.

There are several volumetric methods for assaying lead ores, but the
best known is that based on the precipitation of lead by ammonium
molybdate in an acetic acid solution. The lead sulphate, obtained as
described above and dissolved in ammonium acetate, is acidulated with
acetic acid diluted with hot water and heated to boiling-point. A
standardized solution of ammonium molybdate is then added from a
burette. As long as the solution contains lead, the addition of the
molybdate solution causes a precipitation of white lead molybdate. An
excess of the precipitant is shown by a drop of the solution imparting a
yellow colour to a solution of tannin, prepared by dissolving one part
of tannin in 300 of water; drops of this solution are placed on a white
porcelain plate, and as the precipitant is added to the lead solution a
drop of the latter is removed from time to time on a glass stirring-rod
and added to one of the drops on the porcelain plate. The appearance of
a yellow colour shows that all the lead has been precipitated and that
the solution contains an excess of molybdate. From the reading of the
burette the lead is calculated. The molybdate solution should be of such
a strength that 1 cc. will precipitate 0.01 gramme of lead. It is
standardized by dissolving a weighed amount of lead sulphate in ammonium
acetate and proceeding as described above.

_Zinc._--Chemically the ores of zinc consist of the silicates,
carbonates, oxides, and sulphides of zinc associated with other metals,
some of which complicate the methods of assay. The most modern and the
most generally accepted method is volumetric, and is based on the
reaction between zinc chloride and potassium ferrocyanide, by which
insoluble zinc ferrocyanide and soluble potassium chloride are formed;
the presence of the slightest excess of potassium ferrocyanide is shown
by a brownish tint being imparted by the solution to a drop of uranium
nitrate. The ore (0.5 gramme) is digested with a mixture of potassium
nitrate and nitric acid. A saturated solution of potassium chlorate in
strong nitric acid is added, and the mass evaporated to dryness. It is
then heated with a mixture of ammonium chloride and ammonia, filtered
and washed with a hot dilute solution of the same mixture. The filtrate
diluted to 200 cc. is carefully neutralized with hydrochloric acid, and
excess of 6 cc. of the strong acid is added, and the solution saturated
with hydrogen sulphide, which precipitates the copper and cadmium,
metals which would otherwise interfere. Without filtering, the standard
solution is added from a burette, and from time to time a drop of the
solution is removed on the glass stirring-rod and added to a drop or two
of a strong solution of uranium nitrate, previously placed on a white
porcelain plate. The appearance of a brown tint in one of these tests
shows the end of the reaction. When cadmium is not present the copper
may be precipitated by boiling the acidulated ammoniacal solution with
test lead and titrating, as before described, without removing the lead
and copper from the solution. The ferrocyanide solution is standardized
by dissolving 1 gramme of pure zinc in 6 cc. of hydrochloric acid,
adding ammonium chloride, and titrating as before. This method is
modified in practice by the character of the ores, carbonates and
silicates free from sulphides being decomposed by hydrochloric acid,
with the addition of a little nitric acid.

_Copper._--The fire assay for copper ores was abandoned years ago and
the electrolytic method took its place; this in turn is now largely
replaced by volumetric methods. In the electrolytic method from 0.5 to 5
grammes of ore are treated in a flask or beaker, with a mixture of 10
cc. of nitric and 10 cc. of sulphuric acid, until thoroughly decomposed.
When this liquid is cold it is diluted with cold water, heated until all
the soluble salts are dissolved, transferred to a tall, narrow beaker,
and diluted to about 150 cc. The electrodes are attached to a frame
connected with the battery and the beaker is placed on a stool, which
can be raised so that the electrodes are immersed in the liquid and
reach the bottom of the beaker. The electrodes consist of two cylinders
of platinum (placed one inside the other) about 75 mm. high, the smaller
of the two 37 mm. and the larger 50 mm. in diameter, both pierced with
10 to 12 holes 5 mm. in diameter, evenly distributed over the surfaces
to facilitate diffusion of the liquids. The surfaces of the cylinders
are roughened with a sand blast to increase the areas and make the
deposited metals adhere more firmly. Each cylinder has a platinum wire
fused to the upper circumference to connect with a clamp from which a
wire leads to the proper pole of the battery. The smaller cylinder is
generally the negative electrode on which the copper is deposited. The
framework carrying the clamps is arranged so that a number of
determinations may be made at one time, the wires from the clamps
running from a rheostat, so arranged that currents of any strength may
be used simultaneously. The cylinder, having been carefully weighed, is
placed in position, the beaker containing the solution is adjusted, and
the current passed until all the copper is precipitated. This generally
requires from two to twelve hours. The cylinders are then removed from
the solution and washed with distilled water, the one holding the
deposited copper being washed with alcohol, dried and weighed; the
increase in weight represents the copper contents of the ore. The
deposited copper should be firmly adherent and bright rosy red in
colour. Silver, arsenic and cadmium, if present, are precipitated with
the copper and affect the accuracy of the results; they should be
removed by special methods.

Volumetric methods are more expeditious and require less apparatus. The
potassium cyanide method is based on the fact that, when potassium
cyanide is added to an ammoniacal solution of a salt of copper, the
insoluble copper cyanide is formed, the end of the reaction being
indicated by the disappearance of the blue colour of the solution. One
gramme of the ore is treated in a flask with a mixture of nitric and
sulphuric acids and evaporated until all the nitric acid is expelled.
After cooling a little, water is added, and then a few grammes of
aluminium foil free from copper. On this foil the copper in the solution
is all precipitated by electrolytic action in a few minutes, and the
aluminium is dissolved by the addition of an excess of sulphuric acid.
Water is added, and as soon as the gangue and copper particles have
settled the clear solution is decanted, and the residue washed several
times in the same way. The copper is then dissolved in 5 cc. of nitric
acid; if silver is present a drop or two of hydrochloric acid is added,
the solution diluted to about 50 cc., and filtered. To the filtrate (or,
if no silver is present, to the diluted nitric acid solution) 10 cc. of
ammonia are added, and a standard solution of potassium cyanide is run
in from a burette until the blue colour has nearly disappeared. The
solution is filtered to get rid of the precipitate, and the titration is
finished in the nearly clear nitrate, which should be always about 200
cc. in volume. The titration is complete when the blue colour is so
faint that it is almost imperceptible after the flask has been
vigorously shaken. The potassium cyanide solution is standardized by
dissolving 0.5 gramme of pure copper in 5 cc. of nitric acid, diluting,
adding 10 cc. of ammonia, and titrating exactly as described above.

When potassium iodide is added to a solution of cupric acetate, the
reaction Cu(C2H3O2)2 + 2KI = CuI + 2K(C2H3O2) + I takes place; that is,
for each atom of copper one atom of iodine is liberated. If a solution
of sodium thiosulphate (hyposulphite) is added to this solution,
hydriodic acid, sodium iodide and tetrathionate are formed; and if a
little starch solution has been added, the end of the reaction is
indicated by the disappearance of the blue colour, due to the iodide of
starch. The amount of iodine liberated is therefore a measure of the
copper in the solution, and when the sodium thiosulphate has been
carefully standardized the method is extremely accurate. The ore is
treated as described in the cyanide method until the copper precipitated
by the aluminium foil has been washed and dissolved in 5 cc. of nitric
acid; then 0.25 gramme of potassium chlorate is added, and the solution
boiled nearly dry to oxidize any arsenic present to arsenic acid. The
solution is cooled, 50 cc. water added, then 5 cc. ammonia, and the
solution is boiled for five minutes. Next 5 cc. of glacial acetic acid
are added, the solution cooled, and 5 cc. of a solution of potassium
iodide (300 grammes to the litre) and the standard solution of sodium
thiosulphate run in from a burette until the brown colour has nearly
disappeared. A few drops of starch solution are then added, and when the
blue colour has nearly vanished a drop or two of methyl orange makes the
end reaction very sharp. The thiosulphate solution is standardized by
dissolving 0.3 to 0.5 gramme of pure copper in 3 cc. of nitric acid,
adding 50 cc. of water and 5 cc. of ammonia, and titrating as above
after the addition of 5 cc. of glacial acetic acid and 5 cc. of the
potassium iodide solution.

_Iron._--The methods used in the assay for iron are volumetric, and are
all based on the property possessed by certain reagents of oxidizing
iron from the ferrous to the ferric state. Two salts are in common use
for this purpose, potassium permanganate and potassium bichromate. It is
necessary in the first place, after the ore is in solution, to reduce
all the iron to the ferrous condition; then the carefully standardized
solution of the oxidizing reagent is added until all the iron is in the
ferric state, the volume of the standard solution used being the measure
of the iron contained in the ore. The end of the reaction when potassium
permanganate is employed is known by the change in colour of the
solution. As the solution of potassium permanganate, which is deep red
in colour, is dropped into the colourless iron solution, it is quickly
decolorized while the iron solution gradually assumes a yellowish tinge,
the first drop of the permanganate solution in excess giving it a pink
tint. With potassium bichromate solution, which is yellow, the iron
solution becomes green from the chromium chloride or sulphate formed,
and the end of the reaction is determined by removing a drop of the
solution on the stirring-rod and adding it to a drop of a dilute
solution of potassium ferricyanide on a white tile. So long as the
solution contains a ferrous salt, the drop on the tile changes to blue;
hence the absence of a blue coloration indicates the complete oxidation
of all the ferrous salt and the end of the reaction. One gramme of ore
is usually taken for assay and treated in a small flask or beaker with
10 cc. of hydrochloric acid. All the iron in the ore generally dissolves
upon heating, and a white residue is left. Occasionally this residue
contains a small amount of iron in a difficultly soluble form; in that
case the solution is slightly diluted with water and filtered into a
larger flask. The residue in the filter is ignited and fused with a
little sodium carbonate and nitrate, or with sodium peroxide. The
product is treated with water, filtered, and the residue dissolved in
hydrochloric acid and added to the main solution. This solution, which
should not exceed 50 cc. or 75 cc. in volume, contains the iron in the
ferric state and is ready for reduction.

In the reduction by metallic zinc, about 3 grammes of granulated or
foliated zinc are placed in the flask, which is closed with a small
funnel; when the iron is reduced, add 10 cc. of sulphuric acid, and as
soon as all the zinc is dissolved the solution is ready for titration.
In the reduction by stannous chloride the solution of the ore in the
flask is heated to boiling, and a strong solution of stannous chloride
is added until the solution is completely decolorized; then 60 cc. of a
solution of mercuric chloride (50 grammes to the litre) are run in and
the contents of the flask poured into a dish containing 600 cc. of water
and 60 cc. of a solution containing 200 grammes of manganous sulphate, 1
litre of phosphoric acid (1.3 sp. gr.), 400 cc. of sulphuric acid, and
1600 cc. of water. The solution is then ready for titration with the
standard permanganate solution.

The permanganate or bichromate solution is standardized by dissolving
0.5 of a gramme of pure iron wire in a flask, in hydrochloric acid,
oxidizing it with a little potassium chlorate, boiling off all traces of
chlorine, deoxidizing by one of the methods described above, and
titrating with the solution. As the wire always contains impurities, the
absolute amount of iron in the wire must be determined and the
correction made accordingly. Pure oxalic acid may also be used, which,
in the presence of sulphuric acid, is oxidized by the standard solution
according to the reaction:--

  5(H2C2O42H2O) + 3H2SO4 + 2KMnO4 = 10CO2 + 2MnSO4 + K2SO4 + 18H2O.

The reaction in case of ferrous sulphate is:--

  10FeSO4 + 2KMnO4 + 8H2SO4 = 5Fe2(SO4)3 + K2SO4 + 2MnSO4 + 8H2O;

that is, the same amount of potassium permanganate is required to
oxidize 5 molecules of oxalic acid that is necessary to oxidize 10
molecules of iron in the form of ferrous sulphate to ferric sulphate, or
63 parts by weight of oxalic acid equal 56 parts by weight of metallic
iron. Ammonium ferrous sulphate may also be used; it contains
one-seventh of its weight of iron.     (A. A. B.)