ASSASSIN (properly _Hashishin_, from _Hashish_, the opiate made from the
juice of hemp leaves), a general term for a secret murderer, originally
the name of a branch of the Shiite sect (see SHIITES), known as
Isma'ilites, founded by Hassan (ibn) Sabbah at the end of the 11th
century, and from that time active in Syria and Persia until crushed in
the 13th century by the Mongols under Hulaku (Hulagu) in Persia, and by
the Mameluke Bibars in Syria. The father of Hassan Sabbah, a native of
Khorasan, and a Shiite, had been frequently compelled to profess Sunnite
orthodoxy, and from prudential motives had sent his son to study under
an orthodox doctor at Nishapur. Here Hassan made the acquaintance of
Nizam-ul-Mulk, afterwards vizier of the sultan Malik-Shah (see SELJUKS).
During the reign of Alp-Arslan he remained in obscurity, and then
appeared at the court of Malik-Shah, where he was at first kindly
received by his old friend the vizier. Hassan, who was a man of great
ability, tried to supplant him in the favour of the sultan, but was
outwitted and compelled to take his departure from Persia. He went to
Egypt (1078-79), and, on account of his high reputation, was received
with great honour by the lodge at Cairo. He soon stood so high in the
caliph Mostansir's favour as to excite against him the jealousy of the
chief general, and a cause of open enmity soon arose. The caliph had
nominated first one and then another of his sons as his successor, and
in consequence a party division took place among the leading men.
Hassan, who adopted the cause of Nizar, the eldest son, found his
enemies too strong for him, and was forced to leave Egypt. After many
adventures he reached Aleppo and Damascus, and after a sojourn there,
settled near Kuhistan (Kohistan). He gradually spread his peculiar
modification of Isma'ilite doctrine, and, having collected a
considerable number of followers, formed them into a secret society. In
1090 he obtained, by stratagem, the strong mountain fortress of Alamut
in Persia, and, removing there with his followers, settled as chief of
the famous society afterwards called the Assassins.

The speculative principles of this body were identical with those of the
Isma'ilites, but their external policy was marked by one peculiar and
distinctive feature--the employment of secret "assassination" against
all enemies. This practice was introduced by Hassan, and formed the
essential characteristic of the sect. In organization they closely
resembled the western lodge at Cairo. At the head was the supreme ruler,
the _Sheik-al-Jabal_ (_Jebel_), i.e. Chief, or, as it is commonly
translated, Old Man of the Mountains. Under him were three
_Da'i-al-Kirbal_, or, as they may be called, grand priors, who ruled the
three provinces over which the sheik's power extended. Next came the
body of _Da'is_, or priors, who were fully initiated into all the secret
doctrines, and were the emissaries of the faith. Fourth were the
_Refiqs_, associates or fellows, who were in process of initiation, and
who ultimately advanced to the dignity of _da'is_. Fifth came the most
distinctive class, the _Fedais_ (i.e. the devoted ones), who were the
guards or assassins proper. These were all young men, and from their
ranks were selected the agents for any deed of blood. They were kept
uninitiated, and the blindest obedience was exacted from and yielded by
them. When the sheik required the services of any of them, the selected
_fedais_ were intoxicated with the _hashish_. When in this state they
were introduced into the splendid gardens of the sheik, and surrounded
with every sensual pleasure. Such a foretaste of paradise, only to be
granted by their supreme ruler, made them eager to obey his slightest
command; their lives they counted as nothing, and would resign them at a
word from him. Finally, the sixth and seventh orders were the _Lasiqs_,
or novices, and the common people. Hassan well knew the efficacy of
established law and custom in securing the obedience of a mass of
people; accordingly, upon all but the initiated, the observances of
Islam were rigidly enforced. As for the initiated, they knew the
worthlessness of positive religion and morality; they believed in
nothing, and scoffed at the practices of the faithful.

The Assassins soon began to make their power felt. One of their first
victims was Hassan's former friend, Nizam-ul-Mulk, whose son also died
under the dagger of a secret murderer. The death by poison of the sultan
Malik-Shah was likewise ascribed to this dreaded society, and
contributed to increase their evil fame. Sultan Sinjar, his successor,
made war upon them, but he was soon glad to come to terms with enemies
against whose operations no precaution seemed available. After a long
and prosperous rule Hassan died at an advanced age in 1124. He had
previously slain both his sons, one on suspicion of having been
concerned in the murder of a _da'i_ at Kuhistan, the other for drinking
wine, and he was therefore compelled to name as his successor his chief
_da'i_, Kia-Busurg-Omid.

During the fourteen years' reign of this second leader, the Assassins
were frequently unfortunate in the open field, and their castles were
taken and plundered; but they acquired a stronghold in Syria, while
their numerous murders made them an object of dread to the neighbouring
princes, and spread abroad their evil renown. A long series of
distinguished men perished under the daggers of the _fedais_; even the
most sacred dignity was not spared. The caliph Mostarshid was
assassinated in his tent, and not long after, the caliph Rashid suffered
a similar fate. Busurg-Omid was succeeded by his son Mahommed I., who,
during the long period of twenty-five years, ruthlessly carried out his
predecessor's principles. In his time Massiat became the chief seat of
the Syrian branch of the society. Mahommed's abilities were not great,
and the affections of the people were drawn towards his son Hassan, a
youth of great learning, skilled in all the wisdom of the initiated, and
popularly believed to be the promised Imam become visible on earth. The
old sheik prevented any attempt at insurrection by slaying 250 of
Hassan's adherents, and the son was glad to make submission. When,
however, he attained the throne, he began to put his views into effect.
On the 17th of the month Ramadan, 1164, he assembled the people and
disclosed to them the secret doctrines of the initiated; he announced
that the doctrines of Islam were now abolished, that the people might
give themselves up to feasting and joy. Soon after, he announced that he
was the promised Imam, the caliph of God upon earth. To substantiate
these claims he gave out that he was not the son of Mahommed, but was
descended from Nizar, son of the Egyptian caliph Mostansir, and a lineal
descendant of Isma'il. After a short reign of four years Hassan was
assassinated by his brother-in-law, and his son Mahommed II. succeeded.
One of his first acts was to slay his father's murderer, with all his
family and relatives; and his long rule, extending over a period of
forty-six years, was marked by many similar deeds of cruelty. He had to
contend with many powerful enemies, especially with the great Atabeg
sultan Nureddin, and his more celebrated successor, Saladin, who had
gained possession of Egypt after the death of the last Fatimite caliph,
and against whom even secret assassination seemed powerless. During his
reign, also, the Syrian branch of the society, under their _da'i_,
Sinan, made themselves independent, and remained so ever afterwards. It
was with this Syrian branch that the Crusaders made acquaintance; and it
appears to have been their emissaries who slew Count Raymund of Tripoli
and Conrad of Montferrat.

Mahommed II. died from the effects of poison, administered, it is
believed, by his son, Jelaleddin Hassan III., who succeeded. He restored
the old form of doctrine--secret principles for the initiated, and Islam
for the people--and his general piety and orthodoxy procured for him the
name of the new Mussulman. During his reign of twelve years no
assassinations occurred, and he obtained a high reputation among the
neighbouring princes. Like his father, he was removed by poison, and his
son, 'Ala-ed-din Mahommed III., a child of nine years of age, weak in
mind and body, was placed on the throne. Under his rule the mild
principles of his father were deserted, and a fresh course of
assassination entered on. In 1255, after a reign of thirty years,
'Ala-ed-din was slain, with the connivance of his son, Rukneddin, the
last ruler of the Assassins. In the following year Hulaku (Hulagu),
brother of the Tatar, Mangu Khan, invaded the hill country of Persia,
took Alamut and many other castles, and captured Rukneddin (see
MONGOLS). He treated him kindly, and, at his own request, sent him under
escort to Mangu. On the way, Rukneddin treacherously incited the
inhabitants of Kirdkuh to resist the Tatars. This breach of good faith
was severely punished by the khan, who ordered Rukneddin to be put to
death, and sent a messenger to Hulaku (Hulagu) commanding him to slay
all his captives. About 12,000 of the Assassins were massacred, and
their power in Persia was completely broken. The Syrian branch
flourished for some years longer, till Bibars, the Mameluke sultan of
Egypt, ravaged their country and nearly extirpated them. Small bodies of
them lingered about the mountains of Syria, and are believed still to
exist there. Doctrines somewhat similar to theirs are still to be met
with in north Syria.

  See J. von Hammer, _Geschichte der Assassinen_ (1818); S. de Sacy,
  _Mémoires de l'lnstitut_, iv. (1818), who discusses the etymology
  fully; _Calcutta Review_, vols. lv., lvi.; A. Jourdain in Michaud's
  _Histoire des Croisades_, ii. pp. 465-484, and trans. of the Persian
  historian Mirkhond in _Notices et extraits des manuscrits_, xiii. pp.
  143 sq.; cf. R. Dozy, _Essai sur l'histoire de l'Islamisme_ (Leiden
  and Paris, 1879); ch. ix.     (G. W. T.)