ASSER, or ASSERIUS MENEVENSIS (d. c. 910), English bishop, and author
of a life of Alfred the Great, was a native of the western part of
Wales, and was related to Nobis, bishop of St David's. He became a monk
at St David's, and having acquired some reputation for learning, he was
invited by King Alfred to his court. The king met the monk at Denu
(probably East or West Dean, near Seaford in Sussex), but Asser did not
at once accept the invitation of Alfred, and returned to Wales to
consult his colleagues. He then agreed to spend six months of each year
with the king and six months in his own land; but his first stay at the
royal court extended to eight months, and it is probable that the
annual visit to Wales was curtailed if not altogether discontinued. It
is difficult to fix the date of Asser's arrival in England, but it was
probably about 885. He assisted the king in his studies, received from
him the monasteries of Congresbury and Banwell, and sometime later
"Exeter and its diocese in Saxonland and Cornwall." He became bishop of
Sherborne before 900, and his death is recorded in the Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle under the date 910, although it is possible that it occurred a
year or two earlier. The scanty details of Asser's life are taken from
his biography of Alfred, from which it is inferred that he was
acquainted with one or two Frankish biographies, and possibly had
visited the continent of Europe.

Asser's work, _Annales rerum gestarum Alfredi magni_, was written about
893, and consists of a chronicle of English history from 849 to 887, and
an account of Alfred's life, largely drawn from personal knowledge, down
to 887. The only manuscript of which there is any record dates from
about 1000, and was destroyed by fire in 1731. From this manuscript an
edition was printed in 1574 under the direction of Matthew Parker,
archbishop of Canterbury; but this contained many interpolations and
alterations which were copied by subsequent editors. The text has since
been the subject of careful study, and the edition edited by W.H.
Stevenson (Oxford, 1904) distinguishes between the original work of
Asser and the later additions. Some doubt has been cast upon the
authenticity of the work, especially by T. Wright in the _Biographia
Britannica literaria_ (London, 1842), who ascribes the life to a monk of
St Neots; but the latest scholarship regards it as the work of Asser,
although all the difficulties which surround the authorship have not
been removed. The life was largely used by subsequent chroniclers, among
others by Florence of Worcester, Simeon of Durham, Roger of Hoveden, and
William of Malmesbury.

  See W.H. Stevenson, Introduction to Asser's _Life of King Alfred_
  (Oxford, 1904); R. Pauli, Introduction to _König Aelfred_ (Berlin,
  1851).