ASSESSOR (Lat. _assessare_, _assidere_, to sit by), a Roman term
originally applied to a trained lawyer who sat beside a governor of a
province or other magistrate, to instruct him in the administration of
the laws (see Roll, _De assessoribus magistratuum Romanorum_, Leipzig,
1872). The system is still exemplified in Scotland, where it is usual in
the larger towns for municipal magistrates, in the administration of
their civil jurisdiction, to have the aid of professional assessors. In
England, by the Judicature Act 1873, the court of appeal and the High
Court may in any cause or matter call in the aid of assessors. The
Patents Act 1907 makes special provision for assessors in patent and
trade-mark cases. By the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1891 the House
of Lords may, in appeals in admiralty actions, call in the aid of
assessors, while in the admiralty division of the High Court it is usual
for the Elder Brethren of Trinity House to assist as nautical assessors.
In admiralty cases in the county courts, too, the judge is frequently
assisted by assessors of "nautical skill and experience" (County Court
Admiralty Jurisdiction Act 1868). In the ecclesiastical courts assessors
assist the bishop in proceedings under the Church Discipline Act 1840,
s. 11, while under the Clergy Discipline Act 1892, s. 2, they assist the
chancellor in determining questions of fact. By the Appellate
Jurisdiction Act 1876, s. 14, the king in council may make rules for the
attendance of archbishops and bishops as assessors in the hearing of
ecclesiastical cases by the judicial committee of the privy council.

The term "assessor" is also very generally applied to persons appointed
to ascertain and fix the value of rates, taxes, &c., and in this sense
the word is used in the United States.

In France and in all European countries where the civil law system
prevails, the term _assesseur_ is applied to those assistant judges who,
with a president, compose a judicial court.

In Germany an _Assessor_, or _Beisitzer_, is a member of the legal
profession who has passed four years in actual practice and become
qualified for the position of a judge.