ASSEMANI, the name of a Syrian Maronite family of famous Orientalists.

1. JOSEPH SIMON, a Maronite of Mount Lebanon, was born in 1687. When
very young he was sent to the Maronite college in Rome, and was
transferred thence to the Vatican library. In 1717 he was sent to Egypt
and Syria to search for valuable MSS., and returned with about 150 very
choice ones. The success of this expedition induced the pope to send him
again to the East in 1735, and he returned with a still more valuable
collection. On his return he was made titular archbishop of Tyre and
librarian of the Vatican library. He instantly began to carry into
execution most extensive plans for editing and publishing the most
valuable MS. treasures of the Vatican. His two great works are the
_Bibliotheca Orientalis Clementino-Vaticana rec. manuscr. codd. Syr.,
Arab., Pers., Turc., Hebr., Samarit., Armen., Aethiop., Graec., Aegypt.,
Iber., et Malab., jussu et munif. Clem. XI._ (Rome, 1719-1728), 9 vols.
folio, and _Ephraemi Syri opera omnia quae extant, Gr., Syr., et Lat._,
6 vols. folio (Rome, 1737-1746). Of the _Bibliotheca_ the first three
vols. only were completed. The work was to have been in four parts--(1)
Syrian and allied MSS., orthodox, Nestorian and Jacobite; (2) Arabian
MSS., Christian and Mahommedan; (3) Coptic, Aethiopic, Persian and
Turkish MSS.; and (4) Syrian and Arabian MSS. not distinctively
theological; only the first part was completed, but extensive
preparations were made for the others. There is a German abridgment by
A.F. Pfeiffer.

2. JOSEPH ALOYSIUS, brother of Joseph Simon, and professor of Oriental
languages at Rome. He died in 1782. Besides aiding his brother in his
literary labours, he published, in 1749-1760, _Codex Liturgicus
Ecclesiae Universae in xv. libris_ (this is incomplete), and _Comment.
de Catholicis sive Patriarchis Chaldaeorum et Nestorianorum_ (Rome,
1775).

3. STEPHEN EVODIUS, nephew of Joseph Simon and Joseph Aloysius, was the
chief assistant of his uncle Joseph Simon in his work in the Vatican
library. He was titular archbishop of Apamea in Syria, and held several
rich prebends in Italy. His literary labours were very extensive. His
two most important works were a description of certain valuable MSS. in
his _Bibliotheae Mediceo-Laurentianae et Palatinae codd. manuscr.
Orientalium Catalogus_ (Flor. 1742), fol., and his _Acta SS. Martyrum
Orientalium._ He made several translations from the Syrian, and in
conjunction with his uncle he began the _Bibliothecae Apostol. Vatic.
codd. manusc. Catal., in tres partes distributus._ Only three vols. were
published, and the fire in the Vatican library in 1768 consumed the
manuscript collections which had been prepared for the continuation of
the work.

4. SIMON, grandnephew of Joseph Simon, was born at Tripoli in 1752, and
was professor of Oriental languages in Padua. He died in 1820. He is
best known by his masterly detection of the literary imposture of Vella,
which claimed to be a history of the Saracens in Syria.