ASSETS (from the O. Nor. Fr. _assetz_, mod. Fr. _assez_, "enough"), in
English law, strictly the property of a debtor in the hands of his
representative sufficient for the satisfaction of his creditors or
legatees. Thus the property of a bankrupt is termed his assets and is
the fund out of which his liabilities must be paid. All property of the
debtor is assets, and it is not necessary that it should have been
reduced into possession by him.

The creditors of a debtor are either secured or unsecured. A secured
creditor, e.g. a mortgagee, has a prior claim to be paid his debt out of
his security. If on realization of the security there is a balance after
paying the debt, such balance becomes assets for the unsecured
creditors; if there is a deficit, then the creditor becomes an unsecured
creditor for such deficit. The unsecured creditors were formerly divided
into creditors by specialty and by simple contract, the first being
creditors secured by instrument under seal who ranked in priority to
simple contract creditors. But by Hinde Palmer's Act [the Executors Act]
1869 all unsecured creditors rank alike.

Assets are divisible into legal assets and equitable assets, and the
former class is again divisible into assets real and personal. These
distinctions, though formerly of great importance, have now lost most of
their meaning, but it is necessary briefly to describe the nature of
these divisions and their consequences. The distinction between assets
legal and equitable depends entirely upon the remedy open to the
creditor to recover his debt and in no way upon the nature of the
property from which the debt is sought to be recovered. If the creditor
had to sue the executor of a debtor at law to obtain payment out of the
property, that property was legal assets; but if the only remedy open to
the creditor to get at the property was to bring an action in chancery
for the administration of the estate, then the assets were equitable.

Legal assets, as has been said, were divided into real and personal
assets. The personal assets were those which devolved _virtute officii_
on the executor or administrator; such assets are since Hinde Palmer's
Act available equally for specialty and simple contract creditors. The
real assets consisted of those descending to the heir or devised to a
devisee, and were at law only liable for specialty debts. However, by
the Land Transfer Act 1897 it is provided that the real estate of a
deceased shall devolve upon the executor and "shall be administered in
the same manner ... and with the same incidents as if it were personal
estate." The distinction, therefore, between assets real and personal
has practically ceased to exist, and only continues in regard to such
property as is not included in the act, the most important of which is
land held in copyhold.

The equitable assets were treated otherwise. In the eyes of equity all
unsecured creditors stand upon the same footing, and a creditor suing
for administration of the estate sued on behalf of himself and all other
creditors of the estate, and the distinction between specialty and
simple contract creditors was ignored. Land was not at law liable to
satisfy simple contract creditors; but if a testator expressly charged
it with payment of his debts or devised it to his executors upon trust
to pay his debts, equity treated it as equitable assets and so made it
available to satisfy simple contract creditors; and finally by an act of
1833 it was provided that real estate should in all cases be assets to
be administered by equity for the benefit of simple contract creditors
as well as creditors by specialty. It will be seen therefore that,
generally speaking, all creditors have now the same remedies against the
executors either at law or in equity. The only property as to which
these distinctions at all survive is that not touched by the Land
Transfer Act 1897.

The act of 1833 just mentioned does not, however, deal with legacies,
which continue to be payable only out of personalty unless they are
expressly charged upon the realty by the testator; it has been contended
that the effect of the Land Transfer Act 1897 has been to alter this and
make the realty assets for the purpose of paying legacies, but this view
is believed to be unsound.

It is necessary for the representative so to distribute the assets that
any fund primarily liable shall bear its proper burden, and that as far
as possible all debts and legacies may be paid; this is said to be
"marshalling the assets," and a few examples of the principal cases of
marshalling will make this clear. If the personalty is exhausted in
satisfying the creditors the legatees are left without a fund from which
to be paid. But inasmuch as the creditor could have got paid out of the
realty, as well as the personalty, it is not fair that the legatee
should suffer by the creditor's choice, and he will therefore get
payment from the real estate. So again if one legacy is charged upon the
real estate and another is not, then if the former be paid out of the
personalty the latter will stand in its place and be paid from the real
estate.

Finally it shall be noticed that an insolvent estate may be administered
in bankruptcy. In such a case the law of bankruptcy regulates the order
in which the assets are divided among the creditors (see BANKRUPTCY),
but by the Judicature Act 1875, it is provided that an insolvent estate
may be administered in the chancery division, and in such a case "the
same rules shall prevail and be observed as to the respective rights of
secured and unsecured creditors and as to the debts and liabilities
provable and as to the valuation of annuities and future and contingent
liabilities respectively as may be in force for the time being under the
law of bankruptcy." This clause must be construed strictly, and it is
only in the three cases specifically mentioned that the rules of
bankruptcy will be imported into the administration of an insolvent
estate by the chancery division.

In a less strict sense, the term "assets," or "an asset," is used
derivatively as a synonym for any property, or as opposed to
"liabilities." Cecil Rhodes once spoke of the British flag as a "great
commercial asset" in South Africa, meaning merely that the imperial
connexion was a source of strength and credit.