ASSEMBLY, UNLAWFUL, the term used in English law for an assembly of
three or more persons with intent to commit a crime by force, or to
carry out a common purpose (whether lawful or unlawful), in such a
manner or in such circumstances as would in the opinion of firm and
rational men endanger the public peace or create fear of immediate
danger to the tranquillity of the neighbourhood. In the Year Book of the
third year of Henry VII.'s reign assemblies were referred to as not
punishable unless _in terrorem populi domini regis_. It has been
suggested (Criminal Code Commission, 1879) that legislation first became
necessary at a time when it was usual for those landed proprietors who
were on bad terms with one another to go to market at the head of bands
of armed retainers (Statute of Northampton, 1328, 2 Edw. III. c. 3). An
assembly, otherwise lawful, is not made unlawful if those who take part
in it know beforehand that there will probably be organized opposition
to it, and that it may cause a breach of the peace (_Beatty v.
Gillbanks_, 1882, 9 Q.B.D. 308). All persons may, and must if called
upon to do so, assist in dispersing an unlawful assembly (_Redford v.
Birley_, 1822, 1 St. Tr. n.s. 1215; _R. v. Pinney_, 1831, 3 St. Tr. n.s.
11). An assembly which is lawful cannot be rendered unlawful by
proclamation unless the proclamation is one authorized by statute (_R.
v. Fursey_, 1833, 3 St. Tr. n.s. 543, 567; _R. v. O'Connell_, 1831, 2
St. Tr. n.s. 629, 656; see also the Prevention of Crimes [Ireland] Act
1887). Meetings for training or drilling, or military movements, are
unlawful assemblies unless held under lawful authority from the crown,
the lord-lieutenant, or two justices of the peace (Unlawful Drilling Act
1820, s. 11).

An unlawful assembly which has made a motion towards its common purpose
is termed a _rout_, and if the unlawful assembly should proceed to carry
out its purpose, e.g. begin to demolish a particular enclosure, it
becomes a riot (q.v.). All three offences are misdemeanours in English
law, punishable by fine and imprisonment. The common law as to unlawful
assembly extends to Ireland, subject to the special legislation referred
to under the title RIOT. The law of Scotland includes unlawful assembly
under the same head as rioting.

_British Dominions Abroad._--The law of the British colonies as a
general rule as to unlawful assemblies follows the common law of
England. The definitions in the Criminal Codes of Canada (1892, s. 79)
and Queensland (1899, s. 61) are substantially the same as the
common-law definition above given. Under the Indian Penal Code (s. 141)
an assembly of five or more persons is designated an unlawful assembly
if the common object of the persons composing that assembly is--(1) to
overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, the legislative or
executive government of India, or the government of any presidency or
any lieutenant-governor, or any public servant in the exercise of the
lawful power of such public servant; (2) to resist the execution of any
law or of any legal process; (3) to commit any mischief or "criminal
trespass" or other offence; (4) by means of criminal force or show of
criminal force to any person, to take or obtain possession of any
property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment of a right of way,
or of the use of water, or other corporeal right of which he is in
possession or enjoyment, or to enforce any right or supposed right; or
(5) by means of criminal force or show of criminal force, to compel any
person to do what he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what
he is legally entitled to do (see Mayne, _Ind. Cr. Law_, ed. 1896, p.
480). In South Africa and Mauritius the law on this subject is derived
from the Roman Dutch and French law (see RIOT.)

_United States._--The common-law definition of unlawful assembly is
accepted in the United States subject to the special legislation of the
constituent states. The New York Penal Code (s. 451) declares that
whenever three or more persons being assembled attempt or threaten any
act tending towards a breach of the peace or injury to person or
property, or any unlawful act, such assembly is unlawful (see Bishop,
_Amer. Crim. Law_, 8th ed., 1892, vol. i. s. 534, vol. ii. s. 1256).