ASSIUT, or SIUT, capital of a province of Upper Egypt of the same name,
and the largest and best-built town in the Nile Valley south of Cairo,
from which it is distant 248 m. by rail. The population rose from 32,000
in 1882 to 42,000 in 1900. Assiut stands near the west bank of the Nile
across which, just below the town, is a barrage, completed in 1902,
consisting of an open weir, 2733 ft. long, and over 100 bays or sluices,
each 16½ ft. wide, which can be opened or closed at will. At the western
end of the barrage begins the Ibrahimia canal, the feeder of the Bahr
Yusuf, the largest irrigation canal of Egypt. The Ibrahimia canal is
skirted by a magnificent embankment planted with shady trees leading
from the river to the town. There are several bazaars, baths and
handsome mosques, one noted for its lofty minaret, and here the American
Presbyterian mission has established a college for both sexes. Assiut is
famous for its red and black pottery and for ornamental wood and ivory
work, which find a ready market all over Egypt. It is one of the chief
centres of the Copts. Here also is the northern terminus of the caravan
route across the desert, which, passing through the Kharga oasis, goes
south-west to Darfur. It is known as the Arbain, or forty days road,
from the time occupied on the journey. Assiut (properly Asyut) is the
successor of the ancient Lycopolis (Eg. Siöout), capital of the 13th
nome of Upper Egypt. Here were worshipped two canine gods (see ANUBIS),
Ophoïs (Wepwoi) being the principal god of the city, while Anubis
apparently presided over the necropolis. No ruins are visible, the
mounds of the old city being for the most part hidden under modern
buildings; but the slopes of the limestone hills behind it are pierced
with an infinity of rock-cut tombs, some of which were large and
decorated with sculptures, paintings and long inscriptions. The
archaeological commission of the _Description de l'Égypte_ visited them
in 1799, when the walls of many of the large tombs were still almost
intact; in the first half of the 19th century (and to some extent later)
an immense amount of destruction was caused by blasting for stone. Three
of the tombs illustrate one of the darkest periods in Egypt's history,
when the princes of Siut played a leading part in the struggle between
Heracleopolis and Thebes (Dyns. IX.-XI.); another, of the XIIth Dynasty,
contains a remarkable inscription detailing the contracts made by the
nomarch with the priests of the temples of Ophoïs and Anubis for
perpetual services at his tomb (see Breasted, _Ancient Records of Egypt,
Historical Documents_, vol. i. pp. 179, 258). Remains of the mummies of
dogs and similar animals sacred to these deities are scattered among the
débris on the hillside in abundance. Lycopolis was the birthplace of
Plotinus, the founder of Neo-Platonism (A.D. 205-270). From the 4th
century onwards its grottoes were the dwellings of Christian hermits,
amongst whom John of Lycopolis was the most celebrated.     (F. Ll. G.)