ASSIGNATS (from Lat. _assignatus_, assigned), a form of paper-money
issued in France from 1789 to 1796. Assignats were so termed, as
representing land _assigned_ to the holders.

The financial strait of the French government in 1789 was extreme. Coin
was scarce, loans were not taken up, taxes had ceased to be productive,
and the country was threatened with imminent bankruptcy. In this
emergency assignats were issued to provide a substitute for a metallic
currency. They were originally of the nature of mortgage bonds on the
national lands. These lands consisted of the church property
confiscated, on the motion of Mirabeau, by the Constituent Assembly on
the 2nd of November 1789, and the crown lands, which had been taken over
by the nation on the 7th of October (see FRENCH REVOLUTION).

The assignats were first to be paid to the creditors of the state. With
these the creditors could purchase national land, the assignats having,
for this purpose, the preference over other forms of money. If the
creditor did not care to purchase land, it was supposed that he could
obtain the face-value for them from those who desired land. Those
assignats which were returned to the state as purchase-money were to be
cancelled, and the whole issue, it was argued, would consequently
disappear as the national lands were distributed.

A first issue was made of 400,000,000 francs' worth of assignats, each
note being of 100 francs' value and bearing interest daily at a rate of
5%. They were to be redeemed by the product of the sales, and from
certain other sources, at the rate of 120,000,000 francs in 1791,
100,000,000 francs in 1792, 80,000,000 francs in 1793 and 1794, and the
surplus in 1795. The success of the issue was undoubted, and, possibly,
if the assignats had been restricted, as Mirabeau at first desired, to
the extent of one-half the value of the lands sold, they would not have
shared the usual fate of inconvertible paper money. Mirabeau was a
strenuous advocate of the assignats. "They represent," he said, "real
property, the most secure of all possessions, the soil on which we
tread." "There cannot be a greater error than the fear so generally
prevalent as to the over-issue of assignats ... reabsorbed progressively
in the purchase of the national domains, this paper-money can never
become redundant."

In 1790 the interest was reduced to 3%, and as the treasury had again
become exhausted, a further issue was decided upon; it was also decreed
that the assignats were to be accepted as legal tender, all public
departments being instructed to receive them as the equivalent of
metallic money. This second issue amounted to 800,000,000 francs and
carried no interest. It was solemnly declared in the decree authorizing
the issue that the maximum issue was never to exceed twelve hundred
millions. This pledge, however, was soon broken, and further issues
brought the total up to 3,750,000,000 francs. The consequence of these
further issues was instant depreciation, and the note of 100 francs
nominal value sank to less than 20 francs coin. Recourse was then had to
protective legislation. The first step was to decree the penalty of six
years' imprisonment against any person who should sell specie for a more
considerable quantity of assignats, or who should stipulate a different
price for commodities according as the payment was to be made in specie
or in assignats. For the second offence the penalty was to be twenty
years' imprisonment (August 1, 1793), for which the death penalty was
ultimately substituted (May 10, 1794). This severe provision was,
however, repealed after the fall of Robespierre. Notwithstanding these
precautions, the value of assignats still declined, till the proportion
to specie had become that of six to one. Then came the passing by the
Convention on the 3rd of May 1793 of the absurd "maximum." The decree
required all farmers and corn-dealers to declare the quantity of corn in
their possession and to sell it only in recognized markets. No person
was to be allowed to lay in more than one month's supply. A maximum
price was fixed, above which no one was to buy or sell under severe
penalties. These measures were soon stultified by further issues, and by
June 1794 the total number of assignats aggregated nearly 8,000,000,000,
of which only 2,464,000,000 had returned to the treasury and been
destroyed. The extension of the "maximum" to all commodities only
increased the confusion. Trade was paralysed and all manufacturing
establishments were closed down. Attempts by the Convention to increase
the value of the assignats were of no avail. Too many causes operated in
favour of their depreciation: the enormous issue, the uncertainty as to
their value if the Revolution should fail, the relation they bore to
both specie and commodities, which retained their value and refused to
be exchanged for a money of constantly diminishing purchasing power.
Even between the assignats themselves there were differences. The royal
assignats, which had been issued under Louis XVI., had depreciated less
than the republican ones. They were worth from 8 to 15% more, a fact due
to the hope that in case of a counter-revolution they would be less
likely to be discredited.

The Directory was guilty of even greater abuses in dealing with the
assignats. By 1796 the issues had reached the enormous figure of
45,500,000,000 francs, and even this gigantic total was swollen still
more by the numerous counterfeits introduced into France from the
neighbouring countries. The assignats had now become totally
valueless--the abolition of the "maximum" the previous year (1795) had
produced no effect, and, though, by various payments into the treasury,
the total number had been reduced to about 24,000,000,000 francs, their
face-value was about 30 to 1 of coin. At this value they were converted
into 800,000,000 francs of land-warrants, or _mandats territoriaux_,
which were to constitute a mortgage on all the lands of the republic.
These _mandats_ were no more successful than the assignats, and even on
the day of their issue were at a discount of 82%. They had an existence
of six months, and were finally received back by the state at about the
seventieth part of their face-value in coin.

  AUTHORITIES.--L.A. Thiers, _Histoire de la révolution française_,
  gives a full and graphic account of the assignats, the causes of their
  depreciation, &c.; J. Garnier, _Traité des Finances_ (1862); J.
  Bresson, _Histoire financière de la France_ (1829); R. Stourm, _Les
  Finances de l'ancien régime et de la révolution_ (1885); F.A. Walker,
  _Money_ (1891); Henry Higgs, in the _Cambridge Modern History_, vol.
  viii. (1904).     (T. A. I.)