ASSIZE, or ASSISE (Lat. _assidere_, to sit beside; O. Fr. _assire_, to
sit, _assis_, seated), a legal term, meaning literally a "session," but
in fact, as Littleton has styled it, a _nomen aequivocum_, meaning
sometimes a jury, sometimes the sittings of a court, and sometimes the
ordinances of a court or assembly.

It originally signified the form of trial by a jury of sixteen persons,
which eventually superseded the barbarous judicial combat; this jury was
named the grand assize and was sworn to determine the right of seisin of
land (see EVIDENCE). The grand assize was abolished in 1833; but the
term assize is still applicable to the jury in criminal causes in
Scotland.

In the only sense in which the word is not now almost obsolete, assize
means the periodical session of the judges of the High Court of Justice,
held in the various counties of England, chiefly for the purposes of
gaol delivery and trying causes at _nisi prius_. Previous to Magna Carta
(1215) writs of assize had all to be tried at Westminster, or to await
trial in the locality in which they had originated at the septennial
circuit of the justices in eyre; but, by way of remedy for the great
consequent delay and inconvenience, it was provided by this celebrated
act that the assizes of _mort d'ancestor_ and _novel disseisin_ should
be tried annually by the judges in every county. By successive
enactments, the civil jurisdiction of the justices of assize was
extended, and the number of their sittings increased, till at last the
necessity of repairing to Westminster for judgment in civil actions was
almost obviated to country litigants by an act, passed in the reign of
Edward I., which provided that the writ summoning the jury to
Westminster should also appoint a time and place for hearing such causes
within the county of their origin. The date of the alternative summons
to Westminster was always subsequent to the former date, and so timed as
to fall in the vacation preceding the Westminster term, and thus
"_Unless before_," or _nisi prius_, issues came to be dealt with by the
judges of assize before the summons to Westminster could take effect.
The _nisi prius_ clause, however, was not then introduced for the first
time. It occurs occasionally in writs of the reign of Henry III. The
royal commissions to hold the assizes are--(1) general, (2) special. The
general commission is issued twice a year to the judges of the High
Court of Justice, and two judges are generally sent on each circuit. It
covers commissions--(1) of oyer and terminer, by which they are
empowered to deal with treasons, murders, felonies, &c. This is their
largest commission; (2) of _nisi prius_ (q.v.) (3) of gaol delivery,
which requires them to try every prisoner in gaol, for whatsoever
offence committed; (4) of the peace, by which all justices must be
present at their county assizes, or else suffer a fine. Special
commissions are granted for inquest in certain causes and crimes. See
also the articles CIRCUIT; JURY.

Assizes, in the sense of ordinances or enactments of a court or council
of state, as the "assize of bread and ale," the "assize of Clarendon,"
the "assize of arms," are important in early economic history. As early
as the reign of John the observance of the _assisae venalium_ was
enforced, and for a period of 500 years thereafter it was considered no
unimportant part of the duties of the legislature to regulate by fixed
prices, for the protection of the lieges, the sale of bread, ale, fuel,
&c. (see ADULTERATION). Sometimes in city charters the right to assize
such articles is specially conceded. Regulations of this description
were beneficial in the repression of fraud and adulteration. Assizes are
sometimes used in a wider legislative connexion by early chroniclers and
historians--the "assisae of the realme," e.g. occasionally meaning the
organic laws of the country. For the "assizes of Jerusalem" see
CRUSADES.

The term assize, originally applying to an assembly or court, became
transferred to actions before the court or the writs by which they were
instituted. The following are the more important.

_Assize of darrien presentment_, or last presentation, was a writ
directed to the sheriff to summon an assize or jury to enquire who was
the last patron that presented to a church then vacant, of which the
plaintiff complained that he was deforced or unlawfully deprived by the
defendant. It was abolished in 1833 and the action of _quare impedit_
(q.v.) substituted. But by the Common Law Procedure Act 1860, no _quare
impedit_ can be brought, so that an action in the king's bench of the
High Court was substituted for it.

Assize of _mort d'ancestor_ was a writ which lay where a plaintiff
complained of an "abatement" or entry upon his freehold, effected by a
stranger on the death of the plaintiff's father, mother, brother,
sister, uncle, aunt, &c. It was abolished in 1833.

Assize of _novel disseisin_ was an action to recover lands of which the
plaintiff had been "disseised" or dispossessed. It was abolished in
1833. See Pollock and Maitland, _Hist. Eng. Law._

_Assize, clerk of_, an officer "who writes all things judicially done by
the justices of assizes in their circuits." He has charge of the
commission, and takes recognizances, records, judgments and sentences,
grants certificates of conviction, draws up orders, &c. By the Clerks of
Assize Act 1869 he must either have been for three years a barrister or
solicitor in actual practice, or have acted for three years in the
capacity of subordinate officer of a clerk of assize on circuit.

_United States._--There are no assize courts in the United States; it is
not the custom for supreme court judges of the states to go on circuit,
but the judges of the United States Supreme Court do sit as members of
the United States circuit courts in the several states periodically
throughout the year. These courts are not assize courts, but are federal
as distinguished from state courts, and have a special and limited
jurisdiction. In the several states the highest court is divided into
departments, in each of which there are courts presided over by supreme
court judges residing in that department, thus avoiding the assize court
or circuit-going system.