ASSISI (anc. _Asisium_), a town and episcopal see of Umbria, Italy, in
the province of Perugia, 15 m. E.S.E. by rail from the town of Perugia.
Pop. (1901) town, 5338; commune, 17,240. The town occupies a fine
position on a mountain (1345 ft. above sea-level) with a view over the
valleys of the Tiber and Topino. It is mainly famous in connexion with
St Francis, who was born here in 1182, and returned to die in 1226. The
Franciscan monastery and the lower and upper church of St Francis were
begun immediately after his canonization in 1228, and completed in 1253,
being fine specimens of Gothic architecture. The crypt was added in
1818, when the sarcophagus containing his remains was discovered. The
lower church contains frescoes by Cimabue, Giotto and others, the most
famous of which are those over the high altar by Giotto, illustrating
the vows of the Franciscan order; while the upper church has frescoes
representing scenes from the life of St Francis (probably by Giotto and
his contemporaries) on the lower portion of the walls of the nave, and
scenes from Old and New Testament history by pupils of Cimabue on the
upper. The church of Santa Chiara (St Clare), the foundress of the Poor
Clares, with its massive lateral buttresses, fine rose-window, and
simple Gothic interior, was begun in 1257, four years after her death.
It contains the tomb of the saint and 13th-century frescoes and
pictures. Santa Maria Maggiore is also a good Gothic church. The
cathedral (San Rufino) has a fine façade with three rose-windows of
1140; the interior was modernized in 1572. The town is dominated by the
medieval castle (1655 ft.), built by Cardinal Albornoz (1367) and added
to by Popes Pius II. and Paul III. Two miles to the east in a ravine
below Monte Subasio is the hermitage _delle Carceri_ (2300 ft.), partly
built, partly cut out of the solid rock, given to St Francis by
Benedictine monks as a place of retirement. Below the town to the
south-west, close to the station, is the large pilgrimage church of
Santa Maria degli Angeli, begun in 1569 by Pope Pius V., with Vignola as
architect; but not completed until 1640. It contains the original
oratory of St Francis and the cell in which he died. Adjacent is the
garden in which the saint's thornless roses bloom in May. Half a mile
outside the town to the south-east is the convent of San Damiano,
erected by St Francis, of which St Clare was first abbess.

In the early middle ages Assisi was subject to the dukes of Spoleto; but
in the 11th century it seems to have been independent. It became
involved, however, in the disputes of Guelphs and Ghibellines, and was
frequently at war with Perugia. It was sacked by Perugia and the papal
troops in 1442, and even after that continued to be the prey of
factions. The place is now famous as a resort of pilgrims, and is also
important for the history of Italian art. The poet Metastasio was born
here in 1698.

  See L. Duff-Gordon, _Assisi_ ("Mediaeval Towns" series, London, 1900).
  For ancient history see ASISIUM.     (T. As.)