ASSONANCE (from Lat. _adsonare_ or _assonare_, to sound to or answer
to), a term defined, in its prosodical sense, as "the corresponding or
riming of one word with another in the accented vowel and those which
follow it, but not in the consonants" (_New English Dictionary_,
Oxford). In other words, assonance is an improper or imperfect form of
rhyme, in which the ear is satisfied with the incomplete identity of
sound which the vowel gives without the aid of consonants. Much rustic
or popular verse in England is satisfied with assonance, as in such
cases as

  "And pray who gave thee that jolly red _nose_?
   Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmeg and _Cloves_,"

where the agreement between the two _o's_ permits the ear to neglect the
discord between _s_ and _v_. But in English these instances are the
result of carelessness or blunted ear. It is not so in several
literatures, such as in Spanish, where assonance is systematically
cultivated as a literary ornament. It is an error to confound
alliteration,--which results from the close juxtaposition of words
beginning with the same sound or letter,--and assonance, which is the
repetition of the same vowel-sound in a syllable at points where the ear
expects a rhyme. The latter is a more complicated and less primitive
employment of artifice than the former, although they have often been
used to intensify the effect of each other in a single couplet.
Assonance appears, nevertheless, to have preceded rhyme in several of
the European languages, and to have led the way towards it. It is
particularly observable in the French poetry which was composed before
the 12th century, and it reached its highest point in the "Chanson de
Roland," where the sections are distinguished by the fact that all the
lines in a _laisse_ or stanza close with the same vowel-sound. When the
ear of the French became more delicate, and pure rhyme was introduced,
about the year 1120, assonance almost immediately retired before it and
was employed no more, until recent years, when several French poets have
re-introduced assonance in order to widen the scope of their effects of
sound. It held its place longer in Provençal and some other Romance
literatures, while in Spanish it has retained its absolute authority
over rhyme to the present day. It has been observed that in the Romance
languages the ear prefers the correspondence of vowels, while in the
Teutonic languages the preference is given to consonants. This
distinction is felt most strongly in Spanish, where the satisfaction in
_rimas asonantes_ is expressed no less in the most elaborate works of
the poets and dramatists than in the rough ballads of the people. The
nature of the language here permits the full value of the corresponding
vowel-sounds to be appreciated, whereas in English--and even in German,
where, however, a great deal of assonant poetry exists--the divergence
of the consonants easily veils or blunts the similarity of sound.
Various German poets of high merit, and in particular Tieck and Heine,
have endeavoured to obviate this difficulty, but without complete
success. Occasionally they endeavour, as English rhymers have done, to
mix pure rhyme with assonance, but the result of this in almost all
cases is that the assonances, &c., which make a less strenuous appeal to
the ear, are drowned and lost in the stress of the pure rhymes. Like
alliteration, assonance is a very frequent and very effective ornament
of prose style, but such correspondence in vowel-sound is usually
accidental and involuntary, an instinctive employment of the skill of
the writer. To introduce it with a purpose, as of course must be done in
poetry, has always been held to be a most dangerous practice in prose.
Assonance as a conscious art, in fact, is scarcely recognized as
legitimate in English literature.     (E. G.)