ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS, or MENTAL ASSOCIATION, a term used in psychology
to express the conditions under which representations arise in
consciousness, and also for a principle put forward by an important
historical school of thinkers to account generally for the facts of
mental life. Modern physiological psychology has so altered the approach
to this subject that much of the older discussion has become antiquated,
but it may be recapitulated here for historical purposes.

  _Earlier Theory._--In the long and erudite Note D**, appended by Sir
  W. Hamilton to his edition of Reid's Works, many anticipations of
  modern statements on association are cited from the works of ancient
  or medieval thinkers; and for Aristotle, in particular, the glory is
  claimed of having at once originated the doctrine and practically
  brought it to perfection.[1] As translated by Hamilton, but without
  his interpolations, the classical passage from the _De Memoria et
  Reminiscentia_ runs as follows:--

  "When, therefore, we accomplish an act of reminiscence, we pass
  through a certain series of precursive movements, until we arrive at a
  movement on which the one we are in quest of is habitually consequent.
  Hence, too, it is that we hunt through the mental train, excogitating
  from the present or some other, and from similar or contrary or
  coadjacent. Through this process reminiscence takes place. For the
  movements are, in these cases, sometimes at the same time, sometimes
  parts of the same whole, so that the subsequent movement is already
  more than half accomplished."

  The passage is obscure, but it does at all events indicate the various
  principles commonly termed contiguity, similarity and contrast.
  Similar principles are stated by Zeno the Stoic, by Epicurus (see
  Diog. Laert. vii. § 52, x. § 32), and by St Augustine (_Confessions_,
  x. e. 19). Aristotle's doctrine received a more or less intelligent
  expansion and illustration from the ancient commentators and the
  schoolmen, and in the still later period of transition from the age of
  scholasticism to the time of modern philosophy, prolonged in the works
  of some writers far into the 17th century, Hamilton adduced not a few
  philosophical authorities who gave prominence to the general fact of
  mental association--the Spaniard Ludovicus Vives (1492-1540)
  especially being most exhaustive in his account of memory.

  In Hobbes's psychology much importance is assigned to what he called,
  variously, the succession, sequence, series, consequence, coherence,
  train of imaginations or thoughts in mental discourse. But not before
  Hume is there express question as to what are the distinct principles
  of association. John Locke had, meanwhile, introduced the phrase
  "Association of Ideas" as the title of a supplementary chapter
  incorporated with the fourth edition of his _Essay_, meaning it,
  however, only as the name of a principle accounting for the mental
  peculiarities of individuals, with little or no suggestion of its
  general psychological import. Of this last Hume had the strongest
  impression; he reduced the principles of association to
  three--Resemblance, Contiguity in time and place, Cause and (or)
  Effect. Dugald Stewart put forward Resemblance, Contrariety, and
  Vicinity in time and place, though he added, as another obvious
  principle, accidental coincidence in the sounds of words, and further
  noted three other cases of relation, namely, Cause and Effect, Means
  and End, Premisses and Conclusion, as holding among the trains of
  thought under circumstances of special attention. Reid, preceding
  Stewart, was rather disposed to make light of the subject of
  association, vaguely remarking that it seems to require no other
  original quality of mind but the power of habit to explain the
  spontaneous recurrence of trains of thinking, when become familiar by
  frequent repetition (_Intellectual Powers_, p. 387).

  Hamilton's own theory of mental reproduction, suggestion or
  association is a development, greatly modified, of the doctrine
  expounded in his _Lectures on Metaphysics_ (vol. ii. p. 223, seq.),
  which reduced the principles of association first to two--Simultaneity
  and Affinity, and these further to one supreme principle of
  Redintegration or Totality. In the ultimate scheme he posits no less
  than four general laws of mental succession concerned in reproduction:
  (1) _Associability_ or possible co-suggestion (all thoughts of the
  same mental subject are associable or capable of suggesting each
  other); (2) _Repetition_ or direct remembrance (thoughts coidentical
  in modification, but differing in time, tend to suggest each other);
  (3) _Redintegration_, direct remembrance or reminiscence (thoughts
  once coidentical in time, are, however, different as mental modes,
  again suggestive of each other, and that in the mutual order which
  they originally held); (4) _Preference_ (thoughts are suggested not
  merely by force of the general subjective relation subsisting between
  themselves, they are also suggested in proportion to the relation of
  interest, from whatever source, in which they stand to the individual
  mind). Upon these follow, as special laws:--A, Primary--modes of the
  laws of Repetition and Redintegration--(1) law of Similars (Analogy,
  Affinity); (2) law of Contrast; (3) law of Coadjacency (Cause and
  Effect, &c.); B, Secondary--modes of the law of Preference, under the
  law of Possibility--(1) laws of Immediacy and Homogeneity; (2) law of
  Facility.

  _The Associationist School._--This name is given to the English
  psychologists who aimed at explaining all mental acquisitions, and the
  more complex mental processes generally under laws not other than
  those which have just been set out as determining simple reproduction.
  Hamilton, though professing to deal with reproduction only, formulates
  a number of still more general laws of mental succession--law of
  Succession, law of Variation, law of Dependence, law of Relativity or
  Integration (involving law of Conditioned), and, finally, law of
  Intrinsic or Objective Relativity--as the highest to which human
  consciousness is subject; but it is in a sense quite different that
  the psychologists of the so-called Associationist School intend their
  appropriation of the principle or principles commonly signalized. As
  far as can be judged from imperfect records, they were anticipated to
  some extent by the experientialists of ancient times, both Stoic and
  Epicurean (cf. Diogenes Laertius, as above). In the modern period,
  Hobbes is the first thinker of permanent note to whom this doctrine
  may be traced. Though, in point of fact, he took anything but an
  exhaustive view of the phenomena of mental succession, yet, after
  dealing with trains of imagination, or what he called mental
  discourse, he sought in the higher departments of intellect to explain
  reasoning as a discourse in words, dependent upon an arbitrary system
  of marks, each associated with, or standing for, a variety of
  imaginations; and, save for a general assertion that reasoning is a
  reckoning--otherwise, a compounding and resolving--he had no other
  account of knowledge to give. The whole emotional side of mind, or, in
  his language, the passions, he, in like manner, resolved into an
  expectation of consequences, based on past experience of pleasures and
  pains of sense. Thus, though he made no serious attempt to justify his
  analysis in detail, he is undoubtedly to be classed with the
  associationists of the next century. They, however, were wont to trace
  their psychological theory no further back than to Locke's _Essay_.
  Bishop Berkeley was driven to posit expressly a principle of
  suggestion or association in these terms:--"That one idea may suggest
  another to the mind, it will suffice that they have been observed to
  go together, without any demonstration of the necessity of their
  coexistence, or so much as knowing what it is that makes them so to
  coexist" (_New Theory of Vision_, § 25); and to support the obvious
  application of the principle to the case of the sensations of sight
  and touch before him, he constantly urged that association of sound
  and sense of language which the later school has always put in the
  foreground, whether as illustrating the principle in general or in
  explanation of the supreme importance of language for knowledge. It
  was natural, then, that Hume, coming after Berkeley, and assuming
  Berkeley's results, though he reverted to the larger inquiry of Locke,
  should be more explicit in his reference to association; but he was
  original also, when he spoke of it as a "kind of attraction which in
  the mental world will be found to have as extraordinary effects as in
  the natural, and to show itself in as many and as various forms"
  (_Human Nature_, i. 1, § 4). Other inquirers about the same time
  conceived of association with this breadth of view, and set themselves
  to track, as psychologists, its effects in detail.

  David Hartley in his _Observations on Man_, published in 1749 (eleven
  years after the _Human Nature_, and one year after the better-known
  _Inquiry_, of Hume), opened the path for all the investigations of
  like nature that have been so characteristic of English psychology. A
  physician by profession, he sought to combine with an elaborate theory
  of mental association a minutely detailed hypothesis as to the
  corresponding action of the nervous system, based upon the suggestion
  of a vibratory motion within the nerves thrown out by Newton in the
  last paragraph of the _Principia_. So far, however, from promoting the
  acceptance of the psychological theory, this physical hypothesis
  proved to have rather the opposite effect, and it began to be dropped
  by Hartley's followers (as F. Priestley, in his abridged edition of
  the _Observations_, 1775) before it was seriously impugned from
  without. When it is studied in the original, and not taken upon the
  report of hostile critics, who would not, or could not understand it,
  no little importance must still be accorded to the first attempt, not
  seldom a curiously felicitous one, to carry through that parallelism
  of the physical and psychical, which since then has come to count for
  more and more in the science of mind. Nor should it be forgotten that
  Hartley himself, for all his paternal interest in the doctrine of
  vibrations, was careful to keep separate from its fortunes the cause
  of his other doctrine of mental association. Of this the point lay in
  no mere restatement, with new precision, of a principle of coherence
  among "ideas," but in its being taken as a clue by which to follow
  the progressive development of the mind's powers. Holding that mental
  states could be scientifically understood only as they were analysed,
  Hartley sought for a principle of synthesis to explain the complexity
  exhibited not only in trains of representative images, but alike in
  the most involved combinations of reasonings and (as Berkeley had
  seen) in the apparently simple phenomena of objective perception, as
  well as in the varied play of the emotions, or, again, in the manifold
  conscious adjustments of the motor system. One principle appeared to
  him sufficient for all, running, as enunciated for the simplest case,
  thus: "Any sensations A, B, C, &c., by being associated with one
  another a sufficient number of times, get such a power over the
  corresponding ideas (called by Hartley also vestiges, types, images)
  _a, b, c_, &c., that any one of the sensations A, when impressed
  alone, shall be able to excite in the mind _b, c_, &c., the ideas of
  the rest." To render the principle applicable in the cases where the
  associated elements are neither sensations nor simple ideas of
  sensations, Hartley's first care was to determine the conditions under
  which states other than these simplest ones have their rise in the
  mind, becoming the matter of ever higher and higher combinations. The
  principle itself supplied the key to the difficulty, when coupled with
  the notion, already implied in Berkeley's investigations, of a
  coalescence of simple ideas of sensation into one complex idea, which
  may cease to bear any obvious relation to its constituents. So far
  from being content, like Hobbes, to make a rough generalization to all
  mind from the phenomena of developed memory, as if these might be
  straightway assumed, Hartley made a point of referring them, in a
  subordinate place of their own, to his universal principle of mental
  synthesis. He expressly put forward the law of association, endued
  with such scope, as supplying what was wanting to Locke's doctrine in
  its more strictly psychological aspect, and thus marks by his work a
  distinct advance on the line of development of the experiential
  philosophy.

  The new doctrine received warm support from some, as Law and
  Priestley, who both, like Hume and Hartley himself, took the principle
  of association as having the like import for the science of mind that
  gravitation had acquired for the science of matter. The principle
  began also, if not always with direct reference to Hartley, yet,
  doubtless, owing to his impressive advocacy of it, to be applied
  systematically in special directions, as by Abraham Tucker (1768) to
  morals, and by Archibald Alison (1790) to aesthetics. Thomas Brown (d.
  1820) subjected anew to discussion the question of theory. Hardly less
  unjust to Hartley than Reid or Stewart had been, and forward to
  proclaim all that was different in his own position, Brown must yet be
  ranked with the associationists before and after him for the
  prominence he assigned to the associative principle in
  sense-perception (what he called external affections of mind), and for
  his reference of all other mental states (internal affections) to the
  two generic capacities or susceptibilities of Simple and Relative
  Suggestion. He preferred the word Suggestion to Association, which
  seemed to him to imply some prior connecting process, whereof there
  was no evidence in many of the most important cases of suggestion, nor
  even, strictly speaking, in the case of contiguity in time where the
  term seemed least inapplicable. According to him, all that could be
  assumed was a general constitutional tendency of the mind to exist
  successively in states that have certain relations to each other, of
  itself only, and without any external cause or any influence previous
  to that operating at the moment of the suggestion. Brown's chief
  contribution to the general doctrine of mental association, besides
  what he did for the theory of perception, was, perhaps, his analysis
  of voluntary reminiscence and constructive imagination--faculties that
  appear at first sight to lie altogether beyond the explanatory range
  of the principle. In James Mill's _Analysis of the Phenomena of the
  Human Mind_ (1829), the principle, much as Hartley had conceived it,
  was carried out, with characteristic consequence, over the
  psychological field. With a much enlarged and more varied conception
  of association, Alexander Bain re-executed the general psychological
  task, while Herbert Spencer revised the doctrine from the new point of
  view of the evolution-hypothesis. John Stuart Mill made only
  occasional excursions into the region of psychology proper, but
  sought, in his _System of Logic_ (1843), to determine the conditions
  of objective truth from the point of view of the associationist
  theory, and, thus or otherwise being drawn into general philosophical
  discussion, spread wider than any one before him its repute.

  The Associationist School has been composed chiefly of British
  thinkers, but in France also it has had distinguished representatives.
  Of these it will suffice to mention Condillac, who professed to
  explain all knowledge from the single principle of association
  (_liaison_) of ideas, operating through a previous association with
  signs, verbal or other. In Germany, before the time of Kant, mental
  association was generally treated in the traditional manner, as by
  Wolff. Kant's inquiry into the foundations of knowledge, agreeing in
  its general purport with Locke's, however it differed in its critical
  procedure, brought him face to face with the newer doctrine that had
  been grafted on Locke's philosophy; and to account for the fact of
  synthesis in cognition, in express opposition to associationism, as
  represented by Hume, was, in truth, his prime object, starting, as he
  did, from the assumption that there was that in knowledge which no
  mere association of experiences could explain. To the extent,
  therefore, that his influence prevailed, all inquiries made by the
  English associationists were discounted in Germany. Notwithstanding,
  under the very shadow of his authority a corresponding, if not
  related, movement was initiated by J.F. Herbart. Peculiar, and widely
  different from anything conceived by the associationists, as Herbart's
  metaphysical opinions were, he was at one with them, and at variance
  with Kant, in assigning fundamental importance to the psychological
  investigation of the development of consciousness, nor was his
  conception of the laws determining the interaction and flow of mental
  presentations and representations, when taken in its bare
  psychological import, essentially different from theirs. In F.E.
  Beneke's psychology also, and in more recent inquiries conducted
  mainly by physiologists, mental association has been understood in its
  wider scope, as a general principle of explanation.

  The associationists differ not a little among themselves in the
  statement of their principle, or, when they adduce several principles,
  in their conception of the relative importance of these. Hartley took
  account only of Contiguity, or the repetition of impressions
  synchronous or immediately successive; the like is true of James Mill,
  though, incidentally, he made an express attempt to resolve the
  received principle of Similarity, and through this the other principle
  of Contrast, into his fundamental law--law of Frequency, as he
  sometimes called it, because upon frequency, in conjunction with
  vividness of impressions, the strength of association, in his view,
  depended. In a sense of his own, Brown also, while accepting the
  common Aristotelian enumeration of principles, inclined to the opinion
  that "all suggestion may be found to depend on prior coexistence, or
  at least on such proximity as is itself very probably a modification
  of coexistence," provided account be taken of "the influence of
  emotions and other feelings that are very different from ideas, as
  when an analogous object suggests an analogous object by the influence
  of an emotion which each separately may have produced before, and
  which is, therefore, common to both." To the contrary effect, Spencer
  maintained that the fundamental law of all mental association is that
  presentations aggregate or cohere with their like in past experience,
  and that, besides this law, there is in strictness no other, all
  further phenomena of association being incidental. Thus in particular,
  he would have explained association by Contiguity as due to the
  circumstance of imperfect assimilation of the present to the past in
  consciousness. A. Bain regarded Contiguity and Similarity logically,
  as perfectly distinct principles, though in actual psychological
  occurrence blending intimately with each other, contiguous trains
  being started by a first (it may be, implicit) representation through
  Similarity, while the express assimilation of present to past in
  consciousness is always, or tends to be, followed by the revival of
  what was presented in contiguity with that past.

  The highest, philosophical interest, as distinguished from that which
  is more strictly psychological, attaches to the mode of mental
  association called Inseparable. The coalescence of mental states noted
  by Hartley, as it had been assumed by Berkeley, was farther formulated
  by James Mill in these terms:--

  "Some ideas are by frequency and strength of association so closely
  combined that they cannot be separated; if one exists, the other
  exists along with it in spite of whatever effort we make to disjoin
  them."--(_Analysis of the Human Mind_, 2nd ed. vol. i. p. 93.)

  J.S. Mill's statement is more guarded and particular:--

  "When two phenomena have been very often experienced in conjunction,
  and have not, in any single instance, occurred separately either in
  experience or in thought, there is produced between them what has been
  called inseparable, or, less correctly, indissoluble, association; by
  which is not meant that the association must inevitably last to the
  end of life--that no subsequent experience or process of thought can
  possibly avail to dissolve it; but only that as long as no such
  experience or process of thought has taken place, the association is
  irresistible; it is impossible for us to think the one thing disjoined
  from the other."--(_Examination of Hamilton's Philosophy_, 2nd ed. p.
  191.)

  It is chiefly by J.S. Mill that the philosophical application of the
  principle has been made. The first and most obvious application is to
  so-called necessary truths--such, namely, as are not merely analytic
  judgments but involve a synthesis of distinct notions. Again, the same
  thinker sought to prove Inseparable Association the ground of belief
  in an external objective world. The former application, especially, is
  facilitated, when the experience through which the association is
  supposed to be constituted is understood as cumulative in the race,
  and transmissible as original endowment to individuals--endowment that
  may be expressed either, subjectively, as latent intelligence, or,
  objectively, as fixed nervous connexions. Spencer, as before
  suggested, is the author of this extended view of mental association.

  _Modern Criticism._--Of recent years the associationist theory has
  been subjected to searching criticism, and it has been maintained by
  many writers that the laws are both unsatisfactorily expressed and
  insufficient to explain the facts. Among the most vigorous and
  comprehensive of these investigations is that of F.H. Bradley in his
  _Principles of Logic_ (1883). Having admitted the psychological fact
  of mental association, he attacks the theories of Mill and Bain
  primarily on the ground that they purport to give an account of mental
  life as a whole, a metaphysical doctrine of existence. According to
  this doctrine, mental activity is ultimately reducible to particular
  feelings, impressions, ideas, which are disparate and unconnected,
  until chance Association brings them together. On this assumption the
  laws of Association naturally emerge in the following form:--(1) The
  _law of Contiguity._--"Actions, sensations and states of feeling,
  occurring together or in close connexion, tend to grow together, or
  cohere, in such a way that, when any one of them is afterwards
  presented to the mind, the others are apt to be brought up in idea"
  (A. Bain, _Senses and Intellect_, p. 327). (2) The _law of
  Similarity._--"Present actions, sensation, thoughts or emotions tend
  to revive their like among previous impressions or states" (A. Bain,
  _ibid._ 457. Compare J.S. Mill, _Logic_, ii. p. 440, 9th ed.). The
  fundamental objection to (1) is that ideas and impressions once
  experienced do not recur; they are particular existences, and, as
  such, do not persevere to recur or be presented. So Mill is wrong in
  speaking of two impressions being "frequently experienced." Bradley
  claims thus to reduce the law to "When we have experienced (or even
  thought of) several pairs of impressions (simultaneous or successive),
  which pairs are like one another; then whenever an idea occurs which
  is like all the impressions on one side of these pairs, it tends to
  excite an idea which is like all the impressions on the other side."
  This statement is destructive of the title of the law, because it
  appears that what were contiguous (the impressions) are not
  associated, and what are associated (the ideas) were not contiguous;
  in other words, the association is not due to contiguity at all.

  Proceeding to the law of Similarity (which in Mill's view is at the
  back of association by contiguity), and having made a similar
  criticism of its phrasing, Bradley maintains that it involves an even
  greater absurdity; if two ideas are to be recognized as similar, they
  must both be present in the mind; if one is to call up the other, one
  must be absent. To the obvious reply that the similarity is recognized
  _ex post facto_, and not while the former idea is being called up,
  Bradley replies simply that such a view reduces the law to the mere
  statement of a phenomenon and deprives it of any explanatory value,
  though he hardly makes it clear in what sense this necessarily
  invalidates the law from a psychological point of view. He further
  points out with greater force that in point of fact mere similarity is
  not the basis of ordinary cases of mental reproduction, inasmuch as in
  any given instance there is more difference than similarity between
  the ideas associated.

  Bradley himself bases association on identity plus contiguity:--"Any
  part of a single state of mind tends, if reproduced, to re-instate the
  remainder," or "any element tends to reproduce those elements with
  which it has formed one state of mind." This law he calls by the name
  "redintegration," understood, of course, in a sense different from
  that in which Hamilton used it. The radical difference between this
  law and those of Mill and Bain is that it deals not with particular
  units of thoughts but with universals or identity between individuals.
  In any example of such reproduction the universal appears in a
  particular form which is more or less different from that in which it
  originally existed.

  _Psychophysical Researches._--Bradley's discussion deals with the
  subject purely from the metaphysical side, and the total result
  practically is that association occurs only between universals. From
  the point of view of empirical psychologists Bradley's results are
  open to the charge which he made against those who impugned his view
  of the law of similarity, namely that they are merely a statement--not
  in any real sense an explanation. The relation between the mental and
  the physical phenomena of association has occupied the attention of
  all the leading psychologists (see PSYCHOLOGY). William James holds
  that association is of "objects" not of "ideas," is between "things
  thought of"--so far as the word stands for an effect. "So far as it
  stands for a cause it is between processes in the brain." Dealing with
  the law of Contiguity he says that the "most natural way of accounting
  for it is to conceive it as a result of the laws of habit in the
  nervous system; in other words to ascribe it to a physiological
  cause." Association is thus due to the fact that when a nerve current
  has once passed by a given way, it will pass more easily by that way
  in future; and this fact is a physical fact. He further seeks to
  maintain the important deduction that the only primary or ultimate law
  of association is that of neural habit.

  The objections to the associationist theory are summed up by G.F.
  Stout (_Analytic Psychol._, vol. ii. pp. 47 seq.) under three heads.
  Of these the first is that the theory as stated, e.g. by Bain, lays
  far too much stress on the mere connexion of elements hitherto
  entirely separate; whereas, in fact, every new mental state or
  synthesis consists in the development or modification of a
  pre-existing state or psychic whole. Secondly, it is quite false to
  regard an association as merely an aggregate of disparate units; in
  fact, the _form_ of the new idea is quite as important as the elements
  which it comprises. Thirdly, the phraseology used by the
  associationists seems to assume that the parts that go to form the
  whole retain their identity unimpaired; in fact, each part or element
  is _ipso facto_ modified by the very fact of its entering into such
  combination.

  The experimental methods now in vogue have to a large extent removed
  the discussion of the whole subject of association of ideas, depending
  in the case of the older writers on introspection, into a new sphere.
  In such a work as E.B. Titchener's _Experimental Psychology_ (1905),
  association is treated as a branch of the study of mental reactions,
  of which association reactions are one division.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--See PSYCHOLOGY; and the works of Bradley, Stout, and
  James, above quoted, and general works on psychology: articles in
  _Mind_ (passim); A. Bain, _Senses and Intellect_ (4th ed., 1894), and
  in _Mind_, xii. (1887) pp. 237-249; John Watson, _An Outline of
  Philosophy_ (1898); H. Höffding, _Hist. of Mod. Philos._ (Eng. trans.,
  Lond., 1900), _Psychologie in Umrissen auf Grundlage der Erfahrung_
  (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1893); Jas. Sully, _The Human Mind_ (1892), and
  _Outlines of Psych._ (Lond., 1892); E.B. Titchener, _Outline of
  Psych._ (New York, 1896), and in his trans. of O. Külpe's _Outlines of
  Psych._ (New York, 1895,); Jas. Ward in _Mind_, viii. (1883), xii.
  (1887), new series ii. (1893), iii. (1894); G.T. Ladd, _Psychology,
  Descriptive and Explanatory_ (Lond., 1894); C.L.C. Morgan, _Introd. to
  Comparative Psych._ (Lond., 1894); W. Wundt, _Princip. of Physiol.
  Psych._ (Eng. trans., 1904), _Human and Animal Psych._ (Eng. trans.,
  1894), pp. 282-307; _Outlines of Psych._ (Eng. trans., 1897); E.
  Claparède, _L'Association des idées_ (1903). For associationism in
  Greek philosophy see J.I. Beare, _Greek Theories of Elementary
  Cognition_ (Oxford, 1906), part iii. §§ 14, 43 seq.

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] There are, however, distinct anticipations of the theory in Plato
    (_Phaedo_), as part of the doctrine of [Greek: anamnaesis]; thus we
    find the idea of Simmias recalled by the picture of Simmias
    (similarity), and that of a friend by the sight of the lyre on which
    he played (contiguity).