ASSUS [mod. _Behram_], an ancient Greek city of the Troad, on the
Adramyttian Gulf. The situation is one of the most magnificent in all
the Greek lands. The natural cleavage of the trachyte into joint planes
had already scarped out shelves which it was comparatively easy for
human labour to shape; and so, high up this cone of trachyte, the Greek
town of Assus was built, tier above tier, the summit of the crag being
crowned with a Doric temple of Athena. The view from the summit is very
beautiful and of great historical interest. In front is Lesbos, one of
whose towns, Methymna, is said to have sent forth the founders of Assus,
as early, perhaps, as 1000 or 900 B.C. The whole south coast-line of the
Troad is seen, and in the south-east the ancient territory of Pergamum,
from whose masters the possession of Assus passed to Rome by the bequest
of Attalus III. (133 B.C.). The great heights of Ida rise in the east.
Northward the Tuzla is seen winding through a rich valley. This valley
was traversed by the road which St Paul must have followed when he came
overland from Alexandria Troas to Assus, leaving his fellow-travellers
to proceed by sea. The north-west gateway, to which this road led, is
still flanked by two massive towers, of Hellenic work. On the shore
below, the ancient mole can still be traced by large blocks under the
clear water. Assus affords the only harbour on the 50 m. of coast
between Cape Lectum and the east end of the Adramyttian Gulf; hence it
must always have been the chief shipping-place for the exports of the
southern Troad. The great natural strength of the site protected it
against petty assailants; but, like other towns in that region, it has
known many masters--Lydians, Persians, the kings of Pergamum, Romans and
Ottoman Turks. From the Persian wars to about 350 B.C. Assus enjoyed at
least partial independence. It was about 348-345 B.C. that Aristotle
spent three years at Assus with Hermeas, an ex-slave who had succeeded
his former master Eubulus as despot of Assus and Atarneus. Aristotle has
left some verses from an invocation to Arete (Virtue), commemorating the
worth of Hermeas, who had been seized by Persian treachery and put to
death.

Under its Turkish name of Behram, Assus is still the commercial port of
the southern Troad, being the place to which loads of valonia are
conveyed by camels from all parts of the country. Explorations were
conducted at Assus in 1881-1883 by Mr J.T. Clarke for the Archaeological
Institute of America. The main object was to clear the Doric temple of
Athena, built about 470 B.C. This temple is remarkable for a sculptured
architrave which took the place of the ordinary frieze. The scenes are
partly mythological (labours of Heracles), partly purely heraldic.
Eighteen panels were transported to the Louvre in 1838; other fragments
rewarded the Americans, and a scientific ground-plan was drawn. The
well-preserved Hellenistic walls were also studied.

  See J.T. Clarke, _Assos_, 2 vols., 1882 and 1898 (Papers of Arch.
  Inst. of America, i. ii.); and authorities under TROAD.     (D. G. H.)