ASSUR, the primitive capital of Assyria, now represented by the mounds
of Kaleh Sherghat (Qal'at Shergat) on the west bank of the Tigris,
nearly midway between the Upper and Lower Zab. It is still doubtful (see
discussion on the name in the preceding article) whether the national
god of Assyria took his name from that of the city or whether the
converse was the case. It is most probable, however, that it was the
city which was deified (see Sayce, _Religion of Ancient Egypt and
Babylonia_, 1902, pp. 366, 367). Sir A.H. Layard, through his assistant
Hormuzd Rassam, devoted two or three days to excavating on the site, but
owing to the want of pasturage and the fear of Bedouin attacks he left
the spot after finding a broken clay cylinder containing the annals of
Tiglath-Pileser I., and for many years no subsequent efforts were made
to explore it. In 1904, however, a German expedition under Dr W. Andrae
began systematic excavations, which have led to important results. The
city originally grew up round the great temple of the god Assur, the
foundation of which was ascribed to the High-priest Uspia. For many
centuries Assur and the surrounding district, which came accordingly to
be called the land of Assur (_Assyria_), were governed by high-priests
under the suzerainty of Babylonia. With the decay of the Babylonian
power the high-priests succeeded in making themselves independent kings,
and Assur became the capital of an important kingdom. It was already
surrounded by a wall of crude brick, which rested on stone foundations
and was strengthened at certain points by courses of burnt brick. A deep
moat was dug outside it by Tukulti-Inaristi or Tukulti-Masu (about 1270
B.C.), and it was further defended on the land side by a _salkhu_ or
outwork. In the 15th century B.C. it was considerably extended to the
south in order to include a "new town" which had grown up there. The
wall was pierced by "the gate of Assur," "the gate of the Sun-god," "the
gate of the Tigris," &c., and on the river side was a quay of burnt
brick and limestone cemented with bitumen. The temples were in the
northern part of the city, together with their lofty towers, one of
which has been excavated. Besides the temple of Assur there was another
great temple dedicated to Anu and Hadad, as well as the smaller
sanctuaries of Bel, Ishtar, Merodach and other deities. After the rise
of the kingdom, palaces were erected separate from the temples; the
sites of those of Hadad-nirari I., Shalmaneser I., and Assur-nazir-pal
have been discovered by the German excavators, and about a dozen more
are referred to in the inscriptions. Even after the rise of Nineveh as
the capital of the kingdom and the seat of the civil power, Assur
continued to be the religious centre of the country, where the king was
called on to reside when performing his priestly functions. The city
survived the fall of Assyria, and extensive buildings as well as tombs
of the Parthian age have been found upon the site.

  See _Mitteilungen der deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft_ (1904-1906).
       (A. H. S.)