ASSUR-BANI-PAL ("Assur creates a son"), the _grand monarque_ of Assyria,
was the prototype of the Greek Sardanapalus, and appears probably in the
corrupted form of Asnapper in Ezra iv. 10. He had been publicly
nominated king of Assyria (on the 12th of Iyyar) by his father
Esar-haddon, some time before the latter's death, Babylonia being
assigned to his twin-brother Samas-sum-yukin, in the hope of gratifying
the national feeling of the Babylonians. After Esar-haddon's death in
668 B.C. the first task of Assur-bani-pal was to finish the Egyptian
campaign. Tirhakah, who had reoccupied Egypt, fled to Ethiopia, and the
Assyrian army spent forty days in ascending the Nile from Memphis to
Thebes. Shortly afterwards Necho, the satrap of Sais, and two others
were detected intriguing with Tirhakah; Necho and one of his companions
were sent in chains to Nineveh, but were there pardoned and restored to
their principalities. Tirhakah died 667 B.C., and his successor Tandaman
(Tanuat-Amon) entered Upper Egypt, where a general revolt against
Assyria took place, headed by Thebes. Memphis was taken by assault and
the Assyrian troops driven out of the country. Tyre seems to have
revolted at the same time. Assur-bani-pal, however, lost no time in
pouring fresh forces into the revolted province. Once more the Assyrian
army made its way up the Nile, Thebes was plundered, and its temples
destroyed, two obelisks being carried to Nineveh as trophies (see Nahum
iii. 8). Meanwhile the siege of insular Tyre was closely pressed; its
water-supply was cut off, and it was compelled to surrender.
Assur-bani-pal was now at the height of his power. The land of the Manna
(Minni), south-east of Ararat, had been wasted, its capital captured by
the Assyrians, and its king reduced to vassalage. A war with Teumman of
Elam had resulted in the overthrow of the Elamite army; the head of
Teumman was sent to Nineveh, and another king, Umman-igas, appointed by
the Assyrians. The kings of Cilicia and the Tabal offered their
daughters to the harem of Assur-bani-pal; embassies came from Ararat,
and even Gyges of Lydia despatched envoys to "the great king" in the
hope of obtaining help against the Cimmerians. Suddenly the mighty
empire began to totter. The Lydian king, finding that Nineveh was
helpless to assist him, turned instead to Egypt and furnished the
mercenaries with whose help Psammetichus drove the Assyrians out of the
country and suppressed his brother satraps. Egypt was thus lost to
Assyria for ever (660 B.C.). In Babylonia, moreover, discontent was
arising, and finally Samas-sum-yukin put himself at the head of the
national party and declared war upon his brother. Elamite aid was
readily forthcoming, especially when stimulated by bribes, and the Arab
tribes joined in the revolt. The resources of the Assyrian empire were
strained to their utmost. But thanks in some measure to the intestine
troubles in Elam, the Babylonian army and its allies were defeated and
driven into Babylon, Sippara, Borsippa and Cutha. One by one the cities
fell, Babylon being finally starved into surrender (648 B.C.) after
Samas-sum-yukin had burnt himself in his palace to avoid falling into
the conqueror's hands. It was now the turn of the Arabs, some of whom
had been in Babylon during the siege, while others had occupied
themselves in plundering Edom, Moab and the Hauran. Northern Arabia was
traversed by the Assyrian forces, the Nabataeans were almost
exterminated, and the desert tribes terrorized into order. Elam was
alone left to be dealt with, and the last resources of the empire were
therefore expended in preventing it from ever being again a thorn in the
Assyrian side.

But the effort had exhausted Assyria. Drained of men and resources it
was no longer able to make head against the Cimmerian and Scythian
hordes who now poured over western Asia. The Cimmerian Dugdamme
(Lygdamis in Strabo i. 3, 16), whom Assur-bani-pal calls "a limb of
Satan," after sacking Sardis, had been slain in Cilicia, but other
Scythian invaders came to take his place. When Assur-bani-pal died in
626 (?) B.C. his empire was already in decay, and within a few years the
end came. He was luxurious and indolent, entrusting the command of his
armies to others whose successes he appropriated, cruel and
superstitious, but a magnificent patron of art and literature. The great
library of Nineveh was to a considerable extent his creation, and
scribes were kept constantly employed in it copying the older tablets of
Babylonia, though unfortunately their patron's tastes inclined rather to
omens and astrology than to subjects of more modern interest. The
library was contained in the palace that he built on the northern side
of the mound of Kuyunjik and lined with sculptured slabs which display
Assyrian art at its best. Whether Kandalanu (Kinela-danos), who became
viceroy of Babylonia after the suppression of the revolt, was
Assur-bani-pal under another name, or a different personage, is still
doubtful (see SARDANAPALUS).

  AUTHORITIES.--George Smith, _History of Assurbanipal_ (1871); S.A.
  Smith, _Die Keilschrifttexte Asurbanipals_ (1887-1889); P. Jensen in
  E. Schrader's _Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek_, ii. (1889); J.A.
  Knudtzon, _Assyrische Gebete an den Sonnengott_ (1893); C. Lehmann,
  _Schamashschumukin_ (1892).     (A. H. S.)