ASSUR, ASUR, or ASHUR, the chief god of Assyria, was originally the
patron deity of the city of Assur on the Tigris, the ancient capital of
Assyria from which as a centre the authority of the _patesis_ (as the
rulers were at first called) spread in various directions. The history
of Assyria (q.v.) can now be traced back approximately to 2500 B.C.,
though it does not rise to political prominence until c. 2000 B.C. The
name of the god is identical with that of the city, though an older form
A-shir, signifying "leader," suggests that a differentiation between the
god and the city was at one time attempted. Though the origin of the
form Ashur (or Assur) is not certain, it is probable that the name of
the god is older than that of the city (see discussion on the name
above).

The title _Ashir_ was given to various gods in the south, as Marduk and
Nebo, and there is every reason to believe that it represents a direct
transfer with the intent to emphasize that Assur is the "leader" or head
of the pantheon of the north. He is in fact to all intents and purposes
of the north. Originally like Marduk a solar deity with the winged
disk--the disk always typifying the sun--as his symbol, he becomes as
Assyria develops into a military power a god of war, indicated by the
attachment of the figure of a man with a bow to the winged disk.[1]
While the cult of the other great gods and goddesses of Babylonia was
transferred to Assyria, the worship of Assur so overshadowed that of the
rest as to give the impression of a decided tendency towards the
absorption of all divine powers by the one god. Indeed, the other gods,
Sin, Shamash (Samas), Adad, Ninib and Nergal, and even Ea, take on the
warlike traits of Assur in the epithets and descriptions given of them
in the annals and votive inscriptions of Assyrian rulers to such an
extent as to make them appear like little Assurs by the side of the
great one. Marduk alone retains a large measure of his independence as a
concession on the part of the Assyrians to the traditions of the south,
for which they always manifested a profound respect. Even during the
period that the Assyrian monarchs exercised complete sway over the
south, they rested their claims to the control of Babylonia on the
approval of Marduk, and they or their representatives never failed to
perform the ceremony of "taking the hand" of Marduk, which was the
formal method of assuming the throne in Babylonia. Apart from this
concession, it is Assur who pre-eminently presides over the fortunes of
Assyria.[2] In his name, and with his approval as indicated by
favourable omens, the Assyrian armies march to battle. His symbol is
carried into the thick of the fray, so that the god is actually present
to grant assistance in the crisis, and the victory is with becoming
humility invariably ascribed by the kings "to the help of Assur." With
the fall of Assyria the rule of Assur also comes to an end, whereas it
is significant that the cult of the gods of Babylonia--more particularly
of Marduk--survives for several centuries the loss of political
independence through Cyrus' capture of Babylonia in 539 B.C. The name of
Assur's temple at Assur, represented by the mounds of Kaleh Sherghat,
was known as E-khar-sag-gal-kur-kurra, i.e. "House of the great mountain
of the lands." Its exact site has been determined by excavations
conducted at Kaleh Sherghat since 1903 by the German Oriental Society.
The name indicates the existence of the same conception regarding sacred
edifices in Assyria as in Babylonia, where we find such names as E-Kur
("mountain house") for the temple of Bel (q.v.) at Nippur, and E-Saggila
("lofty house") for Marduk's (q.v.) temple at Babylon and that of Ea
(q.v.) at Eridu, and in view of the general dependence of Assyrian
religious beliefs as of Assyrian culture in general, there is little
reason to doubt that the name of Assur's temple represents a direct
adaptation of such a name as E-Kur, further embellished by epithets
intended to emphasize the supreme control of the god to whom the edifice
was dedicated. The foundation of the edifice can be traced back to Uspia
(Ushpia), c. 2000 B.C., and may turn out to be even older. Besides the
chief temple, the capital contained temples and chapels to Anu, Adad,
Ishtar, Marduk, Gula, Sin, Shamash, so that we are to assume the
existence of a sacred precinct in Assur precisely as in the religious
centres of the south. On the removal of the seat of residence of the
Assyrian kings to Calah (c. 1300 B.C.), and then in the 8th century to
Nineveh, the centre of the Assur cult was likewise transferred, though
the sanctity of the old seat at Assur continued to be recognized. At
Nineveh, which remained the capital till the fall of the Assyrian empire
in 606 B.C., Assur had as his rival Ishtar, who was the real patron
deity of the place, but a reconciliation was brought about by making
Ishtar the consort of the chief god. The combination was, however, of an
artificial character, and the consciousness that Ishtar was in reality
an independent goddess never entirely died out. She too, like Assur, was
viewed as a war deity, and to such an extent was this the case that at
times it would appear that she, rather than Assur, presided over the
fortunes of the Assyrian armies.     (M. Ja.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] See Prince, _Journ. Bibl. Lit._, xxii. 35.

  [2] As essentially a _national_ god, he is almost identical in
    character with the early Yahweh of Israel. See Sayce, Hibbert
    Lectures, _Religion of Ancient Babylonia_, p. 129.