ASSUMPTION, FEAST OF. The feast of the "Assumption of the blessed Virgin
Mary" (Lat. _festum assumptionis, dormitionis, depositionis, pausationis
B. V. M._; Gr. [Greek: koimaesis] or [Greek: analaephis taes theotokou])
is a festival of the Christian Church celebrated on the 15th of August,
in commemoration of the miraculous ascent into heaven of the mother of
Christ. The belief on which this festival rests has its origin in
apocryphal sources, such as the [Greek: eis taen koimaesin taes
uperagias despoinaes] ascribed to the Apostle John, and the _de transitu
Mariae_, assigned to Melito, bishop of Sardis, but actually written
about A.D. 400. Pope Gelasius I. (492-496) included them in the list of
apocryphal books condemned by the _Decretum de libris recipiendis et non
recipiendis_; but they were accepted as authentic by the
pseudo-Dionysius (_de nominbus divinis c. 3_), whose writings date
probably from the 5th century, and by Gregory of Tours (d. 593 or 594).
The latter in his _De gloria martyrum_ (i. 4) gives the following
account of the miracle: As all the Apostles were watching round the
dying Mary, Jesus appeared with His angels and committed the soul of His
Mother to the Archangel Michael. Next day, as they were carrying the
body to the grave, Christ again appeared and carried it with Him in a
cloud to heaven, where it was reunited with the soul. This story is much
amplified in the account given by St John of Damascus in the homilies
_In dormitionem Mariae_, which are still read in the Roman Church as the
lesson during the octave of the feast. According to this the patriarchs
and Adam and Eve also appear at the death-bed, to praise their daughter,
through whom they had been rescued from the curse of God; a Jew who
touches the body loses both his hands, which are restored to him by the
Apostles; and the body lies three days in the grave without corruption
before it is taken up into heaven.

The festival is first mentioned by St Andrew of Crete (c. 650), and,
according to the Byzantine historian Nicephorus Callistus (_Hist.
Eccles._ xvii. 28), was first instituted by the Emperor Maurice in A.D.
582. From the East it was borrowed by Rome, where there is evidence of
its existence so early as the 7th century. In the Gallican Church it was
only adopted at the same time as the Roman liturgy. But though the
festival thus became incorporated in the regular usage of the Western
Church, the belief in the resurrection and bodily assumption of the
Virgin has never been defined as a dogma and remains a "pious opinion,"
which the faithful may reject without imperilling their immortal souls,
though not apparently--to quote Melchior Cano (_De Locis Theolog._ xii.
10)--without "insolent temerity," since such rejection would be contrary
to the common agreement of the Church. By the reformed Churches,
including the Church of England, the festival is not observed, having
been rejected at the Reformation as being neither primitive nor founded
upon any "certain warrant of Holy Scripture."

  See Herzog-Hauck, _Realencyklopädie_ (ed. 3), s. "Maria"; Mgr. L.
  Duchesne, _Christian Worship_ (Eng. trans., London, 1904); Wetzer and
  Welte, _Kirchenlexikon_, s. "Marienfeste"; The _Catholic
  Encyclopaedia_ (London and New York, 1907, &c.), s. "Apocrypha,"
  "Assumption."