ASTARTE, a Semitic goddess whose name appears in the Bible as
Ashtoreth.[1] She is everywhere the great female principle, answering to
the Baal of the Canaanites and Phoenicians[2] and to the Dagon of the
Philistines. She had temples at Sidon and at Tyre (whence her worship
was transplanted to Carthage), and the Philistines probably venerated
her at Ascalon (1 Sam. xxxi. 10). Solomon built a high-place for her at
Jerusalem which lasted until the days of King Josiah (1 Kings xi. 5; 2
Kings xxiii. 13), and the extent of her cult among the Israelites is
proved as much by the numerous biblical references as by the frequent
representations of the deity turned up on Palestinian soil.[3] The
Moabites formed a compound deity, Ashtar-Chemosh (see MOAB), and the
absence of the feminine termination occurs similarly in the Babylonian
and Assyrian prototype Ishtar. The old South Arabian phonetic equivalent
'Athtar is, however, a male deity. Another compound, properly of mixed
sex, appears in the Aramaean Atargatis ('At[t]ar-'athe), worn down to
Derketo, who is specifically associated with sacred pools and fish
(Ascalon, Hierapolis-Mabog). (See ATARGATIS.)

The derivation of the name Ishtar is uncertain, and the original
attributes of the goddess are consequently unknown. She assumes various
local forms in the old Semitic world, and this has led to consequent
fusion and identification with the deities of other nations. As the
great nature-goddess, the attributes of fertility and reproduction are
characteristically hers, as also the accompanying immorality which
originally, perhaps, was often nothing more than primitive magic. As
patroness of the hunt, later identification with Artemis was inevitable.
Hence the consequent fusion with Aphrodite, Artemis, Diana, Juno and
Venus, and the action and reaction of one upon the other in myth and
legend. Her star was the planet Venus, and classical writers give her
the epithet Caelestis and Urania. Whether Astarte was also a lunar
goddess has been questioned. As the female counterpart of the Phoenician
Baal (viewed as a sun-god), and on the testimony of late writers
(Lucian, Herodian) that she was represented with horns, the place-name
Ashteroth-Karnaim in Gilead ("Ashteroth of the horns") has been
considered ample proof in favour of the theory. But it is probable that
the horns were primarily ram's horns,[4] and that Astarte the
moon-goddess is due to the influence of the Egyptian Isis and Hathor.
Robertson Smith, too, argues that Astarte was originally a
sheep-goddess, and points to the interesting use of "Astartes of the
flocks" (Deut. vii. 13, see the comm.) to denote the offspring. To
nomads, Astarte may well have been a sheep-goddess, but this, if her
earliest, was not her only type, as is clear from the sacred fish of
Atargatis, the doves of Ascalon (and of the Phoenician sanctuary of
Eryx), and the gazelle or antelope of the goddess of love (associated
also with the Arabian Athtar).

  The literature is vast; see G.A. Barton, _Amer. Journ. of Sem. Lang._
  vols. ix. x., and his _Semitic Origins_; Driver, Hastings' _Dict.
  Bible_, i. pp. 167-171; Zimmern, _Keilinschr. und das alte Test.³_
  pp. 420 sqq.; Lagrange, _Études d. Relig. Sem._ pp. 123-140; and the
  articles ADONIS, APHRODITE, ARTEMIS, BAAL.     (S. A. C.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The vocalization suggests the Heb. bosheth, "shame"; see BAAL.

  [2] Add also the Hittites; for Sutekh, the Egyptian equivalent of the
    male partner, see W.M. Müller, _Mitt. d. vorderasiat. Gesell._
    (1902), v. pp. 11, 38. Astarte was introduced also into Egypt and had
    her temple at Memphis. See also S.A. Cook, _Religion of Ancient
    Palestine, Index_, s.v.

  [3] Such figurines are in a sense the prototypes of the Venus of
    Medici. On the influence of her cult upon that of the Virgin Mary,
    see Rösch, _Studien u. Krit._ (1888), pp. 265 sqq.

  [4] A model of an Astarte with ram's horns was unearthed by R.A.S.
    Macalister at Gezer (_Pal. Explor. Fund, Quart. Statement_, 1903, p.
    227 with figure facing).