ASTARABAD, a province of Persia bounded N. by the Caspian Sea and
Russian Transcaspian, S. by the Elburz Mountains, W. by Mazandaran, and
E. by Khorasan. The country, mountainous in its southern portion,
possesses extensive forests, fertile valleys, producing rice, wheat and
other grains in abundance, and rich pasturages. The soil, even with
little culture, is exceedingly productive, owing to the abundance of
water which irrigates and fertilizes it. But while the province in many
parts presents a landscape of luxuriant beauty, it is a prey to the
ravages of disease, principally malarial fevers due to the extensive
swamps formed by waters stagnating in the forests, and to the frequent
incursions of the Goklan and Yomut Turkomans, who have their
camping-grounds in the northern part of the province, and until about
1890 plundered caravans sometimes at the very gates of Astarabad city,
and carried people off into slavery and bondage. The province has a
population of about 100,000 and pays a yearly revenue of about £30,000.
The inhabitants, notwithstanding the unhealthiness of their climate, are
a strong and athletic race, belying their yellow and sickly appearance.
The province has the following bulúk (administrative divisions):--(1)
Astarabad town; (2) Astarabad rustak (villages); (3) Sadan rustak; (4).
Anazan; (5) Katúl; (6) Findarisk, with Kuhsar and Nodeh; (7) Shahkuh
Sávar.

ASTARABAD, the capital of the province, is situated on the Astar, a
small tributary of the Kara Su (Black river), which flows into the
Caspian Sea 20 m. W. of the city, and about 18 m. S. of the Gurgan
river, in 36° 51' N. lat. and 54° 26' E. long. It is surrounded by a mud
wall about 30 ft. in height and about 3½ m. in circuit, but much of the
enclosed space is occupied by gardens, mounds of refuse, and ruins. At
one time of greater size, it was reduced by Nadir Shah within its
present limits. Astarabad owes its origin to Yazid ibn Mohallab, who
occupied the province early in the 8th century for Suleiman, the seventh
of the Omayyad caliphs (715-717), and was destroyed by Timur (Tamerlane)
in 1384. Jonas Hanway, the philanthropist (d. 1786), visited the place
in 1744, and attempted to open a direct trade through it between Europe
and central Asia. Owing to the noxious exhalations of the surrounding
forests the town is so extremely unhealthy during the hot weather as to
have acquired the title of the "Abode of the Plague." It has post and
telegraph offices, and a population of about 10,000. Since 1890 the
Turkomans who impeded trade by their perpetual raids have been kept more
in check, and with the decrease of insecurity the commercial activity of
Astarabad has increased considerably.