ASTHMA (Gr. [Greek: asthma], gasping, whence [Greek: asthmaino], I gasp
for breath), a disorder of respiration characterized by severe paroxysms
of difficult breathing (_dyspnoea_) usually followed by a period of
complete relief, with recurrence of the attacks at more or less frequent
intervals. The term is often loosely employed in reference to states of
embarrassed respiration, which are plainly due to permanent organic
disease of the respiratory organs (see RESPIRATORY SYSTEM: _Pathology_).

The attacks occur quite suddenly, and in some patients at regular, in
others at irregular intervals. They are characterized by extreme
difficulty both in inspiration and expiration, but especially in the
latter, the chest becoming distended and the diaphragm immobile. In the
case of "pure," "idiopathic" or "nervous" asthma, there is no fever or
other sign of inflammation. But where the asthma is secondary to disease
of some organ of the body, the symptoms will depend largely on that
organ and the disease present. Such secondary forms may be bronchitic,
cardiac, renal, peptic or thymic.

The mode of onset differs very markedly in different cases. In some the
attack begins quite suddenly and without warning, but in others various
sensations well known to the patient announce that an attack is
imminent. According to the late Dr Hyde Salter the commonest warning is
that of an intense desire for sleep, so overpowering that though the
patient knows his only chance of warding off the attack is to keep
awake, he is yet utterly unable to fight against his drowsiness. Among
other patients, however, a condition of unwonted mental excitement
presages the attack. Again the secondary forms of the disease may be
ushered in by flatulence, constipation and loss of appetite, and a
symptom which often attends the onset, though it is not strictly
premonitory, is a profuse diuresis, the urine being watery and nearly
colourless, as in the condition of hysterical diuresis. In the majority
of instances the attack begins during the night, sometimes abruptly but
often by degrees. The patient may or may not be aware that his asthma is
threatening. A few hours after midnight he is aroused from sleep by a
sense of difficult breathing. In some cases this is a slowly increasing
condition, not becoming acute for some hour or more. But in others the
attack is so sudden, so severe, that the patient springs from his bed
and makes his way at once to an open window, apparently struggling for
breath. Most asthmatics have some favourite attitude which best enables
them to use all the auxiliary muscles of respiration in their struggle
for breath, and this attitude they immediately assume, and guard fixedly
until the attack begins to subside. The picture is characteristic and a
very painful one to watch. The face is pale, anxious, and it may be
livid. The veins of the forehead stand out, the eyes bulge, and
perspiration bedews the face. The head is fixed in position, and
likewise the powerful muscles of the back to aid the attempt at
respiration. The breath is whistling and wheezing, and if it becomes
necessary for the patient to speak, the words are uttered with great
difficulty. If the chest be watched it is seen to be almost motionless,
and the respirations may become extraordinarily slowed. Inspiration is
difficult as the chest is already over-distended, but expiration is an
even far greater struggle. The attack may last any time from an hour to
several days, and between the attacks the patient is usually quite at
ease. But notwithstanding the intensely distressing character of the
attacks, asthma is not one of the diseases that shorten life.

In the child, asthma is usually periodic in its recurrence, but as he
ages it tends to become more erratic in both its manifestations and time
of appearance. Also, though at first it may be strictly "pure" asthma,
later in life it becomes attended by chronic bronchitis, which in its
turn gives rise to emphysema.

As to the underlying cause of the disease, one has only to read the many
utterly different theories put forward to account for it, to see how
little is really known. But it has now been clearly shown that in the
asthmatic state the respiratory centre is in an unstable and excitable
condition, and that there is a morbid connexion between this and some
part of the nasal apparatus. Dr Alexander Francis has shown, however,
that the disease is not directly due to any mechanical obstruction of
the nasal passages, and that the nose comparatively rarely supplies the
immediate exciting cause of the asthmatic attack. Paroxysmal sneezing is
another form in which asthma may show itself, and, curiously enough,
this form occurs more frequently in women, asthma of the more recognized
type in men. In infants and young children paroxysmal bronchitis is
another form of the same disease. Dr James Goodhart notes the connexion
between asthma and certain skin troubles, giving cases of the
alternation of asthma and psoriasis, and also of asthma and eczema. The
disease occurs in families with a well-marked neurotic inheritance, and
twice as frequently in men as in women. The immediate cause of an attack
may be anything or nothing. Dr Hyde Salter notes that 80% of cases in
the young date from an attack of whooping cough, bronchitis or measles.

In the general treatment of asthma there are two methods of dealing with
the patient, either that of hardening the individual, widening his range
of accommodation, and thus making him less susceptible, or that of
modifying and adapting the environment to the patient. These two methods
correspond to the two methods of drug treatment, tonic or sedative.
During the last few years the method of treatment first used by Dr
Alexander Francis has come into prominence. His plan is to restore the
stability of the respiratory centre, by cauterizing the septal mucous
membrane, and combining with this general hygienic measures. In his own
words the operation, which is entirely painless and insignificant, is
performed as follows:--"After painting one side of the septum nasi with
a few drops of cocaine and resorcin, I draw a line with a
galvano-cautery point from a spot opposite the middle turbinated body,
forwards and slightly downwards for a distance of rather less than half
an inch. In about one week's time I repeat the operation on the other
side." In his monograph on the subject, he classifies a large number of
cases treated in this manner, most of which resulted in complete relief,
some in very great improvement, and a very few in slight or no relief.