ASTLEY, JACOB ASTLEY, BARON (1570-1652), royalist commander in the
English Civil War, came of a Norfolk family. In 1598 he joined Counts
Maurice and Henry of Orange in the Netherlands, where he served with
distinction, and afterwards fought under the elector palatine Frederick
V. and Gustavus Adolphus in the Thirty Years' War. He was evidently
thought highly of by the states-general, for when he was absent, serving
under the king of Denmark, his company in the Dutch army was kept open
for him. Returning to England with a well-deserved reputation, he was in
the employment of Charles I. in various military capacities. As
"sergeant-major," or general of the infantry, he went north in 1639 to
organize the defence against the expected Scottish invasion. Here his
duties were as much diplomatic as military, as the discontent which
ended in the Civil War was now coming to a head. In the ill-starred
"Bishops' War," Astley did good service to the cause of the king, and he
was involved in the so-called "Army Plot." At the outbreak of the Great
Rebellion (1642) he at once joined Charles, and was made major-general
of the foot. His characteristic battle-prayer at Edgebill has become
famous: "O Lord, Thou knowest how busy I must be this day. If I forget
Thee, do not forget me. March on, boys!" At Gloucester he commanded a
division, and at the first battle of Newbury he led the infantry of the
royal army. With Hopton, in 1644, he served at Arundel and Cheriton. At
the second battle of Newbury he made a gallant and memorable defence of
Shaw House. He was made a baron by the king, and at Naseby he once more
commanded the main body of the foot. He afterwards served in the west,
and with 1500 men fought stubbornly but vainly the last battle for the
king at Stow-on-the-Wold (March 1646). His remark to his captors has
become as famous as his words at Edgehill, "You have now done your work
and may go play, unless you will fall out amongst yourselves." His
scrupulous honour forbade him to take any part in the Second Civil War,
as he had given his parole at Stow-on-the-Wold; but he had to undergo
his share of the discomforts that were the lot of the vanquished
royalists. He died in February 1651/2. The barony became extinct in
1668.