ASTORGA, EMANUELE D' (1681-1736), Italian musical composer, was born at
Naples on the 11th of December 1681. No authentic account of Astorga's
life can be successfully constructed from the obscure and confusing
evidence that has been until now handed down, although historians have
not failed to indulge many pleasant conjectures. According to some of
these, his father, a baron of Sicily, took an active part in the attempt
to throw off the Spanish yoke, but was betrayed by his own soldiers and
publicly executed. His wife and son were compelled to be spectators of
his fate; and such was the effect upon them that his mother died on the
spot, and Emanuele fell into a state of gloomy despondency, which
threatened to deprive him of reason. By the kindness of the princess
Ursini, the unfortunate young man was placed in a convent at Astorga, in
Leon, where he completed a musical education which is said to have been
begun in Palermo under Francesco Scarlatti. Here he recovered his
health, and his admirable musical talents were cultivated under the best
masters. On the details of this account no reliance can safely be
placed, nor is there any certainty that in 1703 he entered the service
of the duke of Parma. Equally untrustworthy is the story that the duke,
suspecting an attachment between hi? niece Elizabeth Farnese and
Astorga, dismissed the musician. The established facts concerning
Astorga are indeed few enough. They are: that the opera _Dafne_ was
written and conducted by the composer in Barcelona in 1709; that he
visited London, where he wrote his _Stabat Mater_, possibly for the
society of "Antient Musick"; that it was performed in Oxford in 1713;
that in 1712 he was in Vienna, and that he retired at an uncertain date
to Bohemia, where he died on the 21st of August 1736, in a castle which
had been given to him in the domains of Prince Lobkowitz, in Raudnitz.
Astorga deserves remembrance for his dignified and pathetic _Stabat
Mater_, and for his numerous chamber-cantatas for one or two voices. He
was probably the last composer to carry on the traditions of this form
of chamber-music as perfected by Alessandro Scarlatti.