ASTROLOGY, the ancient art or science of divining the fate and future of
human beings from indications given by the positions of the stars (sun,
moon and planets). The belief in a connexion between the heavenly bodies
and the life of man has played an important part in human history. For
long ages astronomy and astrology (which might be called astromancy, on
the same principle as "chiromancy") were identified; and a distinction
is made between "natural astrology," which predicts the motions of the
heavenly bodies, eclipses, &c., and "judicial astrology," which studies
the influence of the stars on human destiny. Isidore of Seville (d. 636)
is one of the first to distinguish between astronomy and astrology; nor
did astronomy begin to rid itself of astrology till the 16th century,
when, with the system of Copernicus, the conviction that the earth
itself is one of the heavenly bodies was finally established. The study
of astromancy and the belief in it, as part of astronomy, is found in a
developed form among the ancient Babylonians, and directly or indirectly
through the Babylonians spread to other nations. It came to Greece about
the middle of the 4th century B.C., and reached Rome before the opening
of the Christian era. In India and China astronomy and astrology are
largely reflections of Greek theories and speculations; and similarly
with the introduction of Greek culture into Egypt, both astronomy and
astrology were actively cultivated in the region of the Nile during the
Hellenistic and Roman periods. Astrology was further developed by the
Arabs from the 7th to the 13th century, and in the Europe of the 14th
and 15th centuries astrologers were dominating influences at court.

Even up to the present day men of intellectual eminence like Dr Richard
Garnett have convinced themselves that astromancy has a foundation of
truth, just as there are still believers in chiromancy or other forms of
divination. Dr Garnett ("A.G. Trent") insisted indeed that it was a
mistake to confuse astrology with fortune-telling, and maintained that
it was a "physical science just as much as geology," depending like them
on ascertained facts, and grossly misrepresented by being connected with
magic. Dr Garnett himself looked upon the study of biography in relation
to the casting of horoscopes as an empirical investigation, but it is
difficult in practice to keep the distinction clear, to judge by
present-day text-books such as those of Dr Wilde (_Primer of Astrology_,
&c.). Dr Wilde insists on there being "nothing incongruous with the laws
of nature in the theory that the sun, moon and stars influence men's
physical bodies and conditions, seeing that man is made up of a physical
part of the earth." There is an obvious tendency, however, for
astromancy to be employed, like palmistry, as a means of imposing on the
ignorant and credulous. How far the more serious claim is likely to be
revived in connexion with the renewal of research into the "occult"
sciences generally, it is still too early to speculate; and it has to be
recognized that such a point of view is opposed to the generally
established belief that astrology is either mere superstition or
absolute imposture, and that its former vogue was due either to
deception or to the tyranny of an unscientific environment. But if the
progress of physical science has not prevented the rehabilitation of
much of ancient alchemy by the later researches into chemical change,
and if psychology now finds a place for explanations of spiritualism and
witchcraft which involve the admission of the empirical facts under a
new theory (as in the case of the divining-rod, &c.), it is at least
conceivable that some new synthesis might once more justify part at all
events of ancient and medieval astromancy, to the extent of admitting
the empirical facts where provable, and substituting for the supposed
influence of the stars as such, some deeper theory which would be
consistent with an application to other forms of prophecy, and thus
might reconcile the possibility of dipping into futurity with certain
interrelations of the universe, different indeed from those assumed by
astrological theory, but underlying and explaining it. If this is ever
accomplished it will need the patient investigation of a number of
empirical observations by competent students unbiassed by any _parti
pris_--a difficult set of conditions to obtain; and even then no
definite results may be achieved.

The history of astrology can now be traced back to ancient Babylonia,
and indeed to the earliest phases of Babylonian history, i.e. to about
3000 B.C. In Babylonia as well as in Assyria as a direct offshoot of
Babylonian culture (or as we might also term it "Euphratean" culture),
astrology takes its place in the official cult as one of the two chief
means at the disposal of the priests (who were called _bare_ or
"inspectors") for ascertaining the will and intention of the gods, the
other being through the inspection of the liver of the sacrificial
animal (see OMEN). Just as this latter method of divination rested on a
well-defined theory, to wit, that the liver was the seat of the soul of
the animal and that the deity in accepting the sacrifice identified
himself with the animal, whose "soul" was thus placed in complete accord
with that of the god and therefore reflected the mind and will of the
god, so astrology is based on a theory of divine government of the
world, which in contrast to "liver" divination assumes at the start a
more scientific or pseudo-scientific aspect. This theory must be taken
into consideration as a factor in accounting for the persistent hold
which even at the present day astrology still maintains on many minds.
Starting with the indisputable fact that man's life and happiness are
largely dependent upon phenomena in the heavens, that the fertility of
the soil is dependent upon the sun shining in the heavens as well as
upon the rains that come from heaven, that on the other hand the
mischief and damage done by storms and inundations, to both of which the
Euphratean Valley was almost regularly subject, were to be traced
likewise to the heavens, the conclusion was drawn that all the great
gods had their seats in the heavens. In that early age of culture known
as the "nomadic" stage, which under normal conditions precedes the
"agricultural" stage, the moon cult is even more prominent than sun
worship, and with the moon and sun cults thus furnished by the "popular"
faith it was a natural step for the priests, who correspond to the
"scientists" of a later day, to perfect a theory of a complete accord
between phenomena observed in the heavens and occurrences on earth.

If moon and sun, whose regular movements conveyed to the more intelligent
minds the conception of the reign of law and order in the universe as
against the more popular notion of chance and caprice, were divine
powers, the same held good of the planets, whose movements, though more
difficult to follow, yet in the course of time came to be at least
partially understood. Of the planets five were recognized--Jupiter,
Venus, Saturn, Mercury and Mars--to name them in the order in which they
appear in the older cuneiform literature; in later texts Mercury and
Saturn change places. These five planets were identified with the great
gods of the pantheon as follows:--Jupiter with Marduk (q.v.), Venus with
the goddess Ishtar (q.v.), Saturn with Ninib (q.v.), Mercury with Nebo
(q.v.), and Mars with Nergal (q.v.). The movements of the sun, moon and
five planets were regarded as representing the activity of the five gods
in question, together with the moon-god Sin (q.v.) and the sun-god
Shamash (q.v.), in preparing the occurrences on earth. If, therefore, one
could correctly read and interpret the activity of these powers, one knew
what the gods were aiming to bring about. The Babylonian priests
accordingly applied themselves to the task of perfecting a system of
interpretation of the phenomena to be observed in the heavens, and it was
natural that the system was extended from the moon, sun and five planets
to the more prominent and recognizable fixed stars. That system involved
not merely the movements of the moon, sun and planets, but the
observation of their relative position to one another and to all kinds of
peculiarities noted at any point in the course of their movements: in the
case of the moon, for instance, the exact appearance of the new crescent,
its position in the heavens, the conditions at conjunction and
opposition, the appearance of the horns, the halo frequently seen with
the new moon, which was compared to a "cap," the ring round the full
moon, which was called a "stall" (i.e. "enclosure"), and more of the
like. To all these phenomena some significance was attached, and this
significance was naturally intensified in the case of such a striking
phenomenon as an eclipse of the moon. Applying the same method of careful
observation to the sun and planets, and later to some of the
constellations and to many of the fixed stars, it will be apparent that
the body of observations noted must have grown in the course of time to
large and indeed to enormous proportions, and correspondingly the
interpretations assigned to the nearly endless variations in the
phenomena thus observed. The interpretations themselves were based (as in
the case of divination through the liver) chiefly on two factors:--(1) on
the recollection or on written records of what in the past had taken
place when the phenomenon or phenomena in question had been observed, and
(2) association of ideas--involving sometimes merely a play upon
words--in connexion with the phenomenon or phenomena observed. Thus if on
a certain occasion the rise of the new moon in a cloudy sky was followed
by victory over an enemy or by abundant rain, the sign in question was
thus proved to be a favourable one and its recurrence would be regarded
as a good omen, though the prognostication would not necessarily be
limited to the one or the other of those occurrences, but might be
extended to apply to other circumstances. On the other hand, the
appearance of the new moon earlier than was expected was regarded as an
unfavourable omen--prognosticating in one case defeat, in another death
among cattle, in a third bad crops--not necessarily because these events
actually took place after such a phenomenon, but by an application of the
general principle resting upon association of ideas whereby anything
premature would suggest an unfavourable occurrence. A thin halo seen
above the new moon was pictured as a cap, and the association between
this and the symbol of royalty, which was a conical-shaped cap, led to
interpreting the phenomenon as an indication that the ruler would have a
successful reign. In this way a mass of traditional interpretation of all
kinds of observed phenomena was gathered, and once gathered became a
guide to the priests for all times.

Astrology in this its earliest stage is, however, marked by two
characteristic limitations. In the first place, the movements and
position of the heavenly bodies point to such occurrences as are of
public import and affect the general welfare. The individual's interests
are not in any way involved, and we must descend many centuries and pass
beyond the confines of Babylonia and Assyria before we reach that phase
which in medieval and modern astrology is almost exclusively dwelt
upon--genethliology or the individual horoscope. In Babylonia and
Assyria the cult centred largely and indeed almost exclusively in the
public welfare and the person of the king, because upon his well-being
and favour with the gods the fortunes of the country were dependent in
accordance with the ancient conception of kingship (see J.G. Frazer,
_The Early History of Kingship_). To some extent, the individual came in
for his share in the incantations and in the purification ritual through
which one might hope to rid oneself of the power of the demons and of
other evil spirits, but outside of this the important aim of the priests
was to secure for the general benefit the favour of the gods, or, as a
means of preparing oneself for what the future had in store, to
ascertain in time whether that favour would be granted in any particular
instance or would be continued in the future. Hence in "liver"
divination, as in astrology, the interpretations of the signs noted all
have reference to public affairs and events and not to the individual's
needs or desires. In the second place, the astronomical knowledge
presupposed and accompanying early Babylonian astrology is essentially
of an empirical character. While in a general way the reign of law and
order in the movements of the heavenly bodies was recognized, and indeed
must have exercised an influence at an early period in leading to the
rise of a methodical divination that was certainly of a much higher
order than the examination of an animal's liver, yet the importance that
was laid upon the endless variations in the form of the phenomena and
the equally numerous apparent deviations from what were regarded as
normal conditions, prevented for a long time the rise of any serious
study of astronomy beyond what was needed for the purely practical
purposes that the priests as "inspectors" of the heavens (as they were
also the "inspectors" of the sacrificial livers) had in mind. True, we
have, probably as early as the days of Khammurabi, i.e. c. 2000 B.C.,
the combinations of prominent groups of stars with outlines of pictures
fantastically put together, but there is no evidence that prior to 700
B.C. more than a number of the constellations of our zodiac had become
part of the current astronomy. The theory of the ecliptic as
representing the course of the sun through the year, divided among
twelve constellations with a measurement of 30° to each division, is
also of Babylonian origin, as has now been definitely proved; but it
does not appear to have been perfected until after the fall of the
Babylonian empire in 539 B.C. Similarly, the other accomplishments of
Babylonian astronomers, such as their system or rather systems of moon
calculations and the drawing up of planetary tablets, belong to this
late period, so that the golden age of Babylonian astronomy belongs not
to the remote past, as was until recently supposed, but to the Seleucid
period, i.e. after the advent of the Greeks in the Euphrates Valley.
From certain expressions used in astrological texts that are earlier
than the 7th century B.C. it would appear, indeed, that the beginnings
at least of the calculation of sun and moon eclipses belong to the
earlier period, but here, too, the chief work accomplished was after 400
B.C., and the defectiveness of early Babylonian astronomy may be
gathered from the fact that as late as the 6th century B.C. an error of
almost an entire month was made by the Babylonian astronomers in the
attempt to determine through calculation the beginning of a certain
year.

The researches of Bouché-Leclercq, Cumont and Boll have enabled us to
fix with a considerable degree of definiteness the middle of the 4th
century B.C. as the period when Babylonian astrology began its triumphal
march to the west, invading the domain of Greek and Roman culture and
destined to exercise a strong hold on all nations and groups--more
particularly in Egypt--that came within the sphere of Greek and Roman
influence. It is rather significant that this spread of astrology should
have been concomitant with the intellectual impulse that led to the rise
of a genuine scientific phase of astronomy in Babylonia itself, which
must have weakened to some extent the hold that astrology had on the
priests and the people. The advent of the Persians, bringing with them a
conception of religion of a far higher order than Babylonian-Assyrian
polytheism (see ZOROASTER), must also have acted as a disintegrating
factor in leading to the decline of the old faith in the Euphrates
Valley, and we thus have the interesting though not entirely exceptional
phenomenon of a great civilization bequeathing as a legacy to posterity
a superstition instead of a real achievement. "Chaldaean wisdom" became
among Greeks and Romans the synonym of divination through the planets
and stars, and it is not surprising that in the course of time to be
known as a "Chaldaean" carried with it frequently the suspicion of
charlatanry and of more or less wilful deception. The spread of
astrology beyond Babylonia is thus concomitant with the rise of a truly
scientific astronomy in Babylonia itself, which in turn is due to the
intellectual impulse afforded by the contact with new forms of culture
from both the East and the West.

In the hands of the Greeks and of the later Egyptians both astrology and
astronomy were carried far beyond the limits attained by the
Babylonians, and it is indeed a matter of surprise to observe the
harmonious combination of the two fields--a harmony that seems to grow
more complete with each age, and that is not broken until we reach the
threshold of modern science in the 16th century. To the Greek astronomer
Hipparchus belongs the credit of the discovery (c. 130 B.C.) of the
theory of the precession of the equinoxes, for a knowledge of which
among the Babylonians we find no definite proof; but such a signal
advance in pure science did not prevent the Greeks from developing in a
most elaborate manner the theory of the influence of the planets upon
the fate of the individual. The endeavour to trace the horoscope of the
individual from the position of the planets and stars at the time of
birth (or, as was attempted by other astrologers, at the time of
conception) represents the most significant contribution of the Greeks
to astrology. The system was carried to such a degree of perfection that
later ages made but few additions of an essential character to the
genethliology or drawing up of the individual horoscope by the Greek
astrologers. The system was taken up almost bodily by the Arab
astronomers, it was embodied in the Kabbalistic lore of Jews and
Christians, and through these and other channels came to be the
substance of the astrology of the middle ages, forming, as already
pointed out, under the designation of "judicial astrology," a
pseudo-science which was placed on a perfect footing of equality with
"natural astrology" or the more genuine science of the study of the
motions and phenomena of the heavenly bodies.

Partly in further development of views unfolded in Babylonia, but
chiefly under Greek influences, the scope of astrology was enlarged
until it was brought into connexion with practically all of the known
sciences, botany, chemistry, zoology, mineralogy, anatomy and medicine.
Colours, metals, stones, plants, drugs and animal life of all kinds were
associated with the planets and placed under their tutelage. In the
system that passes under the name of Ptolemy, Saturn is associated with
grey, Jupiter with white, Mars with red, Venus with yellow, while
Mercury, occupying a peculiar place in Greek as it did in Babylonian
astrology (where it was at one time designated as _the_ planet _par
excellence_), was supposed to vary its colour according to changing
circumstances. The sun was associated with gold, the moon with silver,
Jupiter with electrum, Saturn with lead, Venus with copper, and so on,
while the continued influence of astrological motives is to be seen in
the association of quicksilver, upon its discovery at a comparatively
late period, with Mercury, because of its changeable character as a
solid and a liquid. In the same way stones were connected with both the
planets and the months; plants, by diverse association of ideas, were
connected with the planets, and animals likewise were placed under the
guidance and protection of one or other of the heavenly bodies. By this
curious process of combination the entire realm of the natural sciences
was translated into the language of astrology with the single avowed
purpose of seeing in all phenomena signs indicative of what the future
had in store. The fate of the individual, as that feature of the future
which had a supreme interest, led to the association of the planets with
parts of the body. Here, too, we find various systems devised, in part
representing the views of different schools, in part reflecting
advancing conceptions regarding the functions of the organs in man and
animals. In one system the seat of Mercury, representing divine
intelligence as the source of all knowledge--a view that reverts to
Babylonia where Nebo (corresponding to Mercury) was regarded as the
divine power to whom all wisdom is due--was placed in the liver as the
primeval seat of the soul (see OMEN), whereas in other systems this
distinction was assigned to Jupiter or to Venus. Saturn, taking in Greek
astrology the place at the head of the planets which among the
Babylonians was accorded to Jupiter-Marduk, was given a place in the
brain, which in later times was looked upon as the centre of soul-life;
Venus, as the planet of the passion of love, was supposed to reign
supreme over the genital organs, the belly and the lower limbs; Mars, as
the violent planet, is associated with the bile, as well as with the
blood and kidneys. Again, the right ear is associated with Saturn, the
left ear with Mars, the right eye in the case of the male with the sun
and the left eye with the moon, while in the case of the female it was
just the reverse. From the planets the same association of ideas was
applied to the constellations of the zodiac, which in later phases of
astrology are placed on a par with the planets themselves, so far as
their importance for the individual horoscope is concerned. The fate of
the individual in this combination of planets with the zodiac was made
dependent not merely upon the planet which happened to be rising at the
time of birth or of conception, but also upon its local relationship to
a special sign or to certain signs of the zodiac. The zodiac was
regarded as the prototype of the human body, the different parts of
which all had their corresponding section in the zodiac itself. The head
was placed in the first sign of the zodiac--the Ram; and the feet in the
last sign--the Fishes. Between these two extremes the other parts and
organs of the body were distributed among the remaining signs of the
zodiac, the neck being assigned to the Bull, the shoulders and arms to
the Gemini (or twins), the breast to Cancer, the flanks to Leo, the
bladder to Virgo, the buttocks to the Balance, the pubis to the
Scorpion, the thighs to Sagittarius, the knees to Capricorn, and the
limbs to Aquarius. Not content with this, we find the late Egyptian
astrologers setting up a correspondence between the thirty-six _decani_
recognized by them and the human body, which is thus divided into
thirty-six parts; to each part a god was assigned as a controlling
force. With human anatomy thus connected with the planets, with
constellations, and with single stars, medicine became an integral part
of astrology, or, as we might also put it, astrology became the handmaid
of medicine. Diseases and disturbances of the ordinary functions of the
organs were attributed to the influence of planets or explained as due
to conditions observed in a constellation or in the position of a star;
and an interesting survival of this bond between astrology and medicine
is to be seen in the use up to the present time of the sign of Jupiter,
which still heads medicinal prescriptions, while, on the other hand, the
influence of planetary lore appears in the assignment of the days of the
week to the planets, beginning with Sunday, assigned to the sun, and
ending with Saturday, the day of Saturn. Passing on into still later
periods, Saturn's day was associated with the Jewish sabbath, Sunday
with the Lord's Day, Tuesday with Tiw, the god of war, corresponding to
Mars of the Romans and to the Nergal of the Babylonians. Wednesday was
assigned to the planet Mercury, the equivalent of the Germanic god
Woden; Thursday to Jupiter, the equivalent of Thor; and Friday to Friga,
the goddess of love, who is represented by Venus among the Romans and
among the Babylonians by Ishtar. Astrological considerations likewise
already regulated in ancient Babylonia the distinction of lucky and
unlucky days, which passing down to the Greeks and Romans (_dies fasti_
and _nefasti_) found a striking expression in Hesiod's _Works and Days_.
Among the Arabs similar associations of lucky and unlucky days directly
connected with the influence of the planets prevailed through all times,
Tuesday and Wednesday, for instance, being regarded as the days for
blood-letting, because Tuesday was connected with Mars, the lord of war
and blood, and Wednesday with Mercury, the planet of humours. Even in
modern times travellers relate how, when an auspicious day has been
proclaimed by the astrologers, the streets of Bagdad may be seen running
with blood from the barbers' shops.

It is unnecessary here to give a detailed analysis of the methods of
judicial astrology as an art, or directions for the casting of a
horoscope, or "nativity," i.e. a map of the heavens at the hour of
birth, showing, according to the Ephemeris, the position of the heavenly
bodies, from which their influence may be deduced. Each of the twelve
signs of the zodiac (q.v.) is credited with its own characteristics and
influence, and is the controlling sign of its "house of life." The sign
exactly rising at the moment of birth is called the ascendant. The
benevolent or malignant influence of each planet, together with the sun
and moon, is modified by the sign it inhabits at the nativity; thus
Jupiter in one house may indicate riches, fame in another, beauty in
another, and Saturn similarly poverty, obscurity or deformity. The
calculation is affected by the "aspects," i.e. according as the planets
are near or far as regards one another (in conjunction, in semi-sextile,
semi-square, sextile, quintile, square, trine, sesqui-quadrate,
bi-quintile, opposition or parallel acclination). Disastrous signs
predominate over auspicious, and the various effects are combined in a
very elaborate and complicated manner.

Judicial astrology, as a form of divination, is a concomitant of natural
astrology, in its purer astronomical aspect, but mingled with what is
now considered an unscientific and superstitious view of world-forces.
In the _Janua aurea reserata quatuor linguarum_ (1643) of J.A. Comenius
we find the following definition:--"_Astronomus siderum meatus seu motus
considerat: Astrologus eorundem efficaciam, influxum, et effectum_."
Kepler was more cautious in his opinion; he spoke of astronomy as the
wise mother, and astrology as the foolish daughter, but he added that
the existence of the daughter was necessary to the life of the mother.
Tycho Brahe and Gassendi both began with astrology, and it was only
after pursuing the false science, and finding it wanting, that Gassendi
devoted himself to astronomy. In their numerous allusions to the subtle
mercury, which the one makes when treating of a means of measuring time
by the efflux of the metal, and the other in a treatise on the transit
of the planet, we see traces of the school in which they served their
first apprenticeship. Huygens, moreover, in his great posthumous work,
_Cosmotheoros, seu de terris coelestibus_, shows himself a more exact
observer of astrological symbols than Kircher himself in his _Iter
exstaticum_. Huygens contends that between the inhabitants of different
planets there need not be any greater difference than exists between men
of different types on the earth. "There are on the earth," continues
this rational interpreter of the astrologers and chiromancers, "men of
cold temperament who would thrive in Saturn, which is the farthest
planet from the sun, and there are other spirits warm and ardent enough
to live in Venus."

Those were indeed strange times, according to modern ideas, when
astrologers were dominant by the terror they inspired, and sometimes by
the martydom they endured when their predictions were either too true or
too false. Faith, to borrow their own language, was banished to Virgo,
and rarely shed her influence on men. Cardan (1501-1576), for instance,
hated Luther, and so changed his birthday in order to give him an
unfavourable horoscope. In Cardan's times, as in those of Augustus, it
was a common practice for men to conceal the day and hour of their
birth, till, like Augustus, they found a complaisant astrologer. But, as
a general rule, medieval and Renaissance astrologers did not give
themselves the trouble of reading the stars, but contented themselves
with telling fortunes by faces. They practised chiromancy (see
PALMISTRY), and relied on afterwards drawing a horoscope to suit. As
physiognomists (see PHYSIOGNOMY) their talent was undoubted, and
according to Vanini there was no need to mount to the house-top to cast
a nativity. "Yes," he says, "I can read his face; by his hair and his
forehead it is easy to guess that the sun at his birth was in the sign
of Libra and near Venus. Nay, his complexion shows that Venus touches
Libra. By the rules of astrology he could not lie."

A few salient facts may be added concerning the astrologers and their
predictions, remarkable either for their fulfilment or for the ruin and
confusion they brought upon their authors. We may begin with one taken
from Bacon's _Essay of Prophecies_:--"When I was in France, I heard from
one Dr Pena, that the queen mother, who was given to curious arts,
caused the king her husband's nativitie to be calculated, under a false
name; and the astrologer gave a judgment, that he should be killed in a
duell; at which the queene laughed, thinking her husband to be above
challenges and duels; but he was slaine, upon a course at tilt, the
splinters of the staffe of Mongomery going in at his bever." A favourite
topic of the astrologers of all countries has been the immediate end of
the world. As early as 1186 the earth had escaped one threatened
cataclysm of the astrologers. This did not prevent Stöffler from
predicting a universal deluge for the year 1524--a year, as it turned
out, distinguished for drought. His aspect of the heavens told him that
in that year three planets would meet in the aqueous sign of Pisces. The
prediction was believed far and wide, and President Aurial, at Toulouse,
built himself a Noah's ark--a curious realization, in fact, of Chaucer's
merry invention in the _Miller's Tale_.

Tycho Brahe was from his fifteenth year devoted to astrology, and
adjoining his observatory at Uranienburg the astronomer-royal of Denmark
had a laboratory built in order to study alchemy, and it was only a few
years before his death that he finally abandoned astrology. We may here
notice one very remarkable prediction of the master of Kepler. That he
had carefully studied the comet of 1577 as an astronomer, we may gather
from his adducing the very small parallax of this comet as disproving
the assertion of the Aristotelians that a solid sphere enveloped the
heavens. But besides this, we find him in his character of astrologer
drawing a singular prediction from the appearance of this comet. It
announced, he tells us, that in the north, in Finland, there should be
born a prince who should lay waste Germany and vanish in 1632. Gustavus
Adolphus, it is well known, was born in Finland, overran Germany, and
died in 1632. The fulfilment of the details of this prophecy suggests
that Tycho Brahe had some basis of reason for his prediction. Born in
Denmark of a noble Swedish family, a politician, as were all his
contemporaries of distinction, Tycho, though no conjuror, could foresee
the advent of some great northern hero. Moreover, he was doubtless well
acquainted with a very ancient tradition, that heroes generally came
from the northern frontiers of their native land, where they are
hardened and tempered by the threefold struggle they wage with soil,
climate and barbarian neighbours.

Kepler explained the double movement of the earth by the rotation of the
sun. At one time the sun presented its friendly side, which attracted
one planet, sometimes its adverse side, which repelled it. He also
peopled the planets with souls and genii. He was led to his three great
laws by musical analogies, just as William Herschel afterwards passed
from music to astronomy. Kepler, who in his youth made almanacs, and
once prophesied a hard winter, which came to pass, could not help
putting an astrological interpretation on the disappearance of the
brilliant star of 1572, which Tycho had observed. Theodore Beza thought
that this star, which in December 1573 equalled Jupiter in brilliancy,
predicted the second coming of Christ. Astronomers were only then
beginning to study variable and periodic stars, and disturbances in that
part of the heavens, which had till then, on the authority of Aristotle,
been regarded as incorruptible, combined with the troubles of the times,
must have given a new stimulus to belief in the signs in heaven.
Montaigne (_Essais_, lib. i. chap, x.) relates a singular episode in the
history of astrology. Charles V. and Francis I., who both bid for the
friendship of the infamous Aretino, surnamed the divine, both likewise
engaged astrologers to fight their battles. In Italy those who
prophesied the ruin of France were sure to be listened to. These
prophecies affected the public funds much as telegrams do nowadays. "At
Rome," Montaigne tells us, "a large sum of money was lost on the Change
by this prognostication of our ruin." The marquis of Saluces,
notwithstanding his gratitude to Francis I. for the many favours he had
received, including his marquisate, of which the brother was despoiled
for his benefit, was led in 1536 to betray his country, being scared by
the glorious prophecies of the ultimate success of Charles V. which were
then rife. The influence of the Medici made astrologers popular in
France. Richelieu, on whose council was Jacques Gaffarel (1601-1681),
the last of the Kabbalists, did not despise astrology as an engine of
government. At the birth of Louis XIV. a certain Morin de Villefranche
was placed behind a curtain to cast the nativity of the future autocrat.
A generation back the astrologer would not have been hidden behind a
curtain, but have taken precedence of the doctor. La Bruyère dares not
pronounce against such beliefs, "for there are perplexing facts affirmed
by grave men who were eye-witnesses." In England William Lilly and
Robert Fludd were both dressed in a little brief authority. The latter
gives us elaborate rules for the detection of a thief, and tells us that
he has had personal experience of their efficacy. "If the lord of the
sixth house is found in the second house, or in company with the lord of
the second house, the thief is one of the family. If Mercury is in the
sign of the Scorpion he will be bald, &c." Francis Bacon abuses the
astrologers of his day no less than the alchemists, but he does so
because he has visions of a reformed astrology and a reformed alchemy.
Sir Thomas Browne, too, while he denies the capacity of the astrologers
of his day, does not venture to dispute the reality of the science. The
idea of the souls of men passing at death to the stars, the blessedness
of their particular sphere being assigned them according to their
deserts (the metempsychosis of J. Reynaud), may be regarded as a
survival of religious astrology, which, even as late as Descartes's day,
assigned to the angels the task of moving the planets and the stars.
Joseph de Maistre believed in comets as messengers of divine justice,
and in animated planets, and declared that divination by astrology is
not an absolutely chimerical science. Lastly, we may mention a few
distinguished men who ran counter to their age in denying stellar
influences. Aristarchus of Samos, Martianus Capella (the precursor of
Copernicus), Cicero, Favorinus, Sextus Empiricus, Juvenal, and in a
later age Savonarola and Pico della Mirandola, and La Fontaine, a
contemporary of the neutral La Bruyère, were all pronounced opponents of
astrology.

In England Swift may fairly claim the credit of having given the
death-blow to astrology by his famous squib, entitled _Prediction for
the Year 1708, by Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq._ He begins, by professing
profound belief in the art, and next points out the vagueness and the
absurdities of the philomaths. He then, in the happiest vein of parody,
proceeds to show them a more excellent way:--"My first prediction is but
a trifle, yet I mention it to show how ignorant these sottish pretenders
to astrology are in their own concerns: it refers to Partridge the
almanac-maker. I have consulted the star of his nativity by my own
rules, and find he will infallibly die upon the 29th of March next about
eleven at night of a raging fever. Therefore I advise him to consider of
it and settle his affairs in time." Then followed a letter to a person
of quality giving a full and particular account of the death of
Partridge on the very day and nearly at the hour mentioned. In vain the
wretched astrologer protested that he was alive, got a literary friend
to write a pamphlet to prove it, and published his almanac for 1709.
Swift, in his reply, abused him for his want of manners in giving a
gentleman the lie, answered his arguments _seriatim_, and declared that
the evidence of the publication of another almanac was wholly
irrelevant, "for Gadbury, Poor Robin, Dove and Way do yearly publish
their almanacs, though several of them have been dead since before the
Revolution." Nevertheless a field is found even to this day for almanacs
of a similar type, and for popular belief in them.

To astrological politics we owe the theory of heaven-sent rulers,
instruments in the hands of Providence, and saviours of society.
Napoleon, as well as Wallenstein, believed in his star. Many passages in
the older English poets are unintelligible without some knowledge of
astrology. Chaucer wrote a treatise on the astrolabe; Milton constantly
refers to planetary influences; in Shakespeare's _King Lear_, Gloucester
and Edmund represent respectively the old and the new faith. We still
_contemplate_ and consider; we still speak of men as _jovial_,
_saturnine_ or _mercurial_; we still talk of the _ascendancy_ of genius,
or a _disastrous_ defeat. In French _heur_, _malheur_, _heureux_,
_malheureux_, are all derived from the Latin _augurium_; the expression
_né sous une mauvaise étoile_, born under an evil star, corresponds
(with the change of _étoile_ into _astre_) to the word _malôtru_, in
Provençal _malastrue_; and _son étoile pâlit_, his star grows pale,
belongs to the same class of illusions. The Latia _ex augurio_ appears
in the Italian _sciagura_, _sciagurato_, softened into _sciaura_,
_sciaurato_, wretchedness, wretched. The influence of a particular
planet has also left traces in various languages; but the French and
English _jovial_ and the English _saturnine_ correspond rather to the
gods who served as types in chiromancy than to the planets which bear
the same names. In the case of the expressions _bien_ or _mal luné_,
well or ill mooned, _avoir un quartier de lune dans la tetê_, to have
the quarter of the moon in one's head, the German _mondsüchtig_ and the
English _moonstruck_ or _lunatic_, the fundamental idea lies in the
strange opinions formerly held about the moon.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--For the history of astrology with its affinities to
  astronomy on the one hand, and to other forms of popular belief on the
  other, the following works out of a large number that might be
  mentioned are specially recommended:--A. Bouché-Leclercq,
  _L'Astrologie grecque_ (Paris, 1899), with a full bibliography; Franz
  Boll, _Sphaera_ (Leipzig, 1903); Franz Cumont, _Catalogus Codicum
  Astrologorum Graecorum_ (Brussels, 1898; 7 parts published up to
  1909); Franz Boll, "Die Erforschung der antiken Astrologie" (in _Neue
  Jahrbucher fur das klassische Altertum_, Band xxi. Heft 2, pp.
  103-126); Franz Cumont, _Les Religions orientates dans le paganisme
  romain_ (Paris, 1907) (ch. vii. "L'Astrologie et la magie"); Alfred
  Maury, _La Magie et l'astrologie à l'antiquité et au moyen âge_ (4th
  ed., Paris, 1877); R.C. Thompson, _Reports of the Magicians and
  Astrologers of Nineveh and Babylon_ (2 vols., London, 1900); F.X.
  Kugler, _Sternkunde und Sterndienst in Babel_ (Freiburg, 1907;--to be
  completed in 4 vols.); Ch. Virolleaud, _L'Astrologie chaldéenne_
  (Paris, 1905--to be completed in 8 parts--transliteration and
  translations of cuneiform texts); Jastrow, _Religion Babyloniens und
  Assyriens_ (Parts 13 and 14); also certain sections in
  Bouché-Leclercq, _Histoire de la divination dans l'antiquité_ (Paris,
  1879), vol. i. pp. 205-257; in Marcellin Berthelot, _Les Origines de
  l'alchimie_ (Paris, 1885), pp. 1-56; Ferd. Höfer, _Histoire de
  l'astronomie_ (Paris, 1846), pp. 1-90; in Rudolf Wolf, _Geschichte der
  Astronomie_ (Munich, 1877), ch. i. See also the article by Ernst Riess
  on Astrology in Pauly-Wissowa, _Realencyclopädie der klassischen
  Altertumswissenschaft_, vol. ii. (Stuttgart, 1896). For modern and
  practical astrology the following works may be found useful in
  different ways: E.M. Bennett, _Astrology_ (New York, 1894); J.M.
  Pfaff, _Astrologie_ (Bamberg, 1816); G. Wilde, _Chaldaean Astrology up
  to date_ (1901); R. Garnett ("A.G. Trent"), "The Soul and the Stars,"
  in the _University Magazine_, 1880 (reprinted in Dobson and Wilde,
  _Natal Astrology_, 1893); Abel Haatan, _Traité d'astrologie
  judiciaire_ (Paris, 1825); Fomalhaut, _Manuel d'astrologie sphérique
  el judiciaire_ (Paris, 1897).     (M. Ja.)