ASTRAKHAN, a town of E. Russia, capital of the government of Astrakhan,
on the left bank of the main channel of the Volga, 50 m. from the
Caspian Sea, in 46° 21' N. lat. and 48° 5' E. long. Since the growth of
the petroleum industry of Baku and the construction of the Transcaspian
railway, Astrakhan has become an important commercial centre, exporting
fish, caviare, sugar, metals, naphtha, cottons and woollens, and
importing grain, cotton, fruit and timber, to the aggregate value of
£8,250,000 with foreign countries and of £14,500,000 with the interior
of Russia. The town gives its name to the "fur" called "astrakhan," the
skin of the new-born Persian lamb, and so to an imitation in rough
woollen cloth. There is some tanning, shipbuilding and brewing, and
making of soap, tar and machinery. Astrakhan is the chief port on the
Caspian Sea and the headquarters of the Russian Caspian fleet. The city
consists of (1) the _kreml_ or citadel (1550), crowning a hill, on which
stand also the spacious brick cathedral containing the tombs of two
Georgian princes, the archbishop's palace and the monastery of the
Trinity; (2) the Byelogorod or White Town, containing the administrative
offices and the bazaars; and (3) the suburbs, where most of the
population resides. The buildings in the first two quarters are of
stone, in the third of wood, irregularly arranged along unpaved, dirty
streets. The city is the see of a Greek Catholic archbishop and of an
Armenian archbishop, and contains a Lamaist monastery, as well as
technical schools, an ichthyological museum, the Peter museum, with
ethnographical, archaeological and natural history collections, a
botanical garden, an ecclesiastical seminary, and good squares and
public gardens, one of which is adorned with a statue (1884) of
Alexander II. Vineyards surround the city. Astrakhan was anciently the
capital of a Tatar state, and stood some 7 m. farther north. After this
was destroyed by the Mongol prince Timur the Great in 1395, the existing
city was built. The Tatars were expelled about 1554 by Ivan IV. of
Russia. In 1569 the city was besieged by the Turks, but they were
defeated with great slaughter by the Russians. In 1670 it was seized by
the rebel Stenka Razin; early in the following century Peter the Great
constructed here a shipbuilding yard and made Astrakhan the base for his
hostilities against Persia, and later in the same century Catherine II.
accorded the city important industrial privileges. In 1702, 1718 and
1767, it suffered severely from fires; in 1719 was plundered by the
Persians; and in 1830 the cholera swept away a large number of its
people. In the middle ages the city was known also as Jitarkhan and
Ginterkhan. Pop. (1867) 47,839; (1900) 121,580. Eight miles above
Astrakhan, on the right bank of the Volga, are the ruins of two ancient
cities superimposed one upon the other. In the upper, which may
represent the city of Balanjar (Balansar, Belenjer), have been found
gold and silver coins struck by Mongol rulers, as well as ornaments in
the same metals. The older and scantier underlying ruins are supposed to
be those of the once large and prosperous city of Itil or Atel (Etel,
Idl) of the Arab geographers, a residence of the khan of the Khazars,
destroyed by the Russians in 969.     (P. A. K.)