ASTRONOMY (from Gr. [Greek: astron], a star, and [Greek: nemein], to
classify or arrange). The subject matter of astronomical science,
considered in its widest range, comprehends all the matter of the
universe which lies outside the limit of the earth's atmosphere. The
seeming anomaly of classifying as a single branch of science all that we
know in a field so wide, while subdividing our knowledge of things on
our own planet into an indefinite number of separate sciences, finds its
explanation in the impossibility of subjecting the matter of the heavens
to that experimental scrutiny which yields such rich results when
applied to matter which we can handle at will. Astronomy is of necessity
a science of observation in the pursuit of which experiment can directly
play no part. It is the most ancient of the sciences because, before the
era of experiment, it was the branch of knowledge which could be most
easily systematized, while the relations of its phenomena to day and
night, times and seasons, made some knowledge of the subject a necessity
of social life. In recent times it is among the more progressive of the
sciences, because the new and improved methods of research now at
command have found in its cultivation a field of practically unlimited
extent, in which the lines of research may ultimately lead to a
comprehension of the universe impossible of attainment before our time.

The field we have defined is divisible into at least two parts, that of
Astronomy proper, or "Astrometry," which treats of the motions, mutual
relations and dimensions of the heavenly bodies; and that of
Astrophysics (q.v.), which treats of their physical constitution. While
it is true that the instruments and methods of research in these two
branches are quite different in their details, there is so much in
common in the fundamental principles which underlie their application,
that it is unprofitable to consider them as completely distinct
sciences.

Speaking in the most comprehensive way, and making an exception of the
ethereal medium (see AETHER), which, being capable of experimental
study, is not included in the subject of astronomy, we may say that the
great masses of matter which make up the universe are of two kinds:--(1)
incandescent bodies, made visible to us by their own light; (2) dark
bodies, revolving round them or round each other. These dark bodies are
known to us in two ways: (a) by becoming visible through reflecting the
light from incandescent bodies in their neighbourhood, (b) by their
attraction upon such bodies.

The incandescent bodies are of two classes: stars and nebulae. Among the
stars our sun is to be included, as it has no properties which
distinguish it from the great mass of stars except our proximity to it.
The stars are supposed to be generally spherical, like the sun, in form,
and to have fairly well-defined boundaries; while the nebulae are
generally irregular in outline and have no well-defined limits. It is,
however, probable that the one class runs into the other by
imperceptible gradations. In the relation of the universe to us there is
yet another separation of its bodies into two classes, one comprising
the solar system, the other the remainder of the universe. The former
consists of the sun and the bodies which move round it. Considered as a
part of the universe, our solar system is insignificant in extent,
though, for obvious reasons, great in practical importance to us, and in
the facility with which we may gain knowledge relating to it.

Referring to special articles, SOLAR SYSTEM, STAR, SUN, MOON, &c. for a
description of the various parts of the universe, we confine ourselves,
at present, to setting forth a few of the most general modern
conceptions of the universe. As to extent, it may be said, in a general
way, that while no definite limits can be set to the possible extent of
the universe, or the distance of its farthest bodies, it seems probable,
for reasons which will be given under STAR, that the system to which the
stars that we see belong, is of finite extent.

As the incandescent bodies of the universe are visible by their own
light, the problem of ascertaining their existence and position is
mainly one of seeing, and our facilities for attacking it have
constantly increased with the improvement of our optical appliances. But
such is not the case with the dark bodies. Such a body can be made known
to us only when in the neighbourhood of an incandescent body; and even
then, unless its mass or its dimensions are considerable, it will evade
all the scrutiny of our science. The question of the possible number and
magnitude of such bodies is therefore one that does not admit of
accurate investigation. We can do no more than balance vague estimates
of probability. What we do know is that these bodies vary widely in
size. Those known to be revolving round certain of the stars are far
larger in proportion to their central bodies than our planets are in
respect to the sun; for were it otherwise we should never be able to
detect their existence. At the other extreme we know that innumerable
swarms of minute bodies, probably little more than particles, move round
the sun in orbits of every degree of eccentricity, making themselves
known to us only in the exceptional cases when they strike the earth's
atmosphere. They then appear to us as "shooting stars" (see METEOR).

A general idea of the relation of the solar system to the universe may
be gained by reflecting that the average distance between any two
neighbouring stars is several thousand times the extent of the solar
system. Between the orbit of Neptune and the nearest star known to us is
an immense void in which no bodies are yet known to exist, except
comets. But although these sometimes wander to distances considerably
beyond the orbit of Neptune, it is probable that the extent of the void
which separates our system from the nearest star is hundreds of times
the distance of the farthest point to which a comet ever recedes.

We may conclude this brief characterization of astronomy with a
statement and classification of the principal lines on which
astronomical researches are now pursued. The most comprehensive problem
before the investigator is that of the constitution of the universe. It
is known that, while infinite diversity is found among the bodies of the
universe, there are also common characteristics throughout its whole
extent. In a certain sense we may say that the universe now presents
itself to the thinking astronomer, not as a heterogeneous collection of
bodies, but as a unified whole. The number of stars is so vast that
statistical methods can be applied to many of the characters which they
exhibit--their spectra, their apparent and absolute luminosity, and
their arrangement in space. Thus has arisen in recent times what we may
regard as a third branch of astronomical science, known as _Stellar
Statistics_. The development of this branch has infused life and
interest into what might a few years ago have been regarded as the most
lifeless mass of figures possible, expressing merely the positions and
motions of innumerable individual stars, as determined by generations of
astronomical observers. The development of this new branch requires
great additions to this mass, the product of perhaps centuries of work
on the older lines of the science. To the statistician of the stars,
catalogues of spectra, magnitude, position and proper motions are of the
same importance that census tables are to the student of humanity. The
measurement of the speed with which the individual stars are moving
towards or from our system is a work of such magnitude that what has yet
been done is scarcely more than a beginning. The discovery by improved
optical means, and especially by photography, of new bodies of our
system so small that they evaded all scrutiny in former times, is still
going on, but does not at present promise any important generalization,
unless we regard as such the conclusion that our solar system is a more
complex organism than was formerly supposed.

One characteristic of astronomy which tends to make its progress slow
and continuous arises out of the general fact that, except in the case
of motions to or from us, which can be determined by a single
observation with the spectroscope, the motion of a heavenly body can be
determined only by comparing its position at two different epochs. The
interval required between these two epochs depends upon the speed of the
motion. In the case of the greater number of the fixed stars this is so
slow that centuries may have to elapse before motion can be deduced.
Even in the case of the planets, the variations in the form and position
of the orbits are so slow that long periods of observation are required
for their correct determination.

The process of development is also made slow and difficult by the great
amount of labour involved in deriving the results of astronomical
observations. When an astronomer has made an observation, it still has
to be "reduced," and this commonly requires more labour than that
involved in making it. But even this labour may be small compared with
that of the theoretical astronomer, who, in the future, is to use the
result as the raw material of his work. The computations required in
such work are of extreme complexity, and the labour required is still
further increased by the fact that cases are rather exceptional in which
the results reached by one generation will not have to be revised and
reconstructed by another; processes which may involve the repetition of
the entire work. We may, in fact, regard the fabric of astronomical
science as a building in the construction of which no stone can be added
without a readjustment of some of the stones on which it has to rest.
Thus it comes about that the observer, the computer, and the
mathematician have in astronomical science a practically unlimited field
for the exercise of their powers.

In treating so comprehensive a subject we may naturally distinguish
between what we know of the universe and the methods and processes by
which that knowledge is acquired. The former may be termed general, and
the latter practical, astronomy. When we descend more minutely into
details we find these two branches of the subject to be connected by
certain principles, the application of which relates to both subjects.
Considering as general or descriptive astronomy a description of the
universe as we now understand it, the other branches of the subject
generally recognized are as follows:--

_Geometrical_ or _Spherical Astronomy_, by the principles of which the
positions and the motions of the heavenly bodies are defined.

_Theoretical Astronomy_, which may be considered as an extension of
geometrical astronomy and includes the determination of the positions
and motions of the heavenly bodies by combining mathematical theory with
observation. Modern theoretical astronomy, taken in the most limited
sense, is based upon _Celestial Mechanics_, the science by which, using
purely deductive mechanical methods, the laws of motion of the heavenly
bodies are derived by deductive methods from their mutual gravitation
towards each other.

_Practical Astronomy_, which comprises a description of the instruments
used in astronomical observation, and of the principles and methods
underlying their application.

_Spherical or Geometrical Astronomy._

In astronomy, as in analytical geometry, the position of a point is
defined by stating its distance and its direction from a point of
reference taken as known. The numerical quantities by which the distance
and direction, and therefore the position, are defined, are termed
_co-ordinates_ of the point. The latter are measured or defined with
regard to a fixed system of lines and planes, which form the basis of
the system.

  The following are the fundamental concepts of such a system.

  (a) An origin or point of reference. The points most generally taken
  for this purpose in astronomical practice are the following:--

  (1) The position of a point of observation on the earth's surface. We
  conceive its position to be that occupied by an observer. The position
  of a heavenly body is then defined by its direction and distance from
  the supposed observer.

  (2) The centre of the earth. This point, though it can never be
  occupied by an observer, is used because the positions of the heavenly
  bodies in relation to it are more readily computed than they can be
  from a point on the earth's surface.

  (3) The centre of the sun.

  (4) In addition to these three most usual points, we may, of course,
  take the centre of a planet or that of a star in order to define the
  position of bodies in their respective neighbourhoods.

  Co-ordinates referred to a point of observation as the origin are
  termed "apparent," those referred to the centre of the earth are
  "geocentric," those referred to the centre of the sun, "heliocentric."

  (b) The next concept of the system is a fundamental plane, regarded as
  fixed, passing through the origin. In connexion with it is an axis
  perpendicular to it, also passing through the origin. We may consider
  the axis and the plane as a single concept, the axis determining the
  plane, or the plane the axis. The fundamental concepts of this class
  most in use are:--

  (1) When a point on the earth's surface is taken as the origin, the
  fundamental axis may be the direction of gravity at that point. This
  direction defines the vertical line. The fundamental plane which it
  determines is horizontal and is termed the plane of the horizon. Such
  a plane is realized in the surface of a liquid, a basin of
  quicksilver, for example.

  (2) When the centre of the earth is taken as origin, the most natural
  fundamental axis is that of the earth's rotation. This axis cuts the
  earth's surface at the North and South Poles. The fundamental plane
  perpendicular to it is the plane of the equator. This plane intersects
  the earth's surface in the terrestrial equator. Co-ordinates referred
  to this system are termed equatorial. A system of equatorial
  co-ordinates may also be used when the origin is on the earth's
  surface. The fundamental axis, instead of being the earth's axis
  itself, is then a line parallel to it, and the fundamental plane is
  the plane passing through the point, and parallel to the plane of the
  equator.

  (3) In the system of heliocentric co-ordinates, the plane in which the
  earth moves round the sun, which is the plane of the ecliptic, is
  taken as the fundamental one. The axis of the ecliptic is a line
  perpendicular to this plane.

  (c) The third concept necessary to complete the system is a fixed line
  passing through the origin, and lying in the fundamental plane. This
  line defines an initial direction from which other directions are
  counted.

  [Illustration: FIG. 1.]

  The geometrical concepts just defined are shown in fig. 1. Here O is
  the origin, whatever point it may be; OZ is the fundamental axis
  passing through it. In order to represent in the figure the position
  of the fundamental plane, we conceive a circle to be drawn round O,
  lying in that plane. This circle, projected in perspective as an
  ellipse, is shown in the figure. OX is the fixed initial line by which
  directions are to be defined.

  Now let P be any point in space, say the centre of a heavenly body.
  Conceive a perpendicular PQ to be dropped from this point on the
  fundamental plane, meeting the latter in the point Q; PQ will then be
  parallel to OZ. The co-ordinates of P will then be the following three
  quantities:--

  (1) The length of the line OP, or the distance of the body from the
  origin, which distance is called the radius vector of the body.

  (2) The angle XOQ which the projection of the radius vector upon the
  fundamental plane makes with the initial line OX. This angle is called
  the Longitude, Right Ascension or Azimuth of the body, in the various
  systems of co-ordinates. We may term it in a general way the
  longitudinal co-ordinate.

  (3) The angle QOP, which the radius vector makes with the fundamental
  plane. This we may call the latitudinal co-ordinate. Instead of it is
  frequently used the complementary angle ZOP, known as the polar
  distance of the body. Since ZOQ is a right angle, it follows that the
  sum of the polar distance and the latitudinal co-ordinates is always
  90°. Either may be used for astronomical purposes.

  It is readily seen that the position of a heavenly body is completely
  defined when these co-ordinates are given.

  One of the systems of co-ordinates is familiar to every one, and may
  be used as a general illustration of the method. It is our system of
  defining the position of a point on the earth's surface by its
  latitude and longitude. Regarding O (fig. 1) as the centre of the
  earth, and P as a point on the earth's surface, a city for example, it
  will be seen that OZ being the earth's axis, the circle MN will be the
  equator. The initial line OX then passes through the foot of the
  perpendicular dropped from Greenwich upon the plane of the equator,
  and meets the surface at N. The angle QOP is the latitude of the place
  and the angle NOQ its longitude. The longitudes and latitudes thus
  defined are geocentric, and the latitude is slightly different from
  that in ordinary use for geographic purposes. The difference arises
  from the oblateness of the earth, and need not be considered here.

  The conception of the co-ordinates we have defined is facilitated by
  introducing that of the celestial sphere. This conception is embodied
  in our idea of the vault of heaven, or of the sky. Taking as origin
  the position of an observer, the direction of a heavenly body is
  defined by the point in which he sees it in the sky; that is to say,
  on the celestial sphere. Imagining, as we may well do, that the radius
  of this sphere is infinite--then every direction, whatever the origin,
  may be represented by a point on its surface. Take for example the
  vertical line which is embodied in the direction of the plumb line.
  This line, extended upwards, meets the celestial sphere in the zenith.
  The earth's axis, continued indefinitely upwards, meets the sphere in
  a point called the Celestial Pole. This point in our middle latitudes
  is between the zenith and the north horizon, near a certain star of
  the second magnitude familiarly known as the Pole Star. As the earth
  revolves from west to east the celestial sphere appears to us to
  revolve in the opposite direction, turning on the line joining the
  Celestial Poles as on a pivot.

  As we conceive of the sky, it does not consist of an entire sphere but
  only as a hemisphere bounded by the horizon. But we have no difficulty
  in extending the conception below the horizon, so that the earth with
  everything upon it is in the centre of a complete sphere. The two
  parts of this sphere are the visible hemisphere, which is above the
  horizon, and the invisible, which is below it. Then the plumb line not
  only defines the zenith as already shown, but in a downward direction
  it defines the nadir, which is the point of the sphere directly below
  our feet. On the side of this sphere opposite to the North Celestial
  is the South Pole, invisible in the Northern Terrestrial Hemisphere
  but visible in the Southern one.

  The relation of geocentric to apparent co-ordinates depends upon the
  latitude of the observer. The changes which the aspect of the heaven
  undergoes, as we travel North and South, are so well known that they
  need not be described in detail here; but a general statement of them
  will give a luminous idea of the geometrical co-ordinates we have
  described. Imagine an observer starting from the North Pole to travel
  towards the equator, carrying his zenith with him. When at the pole
  his zenith coincides with the celestial pole, and as the earth
  revolves on its axis, the heavenly bodies perform their apparent
  diurnal revolutions in horizontal circles round the zenith. As he
  travels South, his zenith moves along the celestial sphere, and the
  circles of diurnal rotation become oblique to the horizon. The
  obliquity continually increases until the observer reaches the
  equator. His zenith is then in the equator and the celestial poles are
  in the North and South horizon respectively. The circles in which the
  heavenly bodies appear to revolve are then vertical. Continuing his
  journey towards the south, the north celestial pole sinks below the
  horizon; the south celestial pole rises above it; or to speak more
  exactly, the zenith of the observer approaches that pole. The circles
  of diurnal revolution again become oblique. Finally, at the south pole
  the circles of diurnal revolution are again apparently horizontal, but
  are described in a direction apparently (but not really) the reverse
  of that near the north pole. The reader who will trace out these
  successive concepts and study the results of his changing positions
  will readily acquire the notions which it is our subject to define.

  We have next to point out the relation of the co-ordinates we have
  described to the annual motion of the earth around the sun. In
  consequence of this motion the sun appears to us to describe annually
  a great circle, called the ecliptic, round the celestial sphere, among
  the stars, with a nearly uniform motion, of somewhat less than 1° in a
  day. Were the stars visible in the daytime in the immediate
  neighbourhood of the sun, this motion could be traced from day to day.
  The ecliptic intersects the celestial equator at two opposite points,
  the equinoxes, at an angle of 23° 27'. The vernal equinox is taken as
  the initial point on the sphere from which co-ordinates are measured
  in the equatorial and ecliptic systems. Referring to fig. 1, the
  initial line OX is defined as directed toward the vernal equinox, at
  which point it intersects the celestial sphere.

  The following is an enumeration of the co-ordinates which we have
  described in the three systems:--

      APPARENT SYSTEM.

    Latitudinal Co-ordinate; Altitude or Zenith Distance.
    Longitudinal    "                    Azimuth.

      EQUATORIAL SYSTEM.

    Latitudinal Co-ordinate; Declination or Polar Distance.
    Longitudinal    "                    Right Ascension.

      ECLIPTIC SYSTEM.

    Latitudinal Co-ordinate; Latitude or Ecliptic Polar Distance.
    Longitudinal    "                    Longitude.

  _Relation of the Diurnal Motion to Spherical Co-ordinates._--The
  vertical line at any place being the fundamental axis of the apparent
  system of co-ordinates, this system rotates with the earth, and so
  seems to us as fixed. The other two systems, including the vernal
  equinox, are fixed on the celestial sphere, and so seem to us to
  perform a diurnal revolution from east towards west. Regarding the
  period of the revolution as 24 hours, the apparent motion goes on at
  the rate of 15° per hour. Here we have to make a distinction of
  fundamental importance between the diurnal motions of the sun and of
  the stars. Owing to the unceasing apparent motion of the sun toward
  the east, the interval between two passages of the same star over the
  meridian is nearly four minutes less than the interval between
  consecutive passages of the sun. The latter is the measure of the day
  as used in civil life. In astronomical practice is introduced a day,
  termed "sidereal," determined, not by the diurnal revolution of the
  sun, but of the stars. The year, which comprises 365.25 solar days,
  contains 366.25 sidereal days. The latter are divided into sidereal
  hours, minutes and seconds as the solar day is. The conception of a
  revolution through 360° in 24 hours is applicable to each case. The
  sun apparently moves at the rate of 15° in a solar hour; the stars at
  the rate of 15° in a sidereal hour. The latter motion leads to the
  use, in astronomical practice, of time instead of angle, as the unit
  in which the right ascensions are to be expressed. Considering the
  position of the vernal equinox, and also of a star on the celestial
  sphere, it will be seen that the interval between the transits of
  these two points across the meridian may be used to measure the right
  ascension of a star, since the latter amounts to 15° for every
  sidereal hour of this interval. For example, if the right ascension of
  a star is exactly 15°, it will pass the meridian one sidereal hour
  after the vernal equinox. For the relations thus arising, and their
  practical applications, see TIME, MEASUREMENT OF.

_Theoretical Astronomy._

Theoretical Astronomy is that branch of the science which, making use of
the results of astronomical observations as they are supplied by the
practical astronomer, investigates the motions of the heavenly bodies.
In its most important features it is an offshoot of celestial mechanics,
between which and theoretical astronomy no sharp dividing line can be
drawn. While it is true that the one is concerned altogether with
general theories, it is also true that these theories require
developments and modifications to apply them to the numberless problems
of astronomy, which we may place in either class.

  Among the problems of theoretical astronomy we may assign the first
  place to the determination of orbits (q.v.), which is auxiliary to the
  prediction of the apparent motions of a planet, satellite or star. The
  computations involved in the process, while simple in some cases, are
  extremely complex in others. The orbit of a newly-discovered planet or
  comet may be computed from three complete observations by well-known
  methods in a single day. From the resulting elements of the orbit the
  positions of the body from day to day may be computed and tabulated in
  an ephemeris for the use of observers. But when definitive results as
  to the orbits are required, it is necessary to compute the
  perturbations produced by such of the major planets as have affected
  the motions of the body. With this complicated process is associated
  that of combining numerous observations with a view of obtaining the
  best definitive result. Speaking in a general way, we may say that
  computations pertaining to the orbital revolutions of double stars, as
  well as the bodies of our solar system, are to a greater or less
  extent of the classes we have described. The principal modification is
  that, up to the present time, stellar astronomy has not advanced so
  far that a computation of the perturbations in each case of a system
  of stars is either necessary or possible, except in exceptional cases.

_Celestial Mechanics_.

Celestial Mechanics is, strictly speaking, that branch of applied
mathematics which, by deductive processes, derives the laws of motion of
the heavenly bodies from their gravitation towards each other, or from
the mutual action of the parts which form them. The science had its
origin in the demonstration by Sir Isaac Newton that Kepler's three laws
of planetary motion, and the law of gravitation, in the case of two
bodies, could be mutually derived from each other. A body can move round
the sun in an elliptic orbit having the sun in its focus, and describing
equal areas in equal times, only under the influence of a force directed
towards the sun, and varying inversely as the square of the distance
from it. Conversely, assuming this law of attraction, it can be shown
that the planets will move according to Kepler's laws.

Thus celestial mechanics may be said to have begun with Newton's
_Principia_. The development of the science by the successors of Newton,
especially Laplace and Lagrange, may be classed among the most striking
achievements of the human intellect. The precision with which the path
of an eclipse is laid down years in advance cannot but imbue the minds
of men with a high sense of the perfection reached by astronomical
theories; and the discovery, by purely mathematical processes, of the
changes which the orbits and motions of the planets are to undergo
through future ages is more impressive the more fully one apprehends the
nature of the problem. The purpose of the present article is to convey a
general idea of the methods by which the results of celestial mechanics
are reached, without entering into those technical details which can be
followed only by a trained mathematician. It must be admitted that any
intelligent comprehension of the subject requires at least a grasp of
the fundamental conceptions of analytical geometry and the infinitesimal
calculus, such as only one with some training in these subjects can be
expected to have. This being assumed, the hope of the writer is that the
exposition will afford the student an insight into the theory which may
facilitate his orientation, and convey to the general reader with a
certain amount of mathematical training a clear idea of the methods by
which conclusions relating to it are drawn. The non-mathematical reader
may possibly be able to gain some general idea, though vague, of the
significance of the subject.

  The fundamental hypothesis of the science assumes a system of bodies
  in motion, of which the sun and planets may be taken as examples, and
  of which each separate body is attracted toward all the others
  according to the law of Newton. The motion of each body is then
  expressed in the first place by Newton's three laws of motion (see
  MOTION, LAWS OF, and MECHANICS). The first step in the process shows
  in a striking way the perfection of the analytic method. The
  conception of force is, so to speak, eliminated from the conditions of
  the problem, which is reduced to one of pure kinematics. At the
  outset, the position of each body, considered as a material particle,
  is defined by reference to a system of co-ordinate axes, and not by
  any verbal description. Differential equations which express the
  changes of the co-ordinates are then constructed. The process of
  discovering the laws of motion of the particle then consists in the
  integration of these equations. Such equations can be formed for a
  system of any number of bodies, but the process of integration in a
  rigorous form is possible only to a limited extent or in special
  cases.

  The problems to be treated are of two classes. In one, the bodies are
  regarded as material particles, no account being taken of their
  dimensions. The earth, for example, may be regarded as a particle
  attracted by another more massive particle, the sun. In the other
  class of problems, the relative motion of the different parts of the
  separate bodies is considered; for example, the rotation of the earth
  on its axis, and the consequences of the fact that those parts of a
  body which are nearer to another body are more strongly attracted by
  it. Beginning with the first branch of the subject, the fundamental
  ideas which it is our purpose to convey are embodied in the simple
  case of only two bodies, which we may call the sun and a planet. In
  this case the two bodies really revolve round their common centre of
  gravity; but a very slight modification of the equations of motion
  reduces them to the relative motion of the planet round the sun,
  regarding the moving centre of the latter as the origin of
  co-ordinates. The motion of this centre, which arises from the
  attraction of the planet on the sun, need not be considered.

  In the actual problems of celestial mechanics three co-ordinates
  necessarily enter, leading to three differential equations and six
  equations of solution. But the general principles of the problem are
  completely exemplified with only two bodies, in which case the motion
  takes place in a fixed plane. By taking this plane, which is that of
  the orbit in which the planet performs its revolution, as the plane of
  xy, we have only two co-ordinates to consider. Let us use the
  following notation:

  x, y, the co-ordinates of the planet relative to the sun as the origin.

  M, m, the masses of the attracting bodies, sun and planet.

  r, the distance apart of the two bodies, or the radius vector of m
  relative to M. This last quantity is analytically defined by the
  equation--

    r² = x² + y²

  t, the time, reckoned from any epoch we choose.

  The differential equations which completely determine the changes in
  the co-ordinates x and y, or the motion of m relative to M, are:--

    d²x     (M + m)x
    --- = - --------
    dt²        r³

    d²y     (M + m)y
    --- = - --------
    dt²        r³

  These formulae are worthy of special attention. They are the
  expression in the language of mathematics of Newton's first two laws
  of motion. Their statement in this language may be regarded as
  perfect, because it completely and unambiguously expresses the naked
  phenomena of the motion. The equations do this without expressing any
  conception, such as that of force, not associated with the actual
  phenomena. Moreover, as a third advantage, these expressions are
  entirely free from those difficulties and ambiguities which are met
  with in every attempt to express the laws of motion in ordinary
  language. They afford yet another great advantage in that the
  derivation of the results requires only the analytic operations of the
  infinitesimal calculus.

  The power and spirit of the analytic method will be appreciated by
  showing how it expresses the relations of motion as they were
  conceived geometrically by Newton and Kepler. It is quite evident that
  Kepler's laws do not in themselves enable us to determine the actual
  motion of the planets. We must have, in addition, in the case of each
  special planet, certain specific facts, viz. the axes and eccentricity
  of the ellipse, and the position of the plane in which it lies.
  Besides these, we must have given the position of the planet in the
  orbit at some specified moment. Having these data, the position of the
  planet at any other time may be geometrically constructed by Kepler's
  laws. The third law enables us to compute the time taken by the radius
  vector to sweep over the entire area of the orbit, which is identical
  with the time of revolution. The problem of constructing successive
  radii vectores, the angles of which are measured off from the radius
  vector of the body at the original given position, is then a geometric
  one, known as Kepler's problem.

  In the analytic process these specific data, called elements of the
  orbit, appear as arbitrary constants, introduced by the process of
  integration. In a case like the present one, where there are two
  differential equations of the second order, there will be four such
  constants. The result of the integration is that the co-ordinates x
  and y and their derivatives as to the time, which express the
  position, direction of motion and speed of the planet at any moment,
  are found as functions of the four constants and of the time. Putting

    a, b, c, d,

  for the constants, the general form of the solution will be

    x = f1(a, b, c, d, t)
    y = f2(a, b, c, d, t)                (2)

  From these may be derived by differentiation as to t the velocities

    dx/dt = f'1(a, b, c, d, t) = x'
    dy/dt = f'2(a, b, c, d, t) = y'      (3)

  The symbols x' and y' are used for brevity to mean the velocities
  expressed by the differential coefficients. The arbitrary constants,
  a, b, c and d, are the elements of the orbit, or any quantities from
  which these elements can be obtained. We note that, in the actual
  process of integration, no geometric construction need enter.

  [Illustration: fig. 2.]

  Let us next consider the problem in another form. Conceive that
  instead of the orbit of the planet, there is given a position P (fig.
  2), through which the planet passed at an assigned moment, with a
  given velocity, and in a given direction, represented by the
  arrowhead. Logically these data completely determine the orbit in
  which the planet shall move, because there is only one such orbit
  passing through P, a planet moving in which would have the given
  speed. It follows that the elements of the orbit admit of
  determination when the co-ordinates of the planet at an assigned
  moment and their derivatives as to time are given. Analytically the
  elements are determined from these data by solving the four equations
  just given, regarding a, b, c and d as unknown quantities, and x, y,
  x', y' and t as given quantities. The solution of these equations
  would lead to expressions of the form

    a = [phi]1(x, y, x', y', t)
    b = [phi]2(x, y, x', y', t)          (4)
      &c.  &c.

  one for each of the elements.

  The general equations expressing the motion of a planet considered as
  a material particle round a centre of attraction lead to theorems the
  more interesting of which will now be enunciated.

  (1) The motion of such a planet may take place not only in an ellipse
  but in any curve of the second order; an ellipse, hyperbola, or
  parabola, the latter being the bounding curve between the other two. A
  body moving in a parabola or hyperbola would recede indefinitely from
  its centre of motion and never return to it. The ellipse is therefore
  the only closed orbit.

  (2) The motion takes place in accord with Kepler's laws, enunciated
  elsewhere.

  (3) _Whewell's theorem_: if a point R be taken at a distance from the
  sun equal to the major axis of the orbit of a planet and, therefore,
  at double the mean distance of the planet, the speed of the latter at
  any point is equal to the speed which a body would acquire by falling
  from the point R to the actual position of the planet. The speed of
  the latter may, therefore, be expressed as a function of its radius
  vector at the moment and of the major axis of its orbit without
  introducing any other elements into the expression. Another corollary
  is that in the case of a body moving in a parabolic orbit the velocity
  at any moment is that which would be acquired by the body in falling
  from an infinite distance to the place it occupies at the moment.

  (4) If a number of bodies are projected from any point in space with
  the same velocity, but in various directions, and subjected only to
  the attraction of the sun, they will all return to the point of
  projection at the same moment, although the orbits in which they move
  may be ever so different.

  (5) At each distance from the sun there is a certain velocity which a
  body would have if it moved in a circular orbit at that distance. If
  projected with this velocity in any direction the point of projection
  will be at the end of the minor axis of the orbit, because this is the
  only point of an ellipse of which the distance from the focus is equal
  to the semi-major axis of the curve, and therefore the only point at
  which the distance of the body from the sun is equal to its mean
  distance.

  (6) The relation between the periodic time of a planet and its mean
  distance, approximately expressed by Kepler's third law, follows very
  simply from the laws of centrifugal force. It is an elementary
  principle of mechanics that this force varies directly as the product
  of the distance of the moving body from the centre of motion into the
  square of its angular velocity. When bodies revolve at different
  distances around a centre, their velocities must be such that the
  centrifugal force of each shall be balanced by the attraction of the
  central mass, and therefore vary inversely as the square of the
  distance. If M is the central mass, n the angular velocity, and a the
  distance, the balance of the two forces is expressed by the equation

    an² = M/a²,

  whence a³n² = M, a constant.

  The periodic time varying inversely as n, this equation expresses
  Kepler's third law. This reasoning tacitly supposes the orbit to be a
  circle of radius a, and the mass of the planet to be negligible. The
  rigorous relation is expressed by a slight modification of the law.
  Putting M and m for the respective masses of the sun and planet, a for
  the semi-major axis of the orbit, and n for the mean angular motion in
  unit of time, the relation then is

    a³n² = M + m.

  What is noteworthy in this theorem is that this relation depends only
  on the sum of the masses. It follows, therefore, that were any portion
  of the mass of the sun taken from it, and added to the planet, the
  relation would be unchanged. Kepler's third law therefore expresses
  the fact that the mass of the sun is the same for all the planets, and
  deviates from the truth only to the extent that the masses of the
  latter differ from each other by quantities which are only a small
  fraction of the mass of the sun.

  _Problem of Three Bodies._--As soon as the general law of gravitation
  was fully apprehended, it became evident that, owing to the attraction
  of each planet upon all the others, the actual motion of the planets
  must deviate from their motion in an ellipse according to Kepler's
  laws. In the _Principia_ Newton made several investigations to
  determine the effects of these actions; but the geometrical method
  which he employed could lead only to rude approximations. When the
  subject was taken up by the continental mathematicians, using the
  analytical method, the question naturally arose whether the motions of
  three bodies under their mutual attraction could not be determined
  with a degree of rigour approximating to that with which Newton had
  solved the problem of two bodies. Thus arose the celebrated "problem
  of three bodies." Investigation soon showed that certain integrals
  expressing relations between the motions not only of three but of any
  number of bodies could be found. These were:--

  First, the law of the conservation of the centre of gravity. This
  expresses the general fact that whatever be the number of the bodies
  which act upon each other, their motions are so related that the
  centre of gravity of the entire system moves in a straight line with a
  constant velocity. This is expressed in three equations, one for each
  of the three rectangular co-ordinates.

  Secondly, the law of conservation of areas. This is an extension of
  Kepler's second law. Taking as the radius vector of each body the line
  from the body to the common centre of gravity of all, the sum of the
  products formed by multiplying each area described, by the mass of the
  body, remains a constant. In the language of theoretical mechanics,
  the moment of momentum of the entire system is a constant quantity.
  This law is also expressed in three equations, one for each of the
  three planes on which the areas are projected.

  Thirdly, the entire _vis viva_ of the system or, as it is now called,
  the energy, which is obtained by multiplying the mass of each body
  into half the square of its velocity, is equal to the sum of the
  quotients formed by dividing the product of every pair of the masses,
  taken two and two, by their distance apart, with the addition of a
  constant depending on the original conditions of the system. In the
  language of algebra putting m1, m2, m3, &c. for the masses of the
  bodies, r_1.2, r_1.3, r_2.3, &c. for their mutual distances apart;
  v1, v2, v3, &c., for the velocities with which they are moving at any
  moment; these quantities will continually satisfy the equation

                              m1m2    m1m3    m2m3
    ½(m1v²1 + m2v²2 + ...) = ----- + ----- + ----- + ... + a constant.
                             r_1.2   r_1.3   r_2.3

  The theorems of motion just cited are expressed by seven integrals, or
  equations expressing a law that certain functions of the variables and
  of the time remain constant. It is remarkable that although the seven
  integrals were found almost from the beginning of the investigation,
  no others have since been added; and indeed it has recently been shown
  that no others exist that can be expressed in an algebraic form. In
  the case of three bodies these do not suffice completely to define the
  motion. In this case, the problem can be attacked only by methods of
  approximation, devised so as to meet the special conditions of each
  case. The special conditions which obtain in the solar system are such
  as to make the necessary approximation theoretically possible however
  complex the process may be. These conditions are:--(1) The smallness
  of the masses of the planets in comparison with that of the sun, in
  consequence of which the orbit of each planet deviates but slightly
  from an ellipse during any one revolution; (2) the fact that the
  orbits of the planets are nearly circular, and the planes of their
  orbits but slightly inclined to each other. The result of these
  conditions is that all the quantities required admit of development in
  series proceeding according to the powers of the eccentricities and
  inclinations of the orbits, and the ratio of the masses of the several
  planets to the mass of the sun.

  _Perturbations of the Planets._--Kepler's laws do not completely
  express the motion of a planet around a central body, except when no
  force but the mutual attraction of the two bodies comes into play.
  When one or more other bodies form a part of the system, their action
  produces deviations from the elliptic motion, which are called
  _perturbations_. The problem of determining the perturbations of the
  heavenly bodies is perhaps the most complicated with which the
  mathematical astronomer has to grapple; and the forms under which it
  has to be studied are so numerous that they cannot be easily arranged
  under any one head. But there is one conception of perturbations of
  such generality and elegance that it forms the common base of all
  those methods of determining these deviations which have high
  scientific interest. This conception is embodied in the method of
  "variation of elements," originally due to J.L. Lagrange. The simplest
  method of presenting it starts with the second view of the elliptic
  motion already set forth.

  We have shown that, when the position of a planet and the direction
  and speed of its motion at a certain instant are given, the elements
  of the orbit can be determined. We have supposed this to be done at a
  certain point P of the orbit, the direction and speed being expressed
  by the variables x, y, x' and y'. Now, consider the values of these
  same variables expressing the position of the planet at a second point
  Q, and the speed with which it passes that point. With this position
  and speed the elements of the orbit can again be determined. Since the
  orbit is unchanged so long as no disturbing force acts, it follows
  that the elements determined by means of the two sets of values of the
  variables are in this case the same. In a word, although the position
  and speed of the planet and the direction of its motion are constantly
  changing, the values of the elements determined from these variables
  remain constant. This fact is fully expressed by the equations (4)
  where we have constants on one side of the equation equal to functions
  of the variables on the other. Functions of the variables possessing
  this property of remaining constant are termed _integrals_.

  Now let the planet be subjected to any force additional to that of the
  sun's attraction,--say to the attraction of another planet. To fix the
  ideas let us suppose that the additional attraction is only an impulse
  received at the moment of passing the point P. The first effect will
  evidently be to change either the velocity or the direction in which
  the planet is moving at the moment, or both. If, with the changed
  velocity we again compute the elements they will be different from the
  former elements. But, if the impulse is not repeated, these new
  elements will again remain invariable. If repeated, the second impulse
  will again change the elements, and so on indefinitely. It follows
  that, if we go on computing the elements a, b, c, d from the actual
  values of x, y, x' and y', at each moment when the planet is subject
  to the attraction of another body, they will no longer be invariable,
  but will slowly vary from day to day and year to year. These ever
  varying elements represent an ever varying elliptic orbit,--not an
  orbit which the planet actually describes through its whole course,
  but an ideal one in which it is moving at each instant, and which
  continually adjusts itself to the actual motion of the planet at the
  instant. This is called the _osculating_ orbit.

  The essential principle of Lagrange's elegant method consists in
  determining the variations of this osculating ellipse, the
  co-ordinates and velocities of the planet being ignored in the
  determination. This may be done because, since the elements and
  co-ordinates completely determine each other, we may concentrate our
  attention on either, ignoring the other. The reason for taking the
  elements as the variables is that they vary very slowly, a property
  which facilitates their determination, since the variations may be
  treated as small quantities, of which the squares and products may be
  neglected in a first solution. In a second solution the squares and
  products may be taken account of, and so on as far as necessary.

  If the problem is viewed from a synthetic point of view, the stages of
  its solution are as follows. We first conceive of the planets as
  moving in invariable elliptic orbits, and thus obtain approximate
  expressions for their positions at any moment. With these expressions
  we express their mutual action, or their pull upon each other at any
  and every moment. This pull determines the variations of the ideal
  elements. Knowing these variations it becomes possible to represent by
  integration the value of the elements as algebraic expressions
  containing the time, and the elements with which we started. But the
  variations thus determined will not be rigorously exact, because the
  pull from which they arise has been determined on the supposition that
  the planets are moving in unvarying orbits, whereas the actual pull
  depends on the actual position of the planets. Another approximation
  is, therefore, to be made, when necessary, by correcting the
  expression of the pull through taking account of the variations of the
  elements already determined, which will give a yet nearer
  approximation to the truth. In theory these successive approximations
  may be carried as far as we please, but in practice the labour of
  executing each approximation is so great that we are obliged to stop
  when the solution is so near the truth that the outstanding error is
  less than that of the best observations. Even this degree of precision
  may be impracticable in the more complex cases.

  The results which are required to compare with observations are not
  merely the elements, but the co-ordinates. When the varying elements
  are known these are computed by the equations (2) because, from the
  nature of the algebraic relations, the slowly varying elements are
  continuously determined by the equations (4), which express the same
  relations between the elements and the variables as do the equations
  (2) and (3). This method is, therefore, in form at least, completely
  rigorous. There are some cases in which it may be applied unchanged.
  But commonly it proves to be extremely long and cumbrous, and
  modifications have to be resorted to. Of these modifications the most
  valuable is one conceived by P.A. Hansen. A certain mean elliptic
  orbit, as near as possible to the actual varying orbit of the planet,
  is taken. In this orbit a certain fictitious planet is supposed to
  move according to the law of elliptic motion. Comparing the longitudes
  of the actual and the fictitious planet the former will sometimes be
  ahead of the latter and sometimes behind it. But in every case, if at
  a certain time t, the actual planet has a certain longitude, it is
  certain that at a very short interval dt before or after t, the
  fictitious planet will have this same longitude. What Hansen's method
  does is to determine a correction dt such that, being applied to the
  actual time t, the longitude of the fictitious planet computed for the
  time t + dt, will give the longitude of the true planet at the time t.
  By a number of ingenious devices Hansen developed methods by which dt
  could be determined. The computations are, as a general rule, simpler,
  and the algebraic expressions less complex, than when the computations
  of the longitude itself are calculated. Although the longitude of the
  fictitious planet at the fictitious time is then equal to that of the
  true planet at the true time, their radii vectores will not be
  strictly equal. Hansen, therefore, shows how the radius vector is
  corrected so as to give that of the true planet.

  In all that precedes we have considered only two variables as
  determining the position of the planet, the latter being supposed to
  move in a plane. Although this is true when there are any number of
  bodies moving in the same plane, the fact is that the planets move in
  slightly different planes. Hence the position of the plane of the
  orbit of each planet is continually changing in consequence of their
  mutual action. The problem of determining the changes is, however,
  simpler than others in perturbations. The method is again that of the
  variation of elements. The position and velocity being given in all
  three co-ordinates, a certain osculating plane is determined for each
  instant in which the planet is moving at that instant. This plane
  remains invariable so long as no third body acts; when it does act the
  position of the plane changes very slowly, continually rotating round
  the radius vector of the planet as an instantaneous axis of rotation.

  _Secular and Periodic Variations._--When, following the preceding
  method, the variations of the elements are expressed in terms of the
  time, they are found to be of two classes, _periodic_ and _secular_.
  The first depend on the mean longitudes of the planets, and always
  tend back to their original values when the planets return to their
  original positions in their orbits. The others are, at least through
  long periods of time, continually progressive.

  A luminous idea of the nature of these two classes of variation may be
  gained by conceiving of the motion of a ship, floating on an ocean
  affected by a long ground swell. In consequence of the swell, the ship
  is continually pitching in a somewhat irregular way, the oscillations
  up and down being sometimes great and sometimes small. An observer on
  board of her would notice no motion except this. But, suppose the tide
  to be rising. Then, by continued observation, extended over an hour or
  more, it will be found that, in the general average, the ship is
  gradually rising, so that two different kinds of motion are
  superimposed on each other. The effect of the rising tide is in the
  nature of a secular variation, while the pitching is periodic.

  But the analogy does not end here. If the progressive rise of the ship
  be watched for six hours or more, it will be found gradually to cease
  and reverse its direction. That is to say, making abstraction of the
  pitching, the ship is slowly rising and falling in a total period of
  nearly twelve hours, while superimposed upon this slow motion is a
  more rapid motion due to the waves. It is thus with the motions of the
  planets going through their revolutions. Each orbit continually
  changes its form and position, sometimes in one direction and
  sometimes in another. But when these changes are averaged through
  years and centuries it is found that the average orbit has a secular
  variation which, for a number of centuries, may appear as a very slow
  progressive change in one direction only. But when this change is more
  fully investigated, it is found to be really periodic, so that after
  thousands, tens of thousands, or hundreds of thousands of years, its
  direction will be reversed and so on continually, like the rising and
  falling tide. The orbits thus present themselves to us in the words of
  a distinguished writer as "Great clocks of eternity which beat ages as
  ours beat seconds."

  The periodic variations can be represented algebraically as the
  resultant of a series of harmonic motions in the following way: Let L
  be an angle which is increasing uniformly with the time, and let n be
  its rate of increase. We put L0 for its value at the moment from which
  the time is reckoned. The general expression for the angle will then
  be

    L = nt + L0.

  Such an angle continually goes through the round of 360° in a definite
  period. For example, if the daily motion is 5°, and we take the day as
  the unit of time, the round will be completed in 72 days, and the
  angle will continually go through the value which it had 72 days
  before. Let us now consider an equation of the form

    U = a sin (nt + L0).

  The value of U will continually oscillate between the extreme values
  +a and -a, going through a series of changes in the same period in
  which the angle nt + L0 goes through a revolution. In this case the
  variation will be simply periodic.

  The value of any element of the planet's motion will generally be
  represented by the sum of an infinite series of such periodic
  quantities, having different periods. For example

    U = a sin (nt + L0) + b sin (mt + L1) + c sin (kt + L2) &c.

  In this case the motion of U, while still periodic, is seemingly
  irregular, being much like that of a pitching ship, which has no one
  unvarying period.

  In the problems of celestial mechanics the angles within the
  parentheses are represented by sums or differences of multiples of the
  mean longitudes of the planets as they move round their orbits. If l
  be the mean longitude of the planet whose motion we are considering,
  and l' that of the attracting planet affecting it, the periodic
  inequalities of the elements as well as of the co-ordinates of the
  attracted planet, may be represented by an infinite series of terms
  like the following:--

    a sin (l' - l) + b sin (2l' - l) + c sin (l' - 2l) + &c.

  Here the coefficients of l and l' may separately take all integral
  values, though as a general rule the coefficients a, b, c, &c.
  diminish rapidly when these coefficients become large, so that only
  small values have to be considered.

  [Illustration: Fig. 3.]

  The most interesting kind of periodic inequalities are those known as
  "terms of long period." A general idea both of their nature and of
  their cause will be gained by taking as a special case one celebrated
  in the history of the subject--the great inequality between Jupiter
  and Saturn. We begin by showing what the actual fact is in the case of
  these two planets. Let fig. 3 represent the two orbits, the sun being
  at C. We know that the period of Jupiter is nearly twelve years, and
  that of Saturn a little less than thirty years. It will be seen that
  these numbers are nearly in the ratio of 2 to 5. It follows that the
  motions of the mean longitudes are nearly in the same proportion
  reversed. The annual motion of Jupiter is nearly 30°, that of Saturn a
  little more than 12°. Let us now consider the effect of this relation
  upon the configurations and relations of the two planets. Let the line
  CJ represent the common direction of the two planets from the sun when
  they are in conjunction, and let us follow the motions until they
  again come into conjunction. This will occur along a line CR1, making
  an angle of nearly 240° with CJ. At this point Saturn will have moved
  240° and Jupiter an entire revolution + 240°, making 600°. These two
  motions, it will be seen, are in the proportion 5:2. The next
  conjunction will take place along CS1, and the third after the initial
  one will again take place near the original position JQ, Jupiter
  having made five revolutions and Saturn two.

  The result of these repetitions is that, during a number of
  revolutions, the special mutual actions of the two planets at these
  three points of their orbits repeat themselves, while the actions
  corresponding to the three intermediate arcs are wanting. Thus it
  happens that if the mutual actions are balanced through a period of a
  few revolutions only there is a small residuum of forces corresponding
  to the three regions in question, which repeats itself in the same
  way, and which, if it continued indefinitely, would entirely change
  the forms of the two orbits. But the actual mean motions deviate
  slightly from the ratio 2:5, and we have next to show how this
  deviation results in an ultimate balancing of the forces. The annual
  mean motions, with the corresponding combinations, are as follows:--

    Jupiter:--n  = 30°.349043
     Saturn:--n' = 12°.221133
             2n  = 60°.69809
             5n' = 61°.10567
       5n' - 2n  =  0°.40758

  If we make a more accurate computation of the conjunctions from these
  data, we shall find that, in the general mean, the consecutive
  conjunctions take place when each planet has moved through an entire
  number of revolutions + 242.7°. It follows that the third conjunction
  instead of occurring exactly along the line CQ1 occurs along CQ2,
  making an angle of nearly 8° with CQ1. The successive conjunctions
  following will be along CR2, CS2, CQ3, &c., the law of progression
  being obvious.

  The balancing of the series of forces will not be complete until the
  respective triplets of conjunctions have filled up the entire space
  between them. This will occur when the angle whose annual motion is
  5n' - 2n has gone through 360°. From the preceding value of 5n' - 2n
  we see that this will require a little more than 883 years. The result
  of the continued action of the two planets upon each other is that
  during half of this period the motion of one planet is constantly
  retarded and of the other constantly accelerated, while during the
  other half the effects are reversed. There is thus in the case of each
  planet an oscillation of the mean longitude which increases it and
  then diminishes it to its original value at the end of the period of
  883 years.

  The longitudes, latitudes and radii vectores of a planet, being
  algebraically expressed as the sum of an infinite periodic series of
  the kind we have been describing, it follows that the problem of
  finding their co-ordinates at any moment is solved by computing these
  expressions. This is facilitated by the construction of tables by
  means of which the co-ordinates can be computed at any time. Such
  tables are used in the offices of the national Ephemerides to
  construct ephemerides of the several planets, showing their exact
  positions in the sky from day to day.

  We pass now to the second branch of celestial mechanics viz. that in
  which the planets are no longer considered as particles, but as
  rotating bodies of which the dimensions are to be taken into account.
  Such a body, in free space, not acted on by any force except the
  attraction of its several parts, will go on rotating for ever in an
  invariable direction. But, in consequence of the centrifugal force
  generated by the rotation, it assumes a spheroidal form, the
  equatorial regions bulging out. Such a form we all know to be that of
  the earth and of the planets rotating on their axes. Let us study the
  effect of this deviation from the spherical form upon the attraction
  exercised by a distant body.

  [Illustration: Fig. 4.]

  We begin with the special case of the earth as acted upon by the sun
  and moon. Let fig. 4 represent a section of the earth through its axis
  AB, ECQ being a diameter of the equator. Let the dotted lines show the
  direction of the distant attracting body. The point E, being more
  distant than C, will be attracted with less force, while Q will be
  attracted with a greater force than will the centre C. Were the force
  equal on every point of the earth it would have no influence on its
  rotation, but would simply draw its whole mass toward the attracting
  body. It is therefore only the _difference_ of the forces on different
  parts of the earth that affects the rotation.

  Let us, therefore, divide the attracting forces at each point into two
  parts, one the average force, which we may call F, and which for our
  purpose may be regarded as equal to the force acting at C; the others
  the residual forces which we must superimpose upon the average force F
  in order that the combination may be equal to the actual force. It is
  clear that at Q this residual force as represented by the arrow will
  be in the same direction as the actual force. But at E, since the
  actual force is less than F, the residual force must tend to diminish
  F, and must, therefore, act toward the right, as shown by the arrow.
  These residual forces tend to make the whole earth turn round the
  centre C in a clockwise direction. If nothing modified this tendency
  the result would be to bring the points E and Q into the dotted lines
  of the attraction. In other words the equator would be drawn into
  coincidence with the ecliptic. Here, however, the same action comes
  into play, which keeps a rotating top from falling over. (See
  GYROSCOPE and MECHANICS.) For the same reason as in the case of the
  gyroscope the actual motion of the earth's axis is at right angles to
  the line joining the earth and the attracting centre, and without
  going into the details of the mathematical processes involved, we may
  say that the ultimate mean effect will be to cause the pole P of the
  earth to move at right angles to the circle joining it to the pole of
  the ecliptic. Were the position of the latter invariable, the
  celestial pole would move round it in a circle. Actually the curve in
  which it moves is nearly a circle; but the distance varies slightly
  owing to the minute secular variation in the position of the ecliptic,
  caused by the action of the planets. This motion of the celestial pole
  results in a corresponding revolution of the equinox around the
  celestial sphere. The rate of motion is slightly variable from century
  to century owing to the secular motion of the plane of the ecliptic.
  Its period, with the present rate of motion, would be about 26,000
  years, but the actual period is slightly indeterminate from the cause
  just mentioned.

  The residual force just described is not limited to the case of an
  ellipsoidal body. It will be seen that the reasoning applies to the
  case of any one body or system of bodies, the dimensions of which are
  not regarded as infinitely small compared with the distance of the
  attracting body. In all such cases the residual forces virtually tend
  to draw those portions of the body nearest the attracting centre
  toward the latter, and those opposite the attracting centre away from
  it. Thus we have a tide-producing force tending to deform the body,
  the action of which is of the same nature as the force producing
  precession. It is of interest to note that, very approximately, this
  deforming force varies inversely as the cube of the distance of the
  attracting body.

  The action of the sun upon the satellites of the several planets and
  the effects of this action are of the same general nature. For the
  same reason that the residual forces virtually act in opposite
  directions upon the nearer and more distant portions of a planet they
  will virtually act in the case of a satellite. When the latter is
  between its primary and the sun, the attraction of the latter tends to
  draw the satellite away from the primary. When the satellite is in the
  opposite direction from the sun, the same action tends to draw the
  primary away from the satellite. In both cases, relative to the
  primary, the action is the same. When the satellite is in quadrature
  the convergence of the lines of attraction toward the centre of the
  sun tends to bring the two bodies together. When the orbit of the
  satellite is inclined to that of the primary planet round the sun, the
  action brings about a change in the plane of the orbit represented by
  a rotation round an axis perpendicular to the plane of the orbit of
  the primary. If we conceive a pole to each of these orbits, determined
  by the points in which lines perpendicular to their planes intersect
  the celestial sphere, the pole of the satellite orbit will revolve
  around the pole of the planetary orbit precisely as the pole of the
  earth does around the pole of the ecliptic, the inclination of the two
  orbits remaining unchanged.

  If a planet rotates on its axis so rapidly as to have a considerable
  ellipticity, and if it has satellites revolving very near the plane of
  the equator, the combined actions of the sun and of the equatorial
  protuberances may be such that the whole system will rotate almost as
  if the planes of revolution of the satellites were solidly fixed to
  the plane of the equator. This is the case with the seven inner
  satellites of Saturn. The orbits of these bodies have a large
  inclination, nearly 27°, to the plane of the planet's orbit. The
  action of the sun alone would completely throw them out of these
  planes as each satellite orbit would rotate independently; but the
  effect of the mutual action is to keep all of the planes in close
  coincidence with the plane of the planet's equator.

  _Literature._--The modern methods of celestial mechanics may be
  considered to begin with Joseph Louis Lagrange, whose theory of the
  variation of elements is developed in his _Mécanique analytique_. The
  practical methods of computing perturbations of the planets and
  satellites were first exhaustively developed by Pierre Simon Laplace
  in his _Mécanique céleste_. The only attempt since the publication of
  this great work to develop the various theories involved on a uniform
  plan and mould them into a consistent whole is that of de Pontécoulant
  in _Théorie analytique du système du monde_ (1829-46, Paris). An
  approximation to such an attempt is that of F.F. Tisserand in his
  _Traité de mécanique céleste_ (4 vols., Paris). This work contains a
  clear and excellent résumé of the methods which have been devised by
  the leading investigators from the time of Lagrange until the present,
  and thus forms the most encyclopaedic treatise to which the student
  can refer.

  Works less comprehensive than this are necessarily confined to the
  elements of the subject, to the development of fundamental principles
  and general methods, or to details of special branches. An elementary
  treatise on the subject is F.R. Moulton's _Introduction to Celestial
  Mechanics_ (London, 1902). Other works with the same general object
  are H.A. Resal, _Mécanique céleste_; and O.F. Dziobek, _Theorie der
  Planetenbewegungen_. The most complete and systematic development of
  the general principles of the subject, from the point of view of the
  modern mathematician, is found in J.H. Poincaré, _Les Méthodes
  nouvelles de la mécanique céleste_ (3 vols., Paris, 1899, 1892, 1893).
  Of another work of Poincaré, _Leçons de mécanique céleste_, the first
  volume appeared in 1905.

_Practical Astronomy._

Practical Astronomy, taken in its widest sense, treats of the
instruments by which our knowledge of the heavenly bodies is acquired,
the principles underlying their use, and the methods by which these
principles are practically applied. Our knowledge of these bodies is of
necessity derived through the medium of the light which they emit; and
it is the development and applications of the laws of light which have
made possible the additions to our stock of such knowledge since the
middle of the 19th century.

  At the base of every system of astronomical observation is the law
  that, in the voids of space, a ray of light moves in a right line. The
  fundamental problem of practical astronomy is that of determining by
  measurement the co-ordinates of the heavenly bodies as already
  defined. Of the three co-ordinates, the radius vector does not admit
  of direct measurement, and must be inferred by a combination of
  indirect measurements and physical theories. The other two
  co-ordinates, which define the direction of a body, admit of direct
  measurement on principles applied in the construction and use of
  astronomical instruments.

  In the first system of co-ordinates already described the fundamental
  axis is the vertical line or direction of gravity at the point of
  observation. This is not the direction of gravity proper, or of the
  earth's attraction, but the resultant of this attraction combined with
  the centrifugal force due to the earth's rotation on its axis. The
  most obvious method of realizing this direction is by the plumb-line.
  In our time, however, this appliance is replaced by either of two
  others, which admit of much more precise application. These are the
  basin of mercury and the spirit-level. The surface of a liquid at rest
  is necessarily perpendicular to the direction of gravity, and
  therefore horizontal. Considered as a curved surface, concentric with
  the earth, a tangent plane to such a surface is the plane of the
  horizon. The problem of measuring from an axis perpendicular to this
  plane is solved on the principle that the incident and reflected rays
  of light make equal angles with the perpendicular to a reflecting
  surface. It follows that if PO (fig. 5) is the direction of a ray,
  either from a heavenly body or from a terrestrial point, impinging at
  O upon the surface of quicksilver, and reflected in the direction OR,
  the vertical line is the bisector OZ, of the angle POR. If the point P
  is so adjusted over the quicksilver that the ray is reflected back on
  its own path, P and R lying on the same line above O, then we know
  that the line PO is truly vertical. The zenith-distance of an object
  is the angle which the ray of light from it makes with the vertical
  direction thus defined.

  [Illustration: FIG. 5.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 6.]

  To show the principle involved in the spirit-level let MN (fig. 6) be
  the tube of such a level, fixed to an axis OZ on which it may revolve.
  If this axis is so adjusted that in the course of a revolution around
  it the bubble of the level undergoes no change of position, we know
  that the axis is truly vertical. Any slight deviation from verticality
  is shown by the motion of the bubble during the revolution, which can
  be measured and allowed for. The level may not be actually attached to
  an axis, a revolution of 180° being effected round an imaginary
  vertical axis by turning the level end for end. The motion of the
  bubble then measures double the inclination of this imaginary axis, or
  the deviation of a cylinder on which the level may rest from
  horizontality.

  [Illustration: FIG. 7.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 8.]

  The problem of determining the zenith distance of a celestial object
  now reduces itself to that of measuring the angle between the
  direction of the object and the direction of the vertical line
  realized in one of these ways. This measurement is effected by a
  combination of two instruments, the telescope and the graduated
  circle. Let OF (fig. 7) be a section of the telescope, MN being its
  object glass. Let the parallel dotted lines represent rays of light
  emanating from the object to be observed, which, for our purpose, we
  regard as infinitely distant, a star for example. These rays come to a
  focus at a point F lying in the focal plane of the telescope. In this
  plane are a pair of cross threads or spider lines which, as the
  observer looks into the telescope, are seen as AB and CD (fig. 8). If
  the telescope is so pointed that the image of the star is seen in
  coincidence with the cross threads, as represented in fig. 8, then we
  know that the star is exactly in the line of sight of the telescope,
  defined as the line joining the centre of the object glass, and the
  point of intersection of the cross threads. If the telescope is moved
  around so that the images of two distant points are successively
  brought into coincidence with the cross threads, we know that the
  angle between the directions of these points is equal to that through
  which the telescope has been turned. This angle is measured by means
  of a graduated circle, rigidly attached to the tube of the telescope
  in a plane parallel to the line of sight. When the telescope is turned
  in this plane, the angular motion of the line of sight is equal to
  that through which the circle has turned.

  Stripped of all unnecessary adjuncts, and reduced to a geometric form,
  the ideal method by which the zenith distance of a heavenly body is
  determined by the combination which we have described is as
  follows:--Let OP (fig. 9) be the direction of a celestial body at
  which a telescope, supplied with a graduating circle, is pointed. Let
  OZ be an axis, as nearly vertical as it can easily be set, round which
  the entire instrument may revolve through 180°. After the image of
  the body is brought into coincidence with the cross threads, the
  instrument is turned through 180° on the axis, which results in the
  line of sight of the telescope pointing in a certain direction OQ,
  determined by the condition QOZ = ZOP. The telescope is then a second
  time pointed at the object by being moved through the angle QOP.
  Either of the angles QOZ and ZOP is then one half that through which
  the telescope has been turned, which may be measured by a graduated
  circle, and which is the zenith distance of the object measured from
  the direction of the axis OZ. This axis may not be exactly vertical.
  Its deviation from the vertical line is determined by the motion of
  the bubble of a spirit-level rigidly attached either to the axis, or
  to the telescope. Applying this deviation to the measured arc, the
  true zenith distance of the body is found.

  [Illustration: FIG. 9.]

  When the basin of quicksilver is used, the telescope, either before or
  after being directed toward P, is pointed directly downwards, so that
  the observer mounting above it looks through it into the reflecting
  surface. He then adjusts the instrument so that the cross threads
  coincide with their images reflected from the surface of the
  quicksilver. The angular motion of the telescope in passing from this
  position to that when the celestial object is in the line of sight is
  the distance (ND) of the body from the nadir. Subtracting 90° from
  (ND) gives the altitude; and subtracting (ND) from 180° gives the
  zenith distance.

  In the measurement of equatorial co-ordinates, the polar distance is
  determined in an analogous way. We determine the apparent position of
  an object near the pole on the celestial sphere at any moment, and
  again at another moment, twelve hours later, when, by the diurnal
  motion, it has made half a revolution. The angle through the celestial
  pole, between these two positions, is double the polar distance. The
  pole is the point midway between them. This being ascertained by one
  or more stars near it, may be used to determine by direct measurements
  the polar distances of other bodies.

  The preceding methods apply mainly to the latitudinal co-ordinate. To
  measure the difference between the longitudinal co-ordinates of two
  objects by means of a graduated circle the instruments must turn on an
  axis parallel to the principal axis of the system of co-ordinates, and
  the plane of the graduated circle must be at right angles to that
  axis, and, therefore, parallel to the principal co-ordinate plane. The
  telescope, in order that it may be pointed in any direction, must
  admit of two motions, one round the principal axis, and the other
  round an axis at right angles to it. By these two motions the
  instrument may be pointed first at one of the objects and then at the
  other. The motion of the graduated circle in passing from one pointing
  to the other is the measure of the difference between the longitudinal
  co-ordinates of the two objects.

  In the equatorial system this co-ordinate (the right ascension) is
  measured in a different way, by making the rotating earth perform the
  function of a graduated circle. The unceasing diurnal motion of the
  image of any heavenly body relative to the cross threads of a
  telescope makes a direct accurate measure of any co-ordinate except
  the declination almost impossible. Before the position of a star can
  be noted, it has passed away from the cross threads. This troublesome
  result is utilized and made a means of measurement. Right ascensions
  are now determined, not by measuring the angle between one star and
  another, but, by noting the time between the transits of successive
  stars over the meridian. The difference between these times, when
  reduced to an angle, is the difference of the right ascensions of the
  stars. The principle is the same as that by which the distance between
  two stations may be determined by the time required for a train moving
  at a uniform known speed to pass from one station to the other. The
  uniform speed of the diurnal motion is 15° per hour. We have already
  mentioned that in astronomical practice right ascensions are expressed
  in time, so that no multiplication by 15 is necessary.

  Measures made on the various systems which we have described give the
  apparent direction of a celestial object as seen by the observer. But
  this is not the true direction, because the ray of light from the
  object undergoes refraction in passing through the atmosphere. It is
  therefore necessary to correct the observation for this effect. This
  is one of the most troublesome problems in astronomy because, owing to
  the ever varying density of the atmosphere, arising from differences
  of temperature, and owing to the impossibility of determining the
  temperature with entire precision at any other point than that
  occupied by the observer, the amount of refraction must always be more
  or less uncertain. The complexity of the problem will be seen by
  reflecting that the temperature of the air inside the telescope is not
  without its effect. This temperature may be and commonly is somewhat
  different from that of the observing room, which, again, is commonly
  higher than the temperature of the air outside. The uncertainty thus
  arising in the amount of the refraction is least near the zenith, but
  increases more and more as the horizon is approached.

  The result of astronomical observations which is ordinarily wanted is
  not the direction of an object from the observer, but from the centre
  of the earth. Thus a reduction for parallax is required. Having
  effected this reduction, and computed the correction to be applied to
  the observation in order to eliminate all known errors to which the
  instrument is liable, the work of the practical astronomer is
  completed.

  The instruments used in astronomical research are described under
  their several names. The following are those most used in
  astrometry:--

  The equatorial telescope (q.v.) is an instrument which can be directed
  to any point in the sky, and which derives its appellation from its
  being mounted on an axis parallel to that of the earth. By revolving
  on this axis it follows a star in its diurnal motion, so that the star
  is kept in the field of view notwithstanding that motion.

  Next in extent of use are the transit instrument and the meridian
  circle, which are commonly united in a single instrument, the transit
  circle (q.v.), known also as the meridian circle. This instrument
  moves only in the plane of the meridian on a horizontal east and west
  axis, and is used to determine the right ascensions and declinations
  of stars. These two instruments or combinations are a necessary part
  of the outfit of every important observatory. An adjunct of prime
  importance, which is necessary to their use, is an accurate clock,
  beating seconds.

  _Use of Photography._--Before the development of photography, there
  was no possible way of making observations upon the heavenly bodies
  except by the eye. Since the middle of the 19th century the system of
  photographing the heavenly bodies has been introduced, step by step,
  so that it bids fair to supersede eye observations in many of the
  determinations of astronomy. (See PHOTOGRAPHY: _Celestial_.)

  The field of practical astronomy includes an extension which may be
  regarded as making astronomical science in a certain sense universal.
  The science is concerned with the heavenly bodies. The earth on which
  we live is, to all intents and purposes, one of these bodies, and, so
  far as its relations to the heavens are concerned, must be included in
  astronomy. The processes of measuring great portions of the earth, and
  of determining geographical positions, require both astronomical
  observations proper, and determinations made with instruments similar
  to those of astronomy. Hence geodesy may be regarded as a branch of
  practical astronomy.     (S. N.)

_History of Astronomy._

  Origin of the science.

A practical acquaintance with the elements of astronomy is indispensable
to the conduct of human life. Hence it is most widely diffused among
uncivilized peoples, whose existence depends upon immediate and
unvarying submission to the dictates of external nature. Having no
clocks, they regard instead the face of the sky; the stars serve them
for almanacs; they hunt and fish, they sow and reap in correspondence
with the recurrent order of celestial appearances. But these, to the
untutored imagination, present a mystical, as well as a mechanical
aspect; and barbaric familiarity with the heavens developed at an early
age, through the promptings of superstition, into a fixed system of
observation. In China, Egypt and Babylonia, strength and continuity were
lent to this native tendency by the influence of a centralized
authority; considerable proficiency was attained in the arts of
observation; and from millennial stores of accumulated data, empirical
rules were deduced by which the scope of prediction was widened and its
accuracy enhanced. But no genuine science of astronomy was founded until
the Greeks sublimed experience into theory.

  Chinese astronomy.

Already, in the third millennium B.C., equinoxes and solstices were
determined in China by means of culminating stars. This is known from
the orders promulgated by the emperor Yao about 2300 B.C., as recorded
in the _Shu Chung_, a collection of documents antique in the time of
Confucius (550-478 B.C.). And Yao was merely the renovator of a system
long previously established. The _Shu Chung_ further relates the tragic
fate of the official astronomers, Hsi and Ho, put to death for
neglecting to perform the rites customary during an eclipse of the sun,
identified by Professor S.E. Russell[1] with a partial obscuration
visible in northern China 2136 B.C. The date cannot be far wrong, and it
is by far the earliest assignable to an event of the kind. There is,
however, no certainty that the Chinese were then capable of predicting
eclipses. They were, on the other hand, probably acquainted, a couple
of millenniums before Meton gave it his name, with the nineteen-year
cycle, by which solar and lunar years were harmonized;[2] they
immemorially made observations in the meridian; regulated time by
water-clocks, and used measuring instruments of the nature of armillary
spheres and quadrants. In or near 1100 B.C., Chou Kung, an able
mathematician, determined with surprising accuracy the obliquity of the
ecliptic; but his attempts to estimate the sun's distance failed
hopelessly as being grounded on belief in the flatness of the earth.
From of old, in China, circles were divided into 365¼ parts, so that the
sun described daily one Chinese degree; and the equator began to be
employed as a line of reference, concurrently with the ecliptic,
probably in the second century B.C. Both circles, too, were marked by
star-groups more or less clearly designated and defined. Cometary
records of a vague kind go back in China to 2296 B.C.; they are
intelligible and trustworthy from 611 B.C. onward. Two instruments
constructed at the time of Kublai Khan's accession in 1280 were still
extant at Peking in 1881. They were provided with large graduated
circles adapted for measurements of declination and right ascension, and
prove the Chinese to have anticipated by at least three centuries some
of Tycho Brahe's most important inventions.[3] The native astronomy was
finally superseded in the 17th century by the scientific teachings of
Jesuit missionaries from Europe.

  Egyptian astronomy.

Astrolatry was, in Egypt, the prelude to astronomy. The stars were
observed that they might be duly worshipped. The importance of their
heliacal risings, or first visible appearances at dawn, for the purposes
both of practical life and of ritual observance, caused them to be
systematically noted; the length of the year was accurately fixed in
connexion with the annually recurring Nile-flood; while the curiously
precise orientation of the Pyramids affords a lasting demonstration of
the high degree of technical skill in watching the heavens attained in
the third millennium B.C. The constellational system in vogue among the
Egyptians appears to have been essentially of native origin; but they
contributed little or nothing to the genuine progress of astronomy.

  Babylonian astronomy.

With the Babylonians the case was different, although their science
lacked the vital principle of growth imparted to it by their successors.
From them the Greeks derived their first notions of astronomy. They
copied the Babylonian asterisms, appropriated Babylonian knowledge of
the planets and their courses, and learned to predict eclipses by means
of the "Saros." This is a cycle of 18 years 11 days, or 223 lunations,
discovered at an unknown epoch in Chaldaea, at the end of which the moon
very nearly returns to her original position with regard as well to the
sun as to her own nodes and perigee. There is no getting back to the
beginning of astronomy by the shores of the Euphrates. Records dating
from the reign of Sargon of Akkad (3800 B.C.) imply that even then the
varying aspects of the sky had been long under expert observation. Thus
early, there is reason to suppose, the star-groups with which we are now
familiar began to be formed. They took shape most likely, not through
one stroke of invention, but incidentally, as legends developed and
astrological persuasions became defined.[4] The zodiacal series in
particular seem to have been reformed and reconstructed at wide
intervals of time (see ZODIAC). Virgo, for example, is referred by P.
Jensen, on the ground of its harvesting associations, to the fourth
millennium B.C., while Aries (according to F.K. Ginzel) was interpolated
at a comparatively recent time. In the main, however, the constellations
transmitted to the West from Babylonia by Aratus and Eudoxus must have
been arranged very much in their present order about 2800 B.C. E.W.
Maunder's argument to this effect is unanswerable.[5] For the space of
the southern sky left blank of stellar emblazonments was necessarily
centred on the pole; and since the pole shifts among the stars through
the effects of precession by a known annual amount, the ascertainment of
any former place for it virtually fixes the epoch. It may then be taken
as certain that the heavens described by Aratus in 270 B.C. represented
approximately observations made some 2500 years earlier in or near north
latitude 40°.

In the course of ages, Babylonian astronomy, purified from the
astrological taint, adapted itself to meet the most refined needs of
civil life. The decipherment and interpretation by the learned Jesuits,
Fathers Epping and Strassmeier, of a number of clay tablets preserved in
the British Museum, have supplied detailed knowledge of the methods
practised in Mesopotamia in the 2nd century B.C.[6] They show no trace
of Greek influence, and were doubtless the improved outcome of an
unbroken tradition. How protracted it had been, can be in a measure
estimated from the length of the revolutionary cycles found for the
planets. The Babylonian computers were not only aware that Venus returns
in almost exactly eight years to a given starting-point in the sky, but
they had established similar periodic relations in 46, 59, 70 and 83
years severally for Mercury, Saturn, Mars and Jupiter. They were
accordingly able to fix in advance the approximate positions of these
objects with reference to ecliptical stars which served as fiducial
points for their determination. In the Ephemerides published year by
year, the times of new moon were given, together with the calculated
intervals to the first visibility of the crescent, from which the
beginning of each month was reckoned; the dates and circumstances of
solar and lunar eclipses were predicted; and due information was
supplied as to the forthcoming heliacal risings and settings,
conjunctions and oppositions of the planets. The Babylonians knew of the
inequality in the daily motion of the sun, but misplaced by 10° the
perigee of his orbit. Their sidereal year was 4½^m too long,[7] and they
kept the ecliptic stationary among the stars, making no allowance for
the shifting of the equinoxes. The striking discovery, on the other
hand, has been made by the Rev. F.X. Kugler[8] that the various periods
underlying their lunar predictions were identical with those heretofore
believed to have been independently arrived at by Hipparchus, who
accordingly must be held to have borrowed from Chaldaea the lengths of
the synodic, sidereal, anomalistic and draconitic months.

  Greek astronomy. Thales.

  Pythagoras.

  Heraclides.

A steady flow of knowledge from East to West began in the 7th century
B.C. A Babylonian sage named Berossus founded a school about 640 B.C. in
the island of Cos, and perhaps counted Thales of Miletus (c. 639-548)
among his pupils. The famous "eclipse of Thales" in 585 B.C. has not, it
is true, been authenticated by modern research;[9] yet the story told by
Herodotus appears to intimate that a knowledge of the Saros, and of the
forecasting facilities connected with it, was possessed by the Ionian
sage. Pythagoras of Samos (fl. 540-510 B.C.) learned on his travels in
Egypt and the East to identify the morning and evening stars, to
recognize the obliquity of the ecliptic, and to regard the earth as a
sphere freely poised in space. The tenet of its axial movement was held
by many of his followers--in an obscure form by Philolaus of Crotona
after the middle of the 5th century B.C., and more explicitly by
Ecphantus and Hicetas of Syracuse (4th century B.C.), and by Heraclides
of Pontus. Heraclides, who became a disciple of Plato in 360 B.C.,
taught in addition that the sun, while circulating round the earth, was
the centre of revolution to Venus and Mercury.[10] A genuine
heliocentric system, developed by Aristarchus of Samos (fl. 280-264
B.C.), was described by Archimedes in his _Arenarius_, only to be set
aside with disapproval. The long-lived conception of a series of
crystal spheres, acting as the vehicles of the heavenly bodies, and
attuned to divine harmonies, seems to have originated with Pythagoras
himself.

  Eudoxus.

The first mathematical theory of celestial appearances was devised by
Eudoxus of Cnidus (408-355 B.C.).[11] The problem he attempted to solve
was so to combine uniform circular movements as to produce the resultant
effects actually observed. The sun and moon and the five planets were,
with this end in view, accommodated each with a set of variously
revolving spheres, to the total number of 27. The Eudoxian or
"homocentric" system, after it had been further elaborated by Callippus
and Aristotle, was modified by Apollonius of Perga (fl. 250-220 B.C.)
into the hypothesis of deferents and epicycles, which held the field for
1800 years as the characteristic embodiment of Greek ideas in astronomy.
Eudoxus further wrote two works descriptive of the heavens, the
_Enoptron_ and _Phaenomena_, which, substantially preserved in the
_Phaenomena_ of Aratus (fl. 270 B.C.), provided all the leading features
of modern stellar nomenclature.

  School of Alexandria.

  Aristarchus.

Greek astronomy culminated in the school of Alexandria. It was, soon
after its foundation, illustrated by the labours of Aristyllus and
Timocharis (c. 320-260 B.C.), who constructed the first catalogue giving
star-positions as measured from a reference-point in the sky. This
fundamental advance rendered inevitable the detection of precessional
effects. Aristarchus of Samos observed at Alexandria 280-264 B.C. His
treatise on the magnitudes and distances of the sun and moon, edited by
John Wallis in 1688, describes a theoretically valid method for
determining the relative distances of the sun and moon by measuring the
angle between their centres when half the lunar disk is illuminated; but
the time of dichotomy being widely indeterminate, no useful result was
thus obtainable. Aristarchus in fact concluded the sun to be not more
than twenty times, while it is really four hundred times farther off
than our satellite. His general conception of the universe was
comprehensive beyond that of any of his predecessors.

  Eratosthenes.

Eratosthenes (276-196 B.C.), a native of Cyrene, was summoned from
Athens to Alexandria by Ptolemy Euergetes to take charge of the royal
library. He invented, or improved armillary spheres, the chief
implements of ancient astrometry, determined the obliquity of the
ecliptic at 23° 51' (a value 5' too great), and introduced an effective
mode of arc-measurement. Knowing Alexandria and Syene to be situated
5000 stadia apart on the same meridian, he found the sun to be 7° 12'
south of the zenith at the northern extremity of this arc when it was
vertically overhead at the southern extremity, and he hence inferred a
value of 252,000 stadia for the entire circumference of the globe. This
is a very close approximation to the truth, if the length of the unit
employed has been correctly assigned.[12]

  Hipparchus

Among the astronomers of antiquity, two great men stand out with
unchallenged pre-eminence. Hipparchus and Ptolemy entertained the same
large organic designs; they worked on similar methods; and, as the
outcome, their performances fitted so accurately together that between
them they re-made celestial science. Hipparchus fixed the chief data of
astronomy--the lengths of the tropical and sidereal years, of the
various months, and of the synodic periods of the five planets;
determined the obliquity of the ecliptic and of the moon's path, the
place of the sun's apogee, the eccentricity of his orbit, and the moon's
horizontal parallax; all with approximate accuracy. His loans from
Chaldaean experts appear, indeed, to have been numerous; but were
doubtless independently verified. His supreme merit, however, consisted
in the establishment of astronomy on a sound geometrical basis. His
acquaintance with trigonometry, a branch of science initiated by him,
together with his invention of the planisphere, enabled him to solve a
number of elementary problems; and he was thus led to bestow especial
attention upon the position of the equinox, as being the common point of
origin for measures both in right ascension and longitude. Its steady
retrogression among the stars became manifest to him in 130 B.C., on
comparing his own observations with those made by Timocharis a century
and a half earlier; and he estimated at not less than 36" (the true
value being 50") the annual amount of "precession."

The choice made by Hipparchus of the geocentric theory of the universe
decided the future of Greek astronomy. He further elaborated it by the
introduction of "eccentrics," which accounted for the changes in orbital
velocity of the sun and moon by a displacement of the earth, to a
corresponding extent, from the centre of the circles they were assumed
to describe. This gave the elliptic inequality known as the "equation of
the centre," and no other was at that time obvious. He attempted no
detailed discussion of planetary theory; but his catalogue of 1080
stars, divided into six classes of brightness, or "magnitudes," is one
of the finest monuments of antique astronomy. It is substantially
embodied in Ptolemy's _Almagest_ (see PTOLEMY).

  Ptolemy.

An interval of 250 years elapsed before the constructive labours of
Hipparchus obtained completion at Alexandria. His observations were
largely, and somewhat arbitrarily, employed by Ptolemy. Professor
Newcomb, who has compiled an instructive table of the equinoxes
severally observed by Hipparchus and Ptolemy, with their errors deduced
from Leverrier's solar tables, finds palpable evidence that the
discrepancies between the two series were artificially reconciled on the
basis of a year 6^m too long, adopted by Ptolemy on trust from his
predecessor. He nevertheless holds the process to have been one that
implied no fraudulent intention.

  Arab astronomers.

The Ptolemaic system was, in a geometrical sense, defensible; it
harmonized fairly well with appearances, and physical reasonings had not
then been extended to the heavens. To the ignorant it was recommended by
its conformity to crude common sense; to the learned, by the wealth of
ingenuity expended in bringing it to perfection. The _Almagest_ was the
consummation of Greek astronomy. Ptolemy had no successor; he found only
commentators, among the more noteworthy of whom were Theon of Alexandria
(fl. A.D. 400) and his daughter Hypatia (370-415). With the capture of
Alexandria by Omar in 641, the last glimmer of its scientific light
became extinct, to be rekindled, a century and a half later, on the
banks of the Tigris. The first Arabic translation of the _Almagest_ was
made by order of Harun al-Rashid about the year 800; others followed,
and the Caliph al-Mamun built in 829 a grand observatory at Bagdad. Here
Albumazar (805-885) watched the skies and cast horoscopes; here Tobit
ben Korra (836-901) developed his long unquestioned, yet misleading
theory of the "trepidation" of the equinoxes; Abd-ar-rahman al-Suf
(903-986) revised at first hand the catalogue of Ptolemy;[13] and
Abulwefa (939-998), like al-Sufi, a native of Persia, made continuous
planetary observations, but did not (as alleged by L. Sédillot)
anticipate Tycho Brahe's discovery of the moon's variation. Ibn Junis
(c. 950-1008), although the scene of his activity was in Egypt, falls
into line with the astronomers of Bagdad. He compiled the Hakimite
Tables of the planets, and observed at Cairo, in 977 and 978, two solar
eclipses which, as being the first recorded with scientific
accuracy,[14] were made available in fixing the amount of lunar
acceleration. Nasir ud-din (1201-1274) drew up the Ilkhanic Tables, and
determined the constant of precession at 51". He directed an observatory
established by Hulagu Khan (d. 1265) at Maraga in Persia, and equipped
with a mural quadrant of 12 ft. radius, besides altitude and azimuth
instruments. Ulugh Beg (1394-1449), a grandson of Tamerlane, was the
illustrious personification of Tatar astronomy. He founded about 1420 a
splendid observatory at Samarkand, in which he re-determined nearly all
Ptolemy's stars, while the Tables published by him held the primacy for
two centuries.[15]

  Moorish Astronomy.

  European Astronomy.

  Purbach.

  Walther.

Arab astronomy, transported by the Moors to Spain, flourished
temporarily at Cordova and Toledo. From the latter city the Toletan
Tables, drawn up by Arzachel in 1080, took their name; and there also
the Alfonsine Tables, published in 1252, were prepared under the
authority of Alphonso X. of Castile. Their appearance signalized the
dawn of European science, and was nearly coincident with that of the
_Sphaera Mundi_, a text-book of spherical astronomy, written by a
Yorkshireman, John Holywood, known as Sacro Bosco (d. 1256). It had an
immense vogue, perpetuated by the printing-press in fifty-nine editions.
In Germany, during the 15th century, a brilliant attempt was made to
patch up the flaws in Ptolemaic doctrine. George Purbach (1423-1461)
introduced into Europe the method of determining time by altitudes
employed by Ibn Junis. He lectured with applause at Vienna from 1450;
was joined there in 1452 by Regiomontanus (q.v.); and was on the point
of starting for Rome to inspect a manuscript of the _Almagest_ when he
died suddenly at the age of thirty-eight. His teachings bore fruit in
the work of Regiomontanus, and of Bernhard Walther of Nuremberg
(1430-1504), who fitted up an observatory with clocks driven by weights,
and developed many improvements in practical astronomy.

  Copernicus.

Meantime, a radical reform was being prepared in Italy. Under the
searchlights of the new learning, the dictatorship of Ptolemy appeared
no more inevitable than that of Aristotle; advanced thinkers like
Domenico Maria Novara (1454-1504) promulgated _sub rosa_ what were
called Pythagorean opinions; and they were eagerly and fully
appropriated by Nicolaus Copernicus during his student-years (1496-1505)
at Bologna and Padua. He laid the groundwork of his heliocentric theory
between 1506 and 1512, and brought it to completion in _De
Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium_ (1543). The colossal task of remaking
astronomy on an inverted design was, in this treatise, virtually
accomplished. Its reasonings were solidly founded on the principle of
the relativity of motion. A continuous shifting of the standpoint was in
large measure substituted for the displacements of the objects viewed,
which thus acquired a regularity and consistency heretofore lacking to
them. In the new system, the sphere of the fixed stars no longer
revolved diurnally, the earth rotating instead on an axis directed
towards the celestial pole. The sun too remained stationary, while the
planets, including our own globe, circulated round him. By this means,
the planetary "retrogradations" were explained as simple perspective
effects due to the combination of the earth's revolutions with those of
her sister orbs. The retention, however, by Copernicus of the antique
postulate of uniform circular motion impaired the perfection of his
plan, since it involved a partial survival of the epicyclical machinery.
Nor was it feasible, on this showing, to place the sun at the true
centre of any of the planetary orbits; so that his ruling position in
the midst of them was illusory. The reformed scheme was then by no means
perfect. Its simplicity was only comparative; many outstanding anomalies
compromised its harmonious working. Moreover, the absence of sensible
parallaxes in the stellar heavens seemed inconsistent with its validity;
and a mobile earth outraged deep-rooted prepossessions. Under these
disadvantageous circumstances, it is scarcely surprising that the
heliocentric theory, while admired as a daring speculation, won its way
slowly to acceptance as a truth.

  Observatory of Cassel.

The _Tabulae Prutenicae_, calculated on Copernican principles by Erasmus
Reinhold (1511-1553), appeared in 1551. Although they represented
celestial movements far better than the Alfonsine Tables, large
discrepancies were still apparent, and the desirability of testing the
novel hypothesis upon which they were based by more refined observations
prompted a reform of methods, undertaken almost simultaneously by the
landgrave William IV. of Hesse-Cassel (1532-1592), and by Tycho Brahe.
The landgrave built at Cassel in 1561 the first observatory with a
revolving dome, and worked for some years at a star-catalogue finally
left incomplete. Christoph Rothmann and Joost Bürgi (1552-1632) became
his assistants in 1577 and 1579 respectively; and through the skill of
Bürgi, time-determinations were made available for measuring right
ascensions. At Cassel, too, the altitude and azimuth instrument is
believed to have made its first appearance in Europe.[16]

  Tycho Brahe.

Tycho's labours were both more strenuous and more effective. He
perfected the art of pre-telescopic observation. His instruments were on
a scale and of a type unknown since the days of Nasir ud-din. At
Augsburg, in 1569, he ordered the construction of a 19-ft. quadrant, and
of a celestial globe 5 ft. in diameter; he substituted equatorial for
zodiacal armillae, thus definitively establishing the system of
measurements in right ascension and declination; and improved the
graduation of circular arcs by adopting the method of "transversals." By
these means, employed with consummate skill, he attained an
unprecedented degree of accuracy, and as an incidental though valuable
result, demonstrated the unreality of the supposed trepidation of the
equinoxes.

  Kepler.

No more congruous arrangement could have been devised than the
inheritance by Johann Kepler of the wealth of materials amassed by Tycho
Brahe. The younger man's genius supplied what was wanting to his
predecessor. Tycho's endowments were of the practical order; yet he had
never designed his observations to be an end in themselves. He thought
of them as means towards the end of ascertaining the true form of the
universe. His range of ideas was, however, restricted; and the attempt
embodied in his ground-plan of the solar system to revive the ephemeral
theory of Heraclides failed to influence the development of thought.
Kepler, on the contrary, was endowed with unlimited powers of
speculation, but had no mechanical faculty. He found in Tycho's ample
legacy of first-class data precisely what enabled him to try, by the
touchstone of fact, the successive hypotheses that he imagined; and his
untiring patience in comparing and calculating the observations at his
disposal was rewarded by a series of unique discoveries. He long adhered
to the traditional belief that all celestial revolutions must be
performed equably in circles; but a laborious computation of seven
recorded oppositions of Mars at last persuaded him that the planet
travelled in an ellipse, one focus of which was occupied by the sun.
Pursuing the inquiry, he found that its velocity was uniform with
respect to no single point within the orbit, but that the areas
described, in equal times, by a line drawn from the sun to the planet
were strictly equal. These two principles he extended, by direct proof,
to the motion of the earth; and, by analogy, to that of the other
planets. They were published in 1609 in _De Motibus Stellae Martis_. The
announcement of the third of "Kepler's Laws" was made ten years later,
in _De Harmonice Mundi_. It states that the squares of the periods of
circulation round the sun of the several planets are in the same ratio
as the cubes of their mean distances. This numerical proportion, as
being a necessary consequence of the law of gravitation, must prevail in
every system under its sway. It does in fact prevail among the
satellite-families of our acquaintance, and presumably in stellar
combinations as well. Kepler's ineradicable belief in the existence of
some such congruity was derived from the Pythagorean idea of an
underlying harmony in nature; but his arduous efforts for its
realization took a devious and fantastic course which seemed to give
little promise of their surprising ultimate success. The outcome of his
discoveries was, not only to perfect the geometrical plan of the solar
system, but to enhance very materially the predicting power of
astronomy. The Rudolphine Tables (Ulm, 1627), computed by him from
elliptic elements, retained authority for a century, and have in
principle never been superseded. He was deterred from research into the
orbital relations of comets, by his conviction of their perishable
nature. He supposed their tails to result from the action of solar rays,
which, in traversing their mass, bore off with them some of their
subtler particles to form trains directed away from the sun. And through
the process of waste thus set on foot, they finally dissolved into the
aether, and expired "like spinning insects." (_De Cometis; Opera_, ed.
Frisch, t. vii. p. 110.) This remarkable anticipation of the modern
theory of light-pressure was suggested to him by his observations of the
great comets of 1618.

The formal astronomy of the ancients left Kepler unsatisfied. He aimed
at finding out the cause as well as the mode of the planetary
revolutions; and his demonstration that the planes in which they are
described all pass through the sun was an important preliminary to a
physical explanation of them. But his efforts to supply such an
explanation were rendered futile by his imperfect apprehension of what
motion is in itself. He had, it is true, a distinct conception of a
force analogous to that of gravity, by which cognate bodies tended
towards union. Misled, however, into identifying it with magnetism, he
imagined circulation in the solar system to be maintained through the
material compulsion of fibrous emanations from the sun, carried round by
his axial rotation. Ignorance regarding the inertia of matter drove him
to this expedient. The persistence of movement seemed to him to imply
the persistence of a moving power. He did not recognize that motion and
rest are equally natural, in the sense of requiring force for their
alteration. Yet his rationale of the tides in _De Motibus Stellae_ is
not only memorable as an astonishing forecast of the principle of
reciprocal attraction in the proportion of mass, but for its bold
extension to the earth of the lunar sphere of influence.

Galileo Galilei, Kepler's most eminent contemporary, took a foremost
part in dissipating the obscurity that still hung over the very
foundations of mechanical science. He had, indeed, precursors and
co-operators. Michel Varo of Geneva wrote correctly in 1584 on the
composition of forces; Simon Stevin of Bruges (1548-1620) independently
demonstrated the principle; and G.B. Benedetti expounded in his
_Speculationum Liber_ (Turin, 1585) perfectly clear ideas as to the
nature of accelerated motion, some years in advance of Galileo's
dramatic experiments at Pisa. Yet they were never assimilated by Kepler;
while, on the other hand, the laws of planetary circulation he had
enounced were strangely ignored by Galileo. The two lines of inquiry
remained for some time apart. Had they at once been made to coalesce,
the true nature of the force controlling celestial movements should have
been quickly recognized. As it was, the importance of Kepler's
generalizations was not fully appreciated until Sir Isaac Newton made
them the corner-stone of his new cosmic edifice.

  Galileo.

Galileo's contributions to astronomy were of a different quality from
Kepler's. They were easily intelligible to the general public: in a
sense, they were obvious, since they could be verified by every
possessor of one of the Dutch perspective-instruments, just then in
course of wide and rapid distribution. And similar results to his were
in fact independently obtained in various parts of Europe by Christopher
Scheiner at Ingolstadt, by Johann Fabricius at Osteel in Friesland, and
by Thomas Harriot at Syon House, Isleworth. Galileo was nevertheless by
far the ablest and most versatile of these early telescopic observers.
His gifts of exposition were on a par with his gifts of discernment.
What he saw, he rendered conspicuous to the world. His sagacity was
indeed sometimes at fault. He maintained with full conviction to the end
of his life a grossly erroneous hypothesis of the tides, early adopted
from Andrea Caesalpino; the "triplicate" appearance of Saturn always
remained an enigma to him; and in regarding comets as atmospheric
emanations he lagged far behind Tycho Brahe. Yet he unquestionably ranks
as the true founder of descriptive astronomy; while his splendid
presentment of the laws of projectiles in his dialogue of the "New
Sciences" (Leiden, 1638) lent potent aid to the solid establishment of
celestial mechanics.

  Gravitational Astronomy.

  Bacon.

  Descartes.

  Newton.

  Euler, Clairault, D'Alembert.

The accumulation of facts does not in itself constitute science.
Empirical knowledge scarcely deserves the name. _Vere scire est per
causas scire._ Francis Bacon's prescient dream, however, of a living
astronomy by which the physical laws governing terrestrial relations
should be extended the highest heavens, had long to wait for
realization. Kepler divined its possibility; but his thoughts, derailed
(so to speak) by the false analogy of magnetism, brought him no farther
than to the rough draft of the scheme of vortices expounded in detail by
René Descartes in his _Principia Philosophiae_ (1644). And this was a
Descartes _cul-de-sac._ The only practicable road struck aside from it.
The true foundations of a mechanical theory of the heavens were laid by
Kepler's discoveries, and by Galileo's dynamical demonstrations; its
construction was facilitated by the development of mathematical methods.
The invention of logarithms, the rise of analytical geometry, and the
evolution of B. Cavalieri's "indivisibles" into the infinitesimal
calculus, all accomplished during the 17th century, immeasurably widened
the scope of exact astronomy. Gradually, too, the nature of the problem
awaiting solution came to be apprehended. Jeremiah Horrocks had some
intuition, previously to 1639, that the motion of the moon was
controlled by the earth's gravity, and disturbed by the action of the
sun. Ismael Bouillaud (1605-1694) stated in 1645 the fact of planetary
circulation under the sway of a sun-force decreasing as the inverse
square of the distance; and the inevitableness of this same "duplicate
ratio" was separately perceived by Robert Hooke, Edmund Halley and Sir
Christopher Wren before Newton's discovery had yet been made public. He
was the only man of his generation who both recognized the law, and had
power to demonstrate its validity. And this was only a beginning. His
complete achievement had a twofold aspect. It consisted, first, in the
identification, by strict numerical comparisons, of terrestrial gravity
with the mutual attraction of the heavenly bodies; secondly, in the
following out of its mechanical consequences throughout the solar
system. Gravitation was thus shown to be the sole influence governing
the movements of planets and satellites; the figure of the rotating
earth was successfully explained by its action on the minuter particles
of matter; tides and the procession of the equinoxes proved amenable to
reasonings based on the same principle; and it satisfactorily accounted
as well for some of the chief lunar and planetary inequalities. Newton's
investigations, however, were very far from being exhaustive. Colossal
though his powers were, they had limits; and his work could not but
remain unterminated, since it was by its nature interminable. Nor was it
possible to provide it with what could properly be called a sequel. The
synthetic method employed by him was too unwieldy for common use. Yet no
other was just then at hand. Mathematical analysis needed half a century
of cultivation before it was fully available for the arduous tasks
reserved for it. They were accordingly taken up anew by a band of
continental inquirers, primarily by three men of untiring energy and
vivid genius, Leonhard Euler, Alexis Clairault, and Jean le Rond
d'Alembert. The first of the outstanding gravitational problems with
which they grappled was the unaccountably rapid advance of the lunar
perigee. But the apparent anomaly disappeared under Euler's powerful
treatment in 1749, and his result was shortly afterwards still further
assured by Clairault. The subject of planetary perturbations was next
attacked. Euler devised in 1753 a new method, that of the "variation of
parameters," for their investigation, and applied it to unravel some of
the earth's irregularities in a memoir crowned by the French Academy in
1756; while in 1757, Clairault estimated the masses of the moon and
Venus by their respective disturbing effects upon terrestrial movements.
But the most striking incident in the history of the verification of
Newton's law was the return of Halley's comet to perihelion, on the 12th
of March 1759, in approximate accordance with Clairault's calculation of
the delays due to the action of Jupiter and Saturn. Visual proof was
thus, it might be said, afforded of the harmonious working of a single
principle to the uttermost boundaries of the sun's dominion.

  Lagrange.

These successes paved the way for the higher triumphs of Joseph Louis
Lagrange and of Pierre Simon Laplace. The subject of the lunar
librations was treated by Lagrange with great originality in an essay
crowned by the Paris Academy of Sciences in 1764; and he filled up the
lacunae in his theory of them in a memoir communicated to the Berlin
Academy in 1780. He again won the prize of the Paris Academy in 1766
with an analytical discussion of the movements of Jupiter's satellites
(_Miscellanea_, Turin Acad. t. iv.); and in the same year expanded
Euler's adumbrated method of the variation of parameters into a highly
effective engine of perturbational research. It was especially adapted
to the tracing out of "secular inequalities," or those depending upon
changes in the orbital elements of the bodies affected by them, and
hence progressing indefinitely with time; and by its means, accordingly,
the mechanical stability of the solar system was splendidly demonstrated
through the successive efforts of Lagrange and Laplace. The proper share
of each in bringing about this memorable result is not easy to
apportion, since they freely imparted and profited by one another's
advances and improvements; it need only be said that the fundamental
proposition of the invariability of the planetary major axes laid down
with restrictions by Laplace in 1773, was finally established by
Lagrange in 1776; while Laplace in 1784 proved the subsistence of such a
relation between the eccentricities of the planetary orbits on the one
hand, and their inclinations on the other, that an increase of either
element could, in any single case, proceed only to a very small extent.
The system was thus shown, apart from unknown agencies of subversion, to
be constructed for indefinite permanence. The prize of the Berlin
Academy was, in 1780, adjudged to Lagrange for a treatise on the
perturbations of comets, and he contributed to the Berlin Memoirs,
1781-1784, a set of five elaborate papers, embodying and unifying his
perfected methods and their results.

  Laplace.

The crowning trophies of gravitational astronomy in the 18th century
were Laplace's explanations of the "great inequality" of Jupiter and
Saturn in 1784, and of the "secular acceleration" of the moon in 1787.
Both irregularities had been noted, a century earlier, by Edmund Halley;
both had, since that time, vainly exercised the ingenuity of the ablest
mathematicians; both now almost simultaneously yielded their secret to
the same fortunate inquirer. Johann Heinrich Lambert pointed out in 1773
that the motion of Saturn, from being retarded, had become accelerated.
A periodic character was thus indicated for the disturbance; and Laplace
assigned its true cause in the near approach to commensurability in the
periods of the two planets, the cycle of disturbance completing itself
in about 900 (more accurately 929½) years. The lunar acceleration, too,
obtains ultimate compensation, though only after a vastly protracted
term of years. The discovery, just one hundred years after the
publication of Newton's _Principia_, of its dependence upon the slowly
varying eccentricity of the earth's orbit signalized the removal of the
last conspicuous obstacle to admitting the unqualified validity of the
law of gravitation. Laplace's calculations, it is true, were inexact. An
error, corrected by J.C. Adams in 1853, nearly doubled the value of the
acceleration deducible from them; and served to conceal a discrepancy
with observation which has since given occasion to much profound
research (see MOON).

The _Mécanique céleste_, in which Laplace welded into a whole the items
of knowledge accumulated by the labours of a century, has been termed
the "Almagest of the 18th century" (Fourier). But imposing and complete
though the monument appeared, it did not long hold possession of the
field. Further developments ensued. The "method of least squares," by
which the most probable result can be educed from a body of
observational data, was published by Adrien Marie Legendre in 1806, by
Carl Friedrich Gauss in his _Theoria Motus_ (1809), which described also
a mode of calculating the orbit of a planet from three complete
observations, afterwards turned to important account for the recapture
of Ceres, the first discovered asteroid (see PLANETS, MINOR). Researches
into rotational movement were facilitated by S.D. Poisson's application
to them in 1809 of Lagrange's theory of the variation of constants;
Philippe de Pontécoulant successfully used in 1829, for the prediction
of the impending return of Halley's comet, a system of "mechanical
quadratures" published by Lagrange in the Berlin Memoirs for 1778; and
in his _Théorie analytique du système du monde_ (1846) he modified and
refined general theories of the lunar and planetary revolutions. P.A.
Hansen in 1829 (_Astr. Nach._ Nos. 166-168, 179) left the beaten track
by choosing time as the sole variable, the orbital elements remaining
constant. A.L. Cauchy published in 1842-1845 a method similarly
conceived, though otherwise developed; and the scope of analysis in
determining the movements of the heavenly bodies has since been
perseveringly widened by the labours of Urbain J.J. Leverrier, J.C.
Adams, S. Newcomb, G.W. Hill, E.W. Brown, H. Gyldén, Charles Delaunay,
F. Tisserand, H. Poincaré and others too numerous to mention. Nor were
these abstract investigations unaccompanied by concrete results. Sir
George Airy detected in 1831 an inequality, periodic in 240 years,
between Venus and the earth. Leverrier undertook in 1839, and concluded
in 1876, the formidable task of revising all the planetary theories and
constructing from them improved tables. Not less comprehensive has been
the work carried out by Professor Newcomb of raising to a higher grade
of perfection, and reducing to a uniform standard, all the theories and
constants of the solar system. His inquiries afford the assurance of a
nearly exact conformity among its members to strict gravitational law,
only the moon and Mercury showing some slight, but so far unexplained,
anomalies of movement. The discovery of Neptune in 1846 by Adams and
Leverrier marked the first solution of the "inverse problem" of
perturbations. That is to say, ascertained or ascertainable effects were
made the starting-point instead of the goal of research.

  Descriptive and practical astronomy.

  Bayer.

  Gassendi.

  Horrocks.

  Huygens.

  Gascoigne.

  Hevelius.

Observational astronomy, meanwhile, was advancing to some extent
independently. The descriptive branch found its principle of development
in the growing powers of the telescope, and had little to do with
mathematical theory; which, on the contrary, was closely allied, by
relations of mutual helpfulness, with practical astronomy, or
"astrometry." Meanwhile, the elementary requirement of making visual
acquaintance with the stellar heavens was met, as regards the unknown
southern skies, when Johann Bayer published at Nuremberg in 1603 a
celestial atlas depicting twelve new constellations formed from the rude
observations of navigators across the line. In the same work, the
current mode of star-nomenclature by the letters of the Greek alphabet
made its appearance. On the 7th of November 1631 Pierre Gassendi watched
at Paris the passage of Mercury across the sun. This was the first
planetary transit observed. The next was that of Venus on the 24th of
November (O.S.) 1639, of which Jeremiah Horrocks and William Crabtree
were the sole spectators. The improvement of telescopes was prosecuted
by Christiaan Huygens from 1655, and promptly led to his discoveries of
the sixth Saturnian moon, of the true shape of the Saturnian appendages,
and of the multiple character of the "trapezium" of stars in the Orion
nebula. William Gascoigne's invention of the filar micrometer and of the
adaptation of telescopes to graduated instruments remained submerged for
a quarter of a century in consequence of his untimely death at Marston
Moor (1644). The latter combination had also been ineffectually proposed
in 1634 by Jean Baptiste Morin (1583-1656); and both devices were
recontrived at Paris about 1667, the micrometer by Adrien Auzout (d.
1691), telescopic sights (so-called) by Jean Picard (1620-1682), who
simultaneously introduced the astronomical use of pendulum-clocks,
constructed by Huygens eleven years previously. These improvements were
ignored or rejected by Johann Hevelius of Danzig, the author of the last
important star-catalogue based solely upon naked-eye determinations.
He, nevertheless, used telescopes to good purpose in his studies of
lunar topography, and his designations for the chief mountain-chains and
"seas" of the moon have never been superseded. He, moreover, threw out
the suggestion (in his _Cometographia_, 1668) that comets move round the
sun in orbits of a parabolic form.

  The Paris observatory.

  G.D. Cassini

  Römer.

The establishment, in 1671 and 1676 respectively, of the French and
English national observatories at once typified and stimulated progress.
The Paris institution, it is true, lacked unity of direction. No
authoritative chief was assigned to it until 1771. G.D. Cassini, his son
and his grandson were only _primi inter pares_. Claude Perrault's
stately edifice was equally accessible to all the more eminent members
of the Academy of Sciences; and researches were, more or less
independently, carried on there by (among others) Philippe de la Hire
(1640-1718), G.F. Maraldi (1665-1729), and his nephew, J.D. Maraldi,
Jean Picard, Huygens, Olaus Römer and Nicolas de Lacaille. Some of the
best instruments then extant were mounted at the Paris observatory. G.D.
Cassini brought from Rome a 17-ft. telescope by G. Campani, with which
he discovered in 1671 Iapetus, the ninth in distance of Saturn's family
of satellites; Rhea was detected in 1672 with a glass by the same maker
of 34-ft. focus; the duplicity of the ring showed in 1675; and, in 1684,
two additional satellites were disclosed by a Campani telescope of 100
ft. Cassini, moreover, set up an altazimuth in 1678, and employed from
about 1682 a "parallactic machine," provided with clockwork to enable it
to follow the diurnal motion. Both inventions have been ascribed to
Olaus Römer, who used but did not claim them, and must have become
familiar with their principles during the nine years (1672-1681) spent
by him at the Paris observatory. Römer, on the other hand, deserves full
credit for originating the transit-circle and the prime vertical
instrument; and he earned undying fame by his discovery of the finite
velocity of light, made at Paris in 1675 by comparing his observations
of the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites at the conjunctions and
oppositions of the planet.

  Flamsteed.

The organization of the Greenwich observatory differed widely from that
adopted at Paris. There a fundamental scheme of practical amelioration
was initiated by John Flamsteed, the first astronomer royal, and has
never since been lost sight of. Its purpose is the attainment of so
complete a power of prediction that the places of the sun, moon and
planets may be assigned without noticeable error for an indefinite
future time. Sidereal inquiries, as such, made no part of the original
programme in which the stars figured merely as points of reference. But
these points are not stationary. They have an apparent precessional
movement, the exact amount of which can be arrived at only by prolonged
and toilsome enquiries. They have besides "proper motions," detected in
1718 by E. Halley in a few cases, and since found to prevail
universally. Further, James Bradley discovered in 1728 the annual
shifting of the stars due to the aberration of light (see ABERRATION),
and in 1748, the complicating effects upon precession of the "nutation"
of the earth's axis. Hence, the preparation of a catalogue recording the
"mean" positions of a number of stars for a given epoch involves
considerable preliminary labour; nor do those positions long continue to
satisfy observation. They need, after a time, to be corrected, not only
systematically for precession, but also empirically for proper motion.
Before the stars can safely be employed as route-marks in the sky, their
movements must accordingly be tabulated, and research into the method of
such movements inevitably follows. We perceive then that the fundamental
problems of sidereal science are closely linked up with the elementary
and indispensable procedures of celestial measurement.

The history of the Greenwich observatory is one of strenuous efforts for
refinement, stimulated by the growing stringency of theoretical
necessities. Improved practice, again, reacted upon theory by bringing
to notice residual errors, demanding the correction of formulae, or
intimating neglected disturbances. Each increase of mechanical skill
claims a corresponding gain in the subtlety of analysis; and vice versa.
And this kind of interaction has gone on ever since Flamsteed
reluctantly furnished the "places of the moon," which enabled Newton to
lay the foundations of lunar theory.

  Halley.

  Bradley.

  Bliss.

  Maskelyne.

  Pond.

  Airy.

Edmund Halley, the second astronomer royal, devoted most of his official
attention to the moon. But his plan of attack was not happily chosen; he
carried it out with deficient instrumental means; and his administration
(1720-1742) remained comparatively barren. That of his successor, though
shorter, was vastly more productive. James Bradley chose the most
appropriate tasks, and executed them supremely well, with the
indispensable aid of John Bird (1700-1776), who constructed for him an
8-ft. quadrant of unsurpassed quality. Bradley's store of observations
has accordingly proved invaluable. Those of 3222 stars, reduced by F.W.
Bessel in 1818, and again with masterly insight by Dr A. Auwers in 1882,
form the true basis of exact astronomy, and of our knowledge of proper
motions. Those relating to the moon and planets, corrected by Sir George
Airy, 1840-1846, form part of the standard materials for discussing
theories of movement in the solar system. The fourth astronomer royal,
Nathaniel Bliss, provided in two years a sequel of some value to
Bradley's performance. Nevil Maskelyne, who succeeded him in 1764, set
on foot, in 1767, the publication of the _Nautical Almanac_, and about
the same time had an achromatic telescope fitted to the Greenwich mural
quadrant. The invention, perfected by John Dollond in 1757, was long
debarred from becoming effective by difficulties in the manufacture of
glass, aggravated in England by a heavy excise duty levied until 1845.
More immediately efficacious was the innovation made by John Pond
(astronomer royal, 1811-1836) of substituting entire circles for
quadrants. He further introduced, in 1821, the method of duplicate
observations by direct vision and by reflection, and by these means
obtained results of very high precision. During Sir George Airy's long
term of office (1836-1881) exact astronomy and the traditional purposes
of the royal observatory were promoted with increased vigour, while the
scope of research was at the same time memorably widened. Magnetic,
meteorological, and spectroscopic departments were added to the
establishment; electricity was employed, through the medium of the
chronograph, for the registration of transits; and photography was
resorted to for the daily automatic record of the sun's condition.

  Wargentin.

  Lacaille.

  Tobias Mayer.

  Lalande.

Meanwhile, advances were being made in various parts of the continent of
Europe. Peter Wargentin (1717-1783), secretary to the Swedish Academy of
Sciences, made a special study of the Jovian system. James Bradley had
described to the Royal Society on the 2nd of July 1719 the curious
cyclical relations of the three inner satellites; and their period of
437 days was independently discovered by Wargentin, who based upon it in
1746 a set of tables, superseded only by those of J.B.J. Delambre in
1792. Among the fruits of the strenuous career of Nicolas Louis de
Lacaille were tables of the sun, in which terms depending upon planetary
perturbations were, for the first time, introduced (1758); an extended
acquaintance with the southern heavens; and a determination of the
moon's parallax from observations made at opposite extremities of an arc
of the meridian 85° in length. Tobias Mayer of Göttingen (1723-1762)
originated the mode of adjusting transit-instruments still in vogue;
drew up a catalogue of nearly a thousand zodiacal stars (published
posthumously in 1775); and deduced the proper motions of eighty stars
from a comparison of their places as given by Olaus Romer in 1706 with
those obtained by himself in 1756. He executed besides a chart and forty
drawings of the moon (published at Göttingen in 1881), and calculated
lunar tables from a skilful development of Euler's theory, for which a
reward of £3000 was in 1765 paid to his widow by the British government.
They were published by the Board of Longitude, together with his solar
tables, in 1770. The material interests of navigation were in these
works primarily regarded; but the imaginative side of knowledge had
also potent representatives during the latter half of the 18th century.
In France, especially, the versatile activity of J.J. Lalande
popularized the acquisitions of astronomy, and enforced its demands; and
he had a German counterpart in J.E. Bode.

  Distance of the sun.

Between the time of Aristarchus and the opposition of Mars in 1672, no
serious attempt was made to solve the problem of the sun's distance. In
that year, however, Jean Richer at Cayenne and G.D. Cassini at Paris
made combined observations of the planet, which yielded a parallax for
the sun of 9.5", corresponding to a mean radius for the terrestrial
orbit of 87,000,000 m. This result, though widely inaccurate, came much
nearer to the truth than any previously obtained; and it instructively
illustrated the feasibility of concerted astronomical operations at
distant parts of the earth. The way was thus prepared for availing to
the full of the opportunities for a celestial survey offered by the
transits of Venus in 1761 and 1769. They had been signalized by E.
Halley in 1716; they were later insisted upon by Lalande; an enthusiasm
for co-operation was evoked, and the globe, from Siberia to Otaheite,
was studded with observing parties. The outcome, nevertheless,
disappointed expectation. The instants of contact between the limbs of
the sun and planet defied precise determination. Optical complications
fatally impeded sharpness of vision, and the phenomena took place in a
debateable borderland of uncertainty. J.F. Encke, it is true, derived
from them in 1822-1824 what seemed an authentic parallax of 8.57",
implying a distance of 95,370,000 m.; but the confidence it inspired was
finally overthrown in 1854 by P.A. Hansen's announcement of its
incompatibility with lunar theory. An appeal then lay to the 19th
century pair of transits in 1874 and 1882; but no peremptory decision
ensued; observations were marred by the same optical evils as before.
Their upshot, however, had lost its essential importance; for a fresh
series of investigations based on a variety of principles had already
been started. Leverrier, in 1858, calculated a value of 8.95" for the
solar parallax (equivalent to a distance of 91,000,000 m.) from the
"parallactic inequality" of the moon; Professor Newcomb, using other
forms of the gravitational method, derived in 1895 a parallax of 8.76".
Again, since the constant of aberration defines the ratio between the
velocity of light and the earth's orbital speed, the span of the
terrestrial circuit, in other words, the distance of the sun, is
immediately deducible from known values of the first two quantities. The
rate of light-transmission was accordingly made the subject of an
elaborate set of experiments by Professor Newcomb in 1880-1882; and the
result, taken in connexion with the aberration-constant as determined at
Pulkowa, yielded a solar parallax of 8.79", or a distance (in round
numbers) of 93,000,000 m. But the direct or geometrical mode of attack
has still the preference over any of the indirect plans. Sir David Gill
derived a highly satisfactory value of 8.78" for the long-sought
constant from the opposition of Mars in 1877, and from combined
heliometer observations at five observatories in 1888-1889 of the minor
planets Iris, Victoria and Sappho, the apparently definitive value of
8.80" (equivalent distance, 92,874,000 m.). But an unlooked-for fresh
opportunity was afforded by the discovery in 1898 of the singularly
circumstanced minor planet Eros, which occasionally approaches the earth
more nearly than any other heavenly body except the moon. The opposition
of November 1900, though only moderately favourable, could not be
neglected; an international photographic campaign was organized at Paris
with the aid of 58 observatories; and the voluminous collected data
imply, so far as they have been discussed, a parallax for the sun a
little greater than 8.8". (See also PARALLAX.)

  Reflecting telescopes.

  William Herschel.

  Sir John Herschel.

  Lord Rosse.

The first specimen of a reflecting telescope was constructed by Isaac
Newton in 1668. It was of what is still called "Newtonian" design, and
had a speculum 2 in. in diameter. Through the skill of John Hadley
(1682-1743) and James Short of Edinburgh (1710-1768) the instrument
unfolded, in the ensuing century, some of its capabilities, which the
labours of William Herschel enormously enhanced. Between 1774 and 1789
he built scores of specula of continually augmented size, up to a
diameter of 4 ft., the optical excellence of which approved itself by a
crowd of discoveries. Uranus (q.v.) was recognized by its disk on the
13th of March 1781; two of its satellites, Oberon and Titania, disclosed
themselves on the 11th of January 1787; while with the giant 48-in.
mirror, used on the "front-view" plan, Mimas and Enceladus, the
innermost Saturnian moons, were brought to view on the 28th of August
and the 17th of September 1789. These were incidental trophies;
Herschel's main object was the exploration of the sidereal heavens. The
task, though novel and formidable, was executed with almost incredible
success. Charles Messier (1730-1817) had catalogued in 1781 103 nebulae;
Herschel discovered 2500, laid down the lines of their classification,
divined the laws of their distribution, and assigned their place in a
scheme of development. The proof supplied by him in 1802 that coupled
stars mutually circulate threw open a boundless field of research; and
he originated experimental inquiries into the construction of the
heavens by systematically collecting and sifting stellar statistics. He,
moreover, definitively established, in 1783, the fact and general
direction of the sun's movement in space, and thus introduced an element
of order into the maze of stellar proper motions. Sir John Herschel
continued in the northern, and extended to the southern hemisphere, his
father's work. The third earl of Rosse mounted, at Parsonstown in 1845,
a speculum 6 ft. in diameter, which afforded the first indications of
the spiral structure shown in recent photographs to be the most
prevalent characteristic of nebulae. Down to near the close of the 19th
century, both the use and the improvement of reflectors were left mainly
in British hands; but the gift of the "Crossley" instrument in 1895, to
the Lick observatory, and its splendid subsequent performances in
nebular photography, brought similar tools of research into extensive
use among American astronomers; and they are now, for many of the
various purposes of astrophysics, strongly preferred to refractors.

  Giuseppe Piazzi.

  Max Wolf.

Acquaintance with the asteroidal family began as the 19th century
opened. On the 1st of January 1801 Giuseppe Piazzi (1746-1826)
discovered Ceres, at Palermo, while engaged in collecting materials for
his star-catalogues. A prolonged succession of similar events followed.
But in the mode of detecting these swarming bodies, a typical change was
made on the 22nd of December 1891, when Dr Max Wolf of Heidelberg
photographically captured No. 323. Repetitions of the feat are now
counted by the score.

  Lassell.

  Bond.

  Hall.

  Barnard.

  Perrine.

  W.H. Pickering.

Practical astronomy was only secondarily concerned with the addition of
Neptune, on the 23rd of September 1846, to the company of known planets;
but William Lassell's discovery of its satellite, on the 10th of October
following, was a consequence of the perfect figure and high polish of
his 2-ft. speculum. With the same instrument, he further detected, on
the 19th of September 1848, Hyperion, the seventh of Saturn's
attendants, and, on the 24th of October 1851, Ariel and Umbriel, the
interior moons of Uranus. Simultaneously with Lassell, on the opposite
shore of the Atlantic, W.C. Bond identified Hyperion; and he perceived,
on the 15th of November 1850, Saturn's dusky ring, independently
observed, a fortnight later, by W.R. Dawes, at Wateringbury in Kent.
With the Washington 26-in. refractor, on the 11th of August 1877,
Professor Asaph Hall descried the moons of Mars, Deimos and Phobos; and
a minute light-speck, noticed by Professor E.E. Barnard in the close
neighbourhood of Jupiter on the 9th of September 1892, proved
representative of a small inner satellite, invisible with less perfect
and powerful instruments than the Lick 36-in. achromatic. The Jovian
system has been reinforced by three remote and extremely faint members,
two photographed by Professor C.D. Perrine with the Crossley reflector
in 1904-1905, and the third at Greenwich in 1908; and a pair of
Saturnian moons, designated Phoebe and Themis, were tracked out by
Professor W.H. Pickering, in 1898 and 1905 respectively, amid the
thicket of stars imprinted on negatives taken at Arequipa with the Bruce
24-in. doublet lens. This raises to 26 the number of discovered
satellites in the solar system.

  Comets.

  Meteors.

Cometary science has ramified in unexpected ways during the last hundred
years. The establishment of a class of "short-period" comets by the
computations of J.F. Encke in 1819, and of Wilhelm von Biela in 1826,
led to the theory of their "capture" by the great planets, for which a
solid mathematical basis was provided by H. Newton, F. Tisserand and O.
Callandreau. An argument for the aboriginal connexion of comets with the
solar system, founded by R.C. Carrington in 1860 upon their
participation in its translatory movement, was more fully developed by
L. Fabry in 1893; and the close orbital relationships of cometary
groups, accentuated by the pursuit of each other along nearly the same
track by the comets of 1843, 1880 and 1882, singularly illustrated the
probable vicissitudes of their careers. The most remarkable event,
however, in the recent history of cometary astronomy was its
assimilation to that of meteors, which took unquestionable cosmical rank
as a consequence of the Leonid tempest of November 1833. The affinity of
the two classes of objects became known in 1866 through G.V.
Schiaparelli's announcement that the orbit of the bright comet of 1862
agreed strictly with the elliptic ring formed by the circulating Perseid
meteors; and three other cases of close coincidence were soon afterwards
brought to light. Tebbutt's comet in 1881 was the first to be
satisfactorily photographed. The study of such objects is now carried on
mainly through the agency of the sensitive plate. The photographic
registration of meteor-trails, too, has been lately attempted with
partial success. The full realization of the method will doubtless
provide adequate data for the detailed investigation of meteoric paths.

  Sidereal astronomy.

  Star catalogues.

The progress of science during the 19th century had no more distinctive
feature than the rapid growth of sidereal astronomy (see STAR). Its
scope, wide as the universe, can be compassed no otherwise than by
statistical means, and the collection of materials for this purpose
involves most arduous preliminary labour. The multitudinous enrolment of
stars was the first requisite. Only one "catalogue of precision"--Nevil
Maskelyne's of 36 fundamental stars--was available in 1800. J.J.
Lalande, however, published in 1801, in his _Histoire céleste_, the
approximate places of 47,390 from a re-observation of which the great
Paris catalogue (1887-1892) has been compiled. A valuable catalogue of
about 7600 stars was issued by Giuseppe Piazzi in 1814; Stephen
Groombridge determined 4239 at Blackheath in 1806-1816; while through
the joint and successive work of F.W. Bessel and W.A. Argelander, exact
acquaintance was made with 90,000, a more general acquaintance with the
324,000 stars recorded in the _Bonn Durchmusterung_ (1859-1862). The
southern hemisphere was subsequently reviewed on a similar duplicate
plan by E. Schönfeld (1828-1891) at Bonn, by B.A. Gould and J.M. Thome
at Córdoba. Moreover, the imposing catalogue set on foot in 1865 at
thirteen observatories by the German astronomical society has recently
been completed; and adjuncts to it have, from time to time, been
provided in the publications of the royal observatories at Greenwich and
the Cape of Good Hope, and of national, imperial and private
establishments in the United States and on the continent of Europe. But
in the execution of these protracted undertakings, the human eye has
been, to a large and increasing extent, superseded by the camera.
Photographic star-charting was begun by Sir David Gill in 1885, and the
third and concluding volume of the _Cape Photographic Durchmusterung_
appeared in 1900. It gives the co-ordinates of above 450,000 stars,
measured by Professor J.C. Kapteyn at Groningen on plates taken by C.
Ray Woods at the Cape observatory. And this comprehensive work was
merely preparatory to the International Catalogue and Chart, the
production of which was initiated by the resolutions of the Paris
Photographic Congress of 1887. Eighteen observatories scattered north
and south of the equator divided the sky among them; and the outcome of
their combined operations aimed at the production of a catalogue of at
least 2,000,000 strictly determined stars, together with a colossal map
in 22,000 sheets, showing stars to the fourteenth magnitude, in numbers
difficult to estimate. (Sea PHOTOGRAPHY, CELESTIAL.)

  Photometric catalogues.

The arrangement of the stars in space can be usefully discussed only in
connexion with their apparent light-power, or "magnitude." Photometric
catalogues, accordingly, form an indispensable part of stellar
statistics; and their construction has been zealously prosecuted. The
_Harvard Photometry_ of 4260 lucid stars was issued by Professor E.C.
Pickering in 1884, the _Uranometria Nova Oxoniensis_, giving the
relative lustre of 2784 stars, by C. Pritchard in 1885. The instrument
used at Harvard was a "meridian photometer," constructed on the
principle of polarization; while the "method of extinctions," by means
of a wedge of neutral-tinted glass, served for the Oxford
determinations. At Potsdam, some 17,000 stars have been measured by
C.H.G. Müller and P.F.F. Kempf with a polarizing photometer; but by far
the most comprehensive work of the kind is the Harvard _Photometric
Durchmusterung_ (1901-1903), embracing all stars to 7.5 magnitude, and
extended to the southern pole by measurements executed at Arequipa. The
embarrassing subject of photographic photometry has also been attacked
by Professor Pickering. The need is urgent of fixing a scale, and
defining standards of actinic brightness; but it has not yet been
successfully met.

  Double stars.

The investigation of double stars was carried on from 1819 to 1850 with
singular persistence and ability at Dorpat and Pulkowa by F.G.W. Struve,
and by his son and successor, O.W. Struve. The high excellence of the
data collected by them was a combined result of their skill, and of the
vast improvement in refracting telescopes due to the genius of Joseph
Fraunhofer (1787-1826). Among the inheritors of his renown were Alvan
Clark and Alvan G. Clark of Cambridgeport, Massachusetts; and the superb
definition of their great achromatics rendered practicable the division
of what might have been deemed impossibly close star-pairs. These
facilities were remarkably illustrated by Professor S.W. Burnham's
record of discovery, which roused fresh enthusiasm for this line of
inquiry by compelling recognition of the extraordinary profusion
throughout the heavens of compound objects. Discoveries with the
spectroscope have ratified and extended this conclusion.

  Stellar parallax.

Only spurious star-parallaxes had claimed the attention of astronomers
until F.W. Bessel announced, in December 1838, the perspective yearly
shifting of 61 Cygni in an ellipse with a mean radius of about one-third
of a second. Thomas Henderson (1798-1844) had indeed measured the larger
displacements of [alpha] Centauri at the Cape in 1832-1833, but delayed
until 1839 to publish his result. Out of several hundred stars since
then examined, seventy or eighty have yielded fairly accurate, though
very small parallaxes. But this amount of knowledge, however valuable in
itself, is utterly inadequate to the needs of sidereal research; and
various attempts have accordingly been made, chiefly by Professors J.C.
Kapteyn and Simon Newcomb, to estimate, through the analysis of their
proper motions, the "mean parallax" of stars assorted by magnitude. And
the data thus arrived at are reassuringly self-consistent. A wide
photographic survey, by which parallaxes might be secured wholesale, has
further been recommended by Kapteyn; but is unlikely to be undertaken in
the immediate future.

  Proper motions.

The exhaustive ascertainment of stellar parallaxes, combined with the
visible facts of stellar distribution, would enable us to build a
perfect plan of the universe in three dimensions. Its perfection would,
nevertheless, be undermined by the mobility of all its constituent
parts. Their configuration at a given instant supplies no information as
to their configuration hereafter unless the mode and laws of their
movements have been determined. Hence, one of the leading inducements
to the construction of exact and comprehensive catalogues has been to
elicit, by comparisons of those for widely separated epochs, the proper
motions of the stars enumerated in them. Little was known on the subject
at the beginning of the 19th century. William Herschel founded his
determination in 1783 of the sun's route in space upon the movements of
thirteen stars; and he took into account those of only six in his second
solution of the problem in 1805. But in 1837 Argelander employed 390
proper motions as materials for the treatment of the same subject; and
L. Struve had at his disposal, in 1887, no less than 2800. From the
re-observation of Lalande's stars, after the lapse of not far from a
century, J. Bossert was enabled to deduce 2675 proper motions, published
at Paris in four successive memoirs, 1887-1902; and the sum-total of
those ascertained probably now exceeds 6000. Yet this number, although
it represents a portentous expenditure of labour, is insignificant
compared with the multitude of the stellar throng; nor had any general
tendency been discerned to regulate what seemed casual flittings until
Professor Kapteyn, in 1904, adverted to the prevalence among all the
brighter stars of opposite stream-flows towards two "vertices" situated
in the Milky Way (see STAR). The assured general fact as regards the
direction of stellar movements was that they included a common
parallactic element due to the sun's translation. And it is by the
consideration of this partial accordance in motion that the advance
through space of the solar system has been ascertained.

  Astrophysics.

  Spectrum analysis.

The apex of the sun's way was fixed by Professor Newcomb in 1898 at a
point about 4° S. of the brilliant star Vega; but was shifted nearly 7°
to the S.W. by J.C. Kapteyn's inquiry in 1901; so that the range of
uncertainty as to its position continues unsatisfactorily wide. The
speed with which our system progresses is, on the other hand, fairly
well known. It cannot differ much from 12½ m. a second, the rate
assigned to it by Professor W.W. Campbell in 1902. He employed in his
discussion the radial velocities of 280 stars, spectroscopically
determined; and the upshot signally exemplified the community of
interests between the rising science of astrophysics and the ancient
science of astrometry. Their characteristic purposes are, nevertheless,
entirely different. The positions of the heavenly bodies in space, and
the changes of those positions with time, constitute the primary subject
of investigation by the elder school; while the new astronomy concerns
itself chiefly with the individual peculiarities of suns and planets,
with their chemistry, physical habitudes and modes of luminosity. Its
distinctive method is spectrum analysis, the invention and development
of which in the 19th century have fundamentally altered the purpose and
prospects of celestial inquiries.

  Wollaston.

  Fraunhofer.

  Kirchhoff.

  Chemistry of the sun.

A beam of sunlight admitted into a darkened room through a narrow
aperture, and there dispersed into a vario-tinted band by the
interposition of a prism, is not absolutely continuous. Dr W.H.
Wollaston made the experiment in 1802, and perceived the spaces of
colour to be interrupted by seven obscure gaps, which took the shape of
lines owing to his use of rectangular slit. He thus caught a preliminary
glimpse of the "Fraunhofer lines," so called because Joseph Fraunhofer
brought them into prominent notice by the diligence and insight of his
labours upon them in 1814-1815. He mapped 324, chose out nine, which he
designated by the letters of the alphabet, to be standards of
measurement for the rest, and ascertained the coincidence in position
between the double yellow ray derived from the flame of burning sodium
and the pair of dark lines named by him "D" in the solar spectrum. There
ensued forty-five years of groping for a law which should clear up the
enigma of the solar reversals. Partial anticipations abounded. The vital
heart of the matter was barely missed by W.A. Miller in 1845, by L.
Foucault in 1849, by A.J. Ångström in 1853, by Balfour Stewart in 1858;
while Sir George Stokes held the solution of the problem in the hollow
of his hand from 1852 onward. But it was the synthetic genius of Gustav
Kirchhoff which first gave unity to the scattered phenomena, and finally
reconciled what was elicited in the laboratory with what was observed in
the sun. On the 15th of December 1859 he communicated to the Berlin
Academy of Sciences the principle which bears his name. Its purport is
that glowing vapours similarly circumstanced absorb the identical
radiations which they emit. That is to say, they stop out just those
sections of white light transmitted through them which form their own
special luminous badges. Moreover, if the white light come from a source
at a higher temperature than theirs, the sections, or lines, absorbed by
them show dark against a continuous background. And this is precisely
the case with the sun. Kirchhoff's principle, accordingly, not only
afforded a simple explanation of the Fraunhofer lines, but availed to
found a far-reaching science of celestial chemistry. Thousands of the
dark lines in the solar spectrum agree absolutely in wave-length with
the bright rays artificially obtained from known substances, and
appertaining to them individually. These substances must then exist near
the sun. They are in fact suspended in a state of vapour between our
eyes and the photosphere, the dazzling prismatic radiance of which they,
to a minute extent, intercept, thus writing their signatures on the
coloured scroll of dispersed sunshine. By persistent research,
powerfully aided by the photographic camera and by the concave gratings
invented by H.A. Rowland (1848-1901) in 1882, about forty terrestrial
elements have been identified in the sun. Among them, iron, sodium,
magnesium, calcium and hydrogen are conspicuous; but it would be rash to
assert that any of the seventy forms of matter provisionally enumerated
in text-books are wholly absent from his composition.

  Solar eclipses.

Solar physics has profited enormously by the abolition of glare during
total eclipses. That of the 8th of July 1842 was the first to be
efficiently observed; and the luminous appendages to the sun disclosed
by it were such as to excite startled attention. Their investigation has
since been diligently prosecuted. The corona was photographed at
Königsberg during the totality of the 28th of July 1851; similar records
of the red prominences, successively obtained by Father Angelo Secchi
and Warren de la Rue, as the shadow-track crossed Spain on the 18th of
July 1860, finally demonstrated their solar status. The Indian eclipse
of the 18th of August 1868 supplied knowledge of their spectrum, found
to include the yellow ray of an exotic gas named by Sir Norman Lockyer
"helium." It further suggested, to Lockyer and P. Janssen separately,
the spectroscopic method of observing these objects in daylight. Under
cover of an eclipse visible in North America on the 7th of August 1869,
the bright green line of the corona was discerned; and Professor C.A.
Young caught the "flash spectrum" of the reversing layer, at the moment
of second contact, at Xerez de la Frontera in Spain, on the 22nd of
December 1870. This significant but evanescent phenomenon, which
represents the direct emissions of a low-lying solar envelope, was
photographed by William Shackleton on the occasion of an eclipse in
Novaya Zemlya on the 9th of August 1896; and it has since been
abundantly registered by exposures made during the obscurations of 1898,
1900, 1901 and 1905. A singular and unlooked-for result of eclipse-work
has been to include the corona within the scope of solar periodicity.
Heinrich Schwabe established, in 1851, the cyclical variation, in eleven
years, of spot-frequency; terrestrial magnetic disturbances manifestly
obeyed the same law; and the peculiar winged aspect of the corona
disclosed by the eclipse of the 29th of July 1878, at an epoch of
minimum sun-spots, intimated to A.C. Ranyard a theory of coronal types,
changing concurrently with the fluctuations of spot-activity. This was
amply verified at subsequent eclipses.

  Prominence photography.

The photography of prominences was, after some preliminary trials by
C.A. Young and others, fully realized in 1891 by Professor George E.
Hale at Chicago, and independently by Henri Deslandres at Paris. The
pictures were taken, in both cases, with only one quality of light; the
violet ray of calcium, the remaining superfluous beams being eliminated
by the agency of a double slit. The last-named expedient had been
described by Janssen in 1867. Hale devised on the same principle the
"spectroheliograph," an instrument by which the sun's disk can be
photographed in calcium-light by imparting a rapid movement to its image
relatively to the sensitive plate; and the method has proved in many
ways fruitful.

  Stellar spectroscopy.

The likeness of the sun to the stars has been shown by the spectroscope
to be profound and inherent. Yet the general agreement of solar and
stellar chemistry does not exclude important diversities of detail.
Fraunhofer was the pioneer in this branch. He observed, in 1823, dark
lines in stellar spectra which Kirchhoff's discovery supplied the means
of interpreting. The task, attempted by G.B. Donati in 1860, was
effectively taken in hand, two years later, by Angelo Secchi, William
Huggins and Lewis M. Rutherfurd. There ensued a general classification
of the stars by Secchi into four leading types, distinguished by
diversities of spectral pattern; and the recognition by Huggins of a
considerable number of terrestrial elements as present in stellar
atmospheres. Nebular chemistry was initiated by the same investigator
when, on the 29th of August 1864, he observed the bright-line spectrum
of a planetary nebula in Draco. About seventy analogous objects,
including that in the Sword of Orion, were found by him to give light of
the same quality; and thus after seventy-three years, verification was
brought to William Herschel's hypothesis of a "shining fluid" diffused
through space, the possible raw material of stars. In 1874, Dr H.C.
Vogel published a modification of Secchi's scheme of stellar
diversities, and gave it organic meaning by connecting spectral
differences with advance in "age." And in 1895, he set apart, as in the
earliest stage of growth, a new class of "helium stars," supposed to
develop successively into Sirian, solar, Antarian, or alternatively into
carbon stars.

  Spectra of comets.

On the 5th of August 1864, G.B. Donati analysed the light of a small
comet into three bright bands. Sir William Huggins repeated the
experiment on Winnecke's comet in 1868, obtained the same bands, and
traced them to their origin from glowing carbon-vapour. A photograph of
the spectrum of Tebbutt's comet, taken by him on the 24th of June 1881,
showed radiations of shorter wave-lengths but identical source, and in
addition, a percentage of reflected solar light marked as such by the
presence of some well-known Fraunhofer lines. Further experience has
generalized these earlier results. The rule that comets yield
carbon-spectra has scarcely any exceptions. The usual bands were,
however, temporarily effaced in the two brilliant apparitions of 1882 by
vivid rays of sodium and iron, emitted during the excitement of
perihelion-passage.

  Progress in spectrography.

The adoption, by Sir William Huggins in 1876, of gelatine or dry plates
in celestial photography was a change of decisive import. For it made
long exposures possible; and only with long exposures could autographic
impressions be secured of such faint objects as nebulae, telescopic
comets, and the immense majority of stars, or of the dim ranges of
stellar and nebular spectra. The first conspicuous triumph of the new
"spectrographic" art thus established was the record by Huggins in 1879
of the dispersed light of several "white" or Sirian stars, in which the
chief traits of absorption were the rhythmical series of hydrogen-lines,
then memorably discovered. Again by Sir William Huggins, the spectrum of
the Orion nebula was photographed on the 7th of March 1882; and the
method has gradually become nearly exclusive in the study of nebular
emanations. The "Draper Catalogue" of 10,351 stellar spectra was
published by Professor E.C. Pickering in 1890. The materials for it were
rapidly accumulated by the use of an objective prism, that is, of a
prism placed in front of, instead of behind the object-lens, by which
means the spectra of all the stars in the field, to the number often of
many score, imprinted themselves simultaneously on the sensitive plate.
The progress of this survey was marked by a number of important
discoveries of "new" and variable stars and of spectroscopic binaries,
mainly through the acumen of Mrs Williamina Paton Fleming of Harvard
College in scrutinizing the negatives forming the data for the great
catalogue.

  Doppler's principle.

The principle that the refrangibility of light is altered by end-on
motion was enunciated by Christian Doppler of Prague in 1842. The pitch
of a steam-whistle quite obviously rises and falls as the engine to
which it is attached approaches and recedes from a stationary auditor;
and light-pulses are modified like sound-waves by velocity in the line
of sight. They are crowded together and therefore rendered shorter and
more frequent by the advance of their source, but drawn apart and
lengthened by its recession. These effects vary with the rate of motion,
which they consequently serve to measure; and they are produced
indifferently by movements of the spectator or of the light-source. But
Doppler's idea that they might be detected by colour-change was entirely
illusory. It would apply only if the spectrum had no infra-red and
ultraviolet extensions. These, however, since they share the general
lengthening or shortening of wave-length through motion, are thereby
shifted, to a certain definite extent, into visibility, and so produce
accurate chromatic compensation. Integrated light, accordingly, tells
nothing about velocity; but analysed light does, when it includes bright
or dark rays the normal positions of which are known. The distinction
was pointed out by Hippolyte Fizeau in 1848. By comparison with their
analogues in the laboratory it can be determined whether, in which
direction, and how much, lines of recognized origin are displaced in the
spectra of the heavenly bodies. This subtle mode of research was made
available by Sir William Huggins in 1868. He employed it, with an
outcome of striking promise, to measure the radial speed of some of the
brighter stars. In the following year, Sir Norman Lockyer was enabled to
prove, by its means, the extraordinary vehemence of chromospheric
disturbances, the bright prominence-rays in his spectroscope betraying,
through their opposite shiftings, movements and counter-movements up to
120 m. a second; while its validity and refinement were, in 1871,
vouched for by H.C. Vogel's observations on the 9th of June 1871, of
differences due to the sun's rotation in the refrangibility of
Fraunhofer lines derived respectively from the east and west limbs.
Stellar line-of-sight work, however, made no satisfactory progress
until, in 1888, Vogel changed the _venue_ from the eye to the camera. A
high degree of precision in measurement thus became attainable, and has
since been fully attained. Not only the grosser facts concerning radial
velocity, but variations in it so small as a mile, or less, per second,
have been recorded and interpreted in terms of deep meaning. For the
investigation of the general scheme of sidereal structure, the
multiplication of results of the kind is indispensable. But as yet, the
recessional or approaching movements of only a few hundred stars have
been registered; and this store of information is scanty indeed compared
with the needs of research. How the stars really move in space, and how
the sun travels among them, can be ascertained only with the aid of
materials collected by the spectrograph, which has now fortunately been
brought to comply with the arduous conditions of exactitude requisite
for collaboration with the transit instrument and its allies, the clock
and chronograph. And here, to their great mutual advantage, the old and
the new astronomies meet and join forces.

  AUTHORITIES.--R. Grant, _History of Physical Astronomy_ (1852); Sir G.
  Cornewall Lewis, _An Historical Survey of the Astronomy of the
  Ancients_ (1862); J.B.J. Delambre, _Hist. de l'astr. ancienne; Hist.
  de l'astr. au moyen âge; Hist. de l'astr. moderne; Hist, de l'astr. au
  XVIII^e siècle_; J.S. Bailly, _Histoire de l'astronomie_ (5 vols.,
  1775-1787); J.F. Weidler, _Historia Astronomiae_ (1741); J.H. Mädler,
  _Geschichte der Himmelskunde_ (1873); R. Wolf, _Geschichte der
  Astronomie_ (1876); _Handbuch der Astronomie_ (1890-1892); W. Whewell,
  _Hist. of the Inductive Sciences_; A.M. Clerke, _Hist. of Astronomy
  during the 19th Century_ (4th ed., 1903); A. Berry, _Hist. of
  Astronomy_ (1898); J.K. Schaubach, _Geschichte der griechischen
  Astronomie bis auf Eratosthenes_ (1802); Th. H. Martin, "Mémoire sur
  l'histoire des hypotheses astronomiques," _Mémoires de l'lnstitut_, t.
  xxx. (Paris, 1881); P. Tannery, _Recherches sur l'histoire de
  l'astronomie ancienne_ (1893); O. Gruppe, _Die kosmischen Systeme der
  Griechen_ (1851); G.V. Schiaparelli, _I Precursori del Copernico_
  (1873); _Le Sfere Omocentriche di Eudosso_ (1875); P. Jensen,
  _Kosmologie der Babylonier_ (1890); F.X. Kugler, _Die babylonische
  Mondrechnung_ (1900); J. Epping and J.N. Strassmeier, _Astronomisches
  aus Babylon_ (1889); F.K. Ginzel, _Die astronomischen Kenntnisse der
  Babylonier_ (1901); C.L. Ideler, _Historische Untersuchungen über die
  astronomischen Beobachtungen der Alten_ (1806); _Handbuch der math.
  Chronologie_ (2 vols., 1825-1826); _Untersuchungen über den Ursprung
  der Sternnamen_ (1809); G. Costard, _History of Astronomy_ (1767); J.
  Narrien, _An Historical Account of the Origin and Progress of
  Astronomy_ (1833); J.L.E. Dreyer, _Hist. of the Planetary Systems_
  (1906); G.W. Hill, "Progress of Celestial Mechanics," _The
  Observatory_, vol. xix. (1896).     (A. M. C.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] _The Observatory_, Nos. 231-234, 1895.

  [2] _Observations of Comets_, translated from the Chinese _Annals_ by
   John Williams, F.S.A. (1871).

  [3] J.L.E. Dreyer, _Proc. Roy. Irish Acad._ vol. iii. No. 7 (December
   1881).

  [4] F.K. Ginzel, "Die astronomischen Kenntnisse der Babylonier," C.F.
    Lehmann, _Beiträge zur alten Geschichte_, Heft i. p. 6 (1901).

  [5] _Knowledge and Scientific News_, vol. i. pp. 2, 228.

  [6] _Astronomisches aus Babylon_ (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1889).

  [7] Ginzel, loc. cit. Heft ii. p. 204.

  [8] _Die babylonische Mondrechnung_, p. 50 (1900).

  [9] S. Newcomb, _Astr. Nach._ No. 3682; P.H. Cowell, _Month. Notices
    Roy. Astr. Soc._ lxv. 867.

  [10] G.V. Schiaparelli, _I Precursori del Copernico_, pp. 23-28,
    Pubbl. del R. Osservatorio di Brera, No. iii. (1873).

  [11] G.V. Schiaparelli, _I Precursori del Copernico_, pp. 23-28,
    Pubbl. del R. Osservatorio di Brera, No. ix.

  [12] Marie. _Hist. des sciences_, t. i. p. 79; P. Tannery, _Hist. de
    l'astronomie ancienne_, ch. v. p. 115.

  [13] Published by H.C. Schjellerup in a French translation (St
    Petersburg, 1874).

  [14] Newcomb, _Researches on the Motion of the Moon_, Washington
    Observations for 1875, Appendix ii. p. 20.

  [15] F. Baily, _Memoirs Roy. Astr. Society_, vol. xiii. p. 19.

  [16] J.L.E. Dreyer, _Life of Tycho Brahe_, p. 321.