ASTURIAS, an ancient province and principality of northern Spain,
bounded on the N. by the Bay of Biscay, E. by Old Castile, S. by Leon
and W. by Galicia. Pop. (1900) 627,069; area, 4205 sq. m. By the
division of Spain in 1833, the province took the name of Oviedo, though
not to the exclusion, in ordinary usage, of the older designation. A
full description of its modern condition is therefore given under the
heading OVIEDO; the present article being confined to an account of its
physical features, its history, and the resultant character of its
inhabitants. Asturias consists of a portion of the northern slope of the
Cantabrian Mountains, and is covered in all directions with offshoots
from the main chain, by which it is almost completely shut in on the
south. The higher summits, which often reach a height of 7000-8000 ft.,
are usually covered with snow until July or August, and the whole region
is one of the wildest and most picturesque parts of Spain. Until the
first railway was opened, in the middle of the 19th century, few of the
passes across the mountains were practicable for carriages, and most of
them are difficult even for horses. A narrow strip of level moorland,
covered with furze and rich in deposits of peat, coal and amber,
stretches inland, from the edge of the sheer cliffs which line the
coast, to the foot of the mountains. The province is watered by numerous
streams and rivers, which have hollowed out deep valleys; but owing to
the narrowness of the level tract, their courses are short, rapid and
subject to floods. The most important is the Nalon or Pravia, which
receives the waters of the Caudal, the Trubia and the Narcea, and has a
course of 62 m.; after it rank the Navia and the Sella. The estuaries of
these rivers are rarely navigable, and along the entire littoral, a
distance of 130 m., the only important harbours are at Gijón and Avilés.

A country so rugged, and so isolated by land and sea, naturally served
as the last refuge of the older races of Spain when hard pressed by
successive invaders. Before the Roman conquest, the Iberian tribe of
Astures had been able to maintain itself independent of the
Carthaginians, and to extend its territory as far south as the Douro. It
was famous for its wealth in horses and gold. About 25 B.C., the Romans
subjugated the district south of the Cantabrians, to which they gave the
name of Augustana. Their capital was Asturica Augusta, the modern
Astorga, in Leon. The warlike mountaineers of the northern districts,
known as Transmontana, never altogether abandoned their hostility to the
Romans, whose rule was ended by the Visigothic conquest, late in the 5th
century. In 713, two years after the defeat and death of Roderick, the
last Visigothic king, all Spain, except Galicia and Asturias, fell into
the hands of the Moors. One of the surviving Christian leaders, Pelayo
the Goth, took refuge with three hundred followers in the celebrated
cave of Covadonga, or Cobadonga, near Cangas de Onís, and from this
hiding-place undertook the Christian reconquest of Spain. The Asturians
chose him as their king in 718, and although Galicia was lost in 734,
the Moors proved unable to penetrate into the remoter fastnesses held by
the levies of Pelayo. After his death in 737, the Asturians continued to
offer the same heroic resistance, and ultimately enabled the people of
Galicia, Leon and Castile to recover their liberty. The title of prince
of Asturias, conferred on the heir-apparent to the crown of Spain, dates
from 1388, when it was first bestowed on a Castilian prince. The title
of count of Covadonga is assumed by the kings of Spain. In modern times
Asturias formed a captaincy-general, divided into Asturias d'Oviedo,
which corresponds with the limits of the ancient principality, and
Asturias de Santillana, which now constitutes the western half of
Santander.

Owing to their almost entire immunity from any alien domination except
that of the Romans and Goths, the Asturians may perhaps be regarded as
the purest representatives of the Iberian race; while their dialect
(_linguaje bable_) is sometimes held to be closely akin to the parent
speech from which modern Castilian is derived. It is free from Moorish
idioms, and, like Galician and Portuguese it often retains the original
Latin _f_ which Castilian changes into _h_. In physique, the Asturians
are like the Galicians, a people of hardy mountaineers and fishermen,
finely built, but rarely handsome, and with none of the grace of the
Castilian or Andalusian. Unlike the Galicians, however, they are
remarkable for their keen spirit of independence, which has been
fostered by centuries of isolation. Despite the harsh land-laws and
grinding taxation which prevent them, with all their industry and
thrift, from securing the freehold of the patch of ground cultivated by
each peasant family, the Asturians regard themselves as the aristocracy
of Spain. This pride in their land, race and history they preserve even
when, as often happens, they emigrate to other parts of the country or
to South America, and earn their living as servants, water-carriers, or,
in the case of the women, as nurses. They make admirable soldiers and
sailors, but lack the enterprise and commercial aptitude of the Basques
and Catalans; while they are differentiated from the inhabitants of
central and southern Spain by their superior industry, and perhaps their
lower standard of culture. It is, on the whole, true that by the
exclusion of the Moors they lost their opportunity of playing any
conspicuous part in the literary and artistic development of Spain. One
class of the Asturians deserving special mention is that of the nomad
cattle-drovers known as Baqueros or Vaqueros, who tend their herds on
the mountains of Leitariegos in summer, and along the coast in winter;
forming a separate caste, with distinctive customs, and rarely or never
intermarrying with their neighbours.

  For the modern condition of the principality (including climate, fauna
  and flora), see S. Canals, _Asturias: informancion sobre su presente
  estado_ (Madrid, 1900); and G. Casal, _Memorias de historia natural y
  médica, de Asturias_ (Oviedo, 1900). For the history and antiquities,
  there is much that is valuable in _Asturias monumental, epigráfica y
  diplomática_, &c., by C.M. Vigil (Madrid, 1887)--folio, with maps and
  illustrations. See also F. de Aramburu y Zuloaga, _Monografia de
  Asturias_ (Oviedo, 1899).