ASTYAGES, the last king of the Median empire. In the inscriptions of
Nabonidus the name is written Ishtuvegu (cylinder from Abu Habba V R 64,
col. 1, 32; Annals, published by Pinches, _Tr. Soc. Bibl. Arch_. vii.
col. 2, 2). According to Herodotus, he was the son of Cyaxares and
reigned thirty-five years (584-550 B.C.); his wife was Aryenis, the
daughter of Alyattes of Lydia (Herod, i. 74). About his reign we know
little, as the narrative of Herodotus, which makes Cyrus the grandson of
Astyages by his daughter Mandane, is merely a legend; the figure of
Harpagus, who as general of the Median army betrays the king to Cyrus,
alone seems to contain an historical element, as Harpagus and his family
afterwards obtained a high position in the Persian empire. From the
inscriptions of Nabonidus we learn that Cyrus, king of Anshan (Susiana),
began war against him in 553 B.C.; in 550, when Astyages marched against
Cyrus, his troops rebelled, and he was taken prisoner. Then Cyrus
occupied and plundered Ecbatana. The captive king was treated fairly by
Cyrus (Herod, i. 130), and according to Ctesias (_Pers_. 5, cf. Justin
i. 6) made satrap of Hyrcania, where he was afterwards slain by Oebares
against the will of Cyrus, who gave him a splendid funeral. Alexander
Polyhistor and Abydenus in their excerpts from Berossus, which Eusebius
(_Chron_. i. pp. 29 and 37) and Syncellus (p. 396) have preserved, give
the name Astyages to the Median king who reigned in the time of the fall
of Nineveh (606 B.C.), and became father-in-law of Nebuchadrezzar. This
is evidently a mistake; the name ought to be Cyaxares (in the fragments
of the Jewish history of Alexander Polyhistor, in Euseb. _Praep. Ev_.
ix. 39, the name is converted into Astibaras, who, according to the
unhistorical list of Ctesias, was the father of Astyages), and there is
no reason to invent an earlier king Astyages I., as some modern authors
have done. The Armenian historians render the name Astyages by Ashdahak,
i.e. Azhi Dahaka (Zohak), the mythical king of the Iranian epics, who
has nothing whatever to do with the historical king of the Medes.
     (Ed. M.)