ASYLUM (from Gr. [Greek: a-], privative, and [Greek: sulae], right of
seizure), a place of refuge. In ancient Greece, an asylum was an
"inviolable" refuge for persons fleeing from pursuit and in search of
protection. In a general sense, all Greek temples and altars were
inviolable, that is, it was a religious crime to remove by force any
person or thing once under the protection of a deity. But it was only in
the case of a small number of temples that this protecting right of a
deity was recognized with common consent. Such were the sanctuaries of
Zeus Lycaeus in Arcadia, of Poseidon in the island of Calauria, and of
Apollo at Delos, they were, however, numerous in Asia Minor. They
guaranteed absolute security to the suppliant within their limits. The
right of sanctuary, originally possessed by all temples, appears to have
become limited to a few in consequence of abuses of it. Asylums in this
sense were peculiar to the Greeks. The asylum of Romulus (Livy i. 8),
which was probably the altar of Veiovis, cannot be considered as such.
Under Roman dominion, the rights of existing Greek sanctuaries were at
first confirmed, but their number was considerably reduced by Tiberius.
Under the Empire, the statues of the emperors and the eagles of the
legions were made refuges against acts of violence. Generally speaking,
the classes of persons who claimed the rights of asylum were slaves who
had been maltreated by their masters, soldiers defeated and pursued by
the enemy, and criminals who feared a trial or who had escaped before
sentence was passed. (See treatises _De Asylis Graecis_, by Förster,
1847; Jaenisch, 1868; Barth, 1888.)

With the establishment of Christianity, the custom of asylum or
sanctuary (q.v.) became attached to the church or churchyard. In modern
times the word asylum has come to mean an institution providing shelter
or refuge for any class of afflicted or destitute persons, such as the
blind, deaf and dumb, &c., but more particularly the insane. (See
INSANITY.)