ATACAMA, DESERT OF, an arid, barren and saline region of western South
America, covering the greater part of the Chilean provinces of Atacama
and Antofagasta, the Argentine territory of Los Andes, and the
south-western corner of the Bolivian department of Potosí. The higher
elevations are known as the Puna de Atacama, which is practically a
continuation southward of the great _puna_ region of Peru and Bolivia.
It is a broken, mountainous region, volcanic in places, saline in
others, and ranges from 7000 to 13,500 ft. in general elevation. Its
culminating ridges are marked by an irregular line of peaks and extinct
volcanoes extending north by east from about 28° S. into southern
Bolivia. On the eastern side, occasional rainfalls occur and streams
from the snow-clads peaks produce some slight displays of fertility, but
the general aspect of the plateaus, which are dry and cold in winter and
in summer are swept by rainstorms and covered by occasional tufts of
coarse grass, is barren and forbidding. They are also broken by great
saline lagoons and dry salt basins. This region forms the Argentine
territory of Los Andes and is habitable in places. On the western slope
the land descends gradually to the Pacific, being broken into great
basins, or terraces, by mountainous ridges in its higher elevations,
widening out into gently-sloping sandy plains below, famous for their
nitrate deposits, and terminating on the coast with sharply-sloping
bluffs, having an elevation of 800 to 1500 ft., and looking from the sea
like a range of flat-topped hills. This desolate region, which is
rainless and absolutely barren, and was considered worthless for three
and a half centuries, is now a treasure-house of mineral wealth,
abounding in copper, silver, lead, nickel, cobalt, iron, nitrates and
borax. It is occupied by many mining settlements, and includes some of
the most productive copper and silver mines of the world.

  See L. Darapsky, "Zur Geographic der Puna de Atacama," _Zeits. Ges.
  Erdk. zu Berlin_, 1899; G.E. Church, "South America: an Outline of its
  Physical Geography," _Geographical Journal_, 1901; John Ball, _Notes
  of a Naturalist in South America_ (London, 1887); F. O'Driscoll, "A
  Journey to the North of the Argentine Republic," _Geographical
  Journal_, 1904.     (A. J. L.)