ATAHUALLPA (_atahu_, Lat. _virtus_, and _allpa_, sweet), "the last of
the Incas" (or Yncas) of Peru, was the son of the ruler Huayna Capac, by
Pacha, the daughter of the conquered sovereign of Quito. His brother
Huascar succeeded Huayna Capac in 1527; for, as Atahuallpa was not
descended on both sides from the line of Incas, Peruvian law considered
him illegitimate. He obtained, however, the kingdom of Quito. A jealous
feeling soon sprang up between him and Huascar, who insisted that Quito
should be held as a dependent province of his empire. A civil war broke
out between the brothers, and, about the time when the Spanish conqueror
Pizarro was beginning to move inland from the town of San Miguel,
Huascar had been defeated and thrown into prison, and Atahuallpa had
become Inca. Pizarro set out in September 1532, and made for Caxamarca,
where the Inca was. Messengers passed frequently between them, and the
Spaniards on their march were hospitably received by the inhabitants. On
the 15th of November, Pizarro entered Caxamarca, and sent his brother
and Ferdinando de Soto to request an interview with the Inca. On the
evening of the next day, Atahuallpa entered the great square of
Caxamarca, accompanied by some five or six thousand men, who were either
unarmed or armed only with short clubs and slings concealed under their
dresses. Pizarro's artillery and soldiers were planted in readiness in
the streets opening off the square. The interview was carried on by the
priest Vicente de Valverde, who addressed the Inca through an
interpreter. He stated briefly and dogmatically the principal points of
the Christian faith and the Roman Catholic policy, and concluded by
calling upon Atahuallpa to become a Christian, obey the commands of the
pope, give up the administration of his kingdom, and pay tribute to
Charles V., to whom had been granted the conquest of these lands. To
this extraordinary harangue, which from its own nature and the faults of
the interpreter must have been completely unintelligible, the Inca at
first returned a very temperate answer. He pointed out what seemed to
him certain difficulties in the Christian religion, and declined to
accept as monarch of his dominions this Charles, of whom he knew
nothing. He then took a bible from the priest's hands, and, after
looking at it, threw it violently from him, and began a more impassioned
speech, in which he exposed the designs of the Spaniards, and upbraided
them with the cruelties they had perpetrated. The priest retired, and
Pizarro at once gave the signal for attack. The Spaniards rushed out
suddenly, and the Peruvians, astonished and defenceless, were cut down
in hundreds. Pizarro himself seized the Inca, and in endeavouring to
preserve him alive, received, accidentally, on his hand the only wound
inflicted that day on a Spaniard. Atahuallpa, thus treacherously
captured, offered an enormous sum of money as a ransom, and fulfilled
his engagement; but Pizarro still detained him, until the Spaniards
should have arrived in sufficient numbers to secure the country. While
in captivity, Atahuallpa gave secret orders for the assassination of his
brother Huascar, and also endeavoured to raise an army to expel the
invaders. His plans were betrayed, and Pizarro at once brought him to
trial. He was condemned to death, and, as being an idolater, to death by
fire. Atahuallpa, however, professed himself a Christian, received
baptism, and his sentence was then altered into death by strangulation
(August 29, 1533). His body was afterwards burned, and the ashes
conveyed to Quito. (See also PERU: _History_.)