ATARGATIS, a Syrian deity, known to the Greeks by a shortened form of
the name, Derketo (Strabo xvi. c. 785; Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ v. 23. 81),
and as Dea Syria, or in one word Deasura (Lucian, _de Dea Syria_). She
is generally described as the "fish-goddess." The name is a compound of
two divine names; the first part is a form of the Himyaritic _'Athlar_,
the equivalent of the Old Testament _Ashtoreth_, the Phoenician
_Astarte_ (q.v.), with the feminine ending omitted (Assyr. _Ishtar_);
the second is a Palmyrene name _'Athe_ (_i.e. tempus opportunum_), which
occurs as part of many compounds. As a consequence of the first half of
the name, Atargatis has frequently, though wrongly, been identified with
Astarte. The two deities were, no doubt, of common origin, but their
cults are historically distinct. In 2 Macc. xii. 26 we find reference to
an Atargateion or Atergateion (temple of Atargatis) at Carnion in Gilead
(cf. 1 Macc. v. 43), but the home of the goddess was unquestionably not
Palestine, but Syria proper, especially at Hierapolis (q.v.), where she
had a great temple. From Syria her worship extended to Greece, Italy and
the furthest west. Lucian and Apuleius give descriptions of the
beggar-priests who went round the great cities with an image of the
goddess on an ass and collected money. The wide extension of the cult is
attributable largely to Syrian merchants; thus we find traces of it in
the great seaport towns; at Delos especially numerous inscriptions have
been found bearing witness to its importance. Again we find the cult in
Sicily, introduced, no doubt, by slaves and mercenary troops, who
carried it even to the farthest northern limits of the Roman empire. In
many cases, however, Atargatis and Astarte are fused to such an extent
as to be indistinguishable. This fusion is exemplified by the Carnion
temple, which is probably identical with the famous temple of Astarte at
Ashtaroth-Karnaim.

Atargatis appears generally as the wife of Hadad (Baal). They are the
protecting deities of the community. Atargatis, in the capacity of
[Greek: polionchos], wears a mural crown, is the ancestor of the royal
house, the founder of social and religious life, the goddess of
generation and fertility (hence the prevalence of phallic emblems), and
the inventor of useful appliances. Not unnaturally she is identified
with the Greek Aphrodite. By the conjunction of these many functions,
she becomes ultimately a great Nature-Goddess, analogous to Cybele and
Rhea (see GREAT MOTHER OF THE GODS); in one aspect she typifies the
function of water in producing life; in another, the universal
mother-earth (Macrobius, _Saturn_, i. 23); in a third (influenced, no
doubt, by Chaldaean astrology), the power of destiny. The legends are
numerous and of an astrological character, intended to account for the
Syrian dove-worship and abstinence from fish (see the story in Athenaeus
viii. 37, where Atargatis is derived from [Greek: ates Gatidos] "without
Gatis,"--a queen who is said to have forbidden the eating of fish). Thus
Diodorus Siculus, using Ctesias, tells how she fell in love with a youth
who was worshipping at the shrine of Aphrodite, and by him became the
mother of Semiramis, the Assyrian queen, and how in shame she flung
herself into a pool at Ascalon or Hierapolis and was changed into a fish
(W. Robertson Smith in _Eng. Hist. Rev._ ii., 1887). In another story
she was hatched from an egg found by some fish in the Euphrates and by
them thrust on the bank where it was hatched by a dove; out of gratitude
she persuaded Jupiter to transfer the fish to the Zodiac (cf. Ovid,
_Fast._ ii. 459-474, _Metam._ v. 331).

  See articles _s.v._ in Herzog-Hauck, _Realencyk._ (1897), by W.
  Baudissin; and Pauly-Wissowa, _Realencyc._; Fr. Baethgen, _Beiträge
  zur Semit. Religiongesch._ (1888); R. Pietschmann, _Gesch. der
  Phönizier_ (1889).