ATELLANAE FABULAE ("Atellan fables"), the name of a sort of popular
comedy amongst the ancient Romans. The name is derived from Atella, an
Oscan town in Campania; for this reason, and from their being also
called _Osci Ludi_, it has been supposed that they were of Oscan origin
and introduced at Rome after Campania had been deprived of its
independence. It seems highly improbable that they were performed in the
Oscan language. Mommsen, however, rejects their Oscan origin altogether;
he regards them as purely Latin, the scene merely being laid at Atella
to avoid causing offence by placing it at Rome or one of the Latin
cities. These plays, or rather sketches, contained humorous descriptions
of country as contrasted with town life, and found their subjects
amongst the lower classes of the people. The subjects alone were decided
upon before the performance began; the dialogue was improvised as it
proceeded. The Atellanae contained certain stock characters, like the
Italian harlequinades: Maccus (the fool), Bucco (fat-chaps), Pappus
(daddy), Dossennus (sharper); monsters and bogeys like Manducus, Pytho,
Lamia also made their appearance. The performers were the sons of Roman
citizens, who did not lose their rights as citizens, and were allowed to
serve in the army: professional actors were excluded. The simple prose
dialogues were probably varied by songs in the rude Saturnian metre: the
language was that of the common people, accompanied by lively
gesticulation and movements. They were characterized by coarseness and
obscenity. In the time of Sulla a literary form was given to the
Atellanae by Pomponius of Bononia and Novius, who made them regular
written comedies. Living persons seem to have been attacked, and even
the doings of the gods and heroes of mythology burlesqued. From this
time the Atellanae were used as after-pieces and performed by
professional actors. In 46 B.C. they were ousted by the mimes, but
regained popularity during the reign of Tiberius (chiefly owing to a
certain Mummius), until they were definitely superseded by and merged in
the mimes. They held their ground in the small towns and villages of
Italy during the last days of the empire; they probably lingered on into
the middle ages, and were the origin of the Italian _Commedie dell'
arte._

  The scanty fragments of Pomponius and Novius are collected in
  Ribbeck's _Comicorum Romanorum Reliquiae_; see also Munk, _De Fabulis
  Atellanis_ (1840); and art. LATIN LITERATURE.