ATESTE (mod. _Este, q.v._), an ancient town of Venetia, at the southern
foot of the Euganean hills, 43 ft. above sea-level; 22 m. S.W. of
Patavium (Padua). The site was occupied in very early times, as the
discoveries since 1882 show. Large cemeteries have been excavated, which
show three different periods from the 8th century B.C. down to the Roman
domination. In the first period (Italic) cremation burials closely
approximating to the Villanova type are found; in the second[1]
(Venetian) the tombs are constructed of blocks of stone, and _situlae_
(bronze buckets), sometimes decorated with elaborate designs, are
frequently used to contain the cinerary urns; in the third (Gallic),
which begins during the 4th century B.C., though cremation continues,
the tombs are much poorer, the ossuaries being of badly baked rough
clay, and show traces of Gallic influence, and characteristics of the
La-Tène civilization. The many important objects found in these
excavations are preserved in the local museum. See G. Ghirardini in
_Notizie degli Scavi; Monumenti dei Lincei_, ii. (1893) 161 seq., vii.
(1897) 5 seq., x. (1901) 5 seq.; _Atti del Congresso Internazionale di
Scienze Storiche_ (Rome, 1904), v. 279 seq. Inscriptions show that the
national language asserted its existence even after Ateste came into the
hands of the Romans. When this occurred is not known; boundary stones of
135 B.C. exist, which divide the territory of Ateste from that of
Patavium and of Vicetia, showing that the former extended from the
middle of the Euganean hills to the Atesis (mod. _Adige_, from which
Ateste no doubt took its name, and on which it once stood). After the
battle of Actium, Augustus settled veterans from various of his legions
in this territory, Ateste being thenceforth spoken of as a colony. It
appears to have furnished many recruits, especially for the _cohortes
urbanae_. It appears but little in history, though its importance is
vouched for by numerous inscriptions, the majority of which belong to
the early Empire.     (T. As.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] This is by some authorities divided into two.