ATHANASIUS (293-373), bishop of Alexandria and saint, one of the most
illustrious defenders of the Christian faith, was born probably at
Alexandria. Of his family and of his early education nothing can be said
to be known. According to the legend, the boy is said to have once
baptized some of his playmates and thereupon to have been taken into his
house by Bishop Alexander, who recognized the validity of this
proceeding. It is certain that Athanasius was young when he took orders,
and that he must soon have entered into close relations with his bishop,
whom, after the outbreak of the Arian controversy, he accompanied as
archdeacon to the council of Nicaea. In the sessions and discussions of
the council he could take no part; but in unofficial conferences he took
sides vigorously, according to his own evidence, against the Arians, and
was certainly not without influence. He had already, before the opening
of the Council, defined his personal attitude towards the dogmatic
problem in two essays, _Against the Gentiles_ and _On the Incarnation_,
without, however, any special relation to the Arian controversy.

The essay _On the Incarnation_ is the _locus classicus_ for the
presentation of the teaching of the ancient church on the subject of
salvation. In this the great idea that God himself had entered into
humanity becomes dominant. The doom of death under which mankind had
sighed since Adam's fall could only then be averted, when the immortal
Word of God ([Greek: Logos]) assumed a mortal body, and, by yielding
this to death for the sake of all, abrogated once for all the law of
death, of which the power had been spent on the body of the Lord. Thus
was rendered possible the leading back of mankind to God, of which the
sure pledge lies in the grace of the resurrection of Christ. Athanasius
would hear of no questioning of this religious mystery. In the catchword
_Homousios_, which had been added to the creed at Nicaea, he too
recognized the best formula for the expression of the mystery, although
in his own writings he made but sparing use of it. He was in fact less
concerned with the formula than with the content. Arians and Semi-Arians
seemed to him to be pagans, who worship the creature, instead of the God
who created all things, since they teach two gods, one having no
beginning, the other having a beginning in Time and therefore of the
same nature as the heathen gods, since, like them, he is a creature.
Athanasius has no terms for the definition of the Persons in the one
"Divine" ([Greek: to theion]), which are in their substance one; and yet
he is certain that this "Divine" is not mere abstraction, but something
truly personal: "They are One," so he wrote later in his _Discourses
against the Arians_. "not as though the unity were torn into two parts,
which outside the unity would be nothing, nor as though the unity bore
two names, so that one and the same is at one time Father and then his
own Son, as the heretic Sabellius imagined. But they are two, for the
Father is Father, and the Son is not the same, but, again, the Son is
Son, and not the Father himself. But their Nature ([Greek: physis]) is
one, for the Begotten is not dissimilar ([Greek: anomoios]) to the
Begetter, but his image, and everything that is the Father's is also the
Son's."

Five months after the return from the council of Nicaea Bishop Alexander
died; and on the 8th of February 326 Athanasius, at the age of
thirty-three, became his successor. The first years of his episcopate
were tranquil; then the storms in which the remainder of his life was
passed began to gather round him. The council had by no means composed
the divisions in the Church which the Arian controversy had provoked.
Arius himself still lived, and his friend Eusebius of Nicomedia rapidly
regained influence over the emperor Constantine. The result was a demand
made by the emperor that Arius should be readmitted to communion.
Athanasius stood firm, but many accusers soon rose up against one who
was known to be under the frown of the imperial displeasure. He was
charged with cruelty, even with sorcery and murder. It was reported that
a bishop of the Meletian party (see MELETIUS) in the Thebaid, of the
name of Arsenius, had been unlawfully put to death by him. He was easily
able to clear himself of these charges; but the hatred of his enemies
was not relaxed, and in the summer of 335 he was peremptorily ordered to
appear at Tyre, where a council had been summoned to sit in judgment
upon his conduct. There appeared plainly a predetermination to condemn
him, and he fled from Tyre to Constantinople to appeal to the emperor
himself. Refused at first a hearing, his perseverance was at length
rewarded by the emperor's assent to his reasonable request that his
accusers should be brought face to face with him in the imperial
presence. Accordingly the leaders of the council, the most conspicuous
of whom were Eusebius of Nicomedia and his namesake of Caesarea, were
summoned to Constantinople. Here they did not attempt to repeat their
old charges, but found a more effective weapon to their hands in a new
charge of a political kind--that Athanasius had threatened to stop the
Alexandrian corn-ships bound for Constantinople. It is very difficult to
understand how far there was truth in the persistent accusations made
against the prince-bishop of Alexandria. Probably there was in the very
greatness of his character and the extent of his popular influence a
certain species of dominance which lent a colour of truth to some of the
things said against him. On the present occasion his accusers succeeded
at once in arousing the imperial jealousy. Without obtaining a hearing,
he was banished at the end of 335 to Trèves in Gaul. This was the first
banishment of Athanasius, which lasted about one year and a half. It was
brought to a close by the death of Constantine, and the accession as
emperor of the West of Constantine II., who, in June 337, allowed
Athanasius to return to Alexandria.

He reached his see on the 23rd of November 337, and, as he himself has
told us, "the people ran in crowds to see his face; the churches were
full of rejoicing; thanksgivings were everywhere offered up; the
ministers and clergy thought the day the happiest in their lives." But
this period of happiness was destined to be short-lived. His position as
bishop of Alexandria placed him, not under his patron Constantine, but
under Constantius, another son of the elder Constantine, who had
succeeded to the throne of the East. He in his turn fell, as his father
had done in later years, under the influence of Eusebius of Nicomedia,
who in the latter half of 339 was transferred to the see of
Constantinople, the new seat of the imperial court. A second expulsion
of Athanasius was accordingly resolved upon. The old accusations against
him were revived, and he was further charged with having set at naught
the decision of a council. On the 18th of March 339 the exarch of Egypt
suddenly confronted Athanasius with an imperial edict, by which he was
deposed and a Cappadocian named Gregory was nominated bishop in his
place. On the following day, after tumultuous scenes, Athanasius fled,
and four days later Gregory was installed by the aid of the soldiery. On
the first opportunity, Athanasius went to Rome, to "lay his case before
the church." A synod assembled at Rome in the autumn of 340, and the
great council--probably that which met at Sardica in 342 or 343, where
the Orientals refused to meet the representatives of the Western
church--declared him guiltless. This decision, however, had no immediate
effect in favour of Athanasius. Constantius continued for some time
implacable, and the bold action of the Western bishops only incited the
Arian party in Alexandria to fresh severities. But the death of the
intruder Gregory, on the 26th of June 345, opened up a way of
reconciliation. Constantius decided to yield to the importunity of his
brother Constans, who had succeeded Constantine II. in the West; and the
result was the restoration of Athanasius for the second time, on the
21st of October 346. Again he returned to Alexandria amid the
enthusiastic demonstrations of the populace, which is described by
Gregory of Nazianzus, in his panegyric on Athanasius, as streaming forth
like "another Nile" to meet him afar off as he approached the city.

The six years of his residence in the West had given Athanasius the
opportunity of displaying a momentous activity. He made long journeys in
Italy, in Gaul, and as far as Belgium. Everywhere he laboured for the
Nicene faith, and the impression made by his personality was so great
that to hold fast the orthodox faith and to defend Athanasius were for
many people one and the same thing. This was shown when, after the death
of the emperor Constans, Constantius became sole ruler of East and West.
With the help of counsellors more subtle than discerning, the emperor,
with the object of uniting the various parties in the Church at any
cost, sought for the most colourless possible formula of belief, which
he hoped to persuade all the bishops to accept. As his efforts remained
for years fruitless, he used force. "My will is your guiding-line," he
exclaimed in the summer of 355 to the bishops who had assembled at Milan
in response to his orders. A series of his most defiant opponents had to
go into banishment, Liberius of Rome, Hilarius of Poitiers and Hosius of
Corduba, the last-named once the confidant of Constantine and the actual
originator of the _Homousios_, and now nearly a hundred years old. At
length came the turn of Athanasius, now almost the sole upholder of the
banner of the Nicene creed in the East. Several attempts to expel him
failed owing to the attitude of the populace. On the night of the
8th-9th of February 356, however, when the bishop was holding the
Vigils, soldiers and police broke into the church of Theonas. Athanasius
himself has described the scene for us: "I was seated upon my chair, the
deacon was about to read the psalm, the people to answer, 'For his mercy
endureth for ever.' The solemn act was interrupted; a panic arose." The
bishop, who was at first unwilling to save himself, until he knew that
his faithful followers were in safety, succeeded in escaping, leaving
the town and finding a hiding-place in the country. The solitudes of
Upper Egypt, where numerous monasteries and hermitages had been planted,
seem at this time to have been his chief shelter. In this case, benefit
was repayed by benefit, for Athanasius during his episcopate had been a
zealous promoter of asceticism and monachism. With Anthony the hermit
and Pachomius the founder of monasteries, he had maintained personal
relations, and the former he had commemorated in his _Life of Anthony_.
During his exile his time was occupied in writing on behalf of his
cause, and to this period belong some of his most important works, above
all the great _Orations or Discourses against the Arians_, which furnish
the best exposition of his theological principles.

During his absence the see of Alexandria was left without a pastor. It
is true that George of Cappadocia had taken his place; but he could only
maintain himself for a short while (February 357-October 358). The great
majority of the population remained faithful to the exile. At length, in
November 361, the way was opened to him for his return to his see by the
death of Constantius. Julian, who succeeded to the imperial throne,
professed himself indifferent to the contentions of the Church, and gave
permission to the bishops exiled in the late reign to return home. Among
others, Athanasius availed himself of this permission, and in February
362 once more seated himself upon his throne, amid the rejoicings of
the people. He had begun his episcopal labours with renewed ardour, and
assembled his bishops in Alexandria to decide various important
questions, when an imperial mandate again--for the fourth time--drove
him from his place of power. The faithful gathered around him weeping.
"Be of good heart," he said, "it is but a cloud: it will pass." His
forecast proved true; for within a few months Julian had closed his
brief career of pagan revival. As early as September 363, Athanasius was
able to travel to Jovian, the new emperor, who had sent him a letter
praising his Christian fidelity and encouraging him to resume his work.
He returned to Alexandria on the 20th of February 364. With the emperor
he continued to maintain friendly relations; but the period of repose
was short. In the spring of 365, after the accession of Valens to the
throne, troubles again arose. Athanasius was once more compelled to seek
safety from his persecutors in concealment (October 365), which lasted,
however, only for four months. In February 366 he resumed his episcopal
labours, in which he henceforth remained undisturbed. On the 2nd of May
373, having consecrated one of his presbyters as his successor, he died
quietly in his own house.

Athanasius was a man of action, but he also knew how to use his pen for
the furtherance of his cause. He left a large number of writings, which
cannot of course be compared with those of an Origen, a Basil, or a
Gregory of Nyssa. Athanasius was no systematic theologian. All his
treatises are occasional pieces, born of controversy and intended for
controversial ends. The interest in abstract exposition of clearly
formulated theological ideas is everywhere subordinate to the polemical
purpose. But all these writings are instinct with a living personal
faith, and serve for the defence of the cause; for it was not about
words that he was contending. Even those who do not sympathize with the
cause which Athanasius steadfastly defended cannot but admire his
magnanimous and heroic character. If he was imperious in temper and
inflexible in his conception of the Christian faith, he possessed a
great heart and a great intellect, inspired with an enthusiastic
devotion to Christ. As a theologian, his main distinction was his
zealous advocacy of the essential divinity of Christ. Christianity in
its Arian conception would have evaporated in a new polytheism. To have
set a dam against this process with the whole force of a mighty
personality constitutes the importance of Athanasius in the world's
history. It is with good reason that the Church honours him as the
"Great," and as the "Father of Orthodoxy."

  The best edition of the works of Athanasius is the so-called Maurine
  edition of Bernard de Montfaucon in 3 vols. (Paris, 1698); this was
  enlarged in the 3rd edition by Giustiniani (4 vols., Padua, 1777), and
  is printed in this form in Migne's _Patrologia_, vols. xxv.-xxviii. An
  English translation of selections, with excellent introductions to the
  several writings, was published by Archibald Robertson in the _Library
  of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers_, second series, vol. 4 (Oxford
  and New York, 1892). There is no biography satisfactory from the
  modern point of view. Studies preliminary to such a biography began to
  be published by E. Schwartz in his essays, "Zur Geschichte des
  Athanasius" (in the _Nachrichten der koniglichen Gesellschaft der
  Wissenschaften zu Göttingen_, 1904, &c.). The life of Athanasius,
  however, is so completely intertwined with the history of his time
  that it is permissible to refer, for a knowledge of him, to the
  general descriptions which will be found at the close of the article
  ARIUS. Of the older literature, Tillemont's _Mémoires pour servir à
  l'histoire ecclésiastique des six premiers siècles_, vols. vi. and
  viii., are still a mine of material for the historian. Of the newer
  literature the following deserve to be read:--Johann Adam Mohler,
  _Athanasius der Grosse und die Kirche seiner Zeit_, 2 vols. (2nd ed.,
  Mainz, 1844); and Fr. Boehringer, "Arius und Athanasius," _Die Kirche
  Christi und ihre Zeugen_, vol. i. part 2 (2nd ed., Stuttgart, 1874).
       (G. K.)