ATHAMAS, in Greek mythology, king of the Minyae in Boeotian Orchomenus,
son of Aeolus, king of Thessaly, or of Minyas. His first wife was
Nephele, the cloud-goddess, by whom he had two children, Phrixus and
Helle (see ARGONAUTS). Athamas and his second wife Ino were said to have
incurred the wrath of Hera, because Ino had brought up Dionysus, the son
of her sister Semele, as a girl, to save his life. Athamas went mad, and
slew one of his sons, Learchus; Ino, to escape the pursuit of her
frenzied husband, threw herself into the sea with her other son
Melicertes. Both were afterwards worshipped as marine divinities, Ino as
Leucothea, Melicertes as Palaemon (_Odyssey_ v. 333). Athamas, with the
guilt of his son's murder upon him, was obliged to flee from Boeotia. He
was ordered by the oracle to settle in a place where he should receive
hospitality from wild beasts. This he found at Phthiotis in Thessaly,
where he surprised some wolves eating sheep; on his approach they fled,
leaving him the bones. Athamas, regarding this as the fulfilment of the
oracle, settled there and married a third wife, Themisto. The spot was
afterwards called the Athamanian plain (Apollodorus i. 9; Hyginus,
_Fab_. 1-5; Ovid, _Metam._ iv. 416, _Fasti_, vi. 485; Valerius Flaccus
i. 277).

According to a local legend, Athamas was king of Halos in Phthiotis from
the first (Schol. on Apoll. Rhodius ii. 513). After his attempt on the
life of Phrixus, which was supposed to have succeeded, the Phthiots were
ordered to sacrifice him to Zeus Laphystius, in order to appease the
anger of the gods. As he was on the point of being put to death,
Cytissorus, a son of Phrixus, suddenly arrived from Aea with the news
that Phrixus was still alive. Athamas's life was thus saved, but the
wrath of the gods was unappeased, and pursued the family. It was
ordained that the eldest born of the race should not enter the
council-chamber; if he did so, he was liable to be seized and sacrificed
if detected (Herodotus vii. 197). The legend of Athamas is probably
founded on a very old custom amongst the Minyae--the sacrifice of the
first-born of the race of Athamas to Zeus Laphystius. The story formed
the subject of lost tragedies by Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides and
other Greek and Latin dramatists.