ATHENA (the Attic form of the Homeric Athene, also called Athenaia,
Pallas Athene, Pallas), one of the most important goddesses in Greek
mythology. With Zeus and Apollo, she forms a triad which represents the
embodiment of all divine power. No satisfactory derivation of the name
Athena has been given[1]; Pallas, at first an epithet, but after Pindar
used by itself, may possibly be connected with [Greek: pallakhe]
("maiden"). Athena has been variously described as the pure aether, the
storm-cloud, the dawn, the twilight; but there is little evidence that
she was regarded as representing any of the physical powers of nature,
and it is better to endeavour to form an idea of her character and
attributes from a consideration of her cult-epithets and ritual.
According to the legend, her father Zeus swallowed his wife Metis
("counsel"), when pregnant with Athena, since he had been warned that
his children by her might prove stronger than himself and dethrone him.
Hephaestus (or Prometheus) subsequently split open his head with a
hatchet, and Athena sprang forth fully armed, uttering a loud shout of
victory (Hesiod, _Theogony_, 886; Pindar, _Olympia_, vii. 35). In Crete
she was said to have issued from a cloud burst asunder by Zeus.
According to Roscher, the manner of her birth represents the storm-cloud
split by lightning; Farnell (_Cults of the Greek States_, i. p. 285)
sees in it an indication that, as the daughter of Metis, Athena was
already invested with a mental and moral character, and explains the
swallowing of Metis (for which compare the story of Cronus and his
children) by the desire to attribute an extraordinary birth to one in
whom masculine traits predominated. In another account (as [Greek:
Tritogeneia]) she is the daughter of the river Triton, to which various
localities were assigned, and wherever there was a river (or lake) of
that name, the inhabitants claimed that she was born there. It is
probable that the name originated in Boeotia (C.O. Müller, _Geschichten
hellenischer Stamme_, i. pp. 351-357; but see Macan on Herodotus, iv.
180), whence it was conveyed by colonists to Cyrene and thence to Libya,
where there was a river Triton. Here some local divinity, a daughter of
Poseidon, connected with the water and also of a warlike character, was
identified by the colonists with their own Athena. In any case, it is
fairly certain that Tritogeneia means "water-born," although an old
interpretation derived it from [Greek: trito], a supposed Boeotian word
meaning "head," which further points to the name having originated in
Boeotia. Roscher suggests that the localization of her birthplace in the
extreme west points to the western sea, the home of cloud and storm.

In Homer Athena already appears as the goddess of counsel, of war, of
female arts and industries, and the protectress of Greek cities, this
last aspect of her character being the most important and pronounced.
Hence she is called [Greek: polias], [Greek: poliouchos], in many Greek
states, and is frequently associated with [Greek: Zeus polieus]. The
most celebrated festival of the city-goddess was the Panathenaea at
Athens and other places. Other titles of kindred meaning are [Greek:
archegeris] ("founder") and [Greek: tanachais], the protectress of the
Achaean league. At Athens she presided over the phratries or clans, and
was known as [Greek: apatouria] and [Greek: fratria], and sacrifice was
offered to her at the festival Apaturia. The title [Greek: meter], given
her by the inhabitants of Elis, whose women, according to the legend,
she had blessed with abundance of children, seems at variance with the
generally-recognized conception of her as [Greek: parthenos]; but
[Greek: meter] may bear the same meaning as [Greek: kourotrophos], the
fosterer of the young, in harmony with her aspect as protectress of
civic and family life. At Alalcomenae, near the Tritonian lake in
Boeotia, she was [Greek: alalkomeneis] ("defender"). Her temple, which
was pillaged by Sulla, contained an ivory image, which was said to have
fallen from heaven. The inhabitants claimed that the goddess was born
there and brought up by a local hero Alalcomeneus. Her images, called
Palladia, which guarded the heights (cf. her epithets [Greek: acria,
kranaia]), represented her with shield uplifted, brandishing her spear
to keep off the foe. The cult of Athena Itonia, whose earliest seat
appears to have, been amongst the Thessalians, who used her name as a
battle-cry, made its way to Coronea in Boeotia, where her sanctuary was
the seat of the Pamboeotian confederacy. The meaning of Itonia is
obscure: Dümmler connects it with [Greek: iteones], the "willow-beds" on
the banks of the river Coralios (the river of the maiden, i.e. Athena);
Jebb (on Bacchylides, _fr._ xi. 2) suggests a derivation from [Greek:
ienai], the goddess of the "onset." At Thebes she was worshipped as
Athena Onka or Onga, of equally uncertain derivation (possibly from
[Greek: ogkos], "a height"). Peculiar to Arcadia is the title Athena
Alea, probably = "warder off of evil," although others explain it as =
"warmth," and see in it an allusion to her physical nature as one of the
powers of light. Farnell (_Cults_, p. 275) points out that at the same
time she is certainly looked upon as in some way connected with the
health-divinities, since in her temple she is grouped with Asclepius and
Hygieia (see HYGIEIA).

She already appears as the goddess of counsel ([Greek: poluboulos]) in
the _Iliad_ and in Hesiod. The Attic bouleutae took the oath by Athena
Boulaia; at Sparta she was [Greek: agoraia], presiding over the popular
assemblies in the market-place; in Arcadia [Greek: mechanitis] the
discoverer of devices. The epithet [Greek: pronoia] ("forethought") is
due, according to Farnell, to a confusion with [Greek: pronaia],
referring to a statue of the goddess standing "before a shrine," and
arose later (probably spreading from Delphi), some time after the
Persian wars, in which she repelled a Persian attack on the temples "by
divine forethought"; another legend attributes the name to her skill in
assisting Leto at the birth of Apollo and Artemis. With this aspect of
her character may be compared the Hesiodic legend, according to which
she was the daughter of Metis. Her connexion with the trial of Orestes,
the introduction of a milder form of punishment for justifiable
homicide, and the institution of the court [Greek: to epi Palladio],
show the important part played by her in the development of legal ideas.

The protectress of cities was naturally also a goddess of war. As such
she appears in Homer and Hesiod and in post-Homeric legend as the slayer
of the Gorgon and taking part in the battle of the giants. On numerous
monuments she is represented as [Greek: areia], "the warlike," [Greek:
nikephoros], "bringer of victory," holding an image of Nike (q.v.) in
her outstretched hand (for other similar epithets see Roscher's
_Lexikon_). She was also the goddess of the arts of war in general;
[Greek: stoicheia], she who draws up the ranks for battle, [Greek:
zosteria], she who girds herself for the fray. Martial music (cp.
[Greek: Athene salpinx], "trumpet") and the Pyrrhic dance, in which she
herself is said to have taken part to commemorate the victory over the
giants, and the building of war-ships were attributed to her. She
instructed certain of her favourites in gymnastics and athletics, as a
useful training for war. The epithets [Greek: ippia], [Greek:
chalinitis], [Greek: damasippos], usually referred to her as goddess of
war-horses, may perhaps be reminiscences of an older religion in which
the horse was sacred to her. As a war-goddess, she is the embodiment of
prudent and intelligent tactics, entirely different from Ares, the
personification of brute force and rashness, who is fitly represented as
suffering defeat at her hands. She is the patroness and protectress of
those heroes who are distinguished for their prudence and caution, and
in the Trojan War she sides with the more civilized Greeks.

The goddess of war develops into the goddess of peace and the pursuits
connected with it. She is prominent as the promoter of agriculture in
Attic legend. The Athenian hero Erechtheus (Erichthonius), originally an
earth-god, is her foster-son, with whom she was honoured in the
Erechtheum on the Acropolis. Her oldest priestesses, the
dew-sisters--Aglauros, Herse, Pandrosos--signify the fertilization of
the earth by the dew, and were probably at one time identified with
Athena, as surnames of whom both Aglauros and Pandrosos are found. The
story of the voluntary sacrifice of the Attic maiden Aglauros on behalf
of her country in time of war (commemorated by the ephebi taking the
oath of loyalty to their country in her temple), and of the leap of the
three sisters over the Acropolis rock (see ERECHTHEUS), probably points
to an old human sacrifice. Athena also gave the Athenians the
olive-tree, which was supposed to have sprung from the bare soil of the
Acropolis, when smitten by her spear, close to the horse (or spring of
water) produced by the trident of Poseidon, to which he appealed in
support of his claim to the lordship of Athens. She is also connected
with Poseidon in the legend of Erechtheus, not as being in any way akin
to the former in nature or character, but as indicating the contest
between an old and a new religion. This god, whose worship was
introduced into Athens at a later date by the Ionian immigrants, was
identified with Erechtheus-Erichthonius (for whose birth Athena was in a
certain sense responsible), and thus was brought into connexion with the
goddess, in order to effect a reconciliation of the two cults. Athena
was said to have invented the plough, and to have taught men to tame
horses and yoke oxen. Various arts were attributed to her--shipbuilding,
the goldsmith's craft, fulling, shoemaking and other branches of
industry. As early as Homer she takes especial interest in the
occupations of women; she makes Hera's robe and her own peplus, and
spinning and weaving are often called "the works of Athena." The custom
of offering a beautifully woven peplus at the Panathenaic festival is
connected with her character as Ergane the goddess of industry.[2] As
patroness of the arts, she is associated with Hephaestus (one of her
titles is [Greek: Ephaistia]) and Prometheus, and in Boeotia she was
regarded as the inventress of the flute. According to Pindar, she
imitated on the flute the dismal wail of the two surviving Gorgons after
the death of Medusa. The legend that Athena, observing in the water the
distortion of her features caused by playing that instrument, flung it
away, probably indicates that the Boeotians whom the Athenians regarded
with contempt, used the flute in their worship of the Boeotian Athena.
The story of the slaying of Medusa by Athena, in which there is no
certain evidence that she played a direct part, explained by Roscher as
the scattering of the storm-cloud, probably arose from the fact that she
is represented as wearing the Gorgon's head as a badge.

As in the case of Aphrodite and Apollo, Roscher in his _Lexikon_ deduces
all the characteristics of Athena from a single conception--that of the
goddess of the storm or the thunder-cloud (for a discussion of such
attempts see Farnell, _Cults_, i. pp. 3, 263). There seems little reason
for regarding her as a nature-goddess at all, but rather as the
presiding divinity of states and cities, of the arts and industries--in
short, as the goddess of the whole intellectual side of human life.

Except at Athens, little is known of the ceremonies or festivals which
attended her worship. There we have the following. (1) The ceremony of
the _Three Sacred Ploughs_, by which the signal for seed-time was given,
apparently dating from a period when agriculture was one of the chief
occupations of her worshippers. (2) The _Procharisteria_ at the end of
winter, at which thanks were offered for the germination of the seed.
(3) The _Scirophoria_, with a procession from the Acropolis to the
village of Skiron, in the height of summer, the priests who were to
entreat her to keep off the summer heat walking under the shade of
parasols ([Greek: skyron]) held over them; others, however, connect the
name with [Greek: skiros] ("gypsum"), perhaps used for smearing the
image of the goddess. (4) The _Oschophoria_, at the vintage season, with
races among boys, and a procession, with songs in praise of Dionysus and
Ariadne. (5) The _Chalkeia_ (feast of smiths), at which the birth of
Erechtheus and the invention of the plough were celebrated. (6) The
_Plynteria_ and _Callynteria_, at which her ancient image and peplus in
the Erechtheum and the temple itself were cleaned, with a procession in
which bunches of figs (frequently used in lustrations) were carried. (7)
The _Arrhephoria_ or _Errephoria_ (perhaps = _Ersephoria_,
"dew-bearing"), at which four girls, between seven and eleven years of
age, selected from noble families, carried certain unknown sacred
objects to and from the temple of Aphrodite "in the gardens" (see J.E.
Harrison, _Classical Review_, April 1889). (8) The _Panathenaea_, at
which the new robes for the image of he goddess were carried through the
city, spread like a sail on a mast. The reliefs of the frieze of the
cella of the Parthenon enable us to form an idea of the procession.
Athletic games, open to all who traced their nationality to Athens, were
part of this festival. Mention should also be made of the Argive
ceremony, at which the _xoanon_ (ancient wooden statue) of Athena was
washed in the river Inachus, a symbol of her purification after the
Gigantomachia.

The usual attributes of Athena were the helmet, the aegis, the round
shield with the head of Medusa in the centre, the lance, an olive
branch, the owl, the cock and the snake. Of these the aegis, usually
explained as a storm-cloud, is probably intended as a battle-charm, like
the Gorgon's head on the shield and the faces on the shields of Chinese
soldiers; the owl probably represents the form under which she was
worshipped in primitive times, and subsequently became her favourite
bird (the epithet [Greek: glaukopis], meaning "keen-eyed" in Homer, may
have originally signified "owl-faced"); the snake, a common companion of
the earth deities, probably refers to her connexion with
Erechtheus-Erichthonius.

As to artistic representations of the goddess, we have first the rude
figure which seems to be a copy of the Palladium; secondly, the still
rude, but otherwise more interesting, figures of her, as e.g. when
accompanying heroes, on the early painted vases; and thirdly, the type
of her as produced by Pheidias, from which little variation appears to
have been made. Of his numerous statues of her, the three most
celebrated were set up on the Acropolis. (1) Athena _Parthenos_, in the
Parthenon. It was in ivory and gold, and 30 ft. high. She was
represented standing, in a long tunic; on her head was a helmet,
ornamented with sphinxes and griffins; on her breast was the aegis,
fringed with serpents and the Gorgon's head in centre. In her right hand
was a Nike or winged victory, while her left held a spear, which rested
on a shield on which were represented the battles of the Amazons with
the giants. (2) A colossal statue said to have been formed from the
spoils taken at Marathon, the so-called Athena _Promachos_. (3) Athena
_Lemnia_, so called because it had been dedicated by the Athenian
cleruchies in Lemnos. In this she was represented without arms, as a
brilliant type of virgin beauty. The two last statues were of bronze.
From the time of Pheidias calm earnestness, self-conscious might, and
clearness of intellect were the main characteristics of the goddess. The
eyes, slightly cast down, betoken an attitude of thoughtfulness; the
forehead is clear and open; the mouth indicates firmness and resolution.
The whole suggests a masculine rather than a feminine form.

From Greece the worship of Athena extended to Magna Graecia, where a
number of temples were erected to her in various places. In Italy proper
she was identified with Minerva (q.v.).

  See articles in Pauly-Wissowa's _Realencyclopädie_; W.H. Roscher's
  _Lexikon der Mythologie_; Daremberg and Saglio's _Dictionnaire des
  antiquités_ (s.v. "Minerva"); L. Preller, _Griechische Mythologie_;
  W.H. Roscher, "Die Grundbedeutung der Athene," in _Nektar und
  Ambrosia_ (1883); F.A. Voigt, "Beiträge zur Mythologie des Ares und
  Athena," in _Leipziger Studien_, iv. (1881); L.R. Farnell, _The Cults
  of the Greek States_, i. (1896); J.E. Harrison, _Prolegomena to the
  Study of Greek Religion_ (1903), for the festivals especially; O.
  Gruppe, _Griechische Mythologie_, ii. (1907). In the article GREEK
  ART, fig. 21 represents Athena in the act of striking a prostrate
  giant; fig. 38 a statuette of Athena Parthenos, a replica of the work
  of Pheidias.     (J. H. F.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] O. Gruppe (_Griechische Mythologie_, ii. p. 1194) thinks that it
    probably means "without mother's milk," either in an active or in a
    passive sense "not giving suck," or "unsuckled," in her character as
    the virgin goddess, or as springing from the head of Zeus. In support
    of this view he refers to Hesychius [Greek: thaenion gala] and a
    passage in Athenagoras (_Legatio pro Christianis_, 17), where it is
    stated that Athena was sometimes called [Greek: Athela] or [Greek:
    Athele]. For Pallas, he prefers the old etymology from [Greek: palla]
    (to "shake"), rather in the sense of "earth-shaker" than
    "lance-brandisher."

  [2] According to J.E. Harrison in Classical Review (June 1894),
    Athena Ergane is the goddess of the fruits of the field and the
    procreation of children.