ATHENAGORAS, a Christian apologist of the 2nd century A.D., was,
according to an emendator of the Paris Codex 451 of the 11th century, a
native of Athens. The only sources of information regarding him are a
short notice by Philip of Side, in Pamphylia (c. A.D. 420), and the
inscription on his principal work. Philip--or rather the compiler who
made excerpts from him--says that he was at the head of an Alexandrian
school (the catechetical), that he lived in the time of Hadrian and
Antoninus, to whom he addressed his _Apology_, and that Clement of
Alexandria was his pupil; but these statements are more than doubtful.
The inscription on the work describes it as the "Embassy of Athenagoras,
the Athenian, a philosopher and a Christian concerning the Christians,
to the Emperors Marcus Aurelius Antoninus and Lucius Aurelius Commodus,
&c." This statement has given rise to considerable discussion, but from
it and internal evidence the date of the _Apology_ ([Greek: Presbeia
peri Christianon]) may be fixed at about A.D. 177. Athenagoras is also
the author of a discourse on the resurrection of the body, which is not
authenticated otherwise than by the titles on the various manuscripts.
In the _Apology_, after contrasting the judicial treatment of Christians
with that of other accused persons, he refutes the accusations brought
against the Christians of atheism, eating human flesh and
licentiousness, and in doing so takes occasion to make a vigorous and
skilful attack on pagan polytheism and mythology. The discourse on the
resurrection answers objections to the doctrine, and attempts to prove
its truth from considerations of God's purpose in the creation of man,
His justice and the nature of man himself. Athenagoras is a powerful and
clear writer, who strives to comprehend his opponents' views and is
acquainted with the classical writers. He used the _Apology_ of Justin,
but hardly the works of Aristides or Tatian. His theology is strongly
tinged with Platonism, and this may account for his falling into
desuetude. His discussion of the Trinity has some points of speculative
interest, but it is not sufficiently worked out; he regards the Son as
the Reason or Wisdom of the Father, and the Spirit as a divine
effluence. On some other points, as the nature of matter, the
immortality of the soul and the principle of sin, his views are
interesting.

  EDITIONS.--J.C. Th. Eg. de Otto, _Corpus Apol. Christ. Saec._ II. vol.
  vii. (Jena, 1857); E. Schwartz in _Texte und Untersuchungen_, iv. 2
  (Leipzig, 1891).

  TRANSLATIONS.--Humphreys (London, 1714); B.P. Pratten (_Ante-Nic.
  Fathers_, Edinburgh, 1867).

  LITERATURE.--A. Harnack, _Gesch. der altchr. Litt._ pp. 526-558, and
  similar works by O. Bardenhewer and A. Ehrhard; Herzog-Hauck,
  _Realencyk._; G. Krüger, _Early Chr. Lit._ p. 130 (where additional
  literature is cited). In 1559 and 1612 appeared in French a work on
  _True and Perfect Love_, purporting to be a translation from the Greek
  of Athenagoras; it is a palpable forgery.