ATHENAEUS, of Naucratis in Egypt, Greek rhetorician and grammarian,
flourished about the end of the 2nd and the beginning of the 3rd century
A.D. Suidas only tells us that he lived "in the times of Marcus"; but
the contempt with which he speaks of Commodus (died 192) shows that he
survived that emperor. Athenaeus himself states that he was the author
of a treatise on the _thratta_--a kind of fish mentioned by Archippus
and other comic poets--and of a history of the Syrian kings, both of
which works are lost. We still possess the _Deipnosophistae_, which may
mean dinner-table philosophers or authorities on banquets, in fifteen
books. The first two books, and parts of the third, eleventh and
fifteenth, are only extant in epitome, but otherwise we seem to possess
the work entire. It is an immense storehouse of miscellaneous
information, chiefly on matters connected with the table, but also
containing remarks on music, songs, dances, games, courtesans. It is
full of quotations from writers whose works have not come down to us;
nearly 800 writers and 2500 separate writings are referred to by
Athenaeus; and he boasts of having read 800 plays of the Middle Comedy
alone. The plan of the _Deipnosophistae_ is exceedingly cumbrous, and is
badly carried out. It professes to be an account given by the author to
his friend Timocrates of a banquet held at the house of Laurentius (or
Larentius), a scholar and wealthy patron of art. It is thus a dialogue
within a dialogue, after the manner of Plato, but a conversation of
sufficient length to occupy several days (though represented as taking
place in one) could not be conveyed in a style similar to the short
conversations of Socrates. Among the twenty-nine guests are Galen and
Ulpian, but they are all probably fictitious personages, and the
majority take no part in the conversation. If Ulpian is identical with
the famous jurist, the _Deipnosophistae_ must have been written after
his death (228); but the jurist was murdered by the praetorian guards,
whereas Ulpian in Athenaeus dies a natural death. The conversation
ranges from the dishes before the guests to literary matters of every
description, including points of grammar and criticism; and they are
expected to bring with them extracts from the poets, which are read
aloud and discussed at table. The whole is but a clumsy apparatus for
displaying the varied and extensive reading of the author. As a work of
art it can take but a low rank, but as a repertory of fragments and
morsels of information it is invaluable.

  Editio princeps, Aldine, 1524; Casaubon, 1597-1600; Schweighäuser,
  1801-1807; Dindorf, 1827; Meineke, 1859-1867; Kaibel, 1887-1890;
  English translation by Yonge in Bohn's _Classical Library_.