ATHEISM (from Gr. [Greek: a-], privative, and [Greek: theos], God),
literally a system of belief which denies the existence of God. The term
as generally used, however, is highly ambiguous. Its meaning varies (a)
according to the various definitions of deity, and especially (b)
according as it is (i.) deliberately adopted by a thinker as a
description of his own theological standpoint, or (ii.) applied by one
set of thinkers to their opponents. As to (a), it is obvious that
atheism from the standpoint of the Christian is a very different
conception as compared with atheism as understood by a Deist, a
Positivist, a follower of Euhemerus or Herbert Spencer, or a Buddhist.
But the ambiguities arising from the points of view described in (b) are
much more difficult both intellectually and in their practical social
issues. Thus history shows how readily the term has been used in the
most haphazard manner to describe even the most trivial divergence of
opinion concerning points of dogma. In other words, "atheism" has been
used generally by the orthodox adherents of one religion, or even of a
single sect, for all beliefs which are different or even differently
expressed. It is in fact in these cases, like "heterodoxy," a term of
purely negative significance, and its intellectual value is of the
slightest. The distinction between the terms "religion" and "magic" is,
in a similar way, often due merely to rivalry between the adherents of
two or more mutually exclusive religions brought together in the same
community. When the psalmist declares that "the fool hath said in his
heart, there is no God," he probably does not refer to theoretical
denial, but to a practical disbelief in God's government of human
affairs, shown in disobedience to moral laws. Socrates was charged with
"not believing in the gods the city believes in." The cry of the heathen
populace in the Roman empire against the Christians was "Away with the
atheists! To the lions with the Christians!" The ground for the charge
was probably the lack of idolatry in all Christian worship. Spinoza, for
whom God alone existed, was persecuted as an atheist. A common
designation of Knox was "the atheist," although it was to him "matter of
satisfaction that our most holy religion is founded on faith, not on
reason."

In its most scientific and serious usage the term is applied to that
state of mind which does not find deity (i.e. either one or many gods)
in or above the physical universe. Thus it has been applied to certain
primitive savages, who have been thought (e.g. by Lord Avebury in his
_Prehistoric Times_) to have no religious belief; it is, however, the
better opinion that there are no peoples who are entirely destitute of
some rudimentary religious belief. In the second place, and most
usually, it is applied to a purely intellectual, metaphysical disbelief
in the existence of any god, or of anything supernatural. In this
connexion it is usual to distinguish three types of atheism:--the
_dogmatic_, which denies the existence of God positively; the
_sceptical_, which distrusts the capacity of the human mind to discover
the existence of God; and the _critical_, which doubts the validity of
the theistic argument, the proofs for the existence of God. That the
first type of atheism exists, in spite of the denials of those who
favour the second or the third, may be proved by the utterances of men
like Feuerbach, Flourens or Bradlaugh. "There is no God," says
Feuerbach, "it is clear as the sun and as evident as the day that there
is no God, and still more that there can be none." With greater passion
Flourens declares "Our enemy is God. Hatred of God is the beginning of
wisdom. If mankind would make true progress, it must be on the basis of
atheism." Bradlaugh maintained against Holyoake that he would fight
until men respected the name "atheist." The answer to dogmatic atheism,
that it implies infinite knowledge, has been well stated in John
Foster's _Essays_, and restated by Chalmers in his _Natural Theology_,
and its force is recognized in Holyoake's careful qualification of the
sense in which secularism accepts atheism, "always explaining the term
atheist to mean 'not seeing God' visually or inferentially, never
suffering it to be taken for anti-theism, that is, hating God, denying
God--as _hating_ implies personal knowledge as the ground of dislike,
and _denying_ implies infinite knowledge as the ground of disproof." But
dogmatic atheism is rare compared with the sceptical type, which is
identical with agnosticism (q.v.) in so far as it denies the capacity of
the mind of man to form any conception of God, but is different from it
in so far as the agnostic merely holds his judgment in suspense, though,
in practice, agnosticism is apt to result in an attitude towards
religion which is hardly distinguishable from a passive and unaggressive
atheism. The third or critical type may be illustrated by _A Candid
Examination of Theism_ by "Physicus" (G.J. Romanes), in which the writer
endeavours to establish the weakness of the proofs for the existence of
God, and to substitute for theism Spencer's physical explanation of the
universe, and yet admits how unsatisfying to himself the new position
is. "When at times I think, as think at times I must, of the appalling
contrast between the hallowed glory of that creed which once was mine,
and the lonely mystery of existence as now I find it--at such times I
shall ever feel it impossible to avoid the sharpest pang of which my
nature is susceptible."

Atheism has to meet the protest of the heart as well as the argument of
the mind of mankind. It must be judged not only by theoretical but by
practical arguments, in its relations either to the individual or to a
society. Voltaire himself, speaking as a practical man rather than as a
metaphysician, declared that if there were no God it would be necessary
to invent one; and if the analysis is only carried far enough it will be
found that those who deny the existence of God (in a conventional sense)
are all the time setting up something in the nature of deity by way of
an ideal of their own, while fighting over the meaning of a word or its
conventional misapplication.