ATHENODORUS, the name of two Stoic philosophers of the 1st century B.C.,
who have frequently been confounded.

1. ATHENODORUS CANANITES (c. 74 B.C.-A.D. 7), so called from his
birthplace Canana near Tarsus (not Cana in Cilicia nor Canna in
Lycaonia), was the son of one Sandon, whose name indicates Tarsian
descent, not Jewish as many have held. He was a personal friend of
Strabo, from whom we derive our knowledge of his life. He taught the
young Octavian (afterwards Augustus) at Apollonia, and was a pupil of
Posidonius at Rhodes. Subsequently he appears to have travelled in the
East (Petra and Egypt) and to have made himself famous by lecturing in
the great cities of the Mediterranean. Writing in 50 B.C., Cicero speaks
of him with the highest respect (cf. _Ep. ad. Att._, xvi. 11. 4, 14. 4),
a fact which enables us to fix the date of his birth as not later than
about 74. His influence over Augustus was strong and lasting. He
followed him to Rome in 44, and is said to have criticized him with the
utmost candour, bidding him repeat the letters of the alphabet before
acting on an angry impulse. In later years he was allowed by Augustus to
return to Tarsus in order to remodel the constitution of the city after
the degenerate democracy which had misgoverned it under Boethus. He
succeeded (c. 15-10 B.C.) in setting up a timocratic oligarchy in the
imperial interest (see TARSUS). Sir W.M. Ramsay is inclined to attribute
to the influence of Athenodorus the striking resemblances which can be
established between Seneca and Paul, the latter of whom must certainly
have been acquainted with his teachings. According to Eusebius and
Strabo he was a learned scientist for his day, and some attribute to him
a history of Tarsus. He helped Cicero in the composition of the _De
Officiis_. His works are not certainly known, and none are extant. (See
Sir W.M. Ramsay in the _Expositor_, September 1906, pp. 268 ff.)

2. ATHENODORUS CORDYLION, also of Tarsus, was keeper of the library at
Pergamum, and was an old man in 47 B.C. In his enthusiasm for Stoicism
he used to cut out from Stoic writings passages which seemed to him
unsatisfactory. He also settled in Rome, where he died in the house of
the younger Cato.

  Among others of the name may be mentioned (3) ATHENODORUS OF TEOS, who
  played the cithara at the wedding of Alexander the Great and Statira
  at Susa (324 B.C.); (4) a Greek physician of the 1st century A.D., who
  wrote on epidemic diseases; and two sculptors, of whom (5) one
  executed the statues of Apollo and Zeus which the Spartans dedicated
  at Delphi after Aegospotami; and (6) the other was a son of Alexander
  of Rhodes, whom he helped in the Laocoon group.