Skip to main content
 
 
 
 
 
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "Encyclopædia Britannica 11 ed. Vol. 23 (Refectory to Sainte-Beuve, Charles Augustin)"
See other formats
KNCYCIjMWDIA 
liRfTANNICA 






<;, xx Hi 
REF TO S \! 




I * 



V ▼ mm 1 



J ' 




^ l 



I 



• « 



I ■ ' * 



♦ » 




I 









/ 



THE 



ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



FIRST 


edit 


ion, published in three volumes,,, 1768— 1771. 


SECOND 


. 


, -^ ,, - ten , 


1777— 1?8 4 . 


THIRD 




, ,, eighteen . , 


1788— 1797. 


FOURTH 




, ,, twenty , 


, 1801 — 1810. 


FIFTH 




, ,, twenty , 


1815—1817. 


SIXTH 




, ,, twenty , 


, 1823— 1824. 


SEVENTH 




, ,, twenty-one , 


, 1830— 1842. 


EIGHTH 




, ,, twenty-two , 


1853— 1860 


NINTH 




, ,, twenty-five , 


1875—1889. 


TENTH 




, ninth edition and eleven 






supplementary volumes, 


1902 — 1903, 


ELEVENTH 


j 


, published in twenty-nine volume 


;s, 1 910 — 191 1. 



COPYRIGHT 

in all countries subscribing to the 

Bern Convention 

by 

THE CHANCELLOR, MASTERS AND SCHOLARS 

of the 
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE 



All rights reserved 



THE 



ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA 



DICTIONARY 



OF 



ARTS, SCIENCES, LITERATURE AND GENERAL 

INFORMATION 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



VOLUME XXIII 

REFECTORY to SAINTE-BEUVE 




> i j* y ) i »* J * 

; 3 j j j > » » > 



j ; i > > » 
» j j > * j 
3 i » * » » 



Cambridge, England: 

at the University Press 

New York, 35 West 32nd Street 
191 1 



Copyright, in the United States of America, 191 1, 

by 

The Encyclopaedia Britannica Company 






c 






A. 


B. 


Ch. 


A. 


C. 


G. 


A. 


D. 




A. 


D. 


Mo 



INITIALS USED IN VOLUME XXIII. TO IDENTIFY INDIVIDUAL 

CONTRIBUTORS, 1 WITH THE HEADINGS OF THE 

ARTICLES IN THIS VOLUME SO SIGNED. 

A. B. Ciiatwood, Ass.M.Inst.C.E., M.Inst.Elec.E. \ Safes, Strong-rooms and Vaults, 

Albert Charles Lewis Gotthilf Guenther, M.A., M.D., Ph.D., F.R.S. f 

Keeper of Zoological Department, British Museum, 1875-1895. Gold Medallist, J T>n««i«. ir;*^*, (;„ A «w\ 
Royal Society, 1878. Author of Catalogue of Colubrine Snakes, Batrachia,Salientia,\ Ke P tlles - ***story \%n part) 
and Fishes in the British Museum ; &c. I 

Henry Austin Dobson, LL.D. J" _. . , c . 

See the biographical article: Dobson, Henry Austin. -^ Kicnarospn, £>amuel. 

Anson Daniel Morse, M.A., LL.D. r 

Emeritus Professor of History at Amherst College, Mass. Professor at Amherst < Republican Party. 
College, 1877-1908. [ 

A. G.* Arthur Gamgee, M.D., F.R.S., F.R.C.P., LL.D., D.Sc. (1841-3909). r - . c 

Formerly Fullerian Professor of Physiology, Royal Institution of Great Britain, and J Respiratory System: Move- 
Professor of Physiology in the University of Manchester. Author of Text-Book of] ments of Respiration, 
the Physiological Chemistry of the Animal Body; &c. [ 

A. Go.* Rev. Alexander Gordon, M.A. / Rlbadenelra Pedro A 

Lecturer in Church History in the University of Manchester. \ iUDaaene ™» rearo A - 

A. H.* Albert Hauck, D.Th., D.Ph. , 

Professor of Church History in the University of Leipzig, and Director of the 
Museum of Ecclesiastical Archaeology. Geheimer Kirchenrat of Saxony. Member 
of the Royal Saxon Academy of Sciences and Corresponding Member of the < ReliCS. 
Academies of Berlin and Munich. Author of Kirchengeschichte Deutschlands; &c. 
Editor of the new edition of Herzog's Realencyklopadie fur protestantische Theologie 
und Kirche. L 

Adolf Harnace, D.Ph. /cahpiruc 

See the biographical article: Harnack, Adolf. -JbaoeiUUS. 

Sir A. Houtum-Schindler, CLE. J _ ., 

General in the Persian Army. Author of Eastern Persian Irak. \ Kesnt. 

Arthur Hamilton Smith, M.A„ F.S.A. 

Keeper of the Department of Greek and Roman Antiquities in the British Museum. ^ Ring (in Part). 
Member of the Imperial German Archaeological Institute. Author of Catalogue of* 
Greek Sculpture in the British Museum; &c. 

Agnes Mary Clerke. J" Reoiomonta nus 

See the biographical article: Clerke, A. M. \ «egiomomanus. 

Agnes Mary Frances Duclaux. Jp P nan 

See the biographical article: Duclaux, A. M. F. \ ltendfl - 

Alfred Newton, F.R.S. ("Rhea; Rifleman-bird; 

See the biographical article: Newton, Alfred. 1 Roller (Bird); Ruff. 

Alfred Peter Hillier, M.D., M.P. 

Author of South African Studies; The Commonweal; &c. Served in Kaffir War, 
1 878-1 879. Partner with Dr L. S. Jameson in medical practice in South Africa till 
1896. Member of Reform Committee, Johannesburg, and Political Prisoner at 
Pretoria, 1 895-1 896. M.P. for Hitchin division of Herts, 19 10. 

A. S. P.-P. Andrew Seth Pringle-Pattison, M.A., LL.D., D.C.L. r 

Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh. Gifford I „,,,,, »rv./x™«c t;„ a „„a 
Lecturer in the University of Aberdeen, 191 1. Fellow of the British Academy. 1 Ke,a » inomas ^n pari). 
Author of Man's Place in the Cosmos; The Philosophical Radicals; &c. L 

A. S. Wo. Arthur Smith Woodward, LL.D., F.R.S. f p pn tilps- TTiitnrv (in 4>art\ and 

Keeper of Geology, Natural History Museum, South Kensington. Secretary oU ™V™S . Utslory {tn part) ana 
the Geological Society, London. I General Characters. 

1 A complete list, showing all individual contributors, appears in the final volume. 

v 

1992 



A. 


Ha 




A. 


H. 


■S. 


A. 


H. 


Sm. 


A. 


M. 


C. 


A. 


M. 


F. D 


A. 


N. 




A. 


P. 


H. 



Rhodesia: History (in part). 



VI 


A 


. W. H.* 


A 


W. R. 


C. 


Ba. 


C. 


B. P. 


C. 


».* 


C. 


F. A. 


a 


H. Ha. 


a 


H.W.J 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



C. L. iv. 



c. m: p. 



C. R. B. 



c. 


We. 


D. 


B. Ma. 


D. 


C.T. 


D. 


F. T. 



D. H. 
D. H. M. 
D. LI. T. 
D. M. W. 



D. 


R.-M 


E. 


B. 


E. 


Cu. 


E. 


C.B. 



Arthur William Holland. 

Formerly Scholar of St John's College, Oxford. Bacon Scholar of Gray's Inn, 1900. 

Alexander Wood Renton, M.A., LL.B. 

Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of Ceylon. Editor of Encyclopaedia of the Laws 
of England. 

Cyril Bailey, M.A. 

Fellow, Tutor and Librarian of Balliol College, Oxford. Author of The Religion of 
Ancient Rome; Sec. 

Catherine Beatrice Phillips, B.A. (Mrs W. Alison Phillips). 
Associate of Bedford College, London. 

Charles Everitt, M.A., F.C.S., F.G.S.,.F.R.A.S. 
Sometime Scholar of Magdalen College, Oxford. 

Charles Francis Atkinson. 

Formerly Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford. Captain, 1st City of London (Royal 
Fusiliers). Author of The Wilderness and Cold Harbour. 

Carlton Huntley Hayes, A.M.,. Ph.D. 

Assistant Professor of History in Columbia University, New York City. Member 
of the American Historical Association. 

Rev. Claude Hermann Walter Johns, M.A., Litt.D. 

Master of St Catharine's College, Cambridge. Canon .of Norwich. Author of 
Assyrian Deeds and Documents. 

Charles Letiibridge Kingsford, M.A., F.R.Hist.S. 

Assistant Secretary to the Board of Education. Author of Life of Henry V. Editor 
of Chronicles of London and S tow's Survey of London. 



Formerly Stroke of the Oxford Uni- Rowing, 



Regicide;' RIenz), Cola di. 
Rent. 

Roman Religion. 



Robes. 

Refraction: Refraction of 
Light. 

Rifle (in port); 
Rossbach. 



Rosary. 

Sabbath: Babylonian and 
Assyrian. 

I Richard II.; Richard III.; 
Rivers, Richard Woodville, 
Earl; 
Russell, Bishop. 



Charles Murray Pitman. 

Sometime Scholar of New* College, Oxford, 
versity Eight. 

Charles Raymond Beazley, M.A., D.Litt., F.R.G.S., F.R.Hist.S. 

Professor of Modern History in the University of Birmingham. Formerly Fellow 
of Merton College, Oxford, and University Lecturer in the History of Geography. 
Lothian Prizeman, Oxford, 1889. Lowell Lecturer, Boston, 1908. Author of 
Henry the Navigator; The Dawn of Modern Geography; &c. 

Cecil Weatherly. 

Formerly Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford. 



I 



Barrister-at-Law, Inner Temple. 



Rubruquis, William of 

(in part). 

\ Saddlery and Harness. 



Duncan Black Macdonald, M.A., D.D. i 

Professor of Semitic Languages, Hartford Theological Seminary, Hartford, Conn. J Rum, or Roum. 
Author of Development of Muslim Theology ; Jurisprudence and Constitutional j 
TJteory; Selections from Ibn Khaldun; Religious Attitude and Life in Islam; &c. I 

David Croal Thomson. T 

Formerly Editor of the Art Journal. Author of The Brothers Maris; The Barbizon \ Rousseau, Pierre E. T. 
School of Painters ; Life of " Phiz " ; Life of Bewick ; &c. I 

Donald Francis Tovey. ♦ f Rhythm: in music* 

Author of Essays in Musical Analysis: comprising The Classical Concerto, The \ t> «d * ' 

Goldberg Variations, and analyses of many other classical works. I ^O" 00 * 

David Hannay. f 

Formerly British Vice- Consul at Barcelona. Author of Short History of the Royal { Rigging. 
Navy ; Life of Emilio Castelar ; &c. • \ 

David Heinrich Muller, D.Ph. 

Professor of Semitic Languages in the University of Vienna. Hofrat of the Austrian \ Sabaeans. 
Empire. Knight of the Order of Leopold. Author of Die Gesetze Hammurabi; &c. 



Stipendiary Magistrate at Pontypridd and | Rhondda, 



Daniel Lleufer Thomas. 

Barrister-at-Law, Lincoln's Inn. 
Rhondda. 

Sir Donald Mackenzie Wallace, K.C.I.E., K.C.V.O. 

Extra Groom of the Bedchamber to H.M. King George V. Director of the Foreign 
Department of The Times, 1891-1899. Member of Institut de Droit International 
and Officier de l'lnstmction Publique of France. Joint-editor of New Volumes 
(10th ed.) of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Author of Russia; Egypt and Egyptian 
Question ; The Web of Empire ; &e. 



Russia: History (in part). 



David Randall-Maciver, M.A., D.Sc. 

Curator of Egyptian Department, University of Pennsylvania. 



Reader in Egyptology, University of Oxford. Author of Medieval Rhodesia; Sec. 

Edward Breck, M.A., Ph.D. 

Formerly Foreign Correspondent of the New York Herald and the New York Times. 
Author of Fencing; Wilderness Pets; Sporting in Nova Scotia; &e. 



Formerly Worcester \ Rhodesia: Archaeology. 



Sabre-fencing. 



Edmund Curtis, M.A. 
Keble College, Oxford. 



Lecturer on History in the University of Sheffield. 



Right Rev, Edward Cuthbert Butler, M.A., O.S.B., D.Litt. 

Abbot of Downside Abbey, Bath. Author of " The Lausiac History of Palladius 
in Cambridge Texts and Studies. 



r Robert Guiseard; 
J Roger I. of Sicily; 
t Roger II. of Sicily. 

» < Sabas, St. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



Vll 



E. F. S. 



E.G. 

E. Gr. 
E. Ha. 
E. He. 

E. H. B. 

E. H. M. 

E. L. B. 
E. 0.* 

E. Pr. 

F. C. C. 

F. G. P. 

F. G. S. 

F. Ha. 
F. J. H. 



F. 


J. S. 


F. 


LI. G. 


F. 


L. L. 


F. 


P. 


F. 


R. C. 


F. 


We. 



Edward Fairbrother Strange. 

Assistant Keeper, Victoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington. Member of H 
Council, Japan Society. Author of numerous works on art subjects. Joint-editor 
of Bell's n Cathedral ,1 Series, 



Edmund Gosse, LL.D., D.C.L. 

See the biographical article:'GossE, Edmund. 



Ernest Arthur Gardner, M.A. 

See the biographical article: Gardner, Percy. 

Rev. Edwin Hatch, M.A., D.D. 

See the biographical article: Hatch, Edwin. 

Edward Heawood, M.A. 

Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. 
Society, London. 



Repln, Il]a. . 

Rhyme; Rhythm {in verse); 

Rimbaud, Jean; 

Rivers, Anthony Woodville, 

Earl; 
Rossetti, Christina; 
Runes, Runic Language 

and Inscriptions; 
: Rydberg, Abraham; Saga. 

Rhodes {in part). 



J Sacrifice: In the Christian 
\ Church. 



Sir 



f Rudolf {Lake); 
Librarian of the Royal Geographical-^ Ruwenzorl; 

L Sahara {in part). 
Edward Herbert Bunbury, Bart., M.A., F.R.G.S. (d. 1895). f 

" P. for Bury St Edmunds, 1847-1852. Author of A History of Ancient Geography; -\ Rhodes {in part). 



M 
&c. 



Ellis Hovell Minns, M.A. 

University Lecturer in Palaeography, Cambridge. Lecturer and Assistant Librarian " 
at Pembroke College, Cambridge. Formerly Fellow of Pembroke College. 

Edward Livermore Burlingame, A.M., Ph.D. 

Editor of Scribner's Magazine. Formerly on the Staff of New York Tribune. 

Edmund Owen, F.R.C.S., LL.D., D.Sc. 

Consulting Surgeon to St Mary's Hospital, London, and to the Children's Hospital, 
Great Ormond Street, London. Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Late Ex- 
aminer in Surgery at the Universities of Cambridge, London and Durham. Author 

of A Manual of A natomy for Senior Students. 

Edgar Prestage. 

Special Lecturer in Portuguese Literature in the University of Manchester. Ex- 
aminer in Portuguese in the Universities of London, Manchester, &c. Com- 
mendador, Portuguese Order of S. Thiago. Corresponding Member of Lisbon Royal 
Academy of Sciences, Lisbon Geographical Society; &c. Editor of Letters of a 
Portuguese Nun ; Azurara's Chronicles of Guinea ; &c. 

Frederick Cornwallis Conybeare, M.A., D.Th. 



Russian Language. 



{ 



Ripley, George. 



Respiratory System: Surgery. 



Resende, Andre de; 
Resende, Garcia de; 
Ribeiro, Bernardim; 
Sa de Miranda, Francisco de. 



Fellow of the British Academy. Formerly Fellow of University College, Oxford. 

Author of Myth, Magic and 1 Sacrament. 



Editor of The Ancient Armenian Texts of Aristotle. 
Morals; &c. 






Frederick Gymer Parsons, F.R.C.S., F.Z.S. r 

Vice-President, Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Lecturer on J Reproductive System; 
Anatomy at St Thomas's Hospital and the London School of Medicine for Women, 1 Respiratory System: Anatomy. 
London. Formerly Hunterian Professor at the Royal College of Surgeons. L 



F. G. Stephens. 

Formerly Art Critic of the Athenaeum. Author of Artists at Home; George Cruik- 
shank; Memorials of W. Mulready; French and Flemish Pictures; Sir E. Land- 
seer; T. C. Hook, R.A.; &c. 

Frederic Harrison. 



Rossetti, Dante Gabriel {in 

part). 



See thebiographical article: Harrison, Frederic. 

Francis John Haverfield, M.A., LL.D., F.S.A. 

Camden Professor of Ancient History in the University of Oxford, Fellow of 
Brasenose College. Fellow of the British Academy. Formerly Censor, Student, 
Tutor and Librarian of Christ Church, Oxford. Ford's Lecturer, 1 906-1907. 
Author of Monographs on Roman History, especially Roman Britain; &c. 

Frederick John Snell, M.A. 

Balliol College, Oxford. Author of The Age of Chaucer; &c. 

Francis Llewellyn Griffith, M.A., Ph.D., F.S.A. 

Reader in Egyptology, Oxford University. Editor of the Archaeological Survey 
and Archaeological Reports of the Egypt Exploration Fund. Fellow of Imperial 
German Archaeological Institute. 

Lady Lugard. 

See the biographical article: Lugard, Sir F. J. D. 

Frank Podmore, M.A. (1856-1910). 

Sometime Scholar of Pembroke College, Oxford. 
Mesmerism and Christian Science; &c. 

Frank R. Cana. 

Author of South Africa from the Great Trek to the Union. 

Frederick Wedmore. 

See the biographical article: Wedmore, Frederick. 



J Ruskin, John. 



Roman Army. 

J Robin Hood {in part). 
J Rosetta. 

f Rhodes, Cecil. 
Author of Modern Spiritualism;} Retro-cognition. 



{■ 



r Rhodesia: History {in part); 
\ Sahara {in part). 

{ Ribot, Thdoduie 



viii INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 

F. W. R.* Frederick William Rudler, I.S.O., F.G.S. f Rock-Crystal: 

Curator and Librarian of the Museum of Practical Geology, London, 1879-1902. 1 p nhp n if * Ptlhu 
President of the Geologists* Association, 1887-1889. " I KUDeiuie > " U DY- 

€. A.* Gertrude Franklin Atiierton. f , 

Author of Rezdnov; Ancestors; The Tower of Ivory; &c. \ Kezanov. 

G. Ch. George Chrystal, M.A., LL.D. [ 

Professor of Mathematics and Dean of the Faculty of Arts, Edinburgh University. 1 Rlemann, Georg. 
Hon. Fellow and formerly Fellow and Lecturer of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. I 

G. C. W. ' George Charles Williamson, Litt.D. f 

Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Author of Portrait Miniatures; Life of Richard J «„_„,, r nhn , ~. , * 
Cosway, R.A.; George Engleheart; Portrait Drawings; &e. Editor of the New] Kusseli > ^Otm {fainter). 
Edition of Bryan's Dictionary of Painters and Engravers. I 

G. Du. George Dutiiie, M.A., F.R.S. (Edin.). / Rhodesia: Geography and 

Director of Education, Southern Rhodesia. I Statistics. 

G. J. T. George James Turner. f 

Barrister-at-Law, Lincoln's Inn. Editor of Select Pleas of the Forests for the Selden ■{ Ridings. 
Society. I 

G. R. P. George Robert Parkin, LL.D., C.M.G. / Rhodes, Cecil: Rhodes 

See the biographical article: Parkin, G. R. I Scholarships. 

~ r. 00 TTTA « rT f Retz, Cardinal de; 

G. Sa. George Saintsbury, LL.D., D.C.L. J Rmnance . Ron c ard . 

See the biographical article: Saintsbury, George E. B. 1 « omance > Konsani, 

I Rousseau, Jean Jacques. 
G. Sn. Grant Showerman, A.M., Ph.D. r 

Professor of Latin at the University of Wisconsin. Member of the Archaeological J 

Institute of America. Member of the American Philological Association. Author of 1 Rhea (Mythology). 

With the Professor; The Great Mother of the Gods; &c. [ 

H. B. Hilary Bauermann, F.G.S. (d. 1909). f 

Formerly Lecturer on Metallurgy at the Ordnance College, Woolwich. Author of "j Safety- Lamp. 
A Treatise on the Metallurgy of Iron. I 

H. Br. Henry Bradley, M.A., Ph.D. f 

Joint-editor of the New English Dictionary (Oxford). Fellow of the British ~\ Riddles. 
Academy. Author oT The Story of the Goths; The Making, of English; &c. I 

H. B. M. The Very Rev. Canon H. B. Mackey, O.S.B. J Sacred Heart 

Author of Four Essays on St Francis de Sales. \ 

H. Ch. Hugh Chisholm, M.A. . f Re n r esentatinn- 

Formerly Scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Editor of the nth edition of \ £ e P r £seniauon, 
the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Co-editor of the 10th edition. [ Rosebery, Earl Of. 

H. De. Hippolyte Delehaye, S.J. f p^i, c+. 

Assistant in the compilation of the Bollandist publications: Analecta Bollandiana \ „ ' ' „ . 
and Acta Sanctorum. [Rupert, St; Samt. 

H. E. Karl Hermann Ethe, M.A., Ph.D. r _^ 

Professor of Oriental Languages, University College, Aberystwyth (University of J **umi; 
Wales). Author of Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts in the India Office Library, 1 Sa'di. 
London (Clarendon Press) ; &e. [ 

H. F. G. Hans Friedrich Gadow, F.R.S., Ph.D. f D ... , , , , 

Strickland Curator and Lecturer on Zoology in the University of Cambridge. « ™W l } es ; A™tomy and 
Author of " Amphibia and Reptiles," in the Cambridge Natural History. [ Distribution. 

H. F. P. Henry Francis Pelham, LL.D., D.C.L. J Rome: Ancient History ' 

See the biographical article: Pelham, H. F. 1 (} n j )ar (\ % 

H. Go. Henry Goudy, M.A., D.C.L., LL.D. r 

Regius Professor of Civil Law, Oxford, and Fellow of All Souls' College. Author ^ Roman Law. 
of The Law of Bankruptcy in Scotland ; &c. [ 

H. H. Henri Simon Hymans, Ph.D. f 

Keeper of the Bibliotheque Royale de Belgique, Brussels. Author of Rubens: sal Rubens (in part). 
vie et son osuvre. 1 

\ Respiratory System: 
H. L. H. Harriet L. Hennessy, M.D. (Brux.), L.R.C.P.I., L.R.C.S.I. \ Pathology (in part); 

[ Rheumatoid Arthritis. 
H. M. V. Herbert M. Vaughan, F.S.A. r 

Keble College, Oxford. Author of The Last of the Royal Stuarts; The Medici Popes\\ <?t Davids 
The Last Stuart Queen. # \ x/rtVJua - 

H. R. T. Henry Richard Tedder, F.S.A. , f _ 

Secretary and Librarian of the Athenaeum Club, London. \ «ymer, Thomas. 

H. St. Henry Sturt, M.A. J __. ., E %r __ 

Author of Idola Theatri; The Idea of a Free Church; Personal Idealism. \ Relativity Of Knowledge. 



Roman Art; 

Rome: Ancient City (in part) y 
Christian Rome (in part) and 
Ancient History (in part). 
H. S.-K. Sir Henry Seton-Karr, C.M.G., M.A. J 

M.P. for St Helen's, 1885-1906. Author of My Sporting Holidays; &c. \ Rlfle * 



H. S. J, Henry Stuart Jones, M.A. ^ 

Formerly Fellow and Tutor of Trinity College, Oxford, and Director of the British ^ 
School at Rome. Member of the German Imperial Archaeological Institute. Author 
of The Roman Empire; &c. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



IX 






H. Tr. 

H. W. C. D. 

H. W. S. 

H. Y. 
I. A. 

J. A. H. 

J. A. 0# 

J. Bra. 
J. Bt. 

J. B. B. 

J. B. M. 

J. D. B. 

J. E. C. 
J. F. H. B. 

J. F.-K. 

J. F. M. 

J. F. W. 
ifij. G. 
J. G. H. 
J. H. A. H. 

J. H. M. 
J* ii. R. 



Sir Henry Trotter, K.C.M.G., C.B. f 

Lieutenant-Colonel, Royal Engineers. H.B.M. Consul-General for Roumania, J Rumania* Historv (in -bnrt) 
1894-1906, and British Delegate on the European Commission of the Danube! 1 Kuman,a ' history U» part). 



Victoria Medallist, Royal Geographical Society, 1878. 



Henry William Carless Davis, M.A. 

Fellow and Tutor of Balliol College, Oxford. Fellow of All Souls' College, Oxford, 
1 895-1902. Author of England under the Normans and Angevins; Charlemagne. 



H. Wickham Steed. 

Correspondent of The Times at Vienna.- 
1 897-1902. 



Richard, Earl of Cornwall; 
Richard I.; 
Richard of Devizes; 
Robert of Gloucester; 
Roger of Hoveden; 
Roger of Wendover. 



Correspondent of The Times at Rome, -J Ricasoli, Baron. 



Sir Henry Yule, K. C.S.I. , C.B. 

See the biographical article: Yule, Sir Henry. 

Israel Abrahams, M.A. 

Reader in Talmudie and Rabbinic Literature in the University of Cambridge. 
Formerly President, Jewish Historical Society of England. Author of A Short 
History of Jewish Literature; Jewish Life in the Middle Ages; Judaism ; &c. 

John Allen Howe, B.Sc. 

Curator and Librarian of the Museum of Practical Geology, London. Author of 
The Geology of Building Stones. 

John Addington Symonds, LL.D. 

See the biographical article : Symonds, J. A. 

Joseph Braun, S.J. 

Author of Die Liturgische Gewandung; &e. 

James Bartlett. . r 

Lecturer on Construction, Architecture, Sanitation, Quantities, &c, at King's J R GO f s 
College, London. Member of Society of Architects. Member of Institute of Junior 1 ° 015, 
Engineers. t 

John Bagnall Bury, D.Litt., D.C.L. 

See the biographical article: Bury, J. B. 

James Bass Mullinger, M.A. 

Lecturer in History, St John's College, Cambridge. Formerly University Lecturer 
in History and President of the Cambridge Antiquarian Society. Birkbeck Lecturer 
in Ecclesiastical History at Trinity College, Cambridge, 1 890-1894. Author of 
History of the University of Cambridge; The Schools of Charles tlie Great; &c. 

James David Bourchier, M.A., F.R.G.S. 

King's College, Cambridge. ; Correspondent of The Times in South-Eastern Europe. 
Commander of the Orders oi Prince Danilo of Montenegro and of the Saviour of 
Greece, and Officer of the Order of St Alexander of Bulgaria. 

Rev. Joseph Estlin Carpenter, M.A., D.Litt;, D.D., D.Th. 

Principal of Manchester College, Oxford. Author of The First Three Gospels, their 
Origin and Relations ; The Bible in the Nineteenth Century ; &c. 

Sir John Francis Harpin Broadbent, Bart., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P., M.R.C.S. 
Physician to Out- Patients, St Mary's Hospital, London; Physician totheHamp- 
stead General Hospital ; Assistant Physician to the London Fever Hospital. 
Author of Heart Disease and Aneurysm; &c. 

James Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Litt.D., F.R.Hist.S. 

Gilmour Professor of Spanish Language and Literature, Liverpool University. 
Norman MeColl Lecturer, Cambridge University. Fellow of the British Academy. 
Member of the Royal Spanish Academy. Knight Commander of the Order of 
Alphonso XII. Author of Ar History of Spanish Literature; &e. 

James Fullarton Muirhead, LL.D. 

Editor of many of Baedeker's Guide Books. Author of America, the Land of 
Contrasts. 

John Forbes White, M.A., LL.D. (d. 1904). 

Joint-author of the Life and Art of G. P. Chalmers, R.S.A.; &c. 

His Eminence Cardinal James Gibbons. 
See the biographical article: Gibeons, James. 

Joseph G. Horner, A.M.I.Mech.E. 

Author of Plating and Boiler Making; Practical Metal Turning; &c. 

John Henry Arthur Hart, M.A. 

Fellow, Theological Lecturer and Librarian, St John's College, Cambridge. 

John Henry Middleton, M.A., Litt.D., F.S.A., D.C.L. (1846-1896). 

Slade Professor of Fine Art in the University of Cambridge, 1 886-1 895. Director 
of the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, 1 889-1 892. Art Director of the South 
Kensington Museum, 1892-1896. Author of The Engraved Gems of Classical Times; 
Illuminated Manuscripts in Classical and Mediaeval Times. 

John Horace Round, M.A., LL.D. 

Balliol College, Oxford. Author of Feudal England; Studies in Peerage and Family 
History; Peerage and Pedigree. 



Rlcci, Matteo; 
Rubruquts, William of 

{in part). 
Ritual Murder; 
Sabbatai Sebl; 
Sabbation; 
Sachs, Michael. 



Rhaetlc. 

Renaissance. 
Rochet. 



Roman Empire, Later. 



Richard of Cirencester. 



Ristitch, Jovan. 



Religion. 



Rheumatism. 



Ruiz, Juan. 



Rhine (in part). 

Rembrandt (in part). 

Roman Catholic Church: 

United States. 

Rolling-mill. 

Sadducees. 

Rietschel, Ernst; 

Ring (in part); 

Rome: The Ancient City (in 

part); and Christian Rome 

(in part); 
Round Towers. 

Register. 



X 

J. H. R.* 

J. HI. R. 
J. H. V. C. 

J. J. L.* 
J. J. T. 

J. L. W. 

J. Mt. 

J. S. F. 
J. S. H. 

J. S. R. 

J. T. Be. 

J. T. S.* 
J. W. 

J. Wal.* 

J. We. 
J. W. H. 

K. S. 

L. F. A. 
L. F. V.-H. 

L. J. S. 

L. L. S. 

M. A. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



James Harvey Robinson, A.M., Ph.D. 

Professor of History, Columbia University, New York. 
First Modern Scholar; History of Western Europe; &c. 



Author of Petrarch, the 1 Reformation, The. 



John Holland Rose, M.A., Lirr.D. 

Christ's College, Cambridge. Lecturer on Modern History to the Cambridge., 
University Local Lectures Syndicate. Author of Life of Napoleon I.; Napoleonic 



Relchstadt, Duke of. 



ity „ 
Studies; The Development of the European Na f ions; The Life of Pitt; &c. 

John Henry Verrinder Crowe. r 

Lieut.-Colonel, Royal Artillery. Commandant of the Royal Military College of j Russo-Turklsh War* 
Canada. Formerly Chief Instructor in Military Topography and Military History i f r j?„_~j?\ 
and Tactics at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich. Author of Epitome of the \ 1Q 77 7°)- 
Russo-Turkish War, 1877-78', &c. ^ 

Rev. John James Lias, M.A. f 

Chancellor of Llandaff Cathedral. Formerly Hulscan Lecturer in Divinity and J R eU sch Franz H 
Lady Margaret Preacher, University of Cambridge. Author of Miracles, Science ] ' 

and Prayer; &c. L 

Sir Joseph John Thomson, D.Sc., LL.D., Ph.D., F.R.S. 

Cavendish Professor of Experimental Physics and Fellow of Trinity College, Cam- 
bridge. President of the British Association, 1909-19 10. Author of A Treatise on - 
the Motion of Vortex Rings; Application of Dynamics to Physics and Chemistry; 
Recent Researches in Electricity and Magnetism ; &c. 

Jessie Laidlay Weston. 

Author of Arthurian Romances unrepresented in Malory. 

James Moffatt, M.A., D.D. 

Minister of the United Free Church of Scotland. 
Author of Historical New Testament; &c. 

John Smith Flett, D.Sc, F.G.S. 

Petrographer to the Geological Survey. Formerly Lecturer on Petrology in Edin- J Rhyolite % 

burgh University. Neill Medallist of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Bigsby ] 
Medallist of the Geological Society of London. L 

John Scott Haldane, M.A., M.D., LL.D., F.R.S. " r 

Fellow of New College, Oxford, and University Reader in Physiology. Metro- Respiratory System: Physio- 
politan Gas Referee to the Board of Trade. Joint-editor and founder of the Journal < i Q v 
of Hygiene. Author of Blue-books on " The Causes of Death in Colliery Explo- ^' 

sions " ; &c. I 

Ritschl, Friedrich W.; 



Rontgen Rays. 



j Round Table, The/ 



Jowett Lecturer, London, 1907. -{ Romans, Epistle to the 



James Smith Reid, M.A., LL.M., Litt.D., LL.D. 

Professor of Ancient History and Fellow and Tutor of Gonville and Caius College 
Cambridge^ Hon. Fellow, formerly Fellow and Lecturer, of Christ's College 
Editor of Cicero's Academica; De Amicitia; &c. 



Ruhnken, David; 

Rutilius, Claudius 

Namatianus. 



John Thomas Bealby. f R te a (*» part); 

Joint-author of Stanford's Europe. Formerly Editor of the Scottish Geographical -l Russia: Geography and 
Magazine. Translator of Sven Hedin's Through Asia t Central Asia and Tibet; &c. L Statistics (in part). 



James Thomson Shotwell, Ph.D. . 

Professor of History in Columbia University, New York City. 

James Williams, M.A., D.C.L., LL.D. 



f Richelieu, Cardinal; 
\ Sacrilege. 

I Roman Catholic Church: 



All Souls' Reader in Roman Law in the University of Oxford, and Fellow of Lincoln -\ 

College. Barrister-at-Law of Lincoln's Inn. Author of Law of the Universities; &c. [ -^ n i itsn Law. 

James Walker, M.A. r 

Christ Church, Oxford. Demonstrator in the Clarendon Laboratory. Formerly J p P f Tan ti nfl . n.a/, KaUnrtin* 
Vice-President of the Physical Society. Author of The Analytical Theory of Light; 1 KelractI0n - Uouble fraction. 
Sec. I 

Julius Wellhausen, D.D. 

See the biographical article: Wellhausen, Julius. 

John Wesley Hales, M.A. 

Emeritus Professor of English Literature at King's College, London. Hon. Fellow, 
formerly Fellow and Tutor, of Christ's College, Cambridge. Clark Lecturer in 
English Literature at Trinity College, Cambridge. Author of Shakespeare Essays 
and Notes; Folia Litteraria; &c. 

Kathleen Schlesinger. 



Editor of the Portfolio of Musical Archaeology. 
Orchestra, 



Author of The Instruments of the 



< Reiske, Johann Jacob. 

J Robin Hood (in part), 

J Regal; Rotta; 
1 Sackbut. 



Lawrence F. Abbott. 

President of The Outlook Company, New York. 

Leveson Francis Vernon-Harcourt, M.A., M.Inst.CE. (1839-1907). 

Professor of Civil Engineering at University College, London, 1882-1905. Author j RIver Emrineerimr 
of Rivers and Canals; Harbours and Docks; Civil Engineering as applied in Con-^ engineering. 

struction ; &c. 

Leonard James Spencer, M.A. 

Assistant in Department of Mineralogy, British Museum. Formerly Scholar of 
Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, and Harkness Scholar. Editor oKthe Mineral- 
ogical Magazine. 

Lionel Lancelot Shadwell, M.A. 

Barrister-at-Law, Lincoln's Inn. One of H.M. Commissioners in Lunacy. 
Matthew Arnold. 

See the biographical article: Arnold, Matthew. 



j Roosevelt, Theodore. 



Rutile. 



\ Registration. 



S Sainte-Beuve. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



XI 



M. Cr. 
M.G. 

M. Ha. 
M. H. S. 

M. 0. B. C. 
M.P.* 

N. W. T. 

0. A. 

0. Ba. 

0. M.* 

P. A. A. 

P. A. K. 
P. C. ML 

P. Gi. 

P. G. K. 

P. V. 

R. A. N. 

R. C. J. 
R* H* C* 



Francis Marion Crawford. 

See the biographical article: Crawford, F. Marion. 

Moses Gaster, Ph.D. 



j Rome: The Modem City. 



Chief Rabbi of the Sephardic Communities of England. Vice-President, Zionist 
Congress, 1898, 1899, 1900. Ilchester Lecturer at Oxford on Slavonic and Byzantine m 
Literature, 1886 and 1891. President, Folk-lore Society of England. Vice- 
President, Anglo- Jewish Association. Author of History of Rumanian Popular 
Literature ; &c. 



Rumania: Literature. 



Marcus Hartog, M.A., D.Sc., F.L.S. f Rhizonoda- 

Professor of Zoology, University College, Cork. Author of " Protozoa," in Cam-\ p ... P ' 
bridge Natural History; and papers for various scientific journals. I KOlII © ra - 

Marion H. Spielmann, F.S.A. 

Formerly Editor of the Magazine of Art. Member of Fine Art Committee of Inter- 
national Exhibitions of Brussels, Paris, Buenos Aires, Rome and the Franco-British 
Exhibition, London. Author of History of " Punch " ; British Portrait Painting " 
to the Opening of the Nineteenth Century; Works of G. F. Watts, R.A.; British 
Sculpture and Sculptors of To-day ; Henriette Ronner ; &c. 



Relief; 
Repousse; 
Roubillac, Louis F. 



Maximilian Otto Bismarck Caspari, M.A. 

Reader in Ancient History at London University. 
University, 1 905-1 908. 



r Rhodes {in part); 
Lecturer in Greek at Birmingham J Romanus I.-IV. {Eastern 

I Emperors). 

Leon Jacques Maxime Prinet. . r 

Formerly Archivist to the French National Archives. Auxiliary of the Institute J Retz, Seigneurs and Dukes of; 
of France (Academy of Moral and Political Sciences). Author of L' Industrie du sel j Rouault Joachim. 
en Frenche-Comt6; Francois I et le comt£ de Bourgogne; &c. I 

Northcote Whitridge Thomas, M.A. f 

Government Anthropologist to Southern Nigeria. Corresponding Member of the J c arr ifl rp 
Socidte* d'Anthropologie de Paris. Author of Thought Transference; Kinship and\ 2>acnnce * 
Marriage in Australia; &c. L 

Osmund Airy, M.A., LL.D. r 

H.M. Divisional Inspector of Schools and Inspector of Training Colleges, Board of J D „ T , nr .,„ 
Education. Author of Louis XIV. and the English Restoration; Charles II.; &c. ] Kussell > Lord William. 
Editor of the Lauderdale Papers ; &c. I 

Oswald Barron, F.S.A. 

Editor of The Ancestor, 1902-1905. Hon. 
Honourable Society of the Baronetage. 

Octave Maus, LL.D. r 

Advocate of the Court of Appeal at Brussels. Director of VArt Moderne and of 1 
the Libre EsthStique. President of the Association of Belgian writers. Officer of the -{ Rops, Felicien. 
Legion of Honour. Author of Le ThSdtre de Bayreuth; Aux Ambassadeurs ; Malta, 
Constantinople et la Crimie ; &c. I 

Philip A. Ashworth, M.A., Doc. Juris. 
New College, Oxford. Barrister-at-Law. 
of the English Constitution. 



Genealogist to Standing Council of the i Russell {Family), 



Translator of H. R. von Gneist's History A Rhine {in part). 



Prince Peter Alexeivitch Kropotkin. 

See the biographical article: Kropotkin, Prince P. A. 



f Riga {in part) ; 
-< Russia: Geography and 
I Statistics {in part). 



Peter Chalmers Mitchell, M.A., F.R.S., F.Z.S., D.Sc, LL.D. r 

Secretary of the Zoological Society of London. University Demonstrator in Com- J Regeneration Of Lost Parts; 
parative Anatomy and Assistant to Linacre Professor at Oxford, 1888-1891. Author j Reproduction: of Animals. 
of Outlines of Biology; &c. I 

Peter Giles, M.A., LL.D., Litt.D. 

Fellow and Classical Lecturer of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and University 
Reader in Comparative Philology. Formerly Secretary of the Cambridge Philological 
Society. 

Paul George Konody. f T, OT -v Mn H+ '<•'« M —*- 

Art Critic of the Observer and the Daily Mail. Formerly Editor of The Artist. J, ™moranau*» fan;, 
Author of The Art of Walter Crane; Velasquez: Life and Work' &c. [ Rubens {in part). 



Pasquale Villari. 

See the biographical article: Villari, Pasquale. 

Reynold Alleyne Nicholson, M.A., Litt.D. 

Lecturer in Persian in the University of Cambridge. Sometime Fellow of Trinity 
College, Cambridge, and Professor of Persian at University College, London. . 
Author of Selected Poems from the Dtvani Shamsi Tabriz; A Literary History of 
the Arabs; &c. 

Sir Richard Claverhouse Jebb, LL.D., D.C.L. 

See the biographical article: Jebb, Sir Richard Claverhouse. 

Rev, Robert Henry Charles, M.A., D.D., D.Litt. 

Grinfield Lecturer, and Lecturer in Biblical Studies, Oxford. Fellow of Merton 
College. Fellow of the British Academy. Formerly Professor of Biblical Greek, - 
Trinity College, Dublin. Author of Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future Life; 
Book of Jubilees : &c. 



J Rimini; Rome: Roman Re- 
1 public in the Middle Ages. 



SSblans. 



j Rhetoric. 



Revelation, Book of. 



XII 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



R. J. M 

R.L.* 

R. N. B. 

R. R. M. 

R. S. C. 

R. W. F. H. 
S. A. C. 

stc. 

S. H. V.* 

S.N. 
T. As, 

T. A. I. 

T. Ba. 

T. B. L. 
T. H.* 

T. Wo. 
T. W.-D. 

W. A. B. C. 



W. A. P. 



Ronald John McNeill, M.A. 

Christ Church, Oxford. Barrister-at-Law. 
Gazette, London. 



Formerly Editor of the St James's 



Richard Lydekker, F.R.S., F.Z.S., F.G.S. 

Member of the Staff of the Geological Survey of India, 1874-1882. Author of 
Catalogues of Fossil Mammals, Reptiles and Birds in the British Museum ; The Deer H 
of all Lands ; &c. 

Robert Nisbet Bain (d. 1909). 

Assistant Librarian, British Museum, 1883-1909. Author of Scandinavia: the 
Political History of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, 1513-IQ00; TJie First Romanovs, + 
16 13-1725 : Slavonic Europe: the Political History of Poland and Russia from 146Q 
to 1790; &c. 

Robert Ranulpii Marett, M.A. 

Reader in Social Anthropology, Oxford University, and Fellow and Tutor of 



f Richmond, Earls and 

Dukes of; 
Richmond and Lennox; 

Duchess of; 
Sacheverell, William. 

Reindeer; Rhinoceros(m part};, 
Rhytina; River-hog; 
Rocky Mountain Goat; 
Rodentia; Roe-buck; 
Rorqual. 

Repnin; 

Reuterholm, Baron; 
Sadolin, Jorgen. 

Religion: Primitive Religion; 



Exeter College. Formerly Dean and Sub-Rector of Exeter College. Author of "j Ritual 
The Threshold of Religion. 

Robert Seymour Conway, M.A*., D.Litt. r Rome: Ancient History (in 

Professor of Latin and Indo-European Philology in the University of Manchester. J part); 
Formerly Professor of Latin in University College, Cajdiff, and Fellow of Gonville | Rutuli* SabelliC" 

I < 



and Caius College, Cambridge. Author of The Italic Dialects. 

Robert William Frederick Harrison. 

Barrister-at-Law, Inner Temple. Assistant Secretary of the Royal Society, London. 

Stanley Arthur Cook, M.A 

Lecturer in Hebrew and Syriac, and formerly Fellow, Gonville and Caius College, 
Cambridge. Editor for the Palestine Exploration Fund. Author of Glossary of* 
Aramaic Inscriptions*, The Law of Moses and the Code of Hammurabi; Critical Notes 
on Old Testament History; Religion of Ancient Palestine; &c. 

Viscount St Cyres. 

See the biographical article: Iddesleigh, 1st Earl of. 

Sydney Howard Vines, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S. 

Sherardian Professor of Botany, Oxford University, and Fellow of Magdalen 
College. Fellow of the University of London. Hon. Fellow, formerly Fellow and - 
Lecturer, of Christ's College, Cambridge. President of the Linnean Society, 1900- 
1904. Author of A Student's Text-Book of Botany; &c. 

Simon Newcomb, D.Sc, L.L.D. 

See the biographical article : Newcomb, Simon. 



Sabini. 

Royal Society, The. 



Ruth, Book of (in part); 
Sabbath (in part). 



J Roman Catholic Church (in. 
I part). 



Reproduction: of Plants; 
Sachs, Julius von. 

Refraction: Astronomical 
Refraction. 



Thomas Ashby, M.A., D.Litt. (Oxon.). r p .„ 

Director of British School of Archaeology at Rome. Formerly Scholar of Christ Ke S| llus 5 
Church, Oxford. Craven Fellow, 1897. Conington Prizeman, 1906. Member of J Regium; Rovigo; 
the Imperial German Archaeological Institute. Author of The Classical Topography \ Rusellae; Ruvo; 
of the Roman Campagna. [ st Bernard Passes (in part). 



Thomas Allan Ingram, M.A. , LL.D. 
Trinity College, Dublin. 



4 Sacrilege: English Law. 



Sir Thomas Barclay. r 

Member of the Institute of International Law. Officer of the Legion of Honour. J « . , 
Author of Problems of International Practice and Diplomacy; &c. M.P. for Black- 1 reprisals. 
burn, 1910. [ 



Thomas Bell Lightfoot, M.Inst.C.E., M.Inst.Mech.E. 
Author of Preservation of Foods by Cold; &c. 



{ 



Refrigerating. 



Thomas Harris, M.D., F.R.C.P. r_ a n _ , 

Formerly Hon. Physician to Manchester Royal Infirmary, and Lecturer on Diseases J Respiratory System: Pathology 
of the Respiratory Organs at Owens College, Manchester. Author of numerous] (in part). 
articles on diseases of the respiratory organs. I „ , _ 

f Rope and Rope-making; 

Thomas Woodhouse. J Sacking and Sack Manu- 

Head of the Weaving and Textile Designing Department, Technical College, Dundee. j 

Walter Theodore Watts-Dunton. 

See the biographical article: Watts-Dunton, Walter Theodore. 



Rev. William Augustus Brevoort Coolidge, M.A., F.R.G.S., Ph.D. 

Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxlord. Professor of English History, St David's 
College, Lampeter, 1880-1881. Author of Guide du Haut Dauphini; The Range of- 
the Todi; Guide to Grindelwatd; Guide to Switzerland; The Alps in Nature and 
in History; &c. Editor of the Alpine Journal, 1 880-1 881 ; &c. v 

Walter Alison Phillips, M.A. 

Formerly Exhibitioner of Merton College and Senior Scholar of St John's College, 
Oxford. Author of Modern Europe ; &c. 



facture; Sailcloth, 
-j Rossetti, Dante Gabriel. 

'Referendum and Initiative; 

Reschen Scheideck; 

Rhine: Swiss Portion; 

Rhone; Rorschach; 

Rosa, Monte; Rovereto; 

St Bernard Passes (in part). 

Rochet: Church of England; 

Roman Catholic Church (in 
Part); . 

Russia: Government and Ad- 
ministration. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



xm 



W. 


E. 


A. A 


w. 


H. 


F. 


w. 


J. 


H.* 


w. 


M. 


-L. 


w. 


M. 


R. 


w. 


P. 


C. 


w. 


P. 


P. L. 


w. 


R. 


D. 



W. R. K. 



W. R. M. 



W. R. S. 



William Edmund Armytage Axon, LL.D. r 

Formerly Deputy Chief Librarian of the Manchester Free Libraries. On Literary J Drte . rtil uriiii« m 
Staff of Manchester Guardian, 1874-1905. Member of the Gorsedd, with the | * oscoe > Wiwam. 
bardic name of Manceinion. Author of Annals of Manchester ■; &c. I 

Sir William H. Flower, F.R.S. 

See the biographical article: Flower, Sir W. H. 



J Rhinoceros (in part). 



William James Hughan. 

Past S.G.D. of the Grand Lodge of England. 
of Freemasonry. 

WlLIIELM MEYER-LDBKE, Ph.D. 

H of rat of the Austrian Empire. Professor of Romance Philology in the University - 
of Vienna. Author of Grammatik der Romanischen Sprachen; &c. 

William Michael Rossetti. 

See the biographical article: Rossetti, Dante G. 

William Prideaux Courtney. 

See the biographical article: Courtney, Baron. 

William Pitt Preble Longfellow. 

Fellow of the American Institute of Architects. Editor of the American Architect, 
Author of Cyclopaedia of Architecture in Italy, Greece and the Levant; &c. 



Author of Origin of the English Rite\ Roslcruclanlsm. 



Romance Languages. 

f Ribera, Giuseppe; 
I Rosa, Salvator. 

f Rosslyn, Earl of; 
I Russell, 1st Earl. 



-{ 



Richardson, Henry Hobson. 



Wyndham Roland Dunstan, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S., F.CS. 

Director of the Imperial Institute, London. Formerly Lecturer on Chemistry in 
its Relations to Medicine in the University of Oxford. Professor of Chemistry to -{ Rubber, 
the Pharmaceutical Society and Lecturer on Chemistry at St Thomas's Hospital, 
London. Author of British Cotton Cultivation ; &c. 

Rt. Hon. Sir William Rann Kennedy, LL.D. r 

Lord of Appeal. Hon. Fellow of Pembroke College, Cambridge. Fellow of the I 

British Academy. Judge of King's Bench Division of High Court of Justice, 1892-O Russell 01 Klllowen, Lord* 
1907. I 

William Richard Morfill, M.A. (d. 1910). r 

Formerly Professor of Russian and the other Slavonic Languages in the University J ^ _■__ f . t h 

of Oxford. Curator of the Taylorian Institution, Oxford. Author of Russia; 1 * ussian "ieraiure. 



Slavonic Literature ; &c. 

William Robertson Smith, LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Smith, William Robertson. 



fReuchlin; 
Ruth, Book of (in part); 
Sabbath (in part). 



PRINCIPAL UNSIGNED ARTICLES 



Reflection of Light. 

Regensburg. 

Regent. 

Reims. 

Renfrewshire. 

Rennes. 

Reporting. 

Republic. 

Resorcin. 

Retainer. 

Reunion. 

Rcuss. 

Reynard the Fox. 

Rhine Province. 

Rhode Island. 

Rhodium. 



Rhubarb. 

Rice. 

Richmond (Surrey). 

Richmond (Va.). 

Rickets. 

Riding. 

Riesengebirge. 

Rinderpest. 

Rio de Janeiro. 

Rio Grande do Sul (State). 

Riot. 

Ripon. 

Roads and Streets. 

Rochester (Kent). 

Rochester (N.Y.). 

Rodney. 



Rodriguez. 

Roland, Legend of. 

Rome (N.Y.). 

Romulus. 

Root. 

Rosaceae. 

Roscommon, Co. 

Rose. 

Roses, Wars of the. 

Ross and Cromarty. 

Rostock. 

Rothschild. 

Rotterdam. 

Rouen. 

Roulette. 

Roussillon. 



Roxburghshire. 

Rubidium. 

Rubinstein. 

Rugen. 

Running. 

Russo-Japanese War. 

Rutebeuf. 

Ruthenium. 

Rutland. 

Ryazan. 

Sacramento (Cal.). 

Saffron. 

Saint Albans. 

Saint Andrews. 

St Augustine (FLa.)* 

St Denis* 



ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



VOLUME XXIII 



REFECTORY (med. Lat. refectorium, from reficere, to refresh), 
the hall of a monastery, convent, &c, where the religious took 
their chief meals together. There frequently was a sort of 
ambo, approached by steps, from which to read the legenda 
sanctorum, &c., during meals. The refectory was generally 
situated by the side of the S. cloister, so as to be removed from 
the church but contiguous to the kitchen; sometimes it was 
divided down the centre into two aisles, as at Fountains Abbey 
in England, Mont St Michel in France and at Villiers in 
Belgium, and into three aisles as in St Mary's, York, and the 
Bernardines, Paris. The refectory of St Martin-des-Champs 
in Paris is in two aisles, and is now utilized as the library 
of the ficole des Arts et Metiers. Its wall pulpit, with an 
arcaded staircase in the thickness of the wall, is still in perfect 
preservation. 

REFEREE, a person to whom anything is referred; an 
arbitrator. The court of referees in England was a court to 
which the House of Commons committed the decision of all 
questions as to the right of petitioners to be heard in opposition 
to private bills. As originally constituted the referees consisted 
of the chairman of ways and means, and other members, the 
Speaker's counsel and several official referees not members of 
the House of Commons. In 1903 the appointment of official 
referees was discontinued. The court now consists of the 
chairman of ways and means, the deputy chairman and not 
less than seven other members of the House appointed by the 
Speaker, and its duty, as defined by a standing order, is to decide 
upon all petitions against private bills, or against provisional 
orders or provisional certificates, as to the rights of the 
petitioners to be heard upon such petitions. In the high court 
of justice, under the Judicature Act 1873, cases may be sub- 
mitted to three official referees, for trial, inquiry and report, or 
assessment of damages. Inquiry and report may be directed 
in any ease, trial only by consent of the parties, or in any matter 
requiring any prolonged examination of documents or accounts, 
or any scientific or local investigation which cannot be tried in 
the ordinary way. 

REFERENDUM and INITIATIVE, two methods by which 
the wishes of the general body of electors in a constitutional 
xxin. 1 



state may be expressed with regard to proposed legislation. 
They are developed to the highest extent in Switzerland, and 
are best exemplified -in the Swiss federal and cantonal constitu- 
tions. By these two methods the sovereign people in Switzerland 
(whether in the confederation or in one of its cantons) approve 
or reject the bills and resolutions agreed upon by the legislative 
authority (Referendum), or compel that authority to introduce 
bills on certain specified subjects (Initiative) — in other words, 
exercise the rights of the people as regards their elected repre- 
sentatives at times other than general elections. The Referendum 
means " that which is referred " to the sovereign people, and 
prevailed (up to 1848) in the federal diet, the members of which 
were bound by instructions, all matters outside which being 
taken " ad referendum." A similar system obtained previously 
in the formerly independent confederations of the Grisons and 
of the Valais, in the former case not merely as between the 
Three Leagues, and even the bailiwicks of each within its 
respective league, but also (so far as regards the upper Engadine) 
the communes making up a bailiwick, though in the Valais the 
plan prevailed only as between the seven Zehnten or bailiwicks. 
The Initiative, on the other hand, is the means by which the 
sovereign people can compel its elected representatives to take 
into consideration either some specified object or a draft bill 
relating thereto, the final result of the deliberations of the 
legislature being subject by a referendum vote to the approval 
or rejection of the people. These two institutions therefore 
enable the sovereign people to control the decisions of the 
legislature, without having recourse to a dissolution, or waiting 
for the expiration of its natural term of office. 

As might have been expected, both had been adopted by 
different cantons before they found their way into the federal 
constitution, which naturally has to take account of the sovereign 
rights of the cantons of which it is composed. Further, they (at 
any rate the referendum) were employed in the case of con- 
stitutional matters relating to cantonal constitutions before being 
applied to all or certain specified laws and resolutions. Finally, 
the action of both has been distinctly conservative in the case 
of the confederation, though to a less marked degree in the case of 
the cantons. 



REFLECTION OF LIGHT 



Two forms of the Referendum should be carefully distin- 
guished: the facultative or optional (brought into play only on 
the demand of a fixed number of citizens), and the obligatory 
or compulsory (which obtains in all cases that lie within its 
sphere as defined in the constitution). The Initiative exists 
only in the facultative form, being exercised when a certain 
number of citizens demand it. Both came into common use 
during the Liberal reaction in Switzerland after the Paris 
revolution of July 1830. In 1831 St Gall first adopted the 
" facultative referendum " (then and for some time after called 
the " Veto "), and its example was followed by several cantons 
before 1848. The "obligatory referendum " appears first in 
1852 and 1854 respectively in the Valais and the Grisons, when 
the older system was reformed, but in its modem form it was 
first adopted in 1863 by the canton of rural Basel. The 
Initiative was first adopted in 1845 by Vaud. Of course the 
cantons with Landsgemeinden, Uri, Unterwalden, Appenzell 
and Glarus (where the citizens appear in person) possessed both 
from time immemorial. Excluding these there were at the end 
of 1907 o£ cantons, which had the " obligatory referendum " 
(Aargau, rural Basel, Bern, the Grisons, Schafihausen, Schwyz, 
Soleure, Thurgau, the Valais and Zurich), while 7 J cantons 
possess only the " facultative referendum " (Basel town, Geneva, 
Lucerne, Neuchatel, St Gall, Ticino, Vaud and Zug). Fribourg 
alone had neither, save an obligatory referendum (like all the 
rest) as to the revision of the cantonal constitution. As regards 
the Initiative, all the cantons have it as to the revision of the 
cantonal constitution; while all but Fribourg have it also as 
to bills or legislative projects. In the case both of the facultative 
referendum and of the Initiative each canton fixes the number 
of citizens who have a right to exercise this power. The con- 
stitution of the Swiss confederation lags behind those of the 
cantons. It is true that both in 1848 (art. 113) and in 1874 
(art. 120) it is provided that a vote on the question whether the 
constitution shall be revised must take place if either house of 
the federal legislature or 50,000 qualified voters demand it — 
of course a popular vote (obligatory referendum) must take 
place on the finally elaborated project of revision. But as 
regards bills the case is quite different. The " facultative 
referendum " was not introduced till 1874 (art. 89) and then 
only as regards all bills and resolutions not being of a pressing 
nature, 8 cantons or 30,000 qualified voters being entitled to 
ask for such a popular vote. But the Initiative did not appear 
in the federal constitution till it was inserted in 1891 (art. 121), 
and then merely in the case of a partial (not a total) revision of 
the constitution, if 50,000 qualified voters require it, whether as 
regards a subject in general or a draft bill, — of course the federal 
legislature had an Initiative in this matter in 1848 already. 
The results of the working of these two institutions in federal 
matters up to the end of 1908 are as follows. Excluding the 
votes by which the two federal constitutions of 1848 and 1874 
were adopted, there have been 30 (10 of them between 1848 and 
1874) votes (obligatory referendum) as to amendments of the 
federal constitution; in 15 cases only (of which only one was 
before 1874) did the people accept the amendment proposed. 
In the case of bills there have been 30 votes (very many bills 
have not been attacked at all), all of course since the facultative 
referendum was introduced in 1874; in 11 cases only have the 
people voted in the affirmative. Finally, with regard to the 
Initiative, there have been 7 votes, of which two only were in the 
affirmative. Thus, between 1874 and 1907, of 57 votes 27 only 
were in the affirmative, while if we include the 10 votes 
between 1848 and 1874 the figures are respectively 67 and 
28, one only having been favourable during that period. 
The result is to show that the people, voting after mature 
reflection, are far less radically disposed than has sometimes 
been imagined. 

The method of referendum by itself is also in use in some 
of the states of the American Union (see United States) 
and in Australia, and under the name of plebiscite has been 
employed in France; but it is best studied in the Swiss con- 
stitution. 








T 


/? 




Q \ 






M 




R 


N 


S 









Fig. 1. 



Authorities. — VV. A. B. Coolidge, "The Early History of the 
Referendum " (article in the English Historical Review ior October 
1891); T. Curti, Die schweizerischen Volksreckte, 1848 bis 1900 
(Bern, 1900) (Fr. trans, by J. Roniat with additions by the author, 
Paris, 1905)— Curti 's earlier work, Geschichte d. senweiz. Volks- 
gesetzgebung (Bern, 1882), is not entirely superseded by his later 
one; S. Dcploigc, The Referendum in Switzerland, Engl, trans, with 
additional notes (London, 1898); N. Droz, "The Referendum 
in Switzerland " (article in the Contemporary Review, March 1895); 
J. M. Vincent, Government in Switzerland, chaps, v. and xiv. (New 
York and London, 1900). See also, for the United States and 
generally, the American works on the Referendum by E. P. Ober- 
holtzer (1893 and 1900). (W. A. B. C.) 

REFLECTION OF LIGHT. When a ray of light in a homo- 
geneous medium falls upon the bounding surface of another 
medium, part of it is usually turned back or reflected and part 
is scattered, the remainder traversing or being absorbed by the 
second medium. The scattered rays (also termed the irregu- 
larly or diffusely reflected rays) play an important part in 
rendering objects visible — in fact, without diffuse reflection 
non-luminous objects would be invisible; they are occasioned 
by irregularities in the surface, but are governed by the same 
law as holds for regular reflection. This law is: the incident 
and reflected rays make equal angles with the normal to tbe 
reflecting surface at the point of incidence, and arc coplanar 
with the normal. This is equivalent to saying that the path 
of the ray is a minimum. 1 In fig. 1 , MN represents the section 
of a plane mirror; OR is the in- 
cident ray, RP the reflected ray, 
and TR the normal at R. Then 
the law states that the angle of 
incidence ORT equals the angle 
of reflection PRT, and that 
OR, RT and RP are in the same 
plane. 

This natural law is capable of 
ready experimental proof (a simple 
one is to take the altitude of a 
star with a meridian circle, its depression in a horizontal re- 
flecting surface of mercury and the direction of the nadir), 
and the most delicate instruments have failed to detect 
any divergence from it. Its explanation by the Newtonian 
corpuscular theory is very simple, for we have only to 
assume that at the point of impact the perpendicular velocity 
of a corpuscle is reversed, whilst the horizontal velocity 
is unchanged (the mirror being assumed horizontal). The 
wave-theory explanation is more complicated, and in the 
simple form given by Huygens incomplete. The theory as 
developed by Fresncl shows that regular reflection is due 
to a small zone in the neighbourhood of the point R (above), 
there being destructive interference at all other points on 
the mirror; this theory also accounts for the polarization 
of the reflected light when incident at a certain angle (see 
Polarization of Light). The smoothness or polish of the sur- 
face largely controls the reflecting power, for, obviously, crests 
and furrows, if of sufficient magnitude, disturb the phase 
relations. The permissible deviation from smoothness depends 
on the wave-length of the light employed: it appears that 
surfaces smooth to within |th of a wave-length reflect regularly; 
hence long waves may be regularly reflected by a surface 
which diffuses short waves. Also the obliquity of the incidence 
would diminish the effect of any irregularities; this is experi- 
mentally confirmed by observing the images produced by 
matt surfaces or by smoked glass at grazing incidence. 

We now give some elementary constructions of reflected 
rays, or, what comes to the same thing, of images formed 
by mirrors. 

1. If O be a luminous point and OR a ray incident at R on the 
plane mirror MN (fig. 1) to determine the reflected ray and the 
"image of O. If RP be the reflected ray and RT perpendicular 

1 This principle of the minimum path, however, only holds for 
plane and convex surfaces; with concave surfaces it may be a 
maximum in certain cases. 



REFLECTION OF LIGHT 



A 



// 



m// 



to MN, then, by the law of reflection, angle ORT = TRP 
or ORM=PRN. Hence draw OQ perpendicular to MN, and 

produce it to S, 
making QS = OQ; 
join SR and produce 
to P. It is easily 
seen that PR and 
OR are equally in- 
clined to RT (or MN). 
A point-eye at V 
would see a point 
object at S, i.e. at 
a distance below the 
mirror equal to its 
height above. If the 
object be a solid, then 
the images of its cor- 
ners are formed by 
taking points at the 
same distances below 
as the corners are 
above the mirror, and 
joining these points. 
The eye, however, 
sees the image per- 
verted, i.e. t in the 
same relation as the 
left hand to the 
right. Fig. 2 shows 




Fig. 2. 



On 



8 



how an extended object is viewed in a mirror by a natural 

eye. 

2. If A, B be two parallel plane mirrors and O a luminous point 

between them (fig. 3) to determine the images of O all the 

images must He 
on the line (pro- 
duced) PQ passing 
Y"* through O and 
perpendicular to 
the mirrors. Let 
' OP=£, OQ = g. 
Then if O' be 
the image of O 
in B, such that 
O* has an image 



O, 

-i — 



o 



Fig. 3. 






in A, 00' = 2p; now O' has an image O* 
00" = OQ+QO" = q+q+2p = 2p+2q; similarly 
O'" in A, such that 00'" =4p+2q. In the same way forms an 
image Oi in B such that OOi = 2q ; Oi has an image On in A, such that 
OOn — 2p-{-2q; On has an image Om in B, such that OOm = 2p-{-4q, 
.and so on. Hence there are an infinite number of images at 
definite distances from the mirrors. This explains the vistas as 
seen, for example, between two parallel mirrors at the ends of a 
room. 

3. If A, B be two plane mirrors inclined at an angle 0, and inter- 
secting at C, and O a luminous point between them, determine the 
position and number of images. 

Call are OA = a, 0B=/3. The image of O in A, i.e. a', is such 
that Oa' is perpendicular to CA, and Oa' = 2a. Also Ca' = CO; 
and it is easily seen that all the images lie on a circle of centre C 
and radius CO. The image a' forms an image a" in B such that Oa" 
= OB + Ba"=/3+Ba'=/3-r-OB-r-Oa'=2|S-}-2a = 20. Also a* forms an 

image a'" in A such that Oa'"=OA+Aa' = 2a-h20. And gener- 
ally Oa 2n = 2n0, Oa 2ft+1 = 2n0-|-2a. In the same way it can be 
shown that the image first formed in B gives foci of the general 
distances: O6 2n = 2n0, Ob- n + l = 2nB-\-2&. The number, of images is 
limited, for when any one falls on the are ab between the mirrors 
produced, it lies behind both mirrors, and hence no further image 
is possible. Suppose a Cn be the first image to fall on this are, then 
are Oa 2n >OBa, i.e. 2ttd>ir — a or 2n> Gr-a)/0. Similarly if a 2n+l be 
the first to fall on ab, we obtain 2#-|-i> (tt — a)/$. Hence in both 
cases the number of images is the integer next greater than 
(T — a)l$. In the same way it can be shown that the number of 
images of the b series is the integer next greater than (tt— /9)/0. 
If icjd be an integer, then the number ot images of each series is 
■rr/0, for a/0 and /9/0 are proper fractions. But an image of each 
series coincides; for if tt/0 = 2w, we have Oa 2n +O6 2n = 2n0-f-2n0 = 27r 
i.e. a 2 * 1 and 6 2n coincide; and if ir/$ = 2n-\-i, we have Oa 2n+1 + 
O6 2ft+1 = 4n0+2(a4-/?) = (4«-f-2) 0=2tt, i.e. a 2n+l and 6 2ft + 1 coincide. 
Hence the number of images, including the luminous point, is 2tt/0. 
This principle is utilized in the kaleidoscope (q.v.) t which produces 
five images by means of its mirrors inclined at 6o° (fig. 4). Fig. 5 
shows the seven images formed by mirrors inclined at 45 °. 

4. To determine the reflection at a spherical surface. Let APB 
(fig. 6) be a section of a concave spherical mirror through its 
centre O and luminous point U. If a ray, say UP, meet the surface, 
it will be reflected along PV, which is coplanar with UP and the 
normal PO at P, and makes the angle VPO = UPO. Hence 
VO/VP = OU/UP. This expression may be simplified if we assume 
P to be very close to A, i.e. that the ray UP is very slightly inclined 
to the axis. Writing A for P, we have VO/AV = OU/AU; and 
calling AU=w, AV=v and AO = r, this reduces to tf- l +tr 1 «=2r _1 . 



This formula connects the distances of the object and image formed 
by a spherical concave mirror with the radius of the mirror. Points 
satisfying this relation are called " conjugate foci," for obviously 
they are reciprocal, i.e. u and v can be interchanged in the formula. 




Fig. 4, 



Fig. 5, 



If u be infinite, as, for example, if the luminous source .be a star, 
then tri = 2r -1 , i.e. v = \r. This value is called the focal length of 




Fig. 6. 



the mirror, and the corresponding point, usually denoted by F, 
is called the " principal focus." This formula requires modifica- 
tion for a convex mirror. If u be always considered as positive (v 
may be either positive or negative), r must be regarded as positive 
with concave mirrors and negative with convex. Similarly the 
focal length, having the same sign as r, has different signs in the 
two cases. 

In this formula all distances are measured from the mirror; 
but it is sometimes more convenient to measure from the principal 
focus. If the distances of the object and image from the principal 
focus be x and y, then u-x-\-f and v = y+f (remembering that / 
is positive for concave and negative for convex mirrors). Sub- 
stituting these values in r'-j-f 1 */" 1 and reducing we obtain xy = f i . 
Since ff is always positive, x and y must have the same sign, i.e. 
the object and image must lie on the same side of the principal 
focus. 

We now consider the production of the image of a small object 
placed symmetrically and perpendicular to the axis of a concave 
(fig. 7) and a convex mirror (fig. 8). Let PQ be the object and A 



7^: 




^Q' 


^^*-*d 




A 


^ F c 










>*^ 




c< ^^. 




X^ 


*^ ^^ 


^^ 


^*--o 


i 


W L^ 








Q 




the vertex of the mirror. Consider the point P. Now a ray through 
P and parallel to the axis after meeting the mirror at M is reflected 
through the focus F. The line MF must therefore contain the image 
of P. Also a ray through P and also through the centre of curva- 
ture C of the mirror is reflected along the same path ; this also eon- 
tains the image of P. Hence the image is at P, the intersection 
of the lines MF and PC. Similarly the image of any other point 
can be found, and the final image deduced. We notice that in 
fig. 6 the image is inverted and real, and in fig. 7 erect and virtual. 
The " magnification " or ratio of the size of the image to the object* 
can be deduced from the figures by elementary geometry; it equals 
the ratio of the distances of the image and object from the mirror 
or from the centre of curvature of the mirror. 

The positions and characters of the images for objects at varying 



REFORMATION, THE 



distances are shown in the table (F is the principal focus and C the 
centre of curvature of the mirror MA). 

Concave Mirror 



Position of Object. 


Position of Image. 


Character of Image. 


00 

Between oo and C 

C 
Between C and F 
Between F and A 

A 


F 
Between F and C 

c 

Between C and <» 
Between A and - <» 
A 


Real. 

Real,inverted,diminished 
„ ,, same size 
,, i( magnified 

Virtual, erect, magnified 

Erect, same size 



Convex Mirror 



Position of Object, Position of 1 mage. 



00 

Between wand A 
A 



Between F and A 
A 



Character of Image. 



Virtual 
Virtual, erect, diminished 
Erect, same size 



The above discussion of spherical mirrors assumes that the 
mirror has such a small aperture that the reflected rays from any 
point unite in a point. This, however, no longer holds when the 
mirror has a wide aperture, and in general the reflected rays envelop 
a caustic (q.v., see also Aberration). The only mirror which can 
sharply reproduce an object-point as an image-point has for its 
section an ellipse, which is so placed that the object and image are 
at its foci. This follows from a property of the curve, viz. the sum 
of the focal distances is constant, and that the focal vectores are 
equally inclined to the normal at the point. More important than 
the elliptical mirror, however, is the parabolic, which has the pro- 
perty of converting rays parallel to the axis into a pencil through its 
focus; or, inversely, rays from a source placed at the focus are con- 
verted into a parallel beam; hence the use of this mirror in search- 
lights and similar devices. 

REFORMATION, THE. The Reformation, ' as commonly 
understood, means the religious and political revolution of the 
i6th century, of which the immediate result was the partial dis- 
ruption of the Western Catholic Church and the establishment 
of various national and territorial churches. These agreed 
in repudiating certain of the doctrines, rites and practices 
of the medieval Church, especially the sacrifice of the Mass 
and the headship of the bishop of Rome, and, whatever their 
official designations, came generally to be known as " Pro- 
testant." In some cases they introduced new systems of 
ecclesiastical organization, and in all they sought to justify 
their innovations by an appeal from the Church's tradition 
to the Scriptures. The conflicts between Catholics and Pro- 
testants speedily merged into the chronic political rivalries, 
domestic and foreign, which distracted the European states; 
and religious considerations played a very important part in 
diplomacy and war for at least a century and a half, from the 
diet of Augsburg in 1530 to the English revolution and the 
league of Augsburg, 1688-89. The terms " Reformation " 
and " Protestantism " are inherited by the modern historian; 
they are not of his devising, and come to him laden with re- 
miniscences of all the exalted enthusiasms and bitter anti- 
pathies engendered by a period of fervid religious dissension. 
The unmeasured invective of Luther and Aleander has not 
ceased to re-echo, and the old issues are by no means dead. 

The heat of controversy is, however, abating, and during 
the past thirty or forty years both Catholic and Protestant 
The Re investigators have been vying with one another in 
formation adding to our knowledge and in rectifying old mis- 
ciuslvetya takes J while an ever-increasing number of writers 
Religious pledged to neither party are aiding in developing an 
Revoiu- idea of the scope and nature of the Reformation which 
Hon. differs radically from the traditional one. We now 

appreciate too thoroughly the intricacy of the medieval Church; 
its vast range of activity, secular as well as religious; the 
inextricable interweaving of the civil and ecclesiastical govern- 
ments; the slow and painful process of their divorce as the old 
ideas of the proper functions of the two institutions have changed 
in both Protestant and Catholic lands: we perceive all^oo 
"clearly the limitations of the reformers, their distrust of reason 
and criticism — in short, we know too much about medieval 
institutions and the process of their disintegration longer to 
see in the Reformation an abrupt break in the general history 



of Europe. - No one will, of course, question the importance 
of the schism which created the distinction between Protestants 
and Catholics, but it must always be remembered that the 
religious questions at issue comprised a relatively small part 
of the whole compass of human aspirations and conduct, even 
to those to whom religion was especially vital, while a large 
majority of the leaders in literature, art, science and public 
affairs went their way seemingly almost wholly unaffected by 
theological problems. 

That the religious elements in the Reformation have been 
greatly overestimated from a modern point of view can hardly 
be questioned, and one of the most distinguished students 
of Church history has ventured the assertion that " The motives, 
both remote and proximate, which led to the Lutheran revolt 
were largely secular rather than spiritual." " We may," 
continues Mr H. C, Lea, " dismiss the religious changes incident 
to the Reformation with the remark that they were not the 
object sought, but the means for attaining the object. The 
existing ecclesiastical system was the practical evolution of 
dogma, and the overthrow of dogma was the only way to obtain 
permanent relief from the intolerable abuses of that system " 
{Cambridge Modern History, i. 653). It would perhaps be nearer 
the truth to say that the secular and spiritual interests inter- 
mingled and so permeated one another that it is almost im- 
possible to distinguish them clearly even in thought, while in 
practice they were so bewilderingly confused that they were 
never separated, and were constantly mistaken for one another. 

The first step in clarifying the situation is to come to a full 
realization that the medieval Church was essentially an inter- 
national state, and that the character of the Protestant 
secession from it was largely determined by this fact. Rf sem * 
As Maitland suggests: " We could frame no ac- ofthe 
ceptable definition of a State which would not com- medieval 
prehend the Church. What has it not that a State f h "£ h 
should have ? It has laws, law givers, law courts, state. 
lawyers. It uses physical force to compel men to obey 
the laws. It keeps prisons. In the 13th century, though with 
squeamish phrases, it pronounced sentence of death. It is 
no voluntary society; if people are not born into it 
they are baptized into it when they cannot help them- 
selves. If they attempt to leave they are guilty of crimen 
laesae majestatis, and are likely to be burned. It is supported 
by involuntary contributions, by tithe and tax " (Canon Law 
in the Church of England, p. 100). The Church was not only 
organized like a modern bureaucracy, but performed many of 
the functions of a modern State. It dominated the intellectual 
and profoundly affected the social interests of western Europe. 
Its economic influence was multiform and incalculable, owing 
to its vast property, its system of taxation and its encourage- 
ment of monasticism. When Luther made his first great 
appeal to the German people in his Address to the German 
Nobility , he scarcely adverts to religious matters at all. He 
deals, on the contrary, almost exclusively with the social, 
financial, educational, industrial and general moral problems 
of the day. If Luther, who above all others had the religious 
issue ever before him, attacks the Church as a source of worldly 
disorder, it is not surprising that his contemporary Ulrich von 
Hutten should take a purely secular view of the issues involved. 
Moreover, in the fascinating collection of popular satires and 
ephemeral pamphlets made by Schade, one is constantly im- 
pressed with the absence of religious fervour, and the highly 
secular nature of the matters discussed. The same may be said 
of the various Gravamina, or lists of grievances against the 
papacy drafted from time to time by German diets. 

But not only is the character of the Reformation differently 
conceived from whaUit once was; our notions of the process 
of change are being greatly altered. Formerly, m s t or i c 
writers accounted for the Lutheran movement by so continu- 
magnifying the horrors of the pre-existing regime ity of the 
that it appeared intolerable, and its abolition con- *^ orma " 
sequently inevitable. Protestant writers once con- 
tented themselves with a brief caricature of the Church, 



REFORMATION, THE 



a superficial account of the traffic in indulgences, and a 
rough and ready assumption, which even Kostlin makes, 
that the darkness was greatest just before the dawn. 
Unfortunately this crude solution of the problem proved 
too much; for conditions were no worse immediately 
before the revolt than they had been for centuries, and 
German complaints of papal tyranny go back to Hildegard 
of Bingen and Walther von der Vogelweide, who antedated 
Luther by more than three centuries. So a new theory is 
logically demanded to explain why these conditions, which were 
chronic, failed to produce a change long before it actually 
occurred. Singularly enough it is the modern Catholic scholars, 
Johannes Janssen above all, who, in their efforts further to, 
discredit the Protestant revolt by rehabilitating the institutions 
which the reformers attacked, have done most to explain the 
success of the Reformation. A humble, patient Bohemian 
priest, Hasak, set to work toward half a century ago to bring 
together the devotional works published during the seventy 
years immediately succeeding the invention of printing. Every 
one knows that one at least of these older books, The German 
Theology, was a great favourite of Luther's; but there are 
many more in Hasak's collection which breathe the same spirit 
of piety and spiritual emulation. Building upon the founda- 
tions laid by Hasak and other Catholic writers who have been 
too much neglected by Protestant historians, Janssen pro- 
duced a monumental work in defence of the German Church 
before Luther's defection. He exhibits the great achievements 
of the latter part of the 15th and the early portion of the 16th 
centuries; the art and literature, the material prosperity of 
the towns and the fostering of the spiritual life of the people. 
It may well be that his picture is too bright, and that in his 
obvious anxiety to prove the needlessness of an ecclesiastical 
revolution he has gone to the opposite extreme from the Pro- 
testants. Yet this rehabilitation of pre-Reformation Germany 
cannot but make a strong appeal to the unbiased historical 
student who looks to a conscientious study of the antecedents 
of the revolt as furnishing the true key to the movement. 

Outwardly the Reformation would seem to have begun when, 
on the 10th of December 1520, a professor in the university 
Revolt °f Wittenberg invited all the friends of evangelical 
of the truth among his students to assemble outside the 

various wall at the ninth hour to witness a pious spectacle — 
Bu Zrn" n the burnin S of the " godless book of the papal 
menta decrees." He committed to the flames the whole 
from the body of the canon law, together with an edict of 
papal the head of the Church which had recently been 
monarc y. i ssuec i against his teachings. In this manner Martin 
Luther, with the hearty sympathy of a considerable number 
of his countrymen, publicly proclaimed and illustrated his 
repudiation of the papal government under which western 
Europe had lived for centuries. Within a genera- 
tion after this event the states of north Germany and 
Scandinavia, England, Scotland, the Dutch Netherlands and 
portions of Switzerland, had each in its particular manner 
permanently seceded from the papal monarchy. France, after 
a long period of uncertainty and disorder, remained faithful to 
• the bishop of Rome. Poland, after a defection of years, was 
ultimately recovered for the papacy by the zeal and devo- 
tion of the Jesuit missionaries. In the Habsburg hereditary 
dominions the traditional policy and Catholic fervour of the 
ruling house resulted, after a long struggle, in the restoration of 
the supremacy of Rome; while in Hungary the national spirit 
of independence kept Calvinism alive to divide the religious 
allegiance of the people. In Italy and Spain, on the other 
hand, the rulers, who continued loyal to the pope, found 
little difficulty in suppressing any tendencies of revolt on the 
part of the few converts to the new doctrines. Individuals, 
often large groups, and even whole districts, had indeed earlier 
rejected some portions of the Roman Catholic faith, or refused 
obedience to the ecclesiastical government; but previously to 
the burning of the canon law by Luther no prince had openly 
and permanently cast off his allegiance to the international 



ecclesiastical state of which the bishop of Rome was head. Now, 
a prince or legislative assembly that accepted the doctrine of 
Luther, that the temporal power had been " ordained by God 
for the chastisement of the wicked and the protection of the 
good " and must be permitted to exercise its functions " un- 
hampered throughout the whole Christian body, without respect 
to persons, whether it strikes popes, bishops, priests, monks, 
nuns, or whoever else " — such a government could proceed to 
ratify such modifications of the Christian faith as appealed to 
it in a particular religious confession; it could order its subject 
to conform to the innovations, and could expel, persecute or 
tolerate dissenters, as seemed good to it. A " reformed " 
prince could seize the property of the monasteries, and appro- 
priate such ecclesiastical foundations as he desired. He could 
make rules for the selection of the clergy, disregarding the 
ancient canons of the Church and the claims of the pope to the 
right of ratification. He could cut off entirely all forms of 
papal taxation and put an end to papal jurisdiction. The 
personnel, revenue, jurisdiction, ritual, even the faith of the 
Church, were in this way placed under the complete control 
of the territorial governments. This is the central and sig- 
nificant fact of the so-called Reformation. Wholly novel and 
distinctive it is not, for the rulers of Catholic countries, like 
Spain and France, and of England (before the publication of the 
Act of Supremacy) could and did limit the pope's claims to 
unlimited jurisdiction, patronage and taxation, and they 
introduced the placet forbidding the publication within their 
realms of papal edicts, decisions and orders, without the express 
sanction of the government — in short, in many ways tended 
to approach the conditions in Protestant lands. The Reforma- 
tion was thus essentially a stage in the disengaging of the 
modern state from that medieval, international ecclesiastical 
state which had its beginning in the ecclesia of the Acts of the 
Apostles. An appreciation of the issues of the Reformation — 
or Protestant revolt, as it might be more exactly called — depends 
therefore upon an understanding of the development of the papal 
monarchy, the nature of its claims, the relations it established 
with the civil powers, the abuses which developed in it and the 
attempts to rectify them, the sources of friction between the 
Church and the government, and finally the process by which 
certain of the European states threw off their allegiance to 
the Christian commonwealth, of which they had so long formed 
a part. 

It is surprising to observe how early the Christian Church 
assumed the form of a state, and how speedily upon entering 
into its momentous alliance with the Roman imperial Character 
government under Constantine it acquired the chief ofibc 
privileges and prerogatives it was so long to retain. Monarchy 
In the twelfth book of the Theodosian Code we see and its 
the foundations of the medieval Church already laid; claims. 
for it was the 4th, not the 13th century that established the 
principle that defection from the Church was a crime in the 
eyes of the State, and raised the clergy to a privileged class, 
exempted from the ordinary taxes, permitted under restrictions 
to try its own members and to administer the wealth which 
flowed into its coffers from the gifts of the faithful. The 
bishop of Rome, who had from the first probably enjoyed a 
leading position in the Church as " the successor of the two 
most glorious of the apostles," elaborated his claims to be the 
divinely appointed head of the ecclesiastical organization. 
Sirkius (384-389), Leo the Great (440-461), and Gelasius I. 
(492-496) left little for their successors to add to the arguments 
in favour of the papal supremacy. In short, if we recall the 
characteristics of the Church in the West from the times of Con- 
stantine to those of Theodoric — its reliance upon the civil power 
for favours and protection, combined with its assumption of a 
natural superiority over the civil power and its innate tendency 
to monarchical unity — it becomes clear that Gregory VII. 
in his effort in the latter half of the nth century to establish 
the papacy as the great central power of western Europe was 
in the main only reaffirming and developing old claims in a 
new world. His brief statement of the papal powers as he 



REFORMATION, THE 



conceived them is found in his Dictatus. The bishop of Rome, 
who enjoys a unique title, that of " pope," may annul the 
decrees of all other powers, since he judges all but is judged by 
none. He may depose emperors and absolve the subjects of 
the unjust from their allegiance. Gregory's position was almost 
inexpugnable at a time when it was conceded by practically all 
that spiritual concerns were incalculably more momentous than 
secular, that the Church was rightly one and indivisible, with 
one divinely revealed faith and a system of sacraments abso- 
lutely essential to salvation.. No one called in question the 
claim of the clergy to control completely all " spiritual " matters. 
Moreover, the mightiest secular ruler was but a poor sinner 
dependent for his eternal welfare en the Church and its head, 
the pope, who in this way necessarily exercised an indirect 
control over the civil government, which even the emperor 
Henry IV. and William the Conqueror would not have been 
disposed to deny. They would also have conceded the pope 
the right to play the r61e of a secular ruler in his own lands, as 
did the German bishops, and to dispose of such fiefs as reverted 
to him. This class of prerogatives, as well as the right which 
the pope claimed to ratify the election of the emperor, need not 
detain us, although they doubtless served in the long run to 
weaken the papal power. But the pope laid claim to a direct 
power over the civil governments. Nicholas II. (i 058-1061) 
declared that Jesus had conferred on Peter the control {jura) 
of an earthly as well as of a heavenly empire; and this phrase 
was embodied in the canon law. Innocent III., a century and 
a half later, taught that James the brother of the Lord left to 
Peter not only the government of the whole Church, but that 
of the whole world (tolum seculum gubemandum) } So the 
power of the pope no longer rested upon his headship of the 
Church or his authority as a secular prince, but on a far more 
comprehensive claim to universal dominion. There was no 
reason why the bishop of Rome should justify such acts as 
Innocent himself performed in deposing King John of England 
and later in annulling Magna Carta; or Gregory IV. when he 
struck out fourteen articles from the Sachsenspiegel; or 
Nicholas V. when he invested Portugal with the right to sub- 
jugate all peoples on the Atlantic coast; or Julius II. when 
he threatened to transfer the kingdom of France to England; 
or the conduct of those later pontiffs who condemned the 
treaties of Westphalia, the Austrian constitution of 1867 and 
the establishment of the kingdom of Italy. The theory and 
practice of papal absolutism was successfully promulgated 
by Gratian in his Decretum t completed at Bologna about 1142. 
This was supplemented by later collections composed mainly 
of papal decretals. (See Canon Law and Decretals, False.) 
As every fully equipped university had its faculty of canon 
law in which the Corpus juris canonici was studied, Rashdall 
is hardly guilty of exaggeration when he says: " By means 
of the happy thought of the Bolognese monk the popes were 
enabled to convert the new-born universities — the offspring 
of that intellectual new birth of Europe which might have 
been so formidable an enemy to the papal pretensions — into 
so many engines for the propagation of Ultramontane ideas." 
Thomas Aquinas was the first theologian to describe the Church 
as a divinely organized absolute monarchy, whose head con- 
centrated in his person the entire authority of the Church, and 
was the source of all the ecclesiastical law (conditor juris), 
issuing the decrees of general councils in his own name, and 
claiming the right to revoke or modify the decrees of former 
councils — indeed, to make exceptions or to set aside altogether 
anything which did not rest upon the dictates of divine or 
natural law. In practice the whole of western Europe was 
subject to the jurisdiction of one tribunal of last resort, the 
Roman Curia. The pope claimed the right to tax church 
property throughout Christendom. He was able to exact an 
oath of fidelity from the archbishops, named many of the 
bishops, and asserted the right to transfer and dispose them. 
The organs of this vast monarchy were the papal Curia, which 
first appears distinctly in the nth century (see Curia Roman a), 
*See further, Innocent III. 



and the legates, who visited the courts of Europe as haughty 
representatives of the central government of Christendom. 

It should always be remembered that the law of the Church 
was regarded by all lawyers in the later middle ages as the law 
common to all Europe (jus commune). The laws of Relations 
the Carolingian empire provided that one excom- ofth * 
municated by the Church who did not make his peace 2^/*^*} 
within a year and a day should be outlawed, and this civil gov 
general principle was not lost sight of. It was a capital ernments. 
offence in the eyes of the State to disagree with the teachings 
of the Church, and these, it must be remembered, included 
a recognition of the papal supremacy. The civil authorities 
burnt an obstinate heretic, condemned by the Church, without a 
thought of a new trial. The emperor Frederick II. 's edicts and 
the so-called itahlissements of St Louis provide that the civil 
officers should search out suspected heretics and deliver them 
to the ecclesiastical judges. The civil government recognized 
monastic vows by regarding a professed monk as civilly dead and 
by pursuing him and returning him to his monastery if he 
violated his pledges of obedience and ran away. The State 
recognized the ecclesiastical tribunals and accorded them a 
wide jurisdiction that we should now deem essentially secular 
in its nature. The State also admitted that large classes of 
its citizens — the clergy, students, crusaders, widows and the 
miserable and helpless in general — were justiceable only by 
Church tribunals. By the middle of the 13th century many 
lawyers took the degree of doctor of both laws (J.U.D.), civil 
and canon, and practised both. As is well known, temporal 
rulers constantly selected clergymen as their most trusted 
advisers. The existence of this theocratic international state 
was of course conditioned by the weakness of the civil govern- 
ment. So long as feudal monarchy continued, the Church 
supplied to some extent the deficiencies of the turbulent and 
ignorant princes by endeavouring to maintain order, administer 
justice, protect the weak and encourage learning. So soon as 
the modern national state began to gain strength, the issue 
between secular rulers and the bishops of Rome took a new form. 
The clergy naturally stoutly defended the powers which they 
had long enjoyed and believed to be rightly theirs. On the 
other hand, the State, which could count upon the support of an 
ever-increasing number of prosperous and loyal subjects, sought 
to protect its own interests and showed itself less and less 
inclined to tolerate the extreme claims of the pope. Moreover, 
owing to the spread of education, the king was no longer obliged 
to rely mainly upon the assistance of the clergy in conducting 
his government. 

The chief sources of friction between Church and State were 
four in number. First, the growth of the practice of" reserva- 
tion " and " provision," by which the popes assumed the right 
to appoint their own nominees to vacant sees and other benefices, 
in defiance of the claims of the crown, the chapters and private 
patrons. In the case of wealthy bishoprics or abbacies this 
involved a serious menace to the secular authority. Both pope 
and king were naturally anxious to place their own friends and 
supporters in these influential positions. The pope, moreover, 
had come to depend to a considerable extent for his revenue 
upon the payments made by his nominees, which represented 
a corresponding drain on the resources of the secular states. 
Secondly, there was the great question, how far the lands and 
other property of the clergy should be subject to taxation. Was 
this vast amount of property to increase indefinitely without 
contribution to the maintenance of the secular government? 
A decretal of Innocent III. permitted the clergy to make 
voluntary contributions to the king when there was urgent 
necessity, and the resources of the laity had proved inadequate. 
But the pope maintained that, except in the most critical cases, 
his consent must be obtained for such grants. Thirdly, there 
was the inevitable jealousy between the secular and ecclesiastical 
courts and the serious problem of the exact extent of the original 
and appellate jurisdiction of the Roman Curia. Fourthly, and 
lastly, there was the most fundamental difficulty of all, the 
extent to which the pope, as the universally acknowledged head 



REFORMATION, THE 



of the Church, was justified in interfering in the internal affairs 
of particular states. Unfortunately, most matters could be 
viewed from both a secular and religious standpoint; and even 
in purely secular affairs the claims of the pope to at least indirect 
control were practically unlimited. The specific nature of the 
abuses which flourished in the papal monarchy, the unsuccessful 
attempts to remedy them, and the measures taken by the chief 
European states to protect themselves will become apparent as 
we hastily review the principal events of the 14th and 15th 
centuries. 

As one traces the vicissitudes of the papacy during the two 
centuries from Boniface VIII. to Leo X. one cannot fail to be 
The impressed with the almost incredible strength of the 

papacy la ecclesiastical state which had been organized and 
the 14th fortified by Gregory VII., Alexander III., Innocent III. 
century. an( j G regor y jx, l n spite of the perpetuation of 
all the old abuses and the continual appearance of new 
devices for increasing the papal revenue; in spite of 
the jealousy of kings and princes, the attacks of legists 
and the preaching of the heretics; in spite of seventy 
years of exile from the holy city, forty years of distract- 
ing schism and discord, and thirty years of conflict with 
stately oecumenical councils deliberating in the name of the 
Holy Spirit and intent upon permanently limiting the papal 
prerogatives; in spite of the unworthy conduct of some of those 
who ascended the papal throne, their flagrant political ambitions, 
and their greed; in spite of the spread of knowledge, old and 
new, the development of historical criticism, and philosophical 
speculation; in spite, in short, of every danger which could 
threaten the papal monarchy, it was still intact when Leo X. 
died in 1521. Nevertheless, permanent if partial dissolution 
was at hand, for no one of the perils which the popes had 
seemingly so successfully overcome had failed to weaken the 
constitution of their empire; and it is impossible to comprehend 
its comparatively sudden disintegration without reckoning with 
the varied hostile forces which were accumulating and com- 
bining strength during the 14th and 15th centuries. The first 
serious conflict that arose between the developing modern state 
and the papacy centred about the pope's claim that the property 
of the clergy was normally exempt from royal taxation. 
Boniface VIII. was forced to permit Edward I. and Philip the 
Fair to continue to demand and receive subsidies granted by the 
clergy of their realms. Shortly after the bitter humiliation of 
Boniface by the French government and his death in 1303, the 
bishop of Bordeaux was elected pope as Clement V. (1305). He 
preferred to remain in France, and as the Italian cardinals died 
■ they were replaced by Frenchmen. The papal court was 
presently established at Avignon, on the confines of France, 
where it remained until 1377. While the successors of Clement V. 
were not so completely under the control of the French kings 
as has often been alleged, the very proximity of the curia to 
France served inevitably to intensify national jealousies. The 
claims of John XXII. (13 16-1334) to control the election of the 
emperor called forth the first fundamental and critical attack 
on the papal monarchy, by Marsiglio of Padua, who declared in 
his Defensor pacts (1324) that the assumed supremacy of the 
bishop of Rome was without basis, since it was very doubtful 
if Peter was ever in Rome, and in any case there was no evidence 
that he had transmitted any exceptional prerogatives to 
succeeding bishops. But Marsiglio's logical and elaborate 
justification for a revolt against the medieval Church produced 
no perceptible effects. The removal of the papal court from 
Rome to Avignon, however, not only reduced its prestige but 
increased the pope's chronic financial embarrassments, by 
cutting off the income from his own dominions, which he could 
no longer control, while the unsuccessful wars waged by John 
XXII., the palace building and the notorious luxury of some 
of his successors, served enormously to augment the expenses. 
Various devices were resorted to, old and new, to fill the treasury. 
The fees of the Curia were raised for the numberless favours, 
dispensations, absolutions, and exemptions of all kinds which 
were sought by clerics and laymen. The right claimed by the 



pope to fill benefices of all kinds was extended, and the amount 
contributed to the pope by his nominees amounted to from a 
third to a half of the first year's revenue (sec Annates). Boni- 
face VIII. had discovered a rich source of revenue in the jubilee, 
and in the jubilee indulgences extended to those who could not 
come to Rome. Clement VI. reduced the period between these 
lucrative occasions from one hundred to fifty years, and Urban 
VI. determined in 1389 that they should recur at least once in a 
generation (every thirty-three years). Church offices, high and 
low, were regarded as investments from which the pope had his 
commission. 

England showed itself better able than other countries to 
defend itself against the papal control of church preferment. 
From 1343 onward, statutes were passed by parliament Ea£lSBd 
forbidding any one to accept a papal provision, and & ad the 
cutting off all appeals to the papal curia or ecclesias- papacy Ja 
tical courts in cases involving benefices. Neverthe- ihe ** th 
less, as a statute of 1379 complains, benefices eca ry * 
continued to be given " to divers people of another language 
and of strange lands and nations, and sometimes to actual 
enemies of the king and of his realm, which never made 
residence in this same, nor cannot, may not, nor will not 
in any wise bear and perform the charges of the same 
benefice in hearing confessions, preaching or teaching the 
people." When, in 1365, Innocent VI. demanded that tbe 
arrears of the tribute promised by King John to the pope should 
be paid up, parliament abrogated the whole contract on the 
ground that John had no right to enter into it. A species of 
anti-clerical movement, which found an "unworthy leader in 
John of Gaunt, developed at this time. The Good Parliament of 
1376 declared that, in spite of the laws restricting papal pro- 
visions, the popes at Avignon received five times as much 
revenue from England as the English kings themselves. 
Secularization was mentioned in parliament. Wy cliff e began 
his public career in 1366 by proving that England was not 
bound to pay tribute to the pope. Twelve years later he was, 
like Marsiglio, attacking the very foundations of the papacy 
itself, as lacking all scriptural sanction. He denounced the 
papal government as utterly degraded, and urged that the vast 
property of the Church, which he held to be the chief cause of 
its degradation, should be secularized and that the clergy should 
consist of " poor priests," supported only by tithes and alms. 
They should preach the gospel and encourage the people to seek 
the truth in the Scriptures themselves, of which a translation 
into English was completed in 1382. During the later years 
of his life he attacked the doctrine of transubstantiation, and 
all the most popular institutions of the Church — indulgences, 
pilgrimages, invocation of the saints, relics, celibacy of the clergy, 
auricular confession, &c. His opinions were spread abroad by 
the hundreds of sermons and popular pamphlets written in 
English for the people (see Wycli^fe). For some years after 
Wycliffe's death his followers, the Lollards, continued to carry 
on his work; but they roused the effective opposition of the 
conservative clergy, and were subjected to a persecution which 
put an end to their public agitation. They rapidly disappeared 
and, except in Bohemia, Wycliffe's teachings left no clearly 
traceable impressions. Yet the discussions he aroused, the 
attacks he made upon the institutions of the medieval Church, 
and especially the position he assigned to the Scriptures as the 
exclusive source of revealed truth, serve to make the develop- 
ment of Protestantism under Henry VIII. more explicable than 
it would otherwise be. 

Wycliffe's later attacks upon the papacy had been given 
point by the return of the popes to Rome in 1377 and the 
opening of the Great Schism which was to endure Tbe Qreat 
for forty years. There had been many anti-popes in Schism 
the past, but never before had there been such pro- i*377 m 
longed and genuine doubt as to which of two lines l4lT) * 
of popes was legitimate, since in this case each was supported 
by a college of cardinals, the one at Rome, the other at Avignon. 
Italy, except Naples, took the side of the Italian pope; France, 
of the Avignon pope; England, in its hostility to France, 



8 



REFORMATION,. THE 



sided with Urban VI. in Rome, Scotland with Clement VII., 
his rival; Flanders followed England; Urban secured Germany, 
Hungary and the northern kingdoms; while Spain, after re- 
maining neutral for a time, went over to Clement. Western 
Christendom had now two papal courts to support. The schism 
extended down to the bishoprics, and even to the monasteries 
and parishes, where partisans of the rival popes struggled to 
obtain possession of sees and benefices. The urgent necessity 
for healing the schism, the difficulty of uniting the colleges 
of cardinals, and the prolonged and futile negotiations carried 
on between the rival popes inevitably raised the whole question 
of the papal supremacy, and led to the search for a still higher 
ecclesiastical authority, which, when the normal system of 
choosing the head of the Church broke down, might re-establish 
that ecclesiastical unity to which all Europe as yet clung. 
The idea of the supreme power on earth of a general council 
of Christendom, deliberating in the name of the Holy Spirit, 
convoked, if necessary, independently of the popes, was de- 
fended by many, and advocated by the university of Paris. 
The futile council of Pisa in 1409, however, only served to 
increase to three the number of rival representatives of God 
on earth. The considerable pamphlet literature of the time 
substantiates the conclusion of an eminent modern Catholic 
historian, Ludwig Pastor, who declares that the crisis through 
which the church passed in this terrible period of the schism 
was the most serious in all its history. It was at just this 
period, when the rival popes were engaged in a life-and-death 
struggle, that heretical movements appeared in England, 
France, Italy, Germany, and especially in Bohemia, which 
threatened the whole ecclesiastical order. 

The council of Constance assembled in 1414 under auspices 
hopeful not only for the extinction of the schism but for the 
The general reform of the Church. Its members showed 

councils no patience with doctrinal innovations, even such 
of Con- moderate ones as John Huss represented. They 
undBasei turne( ^ n * m over to tne secular arm for execution, 
although they did not thereby succeed in check- 
ing the growth of heresy in Bohemia (see Huss). The 
healing of the schism proved no very difficult matter; 
but the council hoped not only to restore unity and 
suppress heresy, but to re-establish general councils as 
a regular element in the legislation of the Church. The 
decree Sacrosancta (April 1415) proclaimed that a general 
council assembled in the Holy* Spirit and representing the 
Catholic Church militant had its power immediately from 
Christ, and was supreme over every one in the Church, 
not excluding the pope, in all matters pertaining to the faith 
and reformation of the Church of God in head and members. 
The decree Frequens (October 14 17) provided for the regular 
convocation of councils in the future. As to ecclesiastical 
abuses the council could do very little, and finally satisfied 
itself with making out a list of those which the new pope was 
required to remedy in co-operation with the deputies chosen 
by the council. The list serves as an excellent summary of 
the evils of the papal monarchy as recognized by the unim- 
peachably orthodox. It included: the number, character 
and nationality of the cardinals, the abuse of the " reserva- 
tions " made by the apostolic see, the annates, the collation 
to benefices, expectative favours, cases to be brought before 
the papal Curia (including appeals), functions of the papal 
chancery and penitentiary, benefices in cotntnendatn, con- 
firmation of elections, income during vacancies, indulgences, 
tenths, for what reasons and how is a pope to be corrected or 
deposed. The pope and the representatives of the council 
made no serious effort to remedy the abuses suggested under 
these several captions; but the idea of the superiority of a 
council over the pope, and the right of those who felt aggrieved 
by papal decisions to appeal to a future council, remained a 
serious menace to the theory of papal absolutism. The decree 
Frequens was not wholly neglected; though the next council, 
at Siena, came to naught, the council at Basel, whose chief 
business was to put an end to the terrible religious war that 



had been "raging between the Bohemians and Germans, was 
destined to cause Eugenius IV. much anxiety. It reaffirmed 
the decree Sacrosancta, and refused to recognize the validity 
of a bull Eugenius issued in December 143 1 dissolving it. 
Two years later political reverses forced the pope to sanction 
the existence of the council, which not only concluded a treaty 
with the Bohemian heretics but abolished the papal fees for 
appointments, confirmation and consecration — above all, the 
annates — and greatly reduced papal reservations; it issued 
indulgences, imposed tenths, and established rules for the 
government of the papal states. France, however, withdrew 
its support from the council, and in 1438, under purely national 
auspices, by the famous Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges, ad- 
justed the relations of the Gallican Church to the papacy; and 
Eugenius soon found himself in a position to repudiate the 
council and summoned a new one to assemble in 1438 at Ferrara 
under his control to take up the important question of the 
pending union with the Greek Church. The higher clergy 
deserted the council of Basel, and left matters in the hands of 
the lower clergy, who chose an anti-pope; but the rump council 
gradually lost credit and its lingering members were finally 
dispersed. The various nations were left to make terms with 
a reviving papacy. England had already taken measures to 
check the papal claims. France in the Pragmatic Sanction 
reformulated the claim of the councils to be superior to the 
pope, as well as the decision of the council of Basel in regard 
to elections, annates and other dues, limitations on ecclesi- 
astical jurisdiction, and appeals to the pope. While the 
canonical elections were re-established, the prerogatives of the 
crown were greatly increased, as in England. In short, the 
national ecclesiastical independence of the French Church was 
established. The German diet of Regensburg (1439) ratified 
in the main the decrees of the council of Basel, which clearly 
gratified the electors, princes and prelates; and Germany for 
the first time joined the ranks of the countries which subjected 
the decrees of the highest ecclesiastical instance to the placet 
or approval of the civil authorities. But there was no strong 
power, as in England and France, to attend to the execution 
of the provisions. 

In 1448 Eugenius's successor, Nicholas V., concluded a con- 
cordat with the emperor Frederick III. as representative 
of the German nation. This confined itself to papal 
appointments and the annates. In practice it restored A e nd t ^ 
the former range of papal reservations, and extended papacy in 
the papal right of appointment to all benefices (except ibei5ih 
the higher offices in cathedrals and collegiate churches) 
which fell vacant during the odd months. It also accorded him 
the right to confirm all newly elected prelates and to receive 
the annates. Nothing was said in the concordat of a great 
part of the chief subjects of complaint. This gave the princes 
an excuse for the theory that the decrees of Constance and 
Basel were still in force, limiting the papal prerogatives in all 
respects not noticed in the concordat. It was Germany which 
gave the restored papacy the greatest amount of anxiety during 
the generation following the dissolution of the council of Basel. 
In the " recesses " or formal statements issued at the con- 
clusion of the sessions of the diet one can follow the trend of 
opinion among the German princes, secular and ecclesiastical. 
The pope is constantly accused of violating the concordat, and 
constant demands are made for a general council, or at least 
a national one, which should undertake to remedy the abuses. 
The capture of Constantinople by the Turks afforded a new 
excuse for papal taxation. In 1453 a crusading bull was issued 
imposing a tenth on all benefices of the earth to equip an 
expedition against the infidel. The diet held at Frankfort in 

1456 recalled the fact; that the council of Constance had for- 
bjdden the pope to impose tenths without the consent of the 
clergy in the region affected, and that it was clear that he 
proposed to " pull the German sheep's fleece over its ears." 
A German correspondent • of Aeneas Sylvius assures him in 

1457 that " thousands of tricks are devised by the Roman 
see which enables it to extract the money from our pockets very 



REFORMATION, THE 



neatly, as if we were mere barbarians. Our nation, once so 
famous, is a slave now, who must pay tribute, and has lain in the 
dust these many years bemoaning her fate." Aeneas Sylvius 
issued, immediately after his accession to the papacy as Pius II. 
the bull ExecrabUis forbidding all appeals to a future council. 
This seemed to Germany to cut off its last hope. It found a 
, spokesman in the vigorous Gregory of Heimburg, who accused 
the pope of issuing the bull so that he and his cardinals might 
conveniently pillage Germany unhampered by the threat of 
a council. " By forbidding appeals to a council the pope 
treats us like slaves, and wishes to take for his own pleasures 
all that we and our ancestors have accumulated by honest 
labour. He calls me a chatterer, although he himself is more 
talkative than a magpie." Heimburg's denunciations of the 
pope were widely circulated, and in spite of the major excom- 
munication he was taken into the service of the archbishop of 
Mainz and was his representative at the diet of Nuremberg in 
1462. It is thus clear that motives which might ultimately 
lead to the withdrawal of a certain number of German 
princes from the papal ecclesiastical state were accumulat- 
ing and intensifying during the latter half of the 15th 
century. 

It is impossible to review here the complicated political 
history of the opening years of the 16th century. The 
Coa- names of Charles VIII. and Louis XII. of France, of 

dittoasia Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain, of Henry VII. and 
GerttlA °y Henry VIII. of England, of Maximilian the German 
op e ai ag ot king, of Popes Alexander VI., Julius II. and Leo X., 
thciditi stand for better organized civil governments, with 
century- growing powerful despotic heads; for a perfectly 
worldly papacy absorbed in the interests of an Italian prin- 
cipality, engaged in constant political negotiations with the 
European powers which are beginning to regard Italy as their 
chief field of rivalry, and are using its little states as convenient 
counters in their game of diplomacy and war. It was in Ger- 
many, however, seemingly the weakest and least aggressive of the 
European states, that the first permanent and successful revolts 
against the papal monarchy occurred. Nothing came of the lists 
of German gravamina, or of the demands for a council, so long 
as the incompetent Frederick III. continued to reign. His 
successor, Maximilian, who was elected emperor in 1493, was 
mainly preoccupied with his wars and attempts to reform the 
constitution of the empire; but the diet gave some attention 
to ecclesiastical reform. For instance, in 1501 it took measures 
to prevent money raised by the grantirfg of a papal indulgence 
from leaving the country. After the disruption of the league of 
Cambray, Maximilian, like Louis XII., was thrown into a violent 
anti-curial reaction, and in 1510 he sent to the well-known 
humanist, Joseph Wimpheling, a copy of the French Pragmatic 
Sanction, asking his advice and stating that he had determined 
to free Germany from the yoke of the Curia and prevent the 
great sums of money from going to Rome. Wimpheling in his 
reply rehearsed the old grievances and complained that the 
contributions made to the pope by the archbishops on receiving 
the pallium was a great burden on the people. He stated that 
that of the' archbishop of Mainz had been raised from ten to 
twenty-five thousand gulden, and that there had been seven 
vacancies within a generation, and consequently the subjects 
of the elector had been forced to pay that amount seven times. 
But Wimpheling had only some timid suggestions to make, and, 
since Maximilian was once more on happy terms with the pope, 
political considerations served to cool completely his momentary 
ardour for ecclesiastical reform. In 1514 the archbishopric 
of Mainz fell vacant again, and Albert of Brandenburg, already 
archbishop of Magdeburg and administrator of Halberstadt, 
longing to add it to his possessions, was elected. After some 
scandalous negotiations with Leo X. it was arranged that 
Albert should pay 14,000 ducats for the papal confirmation and 
10,000 as a " composition " for permission to continue to hold, 
against the rules of the Church, his two former archbishoprics. 
Moreover, in order to permit him to pay the sums, he was to 
have half the proceeds in his provinces from an indulgence 



granted to forward the rebuilding of St Peter's. A Dominican 
monk, Johann Tetzel, was selected to proclaim the indulgence 
(together with certain supplementary graces) in the three 
provinces of the elector. This suggestion came from the curia, 
not the elector, whose representatives could not suppress the 
fear that the plan would arouse opposition and perhaps worse. 
Tetzel's preaching and the exaggerated claims that he was re- 
ported to be making for the indulgences attracted the attention 
of an Augustinian friar, Martin Luther, who had for some 
years been lecturing on theology at the university of Wittenberg. 
He found it impossible to reconcile TetzeFs views of indulgences 
with his own fundamental theory oi salvation. He accordingly 
hastily drafted ninety-five propositions relating to indulgences, 
and posted an invitation to those who wished to attend a 
disputation in Wittenberg on the matter, under his presidency. 
He points out the equivocal character of the word poenitentia, 
which meant both " penance " and " penitence "; he declared 
that "true contrition seeks punishment, while the ampleness 
of pardons relaxes it and causes men to hate it." Christians 
ought to be taught that he who gives to a poor man or lends to 
the needy does better than if he bought- pardons. He concludes 
with certain " keen questionings of the laity," as, Why does 
not the pope empty purgatory forthwith for charity's sake, 
instead of cautiously for money ? Why does he not, since he 
is rich as Croesus, build St Peter's with his own money instead 
of taking that of poor believers ? It was probably these closing 
reflections which led to the translation of the theses from Latin 
into German, and their surprising circulation. It must not be 
assumed that Luther's ninety-five theses produced any con- 
siderable direct results. They awakened the author himself 
to a consciousness that his doctrines were after all incompatible 
with some of the Church's teachings, and led bim to consider 
the nature of the papal power which issued the indulgence. 
Two or three years elapsed betore Luther began to be 
generally known and to exercise a perceptible influence upon 
aflairs. 

In July 1 518 a diet assembled in Augsburg to consider the 
new danger from the Turks, who were making rapid conquests 
under Sultan Selim I. The pope's representative, The diet ot 
Cardinal Cajetan, made it clear that the only safety Augsburg 
lay in the collection of a tenth from the clergy ° |/J/5 * 
and a twentieth from laymen; but the diet appointed a 
committee to consider the matter and explain why they pro- 
posed to refuse the pope's demands. Protests urging the diet 
not to weaken came in from all sides. There was an especially 
bitter denunciation of the Curia by some unknown writer. He 
claims that " the pope bids his collectors go into the whole 
world, saying, ' He that believeth, and payeth the tenths, shall 
be saved.' But it is not necessary to stand in such fear of the 
thunder of Christ's vicar, but rather to fear Christ Himself, 
for it is the Florentine's business, not Christ's, that is at issue." 
The report of the committee of the diet was completed on the 
27th of August 1 518. It reviews all the abuses, declares that 
the German people are the victims of war, devastation and 
dearth, and that the common man is beginning to comment 
on the vast amount of wealth that is collected for expeditions 
against the Turk through indulgences or otherwise, and yet no 
expedition takes place. This is the first recognition in the 
official gravamina of the importance of the people. Shortly 
after the committee submitted its report the clergy of Liege 
presented a memorial which, as the ambassador from Frankfort 
observed, set forth in the best Latin all the various forms of 
rascality of which the curiizanen (i.e. curiales ) officials of the 
curia) were guilty. From this time on three new streams begin 
to reinforce the rather feeble current of official efforts for reform. 
The common man, to whom the diet of Augsburg alludes, had 
long been raising his voice against the "parsons" (Pfaffen); 
the men of letters, Brand, Erasmus, Reuchh'n, and above all 
Ulrich von Hutten, contributed, each in their way, to discredit 
the Roman Curia; and lastly, a new type of theology, repre- 
sented chiefly by Martin Luther, threatened to sweep away 
the very foundations of the papal monarchy. 



10 



REFORMATION, THE 



The growing discontent of the poor people, whether in country 
or town, is clearly traceable in Germany during the 15th century, 
and revolutionary agitation was chronic in southern 
of the Germany at least during the first two decades of the 
masses 16th. The clergy were satirized and denounced in 
iothe popular pamphlets and songs. The tithe was an 
Germany, oppressive form of taxation, as were the various fees 
demanded for the performance of the sacraments. The 
so-called " Reformation of Sigismund," drawn up in 1438, had 
demanded that the celibacy of the clergy should be abandoned 
and their excessive wealth reduced. "It is a shame which 
cries to heaven, this oppression by tithes, dues, penalties, 
excommunication, and tolls of the peasant, on whose labour 
all men depend for their existence." In 1476 a poor young 
shepherd drew thousands to Nicklashausen to hear him denounce 
the emperor as a rascal and the pope as a worthless fellow, and 
urge the division of the Church's property among the members 
of the community. The " parsons " must be killed, and the 
lords reduced to earn their bread by daily labour. An apoca- 
lyptic pamphlet of 1508 shows on its cover the Church upside 
down, with the peasant performing the services, while the 
priest guides the plough outside and a monk drives the horses. 
Doubtless the free peasants of Switzerland contributed to 
stimulate disorder and discontent, especially in southern 
Germany. The conspiracies were repeatedly betrayed and the 
guilty parties terribly punished. That discovered in 1517 made 
a deep impression on the authorities by reason of its vast 
extent, and doubtless led the diet of Augsburg to allude to 
the danger which lay in the refusal of the common man to 
pay the ecclesiastical taxes. " It was into this mass of seething 
discontent that the spark of religious protest fell — the one 
thing needed to fire the train and kindle the social conflagration. 
This was the society to which Luther spoke, and its discontent 
was the sounding board which made his words reverberate." * 

On turning from the attitude of the peasants and poorer 
townspeople to that of the scholars, we find in their writings 
Attitude a good deal of harsh criticism of the scholastic theology, 
of the satirical allusions to the friars, and; in Germany, sharp 
human- denunciations of the practices of the Curia. But there 
are many reasons for believing that the older estimate 
of the influence of the so-called Renaissance, or " new learning," 
in promoting the Protestant revolt was an exaggerated one. 
The class of humanists which had grown up in Italy during the 
15th century, and whose influence had been spreading into 
Germany, France and England during the generation immedi- 
ately preceding the opening of the Protestant revolt, repre- 
sented every phase of religious feeling from mystic piety to 
cynical indifference, but there were very few anti-clericals 
among them. The revival of Greek from the time of Chryso- 
loras onward, instead of begetting a Hellenistic spirit, trans- 
ported the more serious-minded to the nebulous shores of Neo- 
Platonism, while the less devout became absorbed in scholarly 
or literary ambitions, translations, elegantly phrased letters, 
clever epigrams or indiscriminate invective. It is true that 
Lorenzo Valla (d. 1457) showed the Donation of Constantine 
to be a forgery, denied that Dionysius the Areopagite wrote 
the works ascribed to him, and refuted the commonly accepted 
notion that each of the apostles had contributed a sentence 
to the Apostles' Creed. But such attacks were rare and isolated 
and were not intended to effect a breach in the solid ramparts 
of the medieval Church, but rather to exhibit the ingenuity of 
the critic. In the libraries collected under humanistic influences 
the patristic writers, both Latin and Greek, and the scholastic 
doctors are conspicuous. Then most of the humanists 
were clerics, and in Italy they enjoyed the patronage of the 
popes. They not unnaturally showed a tolerant spirit on the 
whole toward existing institutions, including the ecclesiastical 
abuses, and, in general, cared little how long the vulgar herd 
was left in the superstitious darkness which befitted their estate, 
so long as the superior man was permitted to hold discreetly 
any views he pleased. Of this attitude Mutian (1471-1526), 
1 Lindsay. 



the German humanist who perhaps approached most nearly 
the Italian type, furnishes a good illustration. He believed 
that Christianity had existed from all eternity, and that the 
Greeks and Romans, sharing in God's truth, would share also in 
the celestial ' joys. Forms and ceremonies should only be 
judged as they promoted the great object of life, a clean heart 
and a right spirit, love to God and one's neighbour. He defined 
faith as commonly understood to mean " not the conformity 
of what we say with fact, but an opinion upon divine things 
founded upon credulity which seeks after profit." " With 
the cross," he declares, u we put our foes to flight, we extort 
money, we consecrate God, we shake hell, we work miracles." 

These reflections were, however, for his intimate friends, and 
like him, his much greater contemporary, Erasmus, abhorred 
anything suggesting open revolt or revolution. The Erasmus 
extraordinary popularity of Erasmus is a sufficient (1464* 
indication that his attitude of mind was viewed with fS36 ^ 
sympathy by the learned, whether in France, England, Germany, 
Spain or Italy. #He was a firm believer in the efficacy of culture. 
He maintained that old prejudices would disappear with the 
progress of knowledge, and that superstition and mechanical 
devices of salvation would be insensibly abandoned. The laity 
should read their New Testament, and would in this way come 
to feel the true significance of Christ's life and teachings, which, 
rather than the Church, formed the centre of Erasmus's religion. 
The dissidence of dissent, however, filled him with uneasiness, and 
he abhorred Luther's denial of free will and his exaggerated notion 
of man's utter depravity; in short, he did nothing whatever to 
promote the Protestant revolt, except so far as his frank denuncia- 
tion and his witty arraignment of clerical and monastic weaknesses 
and soulless ceremonial, especially in his Praise of Folly and Col- 
loquies, contributed to bring the faults of the Church into strong 
relief, and in so far as his edition of the New Testament furnished 
a simple escape from innumerable theological complications. 

A peculiar literary feud in Germany served, about 1515, to 
throw into sharp contrast the humanistic party, which had 
been gradually developing during the previous fifty years, and 
the conservative, monkish, scholastic group, who found their 
leader among the Dominicans of the university of Cologne. 
Johann Reuchlin, a well-known scholar, who had been charged 
by the Dominicans with heresy, not only received the support 
of the newer type of scholars, who wrote him encouraging 
letters which he published under the title Episiolae clarorum 
virorum, but this collection suggested to Crotus Rubianus and 
Ulrich von Huttcn one of the most successful satires of the ages, 
the Episiolae obscurorttm virorum. As Creighton well said, the 
chief importance of the " Letters of Obscure Men " lay in its 
success in popularizing the conception of a stupid party which 
was opposed to the party of progress. At the same time that 
the Neo-Platonists, like Ficino and Pico de la Mirandola, and 
the pantheists, whose God was little more than a reverential 
conception of the universe at large, and the purely worldly 
humanists, like Celtes and Bebel, were widely diverging each 
by his own particular path from the ecclesiastical Weltanschauung 
of the middle ages, Ulrich von Hutten was busy attacking the 
Curia in his witty Dialogues, in the name of German patriotism. 
He, at least, among the well-known scholars eagerly espoused 
Luther's cause, as he understood it. A few of the humanists 
became Protestants — Melanchthon, Bucer, Oecolampadius and 
others — but the great majority of them, even if attracted for the 
moment by Luther's denunciation of scholasticism, speedily 
repudiated the movement. In Socinianism (see below) we have 
perhaps the only instance of humanistic antecedents leading to 
the formation of a religious sect. 

A new type of theology made its appearance at the opening 
of the 1 6th century , v in sharp contrast with the Aristotelian 
scholasticism of the Thomists and Scotists. This was The Bew 
due to the renewed enthusiasm for, and appreciation of, theology 
St Paul with which Erasmus sympathized, and which ™* Hm 
found an able exponent in England in John Colet and ^ * tte " 
in France in Lefevre of Staples (Faber Stapulensis). 
Luther was reaching somewhat similar views at the same time, 



REFORMATION, THE 



ii 



although in a strikingly different manner and with far more 
momentous results for the western world. Martin Luther was 
beyond doubt the most important single figure in the Protestant 
revolt. His influence was indeed by no means so decisive and so 
pervasive as has commonly been supposed, and his attacks on the 
evils in the Church were no bolder or more comprehensive than 
those of Marsiglio and Wy cliff e, or of several among his con- 
temporaries who owed nothing to his example. Had the 
German princes not found it to their interests to enforce his 
principles, he might never have been more than the leader of an 
obscure mystic sect. He was, moreover, no statesman. He 
was recklessly impetuous in his temperament, coarse and grossly 
superstitious according to modem standards. Yet in spite of 
all these allowances he remains one of the great heroes of all 
history. Few come in contact with his writings without feeling 
his deep spiritual nature and an absolute genuineness and 
marvellous individuality which seem never to sink into mere 
routine or affectation. In his more important works almost 
every sentence is alive with that autochthonic quality which 
makes it unmistakably his. His fundamental religious con- 
ception was his own hard-found answer to his own agonized 
question as to the nature and assurance of salvation. Even if 
others before him had reached the conviction that the Vulgate's 
word justitia in Romans i. 16-17 meant " righteousness " 
rather than " justice " in a juridical sense, Luther exhibited 
supreme religious genius in his interpretation of " God's 
righteousness " (Gerechtigkeit) as over against the " good works " 
of man, and in the overwhelming importance he attached to 
the promise that the just shall live by faith. It was his anxiety 
to remove everything that obscured this central idea which led 
him to revolt against the ancient Church, and this conception 
of faith served, when he became leader of the German Protestants, 
as a touchstone to test the expediency of every innovation. 
But only gradually did he come to realize that his source of 
spiritual consolation might undermine altogether the artfully 
constructed fabric of the medieval Church. As late as 1516 he 
declared that the life of a monk was never a more enviable one 
than at that day. He had, however, already begun to look 
sourly upon Aristotle and the current scholastic theology, which 
he believed hid the simple truth of the gospel and the desperate 
state of mankind, who were taught a vain reliance upon outward 
works and ceremonies, when the only safety lay in throwing 
oneself on God's mercy. He was suddenly forced to take up the 
consideration of some of the most fundamental points in the 
orthodox theology by the appearance of Tetzel in 151 7. In his 
hastily drafted Ninety-five Theses he sought to limit the potency 
of indulgences, and so indirectly raised the question as to the 
power of the pope. He was astonished to observe the wide 
circulation of the theses both in the Latin and German versions. 
They soon reached Rome, and a Dominican monk, Prierius, 
wrote a reply in defence of the papal power, in an insolent tone 
which first served to rouse Luther's suspicion of the theology of 
the papal Curia. He was summoned to Rome, but, out of 
consideration for his patron, the important elector of Saxony, 
he was permitted to appear before the papal legate during the 
diet of Augsburg in 15 18. He boldly contradicted the legate's 
theological statements, refused to revoke anything and appealed 
to a future council. On returning to Wittenberg, he turned to 
the canon law, and was shocked to find it so completely at 
variance with his notions of Christianity. He reached the 
conclusion that the papacy was but four hundred years old. 
Yet, although of human origin, it was established by common 
consent and with God's sanction, so that no one might withdraw 
his obedience without offence. 

It was not, however, until 1520 that Luther became in a 
sense the leader of the German people by issuing his three 
great pamphlets, all of which were published in German as 
well as in Latin — his Address to the Christian Nobility of the 
German Nation^ his Babylonish Captivity of the Church, and his 
Freedom of the Christian. In the first he urged that, since the 
Church had failed to reform itself, the secular government 
should come to the rescue. " The Romanists have with great 



dexterity built themselves about with three walls, which have 
hitherto protected them against reform; and thereby is 
Christianity fearfully fallen. In the first place, when the 
temporal power has pressed them hard, they have affirmed and 
maintained that the temporal power has no jurisdiction over 
them — that, on the contrary, the spiritual is above the temporal. 
Secondly, when it was proposed to admonish them from the 
Holy Scriptures they said, ' It beseems no one but the pope 
to interpret the Scriptures/ and, thirdly, when they were 
threatened with a council, they invented the idea that no one 
but the pope can call a council. Thus they have secretly 
stolen our three rods that they may go unpunished, and have 
entrenched themselves safely behind these three walls in order to 
carry on all the rascality and wickedness that we now see." 

He declares that the distinction between the " spiritual 
estate," composed of pope, bishops, priests and monks, as 
over against the " temporal estate " composed of princes, lords, 
artisans and peasants, is a very fine hypocritical invention of 
which no one should be afraid. " A cobbler, a smith, a peasant, 
every man has his own calling and duty, just like the conse- 
crated priests and bishops, and every one in his calling or office 
must help and serve the rest, so that all may work together for 
the common good." After overthrowing the other two walls, 
Luther invites the attention of the German rulers to the old 
theme of the pomp of the pope and cardinals, for which the 
Germans must pay. " What the Romanists really mean to do, 
the 'drunken Germans' are not to see until they have lost 
everything. ... If we rightly hang thieves a'nd behead robbers, 
why do we leave the greed of Rome unpunished ? for Rome is 
the greatest thief and robber that has ever appeared on earth, 
or ever will; and all in the holy names of the Church and St 
Peter." After proving that the secular rulers were free and in 
duty bound to correct the evils of the Church, Luther sketches 
a plan for preventing money from going to Italy, for reducing 
the number of idle, begging monks, harmful pilgrimages and 
excessive holidays. Luxury and drinking were to be sup-, 
pressed, the universities, especially the divinity schools, re- 
organized, &c. 

Apart from fundamental rejection of the papal supremacy, 
there was little novel in Luther's appeal. It had all been said 
before in the various protests of which we have spoken, and 
very recently by Ulrich von Hut ten in his Dialogues, but no 
one had put the case so strongly, or so clearly, before. In 
addressing the German nobility Luther had refrained from 
taking up theological or religious doctrines; but in Sep- 
tember 1520 he attacked the whole sacramental system of 
the medieval Church in his Babylonish Captivity of the Church. 
Many reformers, like Glapion, the Franciscan confessor of, 
Charles V., who had read the Address with equanimity if not 
approval, were shocked by Luther's audacity in rejecting the 
prevailing fundamental religious conceptions. Luther says : 
" I must begin by denying that there are seven sacraments, and 
must lay down for the time being that there are only three — 
baptism, penance and the bread, and that by the court of Rome 
all these have been brought into miserable bondage, and the 
Church despoiled of her liberty." It is, however, in the Freedom 
of the Christian that the essence of Luther's religion is to be 
found. Man cannot save himself, but is saved then and there, 
so soon as he believes God's promises, and to doubt these is 
the supreme crime. So salvation was to him not a painful 
progress toward a goal to be reached by the sacraments and by 
right conduct, but a state in which man found himself so soon 
as he despaired absolutely of his own efforts, and threw himself 
on God's assurances. Man's utter incapacity to do anything 
to please God, and his utter personal dependence on God's grace 
seemed to render the whole system of the Church well-nigh 
gratuitous even if it were purged of all the " sophistry " which 
to Luther seemed to bury out of sight all that was essential in 
religion. Luther's gospel was one of love and confidence, not 
of fear and trembling, and came as an overwhelming revelation 
to those who understood and accepted it. 

The old question of Church reform inevitably reappeared 



12 



REFORMATION, THE 



when the young emperor Charles V. opened his first imperial 
diet at Worms early in 1521, and a committee of -German 
princes drafted a list of gravamina, longer and bitterer than 
The edict any preceding one. While the resolute papal nuncio 
of Worms, Aleanderwas indefatigable in his efforts to induce the 
lS2U diet to condemn Luther's teachings, his curious and 

instructive despatches to the Roman Curia complain constantly 
of the ill-treatment and insults he encountered, of the readiness 
of the printers to issue innumerable copies of Luther's pamphlets 
and of their reluctance to print anything in the pope's favour. 
Charles apparently made up his mind immediately and once for 
all. He approved the gravamina, for he believed a thorough 
reform of the Church essential. This reform he thought should 
be carried out by a council, even against the pope's will; and 
he was destined to engage in many fruitless negotiations to this 
end before the council of Trent at last assembled a score of years 
later. But he had no patience with a single monk who, led 
astray by his private judgment, set himself against the faith 
held by all Christians for a thousand years. " What my fore- 
fathers established at the council of Constance and other 
councils it is my privilege to maintain," he exclaims. Although, 
to Aleander's chagrin, the emperor consented to summon 
Luther to Worms, where he received a species of ovation, 
Charles readily approved the edict drafted by the papal nuncio, 
in which Luther is accused of having " brought together all 
previous heresies in one stinking mass," rejecting all law, 
teaching a life wholly brutish, and urging the lay people to 
bathe their hands in the blood of priests. He and his adherents 
were outlawed; no one was to print, sell or read any of his 
writings, " since they are foul, harmful, suspected, and come 
from a notorious and stiff-necked heretic. " The edict of 
Worms was entirely in harmony with the laws of Western 
Christendom, and there were few among the governing classes 
in Germany at that time who really understood or approved 
Luther's fundamental ideas; nevertheless — if we except the 
elector of Brandenburg, George of Saxony, the dukes of Bavaria, 
and Charles V.'s brother Ferdinand — the princes, including the 
ecclesiastical rulers and the towns, commonly neglected to 
publish the edict, much less to enforce it. They were glad to 
leave Luther unmolested in order to spite the " Curtizanen," 
as the adherents of the papal Curia were called. The emperor 
was forced to leave Germany immediately after the diet had 
dissolved, and was prevented by a succession of wars from 
returning for nearly ten years. The governing council, which 
had been organized to represent him in Germany, fell rapidly 
into disrepute, and exercised no restraining influence on those 
princes who might desire to act on Luther's theory that the 
civil government was supreme in matters of Church reform. 

The records of printing indicate that religious, social and 
economic betterment was the subject of an ever-increasing 
number of pamphlets. The range of opinion was 
wide. Men like Thomas Murner, for instance, heartily 
denounced " the great Lutheran fool," but at the same 
opinion in t j me bitterly attacked monks and priests, and popular- 
ermany. .^ ^ e conception of the simple man with the hoe 
(Karsthans). Hans Sachs, on the other hand, sang the praises 
of the " Wittenberg Nightingale," and a considerable number 
of prominent men of letters accepted Luther as their guide — 
Zell and Bucer, in Strassburg, Eberlin in Ulm, Oecolampadius 
in Augsburg, Osiander and others in Nuremberg, PelKcanus 
in Nordlingen. Moreover, there gradually developed a group 
of radicals who were convinced that Luther had not the courage 
of his convictions. They proposed to abolish the " idolatry " 
of the Mass and all other outward signs of what they deemed 
the old superstitions. Luther's colleague at Wittenberg, 
Carlstadt (q.v.), began denouncing the monastic life, the celi- 
bacy of the clergy, the veneration of images; and before the 
end of 1 5 21 we find the first characteristic outward symptoms 
of Protestantism. Luther had meanwhile been concealed 
by his friends in the Wartburg, near Eisenach, where he busied 
himself with a new German translation of the New Testament, 
to be followed in a few years by the Old Testament. The 



Wide 

diverge 

enceof 



Bible had long been available in the language of the people, 
and there are indications that the numerous early editions of 
the Scriptures were widely read. Luther, however, possessed 
resources of style which served to render his version far superior 
to the older one, and to give it an important place in the develop- 
ment of German literature, as well as in the history of the 
Protestant churches. During his absence two priests from 
parishes near Wittenberg married; while several monks, 
throwing aside their cowls, left their cloisters. Melanchthon, 
who was for a moment carried away by the movement, partook, 
with several of his students, of the communion under both 
kinds, and on Christmas Eve a crowd invaded the church of 
All Saints, broke the lamps, threatened the priests and made 
sport of the venerable ritual. Next day, Carlstadt, who had 
laid aside his clerical robes, dispensed the Lord's Supper in 
the " evangelical fashion." At this time three prophets arrived 
from Zwickau, eager to hasten the movement of emancipation. 
They were weavers who had been associated with Thomas 
Miinzer, and like him looked forward to a very radical reform 
of society. They rejected infant baptism, and were among the 
forerunners of the Anabaptists. 

In January 1522, Carlstadt induced the authorities of Witten- 
berg to publish the first evangelical church ordinance. The 
revenues from ecclesiastical foundations, as well as 
those from the industrial gilds, were to be placed in a testant " 
common chest, to he in charge of the townsmen and the Revolt 
magistrates. The priests were to receive fixed salaries; begins in 
begging, even by monks and poor students, was pro- fm >ny ' 
hibited; the poor, including the monks, were to be 
supported from the common chest. The service of the Mass was 
modified, and the laity were to receive the elements in both 
kinds. Reminders of the old religious usages were to be done 
away with, and fast days were to be no longer observed. These 
measures, and the excitement which followed the arrival of 
the radicals from Zwickau, led Luther to return to Wittenberg 
in March 1522, where he preached a series of sermons attacking 
the impatience of the radical party, and setting forth clearly 
his own views of what the progress of the Reformation should 
be. " The Word created heaven and earth and all things; 
the same Word will also create now, and not we poor sinners. 
Faith must be unconstrained and must be accepted without 
compulsion. To marry, to do away with images, to become 
monks and nuns, or for monks and nuns to leave their convent, 
to eat meat on Friday or not to eat it, and other like things — 
all these are open questions, and should not be forbidden by 
any man .... What we want is the heart, and to win that 
we must preach the gospel. Then the Word will drop into 
one heart to-day and to-morrow into another, and so will 
work that each will forsake the Mass." Luther succeeded 
in quieting the people both in Wittenberg and the neighbour- 
ing towns, and in preventing the excesses which had threatened 
to discredit the whole movement. 

In January 1522, Leo X. had been succeeded by a new 
pope, Adrian VI., a devout Dominican theologian, bent on 
reforming the Church, in which, as he injudiciously Adrian VL 
confessed through his legate to the diet at Nuremberg, 1522- 
the Roman Curia had perhaps been the chief source 1523 * 
of " that corruption which had spread from the head to the 
members." The Lutheran heresy he held to be God's terrible 
judgment on the sins of the clergy. The diet refused to accede 
to the pope's demand that the edict of Worms should be 
enforced, and recommended that a Christian council should 
be summoned in January, to include not only ecclesiastics 
but laymen, who should be permitted freely to express their 
opinions. While the diet approved the list of abuses drawn 
up at Worms, it ordered that Luther's books should no longer 
be published, and that Luther himself should hold his peace, 
while learned men were to admonish the erring preachers. 
The decisions of this diet are noteworthy, since they probably 
give a very fair idea of the prevailing opinion of the ruling 
classes in Germany. They refused to regard Luther as in 
any way their leader, or even to recognize him as a discreet 



REFORMATION, THE 



person. On the other hand, they did not wish to take the 
risk of radical measures against the new doctrines, and were 
glad of an excuse for refusing the demands of the pope. 
Adrian soon died, worn out by his futile attempts to correct 
the abuses at home, and was followed by Clement VII., a 
Medici, less gifted but not less worldly in his instincts than 
LeoX. 

Clement sent one of his ablest Italian diplomatists, Cam- 
peggio, to negotiate with the diet which met at Spires in 1524. 
He induced the diet to promise to execute the edict of 
nla^of Worms as far as that should be possible; but it was 
there- generally understood that it was impossible. The 
Ugfous diet renewed the demand for a general council to meet 
cleft be- j n a German town to settle the affairs of the Church 
German m Germany, and even proposed the convocation of 
states of a national council at Spires in November, to effect 
the north a temporary adjustment. In this precarious situation 
laisu" 111 Campeggio, realizing the hopelessness of his attempt to 
induce all the members of the diet to co-operate with 
him in re-establishing the pope's control, called together at 
Regensburg a certain number of rulers whom he believed to 
be rather more favourably disposed toward the pope than their 
fellows. These included Ferdinand, duke of Austria, the two 
dukes of Bavaria, the archbishops of Salzburg and Trent, the 
bishops of Bamberg, Spires, Strassburg and others. He induced 
these to unite in opposing the Lutheran heresy on condition 
that the pope would issue a decree providing for some of the 
•most needed reforms. There was to be no more financial oppres- 
sion on the part of the clergy, and no unseemly payments 
for performing the church services. Abuses arising from the 
granting of indulgences were to he remedied, and the excessive 
number of church holidays, which seriously interfered with the 
industrial welfare of Germany, was to be reduced. The states 
in the Catholic League were permitted to retain for their own 
uses about one-fifth of the ecclesiastical revenue; the clergy 
was to be subjected to careful discipline; and only authorized 
preachers were to be tolerated, who based their teachings on 
the works of the four Latin Church fathers. Thus the agree- 
ment of Regensburg is of great moment in the development of 
the Protestant revolt in Germany. For Austria, Bavaria and 
the great ecclesiastical states in the south definitely sided 
with the pope against Luther's heresies, and to this day they 
still remain Roman Catholic. In the north, on the other hand, 
it became more and more apparent that the princes were drift- 
ing away from the Roman Catholic Church. Moreover, it 
should be noted that Campeggio's diplomacy was really the 
beginning. of an effective betterment of the old Church, such 
as had been discussed for two or three centuries. He met the 
long-standing and general demand for reform without a revolu- 
tion in doctrines or institutions. A new edition of the German 
Bible was issued with the view of meeting the needs of 
Catholics, a new religious literature grew up designed to sub- 
stantiate the beliefs sanctioned by the Roman Church and 
to carry out the movement begun long before toward spiritual- 
izing its institutions and rites. 

In 1525 the conservative party, which had from the first 
feared that Luther's teaching would result in sedition, received 
The a new an( * terrible proof, as it seemed to them, of the 

Peasant noxious influence of the evangelical preachers. The 
Revolt, peasant movements alluded to above, which had caused 
1S2S * so much anxiety at the diet of Augsburg in 1518, cul- 

minated in the fearful Peasant Revolt in which the common 
man, both in country and town, rose in the name of "God's 
justice " to avenge long-standing wrongs and establish his 
rights. Luther was by no means directly responsible for the 
civil war which followed, but he had certainly contributed 
to stir up the ancient discontent. He had asserted that, 
owing to the habit of foreclosing small mortgages, " any one 
with a hundred gulden could gobble up a peasant a year." The 
German feudal lords he pronounced hangmen, who knew only 
how to swindle the poor man — " such fellows were formerly 
called scoundrels, but now we must call them ' Christians and 



13 

revered princes.' " Yet in spite of this harsh talk about 
princes, Luther relied upon them to forward the reforms in 
which he was interested, and he justly claimed that he had 
greatly increased their powers by reducing the authority of 
the pope and subjecting the clergy in all things to the civil 
government. 

The best known statement of the peasants' grievances is 
to be found in the famous " Twelve Articles " drawn up in 
1524. They certainly showed the unmistakable influence of 
the evangelical teaching. The peasants demanded that the 
gospel should be taught them as a guide in life, and that each 
community should be permitted to choose its pastor and depose 
him if he conducted himself improperly. " The pastor thus 
chosen' should teach us the gospel pure and simple, without 
any addition, doctrine or ordinance of man." The old tithe 
on grain shall continue to be paid, since that is established by 
the Old Testament. It will serve to support the pastor, and 
what is left over shall be given to the poor. Serfdom is against 
God's word, "since Christ has delivered and redeemed us all 
without exception, by the shedding of his precious blood, the 
lowly as well as the great." Protests follow against hunting 
and fishing rights, restrictions on wood-cutting, and ex- 
cessive demands made on peasants. " In the twelfth place," 
the declaration characteristically concluded, " it is our con- 
clusion and final resolution that if one or more of the articles 
here set forth should not be in agreement with the word of God, 
as we think they are, such articles will we willingly retract if 
it be proved by a clear explanation of Scripture really to be 
against the word of God." More radical demands came from 
the working classes in the towns. The articles of Heilbronn 
demanded that the property of the Church should be con- 
fiscated and used for the community; clergy and nobility 
alike were to be deprived of all their privileges, so that they 
could no longer oppress the poor man. The more violent 
leaders, like Miinzer, renewed the old cry that the parsons must 
be slain. Hundreds of castles and monasteries were destroyed 
by the frantic peasantry, and some of the nobles were murdered 
with shocking cruelty. Luther, who believed that the peasants 
were trying to cloak their dreadful sins with excuses from 
the gospel, exhorted the government to put down the in- 
surrection. " Have no pity on the poor folk; stab, smite, 
throttle, who can ! " To him the peasants' attempt to 
abolish serfdom was wholly unchristian, since it was a 
divinely sanctioned institution, and if they succeeded they 
would " make God a liar." The German rulers took Luther's 
advice with terrible literalness, and avenged themselves upon 
the peasants, whose lot was apparently worse afterwards than 
before. 

The terror inspired by the Peasant War led to a new alliance, 
the League of Dessau, formed by some of the leading rulers of 
central and northern Germany, to stamp out the Apt)eMrm 
" accursed Lutheran sect." This included Luther's old ance of 
enemy, Duke George of Saxony, the electors of Bran- anevan- 
denburg and Mainz, and two princes of Brunswick. * e//ca7 
The rumour that the emperor was planning to return party * 
to Germany in order to root out the growing heresy, led a few 
princes who had openly favoured Luther to unite also. Among 
these the chief were the new elector of Saxony, John (who, 
unlike his brother, Frederick the Wise, had openly espoused 
the new doctrines), and the energetic Philip, landgrave of 
Hesse. The emperor did not return, and since there was no 
one to settle the religious question in Germany, the diet of 
Spires (1526) determined that, pending the meeting of the 
proposed general council, each prince, and each knight and 
town owing immediate allegiance to the emperor, should decide 
individually what particular form of religion should prevail 
within the limits of their territories. Each prince was "so 
to live, reign and conduct himself as he would be willing to 
answer before God and His Imperial Majesty." While the 
evangelical party still hoped that some form of religion might 
be agreed upon which would prevent the disruption of the 
Church, the conservatives were confident that the heretics 



H 



REFORMATION, THE 



would soon be suppressed, as they had so often been in the 
past. The situation tended to become more, rather than less, 
complicated, and there was every variety of reformer and 
every degree of conservatism, for there were no standards 
for those who had rejected the papal supremacy, and even 
those who continued to accept it differed widely. For 
example, George of Saxony viewed Aleander, the pope's 
nuncio, with almost as much suspicion as he did Luther 
himself. 

The religious ideas in South Germany were affected by the de- 
velopment of a reform party in Switzerland, under the influence 
z of Zwingli, who claimed that at Einsiedeln, near the 

and the l ake °f Zurich, he had begun to preach the gospel of 
Reforms' Christ in the year 1516 " before any one in my locality 
tionin had so much as heard the name of Luther." Three 
land**' vea rs * ater ne becamepreacher in the cathedralof Zurich. 
Here he began to denounce the abuses in the Church, 
as well as the traffic in mercenaries which had so long been a 
blot upon his country's honour. From the first he combined 
religious and political reform. In 1523 he prepared a complete 
statement of his beliefs, in the form of sixty-seven theses. He 
maintained that Christ was the only high priest and that the 
gospel did not gain its sanction from the authority of the 
Church. He denied the existence of purgatory, and rejected 
those practices of the Church which Luther had already set 
aside. Since no one presented himself to refute him, the town 
council ratified his conclusions, so that the city of Zurich prac- 
tically withdrew from the Roman Catholic Church. Next 
year the Mass, processions and the images of saints were 
abolished. The shrines were opened and the relics burned. 
Some other towns, including Bern, followed Zurich's example, 
but the Forest cantons refused to accept the innovations. In 
1525 a religious and political league was arranged between 
Zurich and Constance, which in the following year was joined 
by St Gallen, Biel, Miihlhausen, Basel and Strassburg. Philip 
of Hesse was attracted by Zwingli's energy, and was eager that 
the northern reformers should be brought into closer relations 
with the south. But the league arranged by Zwingli was 
directed against the house of Habsburg, and Luther did not 
Zwinzii deem ft right to oppose a prince by force of arms. 
and Moreover, he did not believe that Zwingli, who con- 

Luther. ceived the eucharist to be merely symbolical in its 
T narbu character > " heId tne whole tru th of God." Never- 
Articie?. theless, Philip of Hesse finally arranged a religious 
conference in the castle of Marburg (1529) where 
Zwingli and Luther met. They were able to agree on fourteen 
out of the fifteen " Marburg Articles," which stated the chief 
points in the Christian faith as they were accepted by both. 
A fundamental difference as to the doctrine of the eucharist, 
however, stood in the way of the real union. 

The diet of Spires (1529) had received a letter from the 
emperor directing it to look to the enforcement of the edict of 
The diet Worms against the heretics. No one was to preach 
of Spires, against the Mass, and no one was to be prevented from 
1529, and attending it freely. This meant that the evangelical 
testants°~>> P rinces would be forced to restore the most character- 
istic Catholic rite. As they formed only a minority in 
the diet, they could only draw up a protest, which was signed by 
John Frederick of Saxony, Philip of Hesse, and fourteen of the 
three towns, including Strassburg, Nuremberg and Ulm. In 
this they claimed that the majority had no right to abrogate the 
stipulations of the former diet of Spires, which permitted each 
prince to determine religious matters provisionally for him- 
self, for all had unanimously pledged themselves to observe 
that agreement. They therefore appealed to the emperor 
and to a future council against the tyranny of the majority. 
Those who signed this appeal were called Protestants, a name 
which came to be generally applied to those who rejected the 
supremacy of the pope, the Roman Catholic conceptions of 
the clergy and of the Mass, and discarded sundry practices of 
the older Church, without, however, repudiating the Catholic 
creeds. 



During the period which had elapsed since the diet of Worms, 
the emperor had resided in Spain, busy with a series of wars, 
waged mainly with the king of France. 1 In 1530 the ThedIet 
emperor found himself in a position to visit Germany and cou- 
once more, and summoned the diet to meet at Augsburg, fesston ot 
with the hope of settling the religious differences and ^S buFXt 
bringing about harmonious action against the Turk. 
The Protestants were requested to submit a statement of their 
opinions, and on June 25th the "Augsburg Confession" was 
read to the diet. This was signed by the elector of Saxony 
and his son and successor, John Frederick, by George, margrave 
of Brandenburg, two dukes of Liineburg, Philip of Hesse and 
Wolfgang of Anhalt, and by the- representatives of Nuremberg 
and Reutlingen. The confession was drafted by Melanchthon, 
who sought consistently to minimize the breach which separated 
the Lutherans from the old Church. In the first part of the 
confession the Protestants seek to prove that there is nothing 
in their doctrines at variance with those of the universal Church 
" or even of the Roman Church so far as that appears in the 
writings of the Fathers." They made it clear that they still 
held a great part of the beliefs of the medieval Church, especially 
as represented in Augustine's writings, and repudiated the 
radical notions of the Anabaptists and of Zwingli. In the second 
part, those practices of the Church are enumerated which the 
evangelical party rejected; the celibacy of the clergy, the Mass, 
as previously understood, auricular confession, and monastic 
vows, the objections to which are stated with much vigour. 
" Christian perfection is this: to fear God sincerely, to trust* 
assuredly that we have, for Christ's sake, a gracious and merciful 
God; to ask and look with confidence for help from him in all 
our affairs, accordingly to our calling, and outwardly to do good 
works diligently, and to attend to our vocation. In these 
things doth true perfection and a true worship of God consist. 
It doth not consist in going about begging, or in wearing a black 
or a grey cowl." The Protestant princes declared that they had 
no intention of depriving the bishops of their jurisdiction, but 
this one thing only is requested of them, " that they would suffer 
the gospel to be purely taught, and would relax a few observances 
in which we cannot adhere without sin." 

The confession was turned over to a committee of conserva- 
tive theologians, including Eck, Faber and Cochlaeus. Their 
refutation of the Protestant positions seemed needlessly Coarse c / 
sharp to the emperor, and five drafts were made of it. events in 
Charles finally reluctantly accepted it, although he Germany, 
would gladly have had it milder, for it made reconcilia- j?*'" 
tion hopeless. The majority of the diet approved a 
recess, allowing the Protestants a brief period of immunity until 
the 15th of April 1531, after which they were to be put down 
by force. Meanwhile, they were to make no further innovations, 
they were not to molest the conservatives, and were to aid the 
emperor in suppressing the doctrines of Zwingli and of the 
Anabaptists. The Lutheran princes protested, together with 
fourteen cities, and left the diet. The diet thereupon decided 
that the edict of Worms should at last be enforced. All Church 
property was to be restored, and, perhaps most important of all, 
the jurisdiction of the Imperial court {Reichskammergericht), 
which was naturally Catholic in its sympathies, was extended 
to appeals involving the seizure of ecclesiastical benefices, 
contempt of episcopal decisions and other matters deeply affect- 
ing the Protestants. In November the Protestants formed the 
Schmalkaldic League, which, after the death of Zwingli, in 1531, 
was joined by a number of the South German towns. The 
period of immunity assigned to the Protestants passed by; 
but they were left unmolested, for the emperor was involved 
in many difficulties, and the Turks were threatening Vienna. 
Consequently, at the diet of Nuremberg (1532) a recess was 
drafted indefinitely extending the religious truce and quashing 
such cases in the Reichskammergericht as involved Protestant 

1 In 1527 the pope's capital was sacked by Charles's army. This 
was, of course, but an incident in the purely political relations of 
the European powers with the pope, and really has no bearing upon 
the progress of the Protestant revolt. 



REFORMATION, THE 



innovations. The conservatives refused to ratify the recess, 
which was not published, but the Protestant states declared 
that they would accept the emperor's word of honour, and 
furnished him with troops for repelling the Mahommedans. The 
fact that the conservative princes, especially the dukes of 
Bavaria, were opposed to any strengthening of the emperor's 
power, and were in some cases hereditary enemies of the house 
o£ Habsburg, served to protect the Protestant princes. In 
1534 the Schmalkaldic League succeeded in restoring the 
banished duke of Wurttemberg, who declared himself in favour 
of the Lutheran reformation, and thus added another to the 
list of German Protestant states. In 1 539 George of Saxony died, 
and was succeeded by his brother Henry, who also accepted the 
new faith, and in the same year the new elector of Brandenburg 
became a Protestant. Indeed, there was reason to believe at 
this time that the archbishops of Mainz, Trier and Cologne, as 
well as some other bishops, were planning the secularization of 
their principalities. 

To the north, Lutheran influence had spread into Denmark; 
Sweden and Norway were also brought "within its sphere. 
Denmark, Christian II. of Denmark, a nephew of the elector of 
N °™*y Saxony, came to the throne in 1513, bent on bringing 
Sweden Sweden and Norway, over which he nominally ruled in 
become accordance with the terms of the Union of Kalmar 
Protest- (1397), completely under his control. In order to do 
* aU this it was necessary to reduce the power of the nobility 

and clergy, privileged classes exempt from taxation and rivals 
of the royal power. Denmark had suffered from all the abuses 
of papal provisions, and the nuncio of Leo X. had been forced 
in 1 518 to flee from the king's wrath. Christian II. set up a 
supreme court for ecclesiastical matters, and seemed about to 
adopt a policy similar to that later pursued by Henry VIII. of 
England, when his work was broken off by a revolt which 
compelled him to leave the country. Lutheranism continued 
to make rapid progress, and Christian's successor permitted 
the clergy to marry, appropriated the annates and protected 
the Lutherans. Finally Christian III., an ardent Lutheran, 
ascended the throne in 1536; with the sanction of the diet he 
Severed, in 1537, all connexion with the pope, introducing the 
Lutheran system of Church government and accepting the 
Augsburg Confession. 1 Norway was included in the changes, 
but Sweden had won its independence of Denmark, under 
Gustavus Vasa, who, in 1523, was proclaimed king. He used 
the Lutheran theories as an excuse for overthrowing the ecclesi- 
astical aristocracy, which had been insolently powerful in 
Sweden. In 1527, supported by the diet, he carried his measures 
for secularizing such portions of the Church property as he 
thought fit, and for subjecting the Church to the royal power 
(Ordinances of Vcsteras); but many of the old religious cere- 
monies and practices were permitted to continue, and it was not 
until 1592 that Lutheranism was officially sanctioned by the 
Swedish synod. 2 

Charles V., finding that his efforts to check the spread of the 
religious schism were unsuccessful, resorted once more to 
The conferences between Roman "Catholic and Lutheran 

Council theologians, but it became apparent that no permanent 
of Trent compromise was possible. The emperor then succeeded 
in disrupting the Schmalkaldic League by winning over, on 
purely political grounds, Philip of Hesse and young Maurice 
of Saxony, whose father, Henry, had died after a very brief 
reign. Charles V. had always exhibited the greatest confidence 
in the proposed general council, the summoning of which had 
hitherto been frustrated by the popes, and at last, in 1545? 
the council was summoned to meet at Trent, which lay con- 
veniently upon the confines of Italy and Germany (see Trent, 
Council of). The Dominicans and, later, members of the 
newly born Order of Jesus, were conspicuous, among the 

1 The episcopal office was retained, but the " succession " broken, 
the new Lutheran bishops being consecrated by Buggenhagen, 
who was only in priest's orders. 

• 2 The episcopal system and succession were maintained, and the 
/' Mass vestments " (i.e. alb and chasuble) remain in use to this day. 



15 

theological deputies, while the Protestants, though invited, 
refused to attend. It was clear from the first that the decisions 
of the council would be uncompromising in character, and that 
the Protestants would certainly refuse to be bound by its decrees. 
And so it fell out. The very first anathemas of the council were 
directed against those innovations which the Protestants had 
most at heart. The emperor had now tried threats, conferences 
and a general council, and all had failed to unify the Church. 

Maurice of Saxony, without surrendering his religious beliefs, 
had become the political friend of the emperor, who had 
promised him the neighbouring electorate of Saxony. Events 
John Frederick, the elector, was defeated at Muhlberg, cutminat- 
April 1547, and taken prisoner. Philip of Hesse /£«^** 
also surrendered, and Charles tried once more to peaceo f 
establish a basis of agreement. Three theologians, in- Augsburg, 
eluding a conservative Lutheran, were chosen to draft fsss, 
the so-called " Augsburg Interim." This reaffirmed the seven 
sacraments, transubstantiation and the invocation of saints, 
and declared the pope head of the Church, but adopted 
Luther's doctrine of justification by faith in a conditional 
way, as well as the marriage of priests, and considerably 
modified the theory and practice of the Mass. For four 
years Charles, backed by the Spanish troops, made efforts to 
force the Protestant towns to observe the Interim, but with 
little success. He rapidly grew extremely unpopular, and in 
1552 Maurice of Saxony turned upon him and attempted to 
capture him at Innsbruck. Charles escaped, but Maurice 
became for the moment leader of the German princes who 
gathered at Passau (August 1552) to discuss the situation. The 
settlement, however, was deferred for the meeting of the diet, 
which took place at Augsburg, 1555. There was a general 
anxiety to conclude a peace — " bestdndiger, beharrlicher, un- 
bedingter, jur und jilr ewig w&hrender" There was no other 
way but to legalize the new faith in Germany, but only those 
were to be tolerated who accepted the Augsburg Confession. 
This excluded, of course, not only the Zwinglians and Ana- 
baptists, but the ever-increasing Calvinistic or " Reformed " 
Church. The principle citjus regio ejus religio was adopted, 
according to which each secular ruler might choose between the 
old faith and the Lutheran. His decision was to bind all his sub- 
jects, but a subject professing another religion from his prince 
was to be permitted to leave the country. The ecclesiastical 
rulers, however, were to lose their possessions if they abandoned 
the old faith. 3 Freedom of conscience was thus established for 
princes alone, and their power became supreme in religious as 
well as secular matters. The Church and the civil government 
had been closely associated with one another for centuries, and 
the old system was perpetuated in the Protestant states. 
Scarcely any one dreamed that individual subjects could safely be 
left to believe what they would, and permitted, so long as they 
did not violate the law of the land, freely to select and practise 
such religious rites as afforded them help and comfort. 

During the three or four years which followed the signing of 
the Augsburg Confession in 1530 and the formation of the 
Schmalkaldic League, England, while bitterly de- Religious 
nouncing and burning Lutheran heretics in the name sHuatioa 
of the Holy Catholic Church, was herself engaged in gfndfitthe 
severing the bonds which had for well-nigh a thousand opening of 
years bound her to the Apostolic See. An in- theWtb 
dependent national Church was formed in 1 $34, cen<ury * 
which continued, however, for a time to adhere to all 
the characteristic beliefs of the medieval Catholic Church, 
excepting alone the headship of the pope. The circum- 
stances which led to the English schism are dealt with 
elsewhere (see England, Church of), and need be reviewed 
here only in the briefest manner. There was soma heresy 
in England during the opening decades of the 16th century, 
survivals of the Lollardy which now and then brought a victim 
to the stake. There was also the old discontent among the 
orthodox in regard to the Church's exactions, bad clerics and 

1 This so-called " ecclesiastical reservation " was not included in 
the main peace. 



i6 



REFORMATION, THE 



dissolute and lazy monks. Scholars, like Colet, read the New 
Testament in Greek and lectured on justification by faith before 
they knew of Luther, and More included among the institutions 
of Utopia a rather more liberal and enlightened religion than 
that which he observed around him. Erasmus was read and 
approved, and his notion of reform by culture no doubt attracted 
many adherents among English scholars. Luther's works found 
their way into England, and were read and studied at both 
Oxford and Cambridge. In May 1521 Wolsey attended a pom- 
pous burning of Lutheran tracts in St Paul's churchyard, where 
Bishop Fisher preached ardently against the new German heresy. 
Henry VIII. himself stoutly maintained the headship of the pope, 
and, as is well known, after examining the arguments of Luther, 
published his Defence of the Seven Sacraments in 15 21, which won 
for him from the pope the glorious title of " Defender of the Faith." 
The government and the leading men of letters and prelates 
appear therefore to have harboured no notions of revolt before 
the matter of the king's divorce became prominent in 1527. 

Henry's elder brother Arthur, a notoriously sickly youth of 
scarce fifteen, had been married to Catherine, daughter of 
H Ferdinand and Isabella, but had died less than five 

V7//. months after the marriage (April 1502), leaving 

and the doubts as to whether the union had ever been physi- 
divorce ca n v consummated. Political reasons dictated an 
case * alliance between the young widow and her brother-in- 

law Henry, prince of Wales, nearly five years her junior; Julius II. 
was induced reluctantly to grant the dispensation necessary on 
account of the relationship, which, according to the canon law 
and the current interpretation of Leviticus xviii. 16, stood in 
the way of the union. The wedding took place some years 
later (1509), and several children were born,, none of whom 
survived except the princess Mary. By 1527 the king had 
become hopeless of having a male heir by Catherine. He was 
tired of her, and in love with the black-eyed Anne Boleyn, who 
refused to be his mistress. He alleged that he was beginning 
to have a horrible misgiving that his marriage with Catherine 
had been invalid, perhaps downright " incestuous. " The 
negotiations with Clement VII. with the hope of obtaining a 
divorce from Catherine, the reluctance of the pope to impeach 
the dispensation of his predecessor Julius II., and at the same 
time to alienate the English queen's nephew Charles V., the 
futile policy of Wolsey and his final ruin in 1529 are described 
elsewhere (see English History; Henry VIII. ; Catherine 
of Aragon). The king's agents secured the opinion of a number 
of prominent universities that his marriage was void, and an 
assembly of notables, which he summoned in June 1 530, warned 
the pope of the dangers involved in leaving the royal succession 
in uncertainty, since the heir was not only a woman, but, as it 
seemed to many, of illegitimate birth. 

Henry's next move was to bring a monstrous charge against 
the clergy, accusing them of having violated the ancient laws 
Beginning of praemunire in submitting to the authority of papal 
of Eng* legates (although he himself had ratified the appoint- 
revolt ment °* Wolsey as legate a latere). The clergy of the 
against province of Canterbury were fined £100,000 and com- 
papacy. pelled to declare the king " their singular protector and 
only supreme lord, and, as far as that is permitted by the law 
of Christ, the supreme head of the Church and of the clergy." 
This the king claimed, perhaps with truth, was only a clearer 
statement of the provisions of earlier English laws. The 
following year, 1532, parliament presented a petition to the king 
(which had been most carefully elaborated by the monarch's 
own advisers) containing twelve charges against the bishops, 
relating to their courts, fees, injudicious appointments and 
abusive treatment of heretics, which combined to cause an 
unprecedented and " marvellous disorder of the godly quiet, 
peace and tranquillity" of the realm. For the remedy of 
these abuses parliament turned to the king, " in whom and by 
whom the only and sole redress, reformation and remedy herein 
absolutely rests and remains." The ordinaries met these 
accusations with a lengthy and dignified answer; but this did 
not satisfy the king, and convocation was compelled on the 



15th of May 1532, further to clarify the ancient laws of the 
land, as understood by the king, in the very brief, very humble 
and very pertinent document known as the " Submission of 
the Clergy." Herein the king's " most humble subjects daily 
orators, and bedesmen " of the clergy of England, in view of 
his goodness and fervent Christian zeal and his learning far 
exceeding that of all other kings that they have read of, agree 
never to assemble in convocation except at the king's summons, 
and to enact and promulgate no constitution or ordinances 
except they receive the royal assent and authority. Moreover, 
the existing canons are to be subjected to the examination 
of a commission appointed by the king, half its members from 
parliament, half from the clergy, to abrogate with the king's 
assent such provisions as the majority find do not stand with 
God's laws and the laws of the realm. This appeared to place 
the legislation of the clergy, whether old or new, entirely under 
the monarch's control. A few months later Thomas Cranmer, 
who had been one of those to discuss sympathetically Luther's 
works in the little circle at Cambridge, and who believed the 
royal supremacy wbuld tend to the remedying of grave abuses 
and that the pope had acted ultra vires in issuing a dispensation 
for the king's marriage with Catherine, was induced by Henry 
to succeed Warham as archbishop of Canterbury. About the 
same time parliament passed an interesting and important 
statute, forbidding, unless the king should wish to suspend the 
operation of the law, the payment to the pope of the annates. 
This item alone amounted during the previous forty-six years, 
the parliament declared, " at the least to eight score thousand 
pounds, besides other great and intolerable sums which have 
yearly been conveyed to the said court of Rome by many other 
ways and means to the great impoverishment of this realm." 
The annates were thereafter to accrue to the king; and bishops 
and archbishops were thenceforth, in case the pope refused 
to confirm them, 1 to be consecrated and invested within the 
realm, " in like manner as divers other archbishops and bishops 
have been heretofore in ancient times by sundry the king's 
most noble progenitors." No censures, excommunications or 
interdicts with which the Holy Father might vex or grieve 
the sovereign lord or his subjects, should be published or in 
any way impede the usual performance of the sacraments and 
the holding of the divine services. In February parliament 
discovered that " by divers sundry old authentic histories 
and chronicles " it was manifest that the realm of England 
was an empire governed by one supreme head, the king, to 
whom all sorts and degrees of people — both clergy and laity — 
ought to bear next to God a natural and humble obedience, 
and that to him God had given the authority finally to deter- 
mine all causes and contentions in the realm, ' ' without 
restraint, or provocation to any foreign princes or potentates 
of the world." The ancient statutes of the praemunire and 
provisors are recalled and the penalties attached to their 
violation re-enacted. All appeals were to be tried within the 
realm, and suits begun before an archbishop were to be deter- 
mined by him without further appeal. Acting on this, Cranmer 
tried the divorce case before his court, which declared the 
marriage 'with Catherine void and that with Anne Boleyn, 
which had been solemnized privately in January, valid. 
The pope replied by ordering Henry under pain of excommuni- 
cation to put away Anne and restore Catherine, his legal wife, 
within ten days. This sentence the emperor, all the Christian 
princes and the king's own subjects were summoned to carry 
out by force of arms if necessary. 

As might have been anticipated, this caused no break in the 
policy of the English king and his parliament, and a series of 
famous acts passed in the year 1534 completed and Secession 
confirmed the independence of the Church of England, otE jjf 
which, except during five years under Queen Mary, t h n ep j£™j 
was thereafter as completely severed from the papal monarchy* 
monarchy as the electorate of Saxony or the duchy K34. 
of Hesse. The payment of annates and of Peter's pence 

1 Cranmer himself had taken the oath of canonical obedience to- 
the Holy See and duly received the pallium. 



REFORMATION, THE 



was absolutely forbidden, as well as the application to the 
bishop of Rome for dispensations. The bishops were 
thereafter to be elected by the deans and chapters upon 
receiving the king's congS d'eslire (q.v.). The Act of Succession 
provided that, should the king have no sons, Elizabeth, 
Anne's daughter, should succeed to the crown. The brief Act 
of Supremacy confirmed the king's claim to be reputed the 
" only supreme head in earth of the Church of England "; 
he was to enjoy all the honours, dignities, jurisdictions 
and profits thereunto appertaining, and to have full power 
and authority to reform and amend all such errors, heresies 
and abuses, as by any manner of spiritual authority might 
lawfully be reformed, or amended, most to the pleasure of 
Almighty God, and the increase of virtue in Christ's religion, 
" foreign authority, prescription, or any other thing or things 
to the contrary hereof, notwithstanding." The Treasons Act, 
terrible in its operation, included among capital offences that 
of declaring in words or writing the king to be " a heretic, 
schismatic, tyrant, infidel or usurper." The convocations were 
required to abjure the papal supremacy by declaring " that 
the bishop of Rome has not in Scripture any greater 
jurisdiction in the kingdom of England than any other 
foreign bishop." The king had now clarified the ancient 
laws of the realm to his satisfaction, and could proceed to 
abolish superstitious rites, remedy abuses, and seize such por- 
tions of the Church's possessions, especially pious and monastic 
foundations, as he deemed superfluous for the maintenance of 
religion. 

In spite of the fact that the separation from Rome had been 
carried out during the sessions of a single parliament, and 
The that there had been no opportunity for a general 

reform expression of opinion on the part of the nation, there 
of the i s n0 reason to suppose that the majority of the 
Ch rch people, thoughtful or thoughtless, were not ready to 
under reconcile themselves to the abolition of the papal 
Henry supremacy. It seems just as clear that there was 
y w* no strong evangelical movement, and that Henry's 

pretty consistent adherence to the fundamental doctrines 
of the medieval Church was agreeable to the great mass of 
his subjects. The ten " Articles devised by the Kyng's Highnes 
Majestie to stablysh Christen quietness " (1536), together 
with the " Injunctions " of 1536, and 1538, are chiefly 
noteworthy for their affirmation of almost all the current 
doctrines of the Catholic Church, except those relating to the 
papal supremacy, purgatory, images, relics and pilgrimages, 
and the old rooted distrust ■ of the Bible in the vernacular. 
The clergy were bidden to exhort their hearers to the 
" works of charity, mercy and faith, specially prescribed and 
commanded in Scripture, and not to repose their trust or 
affiance in any other works devised by men's phantasies beside 
Scripture; as in wandering to pilgrimages, offering of money, 
candles or tapers to images or relics, or kissing or licking the 
same, saying oyer a number of beads, not understood or minded 
on, or in such-like superstition." To this end a copy of the 
whole English Bible was to be set up in each parish church 
where the people could read it. During the same years the 
monasteries, lesser and greater, were dissolved, and the chief 
shrines were despoiled, notably that of St Thomas of Canter- 
bury. Thus one of the most important of all medieval ecclesi- 
astical institutions, monasticism, came to an end in England. 
Doubtless the king's sore financial needs had much to do with 
the dissolution of the abbeys and the plundering of the shrines, 
but there is no reason to suppose that he was not fully con- 
vinced that the monks had long outlived their usefulness and 
that the shrines were centres of abject superstition and ecclesi- 
astical deceit. Henry, however, stoutly refused to go further 
in the direction of German Protestantism, even with the 
prospect of forwarding the proposed union between him and 
the princes of the Schmalkaldic League. An insurrection of 
the Yorkshire peasants, which is to be ascribed in part to the 
distress caused by the enclosure of the commons on which 
they had been wont to pasture their cattle, and in part to the 



17 

destruction of popular shrines, may have caused the king to 
defend his orthodoxy by introducing into parliament in 1539 the 
six questions. These parliament enacted into the terrible statute 
of " The Six Articles," in which a felon's death was prescribed 
for those who obstinately denied transubstantiation, demanded 
the communion under both kinds, questioned the binding 
character of vows of chastity, or the lawfulness of private 
Masses or the expediency of auricular confession. On the 
30th of July 1540 three Lutheran clergymen were burned 
and three Roman Catholics beheaded, the latter for denying 
the king's spiritual supremacy. The king's ardent desire that 
diversities of minds and opinions should be done away with 
and unity be " charitably established " was further promoted 
by publishing in 1543 A Necessary Doctrine and Erudition 
for any Christian Man, set forth by the King's Majesty of England, 
in which the tenets of medieval theology, except for denial 
of the supremacy of the bishop of Rome and the unmistakable 
assertion of the supremacy of the king, were once more 
restated. 

Henry VIII. died in January 1547, having chosen a council 
of regency for his nine-year-old son Edward, the members 
of which were favourable to further religious innova- England 
tions. Somerset, the new Protector, strove to govern becomes 
on the basis of civil liberty and religious tolerance. Pntegtaat 
The first parliament of the reign swept away almost ^ fmmra 
all the species of treasons created during the previous y/„ 
two centuries, the heresy acts, including the Six 1547- 
Articles, all limitations on printing the Scriptures in iSS3. 
English and reading and expounding the * same — indeed " all 
and every act or acts of parliament concerning doctrine 
or matters of religion." These measures gave a great impetus 
to religious discussion and local innovations. Representatives 
of all the new creeds hastened from the Continent to 
England, where they hoped to find a safe and fertile field 
for the particular seed they had to plant. It is impossible 
exactly to estimate the influence which these teachers 
exerted on the general trend of religious opinion in England; 
in any case, however, it was not unimportant, and the 
Articles of Religion and official homilies of the Church of 
England show unmistakably the influence of Calvin's doctrine. 
There was, however, no such sudden breach with the traditions 
of the past as characterized the Reformation in some con- 
tinental countries. Under Edward VI. the changes were 
continued on the lines laid down by Henry VIII. The old 
hierarchy continued, but service books in English were sub- 
stituted for those in Latin, and preaching was encouraged. 
A royal visitation, heginning in 1547, discovered, however, such 
a degree of ignorance and illiteracy among the parish clergy 
that it became clear that preaching could only be gradually 
given its due place in the services of the Church. Communion 
under both kinds and the marriage of the clergy were 
sanctioned, thus gravely modifying two of the fundamental 
institutions of the medieval Church. A conservative Book 
of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments and 
other Rites and Ceremonies after the Use of the Church of England 
— commonly called the First Prayer Book of Edward VI. — 
was issued in 1549. This was based upon ancient " uses," 
and represented no revolutionary change in the traditions of 
the " old religion." It was followed, however, in 1552 by the 
second Prayer Book, which was destined to be, with some 
modifications, the permanent basis of the English service. 
This made it clear that the communion was no longer to 
be regarded as a propitiatory sacrifice, the names " Holy 
Communion " and " Lord's .Supper " being definitively sub- 
stituted for " Mass " (q.v.), while the word " altar " was 
replaced by " table." In the Forty-two Articles we have 
the basis of Queen Elizabeth's Thirty-nine Articles. Thus 
during the reign of Edward we have not only the founda- 
tions of the Anglican Church laid, but there appears 
the beginning of those evangelical and puritanical sects 
which were to become the " dissenters " of the following 
centuries. 



i8 



REFORMATION, THE 



With the death of Edward there came a period of reaction 
lasting for five years. Queen Mary, unshaken in her attach- 
Cathotic ment to the ancient faith and the papal monarchy, 
reaction was a bj e w j t jj t }, e sanction of a subservient parlia- 
JJf^f ment to turn back the wheels of ecclesiastical legis- 
1553- lation, to restore the old religion, and to reunite the 

1558. English Church with the papal monarchy; the pope's 

legate, Cardinal Pole, was primate of all England. Then, the 
ancient heresy laws having been revived, came the burnings of 
Rogers, Hooker, Latimer, Ridley, Cranmer and many a less 
noteworthy champion of the new religion. It would seem as 
if this sharp, uncompromising reaction was what was needed 
to produce a popular realization of the contrast between the 
Ecclesia anglicana of Henry VIII- and Edward VI., and the 
alternative of " perfect obedience to the See Apostolic." 

Elizabeth, who succeeded her sister Mary in 1558, was sus- 
pected to be Protestant in her leanings, and her adviser, Cecil, 
Settle' nac * received his training as secretary of the Protector 
ment Somerset; but the general European situation as 

under we r] as the young queen's own temperament pre- 
Eihabeth. c j U( j e( j anv abrupt or ostentatious change in religious 
matters. The new sovereign's first proclamation was directed 
against all such preaching as might lead to contention and the 
breaking of the common quiet. In 1559 ten of Henry VIII. 's 
acts were revived. On Easter Sunday the queen ventured 
to display her personal preference for the Protestant conception 
of the eucharist by forbidding the celebrant in her chapel to 
elevate the host. The royal supremacy was reasserted, the 
title being modified into " supreme governor "; and a new 
edition of Edward VI. 's second Prayer Book, with a few 
changes, was issued. The Marian bishops who refused to 
recognize these changes were deposed and imprisoned, but 
care was taken to preserve the " succession " by consecrating 
others in due form to take their places. 1 Four years later the 
Thirty-nine Articles imposed an official creed upon the English 
nation. This was Protestant in its general character: in its 
appeal to the Scriptures as the sole rule of faith (Art. VI.), its 
repudiation of the authority of Rome (Art. XXXVII.), its 
definition of the Church (Art. XIX.), its insistence on justifica- 
tion by faith only (Art. XI.) and repudiation of the sacrifice 
of the Mass (Arts. XXVIII. and XXXI.) . As supreme governor 
of the Church of England the sovereign strictly controlled all 
ecclesiastical legislation and appointed royal delegates- to hear 
appeals from the ecclesiastical courts, to be a " papist " or to 
" hear Mass " (which was construed as the same thing) was to 
risk incurring the terrible penalties of high treason. By the 
Act of Uniformity (1559) a uniform ritual, the Book of Common 
Prayer, was imposed upon clergy and laity alike, and no liberty 
of public worship was permitted. Every subject was bound 
under penalty of a fine to attend church on Sunday. While 
there was in a certain sense freedom of opinion, all printers 
had to seek a licence from the government for every manner of 
book or paper, and heresy was so closely affiliated with treason 
that the free expression of thought, whether reactionary or 
revolutionary, was beset with grave danger. 

Attempts to estimate the width of the gulf separating the 
Church of England in Elizabeth's time from the corresponding 
institution as it existed in the early years of her father's reign 
are likely to be gravely affected by personal bias. There is a 
theory that no sweeping revolution in dogma took place, but 
that only a few medieval beliefs were modified or rejected owing 
to the practical abuses to which they had given rise. To 
Professor A. F. Pollard, for example, " The Reformation in 
England was mainly a domestic affair, a national protest against 
national grievances rather than part of a cosmopolitan move- 
ment toward doctrinal change " .(Carnb. Mod. Hist. ii. 478-9). 
This estimate appeals to persons of* widely different views and 
temperaments. It is as grateful to those who, like many 
" Anglo-Catholics," desire on religious grounds to establish the 
doctrinal continuity of the Anglican Church with that of the 

1 Only one of the Marian bishops, Kitchin of Llandaff, was found 
willing to conform. 



middle ages, as it is obvious to those who, like W. K. Clifford, 
perceive in the ecclesiastical organization and its 'influence 
nothing more than a perpetuation of demoralizing medieval 
superstition. The nonconformists have, moreover, never 
wearied of denouncing the " papistical " conservatism of the 
Anglican establishment. On the other hand, the impartial 
historical student cannot compare the Thirty-nine Articles 
with the contemporaneous canons and decrees of the council of 
Trent without being impressed by striking contrasts between the 
two sets of dogmas. Their spirit is very different. The un- 
mistakable rejection on the part of the English Church of the 
conception of the eucharist as a sacrifice had alone many wide- 
reaching implications. Even although the episcopal organiza- 
tion was retained, the conception of " tradition," of the conciliar 
powers, of the "characters" of the priest, of the celibate life, 
of purgatory, of " good works," &c. — all these serve clearly to 
differentiate the teaching of the English Church before and after 
the Reformation. From this standpoint it is obviously un- 
historical to deny that England had a very important part in 
the cosmopolitan movement toward doctrinal change. 

The little backward kingdom of Scotland definitely accepted 
the new faith two years after Elizabeth's accession, and after 
having for centuries sided with France against England, Tne /? e /- or . 
she was inevitably forced by the Reformation into an mation in 
alliance with her ancient enemy to the south when they Scotland, 
both faced a confederation of Catholic powers. The IS60t 
first martyr of Luther's gospel had been Patrick Hamilton, who 
had suffered in 1528; but in spite of a number of executions the 
new ideas spread, even among the nobility. John Knox, who, 
after a chequered career, had come under the influence of 
Calvin at Geneva, returned to Scotland for a few months in 
1555, and shortly after (1557) that part of the Scottish nobility 
which had been won over to the new faith formed their first 
" covenant " for mutual protection. These " Lords of the 
Congregation " were able to force some concessions from the 
queen regent. Knox appeared in Scotland again in 1559, and 
became a sort of second Calvin. He opened negotiations with 
Cecil, who induced the reluctant Elizabeth to form an alliance 
with the Lords of the Congregation, and the English sent a fleet 
to drive away the French, who were endeavouring to keep their 
hold on Scotland. In 1560 a confession of faith was prepared 
by John Knox and five companions. This was adopted by the 
Scottish parliament, with the resolution " the bishops of Rome 
have no jurisdiction nor authoritie in this Realme in tymes 
cuming." The alliance of England and the Scottish Protestants 
against the French, and the common secession from the papal 
monarchy, was in a sense the foundation and beginning of 
Great Britain. Scottish Calvinism was destined to exercise no 
little influence, not only on the history of England, but on the 
form that the Protestant faith was to take in lands beyond the 
seas, at the time scarcely known to the Europeans. 

While France was deeply affected during the 16th century 
by the Protestant revolt, its government never undertook any 
thoroughgoing reform of the Church. During the Begin- 
latter part of the century its monarchs were en- ai °x s ot 
gaged in a bloody struggle with a powerful religious- JJ^JJ" 
political party, the Huguenots, who finally won a movement 
toleration which they continued to enjoy until the hi France. 
revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685. It was not until 1789 
that the French Church of the middle ages lost its vast possessions 
and was subjected to a fundamental reconstruction by the 
Civil Constitution of the Clergy (1791). 2 Yet no summary of 

2 In 1795 the National Convention gruffly declared that the 
Republic would no longer subsidize any form of worship or furnish 
buildings for religious services. " The law recognizes no minister 
of religion, and no one is^to appear in public with costumes or orna- 
ments used in religious ceremonies." Bonaparte, in the Concordat 
which he forced upon the pope in 1 801, idid not provide for the return 
of 'any of the lands of the Church which had been sold, but agreed 
that the government should pay the salaries of bishops and priests, 
whose appointment it controlled. While the Roman Catholic re- 
ligion was declared to be that accepted by the majority of French- 
men, the state subsidized the Reformed Church, those adhering 
to the Augsburg Confession and the Jewish community. Over a 



REFORMATION, THE 



19 



the Protestant revolt would be complete without some allusion 
to the contrast between the course of affairs in France and in 
the neighbouring countries. The French monarchy, as we have 
seen, had usually succeeded in holding its own against the 
centralizing tendencies of the pope. By the Pragmatic Sanction 
of Bourges (1438) it had secured the advantages of the conciliar 
movement. In 1516, after Francis I. had won his victory at 
Marignano, Leo X. concluded a new concordat with France, 
in which, in view of the repudiation of the offensive Pragmatic 
Sanction, the patronage of the French Church was turned over, 
with scarce any restriction, to the French monarch, although 
in another agreement the annates were reserved to the pope. 
The encroachments— which had begun in the time of Philip the 
Fair — of the king's "lawyers on the ancient ecclesiastical juris- 
diction, had reached a point where there was little cause for 
jealousy on the part of the State. The placet had long prevailed, 
so that the king had few of the reasons, so important in Germany 
and England, for quarrelling with the existing system, unless 
it were on religious grounds. France had been conspicuous in 
the conciliar movement. It had also furnished its due quota 
of heretics, although no one so conspicuous as Wycliffe or Huss. 
Marsiglio of Padua had had Frenchmen among his sympathizers 
and helpers. The first prominent French scholar to " preach 
Christ from the sources " was Jacques Lefebvre of Etaples, who 
in 1512 published a new Latin translation of the epistles of St 
Paul. Later he revised an existing French translation of both 
the New Testament (which appeared in 1523, almost con- 
temporaneously with Luther's German version) and, two years, 
later, the Old Testament. He agreed with Luther in rejecting 
transubstantiation, and in believing that works without the 
grace of God could not make for salvation. The centre of 
Lefebvre's followers was Meaux, and they found an ardent 
adherent in Margaret of Angouleme, the king's sister, but had no 
energetic leader who was willing to face the danger of disturb- 
ances. Luther's works found a good many readers in France, 
but were condemned (1 521) by both the Sorbonneand the parle- 
ment of Paris. The parlement appointed a commission to discover 
and punish heretics; the preachers of Meaux fled to Strassburg, 
and Lefebvre's translation of the Bible was publicly burned. A 
council held at Sens, 1*528-29, approved all those doctrines of the 
old Church which the Protestants were attacking, and satisfied 
itself with enumerating a list of necessary conservative reforms. 
After a fierce attack on Protestants caused by the mutilation 
of a statue of the Virgin, in 1528, the king, anxious to con- 
Joha ciliate both the German Protestants and anti-papal 

Calvin England, invited some of the reformers of Meaux 
and his t preach in the Louvre. An address written by 
tute^of a voun S man °f twenty-four, Jean Cauvin (to 
the become immortal under his Latin name of Calvinus) 

Christian was read by the rector of the university. It was 
Religion." a defence f t he new evangelical views, and so 
aroused the Sorbonne that Calvin was forced to flee from 
Paris. In October 1534, the posting of placards in Paris 
and other towns, containing brutal attacks on the Mass and 
denouncing the pope and the " vermin " of bishops, priests 
and monks as blasphemers and liars, produced an outburst of 
persecution, in which thirty-five Lutherans were burned, while 
many fled the country. The events called forth from Calvin, 
who was in Basel, the famous letter to Francis which forms 
the preface to his Institutes of the Christian Religion. In this 
address he sought to vindicate the high aims of the Protestants, 
and to put the king on his guard against those mad men who 
were disturbing his kingdom with their measures of persecution.* 
The Institutes^ the first great textbook of Protestant theology, 
was published in Latin in 1536, and soon (1541) in a French 
version. The original work is much shorter than in its later 
editions, for, as Calvin says, he wrote learning and learned 
century elapsed before the Concordat was abrogated by the Separa- 
tion Law of 1905 which suppressed all government appropriations 
for religious purposes and vested the control of Church property 
in " associations for public worship " (associations cultuelles), to be 
composed of from seven to twenty- five members according to the 
size of the commune. 



writing. His address had little effect on the king. The parle- 
ments issued a series of edicts against the heretics, culminating 
in the very harsh general edict of Fontainebleau, sanctioned 
by the parlement of Paris in 1543. The Sorbonne issued 
a concise series of twenty-five articles, refuting the Institutes of 
Calvin. This statement, when approved by4he king and his 
council , was published throughout France, and formed a clear test 
of orthodoxy. The Sorbonne also drew up a list of prohibited 
books, including those of Calvin, Luther and Melanchthon; 
and the parlement issued a decree against all printing of Pro- 
testant literature. The later years of Francis's reign were 
noteworthy for the horrible massacre of the Waldenses and the 
martyrdom of fourteen from the group of Meaux, who were 
burnt alive in 1546. When Francis died little had been done, in 
spite of the government's cruelty, to check Protestantism, while 
a potent organ of evangelical propaganda had been developing 
just beyond the confines of France in the town of Geneva. 

In its long struggle with its bishops and with the dukes of 
Savoy, Geneva had turned to her neighbours for aid, especi- 
ally to Bern, with which an alliance was concluded Qeaeva 
in 1526. Two years later Bern formally sanctioned becomes 
the innovations advocated by the Protestant preachers, * centre 
and although predominantly German assumed the of P™P* m 
r61e of protector of the reform party in the Pays 
de Vaud and Geneva. William Farel, one of the group of 
Meaux, who had fled to Switzerland and had been active in 
the conversion of Bern, went to Geneva in 1531. With the 
protection afforded him and his companions by Bern, and 
the absence of well-organized opposition on the part of the 
Roman Catholics, the new doctrines rapidly spread, and by 
1535 Farel was preaching in St Pierre itself. After a public 
disputation in which the Catholics were weakly represented, 
and a popular demonstration in favour of the new doctrines, 
the council of Geneva rather reluctantly sanctioned the 
abolition of the Mass. Meanwhile Bern had declared war 
on the duke of Savoy, and had not only conquered a great 
part of the Pays de Vaud, including the important town of 
Lausanne, but had enabled Geneva to win its complete inde- 
pendence. In the same year (September 1536), as Calvin 
was passing through the town on his way back to Strassburg 
after a short visit in Italy, he was seized by Farel and induced 
most reluctantly to remain and aid him in thoroughly carrying 
out the Reformation in a city in which the conservative senti- 
ment was still very strong. As there proved to be a large 
number in the town councils who did not sympathize with the 
plans of organization recommended by Calvin and his col- 
leagues, the town preachers were, after a year and a half of 
unsatisfactory labour, forced to leave Geneva. For three years 
Calvin sojourned in Germany; he signed the Augsburg Con- 
fession, gained the friendship of Melanchthon and other leading 
reformers, and took part in the religious conferences of the 
period. In 1541 he was induced with great difficulty to sur- 
render once more his hopes of leading the quiet life of a scholar, 
and to return again to Geneva (September 1541), where he 
spent the remaining twenty-three years of his life. His ideal 
was to restore the conditions which he supposed prevailed 
during the first three centuries of the Church's existence; but 
the celebrated Ecclesiastical Ordinances adopted by the town 
in 1 541 and revised in 1561 failed fully to realize his ideas, which 
find a more complete exemplification in the regulations govern- 
ing the French Church later. He wished for the complete 
independence and self-government of the Church, with the 
right of excommunication to be used against the ungodly. The 
Genevan town councils were quite ready to re-enact all the old 
police regulations common in that age in regard to excessive 
display, dancing, obscene songs, &c. It was arranged too that 
town government should listen to the " Consistory," made up of 
the " Elders," but the Small Council was to choose the members 
of the Consistory, two of whom should belong to the Small 
Council, four to the Council of Sixty, and six to the Council of 
Two Hundred. One of the four town syndics was to preside over 
its sessions. The Consistory was thus a sort of committee of 



20 



REFORMATION, THE 



the councils, and it had no power to inflict civil punishment on 
offenders. Thus " we ought," as Lindsay says, " to see in the 
disciplinary powers and punishments of the Consistory of 
Geneva not an exhibition of the working of the Church organ- 
ized on the principles of Calvin, but the ordinary procedure of 
the town council of a medieval city. Their petty punishments 
and their minute interferences with private life are only special 
instances of what was common to all municipal rule in the 16th 
century." This is true of the supreme crime of heresy, which 
in the notorious case of Servetus was only an expression of rules 
laid down over a thousand years earlier in the Theodosian Code. 
Geneva, however, with its most distinguished of Protestant theo- 
logians, became a school of Protestantism, which sent its trained 
men into the Netherlands, England and Scotland, and especially 
across the border into France. It served too as a place of refuge 
for thousands of the persecuted adherents of its heliefs. Calvin's 
book furnished the Protestants not only with a compact and 
admirably written handbook of theology, vigorous and clear, 
but with a system of Church government and a code of morals. 

After the death of Francis I., his successor, Henry II., set 
himself even more strenuously to extirpate heresy; a special 
orivi i branch of the parlement of Paris — the so-called 
Hugueaot Chambre ardente (q.v.) — for the trial of heresy cases 
party was established, and the fierce edict of Chateaubriand 

uader (June 155 1) explicitly adopted many of the expedients 

enry . ^ ^ p a p a j inquisition. While hundreds were im- 
prisoned or burned, Protestants seemed steadily to increase in 
numbers, and finally only the expostulations of the parlement of 
Paris prevented the king from introducing the Inquisition in 
France in accordance with the wishes of the pope and the 
cardinal of Lorraine. The civil tribunals, however, practically 
assumed the functions of regular inquisitorial courts, in spite 
of the objections urged by the ecclesiastical courts. Notwith- 
standing these measures for their extermination, the French 
Protestants were proceeding to organize a church in accordance 
with the conceptions of the early Christian communities as 
Calvin described them in his Institutes. Beginning with Paris, 
some fifteen communities with their consistories were established 
in Ffench towns between 1555 and 1560. In spite of continued 
persecution a national synod was assembled in Paris in 1559, 
representing at least twelve Protestant churches in Normandy 
and central France, which drew up a confession of faith and a 
book of church discipline. It appears to have been from France 
rather than from Geneva that the Presbyterian churches of 
Holland, Scotland and the United States derived their form of 
gowrnment. A reaction against the extreme severity of the 
king's courts became apparent at this date. Du Bourg and 
others ventured warmly to defend the Protestants in the parle- 
ment of Paris in the very presence of the king and of the cardinal 
of Lorraine. The higher aristocracy began now to be attracted 
by the new doctrines, or at least repelled by the flagrant power 
enjoyed by the Guises during the brief reign of Francis II. 
( 1 550-1 560). Protestantism was clearly becoming inextricably 
associated with politics of a very intricate sort. The leading 
members of the Bourbon branch of the royal family, and Gaspard 
de Coligny; admiral of France, were conspicuous among the 
converts to Calvinism. Persecution was revived by the Guises; 
Du Bourg, the brave defender of the Protestants, was burned 
as a heretic; yet Calvin could in the closing years of his life 
form a cheerful estimate that some three hundred thousand of 
his countrymen had been won over to his views. The death of 
Francis II. enabled Catherine de' Medici, the queen mother, to 
assert herself against the Guises, and become the regent of her 
ten-year-old son Charles IX. A meeting of the States General 
had already been summoned to consider the state of the realm. 
Michel de FH6pital, the chancellor, who opened the assembly, 
was an advocate of toleration; he deprecated the abusive use 
of the terms " Lutherans," " Papists " and " Huguenots," and 
advocated deferring all action until a council should have been 
called. The deputies of the clergy were naturally conservative, 
but advocated certain reforms, an abolition of the Concordat, 
and a re-establishment of the older Pragmatic Sanction. The 



noblesse were divided on the matter of toleration, but the 
cahiers (lists of grievances and suggestions for reform) submitted 
by the Third Estate demanded, besides regular meetings of the 
estates every five years, complete toleration and a reform of the 
Church. This grew a little later into the recommendation that 
the revenues and possessions of the French Church should be 
appropriated by the government, which, after properly sub- 
sidizing the clergy, might hope, it was estimated, that a surplus 
of twenty-two millions of livres would accrue to the State. Two 
hundred and thirty years later this plan was realized in the 
Civil Constitution of the Clergy. The deliberations of 1561 
resulted in the various reforms, the suspension of persecution 
and the liberation of Huguenot prisoners. These were not 
accorded freedom of worship, but naturally took advantage of 
the situation to carry on their services more publicly than ever 
before. An unsuccessful effort was made at the conference of 
Poissy to bring the two religious parties together; Beza had an 
opportunity to defend the Calvinistic cause, and Lainez, the 
general of the Order of Jesus, that of the bishop of Rome. The 
government remained tolerant toward the movement, and in 
January 1562 the Huguenots were given permission to hold 
public services outside the walls of fortified towns and were not 
forbidden to meet in private houses within the walls. Catherine, 
who had promoted these measures, cared nothing for the 
Protestants, but desired the support of the Bourbon princes. 
The country was Catholic, and disturbances inevitably occurred, 
culminating in the attack of the duke of Guise and his troops 
.on the Protestants at Vassy, less than two months after the 
issuing of the edict. 

It is impossible to review here the Wars of Religion which 
distracted France, from the " massacre of Vassy " to the 
publication of the edict of Nantes, thirty-six years Tne 
later. Religious issues became more and more domin- French 
ated by purely political and dynastic ambitions, and Wars of 
the whole situation was constantly affected by the ** eI !?!u n 
policy of Philip II. and the struggle going on in the edict of 
Netherlands. Henry IV. was admirably fitted to Nantes, 
reunite France once more, and, after a superficial 1562 ~ 
conversion to the Catholic faith, to meet the needs of 
his former co-religionists, the Huguenots. The edict of Nantes 
recapitulated and codified the provisions of a series of earlier 
edicts of toleration, which had come with each truce during .the 
previous generation. Liberty of conscience in religious matters 
was secured and the right of private worship to those of the 
" so-called Reformed religion." Public worship was permitted 
everywhere where it had existed in 1 596-1 597, in two places 
within each bailliage and sene'ehausse'e, and in the chateaux of the 
Protestant nobility, with slight restrictions in the case of lower 
nobility. Protestants were placed upon a political equality and 
made eligible to all public offices. To ensure these rights, they 
were left in military control of two hundred towns, including 
La Rochelle, Montauban and Montpellier. Jealous of their 
" sharing the State with the king," Richelieu twenty-five years 
later reduced the exceptional privileges of the Huguenots, and 
with the advent of Louis XIV. they began to suffer renewed 
persecution, which the king at last flattered himself had so far 
reduced their number that in 1685 he revoked the edict of Nantes 
and reduced the Protestants to the status of outlaws. It was 
not until 1786 that they were restored to their civil rights, 
and by the Declaration of the Rights of Man, in 1789, to their 
religious freedom. 

Contemporaneously with the Wars of Religion in France 
*a long and terrible struggle between the king of Spain and his 
Dutch and Belgian provinces had resulted in the The 
formation of a Protestant state — the United Nether- **? Hea 
lands, which was destirled to play an important r61e ^nds^and 
in the history of the Reformed religion. Open both their im- 
to 'German and French influences, the Netherlands portance 
had been the scene of the first executions of Lutherans; j*£^ 
they had been a centre of Anabaptist agitation; but Cal- oftohra- 
vinism finally triumphed in the Confession of Dordrecht, tfon. 
1572, since Calvin's system of church government did not, like 



REFORMATION, THE 



21 



Luther's, imply the sympathy of the civil authorities. Charles V. 
had valiantly opposed the development of heresy in the Nether- 
lands, and nowhere else had there been such numbers of martyrs, 
for some thirty thousand are supposed to have been put to death 
during his reign. Under Philip II, it soon became almost 
impossible to distinguish clearly between the religious issues 
and the resistance to the manifold tyranny of Philip and his 
representatives. William of Orange, who had passed through 
several phases of religious conviction, stood first and foremost 
for toleration. Indeed, Holland became the home of modern 
religious liberty, the haven of innumerable free spirits, and the 
centre of activity of printers and publishers, who asked for no 
other imprimatur than the prospect of intelligent readers. 

It is irripossible to offer any exhaustive classification of 
those who, while they rejected the teachings of the old Church, 
The Ana- refused at the same time to conform to the particular 
baptists, types of Protestantism which had found favour in 
the eyes of the princes and been imposed by them on their 
subjects. This large class of " dissenters " found themselves 
as little at home under a Protestant as under a Catholic 
regime, and have until recently been treated with scant 
sympathy by historians of the Church. Long before the 
Protestant revolt, simple, obscure people, under the influence 
of leaders whose names have been forgotten, lost confidence 
in the official clergy and their sacraments and formed secret 
organizations of which vague accounts are found in the reports 
of the 13th-century inquisitors, Rainerus Sacchoni, Bernard 
Gui, and the rest. Their anti-sacerdotalism appears to have 
been their chief offence, for the inquisitors admit that they were 
puritanically careful in word and conduct, and shunned all 
levity. Similar groups are mentioned in the town chronicles 
of the early 16th century, and there is reason to assume that 
informal evangelical movements were no new things when 
Luther first began to preach. His appeal to the Scriptures 
against the traditions of the Church encouraged a more active 
propaganda on the part of Balthasar Hubmaier, Carlstadt, 
Munzer, Johann Denk (d. 1527) and others, some of whom 
were well-trained scholars capable of maintaining with vigour 
and effect their ideas of an apostolic life as the high road to 
salvation. Munzer dreamed of an approaching millennium on 
earth to be heralded by violence and suffering, but Hubmaier 
and Denk were peaceful evangelists who believed that man's 
will was free and that each had within him an inner light which 
would, if he but followed it, guide him to God. To them 
persecution was an outrage upon Jesus's teachings. Luther 
and his sympathizers were blind to the reasonableness of the 
•fundamental teachings of these "brethren." The idea of 
adult baptism, which had after 1525 become generally accepted 
among them, roused a bitterness which it is rather hard to 
understand nowadays. But it is easy to see that informal 
preaching to the people at large, especially after the Peasant 
Revolt, with which Munzer had been "identified, should have 
led to a general condemnation, under the name " Anabaptist " 
or " Catabaptist," of the heterogeneous dissenters who agreed 
in rejecting the State religion and associated a condemnation 
of infant baptism with schemes for social betterment. The 
terrible events in Minister, which was controlled for a short 
time (1533-34) by a group of Anabaptists under the leadership 
of John of Leiden, the introduction of polygamy (which appears 
to have been a peculiar accident rather than a general principle), 
the speedy capture of the town by an alliance of Catholic and 
Protestant princes, and the ruthless retribution inflicted by 
the victors, have been cherished by ecclesiastical writers as 
a choice and convincing instance of the natural fruits of a 
rejection of infant baptism. Much truer than the common 
estimate of the character of the Anabaptists is that given in 
Sebastian Franck's Chronicle: " They taught nothing but love, 
faith and the crucifixion of the flesh, manifesting patience 
and humility under many sufferings, breaking bread with one 
another in sign of unity and love, helping one another with 
true helpfulness, lending, borrowing, giving, learning to Tiave 
all things in common, calling each other * brother.' " Menno 



Simons (b. circ. 1500) succeeded in bringing the scattered Ana- 
baptist communities into a species of association; he dis- 
couraged the earlier apocalyptic hopes, inculcated non-resist- 
ance, denounced the evils of State control over religious matters, 
and emphasized personal conversion, and adult baptism as its 
appropriate seal. The English Independents and the modern 
Baptists, as well as the Mennonites, may be regarded as the 
historical continuation of lines of development going back 
to the Waldensians and the Bohemian Brethren, and passing 
down through the German, Dutch and Swiss Anabaptists. 

The modern scholar as he reviews the period of the Pro- 
testant Revolt looks naturally, but generally in vain, for those 
rationalistic tendencies which become so clear in the soclalaas 
latter part of the 17th century. Luther found no in- or ami- 
tellectual difficulties in his acceptance and interprcta- Trial- 
tion of the Scriptures as God's word, and in maintain- iaiiaas * 
ing against the Anabaptists the legitimacy of every old custom 
that was not obviously contrary to the Scriptures. Indeed, 
he gloried in the inherent and divine unreasonableness of 
Christianity, and brutally denounced reason as a cunning fool, 
" a pretty harlot." The number of questions which Calvin 
failed to ask or eluded by absolutely irrational expedients frees 
him from any taint of modern rationalism. But in Servetus, 
whose execution he approved, we find an isolated, feeble revolt 
against assumptions which both Catholics and Protestants of 
all shades accepted without question. It is pretty clear that 
the common accounts of the Renaissance and of the revival of 
learning grossly exaggerate the influence of the writers of 
Greece and Rome, for they produced no obvious rationalistic 
movement, as would have been the case had Plato and Cicero, 
Lucretius and Lucian, been taken really seriously. Neo- 
Platonism, which is in some respects nearer the Christian 
patristic than the Hellenic spirit, was as far as the radical 
religious thinkers of the Italian Renaissance receded. The 
only religious movement that can be regarded as even rather 
vaguely the outcome of humanism is the Socinian. Faustus 
Sozzini, a native of Sienna (1530-1603), much influenced by 
his uncle Lelio Sozzini, after a wandering, questioning life, 
found his way to Poland, where he succeeded in uniting the 
various Anabaptist sects into a species of church, the doctrines 
of which are set forth in the Confession of Rakow (near Minsk), 
published in Polish in 1605 and speedily in German and Latin. 
The Latin edition declares that although this new statement of 
the elements of the Christian faith differs from the articles of 
other Christian creeds it is not to be mistaken for a challenge. 
It does not aim at binding the opinions of men or at condemn- 
ing to the tortures of hell j fire those who refus"e ■ to accept it. 
Absit a nobis ea mens, immo amentia. " We have, it is true, 
ventured to prepare a catechism, but we force it on no one; 
we express our opinions, but we coerce no one. It is free to 
every one to form his own conclusions in religious matters; 
and so we do no more than set forth the meaning of divine 
things as they appear to our minds without, however, attacking 
or insulting those who differ from us. This is the golden 
freedom of preaching which the holy words of the New Testa- 
meut so strictly enjoin upon us. . . . Who art thou, miserable 
man, who would smother and extinguish in others the fire of 
God's Spirit which it has pleased him to kindle in them ? " 
The Socinian creed sprang from intellectual rather than re- 
ligious motives. Sufficient reasons could be assigned for 
accepting the New Testament as God's word and Christ as the 
Christian's guide. He was not God, but a divine prophet born 
of a virgin and raised on the third day as the first-fruits of 
them that slept. From the standpoint of the history of enlight- 
enment, as Harnack has observed, " Socinianism with its sys- 
tematic criticism (tentative and imperfect as it may now seem) 
and its rejection of all the assumptions based upon mere 
ecclesiastical tradition, can scarcely be rated too highly. That 
modern Unitarianism is all to be traced back to Sozzini and 
the Rakow Confession need not be assumed. The anti-Trini- 
tarian path was one which opened invitingly before a consider- 
able class of critical minds, seeming as it did to lead out into 



22 REFORMATORY— REFORMED CHURCH IN AMERICA 



a sunny open, remote from the unfathomable depths of mystery 
and clouds of religious emotion which beset the way of the 
sincere Catholic and Protestant alike. 

The effects of the Protestant secession on the doctrines, 
organization and practices of the Roman Catholic Church are 
Th0 difficult to estimate, still more so to substantiate. It 

Catholic is clear that the doctrinal conclusions of the council 
Reformat f Trent were largely determined by the necessity 
t!ottt of condemning Protestant tenets, and that the result 

of the council was to give the Roman Catholic faith a more 
precise form than it would otherwise have had. It is much 
less certain that the disciplinary reforms which the council, 
following the example of its predecessors, re-enacted, owed 
anything to Protestantism, unless indeed the council would have 
shown itself less intolerant in respect to such innovations as the 
use of the vernacular in the services had this not smacked of 
evangelicalism. In the matter of the pope's supremacy, the 
council followed the canon law and Thomas Aquinas, not 
the decrees of the council of Constance. It prepared the way 
for the dogmatic formulation of the plenitude of the papal 
power three centuries later by the council of the Vatican. The 
Protestants have sometimes taken credit to themselves for the 
indubitable reforms in the Roman Catholic Church, which by 
the end of the 16th century had done away with many of the 
crying abuses against which councils and diets had so long been 
protesting. But this conservative reformation had begun 
before Luther's preaching, and might conceivably have followed 
much the same course had his doctrine never found popular 
favour or been ratified by the princes. 

In conclusion, a word may be said of the place of the Re- 
formation in the history of progress and enlightenment. A 
The place " philosopher," as Gibbon long ago pointed out, 
of the w ho asks from what articles of faith above and against 

Reformat reason the early Reformers enfranchised their followers 
history of wm * be surprised at their timidity rather than scandal- 
progress. ized by their freedom. They remained severely 
orthodox in the doctrines of the Fathers — the Trinity, the 
Incarnation, the plenary inspiration of the Bible — and they 
condemned those who rejected their teachings to a hell whose 
fires they were not tempted to extenuate. Although they sur- 
rendered transubstantiation, the loss of one mystery was amply 
compensated by the stupendous doctrines of original sin , 
redemption, faith, grace and predestination upon which they 
founded their theory of salvation. They ceased to appeal to 
the Virgin and saints, and to venerate images and relics, procure 
indulgences and go on pilgrimages, they deprecated the monastic 
life, and no longer nourished faith by the daily repetition of 
miracles, but in the witch persecutions their demonology cost 
the lives of thousands of innocent women. They broke the 
chain of authority, without, however, recognizing the propriety 
of toleration. In any attempt to determine the relative im- 
portance of Protestant and Catholic countries in promoting 
modern progress it must not be forgotten that religion is natur- 
ally conservative, and that its avowed business has never been 
to forward scientific research or political reform. Luther and 
his contemporaries had not in any degree the modern idea of 
progress, which first becomes conspicuous with Bacon and 
Descartes, but believed, on the contrary, that the strangling 
of reason was the most precious of offerings to God. " Free- 
thinker " and " rationalist " have been terms of opprobrium 
whether used by Protestants or Catholics. The pursuit of 
salvation does not dominate by any means the whole life and 
ambition of even ardent believers; statesmen, philosophers, 
men of letters, scientific investigators and inventors have 
commonly gone their way regardless of the particular form of 
Christianity which prevailed in the land in which they lived. 
The Reformation was, fundamentally, then, but one phase, 
if the most conspicuous, in the gradual decline of the majestic 
medieval ecclesiastical State, for this decline has gone on 
in France, Austria, Spain and Italy, countries in which 
the Protestant revolt against the ancient Church ended in 
failure. 



Bibliography. — Reference is made here mainly to works dealing 
with the Reformation as a whole. Only recent books are men- 
tioned, since the older works have been largely superseded owing 
to modern critical investigations: Thomas A. Lindsay, A History 



, ooa), "The Reformation," and vol. iii. (190^), 
of Religion, ' with very full bibliographies; M. Creighton, History 
of the Papacy during the Reformation, 6 vols, (new ed. 1899-1901). 
From a Catholic standpoint: L. Pastor, Geschichte der Papstc 
seit dem Ausgang des Mittelalters (1891 sqq., especially vol. iv. in 
two parts, 1906-7, and vol. v % , 1909). This is in course of publica- 
tion and is being translated into English (8 vols, have appeared, 
1891-1908, covering the period 1305-1521); J. Janssen, History 
of the German People at the Close of the Middle Ages, 12 vols., 1896- 
1907, corresponding to vols, i.-vi. of the German original, in 8 vols., 
edited by Pastor, 1 897-1904. This is the standard Catholic treat- 
ment of the Reformation, and is being supplemented by a series of 
monographs, Erganzungen zu Jans sens Geschichte des deutschen 
Volkes, which have been appearing since 1898 and correspond 
with the Protestant Schriften des Vereins fur Reformations- 
geschichte (1883 sqq.). F. von Bezold, Geschichte der deutschen 
Reformation (1890), an excellent illustrated account; E. Troeltsch, 
Protestantisches Christentum und Kirche der Neuzeit, in the series 
11 Kultur der Gegenwart," Teil i. Abt. 4, i. Halfte, 1905; Charles 
Beard, The Reformation of the Sixteenth Century in its Relation to 
Modern Thought and Knowledge (TheHibbert Lectures for 1883), 
and by the same, Martin Luther p , vol. i. (no more published; 1889); 
A. Harnack, History of Dogma (trans, from the 3rd German edition, 
vol. vii., 1900); A. E. Berger, Die Kultur aufgaben der Reformation 
(2nd ed., 1908); Thudichum, Patosttum una Reformation (1903); 
" Janus," The Pope and the Council (1869), by Dollinger and others, 
a suggestive if not wholly accurate sketch of the papal claims; 
W. Maurenbrecher, Geschichte der Katholischen Reformation, vol. i. 
(no more published) (1880); J. Haller, Papsttum und Kirchenreform, 
vol. i. (1903) relates to the 14th century; J. Kostlin, Martin Luther, 
sein Leben und seine Schriften, new edition by Kawerau, 2 vols., 
1903, the most useful life of Luther ; H. Denifle, Luther und 
Lulnerlum, 2 vols. (1904-6), a bitter but learned arraignment of 
Luther by a distinguished Dominican scholar. H. Boehmer, 
Luther im Lichte der neueren Forschungen (1906), brief and sug- 
gestive. First Principles of the Reformation, the Three Primary 
Works of Dr Martin Luther, edited, by Wace and Buchheim, — an 
English translation of the famous pamphlets of 1520. (J. H. R.*) 

REFORMATORY SCHOOL, an institution for the industrial 
training of juvenile offenders, in which they are lodged, clothed 
and fed, as well as taught. They are to be distinguished from 
" industrial schools," which are institutions for potential and 
not actual delinquents. To reformatory schools in England 
are sent juveniles up to the age of sixteen who have been con- 
victed of an offence punishable with penal servitude or im- 
prisonment. The order is made by the court before which 
they are tried; the limit of detention is the age of nineteen. 
Reformatory schools are regulated by the Children Act 1908, 
which repealed the Reformatory Schools Act 1866, as amended 
by acts of 1872, 1874, 1891, 1893, 1899 and 1901. See further 
Juvenile Offenders. 

REFORMED CHURCHES, the name assumed by those Pro- 
testant bodies who adopted the tenets of Zwingli (and later of 
Calvin), as distinguished from those of the Lutheran or Evangeli- 
cal divines. They are accordingly often spoken of as the Calvin- 
istic Churches, Protestant being sometimes used as a synonym 
for Lutheran. The great difference is in the attitude towards 
the Lord's Supper, the Reformed or Calvinistic Churches re- 
pudiating not only transubstantiation but also the Lutheran 
consubstantiation. They also reject the use of crucifixes and 
other symbols and ceremonies retained by the Lutherans. 

Full details of these divergences are given in M.Schneckenburger, 
Vergleichende Darstellung des lulherischen und reformierten Lehrbe- 
griffs (Stuttgart, 1855); G. B. Winer, Comparative Darstellung 
(Berlin, 1866; Eng. tr., Edinburgh, 1873). See also Reformation; 
Presbyterianism; Cameronians. 

REFORMED CHURCH IN AMERICA, until 1867 called offi- 
cially " The Reformed Protestant Dutch Church in North 
America," and still ^popularly called the Dutch Reformed 
Church, an American Calvinist church, originating with the 
settlers from Holland in New York, New Jersey and Delaware, 
the first permanent settlers of the Reformed faith in the New 
World. Their earliest settlements were at Manhattan, Walla- 
bout and Fort Orange (now Albany), where the West India 
Company formally established the Reformed Church of Holland. 



REFORMED CHURCH IN AMERICA 



23 



Their first minister was Jonas Michaelius, pastor in New 
Amsterdam of the " church in the fort " (now the Collegiate 
Church of New York City). The second domine, Everardus 
Bogardus (d. 1647), migrated to New York in 1633 with Gover- 
nor Wouter van T wilier, with whom he quarrelled continually; 
in the same year a wooden church " in the fort " was built; and 
in 1642 it was succeeded by a stone building. A minister, 
John van Mckclcnburg (Johannes Megapolcnsis) migrated to 
Renssclaerwyck manor in 1642, preached to the Indians — 
probably before any other Protestant minister — and after 1649 
was settled in New Amsterdam. With the access of English 
and French settlers, Samuel Drisius, who preached in Dutch, 
German, English and French, was summoned, and he laboured 
in New Amsterdam and New York from 1652 to 1673. On Long 
Island John T. Polhemus preached at Flatbush in 1654-76. 
During Peter Stuyvesant's governorship there was little toleration 
of other denominations, but the West India Company reversed 
his intolerant proclamations against Lutherans and Quakers. 
About 1659 a French and Dutch church was organized in 
Harlem. The first church in New Jersey, at Bergen, in 1661, 
was quickly followed by others at Hackensack and Passaic. 
After English rule in 1664 displaced Dutch in New York, the 
relations of the Dutch churches there were much less close with 
the state Church -of Holland; and in 1679 (on the request of 
the English governor of New York, to whom the people of 
New Castle appealed) a classis was constituted for the ordination 
of a pastor for the church in New Castle, Delaware. The Dutch 
strongly opposed the establishment of the Church of England, 
and contributed largely toward the adoption (in October 1683) 
of the Charter of Liberties which confirmed in their privileges 
all churches then " in practice " in the city of New York and 
elsewhere in the province, but which was repealed by James II. 
in 1686, when he established the Church of England in New 
York but allowed religious liberty to the Dutch and others. 
The Dutch ministers stood by James's government during 
Leisler's rebellion. Under William III., Governors Sloughter 
and Fletcher worked for a law (passed in 1693 and approved 
in 1697) for the settling of a ministry in New York, Richmond, 
Westchester and Queen's counties; but the Assembly foiled 
Fletcher's purpose of establishing a Church of England clergy, 
although he attempted to construe the act as applying only to 
the English Church. In 1696 the first church charter in New 
York was granted to the Reformed Protestant Dutch Church 
(now the Collegiate Church) of New York City; at this time 
there were Dutch ministers at Albany and Kingston, on Long 
Island and in New Jersey; and for years the Dutch and English 
(Episcopalian) churches alone received charters in New York 
and New Jersey — the Dutch church being treated practically 
as an establishment — and the church of the fort and Trinity 
(Episcopalian; chartered 1697) were fraternally harmonious. 
In 1700 there were twenty-nine Reformed Dutch churches out 
of a total of fifty in New York. During the administration 
of Governor Edward Hyde, Lord Cornbury, many members 
joined the Episcopal Church and others removed to New Jersey. 
The Great Awakening crowned the efforts of Theodore J. 
Frelinghuysen, who had come over as a Dutch pastor in 1720 
and had opposed formalism and preached a revival. The 
Church in America in 1738 asked the Classis of Amsterdam (to 
whose care it had been transferred from the West India Com- 
pany) for the privilege of forming a Coetus or Association with 
power to ordain in America; the Classis, after trying to join 
the Dutch with the English Presbyterian churches, granted 
(1747) a Coetus first to the German and then to the Dutch 
churches, which therefore in September 1754 organized them- 
selves into a classis. This action was opposed by the church 
of New York City, and partly through this difference and 
partly because of quarrels over the denominational control 
of King's College (now Columbia), five members of the Coetus 
seceded, and as the president of the Coetus was one of them 
they took the records with them; they were called the Con- 
ferentie; they organized independently in 1764 and carried on 
a bitter warfare with the Coetus (now more properly called 



the American Classis), which in 1766 (and again in 1770) obtained 
a charter for Queen's (now Rutgers) College at New Brunswick. 
But in 1771-72 through the efforts of John H. Livingston 
( 1 746-182 5) , who had become pastor of the New York City church 
in 1770, on the basis of a plan drafted by the Classis of Amster- 
dam Coetus and Confercntie were reunited with a substantial 
independence of Amsterdam, which was made complete in 
1792 when the Synod (the nomenclature of synod and classis 
had been adopted upon the declaration of American Independ- 
ence) adopted a translation of the eighty-four Articles of Dort 
on Church Order with seventy-three "explanatory articles." 1 
In 1800 there were about forty ministers and one hundred 
churches. In 1819 the Church was incorporated as the Re- 
formed Protestant Dutch Church; and in 1867 the name was 
changed to the Reformed Church in America. Preaching in 
Dutch had nearly ceased in 1820, but about 1846 a new Dutch 
immigration began, especially in Michigan, and fifty years later 
Dutch preaching was common in nearly one-third of the churches 
of the country, only to disappear almost entirely in the next 
decade. Union with other Reformed churches was planned 
in 1743, in 1784, in 1816-20, 1873-78 and 1886, but unsuc- 
cessfully; however, ministers go from one to another charge 
in the Dutch and German Reformed, Presbyterian, and to a less 
degree Congregational churches. 

A conservative secession " on account of Hopkinsian errors " 
in 1822 of six ministers (five then under suspension) organized 
a General Synod and the classes of Hackensack and Union 
(central New York) in 1824; it united with the Christian Re- 
formed Church, established by immigrants from Holland after 
i&3$, to which there was added a fresh American secession 
in 1882 due to opposition (on the part of the secedcrs) to secret 
societies. 

The organization of the Church is: a General Synod (1794); 
the (particular) synods of New York (1800), Albany (1800), Chicago 
(1856) and New Brunswick (1869); classes, corresponding to the 

Crcsbyteries of other Calvinistic^ bodies; and the churches, num- 
ering, in 1906, 659. The agencies of the Church are: the Board 
of Education, privately organized in 1828 and adopted by the 
General Synod in 1831; a Widows' Fund (1837) and a Disabled 
Ministers' Fund; a Board of Publication (1855); a Board of 
Domestic Missions (1831 ; reorganized 1849) with a Church Building 
Fund and a Woman's Executive Committee; a Board of Foreign 
Missions (1832) succeeding the United Missionary Society (1816), 
which included Presbyterian, Dutch Reformed and Associate Re- 
formed Churches, and which was merged (1826) in the American 
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, from which the 
Dutch Church did not entirety separate itself until 1857; and a 
Woman's Board of Foreign Missions (1875). The principal missions 
are in India at Arcot (1854; transferred in 1902 to the Synod of 
S. India) and at Amoy in China (1842) ; and the work of the Church 
in Japan was very successful, especially under Guido Fridolin 
Verbeck* (1830-1898), and 1877 native churches built up_ by Presby- 
terian and Dutch Reformed missionaries were organized as the 
United Church of our Lord Jesus Christ in Japan. There is also 
an Arabian mission, begun privately in 1888 and transferred to the 
Board in 1894. 

The colleges and institutions of learning connected with the Church 
are: Rutgers, already mentioned; Union College (1795), the out- 
growth of Schenectady Academy, founded in 1785 by Dirck Romeyn, 
a Dutch minister; Hope College (1866; coeducational) at Holland, 
Michigan, originally a parochial school (1850) and then (1855) 
Holland Academy; the Theological Seminary at New Brunswick 
(q.v.); and the Western Theological Seminary (1869) at Holland, 
Michigan. 

In 1906 (according to Bulletin 103 (1909)^ of the Bureau of the 
U.S. Census) there were 659 organizations with 773 church edifices 
reported and the total membership was 12^,938. More than one- 
half of this total membership (63,350) was in New York state, the 
'principal home of the first great Dutch immigration; more than 
one-quarter (32,290) was in New Jersey; and the other states were: 
Michigan (11,260), Illinois (4962), Iowa (4835), Wisconsin (2^1 2), 
and Pennsylvania 0979)- The Church was also represented in Minne- 
sota, S. Dakota, Oklahoma, Nebraska, Indiana, Ohio, Kansas, 
N. Dakota, S. Carolina, Washington and Maryland — the order 
being that of rank in number of communicants. 

The Christian Reformed Church, an " old school " secession, had 
in 1906, 174 organizations, 181 churches and a membership of 26,669, 



1 In 1832 the articles of Church government were rearranged and 
in 1872-74 they were amended. 
5 See W. E. Griffis, Verbeck of Japan (New York, 1900). 



24 



REFORMED CHURCH IN THE UNITED STATES 



of which more than one-half (H.779) was in Michigan, where many 
of the immigrants who came after 1835 belonged to the seces- 
sion church in Holland. There were 2990 in Iowa, 2392 in New 
Jersey, 2332 in Illinois, and smaller numbers in Wisconsin, Indiana, 
Minnesota, S. Dakota, Ohio, New York, Washington, Kansas 
Massachusetts, Montana, N. Dakota, New Mexico, Nebraska and 
Colorado. M , . . ,. T __ . 

See D. D. Demarest, The Reformed Church tn America (New York, 
1889) ; E. T. Corwin, The Manual of the Reformed Church tn America 
{ibid., 4th ed., 1902), his sketch of the history of the Church in vol. 
viii. {ibid., 1895) of the American Church History Series, and his 
Ecclesiastical Records of the State of New York (Albany, 1901 sqq.), 
published by the State of New York. 

REFORMED CHURCH IN THE UNITED STATES, a 

German Calvinistic church in America, commonly called the 
German Reformed Church. It traces its origin to the great 
German immigration of the 17 th century, especially to 
Pennsylvania, where, although the German Lutherans afterwards 
outnumbered them, the Reformed element was estimated in 
1730 to be more than half the whole number of Germans in the 
colony. In 1709 more than 2000 Palatines emigrated to New 
York with their pastor, Johann Friedrich Hager (d. c. 1723), who 
laboured in the Mohawk Valley. A church in Germantown, 
Virginia, was founded about 17 14. Johann Philip Boehm 
(d. 1749), a school teacher from Worms, although not ordained, 
preached after 1725 to congregations at Falckner's Swamp, 
Skippack, and White Marsh, Pennsylvania, and in 1729 he was 
ordained by Dutch Reformed ministers in New York. Georg 
Michael Weiss (c. 1700-c. 1762), a graduate of Heidelberg, 
ordained and sent to America by the Upper Consistory of the 
Palatinate in 1727, organized a church in Philadelphia; preached 
at Skippack; worked in Dutchess and Schoharie counties, New 
York, in 1731-46; and then returned to his old field in 
Pennsylvania. Johann Heinrich Goetschius was pastor 
(c. 1731-38) of ten churches in Pennsylvania, and was ordained 
by the Presbyterian Synod of Philadelphia in 1737. A part of 
his work was undertaken by Johann Conrad Wirtz, who 
was ordained by the New Brunswick (New Jersey) Presbytery 
in 1750, and in 1761-63 was pastor at York, Pennsylvania. 
A church was built in 1736 at Lancaster, Pennsylvania, where 
Johann Bartholomaeus Rieger (1707-1769), who came from 
Germany with Weiss on his return in 1731, had preached for 
several years. Michael Schlatter (17 16-1790), a Swiss of St 
Gall, sent to America in 1746 by the Synods (Dutch Reformed) 
of Holland, immediately convened Boehm, Weiss and Rieger 
in Philadelphia, and with them planned a Coetus, which first 
met in September 1747; in 1751 he presented the cause of the 
Coetus in Germany and Holland, where he gathered funds; in 
1752 came back to America with six ministers, one of whom, 
William Stoy (1 726-1801), was an active opponent of the 
Coetus and of clericalism after 1772. Thereafter Schlatter's 
work was in the charity schools of Pennsylvania, which the 
people thought were tinged with Episcopalianism. Many 
churches and pastors were independent of the Coetus, notably 
John Joachim Zubly (1724-1781), of St Gall, who migrated to 
S. Carolina in 1726, and was a delegate to the Continental 
Congress from Georgia, but opposed independence and was 
banished from Savannah in 1777. Within the Coetus there were 
two parties. Of the Pietists of the second class one of the 
leaders was Philip William Otterbein (1 726-1813), born in 
Dillenburg, Nassau, whose system of class-meetings was the 
basis of a secession from which grew the United Brethren in 
Christ, commonly called the "New Reformed Church," organized 
in 1800. During the War of Independence the Pennsylvania, 
members of the Church were mostly attached to the American 
cause, and Nicholas Herkimer and Baron von Steuben were 
both Reformed; but in New York and in the South there were 
many German Loyalists. 

Franklin College was founded by Lutherans and Reformed, 
with much outside help, notably that of Benjamin Franklin, 
at Lancaster, Pennsylvania, in 1787. 

The Coetus had actually assumed the power of ordination 
in 1772 and formally assumed it in 1791; in 1792 a synodical 
constitution was prepared; and in 1793 the first independent 



synod met in Lancaster and adopted the constitution, thus 
becoming independent of Holland. Its churches numbered 
178, and there were about 15,000 communicants. The strongest 
churches were those of Philadelphia, Lancaster and Germantown 
in Pennsylvania, and Frederick in Maryland. The German 
Reformed churches in Lunenburg county, Nova Scotia, became 
Presbyterian in 1837; a German church in Waldoboro, Maine, 
after a century, became Congregational in 1850. The New 
York churches became Dutch Reformed. The New Jersey 
churches rapidly fell away, becoming Presbyterian, Dutch 
Reformed, or Lutheran. In Virginia many churches became 
Episcopalian and others United Brethren. By 1825, 13 Re- 
formed ministers were settled W. of the AUeghanies. The 
Synod in 1819 divided itself into eight Classes. In 1824 the 
Classis of Northampton, Pennsylvania (13 ministers and 80 
congregations), became the Synod of Ohio, the parent Synod 
having refused to allow the Classis to ordain. In 1825 there 
were 87 ministers, and in the old Synod about 23,300 com- 
municants. 

A schism over the establishment of a theological seminary 
resulted in the organization of a new synod of the " Free German 
Reformed Congregations of Pennsylvania," which returned to 
the parent synod in 1837. 

John Winebrenner (q.v.), pastor in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, 
left the Church in 1828, and in 1830 organized the " Church of 
God "; his main doctrinal difference with the Reformed Church 
was on infant baptism. 

In 1825 the Church opened a theological seminary at Carlisle, 
Pennsylvania, affiliated with Dickinson College. James Ross 
Reily (1 788-1844) travelled in Holland and Germany, collecting 
money and books for the seminary. It was removed in 1829 
to York, where an academy was connected with it; in 1835 
the academy (which in 1836 became Marshall College) and in 
1837 the seminary removed to Mercersburg, where, in 1840, 
John W. Nevin (q.v.) became its president, and with Philip 
Schaff (q.v.) founded the Mercersburg theology, which lost to 
the Church many who objected to Nevin's (and SchafFs) 
Romanizing tendencies. The seminary was removed in 187 1 
from Mercersburg to Lancaster, whither the college had gone 
in 1853 to form, with Franklin College, Franklin and Marshall 
College. 

In 1842 the Western Synod (i.e. the Synod of Ohio) adopted 
the constitution of the Eastern, and divided into classes. It 
founded in 1850 a theological school and Heidelberg University 
at Tiffin, Ohio. The Synods organized a General Synod in 
1863. New German Synods were: that of the North-West 
(1867), organized at Fort Wayne, Ind.; that of the East (1875), 
organized at Philadelphia; and the Central Synod (1881), 
organized at Galion, Ohio. New English Synods were: that of 
Pittsburg (1870); that of the Potomac (1873); and that of the 
Interior (1887), organized at Kansas City, Missouri. In 1894 
there were eight district synods. 

After a long controversy over a liturgy (connected in part 
with the Mercersburg controversy) a Direclory of Worship was 
adopted in 1887. 

The principal organizations of the Church are: the Board of 
Publication (1844); the Society for the Relief of Ministers and then- 
Widows (founded in 1755 by the Pennsylvania Coetus; incorporated 
in 1810; transferred to the Synod in 1833); a Board of Domestic 
Missions (1826); a Board of Foreign Missions (1838; reorganized 
in 1873), which planted a mission in Japan (1879), now a part of 
the Union Church of Japan, and one in China (1900). The Church 
has publishing houses in Philadelphia (replacing that of Chambers- 
burg, Pa., founded in 1840 and destroyed in July 1864 by the 
Confederate army) and in Cleveland, Ohio. 

Colleges connected with the Church, besides the seminary^ at 
Lancaster, Franklin and Marshall College and Heidelberg University, 
are: Catawba College (1851) at Newton, North Carolina; and Ursinus 
College (1869), founded by the Low Church wing, at Collegeville, 
Pennsylvania, which had, until 1908, a theological seminary, then 
removed to Dayton, Ohio, where it united with Heidelberg 
Theological Seminary (until 1908 at Tiffin) to form the Central 
Theological Seminary. 



In 1906, according to Bulletin 103 (1909) of the Bureau of the 
United States Census, the Church had 1736 organizations in the 



REFORMED EPISCOPAL CHURCH— REFRACTION 



25 



United States f> 1740 churches and 292,654 communicants, of whom 
177,270 were in Pennsylvania, and about one-sixth (50,732) were 
in Ohio. Other states in which the Church had communicants 
were: Maryland (13,442), Wisconsin (8386), Indiana (8289), New 
York (5700), North "Carolina (4718), Iowa (3692), Illinois (2652), 
Virginia (2288), Kentucky (2101), Michigan (1666), Nebraska (1616), 
and (less than 1500 in each of the following arranged in rank) 
S. Dakota, Missouri, New Jersey, Connecticut, Kansas, W. Virginia. 
N. Dakota, Minnesota, District of Columbia, Oregon, Massachusetts, 
Tennessee, California, Colorado, Arkansas and Oklahoma. 

See James L Good, History of the Reformed Church in the United 
States, 1725-1792 (Reading, Pa., 1899), and Historical Handbook 
(Philadelphia, 1902); and the sketch by Joseph Henry Dubbs in 
vol. viii. (New York, 1895) of the American Church History 
Series. 

REFORMED EPISCOPAL CHURCH, a Protestant community 
in the United States of America, dating from December 1873. 
The influence of the Tractarian movement began to be felt at 
an early date in the Episcopal Church of the United States, and 
the ordination of Arthur Carey in New York, July 1843, a 
clergyman who denied that there was any difference in points of 
faith between the Anglican and the Roman Churches and con- 
sidered the Reformation an unjustifiable act, brought into 
relief the antagonism between Low Church and High Church, 
a struggle which went on for a generation with increasing 
bitterness. The High Church party lost no opportunity of 
arraigning any Low Churchman who conducted services in 
non-episcopal churches, and as the Triennial Conference gave 
no heed to remonstrances on the part of these ecclesiastical 
offenders they came to the conclusion that they must either crush 
their consciences or seek relief in separation. The climax was 
reached when George D. Cummins (18 2 2-1 87 6), assistant bishop 
of Kentucky, was angrily attacked for officiating at the united 
communion service held at the meeting of the Sixth General 
Conference of the Evangelical Alliance in New York, October 
1873. This prelate resigned his charge in the Episcopal Church 
on November nth, and a month later, with seven other clergy- 
men and a score of laymen, constituted the Reformed Episcopal 
Church. Cummins was chosen as presiding officer of the new 
body, and consecrated Charles E. Cheney (b. 1836), rector of 
Christ Church, Chicago, to be bishop. The following Declaration 
of Principles (here abridged) was promulgated: — 

I. An expression of belief in the Bible as the Word of God, and 
thesole rule of faith and practice, in the Apostles' Creed, in the 
divine institution of the two sacraments and in the doctrines of 
grace substantially as set out in the 39 Articles. 

II. The recognition of Episcopacy not as of divine right but 
as a very ancient and desirable form of church polity. 

III. An acceptance of the Prayer Book as revised by the General 
Convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church in 1785, with 

•liberty to revise it as may seem most conducive to the edification 
of the people. 

IV. A condemnation of certain positions, viz. v— 

(a) That the Church of God exists only in one form of ecclesi- 

astical polity. 

(b) That Christian ministers as distinct from all believers 

have any special priesthood. 

(c) That the Lord s Table is an altar on which the body and 

blood of Christ are offered anew to the Father. 

(d) That the presence of Christ is a material one. 

(e) That Regeneration is inseparably connected with 

Baptism. 

The Church recognizes no orders of ministry, presbyters and 
deacons; the Episcopate is an office, not an order, the bishop 
being the chief presbyter, primus inter pares. There are some 
7 bishops, 8s clergy and about 9500 communicants. £1600 
annually is raised for foreign missionary work in India. The 
Church was introduced into England in 1877, and has in 
that country a presiding bishop and about 20 organized congrega- 
tions. The Church has a theological seminary in Philadelphia. 

REFRACTION (Lat. refringere, to break open or apart), in 
physics, the change in the direction of a wave of light, heat or 
sound which occurs when such a wave passes from one medium 
into another of different density. 

I. Refraction of Light 
When a ray of light traversing a homogeneous medium falls 
on the bounding surface of another transparent homogeneous 



medium, it is found that the direction of the transmitted ray 
in the second medium is different from that of the incident 
ray; in other words, the ray is refracted or bent at the 
point of incidence. The laws governing refraction are: 
(1) the refracted and incident rays are coplanar with the 
normal to the refracting surface at the point of incidence, 
and (2) the ratio of the sines of the angles between the 
normal and the incident and refracted rays is constant for the 
two media, but depends on the nature of the light employed, 
i.e. on its wave length. This constant is called the relative 
refractive index of the second medium, and may be denoted 
by pah, the suffix ab signifying that the light passes from 
medium a to medium b; similarly ii ha denotes the relative 
refractive index of a with regard to b. The absolute refractive 
index is the index when the first medium is a vacuum. Ele- 
mentary phenomena in refraction, such as the apparent bending 
of a stick when partially immersed in water, were observed in 
very remote times, but the laws, as stated above, were first 
grasped in the iyth century by W. Snell and published by 
Descartes, the full importance of the dependence of the refractive 
index on the nature of the light employed being first thoroughly 
realized by Newton in his famous prismatic decomposition of 
white light into a coloured spectrum. Newton gave a theor- 
etical interpretation of these laws on the basis of his corpuscular 
theory, as did also Huygens on the wave theory (see Light, II. 
Theory of). In this article we only consider refractions at 
plane surfaces, refraction at spherical surfaces being treated 
under Lens. The geometrical theory will* be followed, the 
wave theory being treated in Light, Diffraction and Dis- 
persion. 

Refraction at a Plane Surface. — Let LM (fig. 1) Jbe the surface 





P 




E 




/ A 




y& 


L 








V b k 


(yty/y/s&//M'/$A>'J^p//s 




R/Q 







dividing two homogeneous media A and B; let 10 be a ray in 
the first medium incident on LM at O, and let OR be the refracted 
ray. Draw the normal POQ. Then by Snell's law we have 
invariably sin^ IOP/sin QOR=ju ab . Hence if two of these 
quantities be given the third can be calculated. The commonest 
question is: Given the incident ray and the refractive index to 
construct the refracted ray. A simple construction is to take 
along the incident ray 01, unit distance OC, and a distance OD 
equal to the refractive index in the same units. Draw CE 
perpendicular to LM, and draw an arc with centre O and radius 
OD, cutting CE in E. Then EO produced downwards is the 
refracted ray. The proof is left to the reader. 

In the figure the given incident ray is assumed to be passing 
from a less dense to a denser medium, and it is seen by the con- 
struction or by examining the formula sin = sin a/p that for all 
values of a there is a corresponding value of 0. Consider the 
case when the light passes from a denser to a less dense medium. 
In the equation sin 0=sin a/n we have in this case ju<i. Now 
if sin a</i, we have sin a//i< 1, and hence is real. If sin a^ju, then 
sin /5=i, i.e. £ — 90°; in other words, the refracted ray in the 
second medium passes parallel to and grazes the bounding surface. 
The an^le of incidence, which is given by sin £ = i/p, is termed 
the critical angle. For greater values it is obvious that sin a/ju>i 
and there is no refraction into the second medium, the rays being 
totally reflected back into the first medium; this is called total 
internal reflection. 

Images produced^ by Refraction at Plane Surfaces. — If a luminous 

Coint be situated in a medium separated from one of less density 
y a plane surface, the ray normal to this surface will be unre- 
fracted, whilst the others will undergo refraction according to 
their angles of emergence. If the rays in the less dense medium 
be produced into the denser medium, they envelop a caustic, but 
by restricting ourselves to a small area about the normal ray it 
is seen that they intersect this ray in a point which is the geometrical 



26 



REFRACTION 



image of the luminous source. The position of this point can be 
easily determined. If / be the distance of the source below the 
surface, /' the distance of the image, and ju the refractive index, 
then /'=//ju. This theory provides a convenient method for 
determining the refractive index of a plate. A micrometer 
microscope, with vertical motion, is focused on a scratch on the 
surface of its stage; the plate, which has a fine scratch on its 
upper surface, is now introduced, and the microscope is successively 
focused on the scratch on the stage as viewed through the plate, 
and on the scratch on the plate. The difference between the first 
and third readings gives the thickness of the plate, corresponding 
to / above, and between the second and third readings the depth 
of the image, corresponding to /'. 

Refraction by a Prism. — In optics a prism is a piece of trans- 
parent material bounded by two plane faces which meet at a 
definite angle, called the refracting angle of the prism, in a straight 
line called the edge of the prism; a section perpendicular to the 
edge is called a principal section. Parallel rays, refracted succes- 
sively at the two faces, emerge from the prism as a system of 
parallel rays, but the direction is altered by an amount called 
the deviation. The deviation depends on the angles of incidence 
and emergence; but, since the course of a ray may always be 
reversed, there must be a stationary value, either a maximum 
or minimum, when the ray traverses the prism symmetrically, 
i.e. when the angles of incidence and emergence are equal. As a 
matter of fact, it is a minimum, and the position is called the 
angle of minimum deviation. The relation between the minimum 
deviation D, the angle of the prism t, and the refractive index 
fx is found as follows. Let in fig. 2, PQRS be the course of the 



S graduated directly in refractive indices. The reading is effected 
by a lens L. Beneath the prisms is a mirror for reflecting light 




ray through the prism ; the internal angles <f>\ ty' each equal 
\i, and the angles of incidence and emergence <f>, $ are each equal 
and connected with <f>' by Snell's law, i.e. sin<£ = ju sin<£'. Also the 
deviation D is 2 (<£— <£')• Hence jLt = sin 0/sin <£' = sinj (D+t)/sinJ*\ 

Refractometers. — Instruments for determining the refractive 
indices of media are termed refractometers. 

The simplest are really spectrometers, consisting of a glass 
prism, usually hollow and fitted with accurately parallel glass 
sides, mounted on a table which carries a fixed collimation tube 
and a movable observing tube, the motion of the latter being 
recorded" on a graduated circle. The collimation tube has a 
narrow adjustable elit at its outer end and a lens at the nearer 
end, so that the light leaves the tube as a parallel beam. The 
refracting angle of the prism, i in our previous notation, is deter- 
mined by placing the prism with its refracting edge towards the 
collimator, and observing when the reflections of the slit in the 
two prism faces coincide with the cross- wires in the observing 
telescope; half the angle between these two positions gives i. 
To determine the position of minimum deviation, or D, the prism 
is removed, and the observing telescope is brought into line with 
the slit; in this position the graduation is read. The prism is 
replaced, and the telescope moved until it catches the refracted 
rays. The prism is now turned about a vertical axis until a 
position is found when the telescope has to be moved towards the 
collimator in order to catch the rays; this operation sets the prism 
at the angle of minimum deviation. The refractive index ju is 
calculated from the formula given above. 

More readily manipulated and of superior accuracy are refracto- 
meters depending on total reflection. The Abbe refractomcter 
(fig- 3) essentially consists of a double Abbe prism AB to contain 
the substance to be experimented with; and a telescope F to ob- 
serve the border line of the total reflection. The prisms, which are 
right-angled and made of the same flint glass, are mounted in a 
hinged frame such that the lower prism, which is used for purposes 
of illumination, can be locked so that the hypothenuse faces are 
distant by about 0*15 mm. : or rotated away from the upper prism. 
The double prism is used in examining liquids, a few drops being 
placed between the prisms; the single prism is used when solids 
or plastic bodies are employed. The mount is capable of rotation 
about a horizontal axis by an alidade /. The telescope is provided 
with a reticule, which can be brought into exact coincidence 
with the observed border line, and is rigidly fastened to a sector 




Fig. 3. 

into the apparatus. To use the apparatus, the liquid having been 
inserted between the prisms, or the solid attached by its own 
adhesiveness or by a drop of monobromnaphthalene to the upper 
rjrism, the prism case is rotated until the field of view consists of a 
light and dark portion, and the border line is now brought into 
coincidence with the reticule of the telescope. In using a lamp 
or dayjight this border is coloured, and hence a compensator, 
consisting of two equal Amici prisms, is placed between the 
objective and the ^ prisms. These Amici prisms can be rotated, 
in opposite directions, until they produce a dispersion opposite 
in sign to that originally seen, and hence the border line now 
appears perfectly sharp and colourless. When at zero the alidade 
corresponds to a refractive index of 1*3, and any other reading 
gives the corresponding index correct to about 2 units in the 4th 
decimal place. Since temperature markedly affects the refractive 
index, this apparatus is provided with a device for heating the prisms. 
Figs. 4 and 5 show the course of the rays when a solid and liquid 




Fig. 5- 



are being experimented with. Dr R. Wollny's butter refracto- 
mcter, also made by Zeiss, is constructed similarly to Abbe's 
form, with the exception that the prism casing is rigidly attached 
to the telescope, and the observation made by noting the point where 
the border line intersects an appropriately graduated scale in the 
focal plane of the tele'scopc objective, fractions being read by a 
micrometer screw attached to the objective. This apparatus is 
afco provided with an arrangement for heating. 

This method of reading is also employed in Zeiss's " dipping 
refractometer " (fig. 6). This instrument consists of a telescope R 
having at its lower end a prism P with a refracting angle of 63 °, 
above which and below the objective is a movable compensator A 
for purposes of annulling the dispersion about the border line. In 



REFRACTION 



27 



the focal plane of the objective O there is a scale Sc, exact reading 
being made by a micrometer Z. If a large quantity of liquid be 




Fig. 6. — Zeiss *s Dipping Refractometer. 



available it is sufficient to dip the refractometer perpendicularly 
into a beaker containing the liquid and to transmit light into the 
instrument by means of a mirror. If only a smaller quantity be 
available, it is enclosed in a metal beaker M, which forms an exten- 
sion of the instrument, and the liquid is retained there by a plate D. 
The^ instrument is now placed in a trough B, containing water and 
having one side of ground glass G; light is reflected into the 
refractometer by means of a mirror S outside this trough. An 
accuracy of 3-7 units in the 5th decimal place is obtainable. 

The Pulfrich refractometer is also largely used, especially for 
liquids. It consists essentially of a right-angled glass prism placed 
on a metal foundation with the faces at right angles horizontal 
and vertical, the hypothenuse face being on the support. The 
horizontal face is fitted with a small cylindrical vessel to hold the 
liquid. Light is led to^ the prism at grazing incidence by means 
-of a collimator, and is refracted through the vertical face, the 
deviation being observed by a telescope rotating about a graduated 
circle. From this the refractive index is readily calculated if the 
refractive index of the prism for the light used be known: a fact 
supplied by the maker. The instrument is also available for 
determining the refractive index of isotropic solids. A little of 
the solid is placed inthe vessel and a mixture of monobromnaph- 
thalene and acetone (in which the solid must be insoluble) is added, 
and adjustment made by adding either one or other liquid until 
the border line appears sharp, t.e. until the liquid has the same 
index as the solid. 

The Herbert Smith refractometer (fig. 7) is especially suitable 
for determining the refractive index of gems, a constant which is 




most valuable in distinguishing the precious stones. It consists 
of a hemisphere of very dense glass, having its plane surface fixed 



at a certain angle to the axis of the instrument. Light is admitted 
by a window on the under side, which is inclined at the same angle, 
but in the opposite sense, to the axis. The light on emerging from 
the^ hemisphere is received by a convex lens, in the focal plane of 
which is a scale graduated to read directly in refractive indices. 
The light then traverses a positive eye-piece. To use the instru- 
ment for a gem, a few drops of methylene iodide (the refractive 
index of which may be raised to 1-800 by dissolving sulphur in.it) 
are placed on the plane surface of the hemisphere and a facet of 
the stone then brought into contact with the surface. If mono- 
chromatic light be used {i.e. the D line of the sodium flame) the 
field is sharply divided into a light and a dark portion, and the posi- 
tion of the line of demarcation on the scale immediately gives the 
refractive index. It is necessary for the liquid to have a higher 
refractive index than the crystal, and also that there is close con- 
tact between the facet and the lens. The range of the instrument 
is between 1-400 and 1-760, the results being correct to two units 
in the third decimal place if sodium light be used. (C. E.*) 

II. Double Refraction 

That a stream of light on entry into certain media can give 
rise to two refracted pencils was discovered in the case of Iceland 
spar by Erasmus Bartholinus, who found that one pencil had 
a direction given by the ordinary law of refraction, but that the 
other was bent in accordance with a new law that he was 
unable to determine. This law was discovered about eight 
years later by Christian Huygens. According to Huygens* 
fundamental principle, the law of refraction is determined by 
the form and orientation of the wave-surface in the crystal — 
the locus of points to which a disturbance emanating from a 
luminous point travels in unit time. In the, case of a doubly 
refracting medium the wave-surface must have two sheets, 
one of which is spherical, if one of the pencils obey in all cases 
the ordinary law of refraction. Now Huygens observed that a 
natural crystal of spar behaves in precisely the same way which- 
ever pair of faces the light passes through, and inferred from 
this fact that the second sheet of the wave-surface must be a 
surface of revolution round a b'ne equally inclined to the faces 
of the rhomb, i.e. round the axis of the crystal. He accordingly 
assumed it to be a spheroid, and finding that refraction in the 
direction of the axis was the same for both streams, he concluded 
that the sphere and the spheroid touched one another in the axis. 

So far as his experimental means permitted, Huygens veri- 
fied the law of refraction deduced from this hypothesis, but its 
correctness remained unrecognized until the measures of W. H. 
Wollaston in 1802 and of E. T. Malus in 1810. More recently 
its truth has been established with far more perfect optical 
appliances by R. T. Glazebrook, Ch. S. Hastings and others. 

In the case of Iceland spar and several other crystals the 
extraordinarily refracted stream is refracted away from the 
axis, but Jean Baptiste Biot in 1814 discovered that in many 
cases the reverse occurs, and attributing the extraordinary 
refractions to forces that act as if they emanated from the axis, 
he called crystals of the latter kind " attractive," those of the 
former " repulsive." They are now termed " positive " and 
" negative " respectively; and Huygens* law applies to both 
classes, the spheroid being prolate in the case of positive, and 
oblate in the case of negative crystals. It was at first supposed 
that Huygens 1 law applied to all doubly refracting media. Sir 
David Brewster, however, in 181 5, while examining the rings 
that are seen round the optic axis in polarized light, discovered 
a number of crystals that possess two optic axes. He showed, 
moreover, that such crystals belong to the rhombic, monoclinic 
and anorthic (triclinic) systems, those of the tetragonal and 
hexagonal systems being uniaxal, and those of the cubic system 
being optically isotropic. 

Huygens found in the course of his researches that the streams 
that had traversed a rhomb of Iceland spar had acquired new 
properties with respect to transmission through a second 
crystal. This phenomenon is called polarization (?.v.), and the 
waves are said to be polarized — the ordinary in its principal 
plane and the extraordinary in a plane perpendicular to its 
principal plane, the principal plane of a wave being the plane 
containing its normal and the axis of the crystal. From the 
facts of polarization Augustin Jean Fresnel deduced that the 



28 



REFRACTION 



vibrations in plane polarized light are rectilinear and in the 
plane of the wave, and arguing from the symmetry of uniaxal 
crystals that vibrations perpendicular to the axis are propa- 
gated with the same speed in all directions, he pointed out that 
this would explain the existence of an ordinary wave, and the 
relation between its speed and that of the extraordinary wave. 
From these ideas Fresnel was forced to the conclusion, that he 
at once verified experimentally, that in biaxal crystals there is 
no spherical wave, since there is no single direction round which 
such crystals are symmetrical; and, recognizing the difficulty of 
a direct determination of the wave-surface, he attempted to 
represent the laws of double refraction by the aid of a simpler 
surface. 

The essential problem is the determination of the propaga- 
tional speeds of plane waves as dependent upon the directions 
of their normals. These being known, the deduction of the 
wave-surface follows at once, since it is to be regarded as the 
envelope at any subsequent time of all the plane waves that at 
a given instant may be supposed to pass through a given point, 
the ray corresponding to any tangent plane or the direction of 
transport of energy being by Huygens' principle the radius- 
vector from the centre to the point of contact. Now Fresnel 
perceived that in uniaxal crystals the speeds of plane waves in 
any direction are by Huygens' law the reciprocals of the semi- 
axes of the central section, parallel to the wave-fronts, of a 
spheroid, whose polar and equatorial axes are the reciprocals 
of the equatorial and polar axes of the spheroidal sheet of 
Huygens* wave-surface, and that the plane of polarization of a 
wave is perpendicular to the axis that determines its speed. 
Hence it occurred to him that similar relations with respect to 
an ellipsoid with three unequal axes would give the speeds and 
polarizations of the waves in a biaxal crystal, and the results 
thus deduced he found to be in accordance with all known facts. 
This ellipsoid is called the ellipsoid of polarization, the index 
ellipsoid and the indicatrix. ' % 

We may go a step further; for by considering the intersection 
of a wave-front with two waves, whose normals are indefinitely 
near that of the first and lie in planes perpendicular and parallel 
respectively to its plane of polarization, it is easy to show that 
the ray corresponding to the wave is parallel to the line in which 
the former of the two planes intersects the tangent plane to the 
ellipsoid at the end of the semi-diameter that determines the 
wave- velocity; and it follows by similar triangles that the 
ray- velocity is the reciprocal of the length of the perpendicular 
from the centre on this tangent plane. The laws of double 
refraction are thus contained in the following proposition. The 
propagational speed of a plane wave in any direction is given 
by the reciprocal of one of the semi-axes of the central section 
of the ellipsoid of polarization parallel to the wave; the plane 
of polarization of the wave is perpendicular to this axis; the 
corresponding ray is parallel to the line of intersection of the 
tangent plane at the end of the axis and the plane containing 
the axis and the wave-normal; the ray-velocity is the reciprocal 
of the length of the perpendicular from the centre on the tangent 
plane. By reciprocating with respect to a sphere of unit radius 
concentric with the ellipsoid, we obtain a similar proposition in 
which the ray takes the place of the wave-normal, the ray- 
velocity that of the wave-slowness (the reciprocal of the velocity) 
and vice versa. The wave-surface is thus the apsidal surface of 
the reciprocal ellipsoid; this gives the simplest means of obtain- 
ing its equation, and it is readily seen that its section by each 
plane of optical symmetry consists of an ellipse and a circle, 
and that in the plane of greatest and least wave-velocity these 
curves intersect in four points. The radii-vectors to these 
points are called the ray-axes. 

When the wave-front is parallel to either system of circular 
sections of the ellipsoid of polarization, the problem of finding 
the axes of the parallel central section becomes indeterminate, 
and all waves in this direction are propagated with the same 
speed, whatever may be their polarization. The normals to 
the circular sections are thus the optic axes. To determine the 
rays corresponding to an optic axis, we may note that the ray 



and the 'perpendiculars to it through the centre, in planes 
perpendicular and parallel to that of the ray and the optic axis, 
are three lines intersecting at right angles of which the two 
latter are confined to given planes, viz. the central circular 
section of the ellipsoid and the normal section of the cylinder 
touching the ellipsoid along this section: whence by a known 
proposition the ray describes a cone whose sections parallel to 
the given planes are circles. Thus a plane perpendicular to the 
optic axis touches the wave-surface along a circle. Similarly 
the normals to the circular sections of the reciprocal ellipsoid, or 
the axes of the tangent cylinders to the polarization-ellipsoid 
that have circular normal sections, are directions of single-ray 
velocity or ray-axes, and it may be shown as above that corre- 
sponding to a ray-axis there is a cone of wave-normals with 
circular sections parallel to the normal section of the corre- 
sponding tangent cylinder, and its plane of contact with the 
ellipsoid. Hence the extremities of the ray-axes are conical 
points on the wave-surface. These peculiarities of the wave- 
surface are the cause of the celebrated conical refractions 
discovered by Sir William Rowan Hamilton and H. Lloyd, 
which afford a decisive proof of the general correctness of 
FresnePs wave-surface, though they cannot, as Sir G. Gabriel 
Stokes {Math, and Phys. Papers, iv. 184) has pointed out, be 
employed to decide between theories that lead to this surface 
as a near approximation. 

In general, both the direction and the magnitude of the axes 
of the polarization-ellipsoid depend upon the frequency of the 
light and upon the temperature, but in many cases the possible 
variations are limited by considerations of symmetry. Thus 
the optic axis of a uniaxal crystal is invariable, being deter- 
mined by the principal axis of the system to which it belongs: 
most crystals are of the same sign for all colours, the refractive 
indices and their difference both increasing with the frequency, 
but a few crystals are of opposite sign for the extreme spectral 
colours, becoming isotropic for some intermediate wave-length. 
In crystals of the rhombic system the axes of the ellipsoid 
coincide in all cases with the crystallographic axes, but in a few 
cases their order of magnitude changes so that the plane of the 
optic axes for red light is at right angles to that for blue light, 
the crystal being uniaxal for an intermediate colour. In the 
case of the monoclinic system one axis is in the direction of the 
axis of the system, and this is generally, though there are notable 
exceptions, either the* greatest, the least, or the intermediate 
axis of the ellipsoid for all colours and temperatures. In the 
latter case the optic axes are in the plane of symmetry, and a 
variation of their acute bisectrix occasions the phenomenon 
known as " inclined dispersion ": in the two former cases the 
plane of the optic axes is perpendicular to the plane of symmetry, 
and if it vary with the colour of the light, the crystals exhibit 
" crossed " or " horizontal dispersion " according as it is the 
acute or the obtuse bisectrix that is in the fixed direction. 

The optical constants of a crystal may be determined either 
with a prism or by observations of total reflection. In the 
latter case the phenomenon is characterized by two angles — the 
critical angle and the angle between the plane of incidence and 
the line limiting the region of total reflection in the field of view. 
With any crystalline surface there are four cases in which this 
latter angle is 90 , and the principal refractive indices of the 
crystal are obtained from those calculated from the correspond- 
ing critical angles, by excluding that one of the mean values 
for which the plane of polarization of the limiting rays is 
perpendicular to the plane of incidence. A difficulty, however, 
may arise when the crystalline surface is very nearly the plane 
of the optic axes, as the plane of polarization in the second mean 
case is then also very nearly perpendicular to the plane of 
incidence; but since the two mean refractive indices will be very 
different, the ambiguity can be removed by making, as may 
easily be done, an approximate measure of the angle between the 
optic axes and comparing it with the values calculated by using 
in turn each of these indices (C. M. Viola, ZeU./Ur KrysL, 1902, 
3°\ p. 245). 

A substance originally isotropic can acquire the optical 



REFRESHER 



29 



properties of a crystal under the influence of homogeneous 
strain, the principal axes of the wave-surface being parallel to 
those of the strain, and the medium being uniaxal, if the strain 
he symmetrical. John Kerr also found that a dielectric under 
electric stress behaves as an uniaxal crystal with its optic axis 
parallel to the electric force, glass acting as a negative and 
bisulphide of carhon as a positive crystal (Phil. Mag., 1875 (4), 

1»- 337)- « 

Not content with determining the laws of double refraction, 
Fresnel also attempted to give their mechanical explanation. 
He supposed that the aether consists of a system of distinct 
material points symmetrically arranged and acting on one 
another by forces that depend for a given pair only on their 
distance. If in such a system a single molecule he displaced, the 
projection of the force of restitution on the direction of dis- 
placement is proportional to the inverse square of the parallel 
radius- vector of an ellipsoid; and of all displacements that can 
occur in a given plane, only those in the direction of the axes of 
the parallel central section of the quadric develop forces whose 
projection on the plane is 'along the displacement. In undula- 
tions, however, we are concerned with the elastic forces due to 
relative displacements, and, accordingly, Fresnel assumed that 
the forces called into play during the propagation of a system of 
plane waves (of rectilinear transverse vibrations) differ from 
those developed by the parallel displacement of a single molecule 
only by a constant factor, independent of the plane of the wave. 
Next, regarding the aether as incompressible, he assumed that the 
. components of the elastic forces parallel to the wave-front are 
alone operative, and finally, on the analogy of a stretched string, 
that the propagational speed of a plane wave of permanent 
type is proportional to the square root of the effective force 
developed by the vibrations. With these hypotheses we 
immediately obtain the laws of double refraction, as given by 
the ellipsoid of polarization, with the result that the vibrations 
are perpendicular to the plane of polarization. 

In its dynamical foundations Fresnel's theory, though of 
considerable historical interest, is clearly defective in rigour, 
and a strict treatment of the aether as a crystalline elastic solid 
does not lead naturally to Fresnel's laws of double refraction. 
On the other hand, Lord Kelvin's rotational aether (Math, and 
Phys. Papers, iii. 442)— a medium that has no true rigidity 
but possesses a quasi-rigidity due to elastic resistance to absolute 
rotation — gives these laws at once, if we abolish the resistance 
to compression and, regarding it as gyrostatically isotropic, 
attribute to it aeolotropic inertia. The equations then ohtained 
are the same as those deduced in the electro-magnetic theory from 
.the circuital laws of A. M. Ampere and Michael Faraday, when 
the specific inductive capacity is supposed aeolotropic. In 
order to account for dispersion, it is necessary to take into 
account the interaction with the radiation of aie intra-molecular 
vibrations of the crystalline substance: thus the total current 
on the electro-magnetic theory must be regarded as made up of 
the current of displacement and that due to the oscillations 
of the electrons within the molecules of the crystal. 

Bibliography. — An interesting and instructive account of 
Fresnel's work on double refraction has been given by Emile 
Verdet in his introduction to Fresnel's works: (Euvres d'Augustin 
Fresnel, i. 75 (Paris, 1866); (Euvres de E. Verdet, i. 360 (Paris, 
1872). For an account of theories of double refraction see the 
reports of H. Lloyd, Sir G. G. Stokes and R. T. Glazebrook in 
the Brit. Ass. Reports for 1834, 1862 and 1885, and Lord Kelvin's 
Baltimore Lectures (1904). An exposition of the rotational theory 
of the aether has been given by H, Chipart, Theorie gyrostatique 
de la lumitre (Paris, 1904); and P. Drude's Lehrbuch der Ophk, 
2 te Auf. (1906), the first German edition of which was translated 
by C. Riborg Mann and R. A. Milliken in 1902, treats the subject 
from the standpoint of the electro-magnetic theory^ The methods 
of determining the optical constants of crystals will be found in 
Th. Liebisch's Physikalische Krystallographie (1891); F. Pockcl's 
Lehrbuch der Kristalloptik (1906); and J. Walker's Analytical 
Theory of Light (1904). A detailed list of papers on the geometry 
of the wave-surface has been published by E. Wollfing, Bibl. 
Math., 1902 (3), iii. 361 ; and a general account of the subject 
will be found in the following treatises: L. Fletcher, The Optical 
Indicatrix (1892); Th. Preston, The Theory of Light, 3rd ed. by 
C. J. Joly (1901); A. Schuster, An Introduction to the Theory of 



Optics (1904); R. W. Wood, Physical Optics (1Q05); E. Mascart, 
Traiti d'optique (1889) ; A. Winkelmann, Handbuch der Physik. 

(J. Wal.*) 

III. Astronomical Refraction 
The refraction of a ray of light by the atmosphere as it passes 
from a heavenly body to an observer on the earth's surface, is 
called " astronomical." A knowledge of its amount is a necessary 
datum in the exact determination of the direction of the body. 
In its investigation the fundamental hypothesis is that the strata 
of the air are in equilibrium, which implies that the surfaces of 
equal density are horizontal. But this condition is being 
continually disturhed by aerial currents, which produce con- 
tinual slight fluctuations in the actual refraction, and commonly 
give to the image of a star a tremulous motion. Except for this 
slight motion the refraction is always in the vertical direction; 
that is, the actual zenith distance of the star is always greater 
than its apparent distance. The refracting power of the air is 
nearly proportional to its density. Consequently the amount 
of the refraction varies with the temperature and barometric 
pressure, being greater the higher the barometer and the lower 
the temperature. 

At moderate zenith distances, the amount of the refraction 
varies nearly as the tangent of the zenith distance. Under 
ordinary conditions of pressure and temperature it is, near the 
zenith, about 1 " for each degree of zenith distance. As the tangent 
increases at a greater rate than the angle, the increase of the 
refraction soon exceeds 1* for each degree. At 45 from the 
zenith the tangent is 1 and the mean refraction is about 58*. 
As the horizon is approached the tangent increases more and 
more rapidly, hecoming infinite at the horizon; but the re- 
fraction now increases at a less rate, and, when the observed 
ray is horizontal, or when the object appears on the horizon, the 
refraction is about 34', or a little greater than the diameter of 
the sun or moon. It follows that when either of these objects is 
seen on the horizon their actual direction is entirely below it. 
One result is that the length of the day is increased by refraction 
to the extent of about five minutes in low latitudes, and still 
more in higher latitudes. At 6o° the increase is about nine 
minutes. 

The atmosphere, like every other transparent substance, 
refracts the blue rays of the spectrum more than the red ; conse- 
quently, when the image of a star near the horizon is observed 
with a telescope, it presents somewhat the appearance of a 
spectrum. The edge which is really highest, but seems lowest 
in" the telescope, is hlue, and the opposite one red. When the 
atmosphere is steady this atmospheric spectrum is very marked 
and renders an exact observation of the star difficult. 

Bibliography. — Refraction has been a favourite subject of 
research. See Dr. C. Bruhns, Die astronomische Strahlenbrechung 
(Leipzig, 1861), gives a risumi of the various formulae of refraction 
which had been developed by the leading investigators up to the 
date 1861. Since then developments of the theory are found in: 
W. Chauvenet, Spherical and Practical Astronomy, 1.; F. Brunnow, 
Sphdrischen Astronomic; S. Newcomb, Spherical Astronomy, R. 
Radau, "Recherches sur la theorie des refractions "astronomiques" 
(Annates de V observatoire de Paris, xvi., 1882), " Essai sur les refrac- 
tions astronomiques " (ibid., xix., 1889). 

Among the tables of refraction which have been most used are 
Bessel's, derived from the observations of Bradley in Bessel's 
Fundamenta Astronomiae; and Bessel's revised tables in his Tabulae 
Regiomontanae, in which, however, the constant is too large, but 
which in an expanded form were mostly used at the observatories 
until 1870. The constant use of the Poulkova tables, Tabulae re- 
fractionum, which is reduced to nearly its true value, has gradually 
replaced that of Bessel. Later tables are those of L. de Ball, 
published at Leipzig in 1906. (S. N.) 

REFRESHER, in English legal phraseology, a further or 
additional fee paid to counsel where a case is adjourned from 
one term or sittings to another, or where it extends over more 
than one day and occupies, either on the first day or partly on 
the first and partly on a subsequent day or days, more than 
five hours without being concluded. The refresher allowed 
for every clear day subsequent to that on which the five hours 
have expired is five to ten guineas for a leading counsel and 
from three to seven guineas for other counsel, but the taxing 



3° 



REFRIGERATING 



master is at liberty to allow larger fees in special circumstances. 
See Rules of the Supreme Court, 0. 65, r. 48. 

REFRIGERATING and ICE-MAKING. " Refrigeration " 
(from Lat. frigus, frost) is the cooling of a body by the transfer 
of a portion of its heat to another and therefore a cooler body. 
For ordinary temperatures it is performed directly with water 
as the cooling agent, especially when well water, which usually 
has a temperature of from 52 to 55 F., can be obtained. There 
are, however, an increasingly large number of cases in which 
temperatures below that of any available natural cooling agent 
are required, and in these it is necessary to resort to machines 
which are capable of producing the required cooling effect by 
taking in heat at low temperatures and rejecting it at tempera- 
tures somewhat above that of the natural cooling agent, which 
for obvious reasons is generally water. The function of a 
refrigerating machine, therefore, is to take in heat at a low 
temperature and reject it at a higher one. 

This involves the expenditure of a quantity of work W, the 
amount in any particular case being found by the equation 
W = Qa — Qi,where W is the work, expressed by its equivalent in British 
thermal units; Q 2 the quantity of heat, also in B.Thcr.U., given 
out at the higher temperature T 2 ; and Qi the heat taken in at 
the lower temperature Ti. It is evident that the discharged heat 
Q 2 is equal to the abstracted heat Qi, plus the work expended, 
seeing that the work W," which causes the rise in temperature from 
Ti to T 2 , is the thermal equivalent of the energy actually expended 
in raising the temperature to the level at which it is rejected. The 
relation then between the work expended and the actual cooling 
work performed denotes the efficiency of the process, and this is 
expressed by Qi/(Qs— Qi); but as in a perfect refrigerating^ machine 
it is understood that the whole of the heat Qi is taken in at the 
absolute temperature Ti, and the whole of the heat Q 2 , is rejected 
at the absolute temperature T 2 , the heat quantities are proportional 
to the temperatures, and the expression Ti/(T 2 — Ti) gives the 
ideal coefficient of performance for any stated temperature range, 
whatever working substance is used. These coefficients for a number 
of cases met with in practice are given in the following table. They 

Table I. 



Ti. 

Temperature at 

which Heat is extracted 

in Degrees Fahr. 


Temperature at which Heat is rejected in 
Degrees Fahr. 


-10° 

0° 

10° 

20° 

3°: 

40° 


So* 


6o* 


70° 


8o* 


QO° 


IOO° 


7*5 
9-2 

11*7 
16*0 

24*5 
50-0 


6-4 

77 
9.4 

12*0 

16-3 
25*0 


5*6 
6-6 
7-8 
9-6 

12-2 

16-7 


5*o 
5*8 
67 
8-0 
9-8 

12*5 


4*5 
5*i 
5*9 
6-8 

8-2 
10-0 


4-1 

4-6 
5*2 
6-0 
7-0 
8-3 



show that in all cases the heat abstracted exceeds by many times 
the heat expended. As an instance, when heat is taken in at o° 
and rejectee! at 70 , a perfect refrigerating machine would abstract 
6*6 times as much heat as the equivalent of the energy to be applied. 
If, however, the heat is to be rejected at 100 , then the coefficient 
is reduced to 4*6. 

By examining Table I. it will be seen how important it is to 
reduce the temperature range as much as possible, in order to obtain 
the most economical results. No actual refrigerating machine 
does, in fact, take in heat at the exact temperature of the body 
to be cooled, and reject it at the exact temperature of the cooling 
water, but, for economy in working, it is of great importance that 
the differences should be as small as possible. 

There are two distinct classes of machines used for refrigerat- 
ing and ice-making. In the first refrigeration is produced by 
the expansion of atmospheric air, and in the second by the 
evaporation of a more or less volatile liquid. 

Compressed-air Machines. — A compressed-air refrigerating 
machine consists in its simplest form of three essential parts 
— a compressor, a compressed-air cooler, and an expansion 
cylinder. It is shown diagrammatically in fig. 1 in connexion 
with a chamber which it is keeping cool. The cdmprcssor 
draws in air from the room and compresses it, the work expended 
in compression being almost entirely converted into heat. The 
compressed air, leaving the compressor at the temperature T 2 , 
passes through the cooler, where it is cooled by means of water, 
and is then admitted to the expansion cylinder, where it is 



expanded to atmospheric pressure, performing work on the 
piston. The heat equivalent of the mechanical work per- 
formed on the piston is abstracted from the air, which is dis- 
charged at the temperature Ti. This temperature Ti is neces- 
Compression Cylinder Expansion Cylinder 




Fig. i. — Compressed-Air Refrigerating Machine. 

sarily very much below the temperature to be maintained in 
the room, because the cooling effect is produced by transferring 
heat from the room or its contents to the air, which is thereby 
heated. The rise in temperature of the air is, in fact, the measure 
of the cooling effect produced. If such a machine could be 
constructed with reasonable mechanical efficiency ( to compress 
the air to a temperature but slightly above that of the cooling 
water, and to expand the air to a temperature but slightly 
below that required to be maintained in the room, we should of 
course get a result approximating in efficiency somewhat nearly 
to the figures given in Table L Unfortunately, however, such 
results cannot be obtained in practice, because the extreme 
lightness of the air and its very smallheat capacity (which at 
constant pressure is -2379) would necessitate ,the employment 
of a great volume, with extremely large and mechanically in- 
efficient cylinders and apparatus. A pound of air, represent- 
ing about 12 cub. ft., if raised io° F. will only take up about 
2-4 B.T.U. Consequently, to make such a machine mechani- 
cally successful a comparatively small weight of air must be 
used, and the temperature difference increased; in other 
words, the air must be discharged at a temperature very much 
below that to be maintained in the room. 

This theory of working is founded on the Carnot cycle for a 
perfect heat motor, a perfect refrigerating machine being simply 
a reversed heat motor. Another theory involves the use of the 
Stirling regenerator, which was proposed in connexion with the 
Stirling heat engine (see Air Engines). The air machine invented 
by Dr. A. Kirk in 1862, and described by him in a paper on the 
11 Mechanical Production of Cold " (Proc. Inst. C.E., xxxvii., 
1874, 244), is simply a reversed Stirling air engine, the air working 
in a closed cycle instead of being actually discharged into the room 
to be cooled, as is the usual practice with ordinary compressed- 
air machines. Kirk's machine was used commercially with success 
on a fairly large scale, chiefly for ice-making, and it is recorded that 
it produced about 4 lb of ice for I lb of coal. In 1868 J. Davy 
Postle read a paper before the Royal Society of Victoria, suggesting 
the conveyance of meat on board ship in a frozen state by means 
of refrigerated air, and in 1869 he snowed by experiment how it 
could be done; but his apparatus was not commercially developed. 
In 1877 a compressed-air machine was designed by J. J. Coleman 
of Glasgow, and in the early part of 1879 one of his machines was 
fitted on board the Anchor liner " Circassia," which successfully 
brought a cargo of chilled beef from America — the first imported 
by the aid of refrigerating machinery, ice. having been previously 
used. The first successful cargo of frozen mutton from Australia 
was also brought by a Bell-Coleman machine in 1879. In the 
Bell-Coleman machine the air was cooled during^ compression by 
means of an injection of water, and further by being brought into 
contact with a shower of water. Another, perhaps the principal-, 
feature was the intcrchanger, an apparatus whereby the compressed 
air was further cooled before expansion by means of the com- 
paratively cold air from the room in its passage to the compressor, 
the same air being used over and over again. The object of this 
intcrchanger was not only to cool the compressed air before 
expansion, but to condense part of the moisture in it, so reducing 
the quantity of ice or snow produced during expansion. A full 
description of the machine may be found in a paper on " Air- 
Refrigerating Machinery " by J. J. Coleman {Proc. Inst. C.E. 
lxviii., 1882). At the present time the Bell-Coleman machine 
has practically ceased to exist. In such compressed-air machines 



I 



REFRIGERATING 



3i 



as are now made there is no injection of water during compression, 
and the compressed air is cooled in a surface cooler, not by actual 
mixture with a shower of cold water. Further, though the inter- 
changer is still used by some makers, it has been found by experience 
that, with properly constructed valves and passages in the expansion 
cylinder, tnere is no trouble from the formation of snow, when, as 
is the general practice, the same air is used over and over again, 
the compressor taking its supply from the insulated room. So 
far as the air discharged from the expansion cylinder is concerned, 
its humidity is precisely the same so long as its temperature and 
pressure are the same, inasmuch as when discharged from the 
expansion cylinder it is always in a saturated condition for that 
temperature and pressure. 

The ideal coefficient of performance is about 1, but the actual 
coefficient will be about f , after allowing for the losses incidental 
to working. In practice the air is compressed to about 50 lb per 
square inch above the atmosphere, its temperature rising to 
about 300 F. The compressed air then passes through coolers 
in which it is cooled to within about 5 of the initial temperature 
of the cooling water, and is deprived of a portion of its moisture, 
after which it is admitted into the expansion cylinder and 
expanded nearly to atmospheric pressure. The thermal equi- 
valent of the power exerted on the piston is taken from the 
*air, which, with cooling water at 6o° F. and after allowing for 
friction and other losses, is discharged at a temperature of 
6o° to 8o° below zero F. according to the size of the machine. 
The pistons of the compression and expansion cylinders are 
connected to the same crankshaft, and the difference between the 
power expended in compression and that restored in expansion, 
plus the friction of the machine, is supplied by means of a steam 
engine coupled to the crankshaft, or by any other source of 
power. For marine purposes two complete machines are 
frequently mounted on one bed-plate and worked either together 
or separately. 

In some machines used in the United States the cold air is 
not discharged into the rooms but is worked in a closed cycle, 
the rooms being cooled by means of overhead pipes through 
which the cold expanded air passes on its way back to the 
compressor. 

Liquid Machines. — Machines of the second class may con- 
veniently be divided into three types: (a) Those in which there 
is no recovery of the refrigerating agent, water being the agent 
employed; they will be dealt with as "Vacuum machines." 

(b) Those in which the agent is recovered by means of mechan- 
ical compression; they are termed " Compression machines." 

(c) Those in which the agent is recovered by means of absorption 
by a liquid; they are known as " Absorption machines." 

In the first class, since the refrigerating liquid is itself rejected, 
the only agent cheap enough to be employed is water. The 
Vacuum boiling point of water varies with pressure; thus at 
machines. one atmosphere or 14*7 lb per square inch it is 21 2 F., 
whereas at a pressure of -085 lb per square inch it is 32 , 
and at lower pressures there is a still further fall in temperature. 
This property is made use of in vacuum machines. Water at 
ordinary temperature, say 6o°, is placed in an air-tight glass or 
insulated vessel, and when the pressure is reduced by means of 
a vacuum pump it begins to boil, the heat necessary for evapor- 
ation being taken from the water itself. The pressure being 
still further reduced, the temperature is gradually lowered until 
the freezing-point is reached and ice formed, when about one-sixth 
of the original volume has been evaporated. 

The earliest machine of this kind appears to have been made in 
1755 by Dr. William Cullen, who produced the vacuum by means 
of a pump alone. In 1810 Sir John Leslie combined with the air 
pump a vessel containing strong sulphuric acid for absorbing the 
vapour from the air, and is said to have succeeded in producing 
1 to 1 -J- lb of ice in a single operation. E. C. Carre later adopted the 
same principle. In 1878 F. Windhausen patented a vacuum 
machine for producing ice in large quantities, and in 1881 one of 
these machines, said to be capable of making about 12 tons of ice 
per day, was put to work in London. The installation was fully 
described by Carl Pieper (Trans. Soc. of Engineers, 1882, p. 145) 
and by Dr. John Hopkinson (Journal of Soc. %f Arts, 1882, vol. 
xxxi. p. 20). The process, however, not being successful from a 
commercial point of view, was abandoned. At the present time 
vacuum machines are only employed for domestic purposes. The 
hand apparatus invented by H. A. Fleuss consists of a vacuum 



pump capable of reducing the air pressure to a fraction of a milli- 
metre, the suction pipe of which is connected first with a vessel 
containing sulphuric acid, and second with the vessel containing 
the water to be frozen. Both these vessels are mounted on a rocking 
base, so that the acid can be thoroughly agitated while the machine 
is being worked. As soon as the pump has sufficiently exhausted 
the air from the vessel containing the water,' vapour is rapidly 
given off and is absorbed by the acid until sufficient heat has been 
abstracted to bring about the desired reduction in temperature, 
the acid becoming heated by the absorption of water vapour, 
while the water freezes. The small Fleuss machine will produce 
about 1 1 lb of ice in one operation of 20 minutes. Iced water 
in a carafe for drinking purposes can be produced in about three 
minutes. The acid vessef holds 9 ft) of acid, and nearly 3 lb of ice 
can be made for each 1 lb of acid before the acid has become too weak 
to do further duty. Another machine, which can be easily worked 
by a boy, will produce 20 to 30 lb of ice in one hour, and is perhaps 
the largest size practicable with this method of freezing. The 
temperature attainable depends on the strength and condition of 
the sulphuric acid; ordinarily it can be reduced to zero F., and 
temperatures 20 lower have frequently been obtained. 

Though prior to 1834 several suggestions had been made with 
regard to the production of ice and the cooling of liquids by the 
evaporation of a more volatile liquid than water, the Cbmprcs- 
first machine actually constructed and put to work *ton 
was made by John Hague in that year from the designs mach!a ^* 
of Jacob Perkins (Journal of Soc. of Arts, 1882, vol. xxxi. p. 77). 
This machine, though never used commercially, is the parent 
of all modern compression machines. Perkins in his patent 
specification states that the volatile fluid is by preference ether. 
In 1856 and 1857 James Harrison of Geelong, Victoria, patented 
a machine embodying the same principle as that of Perkins, but 
worked out in a much more complete and practical manner. It 
is stated that these machines were first made in New South 
Wales in 1859, but the first Harrison machine adopted success- 
fully for industrial purposes in England was applied in the year 
1 861 for cooling oil in order to extract the paraffin. In Harrison's 
machine the agent used was ether (C 2 H 5 ) 2 0. Improvements 
were made by Siebe & Company of London, and a considerable 
number of ether machines both for ice- making and refrigerating 
purposes were supplied by that firm and others up to the year 
1880. In 1870 the subject of refrigeration was investigated by 
Professor Carl Linde of Munich, who was the first to consider 
the question from a thermodynamic point of view. He dealt 
with the coefficient of performance as a common basis of com- 
parison for all machines, and showed that the compression 
vapour machine more nearly reached the theoretic maximum 
than any other (Bayerisckes Industrie und Gewerbeblatt, 1870 and 
1871). Linde also examined the physical properties of various 
liquids, and, after making trials with methylic ether in 1872, 
built his first ammonia compression machine in 1873. Since 
then the ammonia compression machine has been most widely 
adopted, though the carbonic acid machine, also compression, 
which was first made in 1880 from Linde's designs, is now used 
to a considerable extent, especially on board ship. 



Condenser 




Refrigerator 



Regulating Valve 
Fig. 2. — Vapour Compression Machine. 

A diagram of a vapour compression machine is shown in tig. 2. 
There are three principal parts, a refrigerator or evaporator, a 
compression pump, and a condenser. The refrigerator, which 



32 



REFRIGERATING 



consists of a coil or series of coils, is connected to the suction side 
of the pump, and the delivery from the pump is connected to the 
condenser, which is generally of somewhat similar construction to 
the refrigerator. The condenser and refrigerator are connected by 
a pipe in which is a valve named the regulator. Outside the re- 
frigerator coils is the air, brine or other substance to be cooled, and 
outside the condenser is the cooling medium, which, as previously 
stated, is generally water. The refrigerating liauid (ether, sulphur 
dioxide, anhydrous ammonia, or carbonic acid) passes from the 
bottom of the condenser through the regulating valve into the 
refrigerator in a continuous stream. The pressure in the refrigerator 
being reduced by the pump^ and maintained at such a degree as to 
give the required boiling-point, which is of course always lower than 
the temperature outside the coils, heat passes from the substance 
outside, through the coil surfaces, and is taken up by the entering 
liquid, which is converted into vapour at the temperature Ti. The 
vapours thus generated are drawn into the pump, compressed, and 
discharged into the condenser at the temperature T 2 , which is some- 
what above that of the cooling water. Heat is transferred from the 
compressed vapour to the cooling water and the vapour is converted 
into a liquid, which collects at the bottom and returns by the re- 
gulating valve into the refrigerator. Asheat is both taken in and 
discharged at constant temperature during the change in physical 
state of the agent, a vapour compression machine must approach 
the ideal much more nearly than a compressed-air machine, in 
which there is no such change. 

This will be seen by taking as an example a case in which the cold 
room is to be kept at io° F., the cooling water being at 6o°. Under 
these conditions, the actual evaporating temperature Ti, in a well- 
constructed ammonia compression machine, after allowing for the 
differences necessary for the exchange of heat, would be about 5° 
below zero, and the discharge temperature T would be about 75 °. 
An ideal machine, working between 5 below zero and 75 above, 
has a coefficient of about 5*7, or nearly six times that of an ideal 
compressed-air machine of usual construction performing the same 
useful cooling work. 

A vapour compression machine does not, however, work precisely 
in the reversed Carnot cycle, inasmuch as the fall in temperature 
between the condenser and the refrigerator is not produced, nor is 
it attempted to be produced, by the adiabatic expansion of the 
agent, but results from the evaporation of apportion of the liquid 
itself. In other words, the liquid-refrigerating agent enters the 
refrigerator at the condenser temperature and ^ introduces heat 
which has to be taken up by the evaporating liquid before any 
useful refrigerating effect can be performed. The extent of this loss 
is determined by the relation between the liquid heat and the latent 
heat of vaporization at the refrigerator temperature. If r represents 
the latent heat of the vapour, and g 2 -and Q\ the amounts of heat 
contained in the liquid at the respective temperatures of T2 and Ti, 
then the loss from the heat carried from the condenser into the 
refrigerator is shown by (g«-gi)/r and the useful refrigerating effect 
produced in the refrigerator is r — (g 2 — ffO- Assuming, as in the 
previous example, that T2 is 75° F., and that Ti is 5 below zero, the 
results for various refrigerating agents are as follows : — 

Table II. 





Latent 

Heat. 

r 


Liquid 
Heat. 


Net 
Refrigeration. 

r-(ff 2 -ffi) 


Proportion 
of Loss. 

(92-g\)/r 


Anhydrous ammonia 
Sulphurous acid 
Carbonic acid . . * 


590-33 
173-13 
119-85 


72-556 
29-062 
47-35 


517-774 

144-068 

72.50 


0-1225 

0-168 

0-395 



The results show that the loss is least in the case of anhydrous 
ammonia and greatest in the case of carbonic acid. At higher con- 
denser temperatures the results are even much more favourable to 
ammonia. As the critical temperature (88-4° F.) of carbonic acid 
is approached, the value of r becomes less and less and the refrigerat- 
ing effect is much reduced. When the critical point is reached 
the value of r disappears altogether, and a carbonic-acid machine is 
then dependent for its refrigerating effect on the reduction in tem- 
perature produced Jby the internal work performed in expanding 
the gaseous carbonic acid from the condenser pressure to that in 
the refrigerator. The abstraction of heat does not then take place 
at constant temperature. The expanded vapour enters the re- 
frigerator at a temperature below that of the substance to be 
cooled, and whatever cooling effect is produced is brought about 
by the superheating of the vapour, the result being that above 
the critical point of carbonic acid the difference T 2 — T 2 is in- 
creased and the efficiency of the machine is reduced. The critical 
temperature of anhydrous ammonia is about 266 F., which is 
never approached in the ordinary working of refrigerating machines. 
Some of the principal physical properties of sulphurous acid, 
anhydrous ammonia, and carbonic acid are given in Tables III.. 
IV. and V. 



Table III. — Ledoux's 


Table for Saturated Sulphur 


Dioxide 






Vapour (S0 2 ). 






t 


Vapour- tension 
in Pounds per 


ff 


r 


Volume of 


Temp, of 

Ebullition. 


Heat of Liquid 


Latent Heat of 


one Pound 


sq. in. 


from 3 2 Fahr. 


Evaporation. 

aT.u. 


of Saturated 


Degs. Fahr. 


Absolute. 


B.T.U. 


Vapour. 
CubVft. 


— 22 


5*546 


-19-55 


176-98 


13-168 


-13 


7-252 


-16-31 


174-94 


10-268 


- 4 


9-303 


-13-05 


I72-9I 


8-122 


5 


1 1 -803 


- 9.79 


I70-82 


6.504 


14 


14.789 


- 6-85 


168-75 


5-254 


23 


18-544 


- 3-26 


166-63 


4*293 


32 


22-468 


O-OO 


164-47 


3-540 


41 


27-445 


3*27 


162-39 


2-931 


50 


33-275 


6-55 

9*83 


160-24 
158-08 


2-451 


59 


39*958 


2-066 


68 


47-637 


13-10 


I55-89 


1-746 


77 


56-311 


16-38 


153-67 


1-490 


86 


66-407 


19-69 


I5I-49 


1-266 


95 


77-641 


22-99 


149-27 


1-089 


104 


90-297 


26-28 


147-02 


0913 



Table IV. — Mollier's Table for Saturated Anhydrous Ammonia 
Vapour (NH,). 



/ 


Vapour-tension 


3 


r 


u 
Volume of 


Temp, of 
Ebullition. 
Degs. Fahr. 


in Pounds per 


Heat of Liquid 


Latent Heat of 


one Pound 


sq. in. 


from 3 2 Fabr. 


Evaporation. 
B.T.U. 


of Saturated 


Absolute. 


B.T.U. 


Vapour. 
Cub. ft. 


-40 


10*238 


—60*048 


600-00 


25-630 


-31 


13*324 


-53.064 


597-24 


20-120 


— 22 


16.920 


-45.918 


595-08 


15-971 


-13 


21.472 


-38-646 


593*00 


12-783 


- 4 


27.OOO 


— 3I-2I2 


590-00 


IO-3I6 


5 


33-701 


-23-634 


586-82 


8-394 


H 


41-522 


-15-894 


581-00 


6-888 


23 


50-908 


- 8-028 


576-00 


5-703 


32 


61.857 


o-ooo 


571-00 


4.742 


41 


74-5^3 


8-172 


562.50 


3-973 


50 


89-159 


16-506 


555*48 


3*364 


59 


105-939 


24-966 


55o-oo 


2-851 


68 


124-994 


33-588 


541-00 


2-435 


77 


146-908 


42-354 


531-00 


2-098 


86 


170.782 


51-282 


523*00 


1*810 


95 


197.800 


60-336 


512-50 


i*570 


104 


227.662 


69-552 


501-50 


1-361 



Table V. — Mollier's 


Table for Saturated Carbon Dioxide 






Vapour (C0 2 ) 






t 


Vapour- tension 
in Pounds per 


Q 


r 


If 
Volume of 


Temp, of 


Heat of Liquid 


Latent Heat of 


one Pound 


Ebullition. 


sq. in. 


from 3 2 Fahr. 


Evaporation. 
B.T.U. 


of Saturated 


Degs. Fahr. 


Absolute. 


B.T.U. 


Vapour. 
Cub. ft. 


— 22 


213-345 


— 24-80 


126-72 


*4330 


-13 


248-903 


— 21-06 


123-25 


•3670 


- 4 


288-727 


-I7-I9 


H9-43 


•3130 


5 


334*240 


-13*17 


115-25 


•2680 


14 


385-443 


— 9-00 


110-65 


•2295 


23 


440-913 


- 4*63 


105-53 


*i955 


32 


503-497 


o-oo 


99-81 


.•1670 


4i 


573-I87 


4-93 


93*35 


•1430 


50 


649-991 


10-28 


85-93 


•1202 


59 


733-906 


1 6-22 


77-40 


•1010 


68 


826-356 


23-08 


66-47 


•0833 


77 


930-184 


31-63 


51-80 


.0673 


86 


1039-701 


45*45 


27-00 


•0481 


87-8 


1062-458 


51*61 


15-12 


•0416 


88-43 


1070-991 


59*24 


o-oo 


•0352 



The action of a vapour compression machine is shown in fig. 3. 
Liquid at the condenser temperature being introduced into the re- 
frigerator through the regulating valve, a small portion evaporates 
and reduces the remaining liquid to the temperature Ti. This is 
shown by the curve AB, and is the useless work represented by the 
expression fo— gO/r. ^Evaporation then continues at the constant 
temperature T, abstracting heat from the substance outside the 
-refrigerator as shoyn by the line BC. The vapour is then compressed 
along the line CD to the temperature T 2 , when, by the action of the 
cooling water in the condenser, heat is abstracted at constant 
temperature and the vapour condensed along the line DA. 

In a compression machine the refrigerator is usually a series of 
iron or steel coils surrounded by the air, brine or other substance it 



REFRIGERATING 



33 




Fig. 3. — Action of Vapour 
Compression Machine. 



is desired to cool. One end (generally the bottom) of the coils is 
connected to the liquid pipe from the condenser and the other end 

to the suction of the compressor. 
Liquid from the condenser is ad- 
mitted to the coils through an ad- 
justable regulating valve, and by 
taking heat from the substance out- 
side is evaporated, the vapour being 
continually drawn off by the com- 
pressoranddischar£edunderincreased 
pressure into the condenser. The 
condenser is constructed of coils like 
the refrigerator, the cooling water being contained in a tank; fre- 
quently, however, a scries of open coils is employed, the cooling 
water falling over the coils into a collecting tray below, and this 
form is perhaps the most convenient for ordinary use as it affords 
great facilities for inspection and painting. The compressor may 
be driven by a steam engine or in any other convenient manner. 
The pressure in the condenser varies according to the temperature 
of the cooling water, and that in the refrigerator is dependent 
upon the temperature to which the outside substance is copied. 
In an ammonia machine copper and copper alloys must be avoided, 
but for carbonic acid they are not objectionable. 

The compression of ammonia is sometimes carried out on what 
is known as the Lindc or " wet " system, and sometimes on the 
" dry " system. When wet compression is used the^ regulating 
valve is opened to such an extent that a little more liquid is passed 
than can be evaporated in the refrigerator. This liquid enters the 
compressor with the vapour, and is evaporated there, the heat 
taken up preventing the rise in temperature during compression 
which would otherwise take place. The compressed vapour is dis- 
charged at a temperature but little above that of the cooling water. 
With dry compression, vapour alone is drawn into the compressor, 
and the temperature rises to as much as 180 or 200 degrees. Wet 
compression theoretically is not quite so efficient as dry compression, 
but it possesses practical advantages in keeping the working parts 
of the compressor cool, and it also greatly facilitates the regulation 
of the liquid, and ensures the full duty of the machine being continu- 
ously performed. Very exact comparative trials have been made 
by Professor M. Schrocter and others with compression machines 
using sulphur dioxide and ammonia. The results are published in 
Vergleichende Versuche an Kaltemaschinen, by Schrocter, Munich, 
1890, and in Nos. 32 and 51 of Bayerisches Industrie und Gewerbeblatt t 
1892. Some of the results obtained by Schroeter in 1893 with an 
ordinary brine cooling machine on the Linde ammonia system are 
given in Table VI. : — 



Table VI. 








Temperature reduction in refriger- 










ator. Degs. Fahr 


42-8 to 37*4 


28*4 to 23 
16*48 


14 to 8-6 


-o*4 to -5 -8 


I.H.P, in steam cylinder .... 


15*79 


15*29 


14-25 
11*98 


I.H.P. in compressor 


14*33 


14*3 


13 '54 


Pressure in refrigerator in pounds 










per sq. in. above atmosphere . . 


45 '2 


32*6 


ig-8 


9*9 


Pressure in condenser in pnunds 










per sq. in. above atmosphere . 
Heat abstracted in refrigerator. 


116*0 


115*0 


110*0 


108*0 










B.T.U. per hour 


342192 


263400 


171 515 


121218 


Heat rejected in condenser. 










B.T.U. per hour 


377567 


301200 


214347 


158594 



The principle of the absorption process is chemical or physical 
rather than mechanical; it depends on the fact that many 
Absorp' vapours of low boiling-point are readily absorbed in 
Hon water, and can be separated again by the application 

machines. f h eati In its simplest form an absorption machine 
consists of two iron vessels connected together by a bent pipe. 
One of these contains a mixture of ammonia and water, which 
on the application of heat gives off a mixed vapour containing 
a large proportion of ammonia, a liquid containing but little 
ammonia being left behind. In the second vessel, which is 
placed in cold water, the vapour rich in ammonia is condensed 
under pressure. To produce refrigeration the operation is 
reversed. On allowing the weak liquor to cool to normal 
temperature, it becomes greedy of ammonia (at 6o° F. at 
atmospheric pressure water will absorb about ?6o times its own 
volume of ammonia vapour), and this produces an evaporation 
from the liquid in the vessel previously .used as a condenser. 
This liquid, containing a large proportion of ammonia, gives off 
vapour at a low temperature, and therefore becomes a refrigerator 
abstracting heat from water or any surrounding body. When 
the ammonia is evaporated the operation as described must 
be again commenced. Such an apparatus is not much used now. 
Larger and more elaborate machines were made by F. P. E. 
Carre in France; but no very high degree of perfection was 

XXIII. 2 




arrived at, owing to the impossibility of getting an anhydrous 
product of distillation. In 1867 Rces Reece, taking advantage 
of the fact that two vapours of different boiling-points, when 
mixed, can be separated by means of fractional condensation, 
brought out an absorption machine in which the distillate was 
very nearly anhydrous. By means of vessels termed the 
analyser and the rectifier, the bulk of the water was condensed 
at a comparatively high temperature and run back to the 
generator, while the ammonia passed into a condenser, and there 
assumed the liquid form under the pressure produced by the 
heat in the generator and the cooling action of water circulating 
outside the condenser tubes. 

Fig. 4 is a diagram of an absorption apparatus. The ammonia 
vapour given off in the refrigerator is absorbed by a cold weak 
solution of ammonia and 
water in the absorber, and 
the strong liquor is pumped 
back into the generator c«noen«*r 
through an intorchanger 
through which also the weak 
hot liquor from the generator 
passes on its way to the 
absorber. In this way the 
strong liquor is heated before 
it enters the generator, and 
the weak liquor is cooled c 
before it enters the absorber. atwyw( 
The generator being heated 
by means of a steam coil, 
ammonia vapour is driven 
off at such a pressure as to 
cause its condensation in the Fig. 4. 

condenser. From the con- 
denser it passes into the refrigerator through a regulating valve in the 
usual manner. The process is continuous, and is identical with that 
of the compression machine, with the exception of the return from 
the temperature Ti to the temperature T 2 , which is brought about 
by the direct application of heat instead of by means of mechan- 
ical compression. With the same temperature range, however, the 
same amount of heat has to be acquired in both cases, though from 
the nature of the process the actual amount of heat demanded from 
the steam is much greater in the absorption system than in the 
compression. This is chiefly due to the fact that in the former 
the heat of vaporization acquired in the refrigerator is rejected in 
the absorber, so that the whole heat of vaporization has to be 
supplied again by the steam in the generator. In the latter the 
vapour passes direct from the refrigerator to the pump; and power 
has to be expended merely in raising the temperature to a sufficient 
degree to enable condensation to occur at the temperature of the 
cooling water. On the other hand, a great advantage is gained in 
the absorption machine^ by using the direct heat of the steam, 
without first converting itinto mechanical work, for in this way its 
latent heat of vaporization can be utilized by condensing the 
steam in the coils and letting it escape inthe form of water. Each 
pound of steam can thus be made to give up some 950 units of 
heat; while in a good steam engine only about 200 units are utilized 
in the steam cylinder per pound of steam, and in addition allowance 
has to be made for mechanical inefficiency. In the absorption 
machine the cooling water has to take up about twice as much 
heat as^ in the compression system, owing to the ammonia being 
twice liquefied— namely, once in the absorber and once in the 
condenser. It is usual to pass the cooling water first through the 
condenser and then through the absorber. 
^ The absorption machine^ is not so economical as the compres- 
sion; but an actual comparison between the two systems is difficult 
to make. Information on this head is given in papers read by Dr. 
Linde and by Professor J. A. Ewing before tne Society of Arts 
(Journal of the Society of Arts, vol. xlii., 1894, p. 322, and Howard 
Lectures, January, February and March 1897). 

An absorption apparatus as applied to the cooling of liquids 
consists of a generator containing coils to which steam is supplied 
at suitable pressure, an analyser, a rectifier, a condenser either of 
the submerged or open type, a refrigerator in which the nearly 
anhydrous ammonia obtained in the condenser is allowed to eva- 
porate, an absorber through which the weak liquor from the gener- 
ator continually flows and absorbs the anhydrous vapour produced 
in the refrigerator, and a pump for forcing the strong liquor produced 
in the absorber back through an economizer into the analyser 
where, meeting with steam from the generator, the ammonia gas 
is again driven off, the process being t^nus carried on continuously. 
Sometimes an additional vessel is employed for heating liquor by 
means of the exhaust steam from the engine driving the ammonia 
pump. t Absorption machines are also made without a pump for 
returning the strong liquor to the generator. In these cases they 
work intermittently. In some machines the same vessel is used 
alternately as a generator and absorber, while in others, in order 



34 



REFRIGERATING 



to minimize the loss of time, two vessels arc provided which can 
be used alternately as generators and absorbers. 

Applications. — Apart from the economical working of the 
machine itself, whatever system may be adopted, it is of 
importance that cold once produced should not be wasted, 
and it is therefore necessary to use some form of insulation to 
protect the vessels in which liquids are being cooled, or the 
rooms of ships' holds in which the freezing or storage processes 
are being carried on. This insulation generally consists of 
materials such as charcoal, silicate cotton, granulated cork, 
small pumice, hair-felt, sawdust, &c, held between layers of 
wood or brick, and forming a more or less heat-tight box. There 
is no recognized standard of insulation. For a cold store to be 
erected inside a brick or stone building, and to be maintained 
at an internal temperature of from i8° to,2o° F., a usual plan is 
shown in fig. 5. The same insulation is used for the floors and 



Wall 



J* Air Sp*c« 



t l%ytr» Hnt. fak*d» 




-Insulation of a Cold Store, 



ceilings, except that the wearing surface of the floor is generally 
made thicker than the inside lining of the sides. Should the 
walls or floor be damp, waterproof paper is added. Granulated 
cork has practically the same insulating properties as silicate 
cotton, and the same thicknesses may be used. About 10 in. 
of flake charcoal and vegetable silica, or 11 of small pumice, 
are required to give the same protection as 7 in. of good 
silicate cotton. Cork bricks made of compressed granulated 
cork are frequently used, a thickness of about 5 in. giving the 
same protection as 7 in. of silicate cotton. The walls and 
ceilings are finished off with a smooth coating of hard cement and 
the floors are protected by cement or asphalt, according to the 
nature of the traffic on them. For lager-beer cellars and 
fermenting rooms, for bacon-curing cellars, and for similar 
purposes, brick walls with single or double air spaces are used, 
and sometimes a space filled with silicate cotton or other in- 
sulating material. In Australia and New Zealand pumice, 
which is found in enormous quantities in the latter country, 
takes the place of charcoal and silicate cotton. In Canada air 
spaces are largely used either alone or in combination with 
silicate cotton or planer shavings. The air spaces, two or three 
in number, are formed between two layers of tongued and 
grooved wood, and the total thickness of the insulation is about 
the same as when silicate cotton alone is used. On board ship 
charcoal has been almost entirely employed, but silicate cotton 
and granulated cork are sometimes used. The material is either 
placed directly up to the skin of the vessel, and kept in place by 
a double lining of wood inside, in which case a thickness of 
about 10 in. is used depending upon the depth of the frames, 
or it is placed between two layers of wood, with an air space next 
the skin, in which case about 6 in. of flake charcoal is generally 
sufficient for the insulation of the holds, though for deck-houses 
and other parts exposed to the sun the thickness must be greater. 
A layer of sheet zinc or tin has frequently to be used as pro- 
tection from rats. Given a certain allowable heat transmission, 
the principal points to be considered in connexion with insulation 
are, first cost, durability, weight and space occupied, the two 
last named being specially important factors on board ship. 
No exact rules can be laid down, as the conditions vary so 
greatly; and though experiments have been made to determine 
the actual heat conduction of various materials per unit of 
surface, thickness and temperature difference, the experience 
of actual practice is at present the only accepted guide. 

With compressed-air machines which discharge the cold air 
direct into the insulated room or hold, a snow box is provided close 
to the outlet of the expansion cylinder to catch the snow and 
congealed oil. The air is distributed by means of wood air trunks 
with openings controlled bv slides, and similar trunks are pro- 



vided in connexion with the suction of the comprcsser to conduct 
the air back to the machine. With liquid machines of the compres- 
sion and absorption system, the rooms are either cooled by means 
of cold pipes or surfaces placed in them, or by a circulation of air 
cooled in an apparatus separated from the rooms. The cold pipes 
may be direct-expansion pipes in which the licjuid evaporates, 
or they may be pipes or walls through which circulates an un- 
congcalable brine previously cooled to the desired temperature. 
The pipes are placed on the ceilings or sides according to circum- 
stances, but they*must be arranged so as to induce a circulation 
of air throughout the compartment and ensure every part being 
cooled. With what is termed the air circulation system the air is 
generally circulated by means of a fan, being drawn from the 
rooms through ducts, passed over a cooler, and returned again to 
the rooms by other ducts. In some coolers the cooling surfaces 
consist of direct-expansion pipes placed in clusters of convenient 
form ; in others brine pipes are used ; in others there is a shower of 
cold brine, and in some cases combinations of cold pipes and brine 
showers. Whether pipes in the rooms or air circulation give the 
best results is to some extent a matter of opinion, but at the 
present time the tendency*is decidedly in favour of air circulation, 
at any rate for general cold storage purposes. Whichever system 
be adopted, it is important for economical reasons that ample 
cooling surface be allowed, and that all surfaces be kept clean and 
active, to make the difference between the temperature of the 
evaporating liquid and the rooms as small as possible. Small 
surfaces reduce first cost, but involve higher working expenses by 
decreasing the value of Ti/(T 2 — Ti), and thus demanding more 
energy, and consequently more fuel, to effect the given result than 
if larger surfaces were employed. 

The general arrangement of an ice factory for producing can ice 
is shown in fig. 6. The water to be frozen is contained in galvanized 

IF 




Fig. 6. — General Arrangement of an Ice Factory. 



or terned steel moulds suspended in a tank filled to the proper 
level with brine maintained at the desired temperature. The 
moulds are frequently arranged in frames, so that by means of 
an overhead crane one complete row is lifted at a time. When 
the water is frozen the moulds are dipped in a tank containing 
warm water, and on being tipped the blocks of ice fall out. Ordinary 
water contains air, and ice made from it is generally opaque, due 
to the inclusion of numerous small air-bubbles. To produce clear 
ice the water must be agitated during the freezing process, or 
previously boiled to get rid of the air. Distilled water is frequently 
used, as well as\he water produced by the condensation ofthe 
steam from the engine, which of course must be thoroughly purified 
and filtered. It should be noted, however, that with an ice- 
making plant of moderate size and a steam-engine of good con- 
struction the weight of steam used will not nearly equal the weight 
of iee produced, so that the difference must be made up either by 
distillation, which is a costly process, or by ordinary water. Can 
ice is usually made in blocks weighing 56, 112 of 224 lb, and irom 
4 to 8 in. thick. For cell ice ordinary water is used, agitated 



REGAL 



35 



during freezing. The cells are flat and constructed of galvanized 
iron, so as to form a hollow space of about 2 in. in width, 
through which cold brine is circulated by a pump. They are 
placed vertically in a tank, the distance between them being from 
8 to 14 in., according to the thickness of the ice to be produced. 
The tank is filled with water, which is kept in agitationby means 
of a reciprocating paddle or piston; in this way the air escapes, 
and with proper care a block of great transparency is produced. 
To thaw it off, warm brine is circulated through the cells. A usual 
size for cell ice is 4 ft. by 3 ft. by 1 ft. mean thickness, the 
weight being about 6 cwt. If perfectly transparent ice is required, 
the two sides of the block are not allowed to join up, and it is then 
called plate ice, which is often made in very large blocks, afterwards 
divided by saws or steam cutters. ^ In such cases the evaporation 
of the ammonia or other refrigerating liquid frequently takes place 
in the cells themselves, brine being dispensed with. With a well- 
constructed can ice-plant of say 25 tons capacity per day, from 15 
to 16 tons of ice should be made in Great Britain to a ton of best 
steam coal. For cell and plate ice the production is considerably 
below this, and the first cost of the plant is much greater than that 
for can ice. 

Fig. 7 shows an arrangement of cold storage on land, refrigerated 
on the air circulation system. The insulated rooms, on two floors, 





UOAOINC 



-t — % — V 



viuti . muwwwx . wunnrum ■ V' gzg ff 



A • * * U OC K 



^A--rvt p r^^M h 



B\ 



O S T.O 



A--,/— -A-ftS— -J— ~>i-4M— -/-— Jt. 



Fig. 7. — Cold Stores. 

are approached by corridors, so as to exclude external air, which if 
allowed to enter would deposit moisture upon the^ cold goods. 
The air cooler is placed at the end, and the air is distributed by 
means of wood ducts furnished with slides for regulating the 
temperature of the rooms, which are insulated according to the 
method shown in fig. 5. In some cases, instead of the entrance 
being at the, sides or ends, it is at the top, all goods being raised 
to the top floor in lifts and lowered by lifts into the rooms. With 
good machinery the cost of raising is not great, and is probably 
equalled by the saving in refrigeration, since the boms hold the 
heavy cold air as a glass holds water. 

Large passenger vessels and yachts are now generally fitted with 
refrigerating machinery for preserving provisions, cooling water 
and wine, and making ice. Usually two insulated compartments 
are provided, one for frozen meats at about 20 F., and one for 
vegetables, &c, at about 40 °. They have a capacity of from 
1500 to 3000 cub. ft. or more, according to the number of passen- 
gers carried, and they are generally cooled by means of brine pipes, 
though direct expansion and air circulation are sometimes adopted. 
A passenger vessel requires from 2 to 4 cwt. of ice per day. On 
battleships and cruisers the British Admiralty use small compressed- 
air machines for ice-making, and larger machines, generally on the 
carbonic-acid system, for cooling the magazines. A modern frozen- 
meat-carrying vessel will accommodate as much as 120,000 
carcases, partly sheep and partly Iambs, requiring a hold capacity 
of about 300,000 cub. ft. In some vessels both fore and aft 
holds and 'tween decks are insulated. Lloyd's Committee now 
issue certificates for refrigerating installations, if constructed 
according^ to their rules, and most modern cargo-carrying vessels 
have their refrigerating machinery classed at Lloyd's. In the 
meat trade between the River Plate, the United States, Canada 
and Great Britain, ammonia or carbonic acid machines are now 
exclusively used, but for the Australian and New Zealand frozen- 
meat trade compressed-air machines are still employed to a small 
extent. The holds of meat-carrying vessels are refrigerated 
eit/ier by cold air circulation or by brine pipes. 



Though the adoption of refrigerating and ice-making machinery 
for industrial purposes practically dates from the year 1880, the 
manufacture of these machines has already assumed very great 
proportions; indeed, in no branch of mechanical engineering, 
with the exception of electrical machinery, has there been so re- 
markablea development in recent years. The sphere of application 
is extending year by year. The cooling of residential and public 
buildings in hot countries, though attempted in a few cases in the 
United States and elsewhere, is yet practically untouched, the 
manufacture of ice and the preservation of perishable foods (apart 
from the frozen and chilled meat trades) have in many countries 
hardly received serious consideration, but in breweries, dairies, 
margarine works and many other industries there is a large and 
increasing field for refrigerating and ice-making machinery. A 
recent application is in the cooling and drying of the air blast for 
blast furnaces. Though this matter had been discussed for some 
years, it was only in 1904 that the first plant was put to work at 
Pittsburg. 

For further information reference may be made to the following: 
Siebel, Compend. of Mechanical Refrigeration (Chicago); Red- 
wood, Theoretical and Practical Ammonia Refrigeration (New 
York); Stephansky, Practical Running of an Ice and Refriger- 
ating Plant (Boston); Lcdoux, Ice-Making Machines (New 
York); Wallis-Taylor, Refrigerating and Ice-Making- Machines 
(London); Ritchie Leask, Refrigerating Machinery (London); Dc 
Volson Wood, Thermodynamics , Heat Motors and Refrigerating 
Machinery (New York); Linde, Kalteerzeugungsmaschine Lexikon 
der gesamten Technik; Behrend, Eis und Kdlteerzeugungs- 
Maschinen (Halle); De Marchena, ^Compressions Kaltemaschinen 
(Halle); Theodore Koller, Die Kalteindustrie (Vienna); Voorhees, 
Indicating the Refrigerating Machine (Chicago); Norman Selfe, 
Machinery for Refrigeration (Chicago) ; Hans Lorenz, Modem Re- 
frigerating Machinery (London); Lehnert, Moderne Kdltetechnik 
(Leipzig) ; L. ^ Marchis, Production et utilisation du froid 
(Pans); C. Heinel, Bau und Betrieb von Kaltemaschinen Anlagen 
(Oldenburg); R. Stetefcld, Eis und Kalteerzeugungs-Maschinen 
(Stuttgart). (T. B. L.) 

REGAL, a small late-medieval portable organ, furnished with 
beating-reeds and having two bellows like a positive organ; 
also in Germany the name given to the reed-stops (beating-rceds) 
of a large organ, and more especially the " vox humana " stop. 
The name was not at first applied to the small tabic instrument, 
but to certain small brass pipes in the organ, sounded by means 
of beating-reeds, the longest of the 8-ft. tone being but si in- 
long. Praetorius (1618) mentions a larger regal used in the 
court orchestras of some of the German princes, more like a 
positive, containing 4-ft., 8-ft. and even sometimes 16-ft. tone 
reeds, and having behind the case two bellows. These rcgals 
were used not only at banquets but often to replace positives 
in small and large churches. The very small regal, sometimes 
called Bible-regal, because *it can be taken to pieces and folded 
up like a book, is also mentioned by the same writer, who states 
that these little instruments, first made in Nuremberg and 
Augsburg, have an unpleasantly harsh tone, due to their tiny 
pipes, not quite an inch long. The pipes in this case were not 
intended to reinforce the vibrations of the beating-reed or of its 
overtones as in the reed pipes of the organ, but merely to form 
an attachment for keeping the reed in its place without inter- 
fering with its functions. The beating-rccd itself in the older 
organs of the early middle ages, many of which, undoubtedly 
were reed organs, was made of wood; those of the regal were 
mostly of brass (hence their " brazen voices "). The length of 
the vibrating portion of the beating-reed governed the pitch of 
the pipe and was regulated by means of a wire passing through 
the socket, the other end pressing on the reed at the proper 
distance. Drawings of the reeds of regals and other reed-pipes, 
as well as of the instrument itself, are given by Praetorius 
(pi. iv., xxxviii.). « 

There is evidence to show that in England, and France also, 
the word "regal " was applied to reed-stops on the organ; 
Mersenne (1636) states that " now the word is applied to the 
vox humana stop on the organ." In England, as late as the 
reign of George III., there was the appointment of " tuner of 
the regals " to the Chapel Royal. 

The reed-stops required constant tuning, according to Prae- 
torius, who lays special emphasis on the fact that the pitch 
of the reed-pipes alone falls in summer and rises in winter. 

During the 16th and 17th centuries the regal was a very great 
favourite, and although, owing to the civil wars and the ravages 



36 



REGALIA— REGENERATION OF LOST PARTS 



of time, very few specimens now remain, the regals are often men- 
tioned in old wills and inventories, such as the list of Henry Vlll.'s 
musical instruments made after his death by Sir Philip Wilder 
(Brit. Mus. Harleian MS. 1415, fol. 200 seq.), in which no fewer than 
thirteen pairs of single and five pairs of double regals are mentioned. 
Monteverde scored for the regals in his operas, and the instrument is 
described and figured by S. Virdung in 151 1, Martin Agricola in 
1528, and Ottmar Luseinius in 1536, as well as by Michael Praetorius 
in 1618. (K. S.) 

REGALIA (Lat. regalis, royal, from rex, king), the ensigns 
of royalty. The crown (see Crown and Coronet) and sceptre 
(see Sceptre) are dealt with separately. Other ancient symbols 
of royal authority are bracelets, the sword, a robe or mantle, 
and, in Christian times, a ring. Bracelets, as royal emblems, 
are mentioned in the Bible in connexion with Saul (2 Sam. i. 10), 
and they have been commonly used by Eastern monarchs. 
In Europe their later use seems to have been fitfully confined 
to England, although they were a very ancient ornament for 
kings among the Teutonic races. Two coronation bracelets 
are mentioned among the articles of the regalia ordered to be 
destroyed at the time of the Commonwealth, and two new 
ones were made at the Restoration. These are of gold, i| in. 
in width, and ornamented with the rose, thistle, harp and 
fleur-de-lis in enamel round them. They have not been used 
for modern coronations. 

The sword is one of the usual regalia of most countries, and 
is girded on to the sovereign during the coronation. In England 
the one sword has been developed into five. The Sword of 
State is borne before the sovereign on certain state occasions, 
and at the coronation is exchanged for a smaller sword, with 
which the king is ceremonially girded. The three other swords 
of the regalia are the " Curtana," the Sword of Justice to the 
Spirituality, and the Sword of Justice to the Temporality. 
The Curtana has a blade cut off short and square, indicating 
thereby the quality of mercy. 

The mantle, as a symbol of royalty, is almost universal, but 
in the middle ages other quasi-priestly robes were added to 
it (see Coronation). The English mantle was formerly made 
of silk; latterly cloth of gold has been used. The ring, by 
which the sovereign is wedded to his kingdom, is not of so wide 
a range of usage. That of the English kings held a large ruby 
with a cross engraved on it. Recently a sapphire has been 
substituted for the ruby. Golden spurs, though included 
among the regalia, are merely used to touch the king's feet, 
and are not worn. 

The orb and cross was not anciently placed in the king's 
hands during the coronation ceremony, but was carried by 
him- in the left hand on leaving the church. It is emblematical 
of monarchical rule, and is only used by a reigning sovereign. 
The idea is undoubtedly derived from the globe with the figure 
of Victory with which the Roman emperors are depicted. The 
larger orb of the English regalia is a magnificent ball of gold, 
6 in. in diameter, with a band round the centre edged with 
gems and pearls. A similar band arches the globe, on the 
top of which is a remarkably fine amethyst i| in. in height, 
upon which rests the cross of gold outlined with diamonds. 
There is a smaller orb made for Mary II., who reigned jointly 
with King William III. 

The English regalia, with one or two exceptions, were made 
for the coronation of Charles II. by Sir Robert Vyner. The 
Scottish regalia preserved at Edinburgh comprise the crown, 
dating, in part, from Robert the Bruce, the sword of state 
given to James IV. by Pope Julius II., and two sceptres. 

Besides regalia proper, certain other articles are sometimes 
included under the name, such as the ampulla for the holy oil, and 
the coronation spoon. The ampulla is of solid gold in the form of 
an eagle with outspread wings. It weighs 10 oz., and holds 6 oz. 
of oil. The spoon was not originally used for its present purpose. 
It is of the 12th or 13th century, with a long handle and egg- 
shaped bowl. Its history is quite unknown. 

See Cyril Davenport, The English Regalia, with illustrations in 
colour of all the regalia; Leopold Wiekham Legg, English Corona- 
tion Records; The Ancestor, Nos. 1 and 2 (1902); Menin, The Form, 
&c. t of Coronations (translated from French, 1727). 



REGENERATION OF LOST PARTS. A loss and renewal 
of living material, either continual or periodical, is a familiar 
occurrence in the tissues of higher animals. The surface of 
the human skin, the inner lining of the mouth and respiratory 
organs, the blood corpuscles, the ends of the nails, and many 
other portions of tissues are continuously being destroyed and 
replaced. The hair of many mammals, the feathers of birds, 
the epidermis of reptiles, and the antlers of stags are shed and 
replaced periodically. In these normal cases the regeneration 
depends on the existence of special formative layers or groups 
of cells, and must be regarded in each case as a special adapta- 
tion, with individual limitations and peculiarities, rather than 
as a mere exhibition of the fundamental power of growth and 
reproduction displayed by living substance. Many tissues, 
even in the highest animals, are capable of replacing an ab- 
normal loss of substance. Thus in mammals, portions of 
muscular tissue, of epithelium, of bone, and of nerve, after 
accidental destruction or removal, may be renewed. The 
characteristic feature of such cases appears to be, in the higher 
animals at any rate, that lost cells are replaced only from cells 
of the same morphological order — epiblastic cells from the 
epiblast, mesoblastic from the mesoblast, and so forth. It is 
also becoming clear that, at least in the higher animals, regenera- 
tion is in intimate relation with the central nervous system. 
The process is in direct relation to the general power of growth 
and reproduction possessed by protoplasm, and is regarded by 
pathologists as the consequence of " removal of resistances to 
growth." It is much less common in the tissues of higher 
plants, in which the adult cells have usually lost the power of 
reproduction, and in which the regeneration of lost parts is 
replaced by a very extended capacity for budding. Still, 
more complicated reproductions of lost parts occur in many 
cases, and are more difficult to understand. 

In Amphibia the entire epidermis, together with the slime-glands 
and the integumentary sense-organs, is regenerated by the epidermic 
cells in the vicinity of the defect. The whole limb of a Salamander 
or a Triton will grow again and again after amputation. Similar 
renewal is either rarer or more difficult in the case of Siren and Pro- 
teus. In frogs regeneration of amputated limbs does not usually 
take place, but instances have been recorded. Chelonians, croco- 
diles and snakes are unable to regenerate lost parts to any extent, 
while lizards and geckoes possess the capacity in a high degree. 
The capacity is absent almost completely in birds and mammals. 
In eoelenterates, worms, and tunicates the power is exhibited in a 
very varying extent. In Hydra, Nais, and Lumbriculus, after 
transverse section, each part may complete the whole ^ animal. 
In most worms the greater, and in particular the anterior part, 
will grow a new posterior part, but the separated posterior portion 
dies. In Hydra, sagittal and horizontal amputations result in the 
completion of the separated parts. In worms such operations 
result in death, which no doubt may be a mere consequence of the 
more severe wound. Extremely interesting instances of regenera- 
tion are what are called " Heteromorphoses," where the removed 
part is replaced by a dissimilar structure. The tail of a lizard, 
grown after amputation, differs in structure from the normal tail: 
the spinal cord is replaced by an epithelial tube which gives off no 
nerves; the vertebrae are replaced by an unsegmented carti- 
laginous tube; very frequently "super-regeneration" occurs, the 
amputated limb or tail being replaced by double or multiple 
new structures. 

J. Loeb produced many heteromorphoses on lower animals. 
He lopped off the polyp head and the pedal disc of a Tubularia, 
and supported the lopped stem in an inverted position in the sand; 
the original pedal end, now superior, gave rise to a new polyp head, 
while the neck-end, on regeneration, formed a pedal disc. In 
Cerianlhus, a sea -anemone, and in done, an aseidian, regeneration 
after his operations resulted in the formation of new mouth-openings 
in abnormal places, surrounded by elaborate structures character- 
istic of normal mouths. Other observers have recorded hetero- 
morphoses in Crustacea, where antennulae have been regenerated 
in place of eyes. It appears that, in the t same fashion as^ more 
simply organized animals display a capacity for reproduction of 
lost parts greater than that of higher animals, so embryos and 
embryonic structures generally have a higher power of renewal 
than that displayed by the corresponding adult organs or organisms. 
Moreover, experimental work on the young stages of organisms has 
revealed a very striking series of phenomena, similar to the hetero- 
morphoses in adult tissues, but more extended in range. H. Drieseh, 
O. Hertwig and others, by separating the segmentation spheres, 
by destroying some of them, by compressing young embryos by 
glass plates, and by many other means, have caused cells to develop 



REGALIA 



Plate I 




i.— St EDWARD'S CROWN. The ancient crown was destroyed at the 
1 Commonwealth , and a model made for Charles Il's coronation. 





Virfti£<s 



2.—THE IMPERIAL STATE CROWN, as worn hy Queen Victoria. The Black 

Prince's ruby is in the centre. Modifications in the cap were made for the cotonation 

of King Edward VII. and the smaller "Cullman" diamond substituted for the sapphire 

below the ruby. 



3— QUEEN ALEXANDRA'S CORONATION CROWN, with the 
Koh-i-Noor in centre. 




4.— THE CORONET OF THE PRINCE OF WALES. 




The illustrations on these 
plates are, except where 
otherwise stated t repro- 
duced by permission from 
the unique collection of 
photographs in the pos- 
session of Sir Benjamin 
Stone, formerly M. P. 
for East Birmingham. 



XXIII. 36. 



5.— THE LARGER OR KING'S ORB. 




6.— THE LESSER C 



Plate n. 



REGALIA 




i.— THE SCEPTRES: (a) The Sceptre with the Dove; (6) The 
Royal Sceptre with the Cross (c/.Fig. 3); (c) The Queen's Sceptre 
with the Cross; (d) The Queen's Ivory Rod; (e) The Queen's 
Sceptre with the Dove. 




2.— THE CORONATION SPOON. 





4.— THE SWORDS: (a) The Spiritual Sword of Justice; (6) The 
Sword of State; (c) The. Temporal Sword of Justice. 

Photo, W. E. Gray, 



• 

• 

1 ^1 

P 


4H 

''^H 





3.— THE HEAD OF THE ROYAL 
SCEPTRE with the largest of 
the "Star of Africa" (Cullinan) 
Diamonds. photo, W. E. Gray. 




5.— THE BRACELETS. 




6.— THE AMPULLA. 



7.— THE St. GEORGE'S SPURS. 



REGALIA 



Plate in. 




i.— THE SILVER-GILT CHRISTENING FONT, made for 
Charles II. 





2 — QUEEN ELIZABETH'S SALT-CELLAR. 



3.— SILVER-GILT ALTAR DISH, used at Christmas and Easter in the 
Cbapel of St Peter ad Vincula, Tower of London. 




4.— THE GOLD SALT-CELLAR preseoted to the Crown by the City of Exeter. 



Plate IV. 



REGALIA 





o # 



"3 .£ 



"Si 



h .a 
11 



P 2 

pi 3 

SI 



REGENSBURG— REGENT 



37 



so as to give rise to structures which in normal development they 
would not have formed. 

It is clear that there are at least three kinds of factors in- 
volved in regeneration. There are: (i) Regenerations due to 
the presence of undifferentiated, or little differentiated, cells, 
which have retained the normal capacity of multiplication when 
conditions are favourable. (2) Regenerations due to the 
presence of special complicated rudiments, the stimulus to the 
development of which is the removal of the fully formed 
structure. (3) Regeneration involving the general capacity 
of protoplasm to respond to changes in the surroundings by 
changes of growth. The most general view is to regard re- 
generations as special adaptations; and A. Weismann, following 
in this matter Arnold Lang, has developed the idea at con- 
siderable length, and has found a place for regenerations in his 
system of the germ-plasm (see Heredity) by the conception 
of the existence of " accessory determinants." Hertwig, on 
the other hand, attaches great importance to the facts of 
regeneration as evidence for his view that every cell of a body 
contains a similar essential plasm. 

In E. Schwalbe's Morphologic der Minbildungen (1904), part i. 
chap, v., an attempt is made to associate the facts of regeneration 
with those of embryology and pathology. Our knowledge of the 
facts, however, is not yet systematic enough to allow of important 
general conclusions. The power of regeneration appears to be^ in 
some cases a special adaptation, but more often simply an expression 
of the general power of protoplasm to grow and to reproduce its 
kind. It has been suggested that regenerated parts always repre- 
sent ancestral stages, but there is no conclusive evidence for this 
view. (P. C. M.) 

REGENSBURG (Ratisbon), a city and episcopal see of 
Germany, in the kingdom of Bavaria, and the capital of the 
government district of the Upper Palatinate. Pop, (1905) 48,41 2. 
It is situated on the right bank of the Danube, opposite the 
influx of the Regen, 86 m. by rail N.E. from Munich, and 60 m. 
S.E. of Nuremberg. On the other side of the river is the suburb 
Stadt-am-Hof, connected with Regensburg by a long stone 
bridge of the 12th century, above and below which *are the 
islands of Oberer and Unterer Worth. In appearance the 
town is quaint and romantic, presenting almost as faithful a 
picture of a town of the early middle ages as Nuremberg does 
of the later. One of the most characteristic features in its 
architecture is the number of strong loopholed towers attached 
to the more ancient dwellings. The interesting " street of the 
envoys " {Gesandtenstrasse) is so called because it contained the 
residences of most of the envoys to the German diet, whose 
coats-of-arms may still be seen on many of the houses. 

The cathedral, though small, is a very interesting example 
of pure German Gothic. It was founded in 1275, and completed 
in 1634, with the exception of the towers, which were finished 
in 1869. Theinteriorcontainsnumerous interesting monuments, 
including one of Peter Vischer's masterpieces. Adjoining the 
cloisters are two chapels of earlier date than the cathedral itself, 
one of which, known as the "old cathedral," goes back 
perhaps to the 8th century. The church of St James — also 
called Schottenkirche — a plain Romanesque basilica of the 
1 2th century, derives its name from the monastery of Irish 
Benedictines (" Scoti ") to which it was attached; the principal 
doorway is covered with very singular grotesque carvings. 
The old parish church of St Ulrich is a good example of the 
Transition style of the* 13th century, and contains a valu- 
able antiquarian collection. Examples of the Romanesque 
basilica style are the church of Obermunster, dating from 
1010, and the abbey church of St Emmeran, built in the 13th 
century, and remarkable as one of the few German churches with 
a detached belfry. The beautiful cloisters of the ancient abbey, 
one of the oldest in Germany, are still in fair preservation. In 
1809 the conventual buildings were converted into a palace for 
the prince of Thurn and Taxis, hereditary postmaster-general 
of the Holy Roman Empire. The town hall, dating in part 
from the 14th century, contains the rooms occupied by the 
imperial diet from 1663 to 1806. An historical interest also 
attaches to the Gasthofzum Goldenen Krettz (Golden Cross Inn), 



where Charles V. made the acquaintance of Barbara Blomberg, 
the mother of Don John of Austria (b. 1547). The house is also 
shown where Kepler died in 1630. Perhaps the most pleasing 
modern building in the city is the Gothic villa of the king of 
Bavaria on the bank of the Danube. At Kumpfmuhl, in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the city, was discovered, in 1885, the 
remains of a Roman camp with an arched gateway; the latter, 
known as the Porta Praetoria, was cleared in 1887. Among the 
public institutions of the city should be mentioned the public 
library, picture gallery, botanical garden, and the institute for 
the making of stained glass. The educational establishments 
include two gymnasia, an episcopal clerical seminary, a 
seminary for boys and a school of church music. Among the 
chief manufactures are iron and steel wares, pottery, parquet 
flooring, tobacco, and lead pencils. Boat-building is also 
prosecuted, and a brisk transit trade is carried on in salt, 
grain and timber. 

Near Regensburg are two very handsome classical buildings, 
erected by Louis I. of Bavaria as national monuments of German 
patriotism and greatness. The more imposing of the two is the 
Walhalla, a costly reproduction of the Parthenon, erected as a 
Teutonic temple of fame on a hill rising from the Danube at Donau- 
stauf, 6 m. to the east. The interior, which is as rich as coloured 
marbles, gilding, and sculptures can make it, contains the busts 
of more than a hundred German worthies. The second of King 
Louis's buildings is the Befreiungshalle at Kelheim, 14 m. above 
Regensburg, a large circular building which has for its aim the 
glorification of the neroes of the war of liberation in 18 13. 

The early Celtic settlement of Radespona (L. "Lat. Ratisbona) 
was chosen by the Romans, who named it Casira Regina, as the 
centre of their power on the upper Danube. It is mentioned as a 
trade centre as early as the 2nd century. It afterwards became 
the seat of the dukes of Bavaria, and one of the main bulwarks of 
the East Prankish monarchy; and it was also the focus from which 
Christianity spread over southern Germany. St Emmeran founded 
an abbey here in the middle of the 7th century, and St Boniface 
established the bishopric about a hundred years later. Regensburg 
acquired the freedom of the empire in the 13th century, and was for 
a time the most flourishing city in southern Germany. It became 
the chief seat of the trade with India and the Levant, and the boat- 
men of Regensburg are frequently heard of as expediting the journeys 
of the Crusaders. The city was loyally Ghibelline in its sympathies, 
and was a favourite residence of the emperors. Numerous diets 
were held here from time to time, and after 1663 it became the 
regular place of meeting of the German diet. The Reformation 
found only temporary _ acceptance at Regensburg, and was met 
by a counter-reformation inspired by the Jesuits. Before this 
period the city had almost wholly lost its commercial importance 
owing to the changes in the^ great highways of trade. Regensburg 
had its due share in the Thirty Years' and other wars, and is said 
to have suffered in all no fewer than seventeen sieges. In 1807 
the town and bfehopric were assigned to the prince primate Dalberg, 
and in 18 10 they were ceded to Bavaria. After the battle of 
Eggmuhl in 1809 the Austrians retired upon Regensburg, and the 
pursuing French defeated them again beneath its walls and reduced 
a great part of the city to ashes. 

See Gemeiner, Chronik der Stadt und des Hockstifts Regensburg 
(4 vols., Regensburg, 1800-24); Chroniken der deutscken Stddte,vo\.xv. 
(Leipzig, 1 878); Count v. VJa\der$dorf t Regensburg in seiner Vergangen- 
heit und Gegenwart (4th ed., Regensburg, 1896); Fink, Regensburg in 
seiner Vorzeit und Gegenwart (6th ed., Regensburg, 1903) ; and Schratz, 
Fiihrer durck Regensburg (5th ed., G. Dengler, Regensburg, 1904). 

REGENT (from Lat. regere, to rule), one who rules or governs, 
especially one who acts temporarily as an administrator of the 
realm during the minority or incapacity of the king. This 
latter function, however, is one unknown to the English common 
law. " In judgment of law the king, as king, cannot be said 
to be a minor, for when the royal body politic of the king doth 
meet with the natural capacity in one person the whole body 
shall have the quality of the royal politic, which is the greater 
and more worthy and wherein is no minority. For ornne majus 
continet in se minus " (Coke upon Littleton, 43a). But for reasons 
of necessity a regency, however anomalous it may be in strict 
law, has frequently been constituted both in England and 
Scotland. The earliest instance in English history is the 
appointment of the earl of Pembroke with the assent of the 
loyal barons on the accession of Henry III. 

Whether or not the sanction of parliament is necessary for the 
appointment is a question which has been much discussed. Lord 
Coke recommends that the office should depend on the will of 



38 



REGGIO CALABRIA— REGICIDE 



parliament (Inst., vol. iv. p. 58), and in modern times provision for a 
regency has always been made by act of parliament. In Scotland 
the appointment of regents was always either by the assent of a 
council or of parliament. Thus in 1315 the earl of Moray was ap- 
pointed regent by Robert I. in a council. At a later period appoint- 
ment by statute was the universal form. Thus by an act of 1542 
the earl of Arran was declared regent during the minority of Mary. 
By an act of 1567 the appointment by Mary of the earl of Moray as 
regent was confirmed. As late as 1704 provision was made for a 
regency after the death of Anne. The earliest regency in England 
resting upon an express statute was that created by 28 Hen. VII 1. 
c. 7, under which the king appointed his executors to exercise the 
authority of the crown till the successor to the crown should attain 
the age of eighteen if a male or sixteen if a female. They delegated 
their rights to the protector Somerset, with the assent of the lords 
spiritual and temporal. No other example of a statutory provision 
for a regency occurs till 1751. In that year the act of 24 Geo. II. 
c. 24 constituted the princess-dowager of Wales regent of the kingdom 
in case the ciown should descend to any of her children before such 
child attained the age of eighteen. A council, called the council of 
regency, was appointed to assist the princess. A prescribed oath 
was to be taken by the regent and members of the council. Their 
consent was necessary for the marriage of a successor to the crown 
during minority. It was declared to be unlawful for the regent to 
make war or peace, or ratify any treaty with any foreign power, or 
prorogue, adjourn or dissolve any parliament without the consent of 
the majority of the council of regency, or give her assent to any bill 
for repealing or varying the Act of Settlement, the Act of Uniformity, 
or the Act of the Scottish parliament for securing the Protestant 
religion and Presbyterian church government in Scotland (1707, c. 6). 
The last is an invariable provision, and occurs in all subsequent 
Regency Acts. The reign of George III. affords examples of pro- 
vision for a regency during both the infancy and incapacity of a 
king. 

The act of 5 Geo. III. c. 27 vested in the king power to ap- 
point a regent under the sign manual, such regent to be one of 
certain named members of the royal family. The remaining pro- 
visions closely followed those of the act of George IL In 1788 the 
insanity of the king led to the introduction of a Regency bill. In 
the course of the debate in the House of Lords the duke of York 
disclaimedon behalf of the prince of Wales any right to assume the 
regency without the consent of parliament. Owing to the king's 
recovery the bill ultimately dropped. On a return of the malady in 
1810 the act of 51 Geo. III. c. 1 was passed, appointing the prince 
of Wales regent during the king's incapacity. The royal assent was 
given by commission authorized by resolution of both Houses. By 
this act no council of regency was appointed. There was no 
restriction on the regent's authority over treaties, peace and war, 
or parliament, as in the previous acts, but his power of granting 
peerages, offices and pensions was limited. At the accession of 
William IV. the duchess of Kent was, by 1 Will. IV. c. 2, appointed 
regent, if necessary, until the Princess Victoria should attain the 
age of eighteen. No council of regency was appointed. By 1 Vict, 
c. 72 lords justices were nominated as a kind of regency council 
without a regent in case the successor to the crown should be out 
of the realm at the queen's death. They were restricted from 
granting peerages, and from dissolving parliament without direc- 
tionsfrom the successor. By 3 & 4 Vict. c. 52 Prince Albert was 
appointed regent in case any of Queen Victoria's children should 
succeed to the crown under the age of eighteen. The only restraint 
on his authority was the usual prohibition to assent to any bill 
repealing the Act of Settlement, &c. When George V. came to the 
throne a Regency Bill was again required, as his eldest son was under 
age, and Queen Mary was appointed. By 10 Geo. IV. c. 7 the 
office of regent of the United Kingdom cannot be held by a Roman 
Catholic. A similar disability is imposed in most, if not all, Regency 
Acts. 

REGGIO CALABRIA (anc. Regium, q.v.), a town and archi- 
episcopal see of Calabria, Italy, capital of the province of 
Reggio, on the Strait of Messina, 248 hi. S.S.E. from Naples 
by rail. Pop. (1906) 39,941 (town); 48,362 (commune). It is 
the terminus of the railways from Naples along the west coast, 
and from Metaponto along the east coast of Calabria. The 
straits are here about 7 m. wide, and the distance to Messina 
nearly 10 m. The ferryboats to Messina therefore cross by 
preference from Villa S. Giovanni, 8 m. N. of Reggio, whence 
the distance is only 5 m. In 1894 the town suffered from an 
earthquake, though less severely, than in 1783. It was totally 
destroyed, however, by the great earthquake of December 1908; 
in the centre of the town about 35,000 out of 40,000 persons 
perished. The cathedral, which dated from the 17th century, 
and the ancient castle which rose above it, were wrecked. 
Great damage was done by a seismic wave following the shock. 
The sea front was swept away, and the level of the land here- 
abouts was lowered. (See further Messina.) 



REGGIO NELL' EMILIA, a city and episcopal see of Emilia, 
Italy, the capital of the province of Reggio nclT Emilia (till 
1859 part of the duchy of Modena), 38 m. by rail N.W. of Bologna. 
Pop. (1906) 19,681 (town); 64,548 (commune). The cathe- 
dral, originally erected in the 12th century, was reconstructed 
in the 15th and 16th; the facade shows traces of both periods, 
the Renaissance work being complete only in the lower portion. 
S. Prospero, close by, has a facade of 1504, in which are incor- 
porated six marble lions belonging to the original Romanesque 
edifice. *The Madonna della Ghiara, built in 1597 in the form 
of a Greek cross, and restored in 1900, is beautifully proportioned 
and finely decorated in stucco and with frescoes of the Bologncse 
school of the early 1 7th century. There are several good palaces 
of the early Renaissance, a fine theatre (1857) and a museum 
containing important palaeo-ethnological collections, ancient 
and medieval sculptures, and the natural history collection 
of Spallanzani. Lodovico Ariosto, the poet (1474-1533), was 
born in Reggio, and his father's house is still preserved. The 
industries embrace the making of cheese, objects in cement, 
matches, and brushes, the production of silkworms, and printing; 
and the town is the centre of a rich agricultural district. It 
b*es on the main line between Bologna and Milan, and is con- 
nected by branch lines with Guastalla and Sassuolo (hence a 
line to Modena). 

Regium Lepidi or Regium Lepidum was probabjy founded by 
M. Aemilius Lepidus at the time of the construction of the Via 
Aemilia (187 B.C.). It lay upon this road, half-way between Mutina 
and Parma. It was during the Roman period a flourishing munici- 
pium, but perhaps never became a colony; and it is associated with 
no event more interesting than the assassination of M. Brutus, the 
father of Caesar's friend and foe. The bishopric dates perhaps from 
the 4th century a.d. * Under the Lombards the town was the seat 
of dukes and counts; in the 12th and 13th centuries it formed a 
flourishing republic, busied in surrounding itself with walls (1229), 
controlling the Crostolo and constructing navigable canals to the Po, 
coining money of its own, and establishing prosperous schools. 
About 1290 it first passed into the hands of Obizzo d'Este, and the 
authority of the Este family was after many vicissitudes more 
formally recognized in 1409. In the contest for liberty which began 
in 1796. and closed with annexation to Piedmont in 1859, Reggio 
took vigorous part. 

REGICIDE (Lat. rex, a king, and caedere, to kill), the name 
given to any one who kills a sovereign. Regicides is the name 
given in English history at the Restoration of 1660 to those 
persons who were responsible for the execution of Charles I. 
On the 4th of April 1660 Charles II. in the Declaration of Breda 
promised a free pardon to all his subjects " excepting only such 
persons as shall hereafter be excepted by parliament," and on 
the 14th of May the House of Commons ordered the immediate 
arrest of " all those persons who sat in judgment upon the late 
king's majesty when sentence was pronounced." The number 
of regicides was estimated at 84, this number being composed 
of the 67 present at the last sitting of the court of justice, 
n others who had attended earlier sittings, 4 officers of the 
court and the 2 executioners. Many of them were arrested or 
surrendered themselves, and the House of Commons in con- 
sidering the proposed bill of indemnity suggested that only 
twelve of the regicides, who were named, should forfeit their 
lives; but the House of Lords urged that all the king's judges, 
with three exceptions, and some others, should be treated in 
this way. 

Eventually a compromise was agreed upon, and the bill as passed 
on the 29th of August 1660 divided the regicides into six classes for 
punishment: (1) Four of them, although dead — Cromwell, Ireton, 
Bradshaw and Pride — were to be attainted for high treason. 
(2) The estates of twenty others, also dead, were to be subjected to 
fine or forfeiture. (3) Thirty living regicides were excepted from all 
indemnity. (4) Nineteen living regicides were also excepted, but 
with a saving clause that their execution was to be suspended until 
a special act of parliament was passed for this purpose. (5) Six 
others were to be punished, but not capitally. (6) Two, Colonels 
Hutchinson and Thomas Lister, were simply declared incapable 
of holding any office. Two regicides — Ingoldsby, who declared he 
had only signed the warrant under compulsion, and Colonel Matthew 
Thomlinson — escaped without punishment. A court of thirty-four 
commissioners was then appointed to try the regicides, and the 
trial took place in October 1660. Twenty-nine were condemned to 
death, but only ten were actually executed, the remaining nineteen 



REGILLUS— REGIOMONTANUS 



39 



with six others being imprisoned for life. The ten who were exe- 
cuted at Charing Cross or Tyburn, London, in October 1660, were 
Thomas Harrison, John Jones, Adrian Scrope, John Carew, Thomas 
Scot, and Gregory Clement, who had signed the death-warrant; 
the preacher Hugh Peters; Francis Hacker and Daniel Axtel, who 
commanded the soldiers atthe trial and the execution of the king; 
and John Cook, the solicitor who directed the prosecution. In 
January 1 66 1 the bodies of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw were 
exhumed and hanged at Tyburn, but Pride's does not appear to 
have been treated in this way. Of the nineteen or twenty regicides 
who had escaped and were living abroad, three, Sir John Barkstead, 
John Okey and Miles Corbet, were arrested in Holland and executed 
in London in April 1662; and one, John Lisle, was murdered at 
Lausanne. The last survivor of the regicides was probably Edmund 
Ludlow, who died at Vevey in 1692. 

Ludlow's Memoirs, edited by C. H. Firth (Oxford, 1894), give 
interesting details about the regicides in exile. See also D. Masson, 
Life of Milton, vol. vi. (1880), and M. Noble, Lives of the English 
Regicides (1798). (A. W. H.*) 

REGILLUS, an ancient lake of Latium, ttaly, famous in the 
legendary history of Rome as the lake in the neighbourhood 
of which occurred (496 B.C.) the battle which finally decided the 
hegemony of Rome in Latium. During the battle, so runs the 
story, the dictator Postumius vowed a temple to Castor and 
Pollux, who were specially venerated in Tusculum, the chief 
city of the Latins (it being a Roman usage to invoke the aid of 
the gods of the enemy), who appeared during the battle, and 
brought the news of the victory to Rome, watering their horses 
at the spring of Juturna, close to which their temple in the 
Forum was erected. There can be little doubt that the lake 
actually existed. Of the various identifications proposed, the 
best is that of Nibby, who finds it in a now dry crater lake 
(Pantano Secco), drained by an emissarium, the date of which 
is uncertain, some 2 m. N. of Frascati. Along the south bank 
of the lake, at some 30 or 40 ft. above the present bottom, ran 
the aqueducts of the Aqua Claudia and Anio Novus. Most of 
the other sites proposed are not, as Regillus should be, within 
the limits of the territory of Tusculum. 

See T. Ashby in Rendiconti dei Lincei (1898), 103 sqq., and Classical 
Review, 1898. (T. As.) 

REGIMENT (from Late Latin rcgimenlum, rule, regere, to rule, 
govern, direct), originally government, command or authority 
exercised over others, or the office of a ruler or sovereign; in this 
sense the word was common in the 16th century. The most 
familiar instance is the title of the tract of John Knox, the First 
Blast of the Trumpet against the Monstrous Regiment of Women. 
The term as applied to a large body of troops dates from the 
French army of the 16th century. In the first instance it 
implied " command," as nowadays we speak of " General A's 
command," meaning the whole number of troops under bis 
command. The early regiments had no similarity in strength 
or organization, except that each was under one commander. 
With the regularization of armies the commands of all such 
superior officers were gradually reduced to uniformity, and a 
regiment came to be definitely a colonel's command. In the 
British infantry the term has no tactical significance, as the 
number of battalions in a regiment is variable, and one at least 
is theoretically abroad at all times, while the reserve or terri- 
torial battalions serve under a different code to that governing 
the regular battalions. The whole corps of Royal Artillery 
is called " the Royal Regiment of Artillery." In the cavalry 
a regiment is tactically as well as administratively a unit of four 
squadrons. On the continent of Europe the regiment of infantry 
is always together under the command of its colonel, and consists 
of three or four battalions under majors or lieutenant-colonels. 

REGINA, the capital city of the province of Saskatchewan, 
Canada, situated at 104 36' W. and 50 27' N., and 357 m. \V. 
of Winnipeg. Pop. (1907) 9804. After the Canadian Pacific 
railway was completed in 1885, the necessity for a place of 
government on the railway line pressed itself upon the Dominion 
government. The North-West Territories were but little 
settled then, but a central position on the prairies was necessary, 
where the mounted police might be stationed and where the 
numerous Indian bands might be easily reached. The minister 
of the interior at Ottawa, afterwards Governor Dewdncy, chose 



this spot, and for a number of years Regina was the seat of the 
Territorial government. The governor took up his abode on the 
adjoining plain, and the North-West Council met each year, 
with a show of constitutional government about it. On the 
formation of the province of Saskatchewan in 1905 the choice 
of capital was left to the first legislature of the province. Prince 
Albert, Moose Jaw and Saskatoon all advanced claims, but 
Regina was decided on as the capital. It probably doubled 
in population between 1905 and 1907. Its public buildings, 
churches and residences are worthy of a place of greater pre- 
tensions. It is the centre for a rich agricultural district, and 
for legislation, education, law and other public benefits. It 
remains the headquarters of the mounted police for the western 
provinces, and near it is an Indian industrial school of some 
note. 

REGINON, or Regino of PrIJm, medieval chronicler, was 
born at Altripp near Spires, and was educated in the monastery 
of Priim. Here he became a monk, and in 892, just after the 
monastery had been sacked by the Danes, he was chosen abbot. 
In 899, however, he was deprived of this position and he went 
to Trier, where he was appointed abbot of St Martin's, a house 
which he reformed. He died in 915, and was buried in the abbey 
of St Maximin at Trier, his tomb being discovered there in 158 1. 

Reginon wrote a Chronicon, dedicated to Adalberon, bishop of 
Augsburg (d. 909), which deals with the history of the world from 
the commencement of the Christian era to 906, especially the 
history of affairs in Lorraine and the neighbourhood. The first book 
(to 741) consists mainly of extracts from Bede, Paulus Diaconus and 
other writers; of the second book (741-906) the latter part is 
original and valuable, although the chronology is at fault and the 
author relied chiefly upon tradition and hearsay for his informa- 
tion. The work was continued to 967 by a monk of Trier, possibly 
Adalbert, archbishop of Magdeburg (d. 981). The chronicle was 
first published at Mainz in 1521; another edition is in Band I. 
of the Monumenta Germaniae historica. Scriptores (1826); the 
best is the one edited by F. Kurze (Hanover, 1890). It has been 
translated into German by W. Wattehbach (Leipzig, 1890). 
Reginon also drew up at the request of his friend and patron Radbod, 
archbishop of Trier (d. 915), a collection of canons, Libri duo de 
synodalibus causis et disciplinis ecclesiasticis, dedicated to Hatto I., 
archbishop of Mainz; this is published in Tome 132 of J. P. Milne's 
Patrologia Latina. To Radbod he wrote a letter on music, Epistola 
de harmonica institutione, with a Tonarius, the object of this being 
to improve the singing in the churches of the diocese. The letter 
is published in Tome I. of Gerbert's Scriptores ecclesiastici de musica 
sacra (1784), and the Tonarius in Tome II. of Coussemaker's 
Scriptores de musica medii aevi. See also H. Ermisch, Die Chronik 
des Regino bis 813 (Gottingen, 1872); P. Schulz, Die Glaubwurdig- 
keit des Abtes Regino] von Prum (Hamburg, 1894); C. Wawra, 
De Reginone Prumensis (Breslau, 1901); A. Molinier, Les Sources 
de Vhxstoire de France, Tome I. (iqoi); and W. Wattenbach, 
Deutschlands Geschichtsquellen, Band I. (1904). 

REGIOMONTANUS (1436-1476), German astronomer, was 
born at Konigsberg in Franconia on the 6th of June 1436. The 
son of a miller, his name originally was Johann Muller, but he 
called himself, from his birthplace, Joh. de Monteregio, an 
appellation which becamegradually modified into Regiomontanus. 
At Vienna, from 1452, he was the pupil and associate of George 
Purbach (1423-1461), and they jointly undertook a reform of 
astronomy rendered necessary by the errors they detected in 
the Alphonsine Tables. In this they were much hindered by 
the lack of correct translations of Ptolemy's works; and in 
1462 Regiomontanus accompanied Cardinal Bessarion to Italy 
in search of authentic manuscripts. He rapidly mastered Greek 
at Rome and Ferrara, lectured on Alfraganus at Padua, and 
completed at Venice in 1463 Purbach 's Epitome in CI. Ptolcmaei 
magnam compositionem (printed at Venice in 1496), and his own 
De Triangulis (Nuremberg, 1533), the earliest work treating 
of trigonometry as a suhstantive science. A quarrel with 
George of Trebizond, the blunders in whose translation of the 
Almagest he had pointed out, obliged him to quit Rome pre- 
cipitately in 1468. He repaired to Vienna, and was thence 
summoned to Buda by Matthias Corvinus, king of Hungary, for 
the purpose of collating Greek manuscripts at a handsome 
salary. He also finished his Tabulae Direclionum (Nuremberg, 
1475)) essentially an astrological work, but containing a valuable 
table of tangents. An outbreak of war, meanwhile, diverted 



4° 



REGISTER 



the king's attention from learning, and in 1471 Regiomontanus 
settled at Nuremberg. Bernhard Walther, a rich patrician, 
became his pupil and patron; and they together equipped the 
first European observatory, for which Regiomontanus himself 
constructed instruments of an improved type (described in his 
posthumous Scripta, Nuremberg, 1544). His observations of 
the great comet of January 1672 supplied the basis of modern 
cometary astronomy. At a printing-press established in 
Walther's house by Regiomontanus, Purbach's Theoricae 
planelamm novae was published in 1472 or 1473; a series of 
popular calendars issued from it, and in 1474 a volume of 
Ephemerides calculated by Regiomontanus for thirty-two 
years (1474-1506), in which the method of "lunar distances," 
for determining the longitude at sea, was recommended and 
explained. In 1472 Regiomontanus was summoned to Rome 
by Pope Sixtus IV. to aid in the reform of the calendar; and 
there he died, most likely of the plague, on the 6th of July 1476. 

Authorities. — P. Gassendi, Vita Jo. Regiomontani (Parisiis, 
1654); J. G. Doppelmayr, Historische Nachricht von den Niirn- 
bergischen Mathematicis, pp. 1-23 (1730); G. A. Will, Number- 
gisches Gelehrten-Lexikon, iii. 273 (1757); P. Niceron, Memoires 
pour servir a Vhistoire des hommes illustres, xxxviii. 337 (1737); 
J. F. Weidler, Hist. Astronomiae, p. 313; A. G. Kastner, Geschtchte 
der Mathematik, i. 556, 572; J. F. Montucla, Hist, des mathS- 
matiques, i. 541; E. F. Apelt, Die Reformation der Sternkunde, 
p. 34; M. Cantor, Vorlesungen ilber Geschtchte der Math., ii. 254- 
264; M. Curtze, Urkunden zur Gesch. der Math., i. 187 (1902); Corr. 
Astr, vii. 21 (1822); G. H. ^ Schubert, _ Peurbach und Regio- 
montan (Erlangen, 1828); A. Ziegler, Regiomontanus ein geistiger 
Vorlaufer des Columbus (1874) ; J. B. J. Delambre, Hist, de V astrono- 
mic au moyen dge f p. 284; J. S. Bailly, HisL, de Vastr, moderne, 
i. 311; R. Wolf, Geschtchte der Astronomie f p, 87; S. Giinther, 
Allg. Deutsche Biog., Bd. xxii. p. 564; C. G. Jocher's Gelehrten- 
Lexikon, iii. 1959, and Fortsetzung, vi. 1551 (H. W. Rotermund, 
Bremen, 1819); Ersch-Gruber' s Encyklopaedie t ii. th. xx. p. 205; 
C. T. von Murr, Memorabilia Btbliothecarum Norimbergensium t 
i. 74 (1786). (A. M. C.) 

REGISTER, a record of facts, proceedings, acts, events, 
names, &c, entered regularly for reference in a volume kept for 
that purpose, also the volume in which the entries are made. 
The Fr. registre is taken from the Med. Lat. registrum for registum, 
Late Lat. regesta t things recorded, hence list, catalogue, from 
regerere, to carry or bear back, to transcribe, enter on a roll. 
For the keeping of public registers dealing with various subjects 
see Registration and the articles there referred to, and for the 
records of baptisms, marriages and burials made by a parish 
clergyman, see section Parish Registers below. The keeper of 
a register was, until the beginning of the 19th century, usually 
known as a " register," but that title has in Great Britain now 
been superseded by "registrar"; it still survives in the Lord 
Clerk Register, an officer of state in Scotland, nominally the 
official keeper of the national records, whose duties are per- 
formed by the Deputy" Clerk Register. In the United States 
the title is still " register." The term " register " has also been 
applied to mechanical contrivances for the automatic registration 
or recording of figures, &c. (see Cash Register), to a stop in an 
organ, to the compass of a voice or musical instrument, and also 
to an apparatus for regulating the in- and outflow of air, heat, 
steam, smoke or the like. Some of these instances of the 
application of the term are apparently due to a confusion in 
etymology, with Lat. regere T to rule, regulate. 

Parish Registers were instituted in England by an order 
of Thomas Cromwell, as vicegerent to Henry VIII., " supreme 
hedd undre Christ of the Church of Englande," in September 
1538. The idea appears to have been of Spanish origin, 
Cardinal Ximenes having instituted, as archbishop of Toledo, 
registers of baptisms in 1497. They included, under the 
above order, baptisms, marriages and burials, which were to 
be recorded weekly. In 1597 it was ordered by the Convocation 
of Canterbury that parchment books should be provided for 
the registers and that transcripts should be made on parch- 
ment of existing registers on paper, and this order was repeated 
in the 70th canon of 1603. The transcripts then made now 
usually represent the earliest registers. It was further pro- 
vided at both these dates that an annual transcript of the 



register should be sent to the bishop for preservation in the 
diocesan registry, which was the origin of the " bishop's tran- 
scripts." The " Directory for the publique worship of God," 
passed by parliament in 1645, provided for the date of birth 
being also registered, and in August 1653, an Act of " Bare- 
bones' Parliament " made a greater change, substituting 
civil " parish registers " (sic) for the clergy, and ordering 
them to record births, banns, marriages and burials. The 
" register " was also to publish the banns and a justice to per- 
form the marriage. The register books were well kept under 
this civil system, but at the Restoration the old system was 
resumed. 

A tax upon births, marriages and burials imposed in 1694 
led to the clergy being ordered to register all births, apart 
from baptisms, but the act soon expired and births were not 
again registered till 1836. Lord Hardwicke's Marriage Act 
(1754), by its rigid provisions, increased the registration of 
marriages by the parochial clergy and prescribed a form of 
entry. In 181 2 parish registers became the subject of parlia- 
mentary enactment, owing to the discovery of their deficiencies. 
Rose's Act provided for their safer custody, for efficient bishops, 
transcripts, and for uniformity of system. This act continued 
to regulate the registers till their supersession for practical 
purposes, in 1837, by civil registration under the act of 1836. 

In age, completeness and condition they vary much. A 
blue book on the subject was published in 1833, but the returns 
it contains are often inaccurate. A few begin even earlier 
than Cromwell's order, the oldest being that of Tipton, Staffs, 
(1513). Between 800 and 900, apparently, begin in 1538 or 
1539. The entries were originally made in Latin, but this 
usage died out early in the 17th century: decay and the 
crabbed handwriting of the time render the earlier registers 
extremely difficult to read. There is general agreement as 
to the shocking neglect of these valuable records in the past, 
and the loss of volumes appears to have continued even through 
the 19th century. Their custody is legally vested in the 
parochial clergy and their wardens, but several proposals have 
been made for their removal to central depositories. The 
fees for searching them are determined by the act of 1836, 
which prescribes half a crown for each certified extract, and 
sixpence a year for searching, with a shilling for the first year. 

The condition of the " bishops' transcripts " was, through- 
out, much worse than that of the parish registers, there being 
no funds provided for their custody. The report on Public 
Records in 1800 drew attention to their neglect, but, in spite 
of the provisions in Rose's Act (1812), little or nothing was done, 
and, in spite of their importance as checking, and even some- 
times supplementing deficient parish registers, they remained 
" unarranged, unindexed and unconsultable." Of recent 
years, however, some improvement has been made. It has 
also been discovered that transcripts from " peculiars " exist 
in other than episcopal registries. 

Outside the parochial registers, which alone were official 
in character, there were, till 1754, irregular marriage registers, 
of which those of the Fleet prison are the most famous, and 
also registers of private chapels in London. Those of the 
Fleet and of Mayfair chapel were deposited with the registrar- 
general, but not authenticated. The registers of dissenting 
chapels remained unofficial till an act of 1840 validated a 
number which had been authenticated, and was extended to 
many others in 1858. Useful information on these registers, 
now mostly deposited with the registrar-general, will be found 
in Sims' Manual, which also deals with those of private chapels, 
of English settlements abroad preserved in London, and with 
English Roman Catholic registers. These last, however, begin 
only under George II. and are restricted to certain London 
chapels. 

The printing of parish registers has of late made much 
progress, but the field is so vast that the rate is relatively 
slow. There is a Parish Register Society, and a section of 
the Harleian Society engaged on the same work, as well as 
some county societies and also one for Dublin. But 



REGISTRATION 



4i 



so many have been issued privately or by individuals that 
reference should be made to the lists in Marshall's Genealogist's 
Guide (1893) and Dr Cox's Parish Registers (19 10), and even 
this last is not perfect. The Huguenot Society has printed 
several registers of the Protestant Refugees, and Mr Moens 
that of the London Dutch church. There are also several 
registers of marriages alone now in print, such as that of St 
Dunstan's, Stepney, in 3 vols. Colonel Chester's extensive 
MS. collection of extracts from parish registers is now in the 
College of Arms, London, and the parishes are indexed in 
Dr Marshall's book. MS. extracts in the British Museum are 
dealt with in Sims' Manual. 

In Scotland registers of baptisms and marriages were insti- 
tuted by the clergy in 1551, and burials were added by order 
of the Privy Council in 1616; but these were very imperfectly 
kept, especially in rural parishes. Yet it was not till 1854 
that civil registration was introduced, by act of parliament, 
in their stead. Some 900 parish registers, beginning about 
1563, have been deposited in the Register House, Edinburgh, 
under acts of parliament which apply to all those prior to 18 19. 
Mr Hallen has printed the register of baptisms of Muthill 
Episcopal Church. 

In Ireland, parish registers were confined to the now dis- 
established church, which was that of a small minority, and 
were, as in Scotland, badly kept. Although great inconvenience 
was caused by this system, civil registration of marriages, 
when introduced in 1844, was only extended to Protestants, 
nor was it till 1864 that universal civil registration was intro- 
duced, great difficulty under the Old Age Pensions Act being 
now the result. No provision was made, as in Scotland, for 
central custody of the registers, which, both Anglican and 
Nonconformist, remain in their former repositories. Roman 
Catholic registers in Ireland only began, apparently, to be 
kept in the 19th century. 

In France registers, but only of baptism, were first instituted 
in 1539. The Council of Trent, however, made registers both 
of baptisms and of marriages a law of the Catholic Church in 
1563, and Louis XIV. imposed a tax on registered baptisms and 
marriages in 1707. 

See Burn, The History of Parish Registers (1829, 1862); Sims, 
Manual for the Genealogist (1856, 1888); Chester Waters, Parish 
Registers in England (1870, 1882, 1887); Marshall, Genealogist's 
Guide (1893); A. M. Burke, Key to the Ancient Parish Registers 
(1908) ; J. C. Cox, Parish Registers of England (1910) ; W. D. Bruce, 
Account . . . of the Ecclesiastical Courts of Record (1854); Bigland, 
Observations on Parochial Registers (1764); Report of the Commis- 
sioners on the state of Registers of Births \ &c. (1838); Lists of Non- 
parochial Registers and Records in the custody of the Registrar- 
General (1841); Report on Non-parochial Registers (1857); Detailed 
List of the old Parochial Registers of Scotland (1872). (j. H. R.) 

REGISTRATION. In all systems of law the registration 
of certain legal facts has been regarded as necessary, chiefly 
for the purpose of ensuring publicity and simplifying evidence. 
Registers, when made in performance of a public duty, are as 
a general rule admissible in evidence merely on the production 
from the proper custody of the registers themselves or (in most 
cases) of examined or certified copies. The extent to which 
registration is carried varies very much in different countries. 
For obvious reasons, judicial decisions are registered in all 
countries alike. In other matters no general rule can be laid 
down, except perhaps that on the whole registration is not as 
fully enforced in the United Kingdom and the United States 
as in continental states. The most important uses of registra- 
tion occur in the case of judicial proceedings, land, ships, bills 
of sale, births, marriages and deaths, companies, friendly and 
other societies, newspapers, copyrights, patents, designs, trade 
marks and professions and occupations. In England registrars 
are attached to the privy council, the Supreme Court and the 
county courts. In the king's bench division (except in its 
bankruptcy jurisdiction) the duty of registrars is performed by 
the masters. Besides exercising limited judicial authority, 
registrars are responsible for the drawing up and recording of 
various stages of the proceedings from the petition, writ or 



plaint to the final decision. 1 With them are filed affidavits, 
depositions, pleadings, &c, when such filing is necessary. The 
difference between filing and registration is that the documents 
filed are filed without alteration, while only an epitome is 
usually registered. The Judicature Act 1873 created district 
registries in the chief towns, the district registrar having an 
authority similar to that of a registrar of the Supreme Court. 
In the admiralty division cases of account are usually referred 
to the registrar and merchants. The registration in the central 
office of the supreme court of judgments affecting lands, writ3 
of execution, recognizances and liles pendentes in England, and 
the registration in Scotland of abbreviates of adjudications 
and of inhibitions, are governed by special legislation. All 
these are among the incumbrances for which search is made on 
investigating a title. Decisions of criminal courts are said to 
be recorded, not registered, except in the case of courts of 
summary jurisdiction, in which, by the Summary Jurisdiction 
Act 1879, a register of convictions is kept. Probates of wills 
and letters of administration, which arc really judicial decisions, 
are registered in the principal or district registries of the probate 
division. In Scotland registration is used for giving a summary 
remedy on obligations without action by means of the fiction of 
a judicial decision having been given establishing the obligation. 

See also the separate articles Land Registration; 
Shipping; Bill of Sale; Companies; Friendly Societies; 
Building Societies; Press Laws; Copyright; Trade 
Marks; Patents, &c. 

Registration of Voters. — Prior to 1832 £he right of parlia- 
mentary electors in England was determined at the moment 
of the tender of the vote at the election, or, in the event of a 
petition against the return, by a scrutiny, a committee of the 
House of Commons striking off those whose qualification was 
held to be insufficient, and, on the other hand, adding those 
who, having tendered their votes at the poll, with a good title 
to do so, were rejected at the time. A conspicuous feature of 
the Reform Act of that year was the introduction of a new 
mode of ascertaining the rights of electors by means of an 
entirely new system of published lists, subject to claims and 
objections, and after due inquiry and revision forming a register 
of voters. Registration was not altogether unknown in Great 
Britain in connexion with the parliamentary franchise before 
the Reform Acts of 1832. Thus in the Scottish counties the 
right to vote depended on the voter's name being upon the 
roll of freeholders established by an act of Charles II.; a 
similar register existed in Ireland of freeholders whose free- 
holds were under £20 annual value; and in the universities 
of Oxford and Cambridge the rolls of members of Convocation 
and of the Senate were, as they still arc, the registers of par- 
liamentary voters. But except in such cases as the above, 
the right of a voter had to be determined by the returning 
officer upon the evidence produced before him when the vote 
was tendered at a poll. This necessarily took time, and the 
result was that a contested election in a large constituency 
might last for weeks. The celebrated Westminster election of 
1784, in which the poll began on the 1st of April and ended on 
the 17th of May, may be mentioned as an illustration. More- 
over, the decision of the returning officer was not conclusive; 
the title of every one who claimed to vote was liable to be 
reconsidered on an election petition, or, in the case of a rejected 
vote, in an action for damages by the voter against the returning 
officer. 

The inconvenience of such a state of things would have been 
greatly aggravated had the old practice continued after the 
enlargement of the franchise in 1832. The establishment of a 
general system of registration was therefore a necessary and 
important part of the reform then effected. It has enabled an 
election in the most populous constituency to be completed in 
a single day. It has also been instrumental in the extinction 

1 The antiquity of registration of this kind is proved by the age of 
the Registrum Brevium, or register of writs, called by Lord Coke " a 
most ancient book of the Common Law " ,(Coke -upon -Littleton, »• 
159a). >; : * > — ^ 



42 



REGISTRATION 



of the " occasional voter," who formerly gave so much trouble 
to returning officers and election committees — the person, 
namely, who acquired a qualifying tenement with the view of 
using it for a particular election and then disposing of it. The 
period of qualification now required in all cases, being fixed 
with reference to the formation of the register, is neces- 
sarily so long anterior to any election which it could effect, 
that the purpose or intention of the voter in acquiring the 
qualifying tenement has ceased to be material, and is not inves- 
tigated. 

England. — The reform of parliamentary representation in 1832 
was followed in 1835 by that of the constitution of municipal 
corporations, which included the *creation of a uniform quali- 
fication (now known as the old burgess qualification) for 
the municipal franchise. In 1888 the municipal franchise 
was enlarged, and was at the same time extended to the whole 
country for the formation of constituencies to elect county 
councils; and in 1894 parochial electors were called into 
existence for the election of parish councils and for other pur- 
poses. Inasmuch as provision was made for the registering of 
persons entitled to votes for the above purposes, there are now 
three registers of voters, namely, the parliamentary register, 
the local government register (i.e. in boroughs under the 
Municipal Corporation Acts, the burgess rolls, and elsewhere 
the county registers) and the register of parochial electors. 
Under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835 the registration 
of burgesses, though on similar lines to that of parliamentary 
voters, was entirely separate from it. Since, however, the 
qualification for the municipal franchise covered to a great 
extent the same ground as that for the parliamentary franchise 
in boroughs which sent members to parliament, a considerable 
number of voters in such boroughs were entitled in respect of 
the same tenement to be upon both parliamentary register 
and burgess roll. The waste , of labour involved in settling 
their rights twice over was put an end to in 1878, when the 
system of parliamentary registration was extended to the 
boroughs in question for municipal purposes, and the lists were 
directed to be made out in such a shape that the portion common 
to the two registers could be detached and combined with 
the portion peculiar to each, so as to form the parliamentary 
register and the burgess roll respectively. This system of 
registration was extended to the non-parliamentary boroughs 
and to the whole country in 1888, the separate municipal 
registration being completely abolished. 

The procedure of parliamentary registration is to be found in 
its main lines in the Parliamentary Registration Act 1843, which 
superseded that provided by the Reform Act of 1832, 
and has itself been considerably amended by later legis- 
lation. The acts applying and adapting thesystem to local 
government and parochial registration are the Parliamentary and 
Municipal Registration Act 1878, the County Electors Act 1888, 
and the Local Government Act 1894. Registration is carried out 
by local machinery, the common-law parish being taken as the 
registration unit; and the work of preparing and publishing the 
lists, which when revised are to form the register, is committed to 
the overseers. The selection of these officers was no doubt due to 
their position as the rating authority, and to their consequent 
opportunities for knowing the ownership and occupation of tene- 
ments within their parish. They do not always perform the duties 
themselves, other persons being empowered to act for them in 
many parishes by general or local acts of parliament; but in all 
or almost all cases they are entitled to act personally if they think 
fit, they sign the lists, and the proceedings are conducted in their 
name. 

In order to render intelligible the following summary of the 
procedure, it will be necessary to divide the voters to be regis- 
tered into classes based on the nature of their qualification, since 
the practice differs in regard to each class. The classes are as 
follows: (1) Owners, including the old forty-shilling freeholders, 
and the copyholders, long leaseholders and others entitled under 
the Reform Act of 1832 to vote at parliamentary elections for 
counties; (2) occupiers, including those entitled to (a) the £10 
occupation qualification, (b) the household qualification and (c) the 
old burgess qualification; (3) lodgers, subdivided into (a) old, 
i.e. those on the previous register for the same lodgings, and (b) new; 
(4) those entitled to reserved rights, i.e. in addition to those (if 
.any stU] remain), who were entitled to votes before the Reform Act 
of j8i2fiA,^pe<-t of qualifications abolished by that act, (a) free- 



Pro- 

cedure* 



hold and burgage tenants in Bristol, Exeter, Norwich, and Notting- 
ham, and ip) liverymen of the City of London and freemen of 
certain old cities and boroughs, whose right to the parliamentary 
franchise was permanently retained by the same act. In regard 
to these classes it may be said that the general scheme is that 
owners must make a claim in the first instance before they can 
get their names upon the register, but that, once entered on the 
register, the names will be retained from year to year until removed 
by the revising barrister; that the lists of occupiers and of freehold 
and burgage tenants are made out afresh every year by the over- 
seers froin their own information and inquiries, without any act 
being required on the part of the voters, who need only make claims 
in case their names are omitted; that lodgers must make claims 
every year; and that liverymen and freemen are in the same posi- 
tion as occupiers, except that the lists of liverymen are made out 
by the clerks of the several companies, and those of freemen by the 
town clerks, the overseers having nothing to do with these voters, 
whose qualifications are personal and not locally connected with 
anv parish. 

The overseers and other officers concerned are required to perform 
their duties in connexion with registration in accordance with the 
instructions and precepts, and to use the notices and forms pre- 
scribed by Order in Council from time to time. The Registration 
Order, 1895, directs the clerk of every^ county council, on or within 
seven days before the 15th of April in every year, to send to the 
overseers of each parish in his county a precept with regard to the 
registration of ownership < electors, and to every parish not within 
a parliamentary or municipal borough a precept with regard to 
the registration of occupation electors (which expression For this 
purpose includes lodgers as well as occupiers proper). The town 
clerk of every borough, municipal or parliamentary, is to send to 
the overseers of every parish in his borough a precept with regard 
to the registration of occupation electors. These precepts are set 
out in the Registration Order, and those issued by the town 
clerks differ according as the borough is parliamentary only, or 
municipal only, or both parliamentary and municipal ; in the cases 
of Bristol, Exeter, Norwich and Nottingham they contain direc- 
tions as to freehold and burgage tenants. ^ The duties of the over- 
seers in regard to registration are set out in detail in the precepts. 
Along with the precepts are forwarded forms of the various lists and 
notices required to be used, and with the ownership precept a certain 
number of copies of that portion of the parliamentary register of 
the county at the time in force which contains the ownership voters 
for the parish, the register being so printed that the portion relating 
to each parish can be detached. It is the duty of the overseers 
to publish on the 20th of June, in manner hereinafter described, the 
portion of the register so received, together with a notice to owners 
not already registered to send in claims by the 20th of July. Mean- 
while the overseers are making the inquiries necessary for the 
preparation of the occupier list. For this purpose they may require 
returns to be furnished by owners of houses let out in separate 
tenements, and by employers who have servants entitled to the 
service franchise. The registrars of births, deaths and marriages 
are required to furnish the overseers with returns of deaths, as 
must the assessed tax collectors with returns of defaulters; the 
relieving officers are to give information as to recipients of parochial 
relief. On or before the 31st of July the overseers are to make 
out and sign the lists of voters. These are the following: the 
list of ownership electors, consisting of the portion of the register 
previously published with a supplemental listof those who have 
sent in claims by the^oth of July; the occupier list; and the old 
lodger list, the last being formed from claims sent in by the 25th of 
July. The overseers do not select the names in the first and last 
of these lists; they take them as supplied in the register and claims. 
It is, however, their duty to write dead " or " objected " in the 
margin against the names of persons whom they have reason to 
believe to be dead or not entitled to vote in respect of the qualifica- 
tion described. The ownership and old lodger lists will be divided 
into two parts, if the register contains names of owners entitled 
to a parochial vote only, or if claims by owners or old lodgers have 
been made limited to that franchise. The occupier list contains 
the names of persons whom the overseers believe to be qualified, 
and no others, and therefore will be free from marginal objections. 
Except in the administrative county of London, it is made out in 
three divisions— division 1 giving the names of occupiers of pro- 
perty qualifying for both parliamentary and local government 
votes, divisions 2 and 3 those of occupiers of property qualifying 
only for parliamentary and only for local government votes respec- 
tively. It happens so frequently that a tenement, if not of sufficient 
value to qualify for the £10 occupation franchise (parliamentary 
and local government), qualifies both for the household franchise 
(parliamentary) and for the old burgess franchise (local govern- 
ment), that division 1 would in most cases be the whole list v but for 
two circumstances. The service franchise is a special modification 
of the household franchise only; and the service occupants, being 
therefore restricted to the parliamentary vote, form the bulk of 
division 2 ; while peers and women, being excluded # from the 
parliamentary vote, are consequently relegated to division 3. In 
the administrative county of London the local government register, 
being coextensive with the register of parochial electors, includes 



REGISTRATION 



43 



the whole of the parliamentary register. The occupier lists are 
consequently there made out in two divisions only, the names which 
would elsewhere appear in division 2 being placed in division 1. 
The lists of freehold and burgage tenants in Bristol, Exeter, Norwich 
and Nottingham are to be made out and signed by the same date. 
The overseers have also to make out and sign a list of persons 
qualified as occupiers to be elected aldermen or councillors, but as 
non-residents disqualified from being on the local government 
register. By the same date also the clerks of the livery companies 
are to make out, sign and deliver to the secondary (who performs 
in the City of London the registration duties which elsewhere fall 
on the town clerk) the lists of liverymen entitled as such to the 
parliamentary vote; and the town clerks are to make out and sign 
the lists of freemen so entitled in towns where this franchise exists. 

On the 1st of August all the above lists are to be published, the 
livery lists by the secondary, lists of freemen by the town clerks 
and the rest by the overseers. In addition the overseers may have 
to publish a list of persons disqualified by having been found guilty 
of corrupt or illegal practices; this list they will receive, when it 
exists, from the clerk of the county council or town clerk with the 
precept. Publication of lists and notices by overseers is made by 
affixing copies on the doors of the church and other places of worship 
of the parish (or, if there be none, in some publicor conspicuous 
situation in the parish), and also, with the exception to be men- 
tioned, in the case of a parish wholly or partly within a municipal 
borough or urban district, in or near every public or municipal or 
parochial office and every post and telegraph office in the parish. 
The exception is that lists and notices relating to ownership electors 
need not be published at the offices mentioned when the parish is 
within a parliamentary borough. Publication by the secondary is 
made by affixing copies outside the Guildhall and Royal Exchange; 
publication by town clerks ismade by affixing copies outside their 
town hall, or, where there is none, in some public or conspicuous 
place in their borough. From the jst to the 20th of August inclusive 
is allowed for the sending in of claims and objections. Those whose 
names have been omitted from the occupier or reserved rights lists, 
or the non-resident list, or whose names, place of abode or particu- 
lars of qualification have been incorrectly stated in such lists, may 
send in claims to have their names registered; lodgers who are not 
qualified as old lodgers, or who have omitted to claim as such, may 
claim as new lodgers; persons whose names are on the corrupt and 
illegal practices list may claim to have them omitted. Any person 
whose name is on the list of parliamentary, local government ^ or 
parochial electors for the same parliamentary county, administrative 
county, borough or parish, may object to names on the same lists. 
Notices of claim and objection in the case of liverymen and freemen are 
to be sent to the secondary and town clerk, and in other cases to the 
overseers ; and notices of objection must also in all cases be sent to the 
person objected to. All notices must be sent inbythe20th of August, 
and on or before the 25th of August the overseers, secondary and town 
clerks are to make out, sign and publish lists of the claimants and 
persons objected to. It remains to be added that any person on a 
fist of voters {i.e. on one of the lists published on the 1st of^ August) 
may make a declaration before a magistrate or commissioner for 
oaths correcting the entry relating to him. In the case of ownership 
electors the correction can only deal with the place of abode; in the 
case of other lists it extends to all particulars stated, and is^ useful 
inasmuch as it enables the revising barrister to make corrections as 
to the qualification which he could not make in the absence of a 
declaration. The declarations must be delivered to the clerk of the 
county council or town clerk on or before the 5th of September. 

The next stage is the revision of the lists. For this purpose 
revising barristers are appointed yearly. The period within which 
revision courts can be held is from the 8th of September 
Revising t0 the I2th of October, both days inclusive. The clerk of 
barrls- ^ countv council attends the first court held for each 
ers * parliamentary division of his county, and the town clerk 

the first court held for his city or borough ; and they respectively 
produce all lists, notices and declarations in their custody, and 
answer any questions put to them by the revising barrister. The 
overseers also attend the courts held for their parish, produce the 
rate books, original notices of claim and objection, &c, and answer 
questions. The claimants, objectors and persons objected to appear 
personally or by representative to support their several conten- 
• tions. Any person qualified to be an objector may also appear 
to oppose any claims, upon giving notice to the barrister before such 
claims are reached. The powers of the revising barristers are as 
follows: As regards persons whose names are on the lists of voters 
published on the 1st of August, he is to expunge the names, whether 
objected to or not, of those who are dead or subject to personal in- 
capacity, such as infants and aliens, and for parliamentary purposes 
peers and women. If an entry is imperfect, the name must be 
removed, unless the particulars necessary for completing it are 
supplied to the barrister. All names marginally objected toby over- 
seers must be expunged, unless the voters prove to the barrister that 
they ought to be retained. Objections made by other objectors 
must be supported by prima facie proof, and if this is not rebutted 
the name is struck out. Claimants must be ready to support their 
claims. The declaration attached to a lodger claim is indeed prima 



facie proof of the facts stated in it, but other claimants require 
evidence to make out even a prima facie case, and if they fail to 
produce it their claims will be disallowed. The barrister is required 
to correct errors in the lists of voters, and has a discretion to rectify 
mistakes in claims and objections upon evidence produced to him, 
although his power in this respect is limited. Lastly, the barrister 
has to deal with duplicates, as a voter is entitled to be on the register 
once, but not more than once, as a parliamentary voter for each 
parliamentary county or borough, as a burgess for each municipal 
borough, as a county elector for each electoral division, and as a 
parochial elector for each parish in which he holds a qualification. 
Consequently, he deals with duplicate entries by expunging or trans- 
ferring them to separate parochial lists. The decision of the re- 
vising barrister is final and conclusive on all questions of fact ; but 
an appeal lies from him on questions of law at the instance of any 
person aggrieved by the removal of his name from a list of voters, by 
the rejection of his claim or objection or by the allowance of a claim 
which he has opposed. Notice of the intention to appeal must be 
given to the barrister in writing on the day when 111s decision is 
given. The barrister may refuse to state a case for appeal ; but if 
he does so without due cause he may be ordered by the High Court 
to state a case. The appeal is heard by a divisional court, from 
whose decision an appeal lies (by leave either of the divisional court 
or of the court of appeal) to the court of appeal, whose decision is 
final. 

On the completion of the revision the barrister hands the county 
and borough lists (every page signed and every alteration initialled 
by him) to the clerk of the county council and the town clerk re- 
spectively, to be printed. With the following exceptions the revised 
lists are to be made up and printed by the 20th of December, and 
come into force as the register for all purposes on the 1st of January. 
In the boroughs created by the London Government Act 1899, the 
whole register is to be made up and printed by the 20th of October, 
and to come into force for the purpose of borough elections under 
the act on the 1st of November. In boroughs subject to the Muni- 
cipal Corporations Acts, divisions 1 and 3 of the occupiers' list are 
to be made up and printed by the 20th of October, and come into 
force for the purpose of municipal and county council elections on 
the 1st of November. Corrections ordered in consequence of a 
successful appeal from a revising barrister are to be made by the 
officers having the custody of the registers, but a pending appeal 
does not affect any right of voting. The register in its final form 
will consist of the lists published on the 1st of August as corrected, 
with the claims which have been allowed on revision incorporated 
with them. It is printed in such form that each list and each 
division of a list for every parish can be separated from the rest for 
the purpose of making up the parliamentary, local government and 
parochial registers respectively. The alphabetical order is followed, 
except in London and some other large towns, where street order is 
adopted for all except the ownership lists and lists of liverymen and 
freemen.^ The parliamentary register for a parliamentary county 
will consist of the ownership lists for all parishes in the county, and 
of the lodger lists and divisions 1 and 2 of the occupier lists for 
parishes within the county and not within a parliamentary borough. 
The parliamentary register for a parliamentary borough will consist 
of the lodger lists, of the lists of freehold and burgage tenants (if 
any), and of divisions 1 and 2 of the occupier lists for all parishes 
within the borough, and also of the borough lists (if any) of liverymen 
or freemen. The local government register for an administrative 
county will consist of divisions 1 and 3 of the occupier lists for all 
parishes in the county, and the burgess roll for a municipal borough 
of divisions 1 and 3 of the occupier lists for all parishes in the borough. 
It will be seen, therefore, that, except in county boroughs, the 
burgess roH is also a part of the local government register of the 
administrative county within which the borough is situate. The 
register of parochial electors consists of the complete set of lists for 
each parish; but this does not include the lists of liverymen and 
freemen, which, as has-been stated, are not parish lists. 

No one whose name is not on the register can vote at an election. 
The^ fact that a man's name is on the register is now so far con- 
clusive of his right that the returning officer is bound to receive 
his vote. Only two questions may be asked of him when he 
tenders his vote, namely, whether he is the person whose name is 
on the register, and whether he has voted before at the election. 
The Reform Act 1832 allowed him to be asked at parliamentary 
elections whether he retained the qualification for which he had 
been registered; but the Registration Act 1843 disallowed the 
question, and made the register conclusive as to the retention of 
the qualification. When, however, a petition is presented against 
an election, the register, although conclusive as to the retention 
of the qualification, does not prevent the court from inquiring 
into the existence of personal incapacities, arising in connexion 
with the election or otherwise, and striking off on scrutiny the 
votes of persons subject thereto, e.g. aliens, infants, or in parliamen- 
tary elections peers, &c. 

The City of London is not within the Municipal Corporations 
Acts, and is not subject to the general registration law in the 
formation of its roll of citizens for municipal purposes. But a 
register of parliamentary, county and parochial electors is made in 



44 



REGIUM 



the "ordinary way/ The universities are also exempt from the 
general law of registration. At Oxford and Cambridge the members 
of Convocation and the Senate respectively have always formed 
the parliamentary constituencies; and, as has been already stated, 
the registers of those members were before 1832, and still arc, 
the parliamentary registers. Similarly, the Reform Act of 1867, 
which gave parliamentary representation to the university of 
London, simply enacted that the register of graduates constituting 
the Convocation should be the parliamentary register of that body. 

Scotland. — In Scotland the qualifications for local government 
and parish electors are the same as those for parliamentary voters, 
the only < difference in the registers being in respect of personal 
incapacities for the parliamentary franchise, incapacity for the 
other franchises by reason of non-payment of rates, and duplicates. 
The principal act regulating registration in burghs is 19 & 20 Vict. 
c. 58, amended in some particulars as to dates by 31 & 32 Vict, 
c. 48, § 20. County registration, formerly regulated by 24 & 25 
Vict. c. 83, has been assimilated to burgh registration by 48 & 49 
Vict. c. 3, § 8 (6). The procedure consists, as in England, of the 
making and publication of lists of voters, the making of claims and 
objections and the holding of revision courts; but there are im- 
portant differences of detail. Though the parish is the registration 
unit, parochial machinery is not used for the formation of the 
register. The parliamentary lists for a county are made up yearly 
by one or more of the assessors of the county, and those for a burgh 
by one or more of the assessors for the burgh, or by the clerk of the 
commissioners. They are published on the 15th of September; 
and claims and objections must be sent in by the 21st and are 
published on the 25th of the same month. Publication is made 
in burghs by posting on or near the town hall, or in some other 
conspicuous place , in counties by posting the part relating to each 
parish on the parish church door, and in both cases giving notice 
by newspaper advertisement of a place where the lists may be 
perused.^ The revision is conducted by the sheriff, the time within 
which bis courts may be held being from the 25th of September to 
the 1 6th of October, both days inclusive. An appeal lies to three 
judges of the Court of Session, one taken from each division of the 
Inner House, and one from the Lords Ordinary of the Outer House. 
The revised lists are delivered in counties to the sheriff clerk, in 
burghs to the town clerk, or person to whom the registration duties 
of town clerk are assigned. The register comes into force for all 
purposes on the 1st of November. 

The municipal register of a royal burgh which is coextensive, 
or of that part of a royal burgh which is coextensive with a parlia- 
mentary burgh, consists of the parliamentary register with a supple- 
mental list of women who but for their sex would be qualified for 
the parliamentary vote. The municipal register for a burgh, or 
for that part of one which is not within a parliamentary burgh, 
consists of ^ persons possessed of qualifications within the burgh 
which, if within a parliamentary burgh, would entitle them, or but 
for their sex would entitle them, to the parliamentary vote. The 
register of county electors consists of the parliamentary register for 
a county with the supplemental list hereafter mentioned; but 
inasmuch as^ exemption from or* failure to pay the consolidated 
county rate is a disqualification for the county electors' franchise, 
the names of persons so disqualified are to be marked with a dis- 
tinctive mark on the register; as are also the names of persons 
whose qualifications are situated within a burgh, such marks indi- 
cating that the persons to whose names they are attached are not 
entitled to vote as county electors. Every third year, in prepara- 
tion for the triennial elections of county and parish councils 
(casual vacancies being filled up by co-optation), a supplemental 
list is to be made of peers and women possessed of qualifications 
which but for their rank and sex would entitle them to parlia- 
mentary votes. The register of county electors in a county and the 
municipal register in a burgh form the registers of parish electors 
for the parishes comprised in each respectively. Inasmuch, how- 
ever, as a man is entitled to be registered as a parish elector in every 
parish where he is qualified, duplicate entries are, when required, 
to be made in the register, with distinctive marks to all but one, 
to indicate that they confer the parish vote only. These dis- 
tinctive marks and those previously mentioned are to be made in 
the lists by the assessors, subject to revision by the sheriff. The 
register is conclusive to the same extent as in England, except that 
the vote of a parish elector who is one year in arrear in payment 
of a parish rate is not to be received. The clerk of the parish 
council is to furnish the returning officer one week before an 
election with the names of persons so in arrear; and the returning 
officer is to reject their votes except upon the production of a 
written receipt. Provision is made by 31 & 32 Vict. c. 48, §§ 27-41, 
for the^ formation of registers of parliamentary electors for the 
universities. The register for each university is to be made annually 
by the university registrar, with the assistance of two members of, 
the council, from whose decisions an appeal lies to the university 
court. 

Ireland. — There are no parish councils in Ireland, and no par- 
ochial electors. There are therefore but two registers of voters, 
the parliamentary and the local government registers, the latter 
of which consists of the former with a local government supplement 



containing the names of those excluded from the parliamentary 
register by reason of their being peers or women, and- duplicate 
entries relating to those whose names are registered elsewhere for 
the same parliamentary constituency. The principal acts regula- 
ting registration are 13 '& 14 Vict. c. 69, 31 & 32 Vict. c. 112, 48 & 
49 Vict. c. 17, and 61 & 62 Vict.c. 2. The lord lieutenant is 
empowered to make by Order in Council rules for registration, 
and to prescribe forms; and under this power has made the Regis- 
tration (Ireland) Rules 1899, now in force. The registration 
unit is not the parish, but the district electoral division, except 
where such division is subdivided into wards, or is partly within 
and partly without any town or ward of a borough or town, in which 
cases each ward of the division or part of a division is a separate 
registration unit. 

The procedure is as follows, subject to variation in cases where 
there are clerks of unions who held office on the 31st of March 1898, 
and have not agreed to transfer their registration duties. The 
clerk of the peace sends out on the 1st of June a precept in the form 
prescribed for county registration to the secretary of the county 
council and clerks of urban district councils, together with a copy 
of the existing register for their county or district; and a precept 
in the form prescribed for borough registration to town clerks of 
boroughs. As regards registration units not in a parliamentary 
or municipal borough, the secretary of the county council or clerk 
of the urban district council is to put marginal objections, " dead " 
or " objected," where required, to £10 occupiers and householders 
in the copy of the register, both in the parliamentary list and in 
the local government supplement. He is also to make out supple- 
mental parliamentary and local government lists of £10 occupiers 
and householders not on the existing register, and to put marginal 
objections where required to these. He is to verify on oath before 
a magistrate the copy of the register and supplemental lists, and 
to return them to the clerk of the peace by the 8th -of July. As 
regards registration units in a parliamentary borough, but outside 
a municipal borough, the secretary of the county council or clerk 
of the urban district council is to make out lists of £10 occupiers 
and householders with local government supplement, and transmit 
them to the town clerk of the municipal borough or town. The 
clerk of the peace is to publish the copy of the register, after himself 
placing marginal objections where required to voters other than 
£10 occupiers and householders, and the supplemental lists as re- 
ceived, and also the corrupt and illegal practices list, if any, on the 
22nd of July. On the same day^ the town clerk will publish the 
lists received as aforesaid for registration units outside the muni- 
cipal borough, and the lists, which he will have made out himself 
for the municipal borough, including the freemen's list and corrupt 
and illegal practices list. Freemen being entitled to the local 
government vote will, if resident, be placed on the list of the regis- 
tration unit t where they reside, and will, if non-resident, be allotted 
by the revising barrister among the registration units of the borough 
for local government purposes in proportion to the number of 
electors in each registration unit. Claims are to be sent in to the 
clerk of the peace and town clerk by the 4th of August, including 
old lodger claims and, in the case of the clerk of the peace, owner- 
ship claims. Lists of claimants with marginal objections, where 
required, are to be published by the clerk of the peace and town 
clerk by the nth of August. Notices of objection to voters or 
claimants may be given by the 20th of August; and lists of persons 
objected to are to be published by the clerk of the peace and town 
clerk by the 24th of the same month. Publication of lists and 
notices by a clerk of the peace is made by posting copies of those 
relating to each registration unit outside every court-house, petty 
sessions court, and other public offices in the unit; publication by 
a town clerk is made by posting copies outside the town hall, or, 
if there be none, in some public and conspicuous place in the 
borough. 

Revising barristers are specially appointed for the county and 
city of Dublin by the lord lieutenant; elsewhere the county court 
judges and chairmen of quarter sessions act as such ex officio t 
assisted, when necessary, by additional barristers appointed by 
the lord lieutenant. The time for the holding of revision courts 
is from the 8th of September to the 25th of October inclusive. An 
appeal lies to the court of appeal, whose decision is final. The 
revised lists are handed to the clerk of the peace; they are to be 
made up by him by the 31st of December, and come into force on 
the 1st of January. 

The registrar of the university of Dublin is to make out in 
December a list of the persons entitled to the parliamentary vote 
for the university, and to print the same in January, and to publish 
a copy in the university calendar, or in one or more public journals 
circulating in Ireland. He is to revise the list annually, and ex- 
punge the names of those dead or disqualified; but an elector 
whose^ name has been expunged because he was supposed to be 
dead is entitled, if alive, to have his name immediately restored 
and to vote at any election. (L. L. S.) 

REQIUM (Gr. ^Vrjyiov; in Latin the aspirate is omitted), a 
city of the territory of the Bruttii in South Italy, on the east 
side of the strait between Italy and Sicily (Strait of Messina). 



REGIUM DONUM— REGNARD 



45 



A colony, mainly of Chakidians, partly of Messenians from the 
Peloponnesus, settled at Regium in the 8th century B.C. About 
494 B.C. Anaxilas, a member of the Messenian party, made him- 
self master of Regium (apparently — from numismatic evidence, 
for the coins assignable to this period are modelled on Samian 
types— with the help of the Samians: see Messina) and about 
488 joined with them in occupying Zancle (Messina). Here 
they remained. (See C. H. Dodd in Journal of Hellenic Studies, 
xxviii. (1908) 56 sqq.) This coinage was resumed after the 
establishment of the democracy about 461 B.C., when Anaxilas' 
sons were driven out. In 433 Regium made a treaty with 
Athens, and in 427 joined the Athenians against Syracuse, but 
in 415 it remained neutral. An attack which it made on 
Dionysius I. of Syracuse in 399 was the beginning of a great 
struggle which in 387 resulted in its complete destruction and the 
dispersion of its inhabitants as slaves. Restored by the younger 
Dionysius under the name of Phoebias, the colony soon recovered 
its prosperity and resumed its original designation. In 280, 
when Pyrrhus invaded Italy, the Regines admitted within their 
walls a Roman garrison of Campanian troops; these mercenaries 
revolted, massacred the male citizens, and held the city till in 
270 they were besieged and put to death by the Roman consul 
Genucius. The city remained faithful to Rome throughout the 
Punic wars, and Hannibal never succeeded in taking it. Up 
till the Social War it struck coins of its own, with Greek legends. 
Though one of the cities promised by the triumvirs to the 
veterans, Regium escaped through the favour of Octavius 
(hence it took the name Regium Julium). It continued, 
however, to be a Greek city even under the Empire, and never 
became a colony. Towards the end of the Empire it was made 
the chief city of the Bruttii. 

Of ancient buildings hardly anything remains at Regium, and 
nothing of the archaic Greek period is in situ, except possibly the 
remains of a temple of Artemis Phacelitis, which have not yet been 
explored, though various inscriptions relative to it have been found. 
The museum, however, contains a number of terra-cottas, vases, 
inscriptions, &c, and a number of Byzantine lead seals. Several 
baths of the Greek period, modified by the Romans, have been 
found, and the remains of one of these may still be seen. A large 
mosaic of the 3rd or 4th century a.d. with representations of wild 
animals and the figure of a warrior in the centre was found in 1904 
and covered up again. The aqueduct and various cisterns connected 
with it have been traced, and some tombs of the 5th or 4th century 
B.C. (or even later) were found in 1907. 

See Nolizie degli scavi, passim ; P. Larizza, Rkegium Ckalcidense 
(Rome, 1905), ( T> As ) 

REGIUM DONUM, or Royal Gift, an annual grant formerly 
made from the public funds to Presbyterian and ' other Non- 
conformist ministers in Great Britain and Ireland. It dates 
from the reign of Charles II., who, according to Bishop Burnet, 
after the declaration of indulgence of 1672 ordered sums of 
money to be paid to Presbyterian ministers. These gifts or 
pensions were soon discontinued, but in 1690 William III. made 
a grant of £1200 a year to the Presbyterian ministers in Ireland 
as a reward for their services during his struggle with James II. 
Owing to the opposition of the Irish House of Lords the money 
was not paid in 1711 and some subsequent years, but it was 
revived in 1715 by George I., who increased the amount to 
£2000 a year.* Further additions were made in 1784 and in 
1792, and in 1868 the sum granted to the Irish Presbyterian 
ministers was £45^000. The Regium Donum was withdrawn 
by the act of 1869 which disestablished the Irish church. Pro- 
vision was made, however, for existing interests therein, and 
many Presbyterian ministers commuted these on the same 
terms as the clergy of the church of Ireland. 

In England the Regium Donum proper dates from 1 721, when 
Dr Edmund Calamy (1671-1732) received £500 from the royal 
bounty " for the use and behalf of the poor widows of dissenting 
ministers." Afterwards this sum was increased to £1000 and 
was made an annual payment " for the assisting either ministers 
or their widows," and later it amounted to £1695 per annum. 
It was given to distributors who represented the three denomina- 
tions, Presbyterians, Baptists and Independents, enjoying the 
grant. Among the Nonconformists themselves, however, or 



at least among the Baptists and the Independents, there was 
some objection to this form of state aid, and in 1851 the chancellor 
of the exchequer announced that it would be withdrawn. This 
was done six years later. 

See J. Stoughton, History of Religion in England (1 got); J.S.Rcid, 
History of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland (Belfast, 1867); and 
E. Calamy, Historical Account of my own Life, edited by J.T. Rutt 
(1829-30). 

REGLA, formerly an important suburb of Havana, Cuba, 
opposite that city, on the bay; now a part of Havana. Pop. 
(1899) 11,363. It was formerly the scene of the Havana bull- 
fights. The church is one of the best in Cuba; the building 
dates substantially from 1805, but the church settlement goes 
back to a hermitage established in 1690. Regla is the shipping- 
point of the Havana sugar trade. It has enormous sugar and 
tobacco warehouses, fine wharves, a dry dock, foundries and an 
electric railway plant. It is the western terminus of the eastern 
line of the United Railways of Havana, and is connected with 
the main city of Havana by ferry. A fishing village was estab- 
lished here about 1733. At the end of the 18th century Regla 
was a principal centre of the smuggling trade, and about 1820 
was notorious as a resort of pirates. It first secured an 
ayuntamiento (city council) in 1872, and after 1899 was annexed 
to Havana. 

REGNARD, JEAN FRANCOIS (1655-1709), French comic 
dramatist, was born in Paris on the 7th of February 1655. His 
father, a rich shopkeeper, died when Regnard was about 
twenty, leaving him master of a considerable fortune. He set 
off at once for Italy, and, after a series of romantic adventures, 
he journeyed by Holland, Denmark and Sweden to Lapland, 
and thence by Poland, Turkey, Hungary and Germany back to 
France. He returned to Paris at the end of 1683, and bought 
the place of treasurer of France in the Paris district; he bad a 
house at Paris in the Rue Richelieu; and he acquired the 
small estate of Grillon near Dourdan in the department of 
Seine-et-Oise, where he hunted, feasted and wrote comedies. 
This latter amusement he began in 1688 with a piece called 
Le Divorce, which was performed at the Theatre Italien. In four 
slight pieces of the same nature be collaborated with Charles 
Riviere Dufresny. He gained access to the Theatre Francais 
on the 19th of May 1694 with a piece called Attendez-moi sous 
Vorme, and two years later, on the 19th of December 1696, he 
produced there the masterly comedy of Le Joueur. The idea of 
the play was evolved in collaboration with Dufresny, but the 
authors disagreed in carrying it out. Finally they each produced 
a comedy on the subject, Dufresny in prose, and Regnard in 
verse. Each accused the other of plagiarism. The plot of 
Regnard 's piece turns on the love of two sisters for Valere, the 
gambler, who loves one and pretends to love the other, really 
deceiving them both, because there is no room for any other 
passion in his character except the love of play. Other of his 
plays were La Sirinade (1694), Le Bourgeois de Falaise (1696), 
Le Distrait (1697), DSmocrite (1700), Le Retour imprewt (i7oo)> 
Les Folies amoureuses (1704), Les Mtnechmes (1705), a clever 
following of Plautus, and his masterpiece, Le Ligataire universel 
(1708). 

Regnard's death on the 4th of September 1709 renews the 
doubtful and romantic circumstances of his earlier life. Some 
hint at poison, but the truth seems to be that his death was 
hastened by the rate at which he lived. 

Besides the plays noticed above and others, Regnard wrote 
miscellaneous poems, the autobiographical romance of La Provengale, 
and several short accounts in prose of his travels, published pos- 
thumously under the title of Voyages. Regnard had written a reply 
to the tenth satire of Boileau, Contre les femmes, and Boileau had 
retorted by putting Regnard among the poets depreciated in his 
epistle Sur mes vers. After the appearance of Le Joueur the poet 
altered his opinion and cut out the allusion. The saying attributed 
to Boileau when some one, thinking to curry favour, remarked that 
Regnard was only a mediocre poet, " II n'est pas midiocrement gai," 
is both true and very appropriate. His French style, especially in 
his purely prose works, is not considered faultless. He is often un- 
original in his plots, and, whether Dufresny was or was not justified 
in his complaint about Le Joueur, it seems likely that Regnard owed 
not a little to him and to others; but he had a thorough grasp of 



46 REGNAULT, H.— REGNAULT DE SAINT JEAN D'ANGELY 



comic situation and incident, and a most amusing faculty of dia- 
logue. 

The first edition of Regnard 's works was published in 1731 
(5 vols., Rouen and Paris). There is a good selection of almost every- 
thing important in the Collection Didot (4 vols., 1819), but there is no 
absolutely complete edition. The best is that published by Crapelet 
(6 vols., Paris, 1822). A selection by L. Moland appeared in 1893. 
See also a Bibliographic et iconographie des ceuvres de J. F. Regnard 
(Paris, Rouquette, 1878); Le Poete J. F. Regnard en son chasteau de 
Grillon, by J. Guyot (Paris, 1907). 

REGNAULT, HENRI (1843-1871), French painter, born at 
Paris on the 31st October 1843, was the son of Henri Victor 
Regnault (tf.v.). On leaving school he successively entered the 
studios of Montfort, Lamothe and Cabanel, was beaten for the 
Grand Prix (1863) by Layraud and Montchablon, and in 1864 
exhibited two portraits in no wise remarkable at the Salon. 
In 1866, however, he carried off the Grand Prix with a work 
of unusual force and distinction — " Thetis bringing the Arms 
forged by Vulcan to Achilles " (School of the Fine Arts). The 
past in Italy did not touch him, but his illustrations to Wey's 
Rome show how observant he was of actual life and manners; 
even his " Automedon " (School of Fine Arts), executed in obedi- 
ence to Academical regulations, was but a lively recollection of a 
carnival horse-race. At Rome, moreover, Regnault came into 
contact with the modern Hispano-Italian school, a school highly 
materialistic and inclined to regard even the human subject 
only as one amongst many sources whence to obtain amusement 
for the eye. The vital, if narrow, energy of this school told on 
Regnault with ever-increasing force during the few remaining 
years of his life. In 1868 he had sent to the Salon a life-size 
portrait of a lady in which he had made one of the first attempts 
to render the actual character of fashionable modern life. While 
making a tour in Spain, he saw Prim pass at the head of his troops, 
and received that lively image of a military demagogue which 
he afterwards put on canvas, somewhat to the displeasure of his 
subject. But this work made an appeal to the imagination 
of the public, whilst all the later productions of Regnault were 
addressed exclusively to the eye. After a further flight to 
Africa, abridged by the necessities of his position as a pensioner 
of the school of Rome, he painted "Judith," then (1 870) " Salome," 
and, as a work due from the Roman school, despatched from 
Tangier the large canvas, " Execution without Hearing under 
the Moorish Kings," in which the painter had played with the 
blood of the victim as if he were a jeweller toying with rubies. 
The war arose, and found Regnault foremost in the devoted 
ranks of Buzenval, where he fell on the 19th of January 1871. 

See Correspondance de H. Regnault; Duparc, H. Regnault, sa vie 
et son (Buvre; Cazalis, H. Regnault, 1843-1871; Bailliere, Les Artistes 
de mon temps; C. Blanc, H. Regnault; P. Mantz, Gazette des Beaux 
Arts (1872). 

REGNAULT, HENRI VICTOR (1810-1878), French chemist 
and physicist, was born on the 21st of July 1810 at Aix-la- 
Chapelle. His early life was a struggle with poverty. When 
a boy he went to Paris and obtained a situation in a large 
drapery establishment, where he remained, occupying every 
spare hour in study, until he was in his twentieth year. Then 
he entered the ficole Poly technique, and passed in 1832 to the 
ficole des Mines, where he developed an aptitude for experi- 
mental chemistry. A few years later he was appointed to a 
professorship of chemistry at Lyons. His most important con- 
tribution to organic chemistry was a series of researches, begun 
in 1835, on the haloid and other derivatives of unsaturated 
hydrocarbons. He also studied the alkaloids and organic 
acids, introduced a classification of the metals according to 
the facility with which they or their sulphides are oxidized 
by steam at high temperatures, and effected a comparison 
of the chemical composition of atmospheric air from all parts 
of the world. In 1840 he was recalled to Paris by his ap- 
pointment to the chair of chemistry in the ficole Polytech- 
nique; at the same time he was elected a member of the 
Acad6mie des Sciences, in the chemical section, in room of 
P. J. Robiquet (1 780-1840); and in the following year he be- 
came professor of physics in the College de France, there suc- 
ceeding P. L. Dulong, his old master, and in many respects 



his model. From this time Regnault devoted almost all his 
attention to practical physics; but in 1847 he published a 
four-volume treatise on Chemistry which has been translated 
into many languages. 

Regnault executed a careful redetermination of the specific 
heats of all the elements obtainable, and of many compounds — 
solids, liquids and gases. He investigated the expansibility 
of gases by heat, determining the coefficient for air as 0-003665, 
and showed that, contrary to previous opinion, no two gases 
had precisely the same rate of expansion. By numerous delicate 
experiments he proved that Boyle's law is only approximately 
true, and that those gases which are most readily liquefied 
diverge most widely from obedience to it. He studied the whole 
subject of thermometry critically; he introduced the use of 
an accurate air-thermometer, and compared its indications 
with those of a mercurial thermometer, determining the ab- 
solute dilatation of mercury by heat as a step in the process. 
He also paid attention to hygrometry and devised a hygrometer 
in which a cooled metal surface is used for the deposition of 
moisture. 

In 1854 he was appointed to succeed J. J. Ebelmen (1814-1852) 
as director of the porcelain manufactory at Sevres. He carried 
on his great research on the expansion of gases in the laboratory 
at Sevres, but all the results of his latest work were destroyed 
during the Franco-German War, in which also his son Henri 
(noticed above) was killed. Regnault never recovered from the 
double blow, and, although he lived until the 19th "of January 
1878, his scientific labours ended in 1872. He wrote more than 
eighty papers on scientific subjects, and he made important 
researches in conjunction with other workers. His greatest 
work, bearing on the practical treatment of steam-engines, 
forms vol. xxi. of the Mfmoires de VAcadimie des Sciences. 

REGNAULT, JEAN BAPTISTE (1754-1829), French painter, 
was born at Paris on the 9th of October 1754, and died in the 
same city on the 12th of November 1829. He began life at 
sea in a merchant vessel, but at the age of fifteen his talent 
attracted attention, and he was sent to Italy by M. de Monval 
under the care of Bardin. After his return to Paris, Regnault, 
in 1776, obtained the Grand Prix, and in 1783 he was elected 
Academician. His diploma picture, the " Education of Achilles 
by Chiron," is now in the Louvre, as also the " Christ taken down 
from the Cross," originally executed for the royal chapel at 
Fontainebleau, and two minor works — the " Origin of Painting " 
and " Pygmalion praying Venus to give Life to his Statue." Be- 
sides various small pictures and allegorical subjects, Regnault 
was also the author of many large historical paintings; and his 
school, which reckoned amongst its chief attendants Guerin, 
Crepin, Lafitte, Blondel, Robert Lefevre and .Menjaud, was 
for a long while the rival in influence of that of David. 

REGNAULT DE SAINT JEAN D'ANGELY, MICHEL LOUIS 
lSTIENNE, Comte (1761-1819), French politician, was born at 
Saint Fargeau (Yonne) on the 3rd of December 1761. Before the 
Revolution he was an avocatin Paris and lieutenant of the maritime 
provostship of Rochefort. In 1789 he was elected deputy to the 
States General by the Third Estate of the senechaussie of Saint 
Jean d'Angely. His eloquence made him a prominent figure in 
the Constituent Assembly, where he boldly attacked Mirabeau, 
and settled the dispute about the ashes of Voltaire by decreeing 
that they belonged to the nation. But the moderation shown 
by the measures he proposed at the time of the flight of the 
king to Varennes, by his refusal to accede to the demands for 
the king's execution, and by the articles he published in the 
Journal de Paris and the Ami des patrioles, marked him out 
for the hostility of the advanced parties. He was arrested after 
the revolution of the 10th of August 1792, but succeeded in 
escaping, and during the reaction which followed the fall of 
Robespierre was appointed administrator of the military 
hospitals in Paris. His powers of organization brought him 
to Bonaparte's notice, and he took part in the coup d J itat of 
18 Brumaire, year VIII. (9th of November 1799). Under the 
Empire he enjoyed the confidence of Bonaparte, and was made 
councillor of state, president of section in the Council of State > 



REGNIER, H.— REGULA 



47 



member of the French Academy, procureur giniral of the high 
court, and a count of the Empire. He was dismissed on the 
first restoration of the Bourbons, but resumed his posts during 
the Hundred Days, and after Waterloo persuaded the emperor 
to abdicate. He was exiled by the government of the second 
Restoration, but subsequently obtained leave to return to 
France. He died on the day of his return to Paris (nth of 
March 1810). Les Souvenirs du Comle Regnault de Si Jean 
d'Angily (Paris, 1817) are spurious. His son, Auguste Michel 
foiENNE Regnault de Saint Jean d'Angely (1704-1870), 
an army officer, was dismissed from the army by the Restora- 
tion government, fought for the Greeks in the Greek War of 
Independence, and rejoined the French army in 1830. In 
1848 he was elected deputy and sat on the right. Under the 
Second Empire he went through the Crimean and Italian cam- 
paigns, and was made senator and marshal for bravery at 
the battle of Magenta. 

REGNIER, HENRI FRANCOIS JOSEPH DE (1864- ), 
French poet, was born at Honfleur (Calvados) on the 28th of 
December 1864, and was educated in Paris for the law. In 
1885 he began to contribute to the Parisian reviews, and his 
verses found their way into most of the French and Belgian 
periodicals favourable to the symbolist writers. Having begun, 
however, to write under the leadership of the Parnassians, he 
retained the classical tradition, though "he adopted some of 
the innovations of Moreas and Gustave Kahn. His gorgeous 
and vaguely suggestive style shows the influence of Stephane 
Mallarme, of whom he was an assiduous disciple. His first 
volume of poems, Lendemains, appeared in 1885, and among 
numerous later volumes are Pobmes anciens et romanesqites 
(1890), Les Jeux rustiques et divins (1890), Les MHailles d 'argent 
(1900), La Cite des eaux (1903). He is also the author of a 
series of realistic novels and tales, among which are La Canne 
de jaspe (2nd ed., 1897), La Double Maitresse (5th cd., 1900), 
Les Vacances d'un jeune homme sage (1904), and Les Amants 
singtdiers (1905). M. de Regnier married Mile. Marie de 
Heredia, daughter of the poet, and herself a novelist and poet 
under the name of Gerard d'Houville. 

See E. Gosse, French Profiles (1Q05), and Poetes d'aujourd'hui 
{6th ed., 1905), by van Bever and Leautaud. 

REGNIER, MATHURIN (1 573-1613), French satirist, was 
born at Chartres on tbe 21st of December 1573. His father, 
Jacques Regnier, was a bourgeois of good means and position; 
his mother, Simone Desportes, was the sister of the poet Des- 
portes. Desportes, who was richly beneficed and in great 
favour at court, seems to have been regarded as Mathurin 
Regnier's natural protector and patron; and the boy himself, 
with a view to his following in his uncle's steps, was tonsured 
at eight years old. Little is known of his youth, and it is 
chiefly conjecture which fixes the date of his visit to Italy in 
a humble position in the suite of the cardinal, Francois de 
Joyeuse, in 1587. The cardinal was accredited to the papal 
court in that year as " protector " of the royal interests. 
Regnier found his duties irksome, and when, after many years 
of constant travel in the cardinal's service, he returned definitely 
to France about 1605, he took advantage of the hospitality of 
Desportes. He early began the practice of satirical writing, 
and the enmity which existed between his uncle and the poet 
Malherbe gave him occasion to attack the latter. In 1606 
Desportes died, leaving nothing to Regnier, who, though dis- 
appointed of the succession to Desportes's abbacies, obtained a 
pension of 2000 livres, chargeable upon one of them. He was 
also made in 1609 canon of Chartres through his friendship 
with the lax bishop, Philippe Hurault, at whose abbey of 
Royaumont he spent much time in the later years of his life. 
But the death of Henry IV. deprived him of his last hope of 
great preferments. His later life had been one of dissipation, 
and he died at Rouen at his hotel, the £cu d'Orleans, on the 
22nd of October 16 13. 

About the time of his death numerous collections of licentious 
and satirical poems were published, while others remained in 
manuscript. Gathered from these there has been a floating 



mass of licentious epigrams, &c, attributed to R6gnier, little 
of which is certainly authentic, so that it is very rare to find 
two editions of R6gnier which exactly agree in contents. His 
undoubted work falls into three classes: regular satires in 
alexandrine couplets, serious poems in various metres, and 
satirical or jocular epigrams and light pieces, which often, if 
not always, exhibit considerable licence of language. The real 
greatness of Regnier consists in the vigour and polish of his 
satires, contrasted and heightened as that vigour is with the 
exquisite feeling and melancholy music of some of his minor 
poems. In these Regnier is a disciple of Ronsard (whom he 
defended brilliantly against Malherbe), without the occasional 
pedantry, the affectation or the undue fluency of the Pl£iade; 
but in the satires he seems to have had no master except the 
ancients, for some of them were written before the publication 
of the satires of Vauquelin' de la Fresnaye, and the Tragiques 
of D'Aubigne did not appear until 161 6. He has sometimes 
followed Horace closely, but always in an entirely original 
spirit. His vocabulary is varied and picturesque, and is not 
marred by the maladroit classicism of some of the Ronsardists. 
His verse is extraordinarily forcible and nervous, but his chief 
distinction as a satirist is the way in which he avoids the 
commonplaces of satire. His keen and accurate knowledge 
of human nature and even his purely literary qualities extorted 
the admiration of Boileau. Regnier displayed remarkable in- 
dependence and acuteness in literary criticism, and the famous 
passage (Satire ix., A Monsieur Rapin) in which he satirizes 
Malherbe contains the best denunciation of the merely " correct " 
theory of poetry that has ever been written. Lastly, R6gnier 
had a most unusual descriptive faculty, and the vividness 
of what he called his narrative satires was not approached 
in France for at least two centuries after his death. All his 
merits are displayed in the masterpiece entitled Macelle ou 
VHypocrisie deconcerMe, which does not suffer even on com- 
parison with Tarluffe; but hardly any one of the sixteen 
satires which he has left falls below a very high standard. 

Les Premieres (Euvres ou satyres de Rignier (Paris, 1608) included 
the Discours an roi and ten satires. There was another in 1609, and 
others in 161 2 and 1613. The author had also contributed to two 
collections— Les Muses gaUlardes in 1609 and Le Temple d'Apollon 
in 1611. In 1616 appeared Les Satyres et autres ceuvres folastres 
du sieur Rtgnier^ with many additions and some poems by other 
hands. Two famous editions by Elzevir (Leiden, 1642 and 1652) 
are highly prized. The^ chief editions of the 18th century are that 
of Claude Brossette (printed by Lyon & Woodman, London, 1729), 
which supplies the standard commentary on Regnier,* and that 
of Lenglet Dufresnoy (printed by J. Tonson, London, 1733). The 
editions of Prosper Poitevin (Paris, i860), of Ed. de BartheMemy 
(Paris, 1862), and of E. Courbet (Paris, 1875), may be specially 
mentioned. t The last, printed after the originals in italic type, and 
well edited, is perhaps the best. See also Vianey's Mathurin Regnier 
(1896); M. H. Cherrier, Bibliographie de Mathurin Rtgnier (1884). 

REGNITZ, a river of Germany, and a left-bank tributary of 
the Main, the most important river of the province of Lower 
Bavaria. It is formed by the confluence, near Fiirth, of the 
Rednitz and Pegnitz. The united river flows north through 
an undulating vine-clad country, past Erlangen, Baiersdorf 
and Forchheim, from which point it is navigable, and falls 
into the Main at Bischberg, just below Bamberg, after a course 
of 126 m. Near Bamberg it is joined by the Ludwigskanal, 
which, running parallel to it from Fiirth and separated by the 
railway, forms the water-connexion between the Main and the 
Danube. Its main tributaries from the right are the Griindlach 
and the Wiesent, and from the left the Zenn, the Aurach and 
the Aisch. 

REGRATING (O.Fr. regraler, to sell by retail), in English 
criminal law, was the offence of buying and selling again in 
the same market, or within four miles thereof. (See En- 
grossing.) 

REGULA, the Latb word for a rule, hence particularly 
applied to the rules of a religious order (see Monasticism). 
In architecture the term is applied to a rule or square, the 
short fillet or rectangular block, under the taenia (q.v.) on the 
architrave of the Doric entablature. 



4 8 



REGULAR— REICHENAU 



REGULAR, orderly, following or arranged according to a 
rule (Lat. regula, whence O.Fr. reule, whence English " rule "), 
steady, uniform, formally correct. The earliest' and only 
use in English until the 16th century was in the Med. Lat. sense 
of regularis, one bound by and subject to the rule (regula) 
of a monastic or religious order, a member of the " regular " 
as opposed to the " secular " clergy, and so, as a substantive, 
a regular, i.e. a monk or friar. Another specific application 
is to that portion of the armed forces of a nation which are 
organized on a permanent system, the standing army, as 
opposed to " irregulars," levies raised on a voluntary basis 
and disbanded when the particular campaign or war for which 
they were raised is at an end. In the British army, the forces 
were divided into regulars, militia and volunteers, until 1906, 
when they were divided into regular and territorial forces. 

REGULUS, MARCUS ATILIUS, Roman general and consul 
(for the second time) in the ninth year of the First Punic War 
(256 B.C.). He was one of the commanders in the Punic naval 
expedition which shattered the Carthaginian fleet at Ecnomus, 
and landed an army on Carthaginian territory (see Punic 
Wars). The invaders were so successful that the other 
consul, L. Manlius Vulso, was recalled to Rome, Regulus being 
left behind to finish the war. After a severe defeat at Adys 
near Carthage, the Carthaginians were inclined for peace, but 
the terms proposed by Regulus were so harsh that they 
resolved to continue the war. In 255, Regulus was completely 
defeated and taken prisoner by the Spartan Xanthippus. 
There is no further trustworthy information about him. Accord- 
ing to tradition, he remained in captivity until 250, when after 
the defeat of the Carthaginians at Panormus he was sent to 
Rome on parole to negotiate a peace or exchange of prisoners. 
On his arrival he strongly urged the senate to refuse both 
proposals, and returning to Carthage was tortured to death 
(Horace, Odes, iii. 5). This story made Regulus to the later 
Romans the type of heroic endurance; but most historians 
regard it as insufficiently attested, Polybius being silent. The 
tale was probably invented by the annalists to excuse the 
cruel treatment of the Carthaginian prisoners by the Romans. 

See Polybius i. 25-34; Floras ii. 2; Cicero, De Officiis, iii. 26; 
Livy, Eptt. 18; Valerius Maximus ix. 2; Sil. Ital. vi. 299-550; 
Appian, Punica, 4; Zonaras viii. 15; see also O. Jager, M. Atitius 
Regulus (1878). 

REH AN, ADA ( 1 860- ) , American actress, whose real 
name was Crehan, was born in Limerick, Ireland, on the 22nd 
of April i860. Her parents removed to the United States 
when she was five years old, and it was in Newark, N.J., that 
in 1874 she made her first stage appearance in a small part in 
Across the Continent. She was with Mrs John Drew's stock 
company in Philadelphia, John W. Albaugh's in Albany and 
Baltimore, and other companies for several seasons, playing 
every kind of minor part, until she became connected with 
Augustin Daly's theatrical management in 1879. Under his 
training she soon showed her talents for vivid, charming por- 
trayal of character, first in modern and then in older comedies. 
She was the heroine in all the Daly adaptations from the German, 
and added to her triumphs the parts of Peggy in Wycherly's 
Country Girl, Julia in the Hunchback, and especially Katharina 
in The Taming of the Shrew, besides playing Rosalind and 
Viola. Miss Rehan accompanied Daly's company to England 
(first in 1884), France and Germany (1886). Her life-size 
portrait as Katharina is in the picture-gallery, and her bust, 
with Ellen Terry's, at the entrance to the theatre in the Shake- 
speare Memorial at Stratford-on-Avon. 

REHEARSAL (from " rehearse," to say over again, repeat, 
recount, O.Fr. rehercer, from re, again, and hercer, to harrow, 
cL " hearse," the original meaning being to rake or go over 
the same ground again as with a harrow), a recital of words or 
statements, particularly the- trial performance in private of a* 
play, musical composition, recitation, &c, for the purpose of 
practice preparatory to the performance in public. In the 
theatre a " full rehearsal " is one in which the whole performance 
is gone through with all the performers, a " dress rehearsal " 



one in which the performance is carried out with scenery, 
costumes, properties, &c, exactly as it is to be played in 
public. 

REHOBOAM (Heb. rehab'am, probably "the clan is cn- 
'arged," sec Ecclus. xlvii. 23, although on the analogy of 
Rehabiah and Bab. ra'bi-ilu, % Am may represent some god; 
Septuagint reads pofioay), son of Solomon and first king of 
Judah. On the events which led to his accession and the 
partition of the Hebrew monarchy, see Jeroboam, Solomon. 
Although his age is given as forty-one (1 Kings xiv. 21), the 
account of his treatment of the Israelite deputation (1 Kings xii.), 
as also 2 Chron. xiii. 7, give an impression of youth. He was 
partly of Ammonite origin (1 Kings xiv. 21), and, like his 
father, continued the foreign worship which his connexions 
involved. The chief event of his reign w T as the incursion of 
Egypt under Shcshonk (Shishak) L, who came up against 
Judah and despoiled the temple about 930 b.c. (sec Egypt, 
History, § " Deltaic Dynasties "). That this invasion is to 
be connected with the friendly relations which are said to 
have subsisted between the first of the Libyan dynasty and 
Rchoboam's rival is unlikely. Sheshonk has figured his 
campaign outside the great temple of Karnak with a list of 
some 150 places which he claims to have conquered, but it 
is possible that these were only tributary, and the names may 
be largely based upon older lists. Towns of both Judah and 
Israel are incorporated, and it is possible that Jerusalem once 
stood where now the stone is mutilated. 1 The book of 
Chronicles enumerates several Judaean cities fortified by 
Rehoboam (not necessarily connected with Sheshonk's cam- 
paign), and characteristically regards the invasion as a punish- 
ment (2 Chron. xi. 5 sqq., xii. 1-15; for the prophet Shemaiah 
see 1 Kings xii. 21-24). Of Rehoboam 's successor Abijah (or 
Abijam) little is known except a victory over Jeroboam re- 
corded in 2 Chron. xiii. See further Asa, Omju, and Jews 
{History), §§ 7, 9. 

REICHA, ANTON JOSEPH (1770-1836), French musical 
theorist and teacher of composition, was born at Prague on the 
27th of February 1770, and educated chiefly by his uncle, 
Joseph Reicha (1 746-1 795), a clever violoncellist, who first 
received him into his house at Wallerstein in Bohemia, and 
afterwards carried him to Bonn. Here, about 1789, he was made 
flutist in the orchestra of the elector. In 1794 he went to 
Hamburg and gave music lessons there, also producing the 
opera Godefroid de Montfort. He was in Paris in 1799 and in 
Vienna from 1802 to 1808, during which period he saw much of 
Beethoven and Haydn. In the latter year he returned to Paris, 
where he produced three operas without much success. In 
181 7 he succeeded Mchul as professor of counterpoint at the 
Conservatoire. In 1829 he was naturalized as a Frenchman, and 
in 1835 he was admitted as a member of the Institute in the 
place of Boieldieu. He died in Paris on the 28th of May 1836. 
He produced a vast quantity of church music, five operas, a 
number of symphonies, oratorios and many miscellaneous 
works. Though clever and ingenious, his compositions are 
more remarkable for their novelty than for the beauty of the 
ideas upon which they are based. His fame is, indeed, more 
securely based upon his didactic works. His Traite de milodie 
(Paris, 1 8 14), Cours de composition musicale (Paris, 1818), 
Traite de haute composition musicale (Paris, 1824-26), and 
Art du compositeur dramatique (Paris, 1833), are valuable and 
instructive essays for the student, though many of the theories 
they set forth are now condemned as erroneous. 

REICHENAU, a picturesque island in the Untersee or 
western arm of the lake of Constance, 3 m. long by 1 broad, and 
connected with the east shore by a causeway three-quarters of a 
mile long. It belqngs to the grand duchy of Baden. The soil 

1 The once popular view that " king of Judah " stands in no. 29 is 
untenable. See Petrie, Hist, of Egypt, ii. p. 235; L. B. Paton, Syria 
and Pal. p. 193 sq.; W. M. Miiller, Mitteil. Vorderasiat. GeselL, 
1900, p. 19 sq., and Ency. Bib. col. 4486. Breasted (Amer. Journ. of 
Sem. Lang., 1904, p. $6) has made the interesting observation that 
the list mentions " the field of Abram " (nos. 71 and 72); see further, 
id., Egypt Hist. Records, iv. pp. 348-357. 



REICHENBACH, G.— REICHSTADT, DUKE OF 



49 



is very fertile, and excellent wine is produced in sufficient 
quantity for exportation. The Benedictine abbey of Reichenau, 
founded in 724, was long celebrated for its wealth and for the 
services rendered by its monks to the cause of learning. In 
1540 the abbey, which had previously been independent, was 
annexed to the see of Constance, and in 1799 it was secularized. 
The abbey church, dating in part from the 9th century, contains 
the tomb of Charles the Fat (d. 888), who retired to this island 
in 887, after losing the empire of Charlemagne. It now 
serves as the parish church of Mittelzell, while the churches of 
Oberzell and Unterzell are also interesting buildings of the 
Carolingian era. 

REICHENBACH, GEORG VON (1772-1826), German astro- 
nomical instrument maker, was born at Durlach in Baden on 
the 24th of August 1772. From 1796 he was occupied with 
the construction of a dividing engine; in 1804, with Joseph, 
Liebherr and Joseph Utzschneider, he founded an instrument- 
making business in Munich; and in 1809 he established, with 
Joseph Fraunhofer and Utzschneider, optical works at Benedict- 
beuern, which were moved to Munich in 1823. He withdrew 
from both enterprises in 1814, and founded with T. L. Ertel a 
new optical business, from which also he retired in 182 1, on 
obtaining an engineering appointment under the Bavarian 
government. He died at Munich on the 21st of May 1826. 

Reich enbach's principal merit was that he introduced into ob- 
servatories the meridian or transit circle, combining the transit in- 
strument and the mural circle into one instrument. This had 
already been done by O. Romer about 1704, but the idea had not 
been adopted by any one else, except in the transit circle constructed 
by Edward Troughton for Stephen Groombridge in 1806. The 
transit circle in the form given it by Reichenbach had one finely 
divided circle attached to one end of the horizontal axis and read 
by four verniers on an " alidade circle," the unaltered position of 
which was tested by a spirit level. The instrument came almost at 
once into universal use on the continent of Europe (the first one was 
made for F. W. Bessel in 1819), but in England the mural circle and 
transit instrument were not superseded for many years. 

REICHENBACH, a town of Germany, in the Prussian 
province of Silesia, situated on the Feile, at the foot of the 
Eulengebirge, a spur of the Riesengebirge, 30 m. S.W. of Breslau 
by rail. Pop. (1905) 15,984. Among its industries are weaving, 
spinning, dyeing, brewing and machine building, and there is a 
considerable trade in grain and cattle. Reichenbach is memor- 
able for the victory gained here on the 16th of August 1762 by 
the Prussians over the Austrians. Here was held the congress 
which resulted in the convention of Reichenbach — signed on the 
27th of July 1790 between Great Britain, Prussia, Austria, 
Poland and Holland — guaranteeing the integrity of Turkey. 
Here, too, in June 1813, was signed the treaty of alliance between 
Austria and the Allies for the prosecution of the war against 
France. 
See the Kurze Geschichteder Stadt Reichenbach (Reichenbach, 1874). 

REICHENBACH, a town in the kingdom of Saxony, situated 
in a hilly district, known as the Vogtland, 11 m. S.W. of Zwickau, 
at the junction of the main lines of railway Dresden-Leipzig-Hof. 
Pop. (1905) 24,915. It contains a handsome town-hall rebuilt 
in 1833, and a natural history museum. The industries embrace 
the manufacture of cloth, machinery and carriages, also dyeing 
and bleaching. The earliest mention of the town occurs in a 
document of 1212, and it acquired municipal rights in 1367. 
The woollen manufacture was introduced in the 1 5th centurj', 
and took the place of the mining industry which had been 
established earlier. 

REICHENBERG (Czech, Liberec), a town of Bohemia, 
87 m. N.E. of Prague by rail. Pop. (1900) 34,099, chiefly 
German. The most prominent buildings are the new town-hall 
(1893); the castle of Count Clam Gallas, built in the 17th 
century, with additions dating from 1774 and 1850; the 
Erzdekanatskirche, of the 16th century; the Protestant church, 
a handsome modern Romanesque edifice (1864-68) and the hall 
of the cloth-workers. Reichenberg is one of the most important 
centres of trade and industry in Bohemia, its staple industry 
being the cloth manufacture. Next in importance comes the 



spinning and weaving of wool, cotton, linen and carpet manu- 
factures, and dyeing. 

Reichenberg is first mentioned in a document of 1348, and from 
1622 to 1634 was among the possessions of the great Wallenstein, 
since whose death it has belonged to the Gallas and Clam Gallas 
families, though their jurisdiction over the town has long ceased. 
The cloth-making industry was introduced in 1579. 

REICHENHALL, a town and watering-place in the kingdom 
of Bavaria, finely situated in an amphitheatre of lofty moun- 
tains, on the river Saalach, 1570 ft. above sea-level, 9 m. S.W. 
of Salzburg. Pop. (1900) 4927, excluding visitors. Reichen- 
hall possesses several copious saline springs, producing about 
8500 tons of salt per annum. The water of some of the. springs, 
the sources of which are 50 ft. below the surface, is so strongly 
saturated with salt (up to 24%) that it is at once conducted 
to the boiling houses, while that of the others is first submitted 
to a process of evaporation. Reichenhall is the centre of the 
four chief Bavarian salt-works, which are connected with each 
other by brine conduits having an aggregate length of 60 m. 
The surplus brine of Berchtesgaden is conducted to Reichen- 
hall, and thence, in increased volume, to Traunstein and Rosen- 
heim, which possess larger supplies of timber for use as fuel 
in the process of boiling. Since 1846 Reichenhall has become 
one of the most fashionable spas and climatic health resorts 
in Germany, and it is now visited annually by about ten 
thousand patients, besides many thousand passing tourists. 
The saline springs are used both for drinking and bathing, 
and are said to be efficacious in scrofula and incipient tuber- 
culosis. 

The brine springs of Reichenhall are mentioned in a docu- 
ment of the 8th century and were perhaps known to the Romans; 
but almost all trace of antiquity of the town was destroyed 
by a conflagration in 1834. The brine conduit to Traunstein 
dates from 1618. The environs abound in numerous charming 
Alpine excursions. 

See G. von Liebig, Reichenhall, sein Klima und seine Heilmittel 
(6th ed., Reichenhall, 1889); and Goldschmidt, Der Kuron Bad 
Reichenhall und seine Umgebung (Vienna, 1892). 

REICHENSPERGER, AUGUST (1808-1895), German poli- 
tician, was born at Coblenz on the 22nd of March 1808, studied 
law and entered government service, becoming counsellor to 
the court of appeal (Appellalionsgerichtsrat) at Cologne in 1849. 
He was a member of the German parliament at Frankfort in 
1848, when he attached himself to the Right, and of the Erfurt 
parliament in 1850, when he voted against the Prussian Union. 
From 1850 to 1863 he sat in the Prussian Lower House, from 
1867 to 1884 in the Reichstag, and from 1879 onwards also 
in the Prussian Chamber of Deputies. Originally of Liberal 
tendencies, he developed from 1837 onwards ultramontane 
opinions, founded in 1852 the Catholic group which in 1861 
took the name of the Centre party (Centrum) and became one 
of its most conspicuous orators. He died on the 16th of July 
1895 at Cologne. He published a considerable number of 
works on art and architecture, including Die ckrisllich-ger- 
manische Baukunst (Trier, 1852, 3rd ed., i860); Fingerzeige 
auf dem Gebiele der christlichen Kunsl (Leipzig, 1854); Augustus 
Pugin, der NeubegrUnder der chrisllichen Kunsl in England 
(Freiburg, 1877). 

See L. v. Pastor, August Reichensperger, 2 vols. (Ffeiburg-im- 
Breisgau, 1899). 

His brother, Peter Reichensperger (1810-1892), counsellor 
to the appeal court at Cologne (1850) and until 1879 to the 
Oberlribunal at Berlin, was elected to the Reichstag in 1867 
as a member of the Liberal Opposition, but subsequently 
joined the Centre party. In the Kulturkampf he took an 
active part on the ultramontane side. He had been a member 
of the Prussian National Assembly in 1848, and in 1888 he 
published his Erlebnisse eines alien Parlamentariers im Revolu- 
tionsjahr 1848. 

REICHSTADT, NAPOLEON FRANCIS JOSEPH CHARLES, 
Duke of (1811-1832), known by the Bonapartists as Napo- 
leon II., was the son of the Emperor Napoleon I. and Marie 
Louise, archduchess of Austria. He was born on the 20th of 



5° 

March 1811, in Paris at the Tuileries palace. He was at first 
named the king of Rome, after the analogy of the heirs of the 
emperors of the Holy Roman Empire. By his ' birth the 
Napoleonic dynasty seemed to be finally established; but in 
three years it crumbled in the dust. At the time of the downfall 
of the empire (April 1814) Marie Louise and the king of Rome 
were at Blois with Joseph and Jerome Bonaparte, who wished 
to keep them as hostages. This design, however, was frustrated. 
Napoleon abdicated in favour of his son; but events prevented 
the reign of Napoleon II. from being more than titular. While 
Napoleon repaired to Elba, his consort and child went to 
Vienna; and they remained in Austria during the Hundred 
Days (181 5), despite efforts made by the Bonapartists to carry 
off the prince to his father at Paris. 

Meanwhile the congress of Vienna had carried out the con- 
ditions of the treaty of Fontainebleau (March 18 14) whereby 
the duchies of Parma and Guastalla were to go to the ex- 
Empress Marie Louise and her son, although much opposition 
was offered to this proposal by Louis XVIII. and even (so it 
now appears) by Metternich. The secret treaty of the 31st 
of May 1 81 5 between Austria, Russia and Prussia secured 
those possessions to her, her son bearing the title Prince of 
Parma, with hereditary rights for his descendants. But after 
the second abdication of Napoleon in favour of his son (22nd 
of June 181 5) — a condition which was wholly nugatory — the 
powers opposed all participation of the prince in the affairs 
of Parma. He therefore remained in Austria, while Marie 
Louise proceeded to Parma. From this time onward he be- 
came, as it were, a pawn in the complex game of European 
politics, his claims being put forward sometimes by Metternich, 
sometimes by the unionists of Italy, while occasionally mal- 
contents in France used his name to discredit the French 
Bourbons. The efforts of malcontents increased the resolve 
of the sovereigns never to allow a son of Napoleon to bear 
rule; and in November 18 16 the court of Vienna informed 
Marie Louise that her son could not succeed to the duchies. 
This decision was confirmed by the treaty of Paris of the roth 
of June 1817. Marie Louise demanded as a slight compensa- 
tion that he should have a title derived from the lands of the 
" Bavarian Palatinate " in northern Bohemia, and the title 
of " duke of Reichstadt " was therefore conferred on him on 
the 22nd of July 18 18. Thus Napoleon I., who once averred 
that he would prefer that his son should be strangled rather 
than brought up as an Austrian prince, lived to see his son 
reduced to a rank inferior to that of the Austrian archdukes. 

His education was confided chiefly to Count Dietrichstein, 
who found him precocious, volatile, passionate and fond of 
military affairs. The same judgment was given by Marshal 
Marmont, duke of Ragusa, who recognized the warlike strain 
in his character. His nature was sensitive, as appeared on his 
receiving the news of the death of his father in 182 1. The 
upheaval in France in 1830 and the disturbances which ensued 
led many Frenchmen to turn their thoughts to Napoleon II.; 
but though Metternich dallied for a time with the French 
Bonapartists, he had no intention of inaugurating a Napoleonic 
revival. By this time, too, the duke's health was on the decline; 
his impatience of all restraint and his indulgence in physical 
exercise far beyond his powers aggravated a natural weakness 
of the chest, and he died on the 22nd of July 1832. 

See A. M. Barthelemy and J. P. A. M6ry, Le Fits de Vhomme 
(Paris, 1829); Baron G. I. Comte de Montbel, Le Due de Reichstadt 
(Paris, 1832); J. de Saint-FeMix, Histoire de Napolion II. (Paris, 
1853); Guy de 1'HeVault, Histoire de NapoUon II. (Paris, 1853); 
Count Anton von Prokesch-Osten, Mein Verhaltniss zutn Herzog 
von Reichstadt (Stuttgart, 1878); H. Welschinger, Le Roi de Rome 
(Paris, 1897); E. de Wertheimer, The Duke of Reichstadt (Eng. ed., 
London, 1905) ; M. Rostand's play UAiglon is a dramatic setting 
of the career of the prince. (J. Hl. R.) 

REID, SIR GEORGE (1841- ), Scottish artist, was born 
in Aberdeen on the 31st of October 1841. He developed an 
early passion for drawing, which led to his being apprenticed 
in 1854 for seven years to Messrs Keith & Gibb, lithographers 
in Aberdeen. In 1861 Reid took lessons from an itinerant 



REID, SIR G.— REID, SIR R. G. 



portrait-painter, William Niddrie, who had been a pupil ol 
James Giles, R.S.A., and afterwards entered as a student in 
the school of the Board of Trustees in Edinburgh. He returned 
to Aberdeen to paint landscapes and portraits for any trifling 
sum which his work could command. His first portrait to 
attract attention, from its fine quality, was that of George 
Macdonald, the poet and novelist, now the property of the 
university of Aberdeen. His early landscapes were con- 
scientiously painted in the open air and on the spot. But 
Reid soon came to see that such work was inherently false, 
painted as the picture was day after day under varying con- 
ditions of light and shade. Accordingly, in 1865 he proceeded 
to Utrecht to study under A. Mollinger, whose work he ad- 
mired, from its unity and simplicity. This change in his 
method of viewing Nature was looked on as revolutionary by 
the Royal Scottish Academy, and for some years his work 
found little favour in that quarter; but other artists gradually 
adopted the system of tone-studies, which ultimately pre- 
vailed. Reid went, to Paris in 1868 to study under the figure 
painter Yvon; and he worked in 1872 with Josef Israels 
at the Hague. From this time forward Reid's success was 
continuous and marked. He showed his versatility in land- 
scape, as in his " Whins in Bloom," which combined great 
breadth with fine detail; in flower-pieces, such as his " Roses," 
which were brilliant in rapid suggestiveness and force; but 
most of all in his portraits, which are marked by great indi- 
viduality, and by fine insight into character. His work in 
black-and-white, his admirable illustrations in brushwork of 
Edinburgh and its neighbourhood, and also his pen-drawings, 
about which it has been declared that " his work contains 
all the. subtleties and refinements of a most delicate etching," 
must also be noted. Elected Associate of the Royal Scottish 
Academy in 1870, Reid attained full membership in 1877, 
and took up his residence in Edinburgh in 1882. In 1891 
he was elected President — a post which he held until 1902 — 
receiving also the honour of knighthood, and he was awarded 
a gold medal at the Paris Exhibition of 1900. His brother 
Samuel (b. 1854) was also a painter and a writer of tales and 
verse. 

REID, ROBERT (1862- ), American artist, was born at 
Stockbridge, Mass., on the 29th of July 1862. He studied 
at the art schools of the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, the 
Art Students' League, New York, and under Boulanger and 
Lefebvre in Paris. His early pictures were figures of French 
peasants, painted at fitaples, but subsequently he became best 
known for mural decoration and designs for stained glass. 
He contributed with others to the frescoes of the dome of 
the Liberal Arts Building at the Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 
in 1893. Other work is in the Congressional Library, Washing- 
ton, the Appellate Court House, New York, and the State 
House, Boston, where are his three large panels, " James 
Otis Delivering his Speech against the Writs of Assistance," 
"Paul Revere's Ride" and the "Boston Tea Party." He 
executed a panel for the American Pavilion at the Paris Ex- 
hibition, 1900, and in 1906 he completed a series of ten stained 
glass windows for a church at Fairhaven, Mass., for the Rogers 
Memorial. In 1906 he became a full member of the National 
Academy of Design. 

REID, SIR ROBERT GILLESPIE (1840-1908), Canadian 
railway contractor, was born at Coupar-Angus, Scotland. 
When a young man he spent a few years in Australia gold- 
mining, and in 1871 he settled in America, where he began his 
career as a contractor. He built one section of the Canadian 
Pacific railway, and was responsible for the erection of the 
international bridge over the Niagara river, the international 
railway bridge over the Rio Grande river and the Lachine 
bridge over the St Lawrence. In 1893 Reid signed a contract 
with the government of Newfoundland by which he under- 
took to construct a railway from St John's to Port-aux-Basques 
and to work the line for ten years in return for a large grant 
of land. In 1898 he further contracted to work all the railways 
in Newfoundland for fifty years on condition that at the end 



of this time they should become his property. This bargain, 
which included other matters such as steamers, docks and 
telegraphs, was extraordinarily favourable to Reid, who, by 
further enormous grants of land, became one of the largest 
landed proprietors in the world; public opinion was aroused 
against it, and at first the governor, Sir Herbert Murray, refused 
to ratify it. After the premier, Sir James Winter, had been 
replaced by Mr (afterwards Sir) Robert Bond, the terms of 
the contract were revised, being made more favourable to 
Newfoundland, and Reid's interests were transferred to a 
company, the Reid Newfoundland Company, of which he was 
the first president (see Newfoundland, Roads and Railways). 
Reid was knighted in 1907, and he died on the 3rd of June 1908. 
REID, THOMAS (1 710-1796), Scottish philosopher, was born 
at Strachan in Kincardineshire, on the 26th of April 1710. 
His father was minister of the place for fifty years, and traced 
his descent from a long line of Presbyterian ministers on Dee- 
side. His mother belonged to the brilliant Gregory family 
(q.v.), which, in the 18th century, gave so many representatives 
to literature and science in Scotland. Reid graduated at Aber- 
deen in 1726, and remained there as librarian to the university 
for ten years, a period which he devoted largely to mathematical 
reading. In 1737 he was presented to the living of Newmachar 
near Aberdeen. The parishioners, violently excited at the 
time about the law of patronage, received him with open 
hostility; and tradition asserts that his uncle defended him 
on the pulpit stair with a drawn sword. Though not dis- 
tinguished as a preacher, he was successful in winning -the 
affections of his people. The publication of Hume's treatise 
turned his attention to philosophy, and in particular to the 
theory of external perception. His first publication, however, 
dealt with a question of philosophical method suggested by 
the reading of Hutcheson. The " Essay on Quantity, occa- 
sioned by reading a Treatise in which Simple and Compound 
Ratios are applied to Virtue and Merit," denies the possibility 
of a mathematical treatment of moral subjects. The essay 
appeared in the Transactions of the Royal Society (1748). 
In 1740 Reid married a cousin, the daughter of a London 
physician. In 1752 the professors of King's College, Aberdeen, 
elected him to the chair of philosophy, which he held for twelve 
years. The foundation of the Aberdeen Philosophical Society 
(the "Wise Club "), which numbered among its members 
Campbell, Beattie, Gerard and Dr John Gregory, was mainly 
owing to the exertions of Reid, who was secretary for the first 
year (1758). Many of the subjects of discussion were drawn 
from Hume's speculations; and during the last years of his 
stay in Aberdeen Reid propounded his new point of view 
in several papers read before the society. The results of these 
papers were embodied in the Enquiry into the Human Mind on 
the Principles of Common Sense (1764), The Enquiry does not 
go beyond an analysis of sense perception, and is therefore more 
limited in scope than the later Essays; but if the latter are more 
mature, there is more freshness about the earlier work. In 
this year, Reid succeeded Adam Smith as professor of moral 
philosophy in the university of Glasgow. After seventeen 
years of active teaching, he retired in order to complete his 
philosophical system. As a lecturer, he was inferior in charm 
and eloquence to Brown and Stewart; the latter says that 
" silent and respectful attention " was accorded to the " sim- 
plicity and perspicuity of his style " and " the gravity and 
authority of his character." His philosophical influence was 
exerted largely through the writings of Dugald Stewart and 
Sir William Hamilton. The Essays on Ike Intellectual Powers 
of Man appeared in 1785, and their ethical complement, the 
Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind, in 1788. These, 
with an account of Aristotle's Logic appended to Lord Karnes's 
Sketches of the History of Man (1774), conclude the list of works 
published in Reid's lifetime. Hamilton's edition of Reid also 
contains an account of the university of Glasgow and a selection 
of Reid's letters, chiefly. addressed to his Aberdeen friends the 
Skenes, to Lord Karnes, and to Dr James Gregory. With the 
two last named he discussed the materialism of Priestley and 



REID, T. 51 

the theory of necessitarianism. He reverted in his old age 
to the mathematical pursuits of his earlier years, and his ardour 
for knowledge of every kind remained fresh to the last. He 
died of paralysis on the 7th of October 1796, his wife and all 
his children save one having predeceased him. His portrait 
by Raeburn is the property of Glasgow University, and in 
the National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, there is a good 
medallion by Tassie, taken in his eighty-first year. His char- 
acter was marked by independence, economy and generosity. 

The key to Reid's philosophy is to be found in his revulsion from 
the sceptical conclusions of Hume. In several passages of his 
writings he expressly dates his philosophical awakening from the 
appearance of the Treatise of Human Nature. In the dedication 
of the Enquiry i he says : " The ingenious author of that treatise 
upon the principles of Locke — who was no sceptic — hath built a 
system of scepticism which leaves no ground to believe any one 
thing rather than its contrary. His reasoning appeared to me to 
be just; there was, therefore, a necessity to call in question the 

grinciples upon which it was founded, or to admit the conclusion." 
leid thus takes Hume's scepticism as, on its own showing, a reductio 
ad impossibile (see Hume, ad fin.) of accepted philosophical 
principles, and refuses, accordingly, to separate Hume from his 
intellectual progenitors. From its origin in Descartes and onwards 
through Locke and Berkeley, modern philosophy carried with it, 
Reid contends, the germ of scepticism. Embracing the whole 
philosophic movement under the name of " the Cartesian system," 
Reid detects its fundamental error in the unproved assumption 
shared by these thinkers " that all the objects of my knowledge 
are ideas in my own mind." This doctrine or hypothesis he usually 
speaks of as ' the ideal system " or " the theory of ideas"; and to 
it he opposes his own analysis of the act of perception. In view 
of the results of this analysis, Reid's theory (ana the theory of 
Scottish philosophy generally) has been dubbed natural realism or 
natural dualism, in contrast to theories like # subjective idealism 
and materialism or to the cosmothctic idealism or hypothetical 
dualism of the majority of philosophers. But this unduly narrows 
the scope of Scottish philosophy, which does not exhaust itself, 
as is sometimes supposed, in uncritically reasserting the independent 
existence of matter and its immediate presence to mind. The 
real significance of Reid's doctrine lies in its attack upon Hume's 
fundamental principles, (1) that all our perceptions are distinct 
existences, and (2) that the mind never perceives any real connexion 
among distinct existences (cf. Appendix to the third volume of the 
Treatise, 1740). It is here that the danger of " the ideal system " 
really lies — in its reduction of reality to "particular perceptions," 
essentially unconnected with each other. This theory admitted, 
nothing is left for philosophy save to explain the illusion of necessary 
connexion. Reid, however, attacks the fundamental assumption. 
In logical language, he denies the actuality of the abstract particular. 
The unit of knowledge is not an isolated impression but a judgment; 
and in such a judgment is contained, even initially, the reference 
both to a permanent subject and to a permanent world of thought, 
and, implied in these, such judgments, for example, as those of 
existence, substance, cause and effect. Such principles are not 
derived from sensation, but are " suggested on occasion of 
sensation, in such a way as to constitute the necessary conditions 
of our having perceptive experience at all. Thus we do not start 
with "ideas, and afterwards refer them to objects; we are never 
restricted to our own minds, but are from the first immediately 
related to a permanent world. Reid has a variety of names for the 
principles which, by their presence, lift us out of subjectivity into 
perception. He calls them " natural judgments," " natural sug- 
gestions," "judgments of nature," # "judgments immediately 
inspired by our constitution," " principles of our nature," " first 
principles," " principles of common sense." The last common 
designation, which became the current one, was un- Sease 
doubtedly unfortunate, and has conveyed to many a false 
impression of Scottish philosophy. It has been understood as if 
Reid had merely appealed from the reasoned conclusions of philo- 
sophers to the unreasoned beliefs of common life. But Reid's 
actions are better than his words; his real mode of procedure is to 
redargue Hume's conclusions by a refutation of the premises in- 
herited by him from his predecessors. For the rest, as regards 
the question of nomenclature, Reid everywhere unites common 
sense and reason, making the former " only another name for 
one branch or degree of reason." Reason, as judging of things 
self-evident, is called common sense to distinguish it from ratio- 
cination or reasoning. ^ And in regard to Reid's favourite proof of 
the principles in question by reference to " the consent of ages and 
nations, of the learned and unlearned," it is only fair to observe 
that this argument assumes a much more scientific form in the 
Essays, where it is almost identified with an appeal to " the structure 
and grammar of all languages." " The structure of all languages," 
he says, " is grounded upon common sense." To take but one 
example, " the distinction between sensible qualities and the 
substance to which they belong, and between thought and the 
mind that thinks, is not the invention of philosophers; it is found 



52 



REID, T. M.— REIGATE 



/ 



The 

Scottish 

School* 



in the structure of all languages, and therefore must be common 
to all men who speak with understanding " (Hamilton's Reid, pp. 
229 and 454). 

The principles which Reid insists upon as everywhere present 
in experience evidently correspond pretty closely to the Kantian 
categories and the unity of apperception. Similarly, Reid's 
Reid and asser ti n of the essential distinction between space or 
Kant. extension and feeling or any succession of feelings may 

be compared with Kant's doctrine in the Aesthetic. " Space, 
he says, " whether tangible or visible, is not so properly 
an object [Kant's " matter "] as a necessary concomitant of the 
objects both of sight and touch." # Like Kant, too, Reid finds in 
space the source of a necessity which sense, as sense, cannot give 
(Hamilton's Reid, p. 323). In the substance of their answer to Hume, 
the two philosophers have therefore much in common. But Reid 
lacked the art to give due impressiveness to the important advance 
which his positions really contain. Although at times he states 
his principles with a wonderful degree of breadth and insight, he 
mars the effect by looseness of statement, and by the incorporation 
of irrelevant psychological matter. And, if Kant was overridden 
by a love of symmetry, Reid's indifference to form and system is 
an even more dangerous defect. Further, Reid is inclined to state 
his principles dogmatically rather than as logical deductions. The 
transcendental deduction, or proof from the possibility of experi- 
ence in general, which forms the vital centre of the Kantian scheme, 
is wanting in Reid; or, at all events, if the spirit of the proof is 
occasionally present, it is nowhere adequately developed. Never- 
theless, Reid s insistence on judgment as the unit of knowledge and 
his sharp distinction between sensation and perception must still 
be recognized as of the highest importance. 

The relativism or phenomenalism which Hamilton afterwards 
adopted from Kant and sought to engraft upon Scottish philosophy 
is wholly absent from the original Scottish doctrine. One 
or two passages may certainly be quoted from Reid in 
which he asserts that we know only properties of things 
and are ignorant of their essence. But the exact meaning 
which he attaches to such expressions is not quite clear; and they 
occur, moreover, only incidentally and with the air of current phrases 
mechanically repeated. Dugafd Stewart, however, deliberately 
emphasizes the merely qualitative nature of our knowledge as the 
foundation of philosophical argument, and thus paves the way for 
the thoroughgoing philosophy of nescience elaborated by Hamilton. 
But since Hamilton's time the most typical Scottish thinkers have 
repudiated his relativistic doctrine, and returned to the original 
tradition of the school. For Reid's ethical theory, see Ethics. 

The complete edition of the works by Sir William Hamilton, 
published in two volumes with notes and supplementary disserta- 
tions by the editor (6th ed. 1863), has superseded all others. For 
Reid's life see D. Stewart's Memoir prefixed to Hamilton's edition 
of Reid's works. See also McCosh, Scottish Philosophers (1875); 
Rait, Universities of Aberdeen, pp. 199-203, 223; A. C. Fraser, 
Monograph (1898); A. Bain, Mental Science, p. 207, p. 422 (for his 
theory of free will), and Appendix, pp. 29, 63, 88, 89. 

(A. S. P.-P.;X.) 

REID, THOMAS MAYNE (1818-1883), better known as 
Mayne Reid, British novelist, the son of a Presbyterian minister, 
was born at Ballyroney, Co. Down, Ireland, on the 4th of April 
1818. His own early life was as adventurous as any boy 
reader of his novels could desire. He was educated for the 
church, but did not take orders, and when twenty years old 
went to America in search of excitement and fortune. He 
made trading excursions on the Red river, studying the ways 
of the red man and the white pioneer. He made acquaintance 
with the Missouri in the same manner, and roved through all 
the states of the Union. In Philadelphia, where he was engaged 
in journalism from 1843 to 1846, he made the acquaintance of 
Edgar Allan Poe. When the war with Mexico broke out in 1846 
he obtained a captain's commission, was present at the siege 
and capture of Vera Cruz, and led a forlorn hope at Chapulte- 
pec, where he sustained such severe injuries that his life was 
despaired of. In one of his novels he says that he believed 
theoretically in the military value of untrained troops, and 
that he had found his theories confirmed in actual warfare. 
An enthusiastic republican, he offered his services to the 
Hungarian insurgents in 1849, raised a body of volunteers, 
and sailed for Europe, but arrived too late. He then settled in 
England, and began his career of a novelist with the publication, 
in 1850, of the Rifle Rangers. This was followed next year' 
by the Scalp Hunters. He never surpassed his first productions, 
except perhaps in The White Chief (1859) and The Quadroon 
(1856); but he continued to produce tales of self-reliant enter- 
prise and exciting adventure with great fertility. Simplicity of 



plot and easy variety of exciting incident are among the merits 
that contribute to his popularity with boys. His reflections 
are not profound, but are frequently more sensible than might 
be presumed at first from his aggressive manner of expressing 
them. He died in London on the 22nd of October 1883. 
See Memoir (1890) by his widow, Elizabeth Mayne Reid. 

REID, WHITELAW (1837- ), American journalist and 
diplomatist, was born of Scotch parentage, near Xenia, Ohio, 
on the 27th of October 1837. He graduated at Miami Uni- 
versity in 1856, and spoke frequently in behalf of John C. 
Fremont, the Republican candidate for the presidency in 
that year; was superintendent of schools of South Charleston, 
Ohio, in 1856-58, and in 1858-59 was editor of the Xenia 
News. In i860 he became legislative correspondent at 
Columbus for several Ohio newspapers, including the Cincinnati 
Gazette, of which he was made city editor in 1861. He was 
war correspondent for the Gazette in 1861-62, serving also 
as volunteer aide-de-camp (with the rank of captain) to General 
Thomas A. Morris (1811-1904) and General William S. Rosecrans 
in West Virginia. He was Washington correspondent of the 
Gazette in 1862-68, acting incidentally as clerk of the mili- 
tary committee of Congress (1862-63) and as librarian of the 
House of Representatives (1863-66). In 1868 he became a 
leading editorial writer for the New York Tribune, in the 
following year was made managing editor, and in 1872, upon 
the death of Horace Greeley, became the principal proprietor 
and editor-in-chief. In 1905 Reid relinquished his active 
editorship of the Tribune, but retained financial control. He 
declined an appointment as United States minister to Germany 
in 1877 and again in 1881, but served as minister to France in 
1880-92, and in 1892 was the unsuccessful Republican candi- 
date for vice-president on the ticket with Benjamin Harrison. 
In 1897 he was special ambassador of the United States on the 
occasion of Queen Victoria's jubilee; in 1898 was a member of 
the commission which arranged the terms of peace between 
the United States and Spain; in 1902 was special ambassador 
of the United States at the coronation of King Edward VII., 
and in 1905 became ambassador to Great Britain. He was 
elected a life member of the New York State Board of Regents 
in 1878; and in 1902 he became vice-chancellor and, in 1904, 
chancellor of the university of the state of New York. In 1881 
he married a daughter of Darius Ogden Mills (1825-1910), a 
prominent financier. 

His publications include After the War (1867), in which he gives 
his observations during a journey through the Southern States in 
1866; Ohio in the War (2 vols., 1868); Some Consequences of the 
Last Treaty of Paris (1899); Our New Duties (1899); Later Aspects 
of Our New Duties (1899); Problems of Expansion (1900); The 
Greatest^ Fact in Modern History (1906), and How America faced its 
Educational Problem (1906). 

REID, SIR WILLIAM (1 791-1858), Scottish administrator 
and man of science, was born on the 25th of April 1791 at 
the manse of Kinglassie, Fifeshire, and entered the Royal 
Engineers in 1809. He saw active service in the Peninsula 
under Wellington, and took part in the bombardment of Algiers 
in 1 81 6. In 1835 and 1836 he again saw active service, in 
Spain against Don Carlos. In 1838 he published his Attempt 
to develop the Law of Storms, which obtained wide popularity. 
In 1839 he was appointed governor of the Bermudas, where 
he did much to develop the agricultural resources of the islands, 
and in 1846 he was transferred to Barbados. In 1850-51 he 
was chairman of the executive committee of the Great Exhi- 
bition; on the completion of the work he was made a K.C.B. 
and appointed governor of Malta. He died in London on the 
-31st of October 1858. 

REIGATE, a market town and municipal borough in the 
Reigate parliamentary division of Surrey, England, 24 m. 
S. by W. of London by the South-Eastern & Chatham rail- 
way. Pop. (1901) 25,993. It is situated at the head of the 
long valley of Holmsdale Hollow, beneath the North Downs. 
A very fine prospect over a great part of Surrey and Sussex, 
and extending to Hampshire and Kent, is obtained from the 
neighbouring Reigate Hill. Of the old castle, supposed to 



REIMARUS— REIMS 



53 



have been built before the Conquest to command the pass 
through the valley, there only remains the entrance to a cave 
beneath, 150 ft. long and from 10 to 12 ft. high, excavated in 
the sandstone, which was used as a guardroom. The grounds 
are laid out as a public garden. Near the market house is 
the site of an ancient chapel dedicated to Thomas a Becket. 
In the chancel of the parish church of St Mary, a building 
ranging from Transitional Norman to Perpendicular, is buried 
Lord Howard, the commander of the English navy against the 
Spanish Armada. Above the vestry there is a library contain- 
ing choice manuscripts and rare books. The grammar school 
was founded in 1675. Among the other public buildings are 
the town hall, the public hall, the market hall, and the working 
men's institute. The borough includes the township of Red- 
hill, adjacent on the east. The town has some agricultural 
trade, and in the neighbourhood are quarries for freestone, 
hearthstone and white sand. The borough is under a mayor, 
6 aldermen and 18 councillors. Area, 5994 acres. 

Reigate (Cherchefelle, Regat, Reygate) owed its first settlement to 
its situation at a cross-road on the Pilgrim's Way, at the foot of the 
North Downs; and its early importance to the castle which was the 
stronghold of the De Warcnnes in the 12th, 13th and 14th centuries. 
On the death of Edith, the widow of Edward the Confessor, to whom 
it belonged, William I. secured the manor of Cherchefelle, as it was 
then called. It was granted by William Rufus to Earl Warenne, 
through whose family it passed in 1347 to the earls of Arundel. _ The 
name Reigate occurs in 1199. Burgesses of Reigate are mentioned 
in a close roll of 1348, but no early charter is known. The town was 
incorporated in 1863. It returned two members to parliament 
from 1295 till 1 83 1, and afterwards one member only until 1867, 
when it was disfranchised for corruption. In the reign of Edward I. 
Earl Warenne held a weekly market on Saturdays, and fairs on 
Tuesday in Whitsun-week, the eve and day of St Lawrence, and 
the eve and day of the Exaltation of the Cross, by prescriptive right. 
Edward II. granted a market on Tuesdays, which is still held. The 
fair days are now Whit-Tuesday and the 9th of December. 

REIMARUS, HERMANN SAMUEL (1694-1768), German 
philosopher and man of letters, was born at Hamburg; on the 
22nd of December 1694. He was educated by his father and 
by the famous scholar J. A. Fabricius, whose son-in-law he 
subsequently became. He studied theology, ancient languages, 
and philosophy at Jena, became Privatdozenl in the university 
of Wittenberg in 1716, and in 1720-21 visited Holland and 
England. In 1723 he became rector of the high school at 
Wismar in Mecklenburg, and in 1727 professor of Hebrew 
and Oriental languages in the high school of his native city. 
This post he held till his death, though offers of more lucrative 
positions were made to him. His duties were light, and he 
employed his leisure in the study of philology, mathematics, 
philosophy, history, political economy, natural science and 
natural history, for which he made large collections. His house 
was the centre of the highest culture of Hamburg, and a monu- 
ment of his influence in that city still remains in the Haus 
der patriotischen Gesellschaft, where the learned and artistic 
societies partly founded by him still meet. He had seven 
children, only three of whom survived him — the distinguished 
physician Johann Albrecht Heinrich, and two daughters, one 
of them being Elise, Lessing's friend and correspondent. He 
died on the 1st of March 1768. 

Reimarus's reputation as a scholar rests on the valuable edition 
of Dio Cassius (1750-52) which he prepared from the materials 
collected by J. A. Fabricius. He published a work on logic 
( Vernunftlehre als A nweisung zum richtigen Gebrauche der 
Vernunft, 1756, 5th ed., 1790), and two popular books on the 
religious questions of the day. The first of these was a col- 
lection of essays on the principal truths of natural religion 
(Abhandlungen von den vornehmsten Wahrheiten der nalurlichen 
Religion, 1755, 7th ed., 1798); the second (Betrachtungen ilber 
die Triebe der Thiere> 1760, 4th ed., 1798) dealt with one par- 
ticular branch of the same subject. His philosophical position 
is essentially that of Christian Wolff. But he is best known by 
his Apologie oder Schutzschrijt fur die vernUnftigen Verekrer 
Gottes (carefully kept back during his lifetime), from which, 
after his death, Lessing published certain chapters under the 
title of the WolfenbUttel Fragments (see Lessing). The original 



MS. is in the Hamburg town library; a copy was made for 
the university library of Gb'ttingen, 1814, and other copies 
are known to exist. In addition to the seven fragments pub- 
lished by Lessing, a second portion of the work was issued in 
1787 by C. A. E. Schmidt (a pseudonym), under the title Uebrige 
noch ungedruckte Werke des Woljenbiittelschen Fragmcntisten, 
and a further portion by D. W. Klose in Niedner's Zeitschrift 
fiir hislorische Theologic t 1850-52. Two of the five books of 
the first part and the whole of the second part, as well as appen- 
dices on the canon, remain unprinted. But D. F. Strauss has 
given an exhaustive analysis of the whole work in his book on 
Reimarus. 

The standpoint of the Apologie is that of pure naturalistic deism. 
Miracles and mysteries arc denied, and natural religion is put forward 
as the absolute contradiction of revealed. The essential truths of 
the former are the existence of a wise and good Creator and the 
immortality of the soul. These truths are discoverable by reason, 
and are such as can constitute the basis of a universal religion. A 
revealed religion could never obtain universality, as it could never 
be intelligible and credible to all men. Even supposing its possi- 
bility, the Bible does not present such a revelation. It abounds in 
error as to matters of fact, contradicts human experience, reason 
and morals, and is one tissue of folly, deceit, enthusiasm, selfishness 
and crime. Moreover, it is not a doctrinal compendium, or catechism, 
which a revelation would have to be. What the Old Testament says 
of the worship of God is little, and that little worthless, while its 
writers are unacquainted with the second fundamental truth of 
religion, the immortality of the soul. The design of the writers of 
the New Testament, as well as that of Jesus, was not to teach true 
rational religion, but to serve their own selfish ambitions, in pro- 
moting which they exhibit an amazing combination of conscious 
fraud and enthusiasm. It is important, however, to remember that 
Reimarus attacked atheism with equal effect and sincerity, and 
that he was a man of high moral character, respected and esteemed 
by his contemporaries. 

Modern estimates of Reimarus may be found in the works of 
B. Piinjer, O. Pfleiderer and H. Hoffding. Piinjer states the position 
of Reimarus as follows: " God is the Creator of the world, and His 
wisdom and "goodness t are conspicuous in it. Immortality is 
founded upon the essential nature of man and upon the purpose of 
God in creation. Religion is conducive to our happiness and alone 
brings satisfaction. Miracles are at variance with the divine 
purpose; without miracles there could be no revelation " (Piinjer, 
History of Christian Philosophy of Religion since Kant, Engl, trans., 
pp. 550-57, which contains an exposition of the Abhandlungen and 
Schutzschrift). Pfleiderer says the errors of Reimarus were that he 
ignored historical and literary criticism, sources, date, origin, &c, 
of documents, and the narratives were said to be either purely 
divine or purely human. He had no conception of an immanent 
reason {Philosophy of Religion, Eng. trans., vol. i. p. 102). H. 
Hoffding also has a brief section on the Schutzschrift, stating 
its main position as follows: " Natural religion suffices; a revelation 
is therefore superfluous. Moreover, such a thing is both physically 
and morally impossible. God cannot interrupt His own work by 
miracles; nor can He favour some men above others by revelations 
which are not granted to all, and with which it is not even possible 
for all to become acquainted. But of all doctrines that of eternal 
punishment is most contrary, Reimarus thinks, to true ideas of God, 
and it was this point which first caused him to stumble " (History 
of Modern Pkil. t Eng. trans. (1900), vol. ii. pp. 12, 13). 

See the " Fragments " as published by Lessing, reprinted in 
vol. xv. of Lessing* s Werke , Hempel's edition ; D. F. Stcauss, H. S. 
Reimarus und seine Schutzschrift fur die vernUnftigen Verekrer Gottes 
(1862, 2nd ed. 1877); Charles Voysey, Fragments from Reimarus 
(London, 1879) (a translation of the life of Reimarus by Strauss, with 
the second part of the seventh fragment, on the " Object of Jesus 
and his Disciples"); the Lives of Lessing by Danzel and G. E. 
Guhrauer, Sime, and Zimmern ; Kuno Fischer, Geschichte der neuern 
Philosophic (vol. ii.pp. 759-72, 2nd ed. 1867); Zeller, Geschichte der 
deutschen Philosophte (2nd ed., 1875, pp. 243-46). 

REIMS (Rheims), a city of north-eastern France, chief town 
of an arrondissement of the department of Marne, 98 m. E.N.E. 
of Paris, on the Eastern railway. Pop. (1906) 102,800. Reims 
is situated in a plain on the right bank of the Vesle, a tributary 
, of the Aisne, and on the canal which connects the Aisne with 
the Marne. South and west rise the " montagne de Reims " 
and vine-clad hills. Reims is limited S.W. by the Vesle and 
the canal, N.W. by promenades which separate it from the 
railway and in other directions by boulevards lined with fine 
residences. Beyond extend large suburbs, the chief of which 
are Ceres to the N.E., Coutures to the E., Laon to the N. and 
Vesle to the W. Of its squares the principal are the Place 



5+ 



REIMS 



Royale, with a statue of Louis XV., and the place du Par vis, 
with an equestrian statue of Joan of Arc. The rue de Vesle, 
the chief street, continued under other names, traverses the 
town from S.W. to N.W., passing through the Place Royale. 

The oldest monument in Reims is the Mars Gate (so called from a 
temple to Mars in the neighbourhood), a triumphal arch 108 ft. in 
length by 43 in height, consisting of three archways flanked by 
columns. It is popularly supposed to have been erected by the 
Remi in honour of Augustus when Agrippa made the great roads 
terminating at the town, but probably belongs to the 3rd or 4th 
century. In its vicinity a curious mosaic^ measuring 36 ft. by 26, 
with thirty-five medallions representing animals and gladiators, was 
discovered in i860. To these remains must be added a Gallo- 
Roman sarcophagus, said to be that of the consul Jovinus (see below) 
and preserved in the archaeological museum in the cloister of the 
abbey of St Remi. The cathedral of Notre-Dame, where the kings 
of France used to be crowned, replaced an older church (burned in 
121 1 ) built on the site of the basilica where Clovis was baptized by 
St Remigius. The cathedral, with the exception of the west front, 
was completed by the end of the 13th century. That portion was 
erected in the 14th century after 13th-century designs — the nave 
having in the meantime been lengthened to afford room for the 
crowds that attended the coronations. In 1481 fire destroyed the 
roof and the spires. In 1875 the National Assembly voted £80,000 
for repairs of the facade and balustrades. This facade is the finest 
portion of the building, and one of the most perfect masterpieces of 
the middle ages. The three portals are laden with statues and 
statuettes. The central portal, dedicated to the Virgin, is surmounted 
by a rose-window framed in an arch itself decorated with statuary. 
The " gallery of the kings " above has the baptism of Clovis in the 
centre and statues of his successors. The towers, 267 ft. high, were 
originally designed to rise 394 ft. ; that on the south contains two 
great bells, one of which, named " Charlotte " by Cardinal de 
Lorraine in 1570, weighs more than in tons. The facades of the 
transepts are also decorated with sculptures — that on the north 
with statues of the principal bishops of Reims, a representation of 
the Last Judgment and a figure of Christ {le Beau Dieu) while that 
on the south side has a beautiful rose-window with the prophets and 
apostles. Of the four towers which flanked the transepts nothing 
remains above the height of the roof since the fire of 1481. Above 
the choir rises an elegant bell-tower in timber and lead, 59 ft. high, 
reconstructed in the 15th century. The interior of the cathedral 
is 455 ft. long, 98 ft. wide in the nave, and 125 ft. high in the centre, 
and comprises a nave with aisles, transepts with aisles, a choir with 
double aisles, and an apse with deambulatory and radiating chapels. 
It has a profusion of statues similar to those of the outside, and 
stained glass of the 13th century. The rose- window over the main 
portal and the gallery beneath are of rare magnificence. The 
cathedral possesses fine tapestries. Of these tlje most important 
series is that presented by Robert de Lenoncourt, archbishop under 
Francis I., representing^ the life of the Virgin. The north transept 
contains a fine organ in a Flamboyant Gothic case. The choir 
clock is ornamented with curious mechanical figures. Several 
paintings, by Tintoretto, Nicolas Poussin, and others, and the 
carved woodwork and the railings of the choir, also deserve mention. 
The treasury contains the Sainte Ampoule, or holy flask, the successor 
of the ancient one broken at the Revolution (see below), a fragment 
of which it contains. 

The archiepiscopal palace, built between 1498 and 1509, and in 
part rebuilt in 1675, was occupied by the kings on the occasion 
of their coronation. The saloon (salle du Tau), where the royal 
banquet was held, has an immense stone chimney of the 1 5th century, 
medallions of the archbishops of Reims, and portraits of fourteen 
kings crowned in the city. Among the other rooms of the royal 
suite, all of which are of great beauty and richness, is that now used 
for the meetings of the Reims Academy ; the building also contains a 
library. The chapel of the archiepiscopal palace consists of two 
storeys, of which the upper still serves as a place of worship. Both 
the chapel and the salle du Tau are decorated with tapestries of the 
17th century, known as the Perpersack tapestries, after the Flemish 
weaver who executed them. 

After the cathedral, which it almost equals in size, the most 
celebrated church is St Remi, once attached to an important abbey, 
the buildings of which are used as a hospital. St Remi dates from 
the nth, 12th, 13th and 15th centuries. The nave and transepts, 
Romanesque in style, date mainly from the earliest, the fagade of the 
south transept from the latest, of those periods, the choir and apse 
chapels from the 12th and 13th centuries. The valuable monu- 
ments with which the church was at one time filled were pillaged 
during the Revolution, and even the tomb of the saint is a modern 
work; but there remain the 12th-century glass windows of the apse 
and tapestries representing the history of St Remigius, given by 
Robert de Lenoncourt. The churches of St Jacques, St Maurice 
(partly rebuilt in 1867), St Andre\ and St Thomas (erected from 
1847 to 1853, under the patronage of Cardinal Gousset, now buried 
within its walls), are all of minor interest. Of the fine church of 
St Nicaisc only insignificant remains arc to be seen. 

The town hall, erected in the 17th and enlarged in the 19th 



century, has a pediment with an equestrian statue of Louis XIII. 
and a tall and elegant campanile. It contains a picture gallery, 
ethnographical, archaeological and other collections, and the public 
library. There are many old houses, the House of the Musicians 
(13th century) being so called from the seated figures of musicians 
which decorate the front. 

In 1874 the construction of a chain of detached forts was 
begun in the vicinity, Reims being selected as one of the chief 
defences of the northern approaches of Paris. The ridge of 
St Thierry is crowned with a fort of the same name, which 
with the neighbouring work of Chenay closes the west side of 
the place. To the north the hill of Brimont has three works 
guarding the Laon railway and the Aisne canal. Farther east, 
on the old Roman road, lies the fort de Fresnes. Due east the 
hills of Arnay are crowned with five large and important works 
which cover the approaches from the upper Aisne. Forts 
Pompelle and Montbr6 close the south-east side, and the Falaise 
hills on the Paris side are open and unguarded. The perimeter 
of the defences is not quite 22 m., and the forts are a mean 
distance of 6 m. from the centre of the city. 

Reims is the seat of an archbishop, a court of assize and 
a sub-prefect. It is an important centre for the combing^ 
carding and spinning of wool and the weaving of flannel, merino,, 
cloth and woollen goods of all kinds, these industries employing 
some 24,000 hands; dyeing and " dressing " are also carried 
on. It is the chief wool market in France, and has a " con- 
ditioning house " which determines the loss of weight resulting 
from the drying of the wool. The manufacture of and trade 
in champagne is also very important. The wine is stored in 
large cellars tunnelled in the chalk. Other manufactures are 
machinery, chemicals, safes, capsules, bottles, casks, candles, 
soap and paper. The town is well known for its cakes and 
biscuits. 

History. — Before the Roman conquest Reims, as Durocor- 
torum, was capital of the Remi, from whose name that of the 
town was subsequently derived. The Remi made voluntary 
submission to the Romans, and by their fidelity throughout the 
various Gallic insurrections secured the special favour of their 
conquerors. Christianity was established in the town by 
the middle of the 3rd century, at which period the bishopric 
was founded. The consul Jovinus, an influential supporter 
of the new faith, repulsed the barbarians who invaded Cham- 
pagne in $$6\ but the Vandals captured the town in 406 and 
slew St Nicasus, and Attila afterwards put it to fire and sword. 
Clovis, after his victory at Soissons (486), was baptized at 
Reims in 496 by St Remigius. Later kings desired to be 
consecrated at Reims with the oil of the sacred phial which was 
believed to have been brought from heaven by a dove for the 
baptism of Clovis and was preserved in the abbey of St Remi. 
Meetings of Pope Stephen III. with Pippin the Short, and of 
Leo III. with Charlemagne, took place at Reims; and here 
Louis the Debonnaire was crowned by Stephen IV. Louis IV. 
gave the town and countship of Reims to the archbishop 
'Artaldus in 940. Louis VII. gave the title of duke and peer 
to William of Champagne, archbishop from n 76 to 1202, and 
the archbishops of Reims took precedence of the other eccle- 
siastical peers of the realm. In the 10th century Reims had 
become a centre of intellectual culture, Archbishop Adalberon, 
seconded by the monk Gerbert (afterwards Pope Silvester II.),. 
having founded schools where the " liberal arts " were taught. 
Adalberon was also one of the prime authors of the revolution 
which put the Capet house in the place of the Carolingians. 
The most important prerogative of the archbishops was the 
consecration of the kings of France — a privilege which was 
exercised, except in a few cases, from the time of Philip Augustus 
to that of Charles X. Louis VII. granted the town a communal 
charter in 1139. The treaty of Troyes (1420) ceded it to the 
English, who had made a futile attempt to take it by siege in 
1360; but they were expelled on the approach of Joan of Arc, 
who in 1429 caused Charles VII. to be consecrated in the 
cathedral. A revolt at Reims, caused by the salt tax in 146 1, 
was cruelly repressed by Louis XI. The town sided with the 
I League (1585), but submitted to Henry IV. after the battle of 



REIN— REINDEER 



55 



Ivry. In the foreign invasions of 1814 it was captured and 
recaptured; in 1870-71 it was made by the Germans the 
seat of a governor-general and impoverished by heavy re- 
quisitions. 

See G. Marlot, Histoire de la ville, cite et university de Reims, 
4 vols. (Reims, 1843-46); J. Justinus (Baron I. Taylor), La Ville 
de Reims (Paris, 1854). 

REIN, a guiding or controlling leather strap or thong, attached 
to the bit of a ridden or driven horse (see Saddlery), The 
word is taken from the 0. Fr. rene, modern rine, and is usually 
traced to a supposed Late Latin substantive retina formed from 
retinere, to hold back, restrain, cf. classical Latin retinaculum, 
halter. The word, usually in the plural, has been often used 
figuratively, as a type of that which guides, restrains or controls, 
e.g. in such phrases as the " reins of government," &c. The 
" reins," i.e. the kidneys (Lat. renes, cf. Gr. <j>pr}v, the midriff), 
or the place where the kidneys are situated, hence the loins, 
also, figuratively, the seat of the emotions or affections, must be 
distinguished. 

REINACH, JOSEPH (1856- ), French author and poh'tician, 
was born in Paris on the 30th of September 1856. After 
leaving the Lycee Condorcet he studied for the bar, being 
called in 1887. He attracted the attention of Gambetta by 
articles on Balkan politics published in the Revue bleue, and 
joined the staff of the Republique franqaise. In Gambetta's 
grand minislere M. Reinach was his secretary, and drew up the 
case for a partial revision of the constitution and for the electoral 
method known as the scrutin de lisle. In the Republique 
franqaise he waged a steady war against General Boulanger 
which brought him three duels, one with Edmond Magnier and 
two with Paul Deroulede. Between 1889 and 1898 he sat 
for the Chamber of Deputies for Digne. As member of the 
army commission, reporter of the budgets of the ministries of 
the interior and of agriculture he brought forward bills for the 
better treatment of the insane, for the establishment of a 
colonial ministry, for the taxation of alcohol, and for the repara- 
tion of judicial errors. He advocated complete freedom of the 
theatre and the press, the abolition of public executions, and 
denounced political corruption of all kinds. He was indirectly 
implicated in the Panama scandals through his father-in-law, 
Baron de Reinach, though he made restitution as soon as he 
learned that he was benefiting by fraud. But he is best known 
as the champion of Captain Dreyfus. At the time of the 
original trial he attempted to secure a public hearing of the 
case, and in 1897 he allied himself with Scheurer-Kestner to 
demand its revision. He denounced in the Siecle the Henry 
forgery, and Esterhazy's complicity. His articles in the 
Siecle aroused the fury of the anti-Dreyfusard party, especially 
as he was himself a Jew and therefore open to the charge of 
having undertaken to defend the innocence of Dreyfus on racial 
grounds. He lost his seat in the Chamber of Deputies, and, 
having refused to fight Henri Rochefort, eventually brought 
an action for libel against him. . Finally, the " affaire " being 
terminated and Dreyfus pardoned, he undertook to write the 
history of the case, the first four volumes of which appeared in 
1901. This was completed in 1905. In 1906 M. Reinach was 
re-elected for Digne. In that year he became member of the 
commission of the national archives, and next year of the 
council on prisons. Reinach was a voluminous writer on 
political subjects. On Gambetta he pubb'shed three volumes 
in 1884, and he also edited his speeches. For the criticisms of 
the anti-Dreyfusard press see Henri Dutrait-Croyon, Joseph 
Reinach, historien (Paris, 1905), a violent criticism in detail of 
Reinach's history of the " affaire." 

His brother, the well-known savant, Salomon Reinach 
(1858- ), born at St Germain-en-Laye on the 29th of August 
1858, was educated at the ficole normale superieure, and joined 
the French school at Athens in 1879. He made valuable 
archaeological discoveries at Myrina near Smyrna in 1880-82, 
at Cyme in 1881, at Thasos, Imbros and Lesbos (1882), at 
Carthage and Meninx (1883-84), at Odessa (1893) and else- 
where. He received honours from the chief learned societies 



of Europe, and in 1886 received an appointment at the National 
Museum of Antiquities at St Germain; in 1893 he became 
assistant keeper, and in 1902 keeper of the national museums. 
In 1903 he became joint editor of the Revue archiologique, and 
in the* same year officer of the Legion of Honour. The lectures 
he delivered on art at the £cole du Louvre in 1902-3 were pub- 
lished by him under the title of Apollo. This book has been 
translated into most European languages, and is one of the most 
compact handbooks of the subject. 

His first published work was a translation of Schopenhauer's 
Essay on Free Will (1877), which passed through many editions. 
This was followed by many works and articles in the learned re- 
views of which a list — up to 1903 — is available in Bibliographic 
de S. R. (Angers, 1003). His Manuel de philologie classique (1880- 
1884) was crowned by the French association for the study of 
Greek; his Grammaire latine (1886) received a prize from the 
Society of Secondary Education; La Ntcropole de Myrina (1887), 
written with E. Pottier, and AntiquiUs nationales were crowned by 
the Academy of Inscriptions. He compiled an important Re- 
pertoire de la statuaire grecque et romaine (3 vols., 1897-98); also 
Repertoire de peintures du moyen dge et de la Renaissance 1280-1580 
(1905, &c); Repertoire des vases peints grecs et itrusques (1900). 
In 1905 he began his Cultes, mytnes et religions-, and in 1009 he 
published a general sketch of the history of religions under the 
title of Orpheus. He also translated from the English H. C. Lea's 
History of the Inquisition. 

A younger brother, Theodore Reinach (i860- ), also 
had a brilliant career as a scholar. He pleaded at the Parisian 
bar in 1881-86, but eventually gave himself up to the study 
of numismatics. He wrote important works on the ancient 
kingdoms of Asia Minor — Trois royaumes de VAsie Mineure, 
Cappadoce, Bithynie, Pont (1888), Mithridate Eupalor (1890); 
also a critical edition and translation with H. Weil of Plutarch's 
Treatise on Music; and an Histoire des hsratlites depuis la 
ruine de leur indipendance naiionale jusqu'a nos jours (2nd ed., 
1901). From 1888 to 1897 he edited the Revue des etudes 
grecques. 

REINAUD, JOSEPH TOUSSAINT (1795-1867), French orien- 
talist, was born on the 4th of December 1795 at Lambesc, 
Bouches du Rh6ne. He came to Paris in 1815, and became a 
pupil of Silvestre de Sacy. In 1818-19 he was at Rome as an 
attache to the French minister, and studied under the Maronites 
of the Propaganda, but gave special attention to Mahommedan 
coins. In 1824 he entered the department of oriental MSS. 
in the Royal Library at Paris, and in 1838, on the death of 
De Sacy, he succeeded to his chair in the: school of living 
oriental languages. In 1847 he became president of the 
Societe Asiatique, and in 1858 conservator of oriental MSS. 
in the Imperial Library. His first important work was his 
classical description of the collections of the due de Blacas 
(1828). To history he contributed an essay on the Arab in- 
vasions of France, Savoy, Piedmont and Switzerland (1836), 
and various collections for the period of the crusades; he 
edited (1840) and in part translated (1848) the geography 
of Abulfeda; to him too is due a useful edition of the very 
curious records of early Arab intercourse with China of which 
Eusebe Renaudot had given but an imperfect translation (Re- 
lation des voyages, &c, 1845), and various other essays illus- 
trating the ancient and medieval geography of the East. 
Reinaud died in Paris on the 14th of May 1867. 

REINDEER, in its strict sense the title of a European deer 
distinguished from all other members of the family Cervidae 
(see Deer), save those of the same genus, by the presence of 
antlers in both sexes; but, in the wider sense, including Asiatic 
and North American deer of the same general type, the latter 
of which are locally designated caribou. Reindeer, or caribou, 
constitute the genus *Rangifer, and are large clumsily built deer, 
inhabiting the sub-Arctic and Arctic regions of both hemispheres. 
As regards their distinctive features, the antlers are of a complex 
type and situated close to the occipital ridge of the skull, and 
thus far away from the sockets of the eyes, with the brow-tines 
in adult males palmated, laterally compressed, deflected towards 
the middle of the face, and often unsymmetrically developed. 
Above the brow-tine is developed a second palmated tine, 



56 



REINECKE— REINHOLD 



which appears to represent the bez-tine of the red-deer; there 
is no trez-tine, but some distance above the bez the beam is 
suddenly bent forward to form an " elbow," on the posterior 
side of which is usually a short back-tine; above the back-tine 
the beam is continued for some distance to terminate in a*large 
expansion or palmation. The antlers of females are simple and 
generally smaller. The muzzle is entirely hairy; the ears and 
tail are short; and the throat is maned. The coat is unspotted 
at all ages, with a whitish area in the region of the tail. The 
main hoofs are short and rounded and the lateral hoofs very 
large. There is a tarsal, but no metatarsal gland and tuft. In 
the skull the gland-pit is shallow, and the vacuity of moderate 
size; the nasal bones are well developed, and much expanded 
at the upper end. Upper canines are wanting; the cheek-teeth 
are small and low-crowned, with the third lobe of the last molar 
in the lower jaw minute. The lateral metacarpal bones are 
represented only by their lower extremities; the importance of 
this feature being noticed in the article Deer. 

In spite of the existence of a number of more or less well-marked 
geographical forms, reindeer from all parts of the northern hemi- 
sphere present such a marked similarity that it seems preferable 
to regard them as all belonging to a single widespread species, of 
which most of the characters will be the same as those of the genus. 
American naturalists, however, generally regard these as distinct 
species. The coat is remarkable for its density and compactness; 
the general colour of the head and upper parts being clove-brown, 
with more or less white or whitish grey on the under parts and inner 
surfaces of the limbs, while there is also some white above the hoofs 
and on the muzzle, and there may be whitish rings round the eyes; 
there is a white area in the region of the tail, which includes the sides 
but not the upper surface of the latter ; and the tarsal tuft is gener- 
ally white. The antlers are smooth, and brownish white in colour, 
but the hoofs jet black. Albino varieties occasionally occur in the 
wild state. A height of 4 ft. 10 in. at the shoulder has been re- 
corded in the case of one race. 

The wild Scandinavian reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) may be re- 
garded as the typical form of the species. It is a smaller animal 
than the American woodland race, with antlers approximating to 
those of the barren-ground race, but less elongated, and with a 
distinct back-tine in the male, the brow-tines moderately palmated 
and frequently nearly symmetrical, and the bez-tine not exces- 
sively expanded. Female antlers are generally much smaller 
than those of males, although occasionally as large, but with much 
fewer points. The antlers make their appearance at an unusually 
early age. 

Mr Madison Grant considers that American reindeer, or caribou, 
may be grouped under two types, one represented by the barren- 
ground caribou R. tarandus arcticus, which is a small animal with 
immense antlers characterized by the length of the beam, and the 
consequent wide separation of the terminal palmation from the 
brow-tine; and the other by the woodland-caribou (R, t, caribou), 
which is a larger animal with shorter and more massive antlers, 
in which the great terminal expansions are in approximation to 
the brow-tine owing to the shortness of the beam. Up to 1902 
seven other American races had been described, four of which are 
grouped by Grant with the first and three with the second type. 
Some of these forms are, however, more or less intermediate between 
the two main types, as is a pair of antlers from Novaia Zemlia 
described by the present writer as R. t. pearsoni. The Scandinavian 
reindeer is identified by Mr Grant with the barren-ground type. 

Reindeer are domesticated by the Lapps and other nationalities 
of northern Europe and Asia, to whom these animals are all-im- 
portant. Domesticated reindeer have also been introduced into 
Alaska. 

See Madison Grant, " The Caribou," ph Annual Report, New 
York Zoological Society (1902); J. G. Millais, Newfoundland and 
its Untrodden Ways (1908). (R. L.*) 

REINECKE, CARL HEINRICH CARSTEN (1824-1910), 
German composer and pianist, was born at Altona on the 23rd of 
June 1824; his father, Peter Reinecke (who was also his teacher), 
being an accomplished musician. At the age of eleven he made 
his first appearance as a pianist, and when scarcely eighteen he 
went on a successful tour through Denmark and Sweden. After 
a stay in Leipzig, where he studied under Mendelssohn and 
under Schumann, Reinecke went on tour with Konigslow and 
Wasielewski, Schumann's biographer, in North Germany and 
Denmark. From 1846 to 1848 Reinecke was court pianist to 
Christian VIII. of Denmark. After resigning this post he went 
first to Paris, and next to Cologne, as professor in the Con- 
servatorium. From 1854 to 1859 he was music director at 
Barmen, in the latter year filling this post at Breslau University; 



in i860 he became conductor of the famous Leipzig Gewandhaus, 
a post which (together with that of professor at the Conserva- 
torium) he held with honour and distinction for thirty-five 
years. He finally retired into private life in 1902 and died 
in March 19 10. During this time Reinecke continually made 
concert tours to England and elsewhere. His pianoforte playing 
belonged to a school now almost extinct. Grace and neatness 
were its characteristics, and at one time Reinecke was probably 
unrivalled as a Mozart player and an accompanist- His grand 
opera Konig Manfred, and the comic opera Auf hohen Befehl, 
were at one time frequently played in Germany; and his 
cantata Hakon Jarl is melodiously beautiful, as are many of his 
songs; while his Friedensfeier overture was once quite hack- 
neyed. By far his most valuable works are those written 
for educational purposes. His sonatinas, his " Kinder- 
garten " and much that he has ably edited will keep his name 
alive. 

REINHART, CHARLES STANLEY (1844-1896), American 
painter and illustrator, was born at Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, 
and after having been employed in railway work and at a steel 
factory, studied art in Paris and at the Munich Academy under 
Straehuber and Otto. He afterwards settled in New York, 
but spent the years 188 2-1 886 in Paris. He was a regular 
exhibitor at the National Academy in New York, and contri- 
buted illustrations in black and white and in colours to the 
leading American periodicals. He died in 1896. Among his 
best-known pictures are: " Reconnoitring," " Caught Napping," 
" September Morning," " Mussel P'isherwoman," " At the 
Ferry," " Normandy Coast," " Gathering Wood," " The Old 
Life Boat," " Sunday," and " English Garden "; but it is as an 
illustrator that he is best known.' 

REINHART, JOACHIM CHRISTIAN (1761-1847), German 
painter and etcher, was born at Hof in Bavaria in i76r, and 
studied under Oeser at Leipzig and under Klingel at Dresden. 
In 1789 he went to Rome, where he became a follower of the 
classicist German painters Carstens and Koch. He devoted 
himself more particularly to landscape painting and to aquatint 
engraving. Examples of his landscapes are to be found at 
most of the important German galleries, notably at Frankfort, 
Munich, Leipzig and Gotha. In Rome he executed a series 
of landscape frescoes for the Villa Massimi. He died in Rome 
in 1847. 

REINHOLD, KARL LEONHARD (1758-1823), German 
philosopher, was born at Vienna. At the age of fourteen he 
entered the Jesuit college of St Anna, on the dissolution of which 
(1774) he joined a similar college of the order of St Barnabas. 
Finding himself out of sympathy with monastic life, he fled in 
1783 to North Germany, and settled in Weimar, where he 
became Wieland's collaborateur on the German Mercury, and 
eventually his son-in-law. In the German Mercury he published, 
in the years 1786-87, his Briefe uber die Kanlische Philosophie, 
which were most important in making Kant known to a wider 
circle of readers. As a result of the Letters, Reinhold received 
a call to the university of Jena, where he taught from 1787 to 
1794. In 1789 he published his chief work, the Versuch einer 
neuen Theorie des menschlichen Vorstellungsvermogens, in which 
he attempted to simplify the Kantian theory and make it more 
of a unity. In 1794 he accepted a call to Kiel, where he taught 
till his death in 1823, but his independent activity was at an 
end. In later life he was powerfully influenced by Fichte, and 
subsequently, on grounds of religious feeling, by Jacobi and 
Bardili. His historical importance belongs entirely to his earlier 
activity. The development of the Kantian standpoint contained 
in the " New Theory of Human Understanding " (1789), and in 
the Fundament des phUosophischen Wissens (1791), was called 
by its author Elemenlar philosophie. 

, " Reinhold lays greater emphasis than Kant upon the unity and 
activity of consciousness. The principle of consciousness tells us 
that every idea is related both to an object and a subject, and is 
partly to be distinguished, partly united to both. Since form 
cannot produce matter nor subject object, we are forced to assume 
a thing-in-itself. But this is a notion which is self-contradictory 
if consciousness be essentially a relating activity. There is there- 



REINKENS— REISKE 



57 



fore something which must bethought and yet cannot be thought** 
(Hoffding, History of Modern Philosophy, Eng. trans., vol. ii.). 

See R. Keil, Wieland und Reinhold (2nd ed. t Leipzig, 1890); 
J. E. Erdmann, Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophic (Berlin, 
1866); histories of philosophy by R. Folckenberg and W. Windel- 
band. 

REINKENS, JOSEPH HUBERT (1821-1896), German Old 
Catholic bishop, was born at Burtscheid, near Aix-la-Chapelle, 
on the 1 st of March 1821, his father being a gardener. In 
1836, on the death of his mother, he took to manual work 
in order to support his numerous brothers and sisters, but in 
1840 he was able to go to the gymnasium at Aix, and he after- 
wards studied theology at the universities of Bonn and Munich. 
He was ordained priest in 1848, and in 1849 graduated as 
doctor in theology. He was soon appointed professor of ecclesi- 
astical history at Breslau, and in 1865 he was made rector of 
the university. During this period he wrote, among other 
treatises, monographs on Clement of Alexandria, Hilary of 
Poitiers and Martin of Tours. In consequence of an essay 
on art, especially in tragedy, after Aristotle, he was made 
doctor in philosophy in the university of Leipzig. When, 
in 1870, the question of papal infallibility was raised, Reinkens 
attached himself to the party opposed to the proclamation of 
the dogma. He wrote several pamphlets on church tradition 
relative to infallibility and on the procedure of the Council. 
When the dogma of infallibility was proclaimed, Reinkens 
joined the band of influential theologians, headed by Dollinger, 
who resolved to organize resistance to the decree. He was 
one of those who signed the Declaration of Nuremberg in 187 1, 
and at the Bonn conferences with Orientals and Anglicans in 
1874 and 1875 he was conspicuous. The Old Catholics having 
decided to separate themselves from the Church of Rome, 
Reinkens was chosen their bishop in Germany at an enthusiastic 
meeting at Cologne in 1873 (see Old Catholics). On the nth 
of August of that year he was consecrated by Dr Heykamp, 
bishop of Deventer. Reinkens devoted himself zealously to 
his office, and it was due to his efforts that the Old Catholic 
movement crystallized into an organized church, with a definite 
status in the various German states. He wrote a number of 
theological works after his consecration, but none of them so 
important as his treatise on Cyprian and the Unity of the 
Church (1873). The chief act of his episcopal career was his 
consecration in 1876 of Dr Edward Herzog to preside as bishop 
over the Old Catholic Church in Switzerland. In 1881 Reinkens 
visited England, and received Holy Communion more than 
once with bishops, clergy and laity of the Church of England, 
and in 1894 he defended the validity of Anglican orders against 
his co-religionists, the Old Catholics of Holland. He died at 
Bonn on the 4th of January 1896. v 

See Joseph Hubert Reinkens, by his nephew, J. M. Reinkens 
(Gotha, 1906). 

REISKE, JOHANN JACOB (1716-1774), German scholar and 
physician, was born on the 25th of December 1716 at Zorbig 
in Electoral Saxony. From the Waisenhaus at Halle he passed 
in 1733 to the university of Leipzig, and there spent five years. 
He tried to find his own way in Greek literature, to which 
German schools then gave little attention; but, as he had not 
mastered the grammar, he soon found this a sore task and took 
up Arabic. He was very poor, having almost nothing beyond 
his allowance, which for the fiv^ years was only two hundred 
thalers. But everything of which he could cheat his appetite 
was spent on Arabic books, and when he had read all that 
was then printed he thirsted for manuscripts, and in March 
1738 started on foot for Hamburg, joyous though totally 
unprovided, on his way to Leiden and the treasures of the 
Warnerianum. At Hamburg he got some money and letters 
of recommendation from the Hebraist Wolf, and took ship 
to Amsterdam. Here d'Orville, to whom he had an intro- 
duction, proposed to retain him as his amanuensis at a salary 
of six hundred guilders. Reiske refused, though he thought 
the offer very generous; he did not want money, he "wanted 
manuscripts. When he reached Leiden (June 6, 1738) he found 
that the lectures were over for the term and that the MSS. 



were not open to him. But d'Orville and A. Schultens helped 
him to private teaching and reading for the press, by which he 
was able to live. He heard the lectures of A. Schultens, and 
practised himself in Arabic with his son J. J. Schultens. 
Through Schultens too he got at Arabic MSS., and was even 
allowed sub rosa to take them home with him. Ultimately 
he seems to have got free access to the collection, which he 
re-catalogued — the work of almost a whole summer, for which 
the curators rewarded him with nine guilders. 

Reiske's first years in Leiden were not unhappy, till he got 
into serious trouble by introducing emendations of his own 
into the second edition of Burmann's Petronius, which he had 
to see through the press. His patrons withdrew from him, and 
his chance of perhaps becoming professor was gone; d'Orville 
indeed soon came round, for he could not do without Reiske, 
who did work of which his patron, after dressing it up in his 
own style, took the credit. But A. Schultens was#iever the 
same as before to him; Reiske indeed was too independent, 
and hurt him by his open criticisms of his master's way of 
making Arabic mainly a handmaid of Hebrew. Reiske, however, 
himself admits that Schultens always behaved honourably to 
him. In 1742 by Schultens's advice Reiske took up medicine 
as a study by which he might hope to live if he could not do so 
by philology. In 1746 he graduated as M.D., the fees being 
remitted at Schultens's intercession. It was Schultens too 
who conquered the difficulties opposed to his graduation at 
the last moment by the faculty of theology on the ground that 
some of his theses had a materialistic "ring. ' On the 10th of 
June 1746 he left Holland and settled in Leipzig, where he 
hoped to get medical practice. 

But his shy, proud nature was not fitted to gain patients, 
and the Leipzig doctors would not recommend one who 
was not a Leipzig graduate. In 1747 an Arabic dedication 
to the electoral prince of Saxony got him the title of professor, 
but neither the faculty of arts nor that of medicine was willing 
to admit him among them, and he never delivered a course of 
lectures. He had still to go on doing literary task-work, but 
his labour was much worse paid in Leipzig than in Leiden. 
Still he could have lived and sent his old mother, as his custom 
was, a yearly present of a piece of leather to be sold in retail 
if he had been a better manager. But, careless for the morrow, 
he was always printing at his own cost great books which 
found no buyers. His academical colleagues were hostile; 
and Ernesti, under a show of friendship, secretly hindered 
his promotion. His unsparing reviews made bad blood with 
the pillars of the university. 

At length in 1758 the magistrates of Leipzig rescued him 
from his misery by giving him the rcctorate of St Nicolai, 
and, though he still made no way with the leading men of the 
university and suffered from the hostility of men like Ruhnkcn 
and J. D. Michaelis, he was compensated for this by the esteem 
of Frederick the Great, of Lessing, Karsten Niebuhr, and many 
foreign scholars. The last decade of his life was made cheerful 
by his marriage with Ernestine Miiller, who shared all his 
interests and learned Greek to help him with collations. In 
proof of his gratitude ber portrait stands beside his in the 
first volume of the Oratorcs Graeci. Reiske died on the 14th of 
August 1774, and his MS. remains passed, through Lessing's 
mediation, to the Danish minister Suhm, and are now in the 
Copenhagen library. 

Reiske certainly surpassed all his predecessors in the range and 
quality of his knowledge of Arabic literature. Ft was the history, the 
realia of the literature, that always interested him; he did not care 
for Arabic poetry as such, and the then much praised Hariri seemed 
to him a grammatical pedant. He read the poets less for their 
verses than for such scholia as supplied historical notices. Thus for 
example the scholia on Jarir furnished him with a remarkable 
notice of the prevalence of Buddhist doctrine and asceticism in 
'Irak under the Omayyads. In the Adnotationes historicae to his 
Abulfeda (Abulf. Annates Moslemici, 5 vols., Copenhagen, 1789-91), 
he collected a veritable treasure of sound and original research ; he 
knew the Byzantine writers as thoroughly as the Arabic authors, and 
was alike at home in modern works of travel in all languages and 
in ancient and medieval authorities. He was interested too in 



5» 



REJANE— RELATIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE 



numismatics, and his letters on Arabic coinage (in Eichhorns 
Repertorium, vols, ix.-xi.) form, according to Dc Sacy, the basis 
of that branch of study. To comprehensive knowledge and very 
wide reading he added a sound historical judgment. He was not, 
like Schultcns, deceived by the pretended antiquity of the Yemenite 
Kasidas. 1 Errors no doubt he made, as in the attempt to ascertain 
the date of the breach of the dam of Marib. 

Though Abulfeda as a late epitomator did not afford a starting- 
point for methodical study of the sources, Reiske's edition with his 
version and notes certainly laid the foundation for research in Arabic 
history. The foundation of Arabic philology, however, was laid not 
by him but by De Sacy. Reiske's linguistic knowledge was great, 
but he used it only to understand his authors; he had no feeling for 
form, for language as language, or for metre. 

In Leipzig Rciske worked mainly at Greek, though he continued 
to draw on his Arabic stores accumulated in Leiden. Yet his merit 
as an Arabist was sooner recognized than the value of his Greek 
work. Reiske the Greek scholar has been rightly valued only in 
recent years, and it is now recognized that he was the first German 
since Syjburg who had a living knowledge of the Greek tongue. His 
reputation, does not rest on his numerous editions, often hasty or 
even made to booksellers' orders, but in his remarks, especially his 
conjectures. He himself designates the Animadversationes in 
Scriptores Graecos as fios ingenii sui, and in truth these thin booklets 
outweigh his big editions. Closely following the author's thought 
he removes obstacles whenever he meets them, but he is so steeped 
in the language and thinks so truly like a Greek that the difficulties 
he feels often seem to us to lie in mere points of style. His criticism 
is empirical and unmethodic, based on immense and careful reading, 
and applied only when he feels a difficulty; and he is most successful 
when he has a large mass of tolerably homogeneousjiterature to lean 
on, whilst on isolated points he is often at a loss. His corrections 
are often hasty and false, but a surprisingly large proportion of 
them have since received confirmation from MSS. And, though 
his merits as a Grecian He mainly in his conjectures, his realism is 
felt in this sphere also ; his German translations especially show more 
freedom and practical insight, more feeling for actual life, than is 
common with the scholars of that age. 2 

For a list of Reiske's writings see Meusel, xi. 192 scq. His chief 
Arabic works (all posthumous) have been mentioned above. In 
Greek letters his chief works are Constantini Porphyrogeniti libri 
II. de ceremoniis aulae Byzant., vols. i. ii. (Leipzig, 1751-66), vol. ill. 
( Bonn, 1829) ; Animadv. ad Graecos auctores (5 vols., Leipzig, 1751-66) 
(the rest lies unprinted at Copenhagen); Oratorum Graec. quae 
supersunt (8 vols., Leipzig, 1770-73); App. crit. ad Demostkenem 
(3 vols., ib., 1 774-75) ; Maximus Tyr. (ib. f 1 774) ; Plutarchus (1 1 vols., 
70., 1774-79) I Dionys Italic. (6 vols., ib., 1774-77) ; Libanius (4 vols., 
Altenburg, 1784-97). Various reviews in the Acta eruditorum and 
Zuverl. Nachrichten are characteristic and worth reading. Compare 
D. Jokann Jacob Reiskens von ikm selbst aufgesetzte Lebensbe- 
sckreibung (Leipzig, 1783)- (J* We.) 

R&JANE, GABRIELLE [Charlotte Reju] (1857- ), 
French actress, was born in Paris, the daughter of an actor. 
She was a pupil of Regnier at the Conservatoire, and took the 
second prize for comedy in 1874. Her debut was made the next 
year, during which she played attractively a number of light — 
especially soubrette — parts. Her first great success was in 
Henri Meilhac's Ma camarade (1883), and she soon became 
known as an emotional actress of rare gifts, notably in Decort, 
Germinie Lacerteux, Ma cousine, Amour ease and Lysistrata. 
In 1892 she married M. Porel, the director of the Vaudeville 
theatre, but the marriage was dissolved in 1905. Her per- 
formances in Madame Sans Gtne (1893) made her as well 
known in England and America as in Paris, and in later years 
she appeared in characteristic parts in both countries, being 
particularly successful in Zaza and La Passerelle. She opened 
the Theatre Rejane in Paris in 1906. The essence of French 
vivacity and animated expression appeared to be concentrated 
in Madame Rejane's acting, and made her unrivalled in the parts 
which she had made her own. 

RELAND, ADRIAN (1676-1718), Dutch Orientalist, was 
born at Ryp, studied at Utrecht and Leiden, and was professor 
of Oriental languages successively at Harderwijk (1699) and 
Utrecht (1701). His most important works were Palaestina ex 
veteribus monumentis Ulustrata (Utrecht, 1714), and Anliqaitates 
sacrae velerum Hebraeorum. (See also Burman, Traj, Erud., 
p.296seq.). ' 

1 " Animadvers. criticae in Hamzae hist, regni Joctanidarum," in 
Eichhorn's Mon. Ant. Hist. Ar.fiyj^. 

. 2 For this estimate of Reiske as a Greek scholar the writer is in- 
debted to Prof. U. v. Wilamowitz-Moellcndorff. 



RELAPSING FEVER (Febris recurrens), the name given to 
a specific infectious disease occasionally appearing as an epidemic 
in communities suffering from scarcity or famine. It is char- 
acterized mainly by its sudden invasion, with violent febrile 
symptoms, which continue for about a week and end in a 
crisis, but are followed, after another week, by a return of the 
fever. 

This disease has received many other names, the best known 
of which are famine fever, seven-day, bilious relapsing fever, 
and spirillum fever. As in the case of typhoid, relapsing fever 
was long believed to be simply a form of typhus. The distinction 
between them appears to have been first clearly established 
in 1826, in connexion with an epidemic in Ireland. 

Relapsing fever is highly contagious. With respect to the nature 
of the contagion, certain important observations have been made 
(see also Parasitic Diseases). In 1873 Obermeier discovered in 
the blood of persons suffering from relapsing fever minute organisms 
in the form of spiral filaments of the genus Spirochaete, measuring 
in length r fo to j^ inch and jn breadth ToiTnr to nnhn inch, and 
possessed of rotatory or twisting movements. This organism 
received the name of Spirillum obermeieri. Fritz Schaudinn' has 
brought forward evidence that it is an animal parasite. The most 
constantly recognized factor in the origin and spread of relapsing 
fever is destitution; but^ this cannot be regarded as more than a 
predisposing cause, since in many lands widespread and destructive 
famines have prevailed without any outbreak of this fever. In- 
stances, too, have been recorded where epidemics were distinctly 
associated with overcrowding rather than with privation. Relapsing 
fever is most commonly met with in the young. One attack does 
not appear to protect from others, but rather, according to some 
authorities, engenders liability. 

The incubation of the disease is about one week. The symptoms 
of the fever then show themselves with great abruptness and violence 
by a rigor, accompanied with pains in the limbs and severe head- 
ache. The febrile phenomena are very marked, and the tempera- 
ture quickly rises to a high point (i05°-i07° Fahr.), at which it con- 
tinues with little variation, while the pulse is rapid (100-140), 
full and strong. There is intense thirst, a dry brown tongue, 
bilious vomiting, tenderness over the Hver and spleen, and occa- 
sionally jaundice. Sometimes a peculiar bronzy appearance of the 
skin is noticed, but there is no characteristic rash as in typhus. 
There is much prostration of strength. After the continuance of 
these symptoms for a period of from five to seven days, the tem- 
perature suddenly falls to the normal point or below it, the pulse 
becomes correspondingly slow, and a profuse perspiration occurs, 
while the severe headache disappears and the appetite returns. 
Except for a sense of weakness, the patient feels well and may 
even return to work, but in some cases there remains a condition of 
great debility, accompanied with rheumatic pains in the limbs. 
This state of freedom from fever continues for about a week, when 
there occurs a well-marked relapse with scarcely less abruptness 
and severity than in the first attack, and the whole symptoms 
are of the same character, but they do not, as a rule, continue so 
long, and they terminate in a crisis in three or four days, after 
which convalescence proceeds satisfactorily. Second, third and 
even fourth relapses, however, may occur in exceptional cases. 

The mortality in relapsing fever is comparatively small, about 
5% being the average death-rate in epidemics (Murchison). 
The fatal cases occur mostly from the complications common to 
continued fevers. The treatment is essentially the same as that 
for typhus fever. Lowcnthal and Gabritochewsky by using the 
serum of an immune horse succeeded in averting the relapse in 40% 
of cases. 

RELATIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE, a philosophic term which 
was mucb used by the philosophers of the middle of the 19th 
century, and has since fallen largely into disuse. It deserves 
explanation, however, not only because it has occupied so large 
a space in the writings of some great British thinkers, but also 
because the main question for which it stands is still matter of 
eager debate. We get at the meaning of the term most easily 
by considering what it is that " relativity " is opposed to. 
" Relativity " of knowledge is opposed to absoluteness or 
positiveness of knowledge. Now there are two senses in which 
knowledge may claim to be absolute. The knower may say, " I 
know this absolutely,*' or he may say, " I know this absolutely." 
With the emphasis upon the " know " he asserts that his know- 
ledge of the matter in question cannot be affected by anything 
whatever. " I know absolutely that two and two are four ' 
makes an assertion about the knower's intellectual state: he is 
convinced that his certain knowledge of the result of adding two 
to two is independent of any other piece of knowledge. With 



RELEASE— RELICS 



59 



the emphasis upon the object of knowledge, " I know this " we 
have the other sense of absoluteness of knowledge: it is an 
assertion that the knower knows the " this," whatever it may be, 
in its essence or as it truly is in itself. The phrase " relativity 
of knowledge " has therefore two meanings: (a) that no 
portion of knowledge is absolute, but is always affected by its 
relations to other portions of knowledge; (b) that what we know 
are not absolute things in themselves, but things conditioned in 
their quality by our channels of knowledge. Each of these 
two propositions must command assent as soon as uncritical 
ignorance gives place to philosophic reflection; but each may 
be exaggerated, indeed has currently been exaggerated, into 
falsity. The simplest experience — a single note struck upon the 
piano — would not be what it is to us but for its relation by 
contrast or comparison with other experiences. This is true; 
but we may easily exaggerate it into a falsehood by saying that 
a piece of experience is entirely constituted by its relation to 
other experiences. Such an extreme relativity, as advocated 
by T. H. Green in the first chapter of his Prolegomena to Ethics, 
involves the absurdity that our whole experience is a tissue of 
relations with no points of attachment on which the relations 
depend. The only motive for advocating it is the prejudice of 
absolute idealism which would deny that sensation has any part 
whatever in the constitution of experience. As soon as we 
recognize the part of sensation, we have no reason to deny the 
common-sense position that each piece of experience has its 
own quality, which is modified indefinitely by the relations in 
which it stands. 

The second sense of relativity, that which asserts the impossi- 
bility of knowing things except as conditioned by our perceptive 
faculties, is more important philosophically and has had a more 
interesting history. To apprehend it is really the first great 
step in philosophical education. The unphilosophical person 
assumes that a tree as he sees it is identical with the tree as it is 
in itself and as it is for other percipient minds. Reflection 
shows that our apprehension of the tree is conditioned by the 
sense-organs with which we have been endowed, and that the 
apprehension of a blind man, and still more the apprehension 
of a dog or horse, is quite different from ours. What the tree is 
in itself — that is, for a perfect intelligence — we cannoUknow, 
any more than a dog or horse can know what the tree is for a 
human intelligence. So far the relativist is on sure ground; 
but from this truth is developed the paradox that the tree has 
no objective existence at all and consists entirely of the conscious 
states of the perceiver. Observe the parallelism of the two 
paradoxical forms of relativity: one says that things are 
•relations with nothing that is related; the other says that things 
are perceptive conditions with nothing objective to which the 
conditions apply. Both make the given nothing and the work 
of the mind everything. 

To see the absurdity of the second paradox of relativity is 
easier than to refute it. If nothing exists but the conscious 
states of the perceiver, how does he come to think that there is 
an objective tree at all ? Why does he regard his conscious 
states as produced by an object? And how does he come to 
imagine that there are other minds than his own ? In short, this 
kind of relativity leads straight to what is generally known as 
" the abyss of solipsism." But, like all the great paradoxes 
of philosophy, it has its value in directing our attention to a 
vital, yet much neglected, element of experience. We cannot 
avoid solipsism (q.v.) so long as we neglect the element of force 
or power. If, as Hegel asserted, our experience is all knowledge, 
and if knowledge is indefinitely transformed by the conditions 
of knowing, then we are tempted to regard the object as super- 
fluous, and to treat our innate conviction that knowledge has 
reference to objects as a delusion which philosophical reflection 
is destined to dispel. The remedy for the paradox is to recognize 
that the foundation for our belief in the existence of objects is 
the force which they exercise upon us and the resistance which 
they offer to our will. What the tree is in regard to its specific 
qualities depends on what faculties we have for perceiving it. 
But, whatever specific qualities it may have, it will still exist 



as an object, so long as it comes into dynamic relations with 
our minds. 

In the history of thought the relativity of knowledge as just 
described begins with Descartes, the founder of modern philosophy: 
the characteristic of modern philosophy is that it lays more stress 
upon the subjective than upon the objective side of experience. It 
is a mistake to refer it back to the Greeks. The maxim of Protagoras, 
for example, "Man is the measure of all things," has a different 
purpose; it was meant to point to the truth that man rather than 
nature is the primary object of human study: it* is a doctrine of 
humanism rather than of relativism. To appreciate the relativistic 
doctrines we find in various thinkers we must take account of the 
use to # which they were put. By Descartes the principle was used 
as an instrument of scepticism, the beneficent scepticism of pulling 
down medieval philosophy to make room for modern science; by 
Berkeley it was used to combat the materialists; by Hume in the 
cause of scepticism once more against the intellectual dogmatists; 
by Kant to prepare a justification for a noumenal sphere to be 
apprehendedby faith; by J. S. Mill and Herbert Spencer to support 
their derivation of all our experience from sensation. It is in Mill's 
Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy that the classical 
statement of the Relativity of Knowledge is to be found. The 
second chapter of that book sets forth the various forms of the , 
doctrine with admirable lucidity and precision, and gives many 
references to other writers. 

For the sake of clearness it seems desirable to keep for the future 
the term " relativity of knowledge " to the first meaning explained 
above: for the second meaning it has been superseded in contem- 
porary philosophizing by the terms " subjectivism," " subjective 
idealism," and, for its extreme form, " solipsism " (q.v.). (H. St.) 

RELEASE (O.Fr. reles, variant of relais, from relaisser, to 
release, let go, Lat. relaxare), freedom or deliverance from 
trouble, pain or sorrow, the freeing or discharge from some 
obligation or debt, the action of letting go or releasing something 
fixed or set in position. In law, the term is applied to the 
discharge of some obligation, by which it is extinguished (see 
Debt), and to the conveyance of an estate or interest in real or 
personal property to one who has already some estate or interest 
therein. For the special form of conveyancing known as " lease 
and release," see Conveyancing. 

RELICS (Lat, reliquiae, the equivalent of the English 
" remains " in the sense of a dead body), the name given in the 
Catholic Church to,(i) the bodies of the saints, or portions of 
them, (2) such objects as the saints made use of during their 
lives, or as were used at their martyrdom. These objects are 
held by the Church in religious veneration, and by their means 
it hopes to obtain divine grace and miraculous benefits (Cone. 
Trid. sess. 24). 

These ideas had taken shape, in all essentials, during the early 
days of the Church, underwent further development in the middle 
ages, and were maintained by the Catholic Church in the face 
of the opposition of the Reformers, while all the Protestant 
Churches rejected them. 

The origins of the veneration of relics lie in the anxiety for 
the preservation of the bodies of the martyrs. Nothing is more 
natural than that the pious solicitude felt by all men for the 
bodies of their loved ones should in the primitive Christian 
Churches have been turned most strongly towards the bodies 
of those who had met with death in confessing their faith. The 
account given by the church at Smyrna of the death of their 
bishop Polycarp (155) gives us an insight into these feelings. 
The church collected and buried the remains of the martyr, 
who had been burnt, in order duly to celebrate the anniversary 
of the martyrdom at the place of burial. The possession of the 
relics seemed to assure the continuation of the common life of 
the church with their bishop, of the living with the dead (Mart. 
Polyc. c. 17). 

The custom of which we have here for the first time an account 
had become universal by the 3rd century. In all parts the 
Christians assembled on the anniversary of the martyrs' death 
at their graves, to celebrate the Agape and the Eucharist at 
this spot. It was a favourite custom to bury the dead near the 
graves of the martyrs; and it was the highest wish of many to 
" rest with the saints." It was the body lying in the tomb which 
was venerated (see Euseb. Hist. eccl. vii. 11, 24; viii. 6, 7). 

But these customs soon underwent a further development. 
About the end of the 3rd and the beginning of the 4th century 



6o 



RELICS 



it became customary for the bodies of the martyrs not to be 
buried, but preserved for the purpose of veneration. Already 
individual Christians began to possess themselves of portions 
of the bodies of martyrs, and to carry them about with them. 
Both these practices met with criticism and opposition, especially 
from the leading men of the Church. According to the testi- 
mony of Athanasius of Alexandria, the hermit Anthony decided 
that it should be held to be unlawful and impious to leave the 
bodies of the martyrs unburied (Vita Ant. 90). In Carthage the 
archdeacon and later the bishop Caecilianus severely blamed a 
certain Lucilla for carrying about with her a relic which she used 
to kiss before receiving the Eucharist (Optatus, De schism. Donat. 
i. 16). The compiler of the Acta S. Fructuosi, a Spanish ecclesi- 
astic, represents the martyred bishop as himself requesting the 
burial of his relics. But energetic as the opposition was, it was 
unsuccessful, and died out. For in the meantime opinion as to 
the efficacy of relics had undergone a transformation, parallel 
with the growth of the theory, which soon predominated in the 
Church, that material instruments are the vehicles of divine 
grace. When the Christians of Smyrna decided that the bones 
of the martyrs were of more worth than gold or gems, and when 
Origen (Exh. ad mart. 50) spoke of the precious blood of the 
martyrs, they were thinking of the act of faith which the martyrs 
had accomplished by the sacrifice of their life. Now, on the 
other hand, the relic came to be looked upon as in itself a thing 
of value as the channel of miraculous divine powers. These 
ideas are set forth by Cyril of Jerusalem. He taught that a 
certain power dwelt in the body of the saint, even when the 
soul had departed from it; just as it was the instrument of 
the soul during life, so the power passed permanently into it 
(Cat. xviii. 16). This was coming very near to a belief that 
objects which the saints had used during their life had also a 
share in their miraculous powers. And this conclusion Cyril 
. had already come to (loc. cit.). 

We can see how early this estimate of relics became general 
from the fact that the former hesitation as to whether they 
should be venerated as sacred died out during the 4th century. 
The Fathers of the Greek Church especially were united in 
recommending the veneration of relics. All the great theologians 
of the 4th and 5th centuries may be quoted as evidence of this: 
Eusebius of Caesarea (Praep. Ev. xiii.n), Gregory of Nazianzus 
(Oral, in Cypr. 17), Gregory of Nyssa (Or at. de S. Theod. mart.) y 
Basil of Caesarea (Ep. ii. 197), Chrysostom (Laud. Drosidis), 
Theodoret of Cyrus (Inps. 67, ir), &c. John of Damascus, the 
great exponent of dogma in the 8th century, gave expression 
to the result of a uniform development which had been going 
on for centuries when he taught that Christ offers the relics to 
Christians as means of salvation. They must not be looked 
upon as something that is dead; for through them all good 
things come to those who pray with faith. Why should it 
seem impossible to believe in this power of the relics, when water 
could be made to gush from a rock in the desert? (Be fide 
orthod. iv. 15). 

Such was the theory; and the practice was in harmony with 
it. Throughout the whole of the Eastern Church the veneration 
of relics prevailed. Nobody hesitated to divide up the bodies 
of the saints in order to afford as many portions of them as 
possible. They were shared among the inhabitants of cities 
and villages, Theodoret tells us, and cherished by everybody 
as healers and physicians for both body and soul (Decnr.Graec. 
aff. 8). The transition from the true relic to the hallowed object 
was especially common. Jerusalem, as early as the time of 
Eusebius, rejoiced in the possession of the .episcopal chair of 
James the Just (Hist. eccl. vii. 19); and as late as the 4th century 
was discovered the most important of the relics of Christ, the 
cross which was alleged to have been His. Cyril of Jerusalem 
already remarks that the whole world was filled with portions 
of the wood of the cross (Cat. iv. 10). 

The development which the veneration of relics underwent 
in the West did not differ essentially from that in the East. 
Here also the idea came to prevail that the body of the saint, 
or a portion of it, [was possessed of healing and protective power 



(Paulinus of Nola, Poem. xix. 14 et seq,, xxvii. 443). The 
objection raised by the Aquitanian presbyter Vigilantius (c. 400) 
to the belief that the souls of the martyrs to a certain extent 
clung to their ashes, and heard the prayers of those who ap- 
proached them, appeared to his contemporaries to be frivolous; 
and he nowhere met with any support. 

The only doubt which was felt was as to whether the bodies 
of the saints should be divided, and removed from their original 
resting-place. Both practices were forbidden by law under 
the emperor Theodosius I. (Cod. Theodos. ix. 17, 7), and the 
division of the bodies of martyrs into pieces was prohibited 
for centuries. Even Pope Gregory I., in a letter to the empress 
Constantia, disapproved it (Ep. iv. 30). Ambrose of Milan, by 
the discovery of the relics of Protasius and Gervasius (cf. 
Ep. 22 and Augustine, Confess, ix. 7), started in the West the 
long series of discoveries and translations of hitherto unknown 
relics. His example was followed, to name only the best 
known instances, by Bishop Theodore of Octodurum (now 
Martigny in the Vaud), who discovered the relics of the Theban 
legion which was alleged to have been destroyed by the emperor 
Maximian on account of its belief in the Christian faith (see 
Passio Acaun. Mart* 16), and by Clematius, a citizen of 
Cologne, to whom the virgin martyrs of this city revealed 
themselves (Kraus, Inschriften der Rheinlande, No. 294), after- 
wards to be known as St Ursula and her eleven thousand 
virgins. 

The West was much poorer in relics than the East. Rome, 
it is true, possessed in the bodies of Peter and Paul a treasure 
the virtue of which outshone all the sacred treasures of the 
East. But many other places were entirely wanting in relics. 
By the discoveries which we have mentioned their number 
was notably increased. But the longing for these pledges 
of the divine assistance was insatiable. In order to satisfy 
it relics were made by placing pieces of cloth on the graves 
of the saints, which were afterwards taken to their homes 
and venerated by the pilgrims. The same purpose was served 
by oil taken from the lamps burning at the graves, flowers from 
the altars, water from some holy well, pieces of the garments of 
saints, earth from Jerusalem, and especially keys which had 
been laid on the grave of St Peter at Rome. All these things 
were not looked upon as mementoes, but the conviction pre- 
vailed that they were informed by a miraculous power, which 
had passed into them through contact with that which was 
originally sacred (cf. Greg. Tur. De Glor. mart. i. 25; Greg. I. 
Ep. iv. 29, No. 30). A dishonest means of satisfying the 
craving for relics was that of forging them, and how common 
this became can be gathered from the many complaints about 
spurious relics (Sulp. Sev. Vita Mark 8; Aug. De op. mon. 28; 
Greg. I. Ep. iv. 30, &c). 

But in the long run these substitutes for relics did not satisfy 
the Christians of the West, and, following the example of 
the Eastern Church, they took to dividing the bodies of the 
saints. Medieval relics in the West also were mostly portions 
of the bodies of saints or of things which they had used during 
their lives. The veneration of relics also received a strong 
impulse from the fact that the Church required that a relic 
should be deposited in every altar. Among the first of those 
whom we know to have attached importance to the placing of 
relics in churches is Ambrose of Milan (Ep. 22), and the 7th 
general council of Nicaea (787) forbade the consecration of 
churches in which relics were not present, under pain of ex- 
communication. This has remained part of the law of the 
Roman Catholic Church. 

The most famous relics discovered during the middle ages 
were those of the apostle James at St Jago de Compostella 
in Spain (see Pilgrimage), the bodies of the three kings, which 
were brought from Milan to Cologne in 11 64 by the emperor 
Fredierick I. (Chron. teg. Colon, for the year 1164), the so- 
called sudarium of St Veronica, which from the 12th century 
onwards was preserved in the Capella Santa Maria ad praesepe 
of St Peter's in Rome (see Dobschiitz, Christusbilder,$. 218 seq.), 
and the seamless robe of Christ, the possession of which lent 



RELIEF— RELIGION 



61 



renown to the cathedral of Trier since the beginning of the 
1 2th century (Gesta Trevir., Mon. Germ. Scr. viii. p. 152). 

The number of relics increased to a fabulous extent dur- 
ing the middle ages. There were churches which possessed 
hundreds, even thousands, of relics. In the cathedral of 
Eichstatt were to be found, as ' early as 1071, 683 relics 
(Gundech, Lib. pont. EisL, Mon. Germ. Scr. vii. p. 246 seq.); 
the monastery of Hirschau had 222 in the year 1091 (De eons, 
mat. mon., Mon. Germ. Scr. xiv. p. 261); the monastery of 
Stedernburg 515 in the year 1166 (Amu Sled. Scr. xvi. p. 212 
seq.). But these figures are trifling compared with those 
at the end of the middle ages. In the year 1520 could be 
counted 19,013 in the Schlosskirche at Wittenberg, and 21,483 
in the Schlosskirche at Halle in 1521 (Kostlin, Friedrick der IF., 
und die Schlosskirche zu Wittenberg, p. 58 seq.; Rediich, Cardinal 
Albrecht und das Neue Stift zu Halle, p. 260). There were also 
collections on the same scale belonging to individuals; a 
patrician of Nuremberg named Muffel was able to gain pos- 
session of 308 relics \Chroniken der deutschen* Stadte, xi. p. 745). 

It is curious that while the popular craving for relics had 
passed all bounds, medieval theology was very cautious in 
its declarations on the subject of the veneration of relics. 
Thomas Aquinas based his justification of them on the idea 
of reverent commemoration; since we. venerate the saints, 
we must also show reverence for their relics, for whoever loves 
another does honour to that which remains of him after death. 
On this account it is our duty, in memory of the saints, to pay 
due honour to their relics and especially to their bodies, which 
were the temples and dwellings of the Holy Ghost in which 
He dwelt and worked, and which in the resurrection are to be 
made like to the body of Christ; and in likewise because God 
honours them, in that He works wonders in their presence 
(Summa theol. in. qu. 25, art. 6). The great scholastic philo- 
sopher abandoned the theory that the relics in themselves are 
vessels and instruments of the divine grace and miraculous 
power. But these ideas were revived, on the other hand, by 
the Catholicism of the counter-Reformation, which again taught 
and teaches that God grants many benefits to mankind through 
the sacred bodies of the martyrs {Cone. Trid. sess. xxv.). The 
doctrine has adapted itself to the popular belief. (A. H.*) 

RELIEF (through Fr. from Lat. relevare, to lift up), an act 
of raising or lifting off or up. Apart from the general sense 
of a mitigation, cessation or removal of pain, sorrow, discomfort, 
&c, and the artistic use (It. relievo) of the projection of a figure 
or design in sculpture from the ground on which it is formed, 
which is treated below, the term "relief" is used in the following 
senses; it was one of the feudal incidents between lord and vassal, 
and consisted of a payment to the lord in kind or money made 
by the heir on the death of the ancestor for the privilege of 
succession, for, fiefs not being hereditary, the estate had lapsed 
to the lord; by this payment the heir caducum praedium 
relevabat (Du Cange, Gloss, s.v. Relevare). The word is also 
generally used, in law, for any exemption granted by a court 
from the strict legal consequences of an act, &c., e.g. to a parlia- 
mentary candidate from the penal consequences ensuing from 
breaches of the regulations of the Corrupt and Illegal Practices 
Acts. Relief is also the term used in English law for the assist- 
ance given to the indigent poor by the Poor Law authorities 
(see Poor Law). 

RELIEF, a term in sculpture signifying ornament, a figure 
or figures raised from the ground of a flat surface of which the 
sculptured portion forms an inherent part of the body of the 
whole. The design may be in high relief — "alto-relievo"(£.fl.),or 
low relief — " bas-relief" or "basso-relievo" (q.v.); in the former 
case the design is almost wholly detached from the ground, the 
attachment, through " under-cutting," remaining only here and 
there; in the latter it is wholly attached and may scarcely rise 
above the surface (as in the modern medal), or it may exceed in 
projection to about a half the proportionate depth (or thickness) 
of the figure or object represented. Formerly three terms were 
commonly employed to express the degree of relief — alto- 
relievo, basso-relievo and mezzo-relievo (or half-relief); but the 



two last-named have been merged by modern custom into 
" low-relief," to the disadvantage of accurate description. The 
term relief belongs to modern sculpture. To low relief as under- 
stood by us Pliny applied the word anaglypta t but it is to be 
observed that embossing and chasing came within the same 
category. It may be considered that less sculptural skill 
(independently of manipulative skill) is needed in high relief 
than in low relief, because in the former the true relative pro- 
portions in the life (whether figure or other object) have to be 
rendered, while in the latter, although the true height and, 
in a measure, breadth can be given, the thickness of the object 
is reduced by at least one-half, sometimes to almost nothing; 
and yet in spite of this departure from actuality, this abandon- 
ment of fact for a pure convention, a true effect must still be 
produced, not only in respect to perspective, but also of the 
actual shadows cast. And insomuch as the compositions are 
often extremely complicated and have sometimes to suggest 
retreating planes, the true plane of the material affords little 
scope for reproducing the required effect. In the beginning 
the essential idea of the relief was always maintained : that is 
to say, the sense of the flatness of the slab from which it was 
cut was impressed throughout the design on the mind of the 
spectator. Thus the Egyptians merely sunk the outlines and 
scarcely more than suggested the modelling of the figures, which 
never* projected beyond the face of the surrounding ground. 
The Persians, the Etruscans and the Greeks carried on the art 
to the highest perfection, alike in sculpture and architectural 
ornament, and they applied it to gem sculpture, as in the case 
of " cameo." Similarly, the inverse treatment of relief — that 
is, sunk below the surface, in order that when used for seals a 
true relief is obtained — was early brought to great completeness; 
this form of engraving is called " intaglio." The degree of 
projection in relief, broadly speaking, has varied greatly with 
the periods of art. Thus, in Byzantine and Romanesque art 
the relief was low. In Gothic it increased with the increased 
desire to render several planes one behind the other. With the 
advent of the Renaissance it became still more accentuated, 
the heads and figures projecting greatly; but such high relief 
is sometimes found in early work, especially in metal-work. 
Although we see a return to lower relief in the Henri II. period, 
it becomes stronger in the Louis XIII. style, very full in 
Louis XIV. and Louis XV., but in Louis XVI. is considerably 
reduced. (M. H.S.) 

RELIGION. The origin of the Latin word rUigio or rdligio 
has been the subject of discussion since the time of Cicero. Two 
alternative derivations have been given, viz. from rZUgere, 
to gather together, and religare, to bind back, fasten. Relegere 
meant to gather together, collect, hence to go over a subject 
again in thought, from re and legere, to collect together, hence to 
read, collect at a glance. This view is that given by Cicero 
(Nat. Deor. ii. 28, 72). He says: " Qui omnia quae ad cultum 
deorum pertinerent diligenter retractarent et tanquamrelegerent, 
sunt dicti religiosi ex relegendo," " men were called 'religious * 
from relegere, because they reconsidered carefully and, as it 
were, went over again in thought all that appertained to the 
worship of the gods." He compares elegantes from eligere t 
diligentes from diligere, and continues, " his enim in verbis 
omnibus inest vis legendi eadem quae in religioso." This view 
is supported by the form of the word in the verse quoted by 
Gellius (iv. 9), " religentem esse oportet, rcligiosum nefas," and 
by the use of the Greek tihkyttv, to pay heed to, frequently with 
a negative, in the sense of the Latin negligere (fiec-legcre) , cf. 
Qe&v wnv obK h\kyovT€$ (Homer, //. xvi. 388), heeding not the 
visitation of the gods, or ob yap KvicXanres Aids . . . akeyovctv 
(Od. ix. 275). The alternative derivation, from religare, to 
fasten, bind, is that adopted by Lactantius (Inst. iv. 28), "Vinculo 
pietatis obstricti, Deo rcligati sumus unde ipsa religio nomen 
cepit. " He quotes in support the line from Lucretius (i. 931), 
" religionum nodis animos exsolvere." Servius (on Virgil, 
Aen. viii. 349) and St Augustine (Retract, i. 13) also take religare 
as the source of the word. It is one that has certainly coloured 
the meaning of the word, particularly in that use which restricts 



62 



RELIGION 



[PRIMITIVE 



it to the monastic life with its binding rules. It also has appealed 
to Christian thought. Liddon (Some Elements t of Religion, 
Lecture I. 19) says: " Lactantius may be wrong in his etymology, 
but he has certainly seized the broad popular sense of the word 
when he connects it with the idea of an obligation by which man 
is bound to an invisible God." Archbishop Trench (Study of 
Words) supposed that when " religion " became equivalent to 
the monastic life, and " religious " to a monk, the words lost 
their original meaning, but the Ancren Riwle, ante 1225, and the 
Cursor Mundi use the words both in the general and the more 
particular sense (see quotations in the New English Dictionary), 
and both meanings can be found in the Imitatio Christi and in 
Erasmus's Colloquia. (X.) 

The study of the forms of belief and worship belonging to 
different tribes, nations or religious communities has only 
recently acquired a scientific foundation. The Greek historians 
early directed their attention to the ideas and customs of the 
peoples with whom they were brought into contact ; and 
Herodotus has been called the " first anthropologist of reli- 
gion." Theopompus described the Persian dualism in the 4th 
century B.C., and when Megasthenes was ambassador to the 
court of Chandragupta, 302 B.C., he noted the religious usages 
of the middle Ganges valley. The early Christian Fathers 
recorded many a valuable observation of the Gentile faiths 
around them from varying points of view, sympathetic or 
hostile; and Eusebius and Epiphanhis, in the 4th century 
a.d., attributed to the librarian of Ptolemy Philadelphus the 
design of collecting the sacred books of the Ethiopians, 
Indians, Persians, Elamites, Babylonians, Assyrians, Romans, 
Phoenicians, Syrians and Greeks. The Mahommedan Blruni 
(b.'A.D. 973) compared the doctrines of the Greeks, Christians, 
Jews, Manichaeans and Sufis with the philosophies and reli- 
gions of India. Akbar (1 542-1605) gathered Brahmans and 
Zoroastrians, Jews, Christians and Mahommedans at his court, 
and endeavoured to get translations of their scriptures. In the 
next century the Persian author of the Dabistan exhibited the 
doctrines of no less than twelve religions and their various sects. 
Meanwhile the scholars of the West had begun to work. Thomas 
Hyde (1636-1703) studied the religion of the ancient Persians; 
John Spencer (1 630-1693) analysed the laws of the Hebrews; 
and Lord Herbert of Cherbury (De Religione Gentilium, 1645) 
endeavoured to trace all religions back to five " truly Catholic 
truths " of primitive faith, the first being the existence of God. 
The doctrine of a primeval revelation survived in various forms 
for two centuries, and appeared as late as the Inventus Mundi 
of W. E. Gladstone (1868, p. 207 ff.). David Hume, on the other 
hand, based his essay on The Natural History of Religion (1757) 
on the conception of the development of human society from 
rude beginnings, and all modern study is frankly founded on the 
general idea of Evolution. 1 

The materials at Hume's command, however, were destined 
to vast and speedy expansion. The Jesuit missionaries had 
already been at work in India and China, and a brilliant band of 
English students, led by Sir William Jones and H. T. Colebrooke, 
began to make known the treasures of Sanskrit literature, 
which the great scholars of Germany and France proceeded to 
develop. In Egypt the discovery of the Rosetta stone placed 
the key to the hieroglyphics within Western reach; and the 
decipherment of the cuneiform character enabled the patient 
scholars of Europe tQ recover the clues to the contents of the 
ancient libraries of Babylonia and Assyria. With the aid of 
inscriptions the cults of Greece and Rome have been largely 
reconstructed. Travellers and missionaries reported the beliefs 
and usages of uncivilized tribes in every part of the world, 
with the result that " ethnography knows no race devoid of 
religion, but only differences in the degree to which religious 
ideas have developed " (Ratzel, History of Mankind, i. 40). 
Meanwhile philosophy was at work on the problem of the 
religious consciousness. The great series of perman thinkers, 
Lessing, Herder, Kant, Hegel, Fichte, Schleiermacher and their 

1 This does not, of course, preclude the possibility of degeneration 
in particular instances. 



successors, sought to explain religion by means of the phenomena 
of mind, and to track it to its roots in the processes of thought 
and feeling. While ethnography was gathering up the facts 
from every part of the globe, psychology began to analyse the 
forms of belief, of action and emotion, to discover if possible 
the 'key to the multitudinous variety which history revealed. 
From the historical and linguistic side attention was first fixed 
upon the myth, and the publication of the ancient hymns of the 
Rig Veda led Max Miiller to seek in the common elements of 
Aryan thought for the secrets of primitive religion (essay on 
Comparative Mythology, 1856). The phenomena of day and 
night, of sunshine and storm, and other aspects of nature, were 
invoked by different interpreters to explain the conceptions of 
the gods, their origins and their relations. Fresh materials 
were gathered at the same time out of European folk-lore; the 
work begun by the brothers Grimm was continued by J. W. E. 
Mannhardt, and a lower stratum of beliefs and rites began to 
emerge into view beneath the poetic forms of the more developed 
mythologies. By such preliminary labours the way was 
prepared for the new science of anthropology. 

Since the appearance of Dr E. B. Tylor's classical treatise 
on Primitive Culture (1871), the study of the origins of religion 
has been pursued with the utmost zeal. Comte had already 
described the primitive form of the religious consciousness as 
that in which man conceives of all external bodies as animated 
by a life analogous to his own (Philos. Positive, tome v., 1841, 
p. 30). This has been since designated as polyzoism or panthelism 
or panvitalism, 2 and represents the obscure undifferentiated 
groundwork out of which Tylor's Animism arises. Many are 
the clues by which it has been sought to explain the secret of 
primitive religion. Hegel, before the anthropological stage, 
found it in magic. Max Miiller, building on philosophy and 
mythology, affirmed that " Religion consists in the perception 
of the infinite under such manifestations as are able to influence 
the moral character of man " (Natural Religion, 1899, p. 188). 
Herbert Spencer derived all religion from the worship of the dead 
(Principles of Sociology, i.), like Grant Allen, and Lippert in 
Germany. Mr Andrew Lang, on the other hand, supposes that 
belief in a supreme being came first in order of evolution, but 
was afterwards thrust into the background by belief in ghosts 
and lesser divinities (Magic and Religion, 1901, p. 224).' Dr 
Jevons finds the primitive form in totemism (Introd. to the 
History of Religion, 1896, chap. ix.). Mr J. G. Frazer regards 
religion (see his definition quoted below) as superposed on an 
antecedent stage of magic. In The Tree of Life (1905), Mr E. 
Crawley interprets it by the vital instinct, and connects its 
first manifestations with the processes of the organic life. The 
veteran Wilhelm Wundt (My thus und Religion, ii. 1906, p. 177) 
recurs to the primitive conceptions of the soul as the source of 
all subsequent development. The origin of religion, however, 
can never be determined archaeologically or historically; it 
must be sought conjecturally through psychology. (J. E. C.) 

A. Primitive "Religion 

There is a point at which the History of Religion becomes in 
its predominant aspect a History of Religions. The conditions 
that we describe by the comprehensive term " civilization " 
occasion a specification and corresponding differentiation of the 
life of societies; whence there result competing types of culture, 
each instinct with the spirit of propagandism and, one might 
almost say, of empire. It is an age of conscious selection as 
between ideal systems. Instead of necessitating a wasteful 
and precarious elimination of inadequate customs by the actual 
destruction of those who practise them — this being the method 
of natural selection, which, like some Spanish Inquisition, 
abolishes the heresy by wiping out the heretics one and all — 
progress now becomes possible along the more direct and less 

2 Comte's own term " fetishism " was most unfortunately ^ mis- 
leading (see Fetishism). Marett proposed the term " Animatism," 
Folk Lore (1900), xi. p. 171. 

3 See his treatise on The Making of Religion (1898), and Hartland's 
article on " The ' High Gods ' of Australia," Folk Lore (1898), ix. 
p. 290. 



PRIMITIVE] 



RELIGION 



63 



painful path of conversion. The heretic, having developed 
powers of rational choice, perceives his heresy, to wit, his want 
of adaptation to the moral environment, and turning round 
embraces the new faith that is the passport to survival. 

Far otherwise is it with man at the stage of savagery — the 
stage of petty groups pursuing a self-centred life of inveterate 
custom, in an isolation almost as complete as if they were 
marooned on separate atolls of the ocean. Progress, or at all 
events change, does indeed take place, though very slowly, 
since the most primitive savage we know of has his portion of 
human intelligence, looks after and before, nay, in regard to the 
pressing needs of every day shows a quite remarkable shrewdness 
and resource. Speaking generally, however, we must pronounce 
him unprogressive, since, on the whole, unreflective in regard to 
his ends. It is the price that must be paid for social discreteness 
and incoherency. And the consequence of this atomism is 
not what a careless thinker might be led to assume, extreme 
diversity, but, on the contrary, extreme homogeneity of culture. 
It has been found unworkable, for instance, to classify the 
religions of really primitive peoples under a plurality of heads, 
as becomes necessary the moment that the presence of a dis- 
tinctive basis of linked ideas testifies to the individuality of 
this or that type of higher creed. Primitive religions are like 
so many similar beads on a string; and the concern of the 
student of comparative religion is at this stage mainly with the 
nature of the string, to wit, the common conditions of soul and 
society that make, say, totemism, or taboo, very much the same 
thing all the savage world over, when we seek to penetrate to 
its essence. 

This fundamental homogeneity of primitive culture, however, 
must not be made the excuse for a treatment at the hands of 
psychology and sociology that dispenses with the study of details 
and trusts to an a priori method. By all means let universal 
characterization be attempted — we are about to attempt one 
here, though well aware of the difficulty in the present state 
of our knowledge — but they must at least model themselves 
on the composite photograph rather than the impressionist 
sketch. An enormous mass of material, mostly quite in the raw, 
awaits reduction to order on the part of anthropological theorists, 
as yet a small and ill-supported body of enthusiasts. Under 
these circumstances it would be premature to expect agreement 
as to results. In regard to method, however, there is little 
difference of opinion. Thus, whereas the popular writer abounds 
in wide generalizations on the subject of primitive humanity, 
the expert has hitherto for the most part deliberately restricted 
himself to departmental investigations. Religion, for example, 
seems altogether too vast a theme for him to embark on, and he 
usually prefers to deal with some single element or aspect. 
Again, origins attract the litterateur; he revels in describing 
the transition from the pre-religious to the religious era. But 
the expert, confining his attention to the known savage, finds 
him already religious, nay, encumbered with religious survivals 
of all kinds; for him, then, it suffices to describe things as they 
now are, or as they were in the comparatively recent fore-time. 
Lastly, there are many who, being competent in some other 
branch of science, but having small acquaintance with the 
scientific study of human culture, are inclined to explain 
primitive ideas and institutions from without, namely by 
reference to various external conditions of the mental life of 
peoples, such as race, climate, food-supply and so on. The 
anthropological expert, on the other hand, insists on making the 
primitive point of view itself the be-all and end-all of his investi- 
gations. The inwardness of savage religion — the meaning it 
has for those who practise it — constitutes its essence and 
meaning likewise for him, who after all is a man and a brother, 
not one who stands really outside. 

In what follows, then, we shall, indeed, venture to present a 
wholesale appreciation of the religious idea as it is for primitive 
man in general; but our account will respect the modern 
anthropological method that bids the student keep closely to 
the actualities of the religious experience of savages, as it can 
with reasonable accuracy be gathered from what they do and say. 



We have sought to render onlv the spirit of primitive religion, 
keeping clear both of technicalities and of departmental investi- 
gations. These are left to the separate articles bearing on the 
subject. There the reader will find the most solid results of 
recent anthropological research. Here is he merely offered a 
flimsy thread that, we hope, may guide him through the maze of 
facts, but alas! is only too likely to break off short in his hand. 
Definition of Primitive Religion. — In dealing with a develop- 
ment of culture that has no immutable essence, but is intrinsically 
fluid and changing, definition must consist either in a 'definition 
of type, which indicates prevalence of relevant resemblance as 
between specimens more or less divergent, or in exterior defini- 
tion, which delimits the field of inquiry by laying down within 
what extreme limits this divergence holds. Amongst the 
numberless definitions of religion that have been suggested, 
those that have been most frequently adopted for working 
purposes by anthropologists are Tylor's and Frazer's. Dr E. B. 
Tylor in Primitive Culture (1), i. 424, proposes as a " minimum 
definition" of religion " the belief in spiritual beings." Objec- 
tions to this definition on the score of incompleteness are, firstly, 
that, besides belief, practice must be reckoned with (since, as 
Dr W. Robertson Smith has made clear in his Lectures on the 
Religion of the Semites , 18 sqq., ritual is in fact primary for 
primitive religion, whilst dogma and myth are secondary); 
secondly, that the outlook of such belief and practice is not 
exclusively towards the spiritual, unless this term be widened 
until it mean next to nothing, but is likewise towards the quasi- 
material, as will be shown presently. The merit of this defini- 
tion, on the other hand, lies in its bilateral form, which calls 
attention to the need of characterizing both the religious 
attitude and the religious object to which the former has refer- 
ence. The same form appears in Dr J. G. Frazer's definition in 
The Golden Bough (2nd ed.), i. 63. He understands by religion 
" a propitiation or conciliation of powers superior to man which 
are believed to direct and control the course of nature and of 
human life." He goes on to explain that by " powers" he means 
" conscious or personal agents." It is also to be noted that he 
is here definitely opposing religion to magic, which he holds 
to be based on the (implicit) assumption " that the course of 
nature is determined, not by the passions or caprice of personal 
beings, but by the operation of immutable laws acting mechani- 
cally." His definition improves'on Tylor's in so far as it makes 
worship integral to the religious attitude. By regarding the 
object of religion as necessarily personal, however, he is led to 
exclude much that the primitive man undoubtedly treats with 
awe and respect as exerting a mystic effect on his life. Further, 
in maintaining that the powers recognized by religion are always 
superior to man, he leaves unclassed a host of practices that 
display a bargaining, or even a hectoring, spirit on the part of 
those addressing them (see Prayer). Threatening or beating 
a fetish cannot be brought under the head of magic, even if 
we adopt Frazer's principle (op. cil. i. 64) that to constrain or 
coerce a personal being is to treat him as an inanimate agent; 
for such a principle is quite inapplicable to cases of mere terrorism, 
whilst it may be doubted if it even renders the sense of the 
savage magician's typical notion of his modus operandi, viz. 
as the bringing to bear of a greater mana or psychic influence 
(see below) on what has less, and must therefore do as it is 
bidden. Such definitions, then, are to be accepted; if at all, as 
definitions of type, selective designations of leading but not 
strictly universal features. An encyclopaedic account, however, 
should rest rather on an exterior definition which can serve as it 
were to pigeon-hole the whole mass of significant facts. Such 
an exterior definition is suggested by Mr E. Crawley in The 
Tree of Life, 209, where he points out that " neither the Greek 
nor the Latin language has any comprehensive term for religion, 
except in the one Up&, and in the other sacra, words which 
are equivalent to 'sacred.' No other term covers the whole 
of religious phenomena, and a survey of the complex details 
of various worships results in showing that no other conception 
will comprise the whole body of religious facts." It may be 
added that we have here no generalization imported from a 



6 4 



RELIGION 



[PRIMITIVE 



higher level of culture, but an idea or blend of ideas familiar to 
primitive thought. An important consequence of thus giving 
the study of primitive religion the wide scope of a comparative 
hierology is that magic is no longer divorced from religion, since 
the sacred will now be found to be coextensive with the magico- 
religious, that largely undifferentiated plasm out of which religion 
and magic slowly take separate shape as society comes more 
and more to contrast legitimate with illicit modes of dealing 
with the sacred. We may define, then, the religious object as 
the sacred, and the corresponding religious attitude as con- 
sisting in such manifestation of feeling, thought and action in 
regard to the sacred as is held to conduce to the welfare of the 
community or to that of individuals considered as members 
of the community. 

Aspects of the Nature of the Sacred. — To exhibit the general 
character of the sacred as it exists for primitive religion it 
is simplest to take stock of various aspects recognized by 
primitive thought as expressed in language. If some, and 
not the least essential, of these aspects are quasi-negative, 
it must be remembered that negations — witness the Unseen, 
the Unknown, the Infinite of a more advanced theology — are 
well adapted to supply that mystery on which the religious 
consciousness feeds with the slight basis of conceptual support 
it needs, (i) The sacred as the forbidden. The primitive 
notion that perhaps comes nearest to our " sacred," whilst it 
immediately underlies the meanings of the Latin sacer and 
sanctus, is that of a taboo, a Polynesian term for which equiva- 
lents can be quoted from most savage vocabularies. The 
root idea seems to be that something is marked off as to be 
shunned, with the added hint of a mystic sanction or penalty 
enforcing the avoidance. Two derivative senses of a more 
positive import call for special notice. On the one hand, 
since that which is tabooed is held to punish the taboo-breaker 
by a sort of mystic infection, taboo comes to stand for un- 
cleanness and sin. On the other hand, since the isolation of 
the sacred, even when originally conceived in the interest of 
the profane, may be interpreted as self-protection on the part 
of the sacred as against defiling contact, taboo takes on the 
connotation of ascetic virtue, purity, devotion, dignity and 
blessedness. Primary and secondary senses of the term between 
them cover so much ground that it is not surprising to find 
taboo used in Polynesia as a name for the whole system of 
religion, founded as it largely is on prohibitions and abstin- 
ences. (2) The sacred as the mysterious. Another quasi- 
negative notion of more restricted distribution is that of the 
mysterious or strange, as we have it expressed, for example, in 
the Siouan wakan, though possihly this is a derivative meaning. 
Meanwhile, it is certain that what is strange, new or por- 
tentous is regularly treated by all savages as sacred. (3) The 
sacred as the secret. The literal sense of the term churinga, 
applied by the Central Australians to their sacred objects, 
and likewise used more abstractly to denote mystic power, 
as when a man is said to be " full of churinga," is " secret," 
and is symptomatic of the esotericism that is a striking mark 
of Australian, and indeed of all primitive, religion, with its 
insistence on initiation, its exclusion of women, and its strictly 
enforced reticence concerning traditional lore and proceedings. 
(4) The sacred as the potent. Passing on to positive conceptions 
of the sacred, perhaps the most fundamental is that which 
identifies the efficacy of sacredness with such mystic or magical 
power as is signified by the mana of the Pacific or orenda of 
the Hurons, terms for which analogies are forthcoming on all 
sides. Of mana Dr R. H. Codrington in The Melanesians, 
119 n., writes: "It essentially belongs to personal beings to 
originate it, though it may act through the medium of water, 
or a stone, or a bone. All Melanesian religion consists . . . 
in getting this mana for oneself, or getting it used for one's 
benefit." E. Tregear's Maori- Polynesian Comparative Dic- 
tionary shows how the word and its derivatives are used to 
express thought, memory, emotion, desire, will — in short, 
psychic energy of all kinds. It also stands for the vehicle 
of the magician's energy — the spell; which would seem like- 



wise to be a meaning, perhaps the root-meaning, of orenda 
(cf. J. N. B. Hewitt, American Anthropologist, N.S., iv. 40). 
Whereas everything, perhaps, has some share of indwelling 
potency, whatever is sacred manifests this potency in an extra- 
ordinary degree, as typically the wonder-working leader of 
society, whose mana consists in his cunning and luck together. 
Altogether, in mana we have what is par excellence the primitive 
religious idea in its positive aspect, tahoo representing its 
negative side, since whatever has mana is taboo, and what- 
ever is taboo has mana. (5) The sacred as the animate. The 
term " animism," which embodies Tylor's classical theory 
of primitive religion, is unfortunately somewhat ambiguous. 
If we take it strictly to mean the belief in ghosts or spirits 
having the " vaporous materiality " proper to the objects 
of dream or hallucination, it is certain that the agency of such 
phantasms is not the sole cause to which all mystic happenings 
are referred (though ghosts and spirits are everywhere believed 
in, and appear to be endowed with greater predominance 
as religious synthesis advances amongst primitive peoples). 
Thus there is good evidence to show that many of the early 
gods, notahly those that are held to be especially well disposed 
to man, are conceived rather in the shape of magnified non- 
natural men dwelling somewhere apart, such as the Mungan- 
ngaur of the Kurnai of S.E. Australia (cf. A. Lang, The 
Making of Religion 2 , x. sqq.). Such anthropomorphism is 
with difficulty reduced to the Tylorian animism. The term, 
however, will have to be used still more vaguely, if it is to 
cover all attribution of personality, will or vitality. This 
can be more simply brought under the notion of mana. Mean- 
while, since quasi-mechanical means are freely resorted to 
in dealing with the sacred, as when a Maori chief snuffs up 
the sanctity his fingers have acquired by touching his own 
sacred head that he may restore the virtue to the part whence 
it was taken (R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui, 165), or when un- 
cleanness is removed as if it were a physical secretion by washing, 
wiping and so forth, it is hard to say whether what we should 
now call a " material " nature is not ascrihed to the sacred, 
more especially when its transmissihility after the manner of 
a contagion is the trait that holds the attention. It is possible, 
however, that the savage always distinguishes in a dim way 
between the material medium and the indwelling principle 
of vital energy, examples of a pure fetishism, in the sense of 
the cult of the purely material, recognized as such, being hard 
to find. (6) The sacred as the ancient. The prominence of 
the notion of the Alcheringa " dreamtime," or sacred past, 
in Central Australian religion illustrates the essential con- 
nexion perceived by the savage to lie between the sacred and 
the traditional. Ritualistic conservatism may be instanced as 
a practical outcome of this feeling. Another development is 
ancestor-worship, the organized cult of ancestors marking, 
however, a certain stage of advance beyond the very primitive, 
though the dead are always sacred and have mana which the 
living may exploit for their own advantage. 

The Activity of the Sacred. — The foregoing views of the sacred, 
though starting from distinct conceptions, converge in a single 
complex notion, as may be seen from the many-sided sense 
borne by such a term as wakan, which may stand not only for 
" mystery," but also for " power, sacred, ancient, grandeur, 
animate, immortal " (W J McGee, 15th Report of U. S. Bureau 
of Ethnology, 182). The reason for this convergence is that, 
whereas there is found great difficulty in characterizing the 
elusive nature of the sacred, its mode of manifesting itself is 
recognized to be much the same in all its phases. Uniform 
characteristics are the fecundity, ambiguity, relativity and 
transmissihility of its activity, (r) Fecundity. The mystic 
potency of the sabred is no fixed quantity, but is big with 
possibilities of all sorts. The same sacred person, object, act, 
will suffice for a variety of purposes. Even where a piece of 
sympathetic magic appears to promise definite results, or when 
a departmental god is recognized, there would seem to be room 
left for a more or less indefinite expectancy. It must be re- 
memhered that the meaning of a rite is for the most part obscure 



PRIMITIVE] 



RELIGION 



65 



to the participants, being overlaid by its traditional character, 
which but guarantees a general efficacy. " Blessings come, 
-evils go," may be said to be the magico-religious formula 
implicit in all socially approved dealings with the sacred, 
however specialized in semblance. (2) Ambiguity. Mystic 
potency, however, because of the very indefiniteness of its 
action, is a two-edged sword. The sacred is not to be approached 
lightly. It will heal or blast, according as it is handled with 
or without due circumspection. That which is taboo, for 
instance, the person of the king, or woman's blood, is poison or 
medicine according as it is manipulated, being inherently just 
.a potentiality for wonder-working in any direction. Not but 
what primitive thought shows a tendency to mark off a certain 
kind of mystic power as wholly bad by a special name, e.g. the 
arungquiltha of Central Australia; and here, we may note, we 
come nearest to a conception of magic as something other than 
religion, the trafficker in arungquiltha being socially suspect, nay, 
liable to persecution, and even death (as amongst the Axunta 
tribe, see Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes of C. Australia, 536), 
at the hands of his fellows. On the other hand, wholly beneficent 
powers seem hardly to be recognized, unless we find them in 
beings such as Mungan-ngaur (" father-our" ), who derive an 
•ethical character from their association with the initiation cere- 
monies and the moral instruction given thereat (cf . Lang, Lc.) . 
(3) Relativity. So far we have tended to represent the activity of 
the sacred as that of a universal force, somewhat in the style of 
our " electricity" or " mind. " It remains to add that this activity 
manifests itself at numberless independent centres. These 
-differ amongst themselves in the degree of their energy. One 
spell is stronger than another, one taboo more inviolable than 
another. Dr \V. H. R. Rivers (The Todas, 448) gives an interest- 
ing analysis of the grades of sanctity apparent in Toda religion. 
The gods of the hill-tops come first. The sacred buffaloes, 
their milk, their bells, the dairies and their vessels are on a 
lower plane; whilst we may note that there are several grades 
amongst the dairies, increase of sanctity going with elaboration 
of dairy ritual (cf. ibid. 232). Still lower is the dairyman, who 
is in no way divine, yet has sanctity as one who maintains 
a condition of ceremonial purity. (4) Tr admissibility. If, 
however, this activity originates at certain centres, it tends to 
spread therefrom in all directions. Dr F. B. Jevons (in An 
Introduction to the History of Religion, vii.) distinguishes between 
" things taboo," which have the mystic contagion inherent in 
them, and " things tabooed," to which the taboo-infection has 
been transmitted. In the former class he places supernatural 
beings (including men with mana as well as ghosts and spirits), 
blood, new-born children with their mothers, and corpses; 
which list might be considerably extended, for instance, by the 
inclusion of natural portents, and animals and plants such as are 
strikingly odd, dangerous or useful. Any one of these can pass 
on its sacred quality to other persons and objects (as a corpse 
defiles the mourner and his clothes), nay to actions, places and 
times as well (as a corpse will likewise cause work to be tabooed, 
ground to be set apart, a holy season to be observed). Such 
transmissibility is commonly explained by the association of 
ideas, that becoming sacred which as it were reminds one of 
the sacred; though it is important to add, firstly, that such 
association takes place under the influence of a selective interest 
generated by strong religious feeling, and, secondly, that this 
interest is primarily a collective product, being governed by a 
social tradition which causes certain possibilities of ideal com- 
bination alone to be realized, whilst it is the chief guarantee of 
the objectivity of what they^ suggest. 

The Exploitation of the Sacred. A. Methods. — It is hard to find 
terms general enough to cover dealings with the sacred that 
range from the manipulation of an almost inanimate type of 
power to intercourse modelled on that between man and man. 
Primitive religion, however, resorts to either way of approach 
so indifferently as to prove that there is little or no awareness 
of an inconsistency of attitude. The radical contrast between 
mechanical and spiritual religion, though fundamental for 
modern theology, is alien to the primitive point of view, and is 



therefore inappropriate to the purposes of anthropological 
description. (1) Acquisition. Mystic power may be regarded 
as innate so far as skill, luck or queerness are signs and con- 
ditions of its presence. On the whole, however, savage society 
tends to regard it as something acquired, the product of acts and 
abstinences having a traditional character for imparting magico- 
religious virtue. An external symbol in the shape of a ceremony 
or cult-object is of great assistance to the dim eye of primitive 
faith. Again, the savage universe is no preserve of man, but 
is an open field wherein human and non-human activities of 
all sorts compete on more or less equal terms, yet so that a 
certain measure of predominance may be secured by a judicious 
combination of forces. (2) Concentration. Hence the magico- 
religious society or individual practitioner piles ceremony on 
ceremony, name of power on name of power, relic on relic, to 
consolidate the forces within reach and assume direction thereof. 
The transmissibility of the sacred ensures the fusion of powers 
drawn from all sources, however disparate. (3) Induction. It 
is necessary, however, as it were to bring this force to a head. 
This would appear to be the essential significance of sacrifice, 
where a number of sacred operations and instruments are made 
to discharge their efficacy into the victim as into a vat, so that a 
blessing-yielding, evil-neutralizing force of highest attainable 
potency is obtained (see H. Hubert and M. Mauss, " Essai sur 
la nature et la fonction du sacrifice" in L* Annie sociologique } ii.). 
(4) Renovation. An important motif in magico-religious ritual, 
which may not have been without effect on the development of 
sacrifice, is, as Dr Frazer's main thesis in The Golden Bough 
asserts, the imparting of reproductive energy to animals, plants 
and man himself, its cessation being suggested by such phenomena 
as old age and the fall of the year. To concentrate, induce and 
renovate are, however, but aspects of one process of acquisition 
by the transfusion of a transmissible energy. (5) Demission. 
Hubert and Mauss show in their penetrating analysis of sacrifice 
that after the rite has been brought to its culminating point 
there follows as a pendant a ceremony of re-entry into ordinary 
life, the idea of which is preserved in the Christian formula 
Ite, missa est. (6) Insulation. Such deposition of sacredness 
is but an aspect of the wider method that causes a ring-fence to 
be erected round the sacred to ward off casual trespassers at 
once in their own interest and to prevent contamination. We 
see here a natural outcome of religious awe supported by the 
spirit of esotericism, and by a sense of the need for an expert 
handling of that which is so potent for good or ill. (7) Direction. 
This last consideration brings to notice the fact that throughout 
magico-religious practice of all kinds the human operator retains 
a certain control over the issue. In the numberless transitions 
that, whilst connecting, separate the spell and the prayer we 
observe as the accompaniment of every mood from extreme 
imperiousness to extreme humility an abiding will and desire 
to help the action out. Even " Thy will be done " preserves 
the echo of a direction, and, needless to say, this is hardly a 
form of primitive address. At the bottom is the vague feeling 
that it is man's own self-directed mysterious energy that is at 
work, however much it needs to be reinforced from without. 
Meanwhile, tradition strictly prescribes the ways and means of 
such reinforcement, so that religion becomes largely a matter 
of sacred lore; and the expert director of rites, who is likewise 
usually at this stage the leader of society, comes more and more 
to be needed as an intermediary between the lay portion of the 
community and the sacred powers. 

B. Results. — Hitherto our account of primitive religion 
has had to move on somewhat abstract lines. His religion 
is, however, anything but an abstraction to the savage, and 
stands rather for the whole of his concrete life so far as it is 
penetrated by a spirit of earnest endeavour. The end and 
result of primitive religion is, in a word, the consecration of 
life, the stimulation of the will to live and to do. This 
bracing of the vital feeling takes place by means of imaginative 
appeal to the great forces man perceives stirring within him 
and about him, such appeal proving effective doubtless by 
reason of the psychological law that to conceive strongly is 

xxiii. 3 



66 



RELIGION 



[PRIMITIVE 



to imitate. Meanwhile, that there shall be no clashing of 
conceptions to inhibit the tendency of the idea of an acquired 
" grace " to realize itself in action, is secured by the complete 
unanimity of public opinion, dominated as it is by an inveterate 
custom. To appreciate the consecrating effect of religion on 
primitive life we have only to look to the churinga-Ytorship 
of the Central Australians (as described by Spencer and Gillen 
in The Native Tribes of Central Australia and The Northern 
Tribes of Central Australia). Contact with these repositories 
of mystic 'influence "makes them glad" (Nat. Tr. 165); it 
likewise makes them " good," so that they are no longer greedy 
or selfish (North. Tr. 266); it endows them with second sight 
(ibid.); it gives them confidence and success in war (Nat. Tr. 135); 
in fact, there is no end to its "strengthening" effects (ibid.w.). 
Or, again, we may note the earnestness and solemnity that 
characterize all their sacred ceremonies. The inwardness 
of primitive religion is, however, non-existent for those who 
observe it as uninitiated strangers; whilst, again, it evaporates 
as soon as native custom breaks down under pressure of 
civilization, when only fragments of meaningless superstition 
survive: wherefore do travesties of primitive religion abound. 

It remains to consider shortly the consecration of life in 
relation to particular categories and departments. (1) Educa- 
tion. Almost every tribe has its initiation ceremonies, and in 
many tribes adult life may almost be described as a continuous 
initiation. The object of these rites is primarily to impart 
mystic virtue to the novice, such virtue, in the eyes of the 
primitive man, being always something more than social use- 
fulness, amounting as it does to a share in the tribal luck by 
means of association with all it holds sacred. Incidentally 
the candidate is trained to perform his duties as a tribesman, 
but religion presides over the course, demanding earnest 
endeavour of an impressionable age. (2) Government. Where 
society is most primitive it is most democratic, as in Australia, 
and magico-religious powers are possessed by the whole body 
of fully initiated males, age, however, conferring increase of 
sacred lore and consequently of authority; whilst even at 
this stage the experts tend to form an inner circle of rulers. 
The man with mana is bound to come to the top, both because 
his gifts give him a start and because his success is taken as a 
sign that he has the gift. A decisive " moment " in the evolu- 
tion of chiefship is the recognition of hereditary mana, bound 
up as this is with the handing on of ceremonies and cult-objects. 
Invested, as society grows more complex, with a sanctity in- 
creasingly superior to that of the layman,, the priest-king 
becomes the representative of the community as repository 
of its luck, whilst, as controller of all sacred forces that bear 
thereon, he is, as Dr Frazer puts it, " dynamical centre of the 
universe" (The Golden Bough (2nd ed.), i. 233). Only when the 
holy man's duty to preserve his holiness binds him hand and foot 
in a network of taboos does his temporal power tend to devolve 
on a deputy. (3) Food-supply. In accordance with the 
principle of Renovation (see above), the root-idea of the appli- 
cation of religion to economics is not the extorting of boons 
from an unwilling nature, but rather the stimulation of the 
sources of life, so that all beings alike may increase and multiply. 
(4) Food-taking. Meanwhile, the primitive meal is always more 
or less of a sacrament, and there are many food-taboos, the 
significance of which is, however, not so much that certain 
foods are unclean and poisonous as that they are of special 
virtue and must be partaken of solemnly and with circum- 
spection. (5) Kinship. It is hard to say whether the -unit 
of primitive society is the tribe or the group of kinsmen. Both 
are forms of union that are consolidated by means of religious 
usages. Thus in Australia the initiation ceremonies, concerned 
as they partly are with marriage, always an affair between 
the kin-groups, are tribal, whilst the totemic rites are the prime 
concern of the members of the totem clans. The significance 
of a common name and a common blood is immensely enhanced 
by its association with mystic rights and duties, and the pulse 
of brotherhood beats faster. (6) The Family. Side by side 
-with the kin there is -always found the domestic group, but 



the latter institution develops fully only as the former weakens, 
so that the one comes largely to inherit the functions of the 
other, whilst the tribe too in its turn hands over certain interests. 
Thus in process of time birth-rites, marriage-rites, funeral- 
rites, not to mention subordinate ceremonies such as those 
of name-giving and food-taking, become domestic sacraments. 
(7) Sex. Woman, for certain physiological reasons, is always 
for primitive peoples hedged round with sanctity, whilst man 
does all he can to inspire awe of his powers in woman by keep- 
ing religion largely in his own hands. The result, so far as 
woman is concerned, is that, in company with those males 
who are endowed with sacredness in a more than ordinary 
degree, she tends as a sex to lose in freedom as much as she 
gains in respect. (8) Personality. Every one has his modicum 
of innate mana, or at least may develop it in himself by com- 
municating with powers that can be brought into answering 
relation by the proper means. Nagualism, or the acquisition 
of a mystic guardian, is a widely distributed custom, the essence 
of which probably consists in the procuring of a personal name 
having potency. The exceptional man is recognized as having 
mana in a special degree, and a belief thus held at once by 
others and by himself is bound to stimulate his individuality. 
The primitive community is not so custom-bound that per- 
sonality has no chance to make itself felt, and the leader of 
men possessed of an inner fund of inspiration is the wonder- 
worker who encourages all forms of social advance. 

Psychology of the Primitive Attitude towards the Sacred. — We 
are on firmer ground when simply describing the phenomena of 
primitive religion than when seeking to account for these in 
terms of natural law — in whatever sense the conception of 
natural law be applicable to the facts of the mental life of man. 
One thing is certain, namely, that savages stand on virtually 
one footing with the civilized as regards the type of explanation 
appropriate to their beliefs and practices. We have no right to 
refer to " instincts " in the case of primitive man, any more 
at any rate than we have in our own case. A child of civilized 
parents brought up from the first amongst savages is a savage > 
neither more nor less. Though race may count for something 
in the matter of mental endowment — and at least it would seem 
to involve differences in weight of brain — it clearly counts for 
much less than does milieu, to wit, that social environment of 
ideas and institutions which depends so largely for its effectiveness 
on mechanical means of tradition, such as the art of writing. 
The outstanding feature of the mental life of savages known to 
psychologists as " primitive credulity " is doubtless chiefly due 
to sheer want of diversity of suggestiveness in their intellectual 
surroundings. Their notions stick fast because there are no 
competing notions to dislodge them. Society suffers a sort of 
perpetual obsession, and remains self-hypnotized as it were 
within a magic circle of traditional views. A rigid orthodoxy 
is sustained by means of purblind imitation assisted by no little 
persecution. Such changes as occur come about, not in conse- 
quence of a new direction taken by conscious policy, but rather 
in the way that fashions in dress alter amongst ourselves, by 
subconscious, hardly purposive drifting. The crowd rather 
than the individual is the thinking unit. A proof is the 
mysterious rapid extinction of savages the moment that their 
group-life is broken up; they are individually so many lost 
sheep, without self-reliance or initiative. And the thinking 
power of a crowd — that is, a mob, not a deliberative assembly — 
is of a very low order, emotion of a " panicky " type driving it 
hither and thither like a rudderless ship. However, as the 
students of mob-psychology have shown, every crowd tends to 
have its meneur f its mob-leader, the man who sets the cheering 
or starts the running-away. So too, then, with the primitive 
society. Grossly ignorant of all that falls outside " the daily 
round, the common task," they are full of panicky fears in regard 
to this unknown, and the primary attitude of society towards 
it is sheer avoidance, taboo. But the mysterious has another 
face. To the mob the mob-leader is mysterious in his power 
of bringing luck and salvation; to himself also he is a wonder, 
since he wills, and lo ! things happen accordingly. He has 



HIGHER RELIGIONS] 



RELIGION 



67 



ptana, power, and by means of this mana, felt inwardly by 
himself, acknowledged by his fellows, he stems the social impulse 
to run away from a mystery. Not without nervous dread — 
witness the special taboo to which the leader of society is subject 
— he draws near and strives to constrain, conciliate or cajole 
the awful forces with which the life of the group is set about. 
He enters the Holy of Holies; the rest remain without, and are 
more than half afraid of their mediator. In short, from the 
standpoint of lay society, the manipulator of the sacred is 
himself sacred, and shares in all the associations of sacrcd- 
ness. An anthropomorphism which is specifically a " mago- 
morphism " renders the sacred powers increasingly one with the 
governing element in society, and religion assumes an ethico- 
political character, whilst correspondingly authority and law 
are invested with a deeper meaning. 

The Abuse of the Sacred. — Lest our picture of primitive 
religion appear too brightly coloured, a word must be said on 
the perversions to which the exploitation of the sacred is liable. 
Envy, malice and uncharitableness are found in primitive 
society, as elsewhere, and in their behoof the mystic forces are 
not unfrequcntly unloosed by those who know how to do so. 
To use the sacred to the detriment of the community, as does, 
for instance, the expert who casts a spell, or utters a prayer, 
to his neighbour's hurt, is what primitive society understands 
by magic (cf. arungquiltha, above), and anthropology has no 
business to attach any other meaning to the word if it under- 
takes to interpret the primitive point of view. On the other 
hand, if those in authority perpetrate in the name of what their 
society holds sacred, and therefore with its full approval, acts 
that to the modern mind are cruel, silly or revolting, it is bad 
science and bad ethics to speak of vice and degradation, unless 
it can be shown that the community in which these things 
occur is thereby brought nearer to elimination in the struggle 
for existence. As a matter of fact, the earlier and more demo- 
cratic types of primitive society, uncontaminated by our 
civilization, do not present many features to which the modern 
conscience can take exception, but display rather the edifying 
spectacle of religious brotherhoods encouraging themselves by 
mystical communion to common effort. With the evolution 
of rank, however, and the concentration of magico-reb'gious 
power in the hands of certain orders, there is less solidarity 
and more individualism, or at all events more opportunity 
for sectional interests to be pursued at other than critical times; 
whereupon fraud and violence are apt to infect religion. Indeed, 
as the history of the higher religions shows, religion tends in the 
end to break away from secular government with its aristocratic 
traditions, and to revert to the more democratic spirit of the 
primitive age, having by now obtained a clearer consciousness 
of its purpose, yet nevertheless clinging to the inveterate forms 
of human ritual as still adequate to symbolize the consecration 
of life — the quickening of the will to face life earnestly. 

Bibliography. — The number of works dealing with primitive 
religion is endless. The English reader who is more or less new to 
the subject is recommended to begin with E. B. Tylor, Primitive 
Culture (4th ed. f Lond. 1903), and then to proceed to J. G. Frazer, 
The Golden Bough (2nd ed. ( Lond. 1900). The latter author's 
Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship (Lond. 1905) may also 
be consulted. Only second in importance to the above are W. 
Robertson Smith, Lectures on the Religion of the Semites (2nd ed. ( 
Lond. 1904); A. Lang, Myth, Ritual and Religion (2nd ed., Lond. 
1899), and Magic and Religion (Lond. 1902); E. S. Hartland, The 
Legend of Perseus (Lond. 1894-1896) ; F. B. Jevons, An Introduction to 
the History of Religion (2nd ed., 1902); E. Crawley, The Mystic Rose 
CLond. 1902), and The Tree of Life (Lond. 1905). The two last- 
mentioned works perhaps most nearly represent the views taken in 
the text, which are also developed by the present writer in " Pre- 
Animistic Religion," Folk-Lore xi. (1900), " From Spell to Prayer," 
Folk-Lore, xv. (1904), and " Is Taboo a Negative Magic?" Anthropo- 
logical Essays presented to E. B. Tylor (1907); L. R. Farnell, The 
EvoliHion of Religion (1905), follows similar lines. The present writer 
owes something to Goblet d'Alviella, Hibbert Lectures (Lond. 1891), 
and more to H. Hubert and M. Mauss, " Essai sur la nature et la 
fonction du sacrifice," L Annie sociologique, ii. ; and " Esquisse d'une 
theoric g6n6rale de la magie," ibid. vii. If the reader wish to keep 
pace with the output of literature on this vast subject, he will 
find L Annie sociologique (1896 onwards) a wonderfully complete 
bibliographical guide. 



Side by side with works of general theory! first-hand authorities 
should be freely used. To make a selection from these is not easy, 
but the following at least are very important: R. H. Codrington, 
The Melanesians (Oxford, 1891); W. B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, 
The Native Tribes of Central Australia (Lond. 1899); The Northern 
Tribes of Central Australia (Lond. 1904); A. W. Howitt, The Native 
Tribes of South-Eastern Australia (Lond. 1904); A. C. Haddon, 
Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres 
Straits (Cambridge, 1904, vol. v.); A. B. Ellis, The TshuSpeaking 
Peoples oUheGoU Coast (Lond. 1897); The Ewe-Speaking Peoples 
of the Slave Coast (Lond. 1890); The Yoruba-Speaking Peoples 
of the Slave Coast (Lond. 1894); Miss M. H. Kingsley, Travels in 
West Africa (Lond. 1898), and West African Studies (Lond. 1899); 
A. C. Hollis, The Masai (1905); W. Crooke, The North-West Pro- 
vinces of India (Lond. 1897); W. H. R. Rivers, The Todas (1906). 
An immense amount of valuable evidence is to be obtained in the 
Reports of the Bureau of Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, Wash- 
ington. SeeNos. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8,9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19,21,22,23, 
and specially J. O. Dorsey, A Study ofSiouan Cults, in No. 1 1 ; A. C. 
Fletcher, The Hako, in No. 22; and M. C. Stevenson, The ZuUi 



Indians, in No. 23. Though dealing primarily with a more advanced 
culture, J. J. M.deGroot, The Religious System of China (1892-1901), 
will be found to throw much light on primitive ideas. Finally let 
it be repeated that there is offered here nomore than an introduc- 
tory course of standard authorities suitable for the English 
reader. (R. R. M.) 

B. The Higher Religions 

Various phenomena associated with the religions of the 
lower culture will be found discussed in the articles on Animism; 
Fetishism; Magic; Mythology; Prayer; Ritual; Sacrifice; 
and Totemism. In this article religions .are treated 
from the point of view of morphology, and no attempt can be 
made in the allotted limits to connect them with the phases 
of ritual, sociological or ethical development. See the separate 
articles on each religious system, and the separate headings for 
different forms of ritual. 

1. Developments of Animism, — Animism is not, indeed, 
itself a religion; it is rather a primitive kind of philosophy 
which provides the intellectual form for the interpretation 
alike of Man and of Nature. It implies that the first great 
step has been taken for distinguishing between the material 
objects — whether the conscious body, or the rocks, trees and 
animals — and the powers that act in or through them. The 
Zunis of New Mexico, U.S.A., supposed " the sun, moon and 
stars, the sky, earth and sea, in all their phenomena and elements, 
and all inanimate objects as well as plants, animals and men, 
to belong to one great system of all-conscious and interrelated 
life, in which the degrees of relationship seem to be deter- 
mined largely, if not wholly, by the degrees of resemblance." 1 
If the earliest conception is that of an obscure undifferentiated 
animation (panvitalism) , the analysis of the human person into 
body and spirit with the corresponding doctrine of " object- 
souls " {e.g. the tornait or " invisible rulers " of every object 
among the Eskimo) 2 constitutes an important development. 
Matter is no longer animated or self-acting; it is subject to 
the will of an agent which can enter or quit it, perhaps at its 
own pleasure, perhaps at the compulsion of another. The 
transition has usually been effected ages before the higher 
religions come into view; but it has left innumerable traces 
in language and custom. Thus the Vedic hymns, which ex- 
hibit the deposits of so many stages of thought, are founded 
ultimately on the conception of the animation of nature. The 
objects of the visible world are themselves mighty to hurt or 
help. The springs and rivers, the wind, the sun, fire, the 
Earth-Mother, the Sky-Father, are all active powers. The 
animals, domesticated or wild, like the horse or cow, the guardian 
dog, the bird of omen, naturally share tbe same b'fe, and are 
approached with the same invocation. The sacred energy 
is also discerned in the ritual implements, in the stones for 
squeezing the soma-juice, and the sacrificial post to which 
animals were bound; nay, it was even recognized in fabricated 
products like the plough (the " tearer " or "divider"), the 

l F. H. Cushing, on " Zuni Fetiches" in Second Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology, Washington, 1883, p. 9. 

* Dr. Franz Boas, in the Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology, 1888, p. 591. 



68 



RELIGION 



[HIGHER RELIGIONS 



war-car, the drum, quiver, bow and axe. The Earth-Mother 
and Sky-Father are to be found again and again in religions, 
at various stages of development, as co-ordinating conceptions 
which comprehend the universe. 1 Sometimes one is more 
prominent, sometimes the other. In many cases the Sky has 
been already resolved into the visible firmament and its lord 
and owner, like the Yoruban Olorun or the Finnic Ukko. The 
consort of Ukko is Maan-emo, " mother of the earth," or maan 
emant'd, " mistress of the earth." But the rare expression 
maan-emd, " Mother-earth," still used in the ancient lays, 2 
points to the older type of belief in the animation of the pro- 
ductive soil. So the Peruvians designated the Earth as Pacha- 
mama, " mother of (all) things." In Egypt the relation was 
curiously reversed; the earth-god Keb was the husband of 
Nut, the sky, represented sometimes as a woman, overarching 
the earth and supported on hands and feet, sometimes as a 
gigantic cow, upheld on the outstretched hands of Shu, the 
atmosphere. 3 When earth and sky were still unseparated, 
Shu thrust himself between them and raised Nut to the heights. 
So in the New Zealand myth, Rangi and Papa, Sky and Earth, 
who once clave together in the darkness, were rent asunder 
by the forest-god Tane-mahuta, who forced up the sky far 
above him. 4 The most elaborate presentment of this mode 
of thought is to be seen in the organized animism of the ancient 
state religion of China, where the supreme power is lodged 
in the living sky (Tien). 6 Tien was originally the actual firma- 
ment; In the Shi-King it is addressed in prayer as " great 
and wide," as " vast and distant "; it is even " blue " (Pt. II. 
v. 6, s). So it is the ancestor of all things; and Heaven and 
Earth are the father and mother of the world. From the 
imperial point of view the sky bore the name of Ti, " ruler," 
or Shang Ti, " supreme ruler " (emperor) ; and later com- 
mentators readily took advantage of this to discriminate between 
the visible expanse and the indwelling spirit, producing a 
kind of Theism. But the older conception still holds its own. 
" Why " (says Edkins, Religion in China, 95), " they have been 
often asked, should you speak of those things which are dead 
matter, fashioned from nothing by the hand of God, as living 
beings? And why not? they have replied. The Sky pours 
down rain and sunshine; the Earth produces corn and grass. 
We see them in perpetual movement, and we therefore say 
that they are living." Tien Ti, Fu Mu, " Heaven and Earth, 
Father and Mother," are conjoined in common speech, and are 
the supreme objects of imperial worship. The great altar 
to Heaven, round in shape like the circuit of the sky, and 
white as the symbol of the light principle (Yang), stands in 
the southern suburb of Peking in the direction of light and 
heat. The altar to the Earth is dark and square, on the north 
side of the city, the region of ym, the principle of cold and 
gloom. Associated with the Sky are tablets to the sun and 
moon, the seven stars of the Great Bear, the five planets, 
the twenty-eight constellations, and all the stars of heaven; 
tablets to clouds, rain, wind and thunder being placed next 
to that of the moon. With the Earth are grouped the tablets 
to the five lofty Mountains, the three Hills of perpetual peace 
and the four Seas, the five celebrated Mountains and the four 
great Rivers. 6 The ancient ritual (Chow Li) carefully graded 
the right of sacrifice from the viceroys of provinces down to 
the humblest district-superintendent who offered to the spirits 
of his district, the hills, lakes and grains. With these spirits 
ranged in feudal order in two vast groups beneath Heaven and 
Earth is associated a third class, those of human beings. They 
are designated by the same name, shin; and they are in- 

1 The Japanese name is Ame-lsuchi, " heaven and earth," a trans- 
lation of the Chinese ten-chi, Aston, Shinto (1905), p. 35. 

2 Castr&i, Finnische Mythologie, p. 86.. 

1 Erma n , Handbook of Egyptian Religion ( 1 907) , pp. 8 , 1 2 . 

4 Sir George Grey, Polynesian Mythology (1855), pp. 1-4. 

6 The English * Heaven " has acquired a quasi-personal mean- 
ing, and is usually employed as its equivalent, but, like the Jewish 
use (e.g. Luke xv. 18), tends to carry too definite religious associa- 
tions with it. . 

•Blodget, on "The Chinese Worship of Heaven and Earth, 
Journ. of the American Oriental Society, xx. p. 58 ff. 



extricably mingled with the operations of nature. So in the 
Vedic hymns the departed " Fathers " inhabit the three zones- 
of earth, air and sky; they are invoked with the streams and 
mountains of this lower earth, as well as with the dawns and 
the sky it$elf; even cosmic functions are ascribed to them; 
and they adorn the heaven with stars. The Chinese concep- 
tion of the Shin under the name of Shin-to (Chinese tad) or 
" spirits'-way " profoundly influenced Japanese thought from 
the 6th century a.d. onwards; and the great Shinto revival of 
the 18th century brought the doctrine again into prominence. 
The Japanese Kami are the " higher " powers, the super i, 
conceived as acting through nature on the one hand and govern- 
ment on the other. Just as the emperor is kami, and provincial 
officers of rank, so also mountains, rivers, the sea, thunder, 
winds, and even animals like the tiger, wolf or fox, are all kami. 7 
The spirits of the dead also become kami, of varying character 
and position; some reside in the temples built in their honour; 
some hover near their tombs; but they are constantly active,, 
mingling in the vast multitude of agencies which makes every 
event in the universe, in the language of Motowori (1 730-1 801), 
the act of the Kami. They direct the changing seasons, the 
wind and the rain; and the good and bad fortunes of individuals,, 
families and states are due to them. 8 Everywhere from birth 
to death the entire life of man is encompassed and guided 
by the Kami, which are sometimes reckoned at 8,000,000 in 
number. 

2. Transition to Polytheism. — In such ways does the Poly-* 
daemonism of early faith survive in the modern practice of 
religion. The process of enrolling the spirits of the dead in the 
ranks of what may be more or less definitely called " gods " 
may be seen in the popular usages of India at the present day,, 
or traced in the pages of the Peking Gazette under the direction 
of the Board of Rites, one of the most ancient branches of 
Chinese administration. Whether the higher polytheisms were 
produced in this fashion out of the cultus of the dead, may, 
however, be doubted. Many influences have doubtless contri- 
buted," and different races have followed different lines of 
development. No definite succession like the series of ages 
marked by the use of stone, bronze and iron can be clearly 
marked. But there must always have been some correspondence 
between the stages of social advance (or, in certain cases, of 
degeneration) and the religious interpretation of the world. 
The formation of clans and tribes, the transitions from the 
hunting to the pastoral life, and from the pastoral to the 
agricultural — the struggle with forest and swamp, the clearings 
for settlement, the protection of the dwelling-place, the safety 
of flocks and herds, the production of corn, — the migration of 
peoples, the founding of colonies, the processes of conquest, 
fusion, and political union — have all reacted on the elaboration 
of the higher polytheisms, before bards and poets, priesthoods 
and theological speculators, began to systematize and regulate 
the relations of the gods. Certain phases of thought may be 
more or less clearly indicated ; certain elements of race, of 
local condition, of foreign contact, may be distinguished with 
more or less historic probability; but no single key can explain , 
all the wide diversity of phenomena. Broadly speaking it 
may be said that a distinction may be drawn between " spirits "" 
and " gods," but it is a distinction of degree rather than of kind,, 
obvious enough at the upper end, yet shading off into manifold 
varieties of resemblance in the lower forms. Some writers 
only recognize friendly agencies as gods; but destructive 
powers like the volcano, or the lords of the underworld, cannot 
be regarded as the protectors of the life of man, yet they seem in. 
many mythologies to attain the full personalised stature of 
gods with definite names. Early Greek religion recognized 
a class of gods of Aversion and Riddance, imoTpbiraiot and 
diroiro/wraioi. Neither the spirit nor the god is conceived as 

* So the epithet '& might be applied in Hebrew to men of might, 
to lofty cedars, or mountains of unusual height, as well as to the 
Supreme Being. ....„, 

8 See E. M. Satow, " Revival of Pure Shinto," Trans. As. Soc. 
of Japan, vol. iii. pt. 1 (1875), Appendix, p. 26. 



HIGHER .RELIGIONS) 



RELIGION 



69 



immaterial. They can take food, though the crudest form of 
this "belief soon passes into the more refined notion that they 
consume the impalpable essence of the meals provided for them. 
The ancient Indian ritual for the sacrifice to the Fathers required 
the officiating priest to turn away with bated breath that he 
might not see the spirits engaged upon the rice-balls laid out 
for them. The elastic impalpable stuff of the spirit-body is 
apparently capable of compression or expansion, just as Athena 
can transform herself into a bird. The spirits can pass swiftly 
through the air or the water; they can enter the stone or the 
tree, the animal or the man. The spirit-land of the Ibo on the 
Lower Niger had its rivers, forests or hills, its towns and roads, 
as upon earth: 1 the spirits of the Mordvinian mythology, 
created by ChkaT, not only resembled men, they even possessed 
the faculty of reproduction by multiplication. 2 The Finns 
ascribed a haltia or genius to each object, which could, how- 
ever, guard other individuals of the same species. This is the 
beginning of the species-god, and implies a step of thought 
comparable to the production in language of general* terms. 
These protecting spirits were free beings, having form and 
shape, but not individualized; while above them rose the higher 
deities like the forest-god Tapio and his maiden Hillervo, 
protectress of herds, or Ahto the water-god who gradually took 
the place of Vesi, the actual element originally conceived as 
itself divine, and ruled over the spirits of lakes and rivers, wells 
and springs. 3 The Finns came to apply to the upper gods the 
term Yumala which originally denoted the living sky; the 
Samoyedes made the same use of Num, and the Mongols of 
Tengri. 4 Above the innumerable wongs of the Gold Coast rose 
Nyongmo, the Sky-god, giver of the sunshine and the rain. 
The Yoruba-speaking peoples generalized the spirits of mountain 
and hill into Oke, god of heights; and the multitude of local 
sea-gods on the western half of the slave coast was fused into 
one god of the Ocean, Olokun. 6 The Babylonian theology 
recognized a Zi or " spirit " in both men and gods, somewhat 
resembling the Egyptian " double " or ka; spirits are classed as 
spirits of heaven and spirits of earth; but the original identity 
of gods and spirits may be inferred from the fact that the same 
sign stands before the names of both. Out of the vast mass of 
undifferentiated powers certain functional deities appear; and 
the Kami of Japan to-day who preside over the gilds and crafts 
of industry and agriculture, over the trees and grasses of the 
field, the operations of the household, and even the kitchen- 
range, the saucepan, the rice-pot, the well, the garden, the 
scarecrow and the privy, have their counterparts in the lists of 
ancient Rome, the indigitamenla over whose contents Tertullian 
and Augustine made merry. The child was reared under the 
superintendence of Educa and Potina.' Abeona and Adeona 
taught him to go out and in. Cuba guarded him when he was 
old enough to exchange a cradle for a bed. Ossipaga strengthened 
his hones; Levdna helped him to get up, and Siaiina to stand. 7 
There were "powers protecting the threshold, the door and the 
hinge: and the duties of the house, the farm, the mill, had each 
its appointed guardian. But such powers were hardly persons. 
The settler who went into the woods might know neither the 
name nor the sex .of the indwelling numen; "si deus si dea," 
" sive mas sive femina," ran the old formulae. 8 So the Baals 

1 Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes (1906), p. 186. 

2 Mainof, " Les Restes de la mythologie mordvine," Journal de la 
Soc. Finno-Ougrienne, v. (1889), p. 102. 

8 Castr6n, Finn. Mythol. pp. 92 ff., 72. 
4 Ibid. pp. 7, 14, 17,24. 

6 A. B. Ellis, The Yoruba-speaking Peoples (1894), P- 2 $9- 

8 Jastrow, Religion of Babylonia and Assyria (1898), p. 181. The 
Zufiis applied the term Grh&i " All-Life " or " the Beings " to all 
supernatural beings, men, animals, plants, and many objects in 
nature regarded as personal existences, as well as to the higher 
anthropomorphic powers known as " Finishers or Makers of the 
Paths of Life," Report of Bureau of Ethnol. (1883), p. n. On the 
distinction between " gods " and n spirits," cf. Ed. Meyer, Gesch. 
desAlterthumSy 2nd ed. Band i. erste Haelfte (1907), p. 97 ff. 

7 Tert. De Anima, 39 Aug. De Civ, Dei, iv. 1 1, &c. 

8 On the Dei Certi and the Dei Incerti, see von Domaszewski 
in the Archivfur Religionswiss., x. (1907), pp. 1-17. 



of the Semitic peoples constituted a group of powers fertilizing 
the land with water-springs, the givers of corn and wine and oil, 
out of which under £onditions of superior political development 
a high-god like the Tyrian Baal, the majestic City-King, might 
be evolved. The Celts who saw the world peopled with the 
spirits of trees and animals, rocks, mountains, springs and rivers, 
grouped them in classes like the Dervonnae (oak-spirits), the 
Niskai (water-spirits), the Proximae, the Matronae (earth- 
goddesses) 9 and the like. Below the small band of Teutonic 
divinities were the elves of forest and field, the water-elves or 
nixes and spirits of house and home. The Vedic deities of the 
nobler sort, the shining devas, the asuras (the " breathers " or 
living, perhaps to be identified with the Scandinavian cesir) 
rose above a vast multitude of demonic powers, many of them 
doubtless derived from the local customs and beliefs of the native 
races whom the immigrant Aryans subdued. In the earliest 
literary record of Greek religion Homer distinguishes between 
the 0e6s and the 8aifjwv, the personalized god and the nutnen 
or divine power. In Homer the element of time is definitely 
recognized. The gods are the " Immortals." They arc born, and 
their parentage is known, but they do not die. Zeus is not 
self-existent in the sense in which the Indian Brahma is 
svayambhUy but certain questions have been by implication 
asked and answered, which the demonology of the savage has 
not yet raised. But behind Homer stretches the dim scene of 
pre-Hellenic religion, and the conflict of elements " Pelasgic," 
oriental and Hellenic, out of which the Homeric religion emerged y 
and beneath the Homeric religion how many features of the* 
religion of ghosts and nature-spirits survived in popular usage 
and the lower cults I 10 When Herodotus (ii. 53) tried to trace 
the origin of the beliefs around him, he found his way back to 
an age before Hesiod or Homer, when the gods were nameless. 
To that age the traditions preserved at Dodona bore witness; 
and the designations of special groups like the Oeol 
ixkyiaroiy Oeol fxeikixtoL, Beol 7rpa£i5Uai, or, possibly, the 
Venerable Goddesses (deal vefjivai) of Athens, point to a mode 
of thought when the divine Powers were not definitely in- 
dividualized. They are just at the point of transition from the 
ranks of spirits to the higher classes of the gods. As they had 
no names, they had no relations. Nor had any images yet been 
made of them. They were associated with hallowed trees, 
with sacred stones and pillars, out of which came the square 
rough-hewn Hermae which were anointed with oil like the sacred 
stone attributed by legend to Jacob at Bethel. 11 By what 
processes the Hellenic immigration introduced new deities and 
the Greek pantheon was slowly formed, can only be conjecturally 
traced with the help of archaeology. But Herodotus and 
Aeschylus were well aware that the religion of Greece had not 
been uniformly the same; and the gods whom they knew had 
been developed out of intercourse with other peoples and the 
succession of races in the obscure and distant past. 

3. Polytheism. — The lower and unprogressive religions 
practically remain in the polydaemonistic stage, though not 
without occasionally feeling the stimulus of contact with higher 
faiths, like some of the West African peoples in the presence 
of the Mahommedan advance. Among the more progressive 
races, on the other hand, continual processes of elevation and 
decline may be observed, and the activities of the greater gods 
are constantly being enriched with new functions. Personal 
or social experiences of the satisfaction of some desire or escape 
from some danger are referred to some particular deity. Ele- 
ments of race-consciousness help to shape the outlook on nature 
or life: and slight differences of linguistic use in the coining of 
descriptive terms sometimes lead to the multiplication of divine 
forms. Exacter observation of nature; closer attention to its 
contrasts of life and death, or light and darkness, or male and 

• Cf. the groups of " Mothers " in modem India, of various origins, 
Crooke, Popular Religion and Folklore (2), i. 1 1 1. 

10 Cf. Andrew Lang, Myth, Ritual and Religion ; and Miss Harrison, 
Prolegomena to the Study ofGreek Religion. 

11 Cf. A. J. Evans, on The Mycenean Tree and Pillar Cult (1901), 
and Sir W. M. Ramsay, " Religion of Greece and Asia Minor," in 
Hastings' Diet, of the Bible, extra vol. 



70 



RELIGION 



[HIGHER RELIGIONS 



female; the distinction between its permanent objects, and its 
occasional or recurring operations; the recognition that behind 
sudden manifestations of power, like the thunder-storm, there 
are steady forces and continuous cosmic agencies at work — lead 
to the gradual rise of the higher deities. And from the social 
side the development of law, the influence of city life, the 
formation of priesthoods, the connexion of particular deities 
with the fortunes of dynasties or the vicissitudes of nations, 
the processes of migration, of conquest and political fusion, the 
deportations of vanquished peoples, even the sale of slaves to 
distant lands and the growth of trade and travel, all contribute 
to the processes which expand and modify different pantheons, 
and determine the importance of particular deities. In the 
midst of the bewildering variety, where all types co-exist 
together and act and react on each other, it is impossible to do 
more than point out some obvious groups receiving their special 
forms chiefly from the side (i) of nature, (2) of human life, 
and (3) from moral or theological speculation. Divine persons, 
objects or powers, connected with ritual, are not here considered, 
such as the Brahman priests who claimed to be manushyadevah 
(human-gods), or the sacred soma-juice which grew by strange 
analogies into a mysterious element, linking together heaven 
and earth. 

I. On the side of Nature the lowest rank (1) seems to belong 
to what Usener has designated " momentary " or " occasional " 
gods. 1 They embody for the time being a vague consciousness 
of the divine, which is concentrated for some single act into an 
outward object, like a warrior's spear or the thunderbolt, 2 or 
the last sheaf of corn into # which the Corn-Mother has been 
driven. 3 (2) Above these, to use again Usener's nomenclature, 4 
are the " special " or '" functional " gods, " departmental 
gods," as Mr Lang has called them. Such were some of the 
deities of the Indigitamenta already compared with the Japanese 
Kami. Among them, for example, were twelve deities of 
ploughing and harvest operations, who were invoked with 
Tellus and Ceres. (3) Another class may be seen in the species- 
deities previously named; the Samoan gods which could become 
incarnate as a heron or an owl, did not die with particular birds. 
A dead owl was not a dead god; he yet lived in all other owls. 5 

(4) The worship of trees, plants and animals is a particular 
phase of the wider series of nature-cults, only named here because 
of its frequency and its obvious survivals in some of the higher 
polytheisms, where, as in Egypt, the Apis bulls were* worshipped; 
or where, as in Mesopotamia, the great gods are partly symbolized 
by animal forms; or where, as in Israel, Yahweh might be 
represented as a bull; or where, as in Greece, such epithets as 
Dendrites and Endendros preserved traces of the association 
of Dionysus and Zeus with vegetation; while sacred animals 
like the serpents of Aesculapius were preserved in the temples. 8 

(5) The higher elemental gods sometimes, like the sun, as the 
Indian Surya, the Egyptian Re, the Babylonian Shamash 
(Samas), the Greek Helios, retain their distinct connexion with 
the visible object. It was naturally more easy for a relatively 
spiritual worship to gather round a god whose name did not 
immediately suggest a familiar body. No one ever thought of 
confessing sin, for instance, to a river. But the daily survey 
of the sun (occasionally also the function of the moon as measurer 
of time), together with his importance for life, secured him a 
high moral rank; and R£, united with the Theban Ammon, 
became (under the New Empire) the leading god of Egypt for 
a thousand years, " He who hath made all, the sole One with 
many hands." Other deities, like Zeus, rise to the head of a 
monarchical polytheism, in which their physical base is almost, 

1 Gotternamen, Bonn, 1896, p. 279 ff. But cp. Dr Farnell's 
essay " On the Place of the Sonder-Gotter in Greek Polytheism," in 
Anthropological Essays presented to Edward Burnett Tylor (1907), 
p. 81. 

* Ibid. pp. 285, 286. 

* Frazer, The Golden Bough (2), ii. 170-1. 
4 Gotternamen, p. 75. 

' 5 Turner, Samoa, 1884, p. 21. 

8 Cf. de Visser, Die nicht Menschen-Gestaltigen Gotter der Griechen 
(Leiden, 1903). 



if not quite, forgotten in cosmic and moral grandeur. The gods 
are often arranged in groups, three, seven and twelve Being 
frequent numbers. Egyptian summaries recognized gods in 
the sky, on earth and in the water; gods of the north and 
south, the east and west, gods of the field and the cities. Indian 
theologians classified them in three zones, earth, air and sky. 
Babylonian speculation embraced the world in a triad of divine 
powers, Anu the god of heaven, Bel of earth and Ea of the deep; 
and these became the symbols of the order of nature, the divine 
embodiments of physical law. 7 Sometimes the number three is 
reached by the distribution of the universe into sky, earth and 
underworld, and the gods of death claim their place as the 
rulers of the world to come. Among these deities all kinds of 
relationships are displayed; consorts must be provided for the 
unwedded, and the family conception, as distinct from the regal, 
presents a divine father, mother and child. The Ibani in 
Southern Nigeria recognized Adum the father-god, Okoba the 
mother-god and Eberebo the son-god. 8 In Egypt, Osiris, 
Isis and Horus proved an influential type. Perhaps at a 
relatively earlier stage maternity alone is emphatically asserted, 
as in the figure of the Cretan Mother, productive without 
distinctly sexual character. 9 Or, again, maternity disappears, 
while parenthood survives, and causation is embodied in a 
universal " Father of all that are and are to be," like the Indian 
Brahma in the days of Gotama the Buddha." 10 

II. On the human side polytheism receives fresh groups in 
connexion with the development of social institutions and 
national feeling. (1) In the family the hearth-fire is the scene 
of the protecting care of deity; the gods of the household watch 
over its welfare. Each Roman householder had. his Genius, the 
women their Junones. These stood at a higher level than the 
" occasional gods," having permanent functions of supervision. 
(2) From the household a series of steps embodied the divine 
power in higher forms for social and political ends. Hestia 
presided over cities; there was even a common Hestia for all 
Greece. The fravashi or ideal type, the genius of both men and 
gods in the Zend Avesta (possibly connected originally with the 
eultus of the dead n ) , rises in successive ranks from the worshipper's 
own person through the household, the village, the district' and 
the province, up to the throne of Ahura himself. 12 The Chinese 
Shin were similarly organized; so (less elaborately) were the 
Japanese Kami? 3 and the Roman lares, the old local land-gods, 
found their highest co-ordinating term in the Lares Augusti, 
just as the Genius was extended to the legion and the colony, 
and finally to Rome itself. (3) In the case of national deities 
the tie between god and people is peculiarly close, as when 
Yahweh of Israel is pitted against Chemosh of Ammon (Judges 
xi. 24) . The great gods of Greece, in their functions as " saviours " 
and city-guardians, acquire new moral characters, and become 
really different gods, though they retain the old names. Ashur 
rises into majestic sovereignty as the " Ruler of all the gods," 
the supreme religious form of Assyrian sway: when the empire 
falls beneath the revived power of Babylon, he fades away and 
disappears. (4) The earthly counterpart of the heavenly 
monarch is the divine king, who may be traced back in Egypt, 
for example, to the remotest antiquity, 14 and who survives to-day 
among the civilized powers in the emperor of Japan (anciently 
Arahito-gami, "incarnate Kami"). "To the end of time," 

7 Jastrow, ReL of Babylonia, p. 432. 

8 Leonard, The Lower Niger and its Tribes, p. 354. 
g Cf. Farnell, Cults oj Greece ', iii. 295. 

10 Dtgha Nikaya, i. 18. 

11 This is denied by Tiele, Religion im Alter turn, tr. Gehrich, ii. 
(1898), p. 259. 

12 Cf. Yasna, >lxxi. 18 fS.B.E. xxxi. p. 331 ; and Soderblom's essay 
in the Rev. de Vhist. des religions, xxxix. (1899), pp. 229, 373. 

18 Hirata's morning prayer in the last century included 800 
myriads of celestial kami, 800 myriads of ancestral kami, the 1500 
myriads to whom are consecrated the great and small temples in 
all provinces, all islands, and all places of the great land of eight 
islands, &c. 

14 Moret, Du caractere religieux de la royaute pharaonique (1902). 
For instances in the lower culture see Frazer, Golden Bough (2), 
i. 140 ff. 



HIGHER RELIGIONS] 



RELIGION 



7? 



said Motowori (18th century), " the Mikado is the child of 
the Sun-goddess." (5) The dead hero (historical or 
mythic) signalizes his power by gracious saving acts; and 
Heracles, Asclepius, Amphiaraus, and others pass into the 
ranks of the gods, which are thus continually recruited from 
below. 

III. A third great group rises out of the sentiments and 
affections of man, or the moral energies which he sees working 
in human life. (1) The Vedic Craddha, "faith," the Greek 
Metameleia, " repentance," 1 the Latin Spes, and a band of other 
figures, represent the dispositions of the heart; Nemesis and 
Nike and Concordia and their kin belong to a somewhat different 
sphere, the divine powers avenging, conquering, harmonizing 
the counterparts of the " departmental " gods in the field of 
moral agencies. (2) Over these theological speculation erects 
a few lofty and impressive forms; sometimes below the highest, 
like Vohu Mano, " the Good Mind " of Ahura Mazda; or the 
Bodhisattva Avalokitcgvara, who vowed not to enter into final 
peace till every creature had received the saving truth; some- 
times supreme, like Brahma or Prajapati (" lord of creatures ") 
in the early Brahmanic theology; or Adi Buddha, or the 
Zervan Akarana, " boundless time," of a kind of Persian 
gnosticism; or the Beds (nf/taros whose worship appears among 
other syncretistic cults of the Roman empire. 

4. The Order of Nature. — Polytheism is here on the way to 
monotheism, and this tendency receives significant support 
from the recognition of an order in nature which is the ground 
and framework of social ethics. Not only does a sky-god like 
Varuna, or a sun-god like the Babylonian Shamash, survey all 
human things, and take cognizance of the evil-doer, but the daily 
course of the world is itself the expression of an intellectual and 
moral power. In the Chinese combination of Heaven and Earth 
as the parents and nourishers of all things, the energy and 
action lie with Tien, Earth being docile and receptive. Tien 
is intelligent and all-observing, and its " sincerity " or stead- 
fastness, displayed in the courses of the sun and moon and the 
succession of the seasons, becomes the basis of right human 
conduct, personal and social. The " way " of Heaven, the 
" course " of Heaven, the " lessons " of Heaven, the law or 
" decree " (ming) of Heaven, are constantly cited as the pattern 
for the emperor and his subjects. This conception is even 
reflected in human nature: " Heaven in giving birth to the 
multitude of the people, to every faculty and relationship affixed 
its laws " (Shi King, III. iii. 6; cf. IV. iii. 2, tr. Legge), and the 
" Grand Unity " forms the source of all moral order (Li Ki, in 
Sacred Books of the East, xxvii. p. 387). Indian thought pre- 
sented this Order in a semi-personal form. The great elemental 
gods imposed their laws (dhdman, dharman, vrata) on the 
visible objects of nature, the flow of rivers, the march of the 
heavenly bodies across the sky. But the idea of Law was 
generalized in the figure of Rita (what is " fitted " or " fixed "; 
or the " course " or " path " which is traversed), whose Zend 
equivalent asha shows that the conception had been reached 
before the separation of the Eastern Aryans produced the 
migrations into India and Iran. 2 In the Rig Veda the gods 
(even those of storm) are again and again described as "born 
from the Rita," or born in it, according to it, or of it. Even 
Heaven and Earth rejoice in the womb or lap of the Rita. In 
virtue of the mystic identity between the cosmic phenomena 
and sacrifice, Rita may be also viewed as the principle of the 
cultus; and from that sphere it passes into conduct and 
acquires the meaning of morality and is equated with what is 
" true." The fundamental idea remains the same in the Zend 
Asha, its philological counterpart, but it is applied with a 
difference. Its form is more personal, for Asha is one of the six 
Holy Immortals round the throne of Ahura Mazda (Auramazda). 
In the primeval conflict between the powers of good and evil, 
the Bounteous Spirit chose Asha, the Righteous Order which 

1 Worshipped at Argos. Usener, Gotternamen, p. 366. 

2 Cf. Max MuIIer, Lectures on the Origin and Growth of Religion 
(Hibbert Lect., 1878), v., and the Vedic treatises of Ludwig, Ber- 
gaigne and Wallis. 



knit the world together and maintained the stars.' The im- 
mediacy of the relation between Ahura and Asha is implied 
in the statements that Ahura created Asha and that he dwells 
in the paths which proceed from Asha; and when he created 
the inspired word of Reason, Asha consented with him in his 
deed. In its ritual form Asha becomes the principle of sacrifice, 
and hence of holiness, first ritual and then moral. Like Rita, 
it rises into an object of worship, and in its most exalted aspect 
(Asha vahista, the " best " Asha, most excellent righteousness) 
it is identified with Ahura himself, being fourth among his 
sacred names (Ormazd Yasht, § 7; S.B.E. xxiii. p. 25). 
Egyptian speculation, in like manner, impersonated the con- 
ceptions of physical and moral order as two sides of a funda- 
mental unity in the goddess Maat. Derived from the verb tn&, 
" to stretch out," her name denoted the ideas of right and rule, 
and covered the notions of order, law, justice and truth, which 
remained steadfast and unalterable. Mythologically she was 
the daughter (or the eye) of the sun-god Re; but she became 
Lady of Heaven and Queen of Earth, and even Lady of the 
land of the West, the mysterious habitation of the dead. Each 
of the great gods was said to be lord or master of Maat; but 
from another point of view she " knew no lord or master," and 
the particular quality of deity was expressed in the phrase 
anx em maat, " living by Maat," which was applied to the gods 
of the physical world, the sun and moon, the days and hours, 
as well as to the divine king. She was solemnly offered by the 
sovereign to his god; and the deity replied by laying her within 
the heart of his worshipper "to manifest her everlastingly 
before the gods." So in the famous scene of the weighing of the 
soul, which first appears pictorially under the New Empire, she 
introduces the deceased before the forty-two assessors of the 
heavenly judge, Osiris, and presides over the scale in which his 
actions and life are weighed. From the zenith to the realm 
of the departed she is the "queen of all gods and goddesses." 4 
The Hellenic polytheism of Homer and Hesiod is already at 
work upon similar ideas, and a whole group of mythic per- 
sonifications slowly rises into view representing different phases 
of the same fundamental conception. Themis (root 0e=Sanskr. 
dha, as in dhdman) appears in Homer as the embodiment of 
what is fit or right; 6 she convenes or dismisses assemblies, she 
even keeps order at the banquet of the gods. Next, Hesiod 
supplies a significant biography. She is the daughter of Ouranos 
and Gaia; and after Metis she becomes the bride of Zeus. 8 
Pindar describes her as born in a golden car from the primeval 
Oceanus, source of all things, to the sacred height of Olympus 
to be the consort of Zeus the saviour; and she bears the same 
august epithet, as the symbol of social justice and the refuge 
for the oppressed. 7 Law was thus the spouse of the sovereign 
of the sky, but Aeschylus identified her with the Earth 
(worshipped at Athens as Ge-Themis), not only the kindly 
Mother, but the goddess who bound herself by fixed rules or 
laws of nature and life. 8 For the cultus of the earth as the 
source of fertility was associated with the maintenance of the 
family, with the operations of agriculture and the social order 
of marriage. So Themis became the mother of the seasons; 
the regular sequence of blossom and fruit was her work; and 
Good Order, Justice and Peace were her offspring. 9 By such 
conceptions the Hellenic polytheism was moralized; the 
physical character of the greater gods fell into the background, 
and the sculptor's art came to the aid of the poet by completely 
enduing them with personality. 

8 Yasna, xxx. 5; Sacred Books of the East f xxxi. p. 30; cf. pp. 44, 
51 1 248. 

* Cf. Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, p. 119; Brugsch, Rel. und MythoL, 
p. 477; Wiedemann, Ann. du Muste Guimet, x. p. 561; Budge, 
Gods of Egypt, i. p. 416. 

* Cf. Aids Qetttares, Od. xvi. 403 ; cf. Apollo, Horn, Hymn. 394. 
•Theog. 135, 901. 

7 Fr. 6, 7 ; 01. viii. 29. 

8 Farnell, however, supposes that Ge acquired the cult-appellative 
through her prophetic character (Cults of t)te Greek States, iii. p. 12). 
The union of Zeus and Themis is, then, a later equivalent of the 
marriage of Zeus and Earth (ibid. p. 14). 

9 Paus. v. 17; Hes. Theog. 901 ; Pindar, 01. xiii. 6; ix. 26. 



72 



RELIGION 



[HIGHER RELIGIONS 



5. Transition lo Monotheism.— From the higher Polytheism 
an easy step leads to some form of Monotheism. The transition 
may be "effected in various ways. Max Muller observed the 
Vedic poets addressing themselves to the several objects of 
their devotion, as if each occupied the field alone. Varuna or 
Indra was for the time being the only god within the worshipper's 
view; and to this mode of thought he gave the name Heno- 
theism. 1 It obviously reappears elsewhere, as it is the natural 
attitude of prayer, and may be seen in the pious homage of 
the pilgrims to the Virgin of Loretto or Einsiedeln. Pfleiderer 
employed the word to denote a relative monotheism like that 
of the early religion of Israel, whose teachers demanded that 
the nation should worship but one god, Yahweh, but did not 
deny the existence of other gods for other peoples. Yet once 
again the term has been applied to characterize a whole group 
of religions, like the Indo-Germanic, which are ultimately 
founded on the unity of the divine nature in a plurality of 
divine persons. A designation of such doubtful meaning it 
seems better (with Chantepie de la Saussaye) to abandon. But 
the unifying process may advance along different lines. The 
deities of different local centres may be identified; many such 
combinations took place in Egypt, and Isis in late days served 
to her votaries as the unitary principle which appeared in one 
figure after another of whole pantheons. Again, the gods may 
be viewed as a collective totality, like the " All-gods " of the 
Vedic poets, or as at Olympia where there was a " common 
altar for all the gods" (cf. the frequent Roman dedication in 
later days, " Jovi optimo maximo caeterisque dis immortalibus "). 
Or the relation between the inferior deities and the most exalted 
may be conceived politically and explained by Tertullian's 
formula, " Imperium penes unum, officia penes multos." One 
particular god may be eminent enough, like Zeus, to rise above 
all others, and supply cultivated thought with a name for the 
supreme power; and this may be strengthened by the national 
motive as in the case of Israel. Or philosophic theology may 
penetrate to an abstract conception of deity, like the Babylonian 
'iluth, or the Vedic devatva and asuratva; and some seer may 
have the courage and insight to formulate the principle that 
" the great asuratva of the devas is one " (R.V. iii. 55. 1). " The 
One with many names " was recognized alike in India and in 
Greece; " icoKKuv ovojjlcltcov fiop<t>ii /uct," says Aeschylus, almost 
in the words of the Vedic poet. 2 Historians have usually 
recognized only three monotheistic religions, Judaism, Chris- 
tianity and Islam. The Christian apologists of the 2nd 
century, however, found plenty of testimony to their doctrine 
of the unity of God in the writings of Greek poets and philo- 
sophers ; it was a commonplace in the revival under the 
Empire; and among the group of religions embraced under the 
name Buddhism more than one form must be ranked as mono- 
theistic. The idealist philosophy of the Prajna Paramita in the 
system of the " Great Vehicle " declared that " every pheno- 
menon is the manifestation of mind " (Beal, Catena, p. 303). 
In the " Lotus of the Good Law " (S.B.E. xxi.) the Buddha is 
the " Father of the World," " Self-born " or Uncreate (like the 
eternal Brahma of the Hindu theology), the protector of all 
creatures, the Healer (Saviour) of the sickness of their sins. 
These types have reappeared in Japan. Nichiren taught a 
philosophical monism in the 13th century which is the basis of 
a vigorous sect at the present day; and the " True Sect of the 
Pure Land;" founded by his older contemporary Shin-ran, and 
now the most numerous, wealthy and powerful of the Buddhist 
denominations, has dropped the original Gotama altogether out 
of sight, and permits worship to Amida alone, the sublime 
figure of " Boundless Light," whose saving power is appro- 
priated by faith. Here is a monotheism of a definite and plear- 
cut type, arising apparently by spontaneous development apart 
from any external impulse. 8 On the other hand, the mqno- 

1 Or Kathenotheism, a term which did not succeed in gaining 
permanent support, Hibbert Lect. t p. 271. 

J R. V. i. 164. 46, " Men call him lndra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni. . . . 
Poets name variously what is but one." 

* Cf. Carpenter, " Japanese Buddhism," in Hibbert Journal, 
April 1906, p. 522. 



theism of Judaism was subject to serious qualifications. An 
exuberant demonology admitted all kinds of interfering causes 
in the field of human life. Above man on earth rose rank after 
rank of angels in the seven heavens. These were of course 
created, but they were in their turn the agents of the phenomena 
of nature, " the angels of the spirit of fire and the angels of the 
spirit of the winds, and the angels of the spirits of the clouds and 
of darkness and of snow and of hail and of hoarfrost, and the 
angels of the voices and of the thunder and of the lightning, and 
the angels of the spirits of cold and of heat, and of winter and of 
spring and of autumn and of summer " (Jubilees, tr. R. H. 
Charles, ii. 2). These powers are of a well-marked animistic 
type, and correspond to the Chinese Shin, save that they were 
not incorporated in the cultus. Higher in rank came various 
mediating forms, like Wisdom, Memra (the Word) or Shekinah 
(the Presence), more or less definitely personalized. [Mahom- 
medanism still recognizes innumerable jinn peopling the solitudes 
of the desert, and over the grave of the deceased saint a little 
mosque is built, and prayers are offered and miracles performed. 4 
Christianity has, in like manner, in the course of its long and 
eventful history, admitted numerous agencies within the sphere 
of superhuman causation. The Virgin, the angelic hierarchy, 
the saints, have received the believer's homage, and answered 
his petitions. Theology might draw subtle distinctions between 
different forms of devotion; but, tried by the comparisons of 
the anthropologist, the monotheism even of historical Chris- 
tianity cannot be strictly maintained. 

6. Classification. — In the panorama of religious development 
thus briefly sketched, the different stages constantly appear to 
shade off into one another, and any one of the higher seems to 
contain elements of all the rest. This is the great difficulty 
of classification. All religions, even the most conservative and 
traditional, are in constant flux, they either advance or decay. 
In these processes, which do not take place at equal rates 
in different cases, all kinds of survivals remain lodged, and 
embarrass every attempt to fix the place of specific religions 
in any general course of development. The theologian, the 
philosopher, the historian, have all tried their hands at dis- 
tribution, (i.) The 18th-century divine who divided religions 
into True and False grimly remarked that the second chapter 
was much the longer of the two. 6 The corresponding distinction 
into Natural and Revealed breaks down in view of the fact that 
revelation by dream and oracle, by inspired seer or divine 
teacher and law-giver, is a practically universal phenomenon 
in more or less distinctly defined forms, (ii.) Philosophy, in 
the person of Hegel, classified religion in a threefold form : (a) the 
religion of Nature, (b) the religion of Spiritual Individuality, 
(c) the Absolute Religion (Christianity). 6 The subdivisions of 
this scheme have been long since abandoned, as the progress of 
knowledge rendered them untenable. K. F. A. Wuttke, however, 
adopted its fundamental idea 7 and distinguished three periods 
or phases: (1) the objective, producing the religions of nature; 

(2) the subjective, God as comprehended in the individual mind; 

(3) God as Absolute Spirit. In the same way Dr Edward Caird 8 
recognizes three similar stages: (1) objective consciousness, 
the divine in nature; (2) self -consciousness, the divine in man * 
(e.g. Judaism, Stoicism, and modern philosophy of the type of 
Kant) ; (3) God-consciousness, where God is above the contrast 
of subject and object, yet is revealed in both (Christianity), 
(iii.) On the historical side numerous bases have been suggested. 
(1) Max Muller proposed to group religions ethnologically by 
tests of language. This had the obvious advantage of lifting 
two great families into prominence, the Semitic and the Indo- 
Germanic. The Semitic peoples were closely bound together 
by common types of thought and civilization, and produced 
three of the leading religions of the world, Judaism, Christianity 
and Islam. But a glance at the table of Indo-Germanic religions 

* Cf. Goldziher, Rev. de VHist. des Rel. ii. 257; Weir, The Shaikhs 
of Morocco (1904). 

6 Broughton, Diet, of all Religions (1745), preface. 
9 Philosophy of Retigion (Eng. trans.), i. p. 266. 

7 Geschichte des Heidenthums (1852), i. p. 95. 

8 Evolution of Religion (1893), lect. vii. 



HIGHER RELIGIONS] 



RELIGION 



73 



drawn up by Tiele (Ency. Brit., 9 th ed., vol. xx. p. 360) will 
show what diversified products are blended together. Why 
should philosophical Brahmanism, or the Buddhism which 
reacted against it, be associated with so undeveloped a form as 
the religion of the ancient Latin settlers in mid-Italy? And 
why, on the other hand, should the religions of the lower culture, 
which are practically of a common type, be separated genea- 
logically into numerous independent families? (2) Whitney 1 
found the most important distinction to he between religions 
which were the collective product of the wisdom of the com- 
munity, race-religions as they might be called, and those which 
proceeded from individual founders. But, as Tiele pointed 
out, the " individual " element cannot be eliminated from the 
" race-religion," where each myth has been first uttered, each 
rite first performed, by some single person. And the founder 
who enters history with an impressive personality can only do 
his work through the response made to him by the insight and 
feeling of his time. (3) Kuenen disengaged another character- 
istic, the scope and aim of any given religion; was it limited to 
a particular people, or could it be thrown open to the world? 
On this foundation the higher religions were classed as national 
or universal, the latter group being formerly supposed to include 
Buddhism, Christianity and Mahommedanism. Here, once 
more, the student is confronted with many qualifications. A 
missionary religion like Mithraism, which established itself all 
the way from Western Asia to the borders of Scotland, was 
certainly not " national." Judaism and Brahmanism both 
passed beyond the confines of race. The Confucian morality 
could be adopted without difficulty in Japan. In other 
words, there was either a definite tendency to expansion, or there 
was no impediment in the religion itself when circumstances 
promoted its transplantation. Further, there are elements of 
Islam, like the usages of the hajj (or pilgrimage to the sacred 
places at Mecca), the dryness of its official doctrine and the 
limitations of its real character as indicated in the Wahhabi 
revival, which so impair its apparent universalism that Kuenen 
found himself obliged to withdraw it from the highest rank 
of religions. 2 (4) Professor M. Jastrow, jun., starting from the 
relation of religion to life, distinguishes four groups, the religions 
of savages, the religions of primitive culture, the religions of 
advanced culture and the religions which emphasize as an ideal 
the coextensiveness of religion with life. It may, however, be 
doubted whether the fundamental assumption of such a scheme, 
viz. that in the b'fe of the savage religion plays a comparatively 
small part, can be satisfactorily established. The evidence 
rather implies that, so far as the sanctions of religion affect the 
savage at all, they affect him with unusual force. In the absence 
of other competing interests his religious beliefs and duties 
occupy a much larger share of his attention than the votaries 
of many higher faiths bestow on theirs; and though his ethical 
range may be very limited, yet the total influence of his religion 
in determining for him what he may do and what he may not, 
brings the greater part of conduct under its control. The savage 
who finds himself encompassed by taboos which he dare not 
break, lives up to his religion with a faithfulness which many 
professing Christians fail to reach. (5) There remains a broad 
distinction between religions that are in the main founded on 
the relation of man to the powers of Nature, and those based 
on ethical ideas, which partly corresponds to the philosophical 
division already cited. This enabled Professor Tiele to arrange 
the chief religions in certain groups, starting from the primitive 
conception of the common life of the objects of the surrounding 
scene: — 3 

1 Princeton Review] May 1881, quoted by Tiele, Elements vf the 
Science of Religion (1897), i. p. 42. 

2 National Religions and Universal Religions (Hibbert Lectures, 
1882). 

s Ency. Brit. y 9th ed., art. " Religions " ; Elements of the Science of 
Religion, vol. i. (1897), with some corrections communicated by letter 
to Professor Chantcpie de la Saussaye, Religionsgesch. (3rd ed., 1905), 
vol. i. p. 11. 

4 For a long series of suggested bases of classification see Raoul de 
la Grasserie, Des Religions Compare* es au Point de Vue Sociologique 
(1899), chap, xii.; cf. further E. von Hartmann, Religionsphilosophie 



I. Nature Religions — 

1. Polyzoic Naturalism (hypothetical). 

2. Polydemonistic-magical religions under the control of 

Animism (religions of savages). 

3. Purified or organized magical religions. Therianthropic 

Polytheism. 

{a) Unorganized (religions of the Japanese, Dravidians, 

Finns, Esths, the ancient Arabs, the ancient 

Pelasgi, the Old-Italian peoples, the Etruscans (?), 

the Old-Slavs). 
(b) Organized (religions of the half-civilized peoples of 

America, ancient Chinese state-religion, religion 

of the Egyptians). 

4. Worship of beings in human form, but of superhuman 

power and half-ethical nature. Anthropomorphic poly- 
theism (religions of the Vedic Indians.the ancient Persians, 
the later Babylonians and Assyrians,thea.dvanced Semites, 
the Kelts, Germans, Hellenes, Greeks and Romans). 
II. Ethical Religions (spiritualistic ethical religions of Revelation) — 

1. National Nomistic (nomothetic) Religious Communions 

(Taoism and Confucianism, Brahmanism, Jainism, Mazde- 
ism, Mosaism and Judaism, the two last already passing 
into 2)/ 

2. Universalistic Religious Communions(Buddhism,Christian- 

ity: Islam with its particularistic and nomistic elements 
only partially belongs to this group). 4 

7. Revelation. — The second group in this division practically 
corresponds to the second stage recognized by Caird; but it 
rests upon a somewhat different basis, the conception of revela- 
tion addressed to the conscience in the form of religious law. 
Neither Taoism nor Confucianism, indeed, makes this claim. 
The Tao-leh-king, or book of aphorisms on " the Tao and virtue " 
ascribed to Lao Tsze, is wholly unlike such a. composition as 
Deuteronomy; and the disciples of Confucius carefully refrained 
from attributing to him any kind of supernatural inspiration 
in his conversations about social and personal morality. The 
sacred literatures of India and Israel, however, present many 
analogies, and emerge out of a wide range of phenomena which 
have their roots in the practices of the lower culture. The 
belief that the Powers controlling man's b'fe are willing upon 
occasion to disclose something of their purpose, has led to 
widespread rites of divination, which Plato described as the 
" art of fellowship between gods and men," and the Stoics 
defended on grounds of a priori religious expectation as well as 
of universal experience. Through the dream the living was put 
into communication with the dead, which sometimes embodied 
itself in peculiar and pathetic literary forms, such as the 
Icelandic dream-verses imparted by the spirits of those who had 
been lost at sea or overwhelmed by the snow; and a whole 
series of steps leads up from necromancy to prophecy and oracle, 
as the higher gods become the teachers of men. The gods of 
revelation are naturally not the highest, since they appear as the 
interpreters of one superior to themselves. The revealing 
agency may be only a voice like Aius Locutius, to which the 
Romans raised a temple; or, like Hermes, he may be the 
messenger of the gods; or, like Marduk, pre-eminently the god 
of oracles in Babylonia, he may be the son of Ea, the mighty 
deep encompassing the earth, source of all wisdom and culture. 
To Marduk the prophet-god Nabu in his turn became son, and 
his consort Tasbmlt (" causing to hear ") was the personification 
of Revelation. Egyptian thought ascribed this function to 
Thoth, who played somewhat different parts in different systems, 
but emerges as the representative of the immanent intelligence 

(1888); Siebeck, Lehrbuch der Religionsphilosophie (1893); Dorner, 
Grundriss der Religionsphilosophie (1903). Siebeck proposed to 
distribute religions in three grades: (1) Nature-Religions, i.e. those 
of the lower culture; (2) Morality-Religions in various grades and 
stages, e.g. Mexicans and Peruvians, Arcadians, Chinese, Egyptians, 
Hindus, Persians, Germans, Romans, with the Greek religion in the 
highest rank; (3) Religions of Redemption (Judaism forming the 
transition from the second group), Buddhism in the sense of world- 
negation, and, positively, Christianity. Bousset, What is Religion? 
(1907) reckons Platonism along with Buddhism. For criticism of 
Siebeck's scheme see Tiele, Elements of the Science of Religion, vol. i. 
(1 897) , pp. 62 , 65. Pfleiderer , Religion and Historic Faiths ( 1 907) , p. 88 , 
recognizes more clearly the difficulty of carrying almost any division 
through the whole field, without frequent breach of historical 
connexions. 

xxm. 3 a 



74 



RELIGION 



[HIGHER RELIGIONS 



of the world, brother of Ma&t and the giver of laws and culture 
to man. 1 Thoth " the thrice-great " passed into Hermes 
Trismegistus whom Christian fathers could recognize, 2 when the 
supremely beautiful figure of Greek theology, Apollo, had lost 
his dignity and ceased to be desired. Thoth was a voluminous 
author, and the collection of forty-two books which bore his 
name was a kind of primitive cyclopaedia of theology, astronomy, 
geography and physiology. Apollo proclaims at his birth that 
he will declare the counsel of Father Zeus to men. 3 But his 
utterances have been only casually preserved. A special 
literature of oracles did indeed arise; the divine words were 
collected and the circumstances which produced them' were 
recorded; and had Delphi become in fact the centre of Greece, 
as Plato conceiyed it, here might have been the nucleus of 
a scripture. Theories of inspiration lurk behind the rich 
vocabulary of Greek prophecy; the seer is evdeos, 6e6\rjTTOs y 
6e6nv€v<7TOs } deofoprjros, and Bakis and Musaeus give their 
names to sacred verses. The story of the Sibylline books 
in Rome, on the other hand, shows the growth of the idea 
of authority. They are deposited in a temple, in charge of 
a small sacred college; new deities and rites are introduced 
under their sanction; when they are accidentally destroyed,- 
envoys are sent to the East and fresh collections are made; 
these are in their turn purged, the false are discarded and the 
true reverently preserved. By what method the books were 
consulted is not known; but they exhibit the idea of a sacred 
canon in process of formation. The theologians of India 
guarded their ancient hymns with the utmost care. A vast 
literary apparatus was devised for their protection. The famous 
Purusha-hymn (R.V. x. 90) already claimed a divine origin for 
the three Vedas, the Rik, the Saman and the Yajush. The 
" triple knowledge " was sometimes derived from the " Lord of 
Creatures " Prajapati — one of the unifying forms of Brahmanical 
theology — through Vac or " speech." The Veda, that is to say, 
had existed in the divine mind ere it was made known to men, 
and as such it belonged to the realm of the deathless and the 
infinite. The tribal poets were supposed to have " seen "'the 
heavenly originals; elaborate arguments were devised to explain 
how the names of particular objects like rivers and mountains 
could have existed in the Eternal; while the grounds of belief 
in the infallibility of the sacred verses were enforced with the 
double weight of philosophy and tradition. Buddhism repudi- 
ated the authority of the Veda, but found it needful to supply 
its place; and the word of tbe omniscient Teacher, faithfully 
reported by his disciples and guaranteed by concurrent tradi- 
tions, became the rule of belief for the new Order. Nor were 
the authors of the scriptures whose fragments are preserved in 
the Zend Avesta less conscious of their divine value. The 
ancient Gathas, which were supposed to be the composition of 
Zarathustra himself, received the homage of later worshippers. 4 
Daena, the ideal personification of law and religion, is the object 
of praise and sacrifice. She dwells on high in the Heavenly 
Home, the radiant "Abode of song," but Zarathustra summons 
her thence, begs for her fellowship, and prays her for righteous- 
ness of thought, speech and deed. 6 She is produced by Vohu 
Mano, the " Good Thought " of Ahura,- one of the six Holy 
Immortals; she thus belongs to the ideal creation before the 
'earth and its inhabitants; 6 but how the heavenly Daena was 
wrought by Zarathustra into written form is nowhere stated. 
This conception of pre-existent spiritual counterparts was not 
without influence on the later theology of Israel. The sacred 
law (Torah) was the earthly reproduction of a heavenly Torah 
which had no origin in time, and constituted the sum of ideal 
wisdom into which God looked when he would create the world. 7 

1 Cf. Maspero, Dawn of Civilization, p. 204; Wiedemann, Religion 
of the Ancient Egyptians, p. 227; Budge, Gods of Egypt, i. p. 4i5 ; 

2 Aug. De Civ. Dei, xvih. 39, attributes the origin of philosophy to 
his era. 

8 Horn. Hymn. i. 

4 Yasna, lv.; S.B.E. xxxi. p. 294. 
. 6 S.B.E. xxiii. p. 264. 

6 Bundahis, i. 25 ; S.B.E. v. p. 9. 

7 Midrask Bereshith Rabba, tr. Wunsche, I. i. ver. i. 



Even Mahommedanism felt the spell of the same modes of 
thought. The idea of revelation was expressed by " sending 
down" (from nazala, to descend); that which passed from 
heaven to earth was a pre-existent word, eternal as God Himself. 
Allusions in particular passages of the Koran to the " mother 
of the scripture," the invisible originals of the prophet's speech, 
led to the doctrine of its uncreated being. The whole history 
of religion presents perhaps no more singular spectacle than the 
mosques of Bagdad in the middle of the 9th century filled with 
vast crowds of twenty and thirty thousand of the faithful, 
assembled to discuss the dogmas of the created and the un- 
created Koran. 8 

8. Ethics and Esckalology. — The second distinguishing mark 
in Tide's higher group is implied in the term " Ethical." By 
this it is not intended to assert that moral ideas are wanting in 
the so-called " naturist " religions. Anthropologists Ijave, it 
is true, taken widely different views of the relation of ethics 
and religion, and the stage at which an effective alliance between 
them might be recognized. Like all problems of origins, the 
question is necessarily extremely obscure, and cannot be definitely 
settled by historical evidence. Broadly speaking, however, it 
may be said that the attempt to show that certain savages are 
destitute of moral feeling cannot be sustained; 9 and evidence 
has been already cited above (in the section on Primitive 
Religion) proving the varied and immediate effects of religion 
on the life of the lowest tribes. Continuous interaction marks 
the slow courses of advance. At a very early period in social 
development the rules of conduct are referred to some higher 
source. Thus among the tribes of south-eastern Australia 
described by Mr Howitt, 10 the native rites and laws handed 
down from generation to generation were supposed to have been 
first imparted by some higher being such as Nurrundere, who 
made all things on the earth; or Nurelli, who created the whole 
country, with the rivers, 'trees and animals; or Daramulun, 
who (like Nurrundere) bestowed weapons on the men, and 
instituted the rites and ceremonies connected with life and death. 
As religion advances with improved social organization, a series- 
of figures, partly human, partly divine, embodies the idea that 
the command of nature implied in the progress of the arts is 
due to some kind of instruction from above, and that the obli- 
gations of law are of more than human origin. The Algonquin 
Manibozho and Quetzalcoatl of Mexico stand for a whole group 
of typical personalities in North and -Central America. The 
mysterious fish-man Oannes,who taught the primitive inhabitants 
of Babylonia, according to Alexander Polyhistor, has been 
identified with Ea, god of the deep, the source of wisdom, culture 
and social order. Zeus gave laws to Minos; Apollo revealed 
the Spartan constitution to Lycurgus; Zaleucus received the 
laws for the Locrians from Athena in a dream; Vishnu and 
Manu condescended to draw up law-books in India. The 
worship of ancestors has again and again gathered around it 
powerful and ethical influences, emphasizing the parental and 
filial relations, and strengthening the mutual obligations of 
communal life. Hirata answered by anticipation the modern 
reproach against Shinto, founded on the absence of any definite 
morality connected with it, by laying down the simple rule, 
" Act so that you need not be ashamed before the Kami of the 
unseen." u The mythological embodiments of the connexion 
of law in nature with the social and moral order have already 
been briefly noted: a few words may be said in conclusion on 
another product of the union of religion and ethics, viz. the 
doctrine of judgment after death. That this doctrine is not 
essential to a highly moralized religion is clear from the fact that 
it formed no part of the earlier Hebrew prophecy. Judgment, 
indeed, was an Inevitable outcome of tbe sovereignty of Yahweh, 
but it would be passed upon the nation in the -immediate scene 
of its misdoings; and even when the scope of the divine doom 

8 Von Kremer, Die Herrschenden Ideen des I slams, p. 233 ff. 

9 See Westermarck, Origin and Development of Moral Ideas, vol.i. 
(1 906) , p. 1 25, on Lord Avebury's conclusions. 

10 Native Tribes of S.E. Australia (1904), pp. 488, 489, 495, 543. 

11 Satow, " Revival of Pure Shinto," Trans. As. Soc. Japan, vol. iii. 
Appendix, p. 87. 



HIGHER RELIGIONS] 



RELIGION 



75 



was extended to include the nations of the world, it was still 
upon the living that it would alight. The seers of Israel were 
content to dismiss their dead to a land of silence and darkness, 
the vast hollow gloom of the subterranean Sheol. 1 A far ruder 
outlook on life, however, which has again and again appealed 
to some form of the divine cognizance by means of the ordeal 
and the oath, frequently supplements the moral issues of this 
world by the judicial award of the next. Assuming the proper 
fulfilment of the ritual of death, ethics gradually extends its 
control over the future. At first the social distinctions of this 
life are simply continued hereafter: the chief remains a chief, 
the slave a slave; and the conditions of the future only prolong 
those of the present. In so far as tribal eminence depends on 
superior skill or courage or wisdom, the germs of ethical differ- 
entiation may be discovered even here. The process is carried 
further (i) in individual cases of retribution, when (as among 
the Kaupuis) crime within the tribe was punished, and a 
murderer becomes in the next life his victim's slave; 2 or 
(2) when service to the community received special reward, 
and warriors who had fallen in battle, women who had died in 
childbirth and merchants who had perished on a journey were 
sent in Mexico to the house of the sun. 3 As the social order 
acquires more definiteness and stability, the control of life by 
the gods tends to become more clearly moralized. This brings 
with it new standards independent of clan-customs or tribe- 
usage. Only the worst offences, however, at first draw down 
post-mortem punishment. The Homeric Erinyes chastise 
outrages on the poor, injuries to guests, failure to show the 
respect due to parents or to recognize the rights of age, in this 
life; only on perjury does the divine doom extend to the next. 4 
On the other hand, the Egyptian version of " the whole duty of 
man " in the famous 125th chapter of the Book of the Dead 
embraces a singular complex of ritual, social and personal 
sins, in which the inward states of lying, anger and ill-will are 
condemned along with murder, theft and adultery, beside 
violation of the times of offerings to the gods, or interference 
with the food of the blessed dead. The great judgment of 
Osiris formulates with the utmost precision the alliance between 
morals and religion. The doctrine established itself in Greek 
theology under the influence of Orphism, and supplied Plato 
with mythic forms for his " criticism of life." In India the 
union of morality and religion was effected in another manner. 
True, Yama, first of men to enter the world beyond, became the 
" King of Righteousness " before whose tribunal the dead must 
appear. But a new agency began to engage the speculations 
of thinkers, the moral values of action embodied in the Deed. 
".The deed does not perish," ran an early formula. 6 " A man is 
born into the world that he has made," said another: 6 and 
what was laid down first as a ritual principle survived as an 
ethical. Buddhism conceived men as constantly making their 
own world for good and ill; it took over from Brahmanism a 
whole series of heavens and hells to provide an exact adjustment 
in the future for the virtue or vice of the present; and its 
eschatologic confidence was one of the potent instruments 
of its success in countries which, like China and Japan, had 
developed no theories of retribution or reward beyond the grave. 
Along a different line of thought the Iranian teachers, beholding 
the world divided between hostile powers, demanded, as the 
fundamental postulate of religion, the victory of the good. The 
conflict must end with the triumph of light, truth and right. 
The details of this remarkable scheme must be studied elsewhere 
(see Zoroaster). The award of the angel-judges at the Bridge 
of Assembly, soon after death, despatched the individual to his 
appropriate lot in the homes of Good or Evil Thought, Word 

1 Cf . Ezek. xxxii. 17-32; Ps. lxxxviii 3-4, io, 11; Job x. 21-22, 
and many other passages. 

2 Watt, Journ. Anthrop. Institute, xvi p. 356. Cf. Codrington, 
The Melanesians (1891), p. 274. 

3 Bancroft, Native Races of the Pacific States of N. America, iii. 
P- 532. 

4 //. iii. 278-79; xix. 258-60. 

6 S.B.E. ii. p. 271; xiv. pp. u6, 310. 
6 Ibid-, xli. p. 181. 



and Deed. But at length the long struggle would draw to an 
end. The great " divine event," the frasho-kereti, the renova- 
tion, would set in. A new heaven and a new earth would be 
created: a general resurrection should take place; the powers 
of evil should be overthrown and extinguished; and hell should 
be brought back for the enlargement of the world. Eschatology 
has again and again expressed the alliance between ethics and 
religion. It remains for the future to show how long that 
alliance will require its support. 

Bibliography. — (For primitive religion see preceding section.) 
Only a selection of the copious and ever-increasing literature can 
here be named. Monographs on the separate religions are named 
in their respective articles. 

1. After Hume's Natural Hist, of Religions (1757) earlier surveys 
will be found in Meiners, Allgem. Krit. Gesch. der Religionen (2 vols., 
1806-7); Constant, De la religion (5 vols., 1824-31); Baur, 
Symbolik und Mytkologie (3 vols., 1825); Creuzcr, Symbolik und 



ology and Religion English study was chiefly influenced by F. Max 
M tiller , Essay on Comparative Mythology (1856); Chips from a 
German Workshop (1867 onwards); Lectures on the Science of 
Language (2 vols., 1861-64) *» Contributions to the Science of Mythology 
(2 vols., 1897); cf. A. Lang, Modern Mythology (1897). Earlier 
Anthropology, Bastian, Der Mensch in der Gesch, (3 vols., Leipzig, 
1860); Waitz-perland, Anthropologic* (6 vols. ; Leipzig, 1877). 

2. Translations from the Scriptures of various religions. — Sacred 
Books of the East (49 vols., 1879 and onwards); Annates du Musee 
Guimet (1880 and onwards). 

3. Manuals, treatises and series in single or collective authorship. — 
C. P. Tiele, Outlines of the History of Religion, tr. Carpenter (London, 
1877); Gesch. der Religion im Alterihum, tr. Gehrich (2 vols., Gotha, 
1895-98) ; Kompendium der Religionsgesch., tr. Weber (Breslau, 1903) ; 
G. Rawlinson, Religions of the Ancient World (London, 1882); 
Religious Systems of the World, by various authors (London, 1890); 
Menzies, Hist, of Religion (1895); Orelli, Allgemeine Religionsgesch. 
(Bonn, 1899); Great Religions of the World, by various authors 
(1901); Bousset, Das Wesen der Religion (Halle, 1903); Eng. trans., 
What is Religion? (London, 1907); Chantepie de la Saussaye, 
Religionsgesch.* (2 vols., 1905); Achelis, Abriss der Vergleichenden 
Religionswissenschaft (Sammlung Gosehen) ; " Die Orientalischen Re- 
ligionen " (in Die Kultur der Gegenwart), by various authors (1906); 
Pfleiderer, Religion und Religionen (Berlin, 1906) ; Eng. trans., Religion 
and Historic Faiths (London, 1907) ; Haarlem Series, Die Voornaamste 
Godsdiensten, beginning with Islam, by Dozy (1863 onwards); Soc* 
for Promotion of Christian Knowledge, Non-Christian Religions^ 
Hibbert Lectures on The Origin and Growth of Religion (15 vols.» 
beginning with F. Max Mtiller, 1878); Asehendorff's series, Darstel- 
lungen aus dent Gebiete der Nichtchristl. Religionsgesch. (14 vols.. 
Munster i.w., beginning 1890); Handbooks on the History of 
Religions, ed. Jastrow, beginning with Hopkins on India (1895); 
American Lectures on the History of Religions, beginning with Rhys 
Davids on Buddhism (1896); Constables series, Religions, Ancient 
and Modern (London, beginning 1905), brief and popular; J. 
Freeman Clarke, Ten Great Religions (Boston, 1871); S. Johnson, 
Oriental Religions, &c. (3 vols.); India* (London, 1873); China 
(Boston, 1877); Persia (1885); Lippert, Die Religionen der Euro- 
paischen Cultur-Volker (Berlin, 1881); A. ReVille, ProUgom. de 
VhisU des rel. (Paris, 1881 ; Engl, trans., 1884); Les ReL des peuples 
non-civilish (2 vols., Paris, 1883); Rel. du Mexique (1885); Rel. 
chinoise (1889); Letourneau, V Evolution religieuse 2 (Paris, 1898); 
Publications of the £cole des hautes Etudes, section des sciences 
religieuses; and Annates du Musie Guimet, " Bibliothequc de 
Vulgarisation." 

4. Works bearing on history. — Fust el de Coulanges, La CM 
antique (Paris, 1864); Lubbock, Origin of Civilization (1870); 
Whitney, Oriental and Linguistic Studies (New York, 1872 and 1874) ; 
Brinton, The Religious Sentiment (1876); Myths of the New World 2 
(New York, 1876); Essays of an Americanist (1890); Religions of 
Primitive Peoples (1897) ; Keary, Outlines of Primitive Belief 
(London, 1882); Leblois, Les Bibles et les initiateurs de Vhumonitt 
(4 vols, in 7 parts, Paris, 1883); Goblet d'Alviella, Introd. & Vhist. 
ginirale des religions (Brussels, 1887); La Migration des symboles 
(Paris, 1891); Hartland, The Legend of Perseus (3 vols., London, 
1894); Ratzel, The History of Mankind, tr. Butler (3 vols., London, 
1896) ; Usener, Gdtternamen (Bonn, 1896) ; Grant Allen, The 
Evolution of the Idea of God (London, 1897); Forlong, Short Studies 
in the Science of Comp. Religions (London, 1897); Lang, The Making 
of Religion (1898); Lyall, Asiatic Studies 2 (2 vols., London, 1899); 
Baissac, Les Origines de la religion 2 (Paris, 1899); Marilficr, 
"Religion," Grande Encyclop. xxviii. (Paris, 1900); Maculloch, 
Comparative Tkeol. (1902); Dieterich, Mutter Erde (Leipzig, 1905); 
S. Reinach, Cultes, mythes et religions (2 vols., Pans, 1905-6); 
Frazer, Adonis, Attis and Osiris (1906); Ed. Meyer, Gesch. des 
Alterthums 2 , I. i. " Einleitung: Elementeder Anthropologic " (1907). 

5. Psychology, Philosophy and History. — Hegel, Philosophy of 



7 6 



REMAGEN— REMAINDER 



\ 




to the Science of Religion (1873); Hibb'erl Lectures (1878); Gifford 
Lectures (4 vols., 1889-^3) ; Spencer, Principles of Sociology, i. (1876) ; 
Fairbairn, Studies in the Philosophy of Religion and History (1876);' 
E. von Hartmann, Das Relig. Bewusstsein der Menschheit (Berlin, 
i882);*Rauwenhoff, Weisbegeerte van den Godsdienst (Leiden, 1887); 
E. Caird, The Evolution of Religion (2 vols., 1893) ; Siebeck, Lehrbuch 
der Religionsphilosophie (Freiburg i. B., 1893); Tiele, Elements of 
the Science of Religion (2 vols., 1897); Raoul de la Grasserie, Des 
religions comparees au point de vue sociologique, and De la psycholo- 
gic des religions (Paris, 1899); Starbuck, Psychology of Religion 
(London, 1900); Jastrow, The Study of Religion (London, 1901); 
W. James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (1903); Dorner, 
Grundriss der Religionsphilosophie (Leipzig, 1903); Girgensohn, 
Die Religion, ihre Psychischen Fortnen und ihre Zentralidee (Leipzig, 
I9°3); Wundt, Volkerpsychologie, Bd. ii. Mythus und Religion 
(1905-6); Ladd, The Philosophy of Religion (2 vols., London, 1906); 
Hdffding, The Philosophy of Religion (Engl, trans., 1906); Wester- 
maarck, The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas, i. (London, 
1906); Hobhouse, Morals in Evolution (2 vols., London, 1906). 

6. Periodicals, &c. — Revue de Vhist. des religions (Paris, 1880 on- 
wards); Folk-Lore (London, 1890 onwards); Archiv. fur Religions- 
wissenschaft (Freiburg i. B., 1898 onwards); U Annie sociologique 
(Paris, 1898 onwards) ; Actes du premier congrls international 
oVhistoire des religions (Paris, 1900); Verhandlungen des II. Inter- 
nationalen Kongr esses fur Allgemeine Religionsgeschichte in Basel 
(1904). 

Much information on the growth and present condition of the 
study has been collected by Jordan, Comparative Religion, its 
Genesis and Growth (Edinburgh, 1905). (J. E. C.) 

REMAGEN, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine 
Province, on the left bank of the Rhine, 1 2 m. above Bonn, by 
the railway from Cologne to Coblenz, and at the junction of the 
Ahr valley railway to Adenau. Pop. (1900) 3534. The (Roman 
Catholic) parish church is remarkable for a gate (Romertor) 
with grotesque sculptures of animals, dating from the 12th 
century. Archaeologists have variously interpreted its original 
purpose, whether as church door, city gate or palace gate. The 
industry of the place is almost wholly concerned with the 
preparation of wine, in which a large export trade is done. 
Just below the town, on a height overlooking the Rhine, stands 
the Apollinaris church, built 1839-53 on the site of a chapel 
formerly dedicated to St Martin, and containing the relics of 
St Apollinaris. It is a frequent place of pilgrimage from all 
parts of the lower Rhine. According to legend, the ship con- 
veying the relics of the three kings and of Bishop Apollinaris 
from Milan to Cologne in 1164 could not be got to move away 
from the spot until the bones of St Apollinaris had been interred 
in St Martin's chapeL 

Remagen (the Rigomagus of the Romans) originally belonged 
to the duchy of JuUich. Many Roman antiquities have been 
discovered here. In 1857 a votive altar dedicated to Jupiter, 
Mars and Mercury was unearthed, and is now in the Provincial 
Museum at Bonn. 

See Kinkel, Der Fuhrer durch das Ahrthal nebst Beschreibung der 
Stadt Remagen (2nd ed., Bonn, 1854). 

REMAINDER, REVERSION. In the view " of English 
law a remainder or reversion is classed either as an incorporeal 
hereditament or, 'with greater correctness, as an estate in 
expectancy. That is to say, it is a present interest subject to 
an existing estate in possession called the particular estate, 
which must determine before the estate in expectancy can 
.become an estate in possession. A remainder or reversion is 
in strictness confined to real estate, whether legal or equitable, 
though a similar interest may exist in personalty. The par- 
ticular estate and the remainder or reversion together make up 
the whole estate over which the grantor has power of disposition. 1 
Accordingly a remainder or reversion limited on an estate in fee 
simple is void. The difference between a remainder and a 
reversion, stated as simply as possible, is that the latter is that 
undisposed-of part of the estate which after the determination 
of the particular estate will fall into the possession of the original 
grantor or his representative, while a remainder is that part of 
the estate which under the same circumstances will fall into the 
possession of a person other than the original grantor or his 
1 Compare the life-rent and fee of Scots law. 



representative. A reversion, in fact, is a special instance of a 
remainder, distinguishable from it in two important respects: 
(1) a reversion arises by operation of law on every grant of an 
estate where the whole interest is not parted with, whereas 
a remainder is created by express words; (2) tenure exists 
between the reversioner and the tenant of the particular estate, 
but not between the latter and the remainderman. Accordingly 
rent service is said to be an incident of a reversion but not of a 
remainder, and a reversioner could distrain for it at common 
law. A reversion may be limited upon any number of remainders, 
each of them as it falls into possession becoming itself a particular 
estate. A remainder or reversion may be alienated either by 
deed or by will. A conveyance by the tenant of a particular 
estate to the remainderman or reversioner is called a surrender; 
a conveyance by the remainderman or reversioner to the tenant 
is a release. 

Remainder. — Remainders are either vested or contingent. " An 
estate is vested in interest when there is a present fixed right of 
future enjoyment. An estate is contingent when a right of enjoy- 
ment is to accrue on an event which is dubious and uncertain. A 
contingent remainder is a remainder limited so as to depend on an 
event or condition which may never happen or be performed, or 
which may not happen or be performed till after the determination 
of the preceding estate " (Fearne, Contingent Remainders, 2, 3). 
Contingent remainders are of two kinds, those limited to uncertain 
persons and those limited on uncertain events. A grant by A to B 
for life, followed by a remainder in fee to the heir of C is an example 
of a contingent remainder. 2 Until the death of C he can have no 
heir.^ If C die during the lifetime of B, the contingent remainder 
of his heir becomes vested; if C survive B, the remainder is at 
common law destroyed owing to the determination of the par- 
ticular estate, for every remainder must have a particular estate 
to support it. In the case of a contingent remainder, it must become 
vested during the continuance of the particular estate or at the 
instant of its determination. This rule of law no doubt arose 
from the disfavour shown by the law to contingent remainders 
on their first introduction. They were not firmly established even 
when Littleton wrote in the reign of Edward IV. (see Williams, 
Real Property). The inconveniences resulting from this liability 
of contingent remainders to destruction were formerly overcome by 
the device of appointing trustees to preserve contingent remainders 
at law. Equitable contingent remainders, it should be noticed, 
were indestructible, for they were supported by the legal estate. 
In modern times the matter has been dealt with by act of Parlia- 
ment. By the Real Property Act 1845, § 8, a contingent remainder 
is rendered capable of taking effect notwithstanding the deter- 
mination by forfeiture, surrender or merger of any preceding 
estate of freehold in the same manner as if such determination had 
not happened. The case of determination by any other means 
is met by the Contingent Remainders Act 1877. The act provides 
that a contingent remainder which would have been valid as a 
springing or shifting use or executory devise or other limitation 
had it not had a sufficient estate to support it as a contingent re- 
mainder is, in the event of the particular estate determining before the 
contingent remainder vests, to be capable of taking effect as though 
the contingent remainder had originally been created as a springing 
or shifting use or executory devise or other executory limitation. 
It will accordingly only be good if the springing use, &c. (for which 
see Trust), would be good. If the springing use be void as a breach 
of the rule against perpetuities (see Perpetuity), the remainder 
will likewise be void. Apart from this act, there is some un- 
certainty as to the application of the rule against perpetuities to 
remainders. The better opinion is that it applies to equitable 
remainders and to legal remainders expectant upon an estate for 
life limited to an unborn person. In the latter case the rule as 
applied to contingent remainders is somewhat different from that 
affecting executory interests. The period is different, the remainder 
allowing the tying up of property for a longer time than the execu- 
tory interest. There is also the further difference that the rule 
does not affects contingent remainder if it become vested before 
the determination of the particular estate. An executory interest 
is void if it may transgress the rule, even though it do not actually 
do so. For the rule in Shelley's case, important in connexion 
with remainders, see that title. 

The state laws of the United States affecting remainders will 
be found^ in Washburn, Real Property, ii. bk. ii. As a general 
rule contingent remainders have been rendered of little practical 
importance by enactments that they shall take effect as executory 
devises or shall not determine on determination of the particular 
estate. 

Reversion. — Unlike remainders, all reversions are present or 
vested estates. The law of reversion, like that of remainder, has 
been considerably modified by statute. It was formerly considered 



2 A contingent remainder amounting to a freehold cannot be 
limited on a particular estate less than a freehold. 



REMAND— REMBRANDT 



77 



that on the grant of the reversion the tenant should have the 
opportunity of objecting to the substitution of a new landlord. 
It was therefore necessary that he should attorn tenant to the 
purchaser. Without such attornment the grant was void, unless 
indeed attornment were compelled by levying a fine. The neces- 
sity of attornment was abolished by 4 & 5 Anne c. 16. Its only 
use at present seems to be in the case of mortgage. A mortgagor 
in possession sometimes attorns tenant to the mortgagee in order 
that the latter may treat him as his tenant and distrain for his 
interest as rent. The legal view that rent was incident to the 
reversion led at common law to a destruction of .the rent by de- 
struction of the reversion. This would chiefly happen in the case 
of an under-tenant and his immediate reversioner, if the inter- 
mediate became merged in the superior reversion. To obviate 
this difficulty it was provided by the Real Property Act 1845, § 9, 
that, on surrender or merger of a reversion expectant on a lease, 
the rights under it should subsist to the reversion conferring the 
next vested right. The question as to what covenants run with the 
reversion is one of the most difficult 'in law. The rule of common 
law seems to have been that covenants ran with the land but not 
with the reversion, that is to say, the benefit of them survived to 
a new tenant but not to a new landlord. The effect of the act 
of 32 Hen. VIII. c. 34, and of the Conveyancing Act 1881, has been 
to annex to the reversion as a general rule the benefitof the rent 
and the lessee's covenants and the burden of the lessor's covenant. 
Merely collateral covenants, however, do not run with the reversion, 
but are regarded as personal contracts between lessor and lessee. 
At common law on tne severance of a reversion a grantee of part 
of the reversion could not take advantage of any condition for 
re-entry, on the ground that the condition was entire and not 
severable. This doctrine was abolished by one of Lord St Leonard's 
Acts in 1859. The Conveyancing Act 1881, § 12, now provides 
in wider terms than those of the act of 1859 that on severance of 
the reversion every condition capable of apportionment is to be 
apportioned. In order to guard against fraudulent concealment 
•of the death of a cestui que vie, or person for whose life any lands are 
held by another, it was provided by 6 Anne c. 18 that on applica- 
tion to the court of chancery by the person entitled in remainder, 
reversion or expectancy, the cestui que vie should be produced to 
the court or its commissioners, or in default should be taken to be 
■dead. In Scotland reversion is generally used in a sense approaching 
that of the equity of redemption of English law. A reversion is 
either legal, as in an adjudication, or conventional, as in a wadset: 
Reversions are registered under the system established by the Act 
1617 c. 16. 

In the United States the act of 32 Hen. VIII. c. 34 " is held to 
be in force in Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Illinois, and Connecti- 
cut, but was never in force in New York till re-enacted " (Wash- 
burn, Real Property, i.). 

REMAND (Lat. remandare), a term of English law meaning 
the return of a prisoner by order of a court to the custody from 
which he came to the court. Thus where an application for 
release is unsuccessfully made by means of habeas corpus, the 
.applicant is remanded to the custody which he has challenged 
as illegal. Where trials or indictments are not concluded at a 
single sitting the court of trial has power to remand the accused 
into proper custody during any necessary adjournment. Where 
a preliminary inquiry into an indictable offence is not completed 
at a single sitting, the prisoner, if not released on bail, may be 
remanded to prison or some other lawful place of custody for 
.a period not exceeding eight days, and so on by further remands 
till the inquiry is. completed and the accused is discharged, or 
•committed to prison to await his trial, or released on bail to 
take his trial. If the remand is for more than three days the 
■order must be in writing (Indictable Offences Act 1848, 11 & 12 
Vict. c. 42, s. 21). Similar powers of remand or committal to 
prison during adjournments are given to justices in the exercise 
of their summary criminal jurisdiction, whether as to offences 
punishable only on summary conviction, or as to indictable 
offences with which it is proposed to deal summarily (Summary 
Jurisdiction Acts 1848, s. 16, and 1879, s. 24). 

In the case of charges against children or young persons, 
where the justices commit for trial or order a remand pending 
inquiry, or with a view to sending a child to an industrial school 
or a reformatory, they may remand to the workhouse or to some 
fit custody instead of remanding to prison (Youthful Offenders 
Act 1 90 1, s. 4). For this purpose remand homes have been 
•established. 

REM BRANDT ( 1 606-1 669) . Rembrandt Harmens van 
Rijn, Dutch painter, was born in Leiden on the 15th of July 
1606. It is only within the past fifty years that we have come 



to know anything of his real history. A tissue of fables formerly 
represented him as ignorant, boorish and avaricious. These 
fictions, resting on the loose assertions of Houbraken (De Groote 
Schouburgh, 17 18), have been cleared away by the untiring 
researches of Scheltema and other Dutchmen, notably by C. 
Vosmaer, whose elaborate work {Rembrandt, sa vie et ses oeuvres; 
1868,2nd ed., 1877) is the basis of our knowledge of the man and 
of the chronological development of the artist. 1 Rembrandt's 
high position in European art rests on the originality of his 
mind, the power of his imagination, his profound sympathy 
with his subjects, the boldness of his system of light and shade, 
the thoroughness of his modelling, his subtle colour, and above 
all on his intense humanity. He was great in conception 
and in execution, a poet as well as a painter, an idealist and 
also a realist; and this rare union is the secret of his power. 
From his dramatic action and mastery of expression Rembrandt 
has been well called " the Shakespeare of Holland." 

In the beginning of the 17th century Holland had entered on 
her grand career of national enterprise. Science and literature 
flourished in her universities, poetry and the stage were favoured 
by her citizens, and art found a home not only in the capital 
but in the provincial towns. It was a time also of new ideas. 
Old conventional forms in religion, philosophy and art had 
fallen away, and liberty was inspiring new conceptions. There 
were no church influences at work to fetter the painter in the 
choice and treatment of his subject, no academies to prescribe 
rules. Left to himself, therefore, the artist painted the life of 
the people among whom he lived and the subjects which inter- 
ested them. It was thus a living history that he painted — 
scenes from the everyday life and amusements of the people, 
as well as the civic rulers, the " regents " or governors of the 
hospitals and the heads of the guilds, and the civic guards who 
defended their towns. So also with religious pictures. The 
dogmas and legends of the Church of Rome were no longer of 
interest to such a nation; but the Bible was read and studied 
with avidity, and from its page the artist drew directly the scenes 
of the simple narrative. Perhaps the earliest trace of this new 
aspect of Bible story is to be found in the pictures painted 
in Rome about the beginning of the 17th century by Adam 
Elsheimer of Frankfort, who had undoubtedly a great influence 
on the Dutch painters studying in Italy. These in their turn 
carried back to * Holland the simplicity and the picturesque 
effect which they found in Elsheimer's work. Among these, 
the precursors of Rembrandt, may be mentioned Moeyaert, 
Ravesteyn, Lastman, Pinas, Honthorst and Bramer. Influenced 
doubtless by these painters, Rembrandt determined to work out 
his own ideas of art on Dutch soil, resisting apparently every 
inducement to visit Italy. Though an admirer of the great 
Italian masters, he yet maintained his own individuality. 

Rembrandt was born at No. 3 Weddesteg, on the rampart 
at Leiden overlooking the Rhine. He was the fourth son of 
Gerrit Harmens van Rijn, a well-to-do miller. As the older 
boys had been sent to trade, his parents resolved that he should 
enter a learned profession. With this view he was sent to the 
High School at Leiden; but the boy soon manifested his dislike 
of the prospect, and determined to be a painter. Accordingly 
he was placed for three years under Swanenburch, a painter of 
no great merit, who enjoyed some reputation from his having 
studied in Italy. His next master was Lastman of Amsterdam, 
a painter of very considerable power. In Lastman's works we 
can trace the germs of the colour and sentiment of his greater 
pupil, though his direct influence cannot have been great, as 
it is said by Orlers that Rembrandt remained with him only six 
months, after which time he returned to Leiden, about 1623. 
During the early years of his life at Leiden Rembrandt seems 
to have devoted himself entirely to studies, painting and etching 
the people around him, the beggars and cripples, every pic- 
turesque face and form he could get hold of. Life, character, 

1 Vosmaer's first volume, on the precursors and apprenticeship of 
Rembrandt, was published in 1863. New light has since been thrown 
on important Doints by Dr Bode {Hollandische Malerei, 1883), De 
Roever, De Vries and others. 



7» 



REMBRANDT 



and above all light were the aims of these studies. His mother 
was a frequent model, and we can trace in her features the strong 
likeness to her son, especially in the portraits of himself at an 
advanced age. In the collection of Rembrandt's works at 
Amsterdam in 1898 were shown three portraits of his father, who 

•died about 1632; nine are catalogued altogether. The last 
portrait of his mother is that of the Vienna Museum, painted the 
year before her death in 1640. One of his sisters also frequently 
sat to him, and Bode suggests that she must have accompanied 
him to Amsterdam and kept house for him till he married. 
This conjecture rests on the number of portraits of the same 
young woman painted in the early years of his stay in Amsterdam 
and before he met his bride. Then, again, in the many portraits 
of himself painted in his early life we can see with what zeal he 
.set himself to master every form of expression, now grave, now 
gay — how thoroughly he learned to model the human face not 
from the outside but from the inner man. Dr Bode gives fifty 
-as the number of the portraits of himself (perhaps sixty is nearer 
the actual number), most of them painted in youth and in old 
age, the times when he had leisure for such work. 

Rembrandt's earliest pictures were painted at Leiden, from 
1627 to 1631. Bode mentions about nine pictures as known to 
belong to these years, chiefly paintings of single figures, as 
" St Paul in Prison " and " St Jerome "; but now and then 
compositions of several, as " Samson in Prison " and " Presenta- 
tion in the Temple." The prevailing tone of all these pictures 
is a greenish grey, the effect being somewhat cold and heavy. 

-The gallery at Cassel gives us a typical example of his studies 

-of the heads of old men, firm and hard in workmanship and full 
of detail, the effects of light and shade being carefully thought 
out. His work was now attracting the attention of lovers of 
art in the great city of Amsterdam; and, urged by their calls, 
he removed about 1631 to live and die there. At one bound 
he leaped into the position of the first portrait painter of the 
city, and received numerous commissions. During the early 
years of his residence there are at least forty known portraits 
from his hand, firm and solid in manner and staid in expression. 
It has been remarked that the fantasy in which he indulged 
through life was reserved only for the portraits of himself and 
his immediate connexions. The excellent painter Thomas dc 
Keyser was then in the height of his power, and his influence 
is to be traced in some of Rembrandt's smaller portraits. Pupils 
also now flocked to his house in the Bloemgracht, among them 

.Gerard Douw, who was nearly of his own age. The first 
important work executed by Rembrandt in Amsterdam is 
" Simeon in the Temple," of the Hague Museum, a fine early 
example of his treatment of light and shade and of his subtle 
colour. The concentrated light falls on the principal figure, 
while the background is full of mystery. The surface is smooth 

.and enamel-like, and all the details are carefully wrought out, 
while the action of light on the mantle of Simeon shows how 

■soon he had felt the magical effect of the play of colour. In the 
life-sized " Lesson in Anatomy " of 1632 we have the first of 
the great portrait subjects— Tulp the anatomist, the early 
friend of Rembrandt, discoursing to his seven associates, who 
are ranged with eager heads round the foreshortened body. 
The subject had been treated in former years by the Mierevelts, 
A. Pietersen and others, for the Hall of the Surgeons. But it 
was reserved for Rembrandt to make it a great picture by the 
grouping of the expressive portraits and by the completeness 

•of the conception. The colour is quiet and the handling of the 
brush timid and precise, while the light and shade are somewhat 

■harsh and abrupt. But it is a marvellous picture for a young 
man of twenty-five, and it is generally accepted as marking a 
new departure in the career of the painter. 

About 700 pictures are known to have come from Rembrandt's 
own hand. It is impossible to notice more than the prominent 
works. Besides the Pellicorne family portraits of 1632 now in the' 
Wallace Collection, we have the caligraphist Coppenol of the 
Cassel Gallery, interesting in the first place as an early example of 
Rembrandt's method of giving permanent interest to a portrait by 
converting it into a fjicture. He invests it with a sense of life by 
a momentary expression as Coppenol raises his head towards the 



spectator while he is mending a quill. The same motive is to be 
found in the " Shipbuilder," 1633 (Buckingham Palace), who looks 
up from his work with a sense of interruption at the approach of 
his wife. Coppenol was painted thrice and etched twice by the 
artist, the last of whose portrait etchings (1661) was the Coppenol 
of large size. The two small pictures of " The Philosopher " of the 
Louvre date from 1633, delicate in execution and full of mysterious 
effect. 

The year 1634 is especially remarkable as that of Rembrandt's 
marriage with Saskia van Uylenborch, a beautiful, fair-haired 
Frisian maiden of good connexions. Till her death in 1642 she 
was the centre of his life and art, and lives for us in many a canvas 
as well as in her own portraits. On her the painter lavished his 
magical power, painting her as the Queen of Artemisia or Bath- 
sheba, and as the wife of Samson — always proud of her long fair 
locks, and covering her with pearls and gold as precious in their 
play of colour as those of the Indies. A joyous pair we see them 
in the Dresden Gallery, Saskia sitting on his knee while he 
laughs gaily, or promenading together in a fine picture of 1636, or 
putting the last touches of ornament to her toilette,'for thus Bode 
interprets the so-called " Burgomaster Pancras and his Wife." 
These were his happy days when he painted himself in his 
exuberant fantasy, and adorned himself, at least in his portraits, 
in scarfs and feathers and gold chains. Saskia brought him a 
marriage portion of forty thousand guilders, a large sum for 
those times, and she brought him also a large circle of good 
friends in Amsterdam. She bore him four children, Rumbartus 
and two girls, successively named Cornelia after his beloved 
mother, all of whom died in infancy, and Titus, named after 
Titia a sister of Saskia. We have several noble portraits of 
Saskia, a good type of the beauty of Holland, all painted with 
the utmost love and care, at Cassel (1633), at Dresden (1641), 
and a posthumous one (1643) at Berlin. But the greatest in 
workmanship and most pathetic in expression seems to us, 
though it is decried by Bode, that of Antwerp (1641), in which 
it is impossible not to trace declining health and to find a melan- 
choly presage of her death. 

One of Rembrandt's greatest portraits of 1634 is the superb full- 
length of Martin Daey, which, with that of Madame Daey, painted 
according to Vosmaer some years later, formed one of the ornaments 
of the Van Loon collection at Amsterdam. Both now belong to 
Baron Gu stave de Rothschild. From the firm detailed execution 
of this portrait one turns with wonder to the broader handling of the 
" Old Woman " (Francoise van Wasserhoven), aged eighty-three, 
in the National Gallery, of the same year, remarkable for the effect 
of reflected light and still more for the sympathetic rendering of 
character. 

The life of Samson supplied many subjects in these early days. 
The so-called " Count of Gueldres threatening his Father-in-law " 
of the Berlin Gallery has been restored to its proper signification 
by M. Kolloff, who finds it to be Samson. It is forced and violent 
in > its action. The greatest of this series, and one of the pro- 
minent pictures of Rembrandt's work, is the " Marriage of Samson," 
of the^ Dresden Gallery, painted in 1638. Here Rembrandt gives 
the rein to his imagination and makes the scene live before us. 
Except the bride (Saskia), who sits calm and grand on a dais in the 
centre of the feast, with the full light again playing on her flowing 
locks and wealth of jewels, all is animated and full of bustle. Sam- 
son, evidently a Rembrandt of fantasy, leans' over a chair pro- 
pounding his riddle to the Philistine lords. In execution it is a 
great advance on former subject pictures; it is bolder in manner, 
and we have here signs of his approaching love of warmer tones of 
red and yellow. 

The story of Susannah also occupied him in these earlv years, 
and he returned to the subject in 1641 and 1653. "The Bather " 
of the National Gallery may be another interpretation of the same 
theme. ^ In all of these pictures the woman is coarse in type and 
lumpy in form, though the modelling is soft and round, the effect 
which Rembrandt always strove to gain. Beauty of form was 
outside his art ; But the so-called " Danae " (1636) at St Peters- 
burg is a sufficient reply to those who deny his ability ever to ap- 
preciate the beauty of the nude female form. It glows with colour 
and life, and the blood seems to pulsate under the warm skin. In 
the picturesque story of Tobit Rembrandt found much to interest 
him, as we see in the beautiful small picture of the d'Arenberg 
Collection at Brussels. Sight is being restored to the aged Tobias, 
while with infinite tenderness his wife holds the old man's hand 
caressingly. The momentary action is complete, and the picture 
goes straight to the heart. In the Berlin Gallery he paints the 
anxiety of the parents as they wait the return of their son. In 
1637 he painted the fine picture now in the Louvre of the " Flight 
of the Angel "; and the same subject is grandly treated by him, 



REMBRANDT 



79 






apparently about 1645, in the picture exhibited in the winter exhibi- 
tion at Burlington House in 1885. Reverence and awe are shown 
in every attitude of the Tobit family. A similar lofty treatment is 
to be found in the " Christ as the Gardener," appearing to Mary, of 
1638 (Buckingham Palace). 

We have now arrived at the year 1640, the threshold of 
his second manner, which extended to 1654, the middle age of 
Rembrandt. During the latter part of the previous decade we 
find the shadows more transparent and the blending of light 
and shade more perfect. There is a growing power in every 
part of his art. The coldness of his first manner had disappeared, 
and the tones were gradually changing into golden-brown. He 
had passed through what Bode calls his " Sturm-und-Drang " 
period of exaggerated expression, as in the Berlin Samson, and 
had attained to a truer, calmer form of dramatic expression, of 
which the " Manoah " of Dresden is a good example (1641). 
The portraits painted " to order " became more rare about this 
time, and those which we have are chiefly friends of his circle, 
such as the " Mennonite Preacher " (C. C. Ansloo) and the 
" Gilder," a fine example of his golden tone, formerly in the 
Morny collection and now in America. His own splendid 
portrait (1640) in the National Gallery illustrates the change in 
his work. It describes the man well-^-strong and robust, with 
powerful head, firm and compressed lips and determined chin, 
with heavy eyebrows, separated by a deep vertical furrow, and 
with eyes of keen penetrating glance — altogether a self-reliant 
man that would carry out his own ideas, careless whether his 
popularity waxed or waned. The fantastic rendering of himself 
has disappeared; he seems more conscious of his dignity and 
position. He has now many friends and pupils, and numerous 
■commissions, even from the stadtholder; he has bought a large 
house in the Breedstraat, in which during the next sixteen years 
of his life he gathers his large collection of paintings, engravings, 
armour and costume which figure afterwards in his inventory. 
His taste was wide and his purchases large, for he was joint 
owner with picture-dealers of paintings by Giorgione and Palma 
Vecchio, while for a high-priced Marcantonio Raimondi print 
he gave in exchange a fine impression of his " Christ Healing 
the Sick," which has since been known as the " Hundred Guilder 
Print." The stadtholder was not a prompt payer, and an 
interesting correspondence took place between Rembrandt and 
Constantin Huygens, the poet and secretary of the prince. The 
Rembrandt letters which have come down to us are few, and 
these are therefore of importance. Rembrandt puts a high 
value on the picture, which he says had been painted " with 
much care and zeal," but he is willing to take what the prince 
thinks proper; while to Huygens he sends a large picture as a 
present for his trouble in carrying through the business. There 
is here no sign of the grasping greed with which he has been 
charged, while his unselfish conduct is seen in the settlement of 
the family affairs at the death of his mother in 1640. 

The year 1642 is remarkable for the great picture formerly known 
as the " Night Watch," but now more correctly as the " Sortie 
of the Banning Cock Company," another of the landmarks of Rem- 
brandt's career, in which twenty-nine life-sized civic guards are 
introduced issuing pell-mell from their club house. Such gilds 
of arquebusiers had been painted admirably before by Ravesteyn 
and notably by; Frans Hals, but Rembrandt determined to throw 
life and animation into the scene, which is full of bustle and move- 
ment. The dominant colour is the citron yellow uniform of the 
lieutenant, wearing a blue sash, while a Titian-like red dress of a 
musketeer, the black velvet dress of the captain, and the varied 
green of the girl and drummer, all produce a rich and harmonious 
effect. The background has become dark and heavy by accident 
or neglect, and the scutcheon on which the names are painted is 
scarcely to be seen. It is to be observed that, as proved by the 
copy by Gerrit Lundens in the National Gallery, it represents not a 
" night watch," except in name, but a day watch. 

But this year of great achievement was also the year of his great 
loss, for Saskia died in 16^2, leaving Rembrandt her sole trustee 
for her son Titus, but with full use of the money till he should 
marry again or till the marriage of Titus. The words of the will 
express her love for her husband and her confidence in him. With 
her death his life was changed. Bode has remarked that there 
is a pathetic sadness in his pictures of the Holy Family — a favourite 
subject at this period of his life. All of these he treats with the 
naive simplicity of Reformed Holland, giving us the real carpenter's 



shop and the mother t watching over the Infant reverently and 
lovingly, with a fine union of realism and idealism. 

The street in which he lived was full of Dutch and Portuguese 
Jews, and many a Jewish rabbi sat to him. He accepted or invented 
their turbans and local dress as characteristic of the people. But 
in his religious pictures it is not the costume we look at; what 
strikes us is the profound perception of the sentiment of the story, 
making them true to all time and independent of local circumstance. 
A notable example of this feeling is to be found in the " Woman 
Taken in Adultery " of the National Gallery, painted in 1644 in 
the manner of the " Simeon " of the Hague. Beyond the ordinary 
claims of art, it commands our attention from the grand conception 
of the painter who here, as in other pictures and etchings, has invested 
Christ with a majestic dignity which recalls Lionardo and no other. 
A similar lofty ideal is to be found in his various renderings of the 
" Pilgrims at Emmaus," notably in the Louvre picture of 1648, 
in which, as Mrs Jameson says, " he returns to those first spiritual 
principles which were always the dowry of ancient art." From the 
same year we have the " Good Samaritan " of the Louvre, the story 
of which is told with intense pathos. The helpless suffering of the 
wounded man, the curiosity of the boy on tiptoe, the excitea faces 
at the uprjer window, are all conveyed with masterly skill. In these 
last two pictures we find a broader touch and freer handling, while 
the tones pass into a dull yellow and brown with a marked pre- 
dilection for deep rich red. Whether it was that this scheme of 
colour found no favour with the Amsterdamers, who, as Hoo£- 
straten tells us, could not understand the " Sortie," it seems certain 
that Rembrandt was not invited to take any leading part in the 
celebration of the congress of Westphalia (1648). 

Rembrandt touched no side of art without setting his mark on it, 
whether in still life, as in his dead birds or the " Slaughtered Ox " 
of the Louvre (with its repetitions at Glasgow and Budapest), or 
in his drawings of elephants and lions, all of which are instinct with 
life. But at^ this period of his career we come upon a branch of 
his art on which he left, both in etching and in*painting, the stamp 
of his genius, viz. landscape. Roeland Roghman, but ten years 
his senior, evidently influenced his style, for the resemblance between 
their works is so great that, as at Cassel, there has been confusion 
of authorship. Hercules Sieghers also was much appreciated by 
Rembrandt, for at his sale eight pictures by this master figure in 
the inventory, and Vosmaer discovered that Rembrandt had worked 
on a plate by Seghers and had added figures to an etched " Flight 
into Egypt.' The earliest pure landscape known to us from Rem- 
brandt's hand is that at the Ryks Museum (1637-38), followed in 
the latter year by those at Brunswick, Cracow and Boston (U.S.A.), 
and that dated 1638 and belonging to Mr G. Rath in Budapest. 
Better known is the " Winter Scene " of Cassel (1646), silvery and 
delicate. _ As a rule in his painted landscape he aims at grandeur 
and poetical effect, as in the " Repose of the Holy Family " of 
1647 (formerly called the " Gipsies "), a moonlight effect, clear 
even in the shadows. The " Canal " of Lord Lansdowne, and the 
" Mountain Landscape with Approaching Storm," the sun shining 
out behind the heavy clouds, are both conceived and executed in 
this spirit. A similar poetical vein runs through the " Castle 
on the Hill " of Cassel, in which the beams of the setting sun strike 
on the castle while the valley is sunk in the shades of approaching 
night. More powerful still is the weird effect of Lord Lansdowne's 
" Windmill," with its glow of light and darkening shadows. In 
all these pictures light with its magical influences is the theme of 
the poet-painter. From the number of landscapes by himself in 
the inventory of his sale, it would appear that these grand works 
were not . appreciated by his contemporaries. The last of the 
landscape series dates from 1655 or 1656, the close of the middle 
age or manhood of Rembrandt, a period of splendid power. In the 
" Joseph Accused by Potiphar's Wife " of 1654 we have great 
dramatic vigour and perfect mastery of expression, while the 
brilliant colour and glowing effect of light and shade attest his 
strength. To this period also belongs the great portrait of himself 
in the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge. 

But evil days were at hand. The long-continued wars and 
civil troubles had worn out the country, and money was scarce. 
Rembrandt's and doubtless Saskia's means were tied up in his 
house and in his large collection of valuable pictures, and we find 
Rembrandt borrowing considerable sums of money on the security 
of his house to keep things going. Perhaps, as Bode suggests, 
this was the reason of his extraordinary activity at this time. 
Then, unfortunately, in this year of 1654, we find Rembrandt 
involved in the scandal of having a child by his servant Hendrickje 
Jaghers or Stoffels, as appears by the books of the Reformed 
Church at Amsterdam. He recognized the child and gave it the 
name of Cornelia, after his much-loved mother, but there is no 
proof that he married the mother, and the probability is against 
such a marriage, as the provisions of Saskia's will would in that 
case have come into force, and her fortune would have passed 
at once to her son Titus. Hendrickje' seems to have continued 



8o 



REMBRANDT 



to live with him, for we find her claiming a chest as her property 
at his sale in 1658. Doubtless she is the peasant girl of Rasdorf 
to whom Houbraken says Rembrandt was married. Sad as the 
story is, Hendrickje has an interest for us. Bode asserts that in 
his art there was always a woman in close relationship to Rem- 
brandt and appearing in his work — his mother, his sister and 
then Saskia. 

He also suggests that the beautiful portrait of the " Lady " 
in the Salon Carr6 of the Louvre and the " Venus and Cupid " of 
the same gallery may represent Hendrickje and her child. Both 
pictures belong to this date, and by their treatment are removed 
from the category of Rembrandt's usual portraits. But if this 
is conjecture, we get nearer to fact when we look at the picture 
exhibited at Burlington House in 1883 to which tradition has 
attached the name of " Rembrandt's Mistress," now in the 
Edinburgh National Gallery. At a glance one can see that it is 
not the mere head of a model, as she lies in bed raising herself 
to put aside a curtain as if she heard a well-known footstep. It 
is clearly a woman in whom Rembrandt had a personal interest. 
The date is clearly 165 — the fourth figure being illegible; but 
the brilliant carnations and masterly touch connect it with 
the " Potiphar's Wife " of 1654 and the Jaghers period. In 1656 
Rembrandt's financial affairs became more involved, and the 
Orphans' Chamber transferred the house and ground to Titus, 
though Rembrandt was still allowed to take charge of Saskia's 
estate. Nothing, however, could avert the ruin of the painter, 
who was declared bankrupt in July 1656, an inventory of all his 
property being ordered by the Insolvency Chamber. The first 
sale took place in 1657 in the Keizerskroon hotel; and the second 
in 1658, when the larger part of the etchings and drawings were 
disposed of — " collected by Rembrandt himself with much love 
and care," says the catalogue. The sum realized, under 5000 
guilders, was but a fraction of their value. The time was 
unfavourable over the whole of Europe for such sales, the 
renowned collection of Charles I. of England having brought but 
a comparatively small sum in 1653. Driven thus from his house, 
stripped of everything he possessed, even to his table linen, 
Rembrandt took a modest lodging in the same Keizerskroon 
hostelry (the amounts of his bills are on record), apparently 
without friends and thrown entirely on himself. 

But this dark year of 1656 stands' out prominently as one in which 
some of his greatest works were produced, as, for example, " John 
the Baptist preaching in the Wilderness," of the Berlin Gallery, and 
" Jacob blessing the Sons of Joseph," of the Cassel Gallery. It 
is impossible not to respect the man who, amid the utter ruin of his 
affairs, could calmly conceive and carry out such noble work. Yet 
even in his art one can see that the tone of his mind was sombre. 
Instead of the brilliancy of 1654 we have for two or three years a 
preference for dull yellows, reds and greys, with a certain uni- 
formity of tone. The handling is broad and rapid, as if to give 
utterance to the ideas which crowded on his mind. There is less 
caressing of colour for its own sake, even less straining after 
vigorous effect of light and shade. Still the two pictures just named 
are among the greatest works of the master. To the same year 
belongs the " Lesson in Anatomy of Johann Deyman." The sub- 
ject is similar to the great Tulp of 1632, but his manner and power 
of colour had advanced so much that Sir Joshua Reynolds, in his 
visit to Holland in 1781, was reminded by it of Michelangelo and 
Titian. 1 Vosmaer ascribes to the same year, though Bode places 
it later, the famous ^ " Portrait of Jan Six," the future burgo- 
master, consummate in its ease and character, as Six descends the 
steps of his house drawing on his glove. The connexion between 
Rembrandt and the great family of Six was long and close. In 
1641, the mother of Six, Anna Wymer, had been painted with con- 
summate skill by Rembrandt, who also executed in 1647 the beauti- 
ful etching of Six standing by a window reading his tragedy of 
Medea, afterwards illustrated by his friend. Now he paints his 
portrait in the prime of manhood, and in the same year of gloom 
paints for him the masterly " John the Baptist." Six, if he could 
not avert the disaster of Rembrandt's life, at least stood by him in 
the darkest hour, when certainly the creative energy of Rembrandt 

1 This picture has had a strange history. It had suffered by fire 
and was sold to a Mr Chaplin of London in 1841, was exhibited in 
Leeds in 1868, and again disappeared, ultimately to be found in the 
storeroom of the South Kensington Museum as a doubtful Rem- 
brandt. The patriotism of some Dutch lovers of art restored it to 
its native country; and it now hangs, a magnificent fragment, in 
the museum of Amsterdam. 



was in full play. The same period gives us the " Master of the 
Vineyard," and the " Adoration of the Magi " of Buckingham 
Palace. 

After the sale of the house in the Breedstraat, Rembrandt retired 
to the Rosengracht f an obscure quarter at the west end of the city. 
We are now drawing to the splendid close of his career in his third 
manner, in which his touch became broader, his impasto more solid 
and his knowledge more complete. We may mention the " Old 
Man with the Grey Beard " of the National Gallery (1657) and the 
" Bruyningh, the Secretary of the Insolvents' Chamber, of Cassel 
(1658), both leading up to the great portraits of the " Syndics of 
the Cloth Hall "of 1661. Nearly thirty years separate us from the 
" Lesson in Anatomy," years of long-continued observation and 
labour. The knowledge thus gathered, the problems solved, the 
mastery attained, are shown here in abundance. Rembrandt 
returns to the simplest gamut of colour, but shows his skill in the 
use of it, leaving on the spectator an impression of absolute enjoy- 
ment of the result, unconscious of the means. The plain burghers, 
dealing with the simple concerns of their gild arrest our attention 
as if they were the makers of history. They live for ever; and we 
close our eyes to the strange perspective of the table. 

In his old age Rembrandt continued to paint his own portrait 
as assiduously as in his youthful and happy days. About 
twenty of these portraits are known; a typical one is to be found 
in the National Gallery. All show the same self-reliant expres- 
sion, though broken down indeed by age and the cares of a hard 
life. 

About the year 1663 Rembrandt painted the (so-called) 
" Jewish Bride " of the Ryks Museum in Amsterdam, and the 
" Family Group " of Brunswick, the last and perhaps the most 
brilliant works of his life, bold and rapid in execution and 
marvellous in the subtle mixture and play of colours in which 
he seems to revel. The woman and children are painted with 
such love that the impression is conveyed that they represent a 
fancy family group of the painter in his old age. This idea 
received some confirmation from the supposed discovery that 
he left a widow Catherine Van Wyck and two children, but this 
theory falls to the ground, for de Roever has shown {Oud 
Holland, 1883) that Catherine was the widow of a marine painter 
Theunisz Blanckerhoff, who died about the same time as Rem- 
brandt. The mistake arose from a miscopying of the register. 
The subject of these pictures is thus more mysterious than ever. 

In 1668 Titus, the only son of Rembrandt, died, leaving one 
child, and on the 8th of October 1669 the great painter himself 
passed away, leaving two children, and was buried in the Wester 
Kerk. He had outlived his popularity, for his manner of paint- 
ing, as we know from contemporaries, was no longer in favour 
with a people who preferred the smooth trivialities of Van der 
Werff and the younger Mieris, the leaders of an expiring school. 

We must give but a short notice of Rembrandt's achievements in 
etching. Here he stands out by universal confession as first, excel- 
ling by his unrivalled technical skill, his mastery of expression and 
the lofty conceptions of many of his great pieces, as in the " Death 
of the Virgin, the " Christ Preaching," the " Christ Healing the 
Sick " (the " Hundred Guilder Print ), the " Presentation to the 
People," the " Crucifixion " and others. So great is his skill simply 
as an etcher that one is apt to overlook the nobleness of the etcher s 
ideas and the depth of his nature, and this tendency has been doubt- 
less confirmed by the enormous difference in money value between 
11 states " of the same plate, rarity giving in many cases a factitious 
worth in the eyes of collectors. A single impression of one of his 
etchings — " Rembrandt with a Sabre " — realized £2000 at the 
Holford sale in 
fetched 
points 

and changes made by Rembrandt on the plate; and the prints 
taken off by him have been subjected to the closest inspection by 
Bartsch, Gersaint, Wilson, Daulby, De Claussin, C. Blanc, Willshire, 
Seymour Haden, Middleton and others, who have described them 
at great length, and to whom the reader is referred. The classifica- 
tion of Rembrandt's etchings adopted till lately was according to 
the subject, as Biblical, portrait, landscape, and so on; until 
Vosmaer attempted the more scientific and interesting line of 
chronology. This method has been developed by Sir F. Seymour 
Haden and Middleton.^ But even in 1873 C. Blanc, in his fine work 
UQLuvre complet de Rembrandt, still adheres to the older and less 
intelligent arrangement, resting his • preference on the frequent 
absence of dates on the etchings and more strangely still on the 
equality of the work. Sir Seymour Haden 's reply is " that the more 
important etchings which may be taken as types are dated, and 
that, the style of the etchings at different periods of Rembrandt's 
career being fully as marked as that of his paintings, no more 



REMEDIOS— REMIREMONT 



8r 



difficulty attends the classification of one than of the other." In- 
deed Vosmaer points out in his Life of Rembrandt that there is a 
marked parallelism between Rembrandt's painted and etched work, 
his early work in both cases being timid and tentative, while he 
gradually gains strength and character both with the brush and the 
graver's tools. 

In his VCEuvre complet de Rembrandt (Paris, 1885), Eugene Dutuit 
rejects the classification of C. Blanc as dubious and unwarranted, 
dismisses the chronological arrangement proposed by Vosmaer and 
adopted by Seymour Haden and Middleton as open to discussion 
and lacking in possibility of proof, and reverts to the order estab- 
lished by Gersaint, ranging his materials under twelve heads: 
Portraits (real and supposed), Old Testament and New Testament 
subjects, histories, landscapes, &c. Sir Seymour Haden originated 
the theory that many of the etchings ascribed to Rembrandt up to 
1640 were the work ofhis pupils, and seems to make out his case, 
though it may be carried too far. He argues (in his monograph on 
the Etched Work of Rembrandt, 1877) that Rembrandt's real work in 
etching began after Saskia's death, when he assumes that Rembrandt 
betook himself to Elsbroek, the country house of his "powerful 
friend " Jan Six. But it must be remembered that the future 
burgomaster was then but a student of twenty-four, a member of a 
great family it is true, but unmarried and taking as yet no share in 
public life. That Rembrandt was a frequent visitor at Elsbroek, 
and that the " Three Trees " and other etchings may have been pro- 
duced there, may be admitted without requiring us to believe that 
he had left Amsterdam as his place of abode. The great period of 
his etching lies between 1639 and 1661, after which the old painter 
seems to nave renounced the needle. In these twenty years were 
produced his greatest ^ works in portraiture, landscape and Bible 
story. They bear the impress of the genius of the map. 

In addition to the authors named, the reader is referred to 
W. Burger, (the nom de plume of T. Thor6), Musies de la Hollande 
(1858-60); E. Fromentin, Maitres d' autrefois; H. Havard, V&cole 
Hollandaise; Scheltema, Rembrandt, discours sur sa vie (1866); Ath. 
Cocquerel fils, Rembrandt, son indivtdualisme dans Vart (Paris, 1869) ; 
Dr Langbehn, Rembrandt als Erzieher (Leipzig, 1890); Emile 
Michel, Rembrandt, sa vie, son ceuvre, et son temps (Pans, 1893); 
P. G. Hamerton, Rembrandt's Etchings (London, 1894); Malcolm 
Bell, Rembrandt van Rijn and his Work (London, 1899); Adolf 
Rosenberg, Rembrandt, des Meisters Gemalde (Stuttgart and Leipzig, 



lpzig, 



reproducing A02 etchings. The chronological, geographical and 
classifying indexes in both books are of particular utility. 

(J.F.W.; P.G. K.) 

REMEDIOS, or San Juan de Los Remedios, town of Santa 
Clara province, Cuba, in the municipality of San Juan de Los 
Remedios. Pop. of the town (1907), 6988; of the munici- 
pality, 21,573. The town is served by a branch of the Cuban 
Central railway, extending from Caibarien to Camajuani, where 
it connects with the main line. The site is low and flat, and 
unhealthily wet in the rainy season. The port of Remedios 
i5 Caibarien (pop. in 1907, 8333), on the N. coast, about 5 m. E. 
Both are in the sugar country, and sugar is the base of their 
economic interests. The first settlement on the site of the 
present town was made in 151 5-16, and in 1545 Remedios was 
created a villa with an ayuntamiento (council). 

REMEMBRANCER, the name originally of certain subordinate 
officers of the English Exchequer. The office itself is of great 
antiquity, the holder having been termed remembrancer, 
memorator, rememorator, registrar, keeper of the register, 
despatcher of business (Maddox, History of the Exchequer). 
There were at one time three clerks of the remembrance, styled 
king's remembrancer, lord treasurer's remembrancer and re- 
membrancer of first-fruits. The latter two offices have become 
extinct, that of remembrancer of first-fruits by the diversion 
of the fund (Queen Anne's Bounty Act 1838), and that of lord 
treasurer's remembrancer on being merged in the office of king's 
remembrancer (1833). By the Queen's Remembrancer Act 
1859 the office ceased to exist separately, and the queen's 
remembrancer was required to be a master of the court of 
exchequer. The Judicature Act 1873, s. 77, attached the office 
to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court of Judicature 
(Officers) Act 1879 transferred it to the central office of the 
Supreme Court. By s. 8 the king's remembrancer is a master 
of the Supreme Court, and the office is usually filled by the 
senior master. The king's remembrancer department of the 
central office is now amalgamated with the judgments and 
married women's acknowledgments department. The king's 



remembrancer still assists at certain ceremonial functions — 
relics of the former importance of the office— such as the nomina- 
tion of sheriffs, the swearing-in of the lord mayor of London, 
the trial of the pyx and the acknowledgments of homage for 
crown lands. Other duties are set out in the Second Report of 
the Legal Departments Commission^ 1874. 

" Remembrancer " is also the title of an official of the cor- 
poration of the city of London, whose principal duty is to 
represent that body before parliamentary committees and at 
council and treasury boards. 

REMIGIUS, ST (c. 437-533), bishop of Reims and the friend 
of Clovis, whom he converted to Christianity. According to 
Gregory of Tours, 3000 Franks were baptized with Clovis by 
Remigius on Christmas Day, 496, after the defeat of the Ala- 
manni. With the growing power of the papacy a good many 
fictions grew up around his name, e.g. that he anointed Clovis 
with oil from the sacred ampulla, and that Pope Hormisdas had 
recognized him as primate of France. The Commentary on the- 
Pauline Epistles (ed. Villalpandus, 1699) is not his work, but that 
of Remigius of Auxerre. 

For authorities see H. Jadart, Bibliographic des outrages cone, 
la vie et le culte de S. Remi . . . (Reims, 1891), which contains 126 
references, 

REMINGTON, FREDERICK (1861-1909), American artist, 
was born at Canton, New York, on the 4th of October r86i. 
He was a pupil of the Yale Art School, and of the Art Students'" 
League, New York, and became known as an illustrator,, 
painter and sculptor. Having spent much time in the West,, 
whither he went for his health, and having been with the 
United States troops in actual warfare, he made a specialty of 
rendering the North American Indian and the United States 
soldier as seen on the western plains. In the Spanish-American 
War he was with the army under General Shafter as war corre- 
spondent. He died on the 26th of December 1909, near Ridge- 
field, Connecticut. His statuettes of soldiers, Indians, cowboys 
and trappers are full of character, while his paintings have been 
largely reproduced. He wrote several volumes of stories, 
including Pony Tracks (1895), Crooked Trails (1898), Sundown 
Leflare (1899), and John Ermine of the Yellowstone (1902). 

REMINISCENCE (from Lat. reminisci t to remember), the 
recognized translation of the Greek b.vhixvq<ns, which is used 
technically by Plato in his doctrine that the soul recovers 
knowledge of which it had direct intuition in a former incorporeal 
existence. The doctrine may be regarded as the poetical 
precursor of modern a priori theories of knowledge and of 
" race-memory " and the like. In common language " remi- 
niscence " is synonymous with " recollection." 

REMIREMONT, a town of eastern France, capital of an 
arrondissement in the department of Vosges, 17 m. S.S.E. of 
Spinal by rail, on the Moselle, a mile below its confluence with 
the Moselotte. Pop. town, 8782; commune, 10,548. Remire- 
mont is surrounded by forest-clad mountains, and commanded 
by Fort Parmont, one of the Moselle line of defensive works. 
The abbey church, consecrated in 1051, has a crypt of the nth 
century in which are the tombs of some of the abbesses, but as a 
whole belongs to the late r3th century. The abbatial residence 
(which now contains the mairie, the court-house and the public 
library) has been twice rebuilt in modern times (in 1750 and 
again after a fire in 1871), but the original plan and style have 
been preserved in the imposing front, the vestibule and the 
grand staircase. Some of the houses of the canonesses dating 
from the 17th and 18th centuries also remain. Remiremont 
is the seat of a sub-prefect and has a tribunal of first instance, 
a communal college, a board of trade-arbitration and a chamber 
of arts and manufactures. Its industries include cotton-spinning 
and weaving, the manufacture of hosiery and embroidery, iron 
and copper founding and the manufacture of boots and shoes 
and brushes. 

Remiremont (Romarici Mons) derives its name from St 
Romaric, one of the companions of St Columban of Luxeuil, 
who in the 7th century founded a monastery and a convent 
on the hills above the present town. In 910 the nuns, menaced 



82 



REMONSTRANTS— REMUSAT, COMTE DE 



by the invasion of the Hungarians, took refuge at Remiremont, 
which had grown up round a villa of the Frankish kings, and in 
the nth century they permanently settled there. Enriched 
by dukes ©f Lorraine, kings of France and emperors of Germany, 
the ladies of Remiremont attained great power. The abbess was 
a princess of the empire, and received consecration at the hands 
of the pope. The fifty canonesses were selected from those 
who could give proof of noble descent. On Whit-Monday the 
neighbouring parishes paid homage to the chapter in a ceremony 
called the "Kyrioles"; and on their accession Ihe dukes of 
Lorraine, the immediate suzerains of the abbey, had to come to 
Remiremont to swear to continue their protection. The " War 
of the Scutcheons " (Panonceaux) in 1566 between the duke and 
the abbess ended in favour of the duke; and the abbess never 
recovered her former position. In the 17th century the ladies 
of Remiremont fell away so much from the original monastic 
rule as to take the title of countesses, renounce their vows and 
marry. The town was attacked by the French in 1638 and 
ruined by the earthquake of 1682. With the rest of Lorraine 
it was joined to France in 1766. The monastery on the hill 
and the nunnery in the town were both suppressed in the 
Revolution. 

REMONSTRANTS, the name given to those Dutch Protestants 
who, after the death of Arminius (q.v.), maintained the views 
associated with his name, and in 16 10 presented to the states of 
Holland and Friesland a " remonstrance " in five articles 
formulating their points of departure from stricter Calvinism. 
These were: (1) that the divine decree of predestination is 
conditional, not absolute; (2) that the Atonement is in intention 
universal; (3) that man cannot of himself exercise a saving 
faith; (4) that though the grace of God is a necessary condition 
of human effort it does not act irresistibly in man; (5) that 
believers are able to resist sin but are not beyond the possibility 
of falling from grace. Their adversaries (the Gomarists) met 
them with a " counter-remonstrance," and so wer.e known as the 
Counter-Remonstrants. Although the states-general issued an 
edict tolerating both parties and forbidding further dispute, the 
conflict continued, and the Remonstrants were assailed both 
by personal enemies and by the political weapons of Maurice 
of Orange, who executed and imprisoned their leaders for holding 
republican views. In 1618-19 the synod of Dort (see Dort, 
Synod of), the thirteen Arminian pastors headed by Simon 
Episcopius (q.v.) being shut out, established the victory of the 
Calvinist school, drew up ninety-three canonical rules, and 
confirmed the authority of the Belgic Confession and the 
Heidelberg Catechism. The judgment of the synod was enforced 
by the deposition and in some cases the banishment of Remon- 
strant ministers; but the government soon became convinced 
that their party was not dangerous to the state, and in 1630 they 
were formally allowed liberty to reside in all parts of Holland 
and build churches and schools. In 1621 they had already 
received liberty to make a settlement in Schleswig, where they 
built the town of Friedrichstadt. This colony still exists. The 
doctrine of the Remonstrants was embodied in 16 21 in a confessio 
written by Episcopius, their great theologian, while J. Uyten- 
bogaert gave them a catechism and regulated their churchly 
order. The Remonstrants adopted a simple synodical constitu- 
tion; but their importance was henceforth more theological 
than ecclesiastical. Their seminary in Amsterdam has boasted 
of many distinguished names — Curcellaeus, Limborch, Wetstein, 
Le Clerc; and their liberal school of theology, which naturally 
grew more liberal and even rationalistic, reacted powerfully 
on the state church and on other Christian denominations. 
The Remonstrants first received official recognition in 1795. As 
a church they now number 27 communities with about 12,500 
members, in a flourishing condition and respected for their 
traditions of scholarship and liberal thought. Their chief- 
congregation is in Rotterdam. 

REMPHAN, the Authorized Version's rendering of the Greek 
word variously appearing in Acts vii. 48 as To/i0&, 'Pe/i^ap, 
Te^a/x, Tat^&v, Te^&v. It is part of a quotation from 
Amos v. 26, where the ,Septuagint 'Pai^d? or Te^&v stands 



for the Hebrew P*3 Chuin or Kewan. The Greek forms are 
probably simple mistakes for the Hebrew, k ( D ) having been 
replaced by r (">) and ph (tj>) substituted for v 0). Kewan 
is probably the old Babylonian Ka(y)awanu } the planet Saturn, 
another (the Akkadian) name for which is Sakkul, which appears 
as Siccuth in the earlier part of the verse. 

REMSCHEID, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine 
Province, situated on an elevated plateau, 1100 ft. above sea- 
level, 6 m. by rail S. of Barmen and 20 m. N.E. of Cologne. 
Pop. (1905) 64,340. Remscheid is a centre of the hardware 
industry, and large quantities of tools, scythes, skates and 
other small articles in iron, steel and brass are made for export 
to all parts of Europe, the East, and North and South America. 
The name of Remscheid occurs in a document of 1132, and 
the town received the first impulse to its industrial importance 
through the immigration of Protestant refugees from France 
and Holland. 

R6MUSAT, CHARLES FRANCOIS MARIE, Comte de (1797- 
1875), French politician and man of letters, was born in Paris 
on the 13th of March 1797. His father, Auguste Laurent, 
Comte de Remusat, of a good family of Toulouse, was chamber- 
lain to Napoleon, but acquiesced in the restoration and became 
prefect first of Haute Garonne, and then of Nord. His mother's 
maiden name was Claire filisabeth Jeanne Gravier de Ver- 
gennes, born in 1780. She married at sixteen, and was attached 
to Josephine as dame du palais in 1802. Talleyrand was among 
her admirers, and she was generally recognized as a woman of 
great intellectual capacity and personal grace. After her 
death (1824) an Essai sur V education des femtnes was published 
and received an academic cottronne. But it was not until her 
grandson Paul de R6musat published her MSmoires (3 vols., 
Paris, 1870-80), which have since been followed by some corre- 
spondence with her son (2 vols., 188 1), that justice could be 
done to her literary talent. Much light was thrown on the 
Napoleonic court by this book, and on the youth and education 
of her son Charles. He early developed political views more 
liberal than those of his parents, and, being bred to the bar, 
published in 1820 a pamphlet on trial by jury. He was an 
active journalist, showing in philosophy and literature the 
influence of Cousin, and is said to have furnished to no small 
extent the original of Balzac's brilliant egoist Henri de Marsay. 
He signed the journalists' protest against the Ordinances of 
July 1830, and in the following October was elected deputy 
.for Haute Garonne. He then ranked himself with the doctrin- 
aires, and supported most of those measures of restriction on 
popular liberty which made the July monarchy unpopular with 
French Radicals. In 1836 he became for a short time under- 
secretary of state for the interior. He then became an ally of 
Thiers, and in 1840 held the ministry of the interior for a brief 
period. In the same year he became an Academician. For 
the rest of Louis Philippe's reign he was in opposition till he 
joined Thiers in his attempt at a ministry in the spring of 1848. 
During this time R6musat constantly spoke in the chamber, 
but was still more active in literature, especially on philosophical 
subjects, the most remarkable of his works being his book on 
Abelard (2 vols., 1845). In 1848 he was elected, and in 1849 
re-elected, for Haute Garonne, and voted with the Conservative 
side. He had to leave France after the coup d'etat; nor did he 
re-enter political life during the Second Empire until 1869, when 
he founded a moderate opposition journal at Toulouse. In 1871 
he refused the Vienna embassy offered him by Thiers, but in 
August he was appointed minister of foreign affairs in succession 
to M. Jules Favre. Although minister he was not a deputy, and 
on standing for Paris in September 1873 he was beaten by Desire 
Barodet. A month later he was elected (having already 
resigned with Thiers) for Haute Garonne by a great majority. 
He died in Paris on the 6th of January 1875. 

During his abstention from politics Remusat continued to 
write on philosophical history, especially English. Saint 
Anselme de Cantorbery appeared in 1854; UAnglcterre au 
XVIIIeme Steele in 1856 (2nd ed. enlarged, 1865); Bacon, sa vie, 



REMUSAT, J. P. A.— RENAISSANCE 



83 



son temps >&c n in 1858; Channing, sa vie et ses muvres, in 1862; 
John Wesley in 1870; Lord Herbert de Cherbury in 1874; His- 
toire de la philosophic en Angleterre depuis Bacon jusqu'd Locke 
in 1875; besides other and minor works. He wrote well, was 
a forcible speaker and an acute critic; but his adoption of the 
indeterminate eclecticism of Cousin in philosophy and of the 
somewhat similarly indeterminate liberalism of Thiers in politics 
probably limited his powers, though both no doubt accorded 
with his critical and unenthusiastic turn of mind. 

His son Paul de Remusat (1831-1897) became a distin- 
guished journalist and writer. He was for many years a regular 
contributor to the Revue des deux mondes. He stood for election 
in Haute-Garonne in 1869 in opposition to the imperial policy 
and failed, but was elected to the National Assembly in 1871 
and later. In 1890 he entered the Acad6mie des sciences 
morales et politiqucs. 

R&WUSAT, JEAN PIERRE ABEL (1 788-1832), French 
Chinese scholar, was born in Paris on the 5th of September 1788. 
He was educated for the medical profession, but a Chinese 
herbal in the collection of the Abbe Tersan attracted his atten- 
tion, and he taught himself to read it by great perseverance 
and with imperfect help. At the end of five years' study he 
produced in 181 1 an Essai sur la langue ct la litter ature chinoises, 
and a paper on foreign languages among the Chinese, which 
procured him the patronage of Silvestre de Sacy. In 1814 a 
chair of Chinese was founded at the College de France, and 
Remusat was placed in it. From this time he gave himself 
wholly to the languages of the Far East, and published a series 
of useful works, among which his contributions from Chinese 
sources to the history of the Tatar nations claim special notice. 
Remusat became an editor of the Journal de savants in 1818, 
and founder and first secretary of the Paris Asiatic Society in 
1822; he also held various Government appointments. He 
died at Paris on the 4th of June 1832. A list of his works is 
given in Querard's France littiraire s.v. Remusat. 

RENAISSANCE, THE.— The " Renaissance " or " Renascence " 
"is a term used to indicate a well-known but indefinite space 
of time and a certain phase in the development of Europe. 1 On 
the one hand it denotes the transition from that period of his- 
tory which we call the middle ages (q.v.) to that which we call 
modern. On the other hand it implies those changes in the 
intellectual and moral attitude of the Western nations by which 
the transition was characterized. If we insist upon the literal 
and etymological meaning of the word, the Renaissance was a 
re-birth; and it is needful to inquire of what it was the re-birth. 
The metaphor of Renaissance may signify the entrance of the 
European nations upon a fresh stage of vital energy in general, 
implying a fuller consciousness and a freer exercise of faculties 
than had belonged to the medieval period. Or it may mean the 
resuscitation of simply intellectual activities, stimulated by the 
revival of antique learning and its application to the arts and 
literatures of modern peoples. Upon our choice between these 
two interpretations of the word depend important differences in 
any treatment of the subject. The former has the disadvantage 
of making it difficult to separate the Renaissance from other 
historical phases — the Reformation, for example — with which 
it ought not to be confounded. The latter has the merit of 
assigning a specific name to a limited series of events and group 
of facts, which can be distinguished for the purpose of analysis 
from other events and facts with which they are intimately but 
not indissolubly connected. In other words, the one definition 
of Renaissance makes it denote the whole change which came 
over Europe at the close of the middle ages. The other confines 
it to what was known by our ancestors as the Revival of Learning. 
Yet, when we concentrate attention on the recovery of antique 
culture, we become aware that this was only one phenomenon 
or symptom of a far wider and more comprehensive alteration 
in the conditions of the European races. We find it needful to 
retain both terms, Renaissance and Revival of Learning, and 

1 For a somewhat different view of the parcelling out into such 
periods, see the article Middle Ages. 



to show the relations between the scries of events and facts which 
they severally imply. \The Revival of Learning must be regarded 
as a function of that vital energy, an organ of that mental 
evolution, which brought into existence the modern world, with 
its new conceptions of philosophy and religion, its reawakened 
arts and sciences, its firmer grasp on the realities of human nature 
and the world, its manifold inventions and discoveries, its altered 
political systems, its expansive and progressive forces. Im- 
portant as the Revival of Learning undoubtedly was, there are 
essential factors in the complex called the Renaissance with 
which it can but remotely be connected. When we analyse the 
whole group of phenomena which have to be considered, we 
perceive that some of the most essential have nothing or little 
to do with the recovery of the classics. These are, briefly 
speaking, the decay of those great fabrics, church and empire, 
which ruled the middle 'ages both as ideas and as realities; the 
development of nationalities and languages; the enfeeblement 
of the feudal system throughout Europe; the invention and 
application of paper, the mariner's compass, gunpowder, and 
printing; the exploration of continents beyond the ocean; and 
the substitution of the Copcrnican for the Ptolemaic system of 
astronomy. Europe in fact had been prepared for a thorough- 
going metamorphosis before that new ideal of human life and 
culture which the Revival of Learning brought to light had 
been made manifest. It had recovered from the confusion conse- 
quent upon the dissolution of the ancient Roman empire. The 
Teutonic tribes had been Christianized, civilized and assimilated 
to the previously Latinized races over whom they exercised the 
authority of conquerors. Comparative tranquillity and material 
comfort had succeeded to discord and rough living. Modern 
nationalities, defined as separate factors in a common system, 
were ready to co-operate upon the basis of European federation. 
The ideas of universal monarchy and of indivisible Christendom, 
incorporated in the Holy Roman Empire and the Roman 
Church, had so far lost their hold that scope was offered for the 
introduction of new theories both of state and church which would 
have seemed visionary or impious to the medieval mind. It is 
therefore obvious that some term, wider than Revival of Learn- 
ing, descriptive of the change which began to pass over Europe 
in the 14th and 15th centuries, has to be adopted. That of 
Renaissance, Rinascimento, or Renascence is sufficient for the 
purpose, though we have to guard against the tyranny of what is 
after all a metaphor. We must not suffer it to lead us into rhetoric 
about the deadncss and the darkness of the middle ages, or hamper 
our inquiry with preconceived assumptions that the re-birth in 
question was in any true sense a return to the irrecoverable pagan 
past. Nor must we imagine that there was any abrupt break 
with the middle ages. On the contrary, the Renaissance was 
rather the last stage of the middle ages, emerging from ecclesi- 
astical and feudal despotism, developing what was original in 
medieval ideas by the light of classic arts and letters, holding 
in itself the promise of the modern world. It was therefore a 
period and a process of transition, fusion, preparation, tentative 
endeavour. And just at this point the real importance of the 
Revival of Learning may be indicated. That rediscovery of the 
classic past restored the confidence in their own faculties to men 
striving after spiritual freedom; revealed the continuity of 
history* and the identity of human nature in spite of diverse 
creeds and different customs; held up for emulation master- 
works of literature, philosophy and art; provoked inquiry; 
encouraged criticism; shattered the narrow mental barriers 
imposed by medieval orthodoxy.} Humanism, a word which 
will often recur in the ensuing paragraphs, denotes a specific 
bias which the forces liberated in the Renaissance took from 
contact with the ancient world, — the particular form assumed 
by human self-esteem at that epoch, — the ideal of life and 
civilization evolved by the modern nations. It indicates the 
endeavour of man to reconstitute himself as a free being, not as 
the thrall of theological despotism, and the peculiar assistance 
he derived in this effort from Greek and Roman literature, the 
litter ae humaniores, letters leaning rather to the side of man than 
of divinity. 



8 4 



RENAISSANCE 



In this article the Renaissance will be considered as implying 
a comprehensive movement of the European intellect and will 
Method toward self-emancipation, toward reassertion of the 
ottreat» natural rights of the reason and the senses, toward 
meaU Oh<Tconquest of this planet as a place of human occu- 
pation, and toward the formation of regulative theories 
both for states and individuals differing from those of medieval 
times. The Revival of Learning will be treated as a decisive 
factor in this process of evolution on a new plan. To exclude 
the Reformation and the Counter-Reformation wholly from the 
survey is impossible. These terms indicate moments in the 
whole process of modern history which were opposed, each to 
the other, and both to the Renaissance; and it is needful to 
bear in mind that they have, scientifically speaking, a quite 
separate existence. Yet if the history of Europe in the 16th 
century of our era came to be written with the brevity with 
which we write the history of Europe in the 6th century B.C., 
it would be difficult at the distance of time implied by that 
supposition to distinguish the Italian movement of the 
Renaissance in its origin from the German movement of the 
Reformation. Both would be seen to have a common starting- 
point in the reaction against long dominant ideas which were 
becoming obsolete, and also in the excitation of faculties which 
had during the same period been accumulating energy. 

The Renaissance, if we try to regard it as a period, was essentially 
the transition from one historical stage to another. It cannot 
therefore be confined within strict chronological limits. 
Chrono' There is one date, however, which may be remembered 
{?•** zf with advantage as the starting-point in time of the Re- 

naissance, after the departure from the middle ages had 
been definitely and consciously made by the Italians. This is the 
year 1453, when Constantinople, chosen for his capital by the first 
Christian emperor of Rome, fell into the hands of the Turk. One of 
the survivals of the old world, the shadow of what had been the 
Eastern Empire, now passed suddenly away. Almost at the same 
date that visionary revival of the Western Empire, which had im- 
posed for six centuries upon the imagination of medieval Europe, 
hampering Italy and impeding the consolidation of Germany, 
ceased to reckon among political actualities ; a while its more robust 
rival, the Roman Church, seemed likely to sink into the rank of a 
petty Italian principality. It was demonstrated by the destruction 
of the Eastern and the dotage of the Western Empire, and by the 
new papal policy which Nicholas V. inaugurated, that the old order 
of society was about to be # superseded. Nothing remained to check 
those centrifugal forces in state and church which substituted 
a confederation of rival European powers for the earlier ideal 
of universal monarchy, and separate religious constitutions for 
the previous Catholic unity. At the same time the new learning 
introduced by the earlier humanists awakened free thought, encour- 
aged curiosity, and prepared the best minds of Europe for specula- 
tive audacities from which the schoolmen would have shrunk, and 
which soon expressed themselves in acts of cosmopolitan importance. 
If we look a little forward to the years 1492- 1500, we obtain a 
second date of great importance. In these years the expedition of 
Charles VIII. to Naples opened Italy to French, Spanish and 
German interference. The leading nations of Europe began to 
compete for the prize of the peninsula, and learned meanwhile that 
culture which the Italians had perfected. In these years the secular- 
ization of the papacy was carried to its final point by Alexander VI., 
and the Reformation became inevitable. The same period was 
marked by the discovery of America, the exploration of the Indian 
seas, and the consolidation of the Spanish nationality. It also 
witnessed the application of printing to the diffusion of knowledge. 
Thus, speaking roughly, the half-century between 1450 and 1500 
may be termed the culminating point of the Renaissance. The 
transition from the medieval to the modern order was now* secured 
if not accomplished, and a Rubicon had been crossed from which no 
retrogression to the past was possible. Looking yet a little farther, 
to the years 1527 and 1530, a third decisive date is reached. In the 
first of these years happened the sack of Rome, in the second the 
pacification of Italy by Charles V. under a Spanish hegemony. The 
age of the Renaissance was now closed for the land which gave it 
birth. The Reformation had taken firm hold on northern Europe. 
The Counter-Reformation was already imminent. 

It must not be imagined that so great a change as that implied 
by the Renaissance was accomplished without premonitory 
Precur- symptoms and previous endeavours. In the main 
sors of we mean by it the recovery of freedom for the human 
the Re- spirit after a long period of bondage to oppressive 
ua ssanc . ecc i es i as tj ca i anc j political orthodoxy — a return to 
the liberal and practical conceptions of the world which 



the nations of antiquity had enjoyed, but upon a new and 
enlarged platform. This being so, it was inevitable that the 
finally successful efforts after self-emancipation should have 
been anticipated from time to time by strivings within the 
ages that are known as dark and medieval. It is therefore 
part of the present inquiry to pass in review some of the 
claimants to be considered precursors of the Renaissance. 

First of all must be named the Frank in whose lifetime the dual 
conception of universal empire and universal church, divinely ap- 
pointed, sacred and inviolable, began to control the order of Euro- 
pean society. Charles the Great (Charlemagne) lent his forces to 
the plan of resuscitating the Roman empire at a moment when his 
own power made him the arbiter of western Europe, when the papacy 
needed his alliance, and when the Eastern Empire had passed under 
the usurped regency of a female. He modelled an empire, Roman 
in name but essentially Teutonic, since it owed such substance as 
its fabric possessed to Frankish armies and the sinews of the German 
people. As a structure composed of diver? ill-connected parts it 
fell to pieces at its builder's death, leaving little but the incubus 
of a memory, the fascination of a mighty name, to dominate the 
mind of medieval Europe. As an idea, the empire grew in visionary 
power, and remained one of the chief obstacles in the way of botn 
Italian and German national coherence. Real force was not in it, 
but rather in that counterpart to its unlimited pretensions, the 
church, which had evolved it from barbarian night, and which used 
her own more vital energies for'undermining the rival of her creation. 
Charles the Great, having proclaimed himself successor of the Caesars, 
was obscurely ambitious of imitating the Augusti also in the sphere 
of letters. He caused a scheme of humanistic education to be 
formulated, and gave employment at his court to rhetoricians, of 
whom Alcuin was the most considerable. But very little came of 
the revival of learning which Charles is supposed to have encouraged ; 
and the empire he restored was accepted by the medieval intellect 
in a crudely theological and vaguely mystical spirit. We should, 
however, here remember that the study of Roman law, which was 
one important precursory symptom of the Renaissance, owed much 
to medieval respect for the empire as a divine institution. This, 
together with the municipal Italian intolerance of the Lombard and 
Frankish codes, kept alive the practice and revived the science of 
Latin jurisprudence at an early period. ^ 

Philosophy had attempted to free itself from the trammels of 
theological orthodoxy in the hardy speculations of some schoolmen, 
notably of Scotus Engena and Abelard. These innovators 
found, however, small support, and were defeated by Speai/s- 
opponents who used the same logical weapons with auth- •* 0fl aad 
ority to back them. Nor were the rationalistic opinions ^T/HMtfte 
of tne Averroists without their value, though the church *™ 
condemned these deviators from her discipline as heretics. * 
Such medieval materialists, moreover, had but feeble hold upon the 
substance of real knowledge. Imperfect acquaintance with authors 
whom they studied in Latin translations made by Jews from Arabic 
commentaries on Greek texts, together with almost total ignorance 
of natural laws, condemned them to sterility. Like the other 
schiomachists of their epoch, they fought with phantoms in a 
visionary realm. A similar judgment may be passed upon those 
Paulician, Albigensian, Patenne and Epicurean dissenters from the 
Catholic creed who opposed the phalanxes of orthodoxy with frail 
imaginative weapons, and alarmed established orders in the state 
by the audacity of their communistic opinions. Physical science 
struggled into feeble life in the cells of Gerbert and Roger Bacon. 
But these men were accounted magicians by the vulgar; and, 
while the one eventually assumed the tiara, the other was incarcer- 
ated. in a dungeon. The schools meanwhile resounded still to the 
interminable dispute upon abstractions. Are only universals real, 
or has each name a corresponding entity? From the midst of the 
Franciscans who had persecuted Roger Bacon because he presumed 
to know more than was consistent with human humility arose John 
of Parma, adopting and popularizing the mystic prophecy of 
Joachim of Flora. The reign of the Father is past; the reign of the 
Son is passing; the reign of the Spirit is at hand. Such was the 
formula of the Eternal Gospel, which, as an unconscious forecast of 
the Renaissance, has attracted retrospective students by its felicity 
of adaptation to their historical method. Yet we must remember 
that this bold intuition of the abbot Joachim indicated a monastic 
reaction against the tyrannies and corruptions of the church, rather 
than a fertile philosophical conception. The Fraticelli spiritualists, 
and similar sects who fed their imagination with his doctrine, ex- 
pired in the flames to which Fra Dolcino Longino and Margharita 
were consigned. To what extent the accusations of profligate 
morals brought against these reforming sectarians were justified 
remains doubtful ; and the same uncertainty rests upon the alleged 
'iniquities of the Templars. It is only certain that at this epoch the 
fabric of Catholic faith was threatened with various forms of pro- 
phetic and Oriental mysticism, symptomatic of a widespread desire 
to grasp at something simpler, purer and less rigid than Latin 
theology afforded. Devoid of criticism, devoid of sound learning, 
devoid of a firm hold on the realities of life, these heresies passed 
away without solid results and were forgotten. 



RENAISSANCE 



«5 



We are too apt to take for granted that the men of the middle 

ages were immersed in meditations on the other world, and that their 

Natural' intellectual exer.cises were confined to abstractions of the 

' ' schools, hallucinations of the fancy, allegories, visions. 

rfte / ^his assumption applies indeed in a broad sense to that 
me a iev ai per j oc j -vv^hioh was dominated by intolerant theology and 
literature deprived of positive knowledge. Yet there are abundant 
* signs that the native human instincts, the natural human 
appetites, remained unaltered and alive beneath the crust of ortho- 
doxy. In the person of a pope like Boniface VIII. those ineradicable 
forces of the natural man assumed, if we pay trust the depositions 
of ecclesiastics well acquainted with his life, a form of brutal 
atheistic cynicism. In the person of an emperor, Frederick II., 
they emerged under the more agreeable garb of liberal culture and 
Epicurean scepticism. Frederick dreamed of remodelling ^ society 
upon a mundane^ type, which anticipated the large toleration and 
cosmopolitan enlightenment of the actual Renaissance. But his 
efforts were defeated by the unrelenting hostility of the church, 
and by the incapacity of his contemporaries to understand his aims. 
After being forced in his lifetime to submit to authority, he was 
consigned by Dante to hell. Frederick's ideal of civilization was 
derived in a large measure from Provence, where a beautiful culture 
had prematurely bloomed, filling southern Europe with the perfume 
of poetry and gentle living. Here, if anywhere, it seemed asthough 
the ecclesiastical and feudal fetters of the middle ages might be 
broken, and humanity might enter on a new stage of joyous unim- 
peded evolution. This was, however, not to be. The church 
preached Simon de Montfort's crusade, and organized Dominic's 
I nquisition ; what Quinet calls the " Renaissance sociale par 
1* Amour " was extirpated by sword, fire, famine and pestilence. 
Meanwhile the Provencal poets had developed their modern language 
with incomparable richness and dexterity, creating forms of verse 
and modes of emotional expression which determined the latest 
medieval phase of literature in Europe. The naturalism of which 
we have been speaking found free utterance now in the fabliaux of 
jongleurs, lyrics of minnesingers, tales of trouveres, romances of 
Arthur and his knights — compositions variedin type and tone, but 
in all of which sincere passion and real enjoyment of life pierce 
through the thin veil of chivalrous mysticism or of allegory with 
which they were sometimes conventionally draped. The tales of 
Lancelot and Tristram, the lives of the troubadours and the Wacht- 
lieder of the minnesingers, sufficiently prove with what sensual 
freedom a knight loved the lady whom. custom and art made him 
profess to worship as a saint. We do not need to be reminded that 
Beatrice's adorer had a wife and children, or that Laura's poet 
owned a son and daughter by a concubine, in order to perceive that 
the mystic passion of chivalry was compatibles the middle ages 
with commonplace matrimony or vulgar illegitimate connexions. 
But perhaps the most convincing testimony to the presence of this 
ineradicable naturalism is afforded by the Latin songs of wandering 
students, known as Carmina Burana^ written by the self-styled 
Qollardlc Goliardi. 1° these compositions, remarkable for their 
ooetrv * ac ite handling of medieval Latin rhymes and rhythms, 
the allegorizing mysticism which envelops chivalrous 
poetry is discarded. Love is treated from a frankly carnal point of 
view. Bacchus and Venus go hand in hand, as in the ancient ante- 
Christian age. The open-air enjoyments of the wood, the field, the 
-dance upon the village green, are sung with juvenile lighthearted- 
ness. No grave note, warning us that the pleasures of this earth 
are fleeting, that the visible world is but a symbol of the invisible, 
that human life is a probation for thelife beyond, interrupts the 
tinkling music as of castanets and tripping feet which gives a novel 
charm to these unique relics of the 13th century. Goliardic poetry 
is further curious as showing how the classics even at that early 
period were a fountain-head of pagan inspiration. In the taverns 
and low places of amusement haunted by those lettered songsters, 
on the open road and in the forests trodden by their vagrant feet, 
the deities of Greece and Rome were not in exile, but at home 
within the hearts of living men. Thus, while Christendom was still 
preoccupied with the Crusades, two main forces of the Renaissance, 
naturalism and enthusiasm for antique modes of feeling, already 
brought their latent potency to light, prematurely indeed and 
precociously, yet with a promise that was destined to be kept. 

When due regard is paid to these miscellaneous evidences of 
intellectual and sensual freedom during the middle ages, it will be 
M dl l seen *^ at tnere were D 7 no means lacking elements of 
attitude nat ' ve vigour ready to burst forth. What was wanting 
of mind was not vita^X an< * hc ence > not audacity of speculation, 
not lawless instinct or rebellious impulse. It was rather 
the right touch on life, the right feeling for human independence, 
the right way of approaching the materials of philosophy, religion, 
scholarship and literature, that failed. The courage that is born of 
knowledge, the calm strength begotten by a positive attitude of mind, 
face to face with the dominant over-shadowing Sphinx of theology, 
were lacking. We may fairly say that natural and untaught people 
had more of the just intuition that was needed than learned folk 
trained in the schools. But these people were rendered licentious 
in revolt or impotent for salutary action by ignorance, by terror, 
by uneasy dread of the doom declared for heretics and rebels. The 



massive vengeance of the church hung over them, like a heavy 
sword suspended in the* cloudy air. Superstition and stupidity 
hedged them in on every side, so that sorcery and magic seemed the 
only means of winning power over nature or insight into mysteries 
surrounding human life. The path from darkness to light was lost; 
thought was involved in allegory; the study of nature had been 
perverted into an inept system of grotesque and pious parable- 
mongering; the pursuit of truth had become a game of wordy 
dialectics. The other world, with its imagined heaven and hell, 
haunted the conscience like a nightmare. However sweet this 
world seemed, however fair the flesh, both world and flesh were 
theoretically given over to the devil. It was not worth while to 
master and economize the resources of this earth, to utilize the good 
and ameliorate the evils of this life, while every one agreed, in theory 
at a^y rate, that the present was but a bad prelude to an infinitely 
worse or infinitely better future. To escape from these preoccupa- 
tions and prejudices except upon the path of conscious and deliber- 
ate sin was impossible tor all but minds of rarest quality and 
courage ; and these were too often reduced to the recantation of 
their supposed errors no less by some secret clinging sense of guilt 
than by the church's iron hand. Man and the actual universe kept 
on reasserting their rights and claims, announcing their goodliness 
and delightfulness, in one^ way or another; but they were always 
being thrust back again into Cimmerian regions of abstractions, 
fictions, visions, spectral hopes and fears, in the midst of which the 
intellect somnambulistically moved upon an unknown way. 

At this point the Revival of Learning intervened to determine 
the course of the Renaissance. Medieval students possessed 
a considerable portion of the Latin classics, though italy—the 
Greek had hecome in the fullest sense of the phrase Revival of 
a dead language. But what they retained of ancient Learning. 
literature they could not comprehend in the right spirit. 
Between them and the text of poet or historian hung a 
veil of mysticism, a vapour of misapprehension. The odour 
of unsanctity clung around those relics of the pagan past. Men 
bred in the cloister and the lecture-room of the logicians, trained 
in scholastic disputations, versed in allegorical interpretations 
of the plainest words and most apparent facts, could not find 
the key which might unlock those stores of wisdom and of 
beauty. Petrarch first opened a new method in scholarship, 
and revealed what we denote as humanism. In his teaching 
lay the twofold discovery of man and of the world. For 
humanism, which was the vital element in the Revival of 
Learning, consists mainly of a just perception of the dignity of 
man as a rational, volitional and sentient being, born upon 
this earth with a right to use it and enjoy it. Humanism 
implied the rejection of those visions of a future and imagined 
state of souls as the only absolute reality, which had fascinated 
the imagination of the middle ages. It involved a vivid 
recognition of the goodliness of man and nature, displayed in 
the great monuments of human power recovered from the past. 
It stimulated the curiosity of latent sensibilities, provoked fresh 
inquisition into the groundwork of existence, and strengthened 
man's self-esteem by knowledge of what men had thought and 
felt and done in ages when Christianity was not. It roused 
a desire to reappropriate the whole abandoned provinces of 
mundane energy, and a hope to emulate antiquity in works 
of living loveliness and vigour. The Italians of the 14th century, 
more precocious than the other European races, were ripe for 
this emancipation of enslaved intelligence. In the classics 
they found the food which was required to nourish the new spirit; 
and a variety of circumstances, among which must be reckoned 
the pride of a nation boasting of its descent from the Populus 
Romanus, rendered them apt to fling aside the obstacles that 
had impeded the free action of the mind through' many centuries. 
Petrarch not only set his countrymen upon the right method 
of studying the Latin classics, hut he also divined the importance 
of recovering a knowledge of Greek literature. To this task 
Boccaccio addressed himself; and he was followed hy numerous 
Italian enthusiasts, who visited Byzantium before its fall as the 
sacred city of a new revelation. The next step was to collect 
MSS., to hunt out, copy and preserve the precious relics of the 
past. In this work of accumulation Guarino and Filelfo, 
Aurispa and Poggio, took the chief part, aided by the wealth 
of Italian patricians, merchant-princes and despots, who were 
inspired by the sacred thirst for learning. Learning was then 



86 



RENAISSANCE 



no mere pursuit of a special and recluse class. It was fashionable 
and it was passionate, pervading all society with the fervour of 
romance. For a generation nursed in decadent scholasticism 
and stereotyped theological formulae it was the fountain of 
renascent youth, beauty and freedom, the shape in which the 
Helen of art and poetry, appeared to the ravished eyes of 
medieval Faustus. It was the resurrection of the mightiest 
spirits of the past. " I go," said Cyriac of Ancona, the inde- 
fatigable though uncritical explorer of antiquities, " I go to 
awake the dead!" This was the enthusiasm, this the vitalizing 
faith, which made the work of scholarship in the 15th century 
so highly strung and ardent. The men who followed it knew 
that they were restoring humanity to its birthright after the 
expatriation of ten centuries. They were instinctively aware 
that the effort was for liberty of action, thought and conscience 
in the future. This conviction made young men leave their 
loves and pleasures, grave men quit their counting-houses, 
churchmen desert their missals, to crowd the lecture-rooms of 
philologers and rhetoricians. When Greek had been acquired, 
MSS. accumulated, libraries and museums formed, came the age 
of printers and expositors. Aldus Manutius in Italy, Froben in 
Basel, the fitiennes in Paris, committed to the press what the 
investigators had recovered. Nor were there wanting men who 
dedicated their powers to Hebrew and Oriental erudition, 
laying, together with the Grecians, a basis for those Biblical 
studies which advanced the Reformation. Meanwhile the 
languages of Greece and Rome had been so thoroughly appro- 
priated that a final race of scholars, headed by Politian, Pontano, 
Valla, handled once again in verse and prose both antique 
dialects, and thrilled the ears of Europe with new-made pagan 
melodies. The church itself at this epoch lent its influence to 
the prevalent enthusiasm. Nicholas V. and Leo X., not to 
mention intervening popes who showed themselves tolerant of 
humanistic culture, were heroes of the classical revival. Scholar- 
ship became the surest path of advancement to ecclesiastical 
and political honours. Italy was one great school of the new 
learning at the moment when the German, French and Spanish 
nations were invited to her feast. 

It will be well to describe briefly, but in detail, what this 
meeting of the modern with the ancient mind effected over the 
Nature of whole field of intellectual interests. In doing so, we 
Italian must be careful to remember that the study of the 
human- classics did but give a special impulse to pent-up 
energies which were bound in one way or another to 
assert their independence. Without the Revival of Learning 
the direction of those forces would have been different; but 
that novel intuition into the nature of the world and man which 
constitutes what we describe as Renaissance must have emerged. 
As the facts, however, stand before us, it is impossible to dis- 
sociate the rejection of the other world as the sole reality, the 
joyous acceptance of this world as a place to live and act in, the 
conviction that " the proper study of mankind is man," from 
humanism. Humanism, as it actually appeared in Italy, was 
positive in its conception of the problems to be solved, pagan 
in its contempt for medieval mysticism, invigorated for sensuous 
enjoyment by contact with antiquity, yet holding in itself the 
germ of new religious aspirations, profounder science and sterner 
probings of the mysteries of life than had been attempted even 
by the ancients. The operation of this humanistic spirit has 
now to be traced. 

It is- obvious that Italian literature owed little at the outset to 
the Revival of Learning. The Divine Comedy, the Canzoniere 

and the Decameron were works of monumental art, 
of Dante derivm S neither form nor inspiration immediately from 
Petrarch t ^ ie c ' ass i cs ' Dut a Pplyi n g the originality of Italian genius 
Boccaccio to matter drawn from previous medieval sources. Dante 
and Viliani snowe d Dotn m ms e Pi° poem and in his lyrics that he 
to the had not abandoned the sphere of contemporary thought. 

Revival of Allegory and theology, the vision and the symbol, still 
Learning, determine the form of masterpieces which for perfection 

of workmanship and for emancipated force of intellect 
rank among the highest products of the human mind. Yet they 
are not medieval in the same sense as the song of Roland or the 



Arthurian cycle. They proved that, though Italy came late into 
the realm of literature, her action was destined to be decisive and 
alterative by the introduction of a new spirit, a firmer and more 
positive grasp on life and art. These qualities she owed to her 
material prosperity, to her freedom from feudalism, to her secular- 
ized church, her commercial nobility, her political independence in 
a federation of small states. Petrarch and Boccaccio, though they 
both held the medieval doctrine that literature should teach some 
abstruse truth beneath a veil of fiction, differed from Dante in this 
that their poetry and prose in the vernacular abandoned both 
allegory and symbol. t In their practice they ignored their theory. 
Petrarch's lyrics continue the Provencal tradition as it had been 
reformed in Tuscany, with a subtler and more modern analysis of 
emotion, a purer and more chastened style, than his masters could 
boast. Boccaccio's tales, in like manner, continue the tradition 
of the fabliaux, raising that literary species to the rank of finished 
art, enriching it with humour and strengthening its substance 
by keen insight into all varieties of character. The Canzoniere 
and the Decameron distinguish themselves from medieval literature, 
not by any return to classical precedents, but by free self-conscious 
handling of human nature. So much had to be premised in order 
to make it clear in what relation humanism stood to the Renais- 
sance, since the Italian work of Dante, Petrarch and Boccaccio 
is sufficient to indicate the re-birth of the spirit after ages of ap- 
parent deadness. Had the Revival of Learning not intervened it is 
probable that the vigorous efforts of these writers alone would have 
inaugurated a new age of European culture. Yet, while noting 
this reservation of judgment, it must also be remarked that all three 
felt themselves under some peculiar obligation to the classics. 
Dante, medieval as his temper seems to us, chose Virgil for his guide, 
and ascribed his mastery of style to the study of Virgilian poetry. 
Petrarch and Boccaccio were, as we have seen, the pioneers of the 
new learning. They held their writings in the vernacular cheap, 
and initiated that contempt for the mother tongue which was a 
note of the earlier Renaissance. Giovanni Viliani, the first chroni- 
cler who used Italian for the compilation of a methodical history, 
tells us how he was impelled to write by musing on the ruins of Rome 
and thinking of the vanished greatness of the Latin race. We 
have therefore to recognize that the four greatest writers of the 14th 
century, while the Revival of Learning was yet in its cradle, each 
after his own fashion acknowledged the vivifying touch upon their 
'spirit of the antique genius. They seem to have been conscious 
that they could not give the desired impulse to modern literature 
and art without contact with the classics; and, in spite of the 
splendour of their achievements in Italian, they found no immediate 
followers upon that path. 

The fascination of pure study was so powerful, the Italians at 
that epoch were so eager to recover the past, that during the 15th 
century we h^ve before our eyes the spectacle of this great n e i./j „ 
nation deviating from the course of development begun f„ uman . 
in poetry by Dante and Petrarch, in prose by Boccaccio ism t 
and Viliani, into the channels of scholarship and anti- scno j arm 
quarian research. The language of the Canzoniere and sn ) pan d 
Decameron was abandoned for revived Latin and dis- literature. 
covered Greek. Acquisition supplanted invention; 
imitation of classical authors suppressed originality of style. 
The energies of the Italian people were devoted to transcrib- 
ing codices, settling texts, translating Greek books into Latin, 
compiling grammars, commentaries, encyclopaedias, dictionaries, 
epitomes and ephemerides. During this century the best histories 
— Bruno's and Poggio's annals of Florence, for example — were 
composed in Latin after the manner of Livy. The best disserta- 
tions, Landino's Camaldunenses, Valla's De Voluptate, were laboured 
imitations of Cicero's Tuscttlans. The best verses, Pontano's 
elegies, Politian's hexameters, were in -like manner Latin ; public 
orations upon ceremonial occasions were delivered in the Latin 
tongue; correspondence, official and familiar, was carried on in 
the same language; even the fabliaux received, in Poggio's Facetiae. 
a dress of elegant Latinity. The noticeable barrenness of Italian 
literature at this period is referable to the fact that men of genius 
and talent devoted themselves to erudition and struggled to express 
their thoughts and feelings in a speech which was not natural. 
Yet they were engaged in a work of incalculable importance. At 
the close of the century the knowledge of Greece and Rome had been 
reappropriated and placed beyond the possibility of destruction; 
the chasm between the old and new world had been bridged; 
medieval modes of thinking and discussing had been superseded; 
the staple of education, the common culture which has brought all 
Europe into intellectual agreement, was already in existence. 
Humanism was now an actuality. Owing to the uncritical venera- 
tion for antiquity which then prevailed, it had received a strong 
tincture of pedantry. Mts professors, in their revolt against the 
middle ages, made light of Christianity and paYaded paganism. 
What was even worse from an artistic point of view, they had con- 
tracted puerilities of style, vanities of rhetoric, stupidities of weari- 
some citation.. Still, at the opening of the 16th century, it became 
manifest what fruits of noble quality the Revival of Letters was 
about to bring forth for modern literature. Two great scholars, 
Lorenzo de' Medici and Politian, had already returned to the 



RENAISSANCE 



practice of Italian poetry. |Their work is the first absolutely 
modern work, — modern in the sense of having absorbed the stores 
of classic learning and reproduced those treasures in forms of simple, 
natural, native beauty. Boiardo occupies a similar position by 
the fusion of classic mythology with chivalrous romance in his 
Orlando Innamorato. But the victor's laurels were reserved for 
Ariosto, whose Orlando Furioso is the purest and most perfect 
extant example of Renaissance poetry. It was not merely in what 
they had acquired and assimilated from the classics that these 
poets showed the transformation effected in the field of literature 
by humanism. The whole method and spirit of medieval art had 
been abandoned. That of the Cinque Cento is positive, defined, 
mundane. The deity, if deity there be, that rules in it, is beauty. 
Interest is confined to the actions, passions, sufferings and joys 
of human life, to its pathetic, tragic, humorous and sentimental 
incidents. Of the state of souls beyond the grave we hear and 
arc supposed to care nothing. In the drama the pedantry of the 
Revival, which had not injured romantic literature, made itself 
perniciously felt. Rules were collected from Horace and Aristotle. 
Seneca was chosen as the model of tragedy; Plautus and Terence 
supplied the groundwork of comedy. Thus in the plays of Rucellai, 
Trissino, Sperone and other tragic poets the nobler elements of 
humanism, considered as a revelation of the world and man, ob- 
tained no free development. Even the comedies of the best 
authors are too observant- of Latin precedents, although some 
pieces of Machiavelli, Ariosto, Aretino, Cecchi and Gelli are admirable 
for vivid delineation of contemporary manners. 

The relation of the plastic arts to the revival of learning is similar 
to that which has been sketched in the case of poetry. Cimabue 
started with work which owed nothing directly to anti- 
Flaearts. q U j t y At about the same time Niccola Pisano (d. 1278) 
studied the style of sculpture in fragments of Graeco-Roman 
marbles. His manner influenced Giotto, who set painting on a 
forward path. Fortunately for the unimpeded expansion of Italian 
art, little was brought to light of antique workmanship during the 
14th and 15th centuries. The classical stimulus came to painters, 
sculptors and architects chiefly through literature. Therefore 
there was narrow scope for imitation, and the right spirit of humanism 
displayed itself in a passionate study of perspective, nature and 
the nude. Yet we find in the writings of Ghiberti and Alberti, 
we notice in the masterpieces of these men and their compeers 
Brunejleschi and Donatello, how even in the 15th century the minds 
of artists were fascinated by what survived of classic grace and 
science. Gradually, as the race became penetrated with antique 
thought, the earlier Christian motives of the arts yielded to pagan 
subjects. Gothic architecture, which had always flourished feebly 
on Italian soil, was supplanted by a hybrid Roman style. The 
study of Vitruvius gave strong support to that pseudo-classic 
manner which, when it had reached its final point in Palladio's 
work, overspread the whole of Europe and dominated taste during 
two centuries. But the perfect plastic art of Italy, the pure art 
of the Cinque Cento, the painting of Raphael, Da Vinci, Titian 
and Correggio, the sculpture of Donatello, Michelangelo and 
Sansovino, the architecture of Bramante, Omodeoand the Venetian 
Lombardi, however much imbued with the spirit of the classical 
revival, takes rank beside the poetry of Ariosto as a free intelligent 
product of the Renaissance. That is to say, it is not so much an 
outcome of studies in antiquity as an exhibition of emancipated 
modern genius fired and illuminated by the masterpieces .of the 
past. It indicates a separation from the middle ages, inasmuch as 
it is permanently natural. Its religion is joyous, sensuous, dramatic, 
terrible, but in each and all of its many-sided manifestations 
strictly human. Its touch on classical mythology is original, 
rarely imitative or pedantic. The art of the Renaissance was an 
apocalypse of the beauty of the world and man in unaffected 
spontaneity, without side thoughts for piety or erudition, inspired 
by pure delight in loveliness ana harmony for their own sakes. 

In the fields of science and philosophy humanism wrought similar 

important changes. Petrarch began by waging relentless war 

against the logicians and materialists of his own day. 

rf A// - With the advance made in Greek studies scholastic methods 
s £, °' °f thinking fell into contemptuous oblivion. The newly 
sop y. ^ aroused curiosity for nature encouraged menlike Alberti, 
Da Vinci, Toscanelli and Da Porta to make practical experiments, 
penetrate the working of physical forces, and invent scientific 
instruments. Anatomy began to be studied, and the time was not 
far distant when Titian should lend his pencil to the epoch-making 
treatise of Vesalius. The middle ages had been satisfied with 
absurd and visionary notions about the world around them, while 
the body of man was regarded with too much suspicion to be 
studied. Now the right method of interrogating nature with 
patience and loving admiration was instituted. At the same time 
the texts of ancient authors supplied hints which led to discoveries 
so far-reaching in their results as those of Copernicus, Columbus 
and Galileo. In philosophy, properly so called, the humanistic 
scorn for medieval dullness and obscurity swept away theological 
metaphysics as valueless. But at first little beyond empty rhetoric 
and ekimsy compilation was substituted. The ethical treatises 
of the scholars are deficient in substance, while Ficino's attempt 



87 

to revive Platonism betrays an uncritical conception of his master's 
drift. It was something, however, to have shaken off the shackles 
of ecclesiastical authority; and, even if a new authority, that of 
the ancients, was accepted in its stead, still progress was being 
made toward sounder methods of analysis. This is noticeable 
in Pomponazzo's system of materialism, based on the interpreta- 
tion of Aristotle, but revealing a virile spirit of disinterested and 
unprejudiced research. The thinkers of southern Italy, Telesio, 
Bruno and Campanella, at last opened the two chief lines on which 
modern speculation has since moved. Telesio and Campanella 
may be termed the predecessors of Bacon. Bruno was the pre- 
cursor of the idealistic schools. All three alike strove to disengage 
their minds from classical as well as ecclesiastical authority, proving 
that the emancipation of the will had been accomplished. It must 
be added that their writings, like every other product of the Re- 
naissance, except its purest poetry and art, exhibit a hybrid between 
medieval and modern tendencies. Childish ineptitudes arc mingled 
with intuitions of maturest wisdom, and seeds of future thought 
germinate in the decaying refuse of.past systems. 

Humanism in its earliest stages was uncritical. It absorbed the 
relics of antiquity with omnivorous appetite, and with very im- 
perfect sense of the distinction between worse and better 
work. Yet it led in process of time to criticism. The cw " c/5m ' 
critique of literature began in the lecture-room of Politian, in the 
printing-house of Aldus, and in the school of Vittorino. The critique 
of Roman law started, under Politian's auspices, upon a more 
liberal course than that which had been followed by the powerful 
but narrow-sighted glossators of Bologna. Finally, in the court of 
Naples arose that most formidable of all critical engines, the critique 
of established ecclesiastical traditions and spurious historical docu- 
ments. Valla by one vigorous effort destroyed the False Decretals 
and exposed the Donation of Constantine to ridicule, paving the 
way for the polemic carried on against the dubious pretensions of 
the^ papal throne by scholars of the Reformation. A similar 
criticism, conducted less on lines of erudition than of persiflage 
and irony, ransacked the moral abuses of the church and played 
around the very foundations of Christianity. This was tolerated 
with approval by men who repeated Leo X.'s witty epigram: 
" What profit has not that^ fable of Christ brought us I" The same 
critical and philosophic spirit working on the materials of history 
produced a new science, the honours of which belong to Machia- 
velli. He showed, on the one side, how the history of a people 
can be written with a recognition of fixed principles, and at the same 
time with an artistic feeling for personal and dramatic episodes. 
On the other side, he addressed himself to the analysis of man 
considered as a political being, to the anatomy of constitutions 
and the classification of governments, to the study of motives 
underlying public action, the secrets of success and the causes of 
failure in the conduct of affairs. The unscrupulous rigour with 
which he applied his scientific method, and the sinister deductions 
he thought himself justified in drawing from the results it yielded, 
excited terror and repulsion. Nevertheless, a department had 
been added to the intellectual empire of mankind, in which fel- 
low-workers, like Guicciardini at Florence, and subsequently 
Sarpi at Venice, were not slow to follow the path traced by 
Machiavelli. 

The objectof the foregoing paragraphs has been to show in what 
way the positive, inquisitive, secular, exploratory spirit of the Renais- 
sance, when toned and controlled by humanism, penetrated 
the regions of literature, art, philosophy and science. It crfuca- 
becomes at this point of much moment to consider how # ' 
social manners in Italy were modified by the same causes, since the 
type developed there was in large measure communicated together 
with the new culture to the rest of Europe. The first subject to 
be noticed under this heading is education. What has come to be 
called a classical education was the immediate product of the Italian 
Renaissance. The universities of Bologna, Padua and Salerno had 
been famous through the, middle ages for the study of law, physics 
and medicine; and during the 15th and 16th centuries the first 
two still enjoyed celebrity in these faculties. But at this period 
no lecture-rooms were so crowded as those in which professors of 
antique literature and language read passages from the poets and 
orators, taught Greek, and commented upon the systems of philo- 
sophers. The medieval curriculum offered no defined place ^ for 
the new learning of the Revival, which had indeed no recognized 
name. Chairs had therefore to be founded under the title of rhe- 
toric, from which men like Chrysoloras and Guarino, Filelfo and Poli- 
tian expounded orally to hundreds of eager students from every 
town of Italy and every nation in Europe their accumulated know- 
ledge of antiquity. One mass of Greek and^ Roman erudition, 
including history and metaphysics, law and science, civic institu- 
tions and the art of war, mythology and magistracies, metrical 
systems and oratory, agriculture and astronomy, domestic manners 
and religious rites, grammar and philology, biography and numis- 
matics, formed the miscellaneous subject-matter of this so-styled 
rhetoric. Notes taken at these lectures supplied young scholars 
with hints for further exploration ; and a certain tradition of treat- 
ing antique authors for the display of general learning, as well as 1 
for the elucidation of their texts, came into vogue, which has 



88 



RENAISSANCE 



Social 
manners, 



determined the method of scholarship for the last three centuries in 
Europe. The lack of printed books in the first period of the Revival, 
and the comparative rarity of Greek erudition among students, 
combined with the intense enthusiasm aroused for the new gospel 
of the classics, gave special value to the personal teaching of these 
professors. They journeyed from city to city, attracted by promises 
of higher pay, and allured by ever-growing laurels of popular fame. 
Each large town established its public study, academy or uni- 
versity, similar institutions under varying designations, for the 
exposition of the literae humaniores. The humanists, or professors 
of that branch of knowledge, became a class of the highest dignity. 
They were found in the chanceries of the republics, in the papal 
curia, in the council chambers of princes, at the headquarters of 
condottieri, wherever business had to be transacted, speeches to 
be made and the work of secretaries to be performed. Further- 
more, they undertook the charge of private education, opening 
schools which displaced the medieval system of instruction, and 
taking engagements as tutors in the families of despots, noblemen 
and wealthy merchants. The academy established by Vittorino 
da Feltre at Mantua under the protection of Gian Francesco Gonzaga 
for the training of pupils of both sexes, might be chosen as the type 
of this Italian method. His scholars, who were lodged in appro- 
priate buildings, met daily to hear the master read and comment 
on the classics. They learned portions of the best authors by heart, 
exercised themselves in translation from one language to another, 
and practised composition in prose and verse. It was Vittorino's 
care to see that, while their memories were duly stored with words 
and facts, their judgment should be formed by critical analysis, 
attention to style, and comparison of the authors of a decadent age 
with those who were acknowledged classics. ^ During the hours 
of recreation suitable physical exercises, as fencing, riding and gym- 
nastics, were conducted under qualified trainers. From this sketch 
it will be seen how closely the educational system which came into 
England during the reigns of the Tudors, and which has prevailed 
until the present time, was modelled upon the Italian type.^ English 
youths who spend their time at Eton between athletic sports 
and Latin verses, and who take an Ireland with a first class in 
" Greats " at Oxford, are pursuing the same course of physical 
and mental discipline as the princes of Gonzaga or Montefeltro 
in the 15th century. 

The humanists effected a deeply penetrating change in social 
manners. Through their influence as tutors, professors, orators 
and courtiers, society was permeated by a fresh ideal of 
culture. To be a gentleman in Italy meant at this epoch 
to be a man acquainted with the rudiments at least of 
scholarship, refined in diction, capable of corresponding or of speak- 
ing in choice phrases, open to the beauty of the arts, intelligently 
interested in archaeology, taking for his models of conduct the great 
men of antiquity rather than the saints of the church. He was also 
expected to prove himself an adept in physical exercises and in the 
courteous observances which survived from chivalry. The type 
is set before us by Castiglione in that book upon the courtier which 
went the round of Europe in the 16th century. It is further em- 
phasized in a famous passage^ of the Orlando Innamorato where 
Boiardo compares the Italian ideal of an accomplished gentleman 
with the coarser type admired by nations of the north. To this 
point the awakened intelligence of the Renaissance, instructed by 
humanism, polished by the fine arts, expanding in genial conditions 
of diffused wealthy had brought, the Italians at a period when the 
rest of Europe was comparatively barbarous. 

This picture has undoubtedly a darker side. Humanism, in its 
revolt against the middle ages, was, as we have seen already, 
The moral mun dane, pagan, irreligious, positive. The Renaissance 
defects of can » a ^ ter a ^» De regarded only as a period of transition 
the Italian m wmcn much of the good of the past was sacrificed while 
Renate- some of the evil was retained, and neither the bad nor the 
sance " gooc * °^ tne f uture was brought clearly into fact. Beneath 
the surface of brilliant socialculture lurked gross appetites 
and savage passions, unrestrained by medieval piety, untutored 
by modern experience. Italian society exhibited an almost un- 
exampled spectacle of literary, artistic and courtly refinement 
crossed by brutalities of lust, treasons, poisonings, assassinations, 
violence. A succession of worldly pontiffs brought the church into 
flagrant discord with the principles of Christianity. Steeped in 
pagan learning, emulous of imitating the manners of the ancients, 
used to think and feel in harmony with Ovid and Theocritus, and 
at the same time rendered cynical by the corruption of papal Rome, 
the educated classes lost their grasp upon morality. Political 
honesty ceased almost to have a name in Italy. The Christian 
virtues were scorned by the foremost actors and the ablest thinkers 
of the time, while the antique virtues were themes for rhetoric 
rather than moving-springs of conduct. This is apparent to all 
students of Machiavelli and Guicciardini, the profoundest analysts 
of their age, the bitterest satirists of its vices, but themselves in- 
fected with its incapacity for moral goodness. Not only were the 
Italians vitiated; but they had also become impotent for action 
and resistance. At the height of the Renaissance the five great 
powers in the peninsula formed a confederation of independent 
but mutually attractive and repellent states. Equilibrium was 



maintained by diplomacy, in which the humanists played a fore- 
most part, casting a network of intrigue over the nation which 
helped in no small measure to stimulate intelligence and create a 
common medium of culture, but which accustomed statesmen to 
believe that everything could be achieved by wire-pulling. Wars 
were conducted on a showy system by means of mercenaries, who 
played a safe game in the field and developed a system of blood- 
less campaigns. Meanwhile the people grew up unused to arms. 
When Italy between the years 140A and 1530 became the battle- 
field of French, German and Spanish forces, it was seen to what a 
point of helplessness the political, moral and social conditions of 
the Renaissance had brought the nation. 

It was needful to study at some length the main phenomena 
of the Renaissance in Italy, because the history of that phase 
of evolution in the other Western races turns almost Diffusion 
entirely upon points in which they either adhered of the 
to or diverged from the type established there. Speak- f tfH / tf ^°~ 
ing broadly, what France, Germany, Spain and " t ^° m 
England assimilated from Italy at this epoch was in the through* 
first place the new learning, as it was then called, out 
This implied the new conception of human life, Europe. 
the new interest in the material universe, the new 
method of education, and the new manners, which we have 
seen to be inseparable from Italian humanism. Under these 
forms of intellectual enlightenment and polite culture the 
renascence of the human spirit had appeared in Italy, where it 
was more than elsewhere connected with the study of classical 
antiquity. But that audacious exploratory energy which 
formed the motive force of the Renaissance as distinguished 
from the Revival of Learning took, as we shall see, very different 
directions in the several nations who now were sending the 
flower of their youth to study at the feet of Italian rhetoricians. 

The Renaissance ran its course in Italy with strange indiffer- 
ence to consequences. The five great powers, held in equilibrium 
by Lorenzo de' Medici, dreamed that the peninsula could be 
maintained in statu quo by diplomacy. The church saw no 
danger in encouraging a pseudo-pagan ideal of life, violating 
its own principle of existence by assuming the policy of an 
aggrandizing secular state, and outraging Christendom openly 
by its acts and utterances. Society at large was hardly aware 
that an intellectual force of stupendous magnitude and in- 
calculable explosive power had been created by the new learning. 
Why should not established institutions proceed upon the 
customary and convenient methods of routine, while the delights 
of existence were augmented, manners polished, arts developed, 
and a golden age of epicurean ease made decent by a state religion 
which no one cared to break with because no one was left to 
regard it seriously? This was the attitude of the Italians when 
the Renaissance, which they had initiated as a thing of beauty, 
began to operate as a thing of power beyond the Alps. 

Germany was already provided with universities, seven of which 
had been founded between 1348 and 1409. In these haunts of 
learning the new studies took root after the year 1440, RevivaI of 
chiefly through the influence of travelling professors, Peter 
Luder and Samuel Karoch. German scholars made their j^T 1 * 
way to Lombard and Tuscan lecture-rooms, bringing back aer " 
the methods of the humanists. Greek, Latin and Hebrew ****** 
erudition soon found itself at home on Teutonic soil. Like Italian 
men of letters, these pioneers of humanism gave a classic turn to 
their patronymics; unfamiliar names, CrotusRubeanusand Pierius 
Graecus, Capnion and Lupambulus Ganymedes, Occolampadius and 
Mclanchthon, resounded on the Rhine. A few of the German 
princes, among whom Maximilian, the prince cardinal Albert of 
Mainz, Frederick the Wise of Saxony, and Eberhard of Wurttem- 
berg deserve mention, exercised a not insignificant influence on 
letters by the foundation of new universities and the patronage of 
learned men. The cities of Strassburg, Nuremberg, Augsburg, Basel, 
became centres of learned coteries, which gathered round scholars 
like Wimpheling, Brant, Peutinger, Schedel, and Pirckheimer, 
artists like Diirer and Holbein, printers of the eminence of Froben. 
Academies in imitation oMtalian institutions came into existence, 
the two most conspicuous, named after the Rhine and the Danube, 
holding their headquarters respectively at Heidelberg and Vienna. 
Crowned poets, of whom the most eminent was Conrad Celtes Pro- 
tucius (Pickcl!), emulated the fame of Politian and Pontano. Yet, 
though the Renaissance was thus widely communicated to the 
centres of German intelligence, it displayed a different character 
from that which it assumed in Italy. Gothic art, which was indi- 
genous in Germany, yielded but little to southern influences. Such 



RENAISSANCE 



89 



■work as that of Dtirer, Vischer, Cranach, Schongauer, Holbein, con- 
summate as it was in technical excellence, did not assume Italian 
forms of loveliness, did not display the paganism of the Latin races. 
The modification of Gothic architecture by pseudo-Roman elements 
of style was incomplete. What Germany afterwards took of the 
Palladian manner was destined to reach it on a circuitous route from 
France. In like manner the new learning failed to penetrate all 
classes of society with the rapidity of its expansion in Italy, nor was 
the new ideal of life and customs so easily substituted for the 
medieval. The German aristocracy, as Aeneas Sylvius had noticed, 
remained for the most part barbarous, addicted to gross pleasures, 
contemptuous of culture. The German dialects were too rough to 
receive that artistic elaboration under antique influences which had 
been so facile in Tuscany. The doctors of the universities were too 
wedded to their antiquated manuals and methods, too satisfied with 
-dullness, too proud of titles and diplomas, too anxious to preserve 
-ecclesiastical discipline and to repress mental activity, for a genial 
spirit of humanism to spread freely. Not in Cologne or Tubingen 
but in Padua and Florence did the German pioneers of the Renais- 
sance acquire their sense of liberal studies. And when they returned 
home they found themselves encumbered with stupidities, jealousies 
and rancours. Moreover, the temper of these more enlightened 
men was itself opposed to Italian indifference and immorality; it 
was pugnacious and polemical, eager to beat down the arrogance of 
monks and theologians rather than to pursue an ideal of aesthetical 
self-culture. To a student of the origins of German humanism it is 
dear that something very different from the Renaissance of Lorenzo 
ie' Medici and Leo X. was in preparation from the first upon 
Teutonic soil. Far less plastic and form-loving than the Italian, 
the German intelligence was more penetrative, earnest, disputative, 
occupied with substantial problems. Starting with theological 
criticism, proceeding to the stage of solid studies in the three 
learned languages, German humanism occupied the attention of a 
widely scattered sect of erudite scholars; but it did not arouse the 
interest of the whole nation until it was forced into a violently 
militant attitude by Pfefferkorn's attack on Reuchlin. That 
attempt to extinguish honest thought prepared the Reformation; 
and humanism after 1518 was absorbed in politico-religious warfare. 

The point of contact between humanism and the Reformation in 
-Germany has to be insisted on ; for it is just here that the relation 
of the Reformation to the Renaissance in general makes 
Relation itself apparent. As the Renaissance had its precur- 
of human- sorv movemen ts in the medieval period, so the German 
ism to the R e f orma tion was preceded by Wickliffe and Huss, by the 
German ^ discontents of the Great,Schism and by the councils of Con- 

e orma- stance an j Basel. These two main streams of modern 
progress had been proceeding upon different tracks to 
•diverse issues, but they touched in the < studies stimulated by 
the Revival, and they had a common origin in the struggle of the 
spirit after self-emancipation. Johann Reuchlin, who entered the 
lecture-room of Argyropoulos at Rome in 1482, Erasmus of Rotter- 
dam, who once dwelt at Venice as the house guest of the Aldi, applied 
their critical knowledge of Hebrew and of Greek to the elucidation 
and diffusion of the Bible. To the Germans, as to all nations of 
that epoch, the Bible came as a new book, because they now read it 
for the first time with eyes opened by humanism. The touch of the 
new spirit which had evolved literature, art and culture in Italy 
sufficed in Germany to recreate Christianity. This new spirit in 
Italy emancipated human intelligence by the classics; in Germany 
it emancipated. the human conscience by the Bible. The indigna- 
tion excited by Leo X.'s sale of indulgences, the moral rage stirred 
in Northern hearts by papal abominations in Rome, were external 
causes which precipitated the schism between Teutonic and Latin 
Christianity. The Reformation, inspired by the same energy of 
resuscitated life as the Renaissance, assisted by the same engines of 
the printing-press and paper, using the same apparatus of scholar- 
ship, criticism, literary skill, being in truth another manifestation 
of the same world-movement under a diverse form, now posed 
itself as an irreconcilable antagonist to Renaissance Italy. It would 
be difficult to draw any comparison between German and Italian 
humanists to the disparagement of the former. Reuchlin was no less 
learned than Pico; Melanchthon no less humane than Ficino; 
Erasmus no less witty, and far more trenchant, than Petrarch; 
Ulrich von Hutten no less humorous than Folengo; Paracelsus 
no less fantastically learned than Cardano. But the cause in which 
■German intellect and will were enlisted was so different that it is 
difficult not to make a^ formal separation between that movement 
which evolved culture in Italy and that which restored religion in 
Germany, establishing the freedom of intelligence in the one sphere 
and the freedom of the conscience in the other. The truth is that 
the Reformation was the Teutonic Renaissance. It was the emanci- 
pation of the reason on a line neglected by the Italians, more impor- 
tant indeed in its political consequences, more weighty in its bearing 
-on rationalistic developments than the Italian Renaissance, but 
none the less an outcome of the same ground-influences. We have 
already in this century reached a point at which, in spite of 
stubborn Protestant dogmatism and bitter Catholic reaction, we 
can perceive how the ultimate affranchisement of man will be 
the work of both. 



The German Reformation was incapable of propagating itself in 
Italy, chiefly for the reason that the intellectual forces which it 
represented and employed had already found specific _. 
outlet in that country. It was not in the nature of the catholic 
Italians, sceptical and paganized by the Revival, to be . . 

keenly interested about questions which seemed to revive tnttaly 
the scholastic disputes of the middle ages. It was not in ^* 

their external conditions, suffering as they were from invasions, 
enthralled by despots, to use the Reformation as a lever for political 
revolution. Yet when a tumultuary army of so-called Lutherans 
sacked Rome in 1527 no sober thinker doubted that a new agent had 
appeared in Europe which would alter the destinies of the peninsula. 
The Renaissance was virtually closed, so far as it concerned Italy, 
when Clement VII. and Charles V. struck their compact at Bologna 
in 1530. This compact proclaimed the principle of monarchical 
absolutism, supported by papal authority, itself monarchically 
absolute, which influenced Europe until the outbreak of the Revolu- 
tion. A reaction immediately set in both against the Renaissance 
and the Reformation. The council of Trent, opened in 1545 anc * 
closed in 1563, decreed a formal purgation of the church, affirmed 
the fundamental doctrines of Catholicism, strengthened the papal 
supremacy, and inaugurated that movement of resistance which is 
known as the Counter-Reformation. The complex onward effort 
of the modern nations, expressing itself in Italy as Renaissance, in 
Germany as Reformation, had aroused the forces of conservatism. 
The four main instruments of the reaction were the papacy, which 
had dope so muchby its sympathy with the revival to promote the 
humanistic spirit it now dreaded, the strength of Spain, and two 
Spanish institutions planted on Roman soil — the Inquisition and the 
Order of Jesus. The principle contended for and established by 
this reaction was absolutism as opposed to freedom — monarchical 
absolutism, papal absolutism, the suppression of energies liberated 
by the Renaissance and the Reformation. The partial triumph of this 
principle was secure, inasmuch as the majority of established powers 
in church and state felt threatened by the* revolutionary opinions 
afloat in Europe. Renaissance and Reformation were, moreover, 
already at strife. Both, too, were spiritual and elastic tendencies 
toward progress, ideals rather than solid organisms. 

The part played by Spain in this period of history was deter- 
mined in large measure by external circumstance. The Spaniards 
became one nation by the conquest of Granada and the 
union of the crowns of Castile and Aragon. The war of fP ~ 
national aggrandizement, being in its nature a crusade, * 
inflamed the religious enthusiasm of the people. It na J^^f e 
was followed by the expulsionof Jews and Moors, and by ^ - 
the establishment of the Inquisition on a solid basis, with j etters 
powers formidable to the freedom of all Spaniards from the 
peasant to the throne. These facts explain the decisive action of 
the Spanish nation on the side of Catholic conservatism, and help 
us to understand why their brilliant achievements in the field of 
culture during the 16th century were speedily followed by stag- 
nation. It will be well, in dealing with the Renaissance in Spain, to 
touch first upon the arts and literature, and then to consider those 
qualities of character in action whereby the nation most distinguished 
itself from the rest of Europe. Architecture in Spain, emerging 
from the Gothic stage, developed an Early Renaissance style of 
bewildering richness by adopting elements of^ Arabic and Moorish 
decoration. Sculpture exhibited realistic vigour of indubitably 
native stamp; and the minor plastic crafts were cultivated with 
success on lines of striking originality. Painting grew from^ a 
homely stock, until the work of Velazquez showed that Spanish 
masters in this branch were fully abreast of their Italian compeers 
and contemporaries. To dwell here upon the Italianizing versifiers, 
moralists and pastoral romancers who attempted to refine the 
vernacular of the Romancer o would be superfluous. They are 
mainly noticeable as proving that certain coteries in Spain were 
willing to accept the Italian Renaissance. But the real force of 
the people was not in this courtly literary style. It expressed 
itself at last in the monumental work of Von Quixote, which places 
Cervantes beside Rabelais, Ariosto and Shakespeare as oneof the 
four supreme exponents of the Renaissance. The affectations of 
decadent chivalry disappeared before its humour; the lineaments 
of a noble nation, animated by the youth ofjtnqdern Europe emerging 
from the middle ages, were portrayed in its enduring pictures 
of human experience. The Spanish drama, meanwhile, untram- 
melled by those false canons of psreudo-classic taste which fettered 
the theatre in Italy and afterwards in France, rose to an eminence in 
the hands of Lope de Vega and Calderon which only the English, and 
the English only in the masterpieces of three or four playwrights, 
can rival. Camoens, in the Lusiad, if we may here group Portugal 
with Spain, was the first modern poet to compose an epic on a purely 
modern theme, vying with Virgil, but not bending to pedantic 
rules, and breathing the spirit of the age of heroic adventures 
and almost fabulous discoveries into his melodious numbers. What 
has chiefly to be noted regarding the achievements of the Spanish 
race in arts and letters at this epoch is their potent national origin- 
ality. The revival of learning produced in Spain no slavish imitation 
as it did in Italy, no formal humanism, and, it may be added, very 
little of fruitful scholarship. The Renaissance here, as in England, 



9 o 



RENAISSANCE 



displayed essential qualities of intellectual freedom, delight in life, 
exultation over rediscovered earth and man. The note of Renais- 
sance work in Germany was still Gothic. This we feel' in the 
penetrative earnestness of Durer, in the homeliness of Hans Sachs, 
in the grotesque humour of Eulenspiegel and the Narrenschiff, 
the sombre pregnancy of the Faust legend, the almost stolid mastery 
of Holbein. It lay not in the German genius to escape from the 
preoccupations and the limitations of the middle ages, for this 
reason mainly' that what we call medieval was to a very large 
extent Teutonic. But on the Spanish peninsula, in the master- 
pieces of Velazquez, Cervantes, Camoens, Calderon, we emerge 
into an atmosphere of art, definitely national, distinctly modern, 
where solid natural forms stand before us realistically modelled, 
with light and shadow on their rounded outlines, and where the 
airiest creatures of the fancy take shape and weave a dance of 
rhythmic, light, incomparable intricacy. The Spanish Renaissance 
would in itself suffice, if other witnesses were wanting, to prove 
how inaccurate is the theory that limits this movement to the 
revival of learning. Touched by Italian influences, enriched and 
fortified by the new learning, Spanish genius walked firmly forward on 
its own path. It was only crushed by forces generated in the nation 
that produced it, by the Inquisition and by despotic Catholic 
absolutism. 

In the history of the Renaissance, Spain and Portugal represent 
the exploration of the ocean and the colonization of the other 
Bxoiora* hemisphere. The voyages of Columbus and Vespucci 
Hon of ' t0 America, the rounding of the Cape by Diaz and the 
the ocean, discovery of the sea road to India by Vascoda Gama, 

CortesV conquest of Mexico and Pizarro'sconquest of 
Peru, marked a new era for the human race and inaugurated 
the modern age more decisively than any other series of events 
has done. It has recentlybeen maintained that modern European 
history is chiefly an affair of competition* between confederated 
states for the possession of lands revealed by Columbus and Da 
Gama. Without challenging or adopting this speculation, it may 
be safely affirmed that nothing- so pregnant of results has happened 
as this exploration of the globe. To say that it displaced the centre 
of gravity in politics and commerce, substituting the ocean for the 
Mediterranean, dethroning Italy from her seat of central importance 
in traffic, depressing the eastern and elevating the western powers 
of Europe, opening a path for Anglo-Saxon expansiveness, forcing 
philosophers and statesmen to regard the Occidental nations as a 
single group in counterpoise to other groups of nations, the European 
community as one unit correlated to other units of humanity upon 
this planet, is truth enough to vindicate the vast significance of 
these discoveries. The Renaissance, far from being the re-birth 
of antiquity with its civilization confined to the Mediterranean, 
with its Hercules* Pillars beyond which lay Cimmerian darkness, 
was thus effectively the entrance upon a quite incalculably wider 
stage of life, on which mankind at large has since enacted one great 
drama. 

While Spanish navies were exploring the ocean, and Spanish 
paladins were overturning empires, Charles V. headed the reaction 
Dogmatic °^ Catholicism against reform. Stronger as king of Spain 
Catholt- than as emperor, for the Empire was little but a name, 
clstn. ne ^ en * *he weight of his authority to that system of 

coercion and repression which enslaved Italy, desolated 
Germany with war, and drowned the Low Countries in blood. 
Philip II., with full approval of the Spanish nation, pursued the same 
policy in an even stricter spirit. He was powerfully assisted by 
two institutions, in which the national character of Spain expressed 
itself, the Inquisition and the Society of Jesus. Of the former 
it is not needful to speak here. But we have to observe that the 
last great phenomenon of the Spanish Renaissance was Ignatius 
Loyola, who organized the militia by means of which the church 
worked her Counter-Reformation. His motto, Perinde ac cadaver, 
expressed that recognition of absolutism which papacy and 
monarchy demanded for their consolidation (see Jesuits and 
Loyola). 

The logical order of an essay which attempts to show how 
Renaissance was correlated to Reformation and Counter- 
France m Reformation has necessitated the treatment of Italy, 
the Re- Germany and Spain in succession; for these three 
"ertod 006 nat * ons were tne three m ain agents in the triple 
process to be analysed. It was due to their specific 
qualities, and to the diverse circumstances of their external 
development, that the re-birth of Europe took this form of 
duplex action on the lines of intellectual and moral progress, 
followed by reaction against mental freedom. We have now to 
speak of France, which earliest absorbed the influence of the 
Italian revival, and of England, which received it latest. The 
Renaissance may be said to have begun in France with Charles 
VIII. 's expedition to Naples, and to have continued until the 
extinction of the house of Valois. Louis XII. and Francis I. 
spent a considerable portion of their reigns in the attempt to 



secure possession of the Italian provinces they claimed. Henry 
II. 's queen was Catherine of the Medicean family; and her 
children, Charles IX. and Henry III., were Italianated French- 
men. Thus the connexion between France and Italy during 
the period 1494-1589 was continuous. The French passed to 
and fro across the Alps on military; and peaceful expeditions. 
Italians came to France as courtiers, ambassadors, men of 
business, captains and artists. French society assumed a 
strong Italian colouring, nor were the manners of the court very- 
different from those of an Italian city, except that externally 
they remained ruder and less polished. The relation between 
the crown and its great feudatories, the military bias of the 
aristocracy, and the marked distinction between classes 
which survived from the middle ages, rendered France 
in many vital points unlike Italy. Yet the annals of 
that age, and the anecdotes retailed by Brant6me, prove 
that the royalty and nobility of France had been largely 
Italianized. 

It is said that Louis XII. brought Fra Giocondo of Verona back 
with him to France, and -founded a school of architects. But we 
need not have recourse to this legend for the explanation preach 
of such Italian influences as were already noticeable archltec- 
in the Renaissance buildings on the Loire. Without f ure ^ 
determining the French "style, Italian intercourse helped 
to stimulate its formation and development. There are students 
of the 15th century in France who resent this intrusion of the 
Italian Renaissance. But they forget that France was bound Jby 
inexorable laws of human evolution to obey the impulse which 
communicated itself to every form of art in Europe. In the school 
of Fontainebleau, under the patronage of Francis I., that Italian 
influence made itself distinctly felt; yet a true French manner 
had been already formed, which, when it was subsequently applied 
at Paris, preserved a marked national quality. The characteristic 
of the style developed by Bullant, De l'Orme and Lescot, in the 
royal or princely palaces of Chenonceaux, Chambord, Anet, ficouen, 
Fontainebleau, the Louvre and elsewhere, is a blending of capricious, 
fancy and inventive richness of decoration with purity of outline 
and a large sense of the beauty of extended masses. Beginning 
with the older castles of Touraine, and passing onward to the 
Tuileries, we trace the passage from the medieval fortress to the 
modern pleasure-house, and note how architecture obeyed the 
special demands of that new phenomenon of Renaissance civiliza- 
tion, the court. In the general distribution of parts these monu- 
mental buildings express the peculiar conditions which French 
society assumed under the influence of Francis 1. and Diane de 
Poitiers. In details of execution and harmonic combinations they 
illustrate the precision, logic, lucidity and cheerful spirit of the 
national genius. Here, as in Lombardy, a feeling for serene beauty 
derived from study of the antique has not interrupted the evolution 
of a style indigenous to France and eminently characteristic of the 
French temperament. 

During the reign of Francis I. several Italian painters of eminence 
visited France. Among these, Del Rosso, Primaticcio, Del Sarto 
and Da Vinci are the most famous. But their example p^nch 
was not productive of a really great school of French paint- oaintins 
ing. It was left for the Poussins and Claude Lorraine an # 
in the next century, acting under mingled Italian and sculpture, 
Flemish influences, to embody the still active spirit of 
the classical revival. These three masters were the contemporaries 
of Corneille, and do not belong to the Renaissance period. Sculp- 
ture, on the contrary, in which art, as in architecture, the medieval 
French had been surpassed by no other people of Europe, was 
practised with originality and power in the reigns of Henry II. 
and Francis I. Ponzio and Cellini, who quitted Italy for France, 
found themselves outrivalled in their own sphere by Jean Goujon, 
Cousin and Pilon. The decorative sculpture of this epoch, whether 
combined with architecture or isolated in monumental statuary, 
ranks for grace and suavity with the best of Sansovino's. At the 
same time it is unmistakably inspired by a sense of beauty different 
from the Italian — more piquant and pointed, less languorous, 
more mannered perhaps, but with less of empty rhythmical effect. 
All this while, the minor arts of enamelling, miniature, glass-paint- 
ing, goldsmith's work, jewellery, engraving, tapestry, wood-carving, 
pottery, &c, were cultivated with a spontaneity and freedom which 
proved that France, in the middle point between Flanders and Italy, 
was able to use both influences without a sacrifice of native taste. 
It may indeed be said in general that what is true of France is 
likewise true of all countries which felt the artistic impulses of 
the Renaissance. Whether we regard Spain, the Netherlands, or 
Germany at this epoch, we find a national impress stamped upon 
the products of the plastic and the decorative arts, notwithstanding 
the prevalence of certain forms derived from the antique and Italy. 
It was only at a later period that the formalism of pseudo-classic 
pedantry reduced natural and national originality to a dead 
unanimity. 



RENAISSANCE 



9 1 



French literature was quick to respond to Renaissance influences. 
T)e Comines, the historian of Charles VIII.'s expedition to Naples, 
„ . differs from the earlier French chroniclers in his way of 

iHrat re re S ar ^* n ? tne world of men and affairs. He has the 
" * perspicuity and analytical penetration of a Venetian 
ambassador. Villon, his contemporary, may rather be ranked, 
so far as artistic form and use 01 knowledge are concerned, with 
poets of the middle ages, and in particular with the Goliardi. But 
he is essentially modern in the vividness of his self-portraiture, 
and in what we are wont to call realism. Both De Comines and 
Villon indicate the entrance of a new quality into literature. The 
Rh6toriqueurs, while protracting medieval traditions by their use 
of allegory and complicated metrical systems, sought to improve 
the French language by introducing Latmisms. Thus the Revival 
of Learning began to affect the vernacular in the last years of the 
15th century. Marot and his school reacted against this pedantry. 
The Renaissance displayed itself in their effort to purify the form 
*and diction of poetry. But the decisive revolution was effected 
by Ronsard and his comrades of the Pleiade. It was their professed 
object to raise French to a level with the classics, and to acclimatize 
Italian species of verse. The humanistic movement led these 
learned writers to engraft the graces of the antique upon* their 
native literature, and to refine it by emulating the lucidity of 
Petrarch. The result of their endeavour was immediately apparent 
in the new force added to French rhythm, the new pomp, richness, 
colouring and polish conferred upon poetic diction. French style 
gradually attained to fixity* and the alexandrine came to be recog- 
nized as the standard line in poetry. D^Aubigne's inveqtive and 
Regnier's satire, at the close of the 16th century, are as modern as 
Voltaire's. Meanwhile the drama was emerging from the medieval 
mysteries; and the classical type, made popular by Garnier's 
genius, was elaborated, as in Italy, upon the model of Seneca and 
the canons of the three unities. The tradition thus formed was 
continued and fortified by the illustrious playwrights of the 17th 
•century. Translation from Greek and Latin into French progressed 
rapidly at the commencement of this period. It was a marked 
•characteristic of the Renaissance in France to appropriate the 
spoils of Greece and Rome for the profit of the mother tongue. 
Amyot's Plutarch and his Dapknis and Chloe rank among the 
most exquisite examples of beautiful French prose. Prose had now 
the charm of simplicity combined with grace. To mention Bran- 
time is to mention the most entertaining of gossips. To speak of 
Montaigne is to speak of the best as well as the first of essayists. 
In all the literary work which has been mentioned, the originality 
•and freshness of the French genius are no less conspicuous 
than its saturation with the new learning and with Italian 
studies. But the greatest name of the epoch, the name which 
is synonymous with the Renaissance in France, has yet to be 
uttered. That, of course, is Rabelais. His incommensurable 
-and indescribable masterpiece of mingled humour, wisdom, 
satire, erudition, indecency, profundity, levity, imagina- 
tion, realism, reflects the" whole age in its mirror of hyper- 
Aristophanic farce. What Ariosto is for Italy, Cervantes for 
Spain, Erasmus for Holland, Luther for Germany, Shakespeare 
for England, that is Rabelais for France. The Renaissance can- 
not be comprehended in its true character without familiarity 
with these six representatives of its manifold and many-sided 
inspiration. 

The French Renaissance, so rich on the side of arts and letters, 
was hardly less rich on the side of classical studies. The revival 

of learning has a noble muster-roll of names in France: 

h 1 Turnebus, the patriarch' of Hellenistic studies; the 

hi *Th ^ t ^ ennes °f Paris, equalling in numbers, industry and 

% f* a-* l earnm S their Venetian rivals; the two Scaligers; impas- 

tlonln 1 " s * onec l Dolet; eloquent Muret; learned Cujas; terrible 

France Calvin; Ramus, the intrepid antagonist of Aristotle; 

De Thou and De Beze;\ponderous Casaubon; brilliant 
young Saumaise. The distinguishing characteristics of French 
humanism are vivid intelligence, critical audacity and polemical 
•acumen,' perspicuity of exposition, learning directed in its appli- 
cations by logical sense rather than by artistic ideals of taste. 
Some of the names just mentioned remind us that in France, as 
in Germany and Holland, the Reformation was closely connected 
with the revival of learning. Humanism has never been in the 
narrow sense of that term Protestant ; still less has it been strictly 
Catholic. In Italy it fostered a temper of mind decidedly averse 
to theological speculation and religious earnestness. In Holland 
and Germany, with Erasmus, Reuchlin and Melanchthon, it de- 
veloped types of character, urbane, reflective, pointedly or gently 
critical, which, left to themselves, would not have plunged the north 
of Europe into the whirlpool of belligerent reform. Yet none the 
less was the new learning, through the open spirit of inquiry it 
nourished, its vindication of the private reason, its enthusiasm for 
republican antiquity, and its proud assertion of the rights of human 
independence, linked by a strong and subtle chain to that turbid 
revolt of the individual consciousness against spiritual despotism 
draped in fallacies and throned upon abuses. To this rebellion 
we give the name of Reformation. But, while the necessities of 
•antagonism to papal Rome made it assume at first the form of 



narrow and sectarian opposition, it marked in fact a vital struggle 
of the intellect towards truth and freedom, involving future results 
of scepticism and rationalistic audacity from which its earlier 
champions would have shrunk. It marked, moreover, in the con- 
dition of armed resistance against established authority which was 
forced upon it by the Counter- Reformation, a firm resolve to assert 
political liberty, leading in the course of time to a revolution with 
which the rebellious spirit of the Revival was sympathetic. This 
being the relation of humanism in general to reform, French learn- 
ing in particular displayed such innovating boldness as threw many 
of its most conspicuous professors into the camp at war with Rome. 
Calvin, a French student of Picard origin, created the type of 
Protestantism to which the majority of French Huguenots adhered. 
This^ too was a moment at which philosophical seclusion was hardly 
possible. In a nation so tumultuously agitated one side or the 
other had to be adopted. Those of the French humanists who did 
not proclaim Huguenot opinions found themselves obliged with 
Muretus to lend their talents to the Counter- Reformation, or to 
suffer persecution for heterodoxy, like Dolet. The church, terrified 
and infuriated by the progress of reform, suspected learning on its 
own account. To be an eminent scholar was to be accused of 
immorality, heresy and atheism in a single indictment; and the 
defence of weaker minds lay in joining the Jesuits, as Heinsius was 
fain to do. France had already absorbed the earlier Renaissance 
in an Italianizing spirit before the Reformation made itself felt 
as a political actuality. This fact, together with the strong 
Italian bias of the Valois, serves to explain in some degree 
the reason why the Counter- Reformation entailed those fierce 
entangled civil wars, massacres of St Bartholomew, murders 
of^ the Guises, regicides, treasons and empoisonments that ter- 
minated with the compromise of Henry IV. It is no part 
of the present subject to analyse the political, religious and 
social interests of that struggle. The upshot was the triumph 
of^ the Counter- Reformation, and the establishment of its 
principle, absolutism, as the basis of French government. It 
was a French king who, when the nation had been reduced to 
order, uttered the famous word of absolutism, u L'fitat, e'est 
moi." 

The Renaissance in the Low Countries, as elsewhere, had its 
brilliant age of arts and letters. During the middle ages the wealthy 
free^ towns of Flanders flourished under conditions not _ 
dissimilar to those of the Italian republics. They raised 7?* 
miracles of architectural beauty, which were modified in ^ J c ^ 
the 15th and 16th centuries by characteristic elements £." s . . 
of the new style. The Van Eycks, followed by Memling, ™™ 
Metsys, Mabuse, Lucas van Leyden, struck out a new path o u t C h 
in the revival of painting and taught Europe the secret palntlast 
of oil-colouring. But it was reserved for the 17th century 
to witness the flower and fruit time of this powerful art in 
the work of Porbus, Rubens and Vandyck, in the Dutch schools 
of landscape and home-life, and in the unique masterpieces of 
Rembrandt. We have a right to connect this later period with 
the ^ Renaissance, because the distracted state of the Netherlands 
during the 16th century suspended, while it could not extinguish, 
their aesthetic development. The various schools of the 17th 
century, moreover, are animated with the Renaissance spirit no 
less surely than the Florentine school of the 15th or the Venetian 
of the 16th. The animal vigour and carnal enjoyment of Rubens, 
the refined Italianizing beauty of Vandyck, the mystery of light 
and gloom on Rembrandt's panels, the love of nature in Ruysdael, 
Cuyp and Van Hooghe, with their luminously misty skies, silvery- 
daylight and broad expanse of landscape, the interest in common 
life displayed by Ter Borch, Van Steen, Douw, Ostade and Teniers, 
the instinct for the beauty of animals in Potter, the vast sea spaces 
of Vanderveldt, the grasp on reality, the acute intuition into char- 
acter in portraits, the scientific study of the world and man, the 
robust sympathy with natural appetites, which distinguish the 
whole art of the Low Countries, are a direct emanation from the 
Renaissance. 

The vernacular in the Netherlands profited at first but little 
by the impulse which raised Italian, Spanish, French and English 
to the rank of classic languages. But humanism, first of -. . . 
all in its protagonist Erasmus, afterwards in the long e *?* .. 
list of critical scholars and editors, Lipsius, Heinsius ^hotar' 
and Grotius, in the printers Elzevir and Plantin, developed sbJ 
itself from the centre of the Leiden university with 
massive energy, and proved that it was still a motive force 
of intellectual progress. In the fields of classical learning the 
students of the Low Countries broke new ground chiefly by 
methodical collection, classification and comprehensive criticism 
of previously accumulated stores. Their works were solid and sub- 
stantial edifices, forming the substratum for future scholarship. 
In addition to this they brought philosophy and scientific thorough- 
ness to bear on studies which had been pursued in a more literary 
spirit. It would, however, be uncritical to pursue this subject 
further; for the encyclopaedic labours of the Dutch philologers 
belong to a period when tte Renaissance was overpast. For the 
same reason it is inadmissible to do more than mention the name 
of Spinoza here. 



9 2 



RENAISSANCE 



The Netherlands became the battlefield of Reformation and 
Counter-Reformation in even a stricter sense than France. Here 
Dutch t ^ ie antagonistic principles were plainly posed in the 

wars of cours . e °* struggle against foreign despotism. The 
Indeoend- conmct ended in the assertion of political independence 
ence ' as °PP° se d to absolute dominion. Europe in large measure 
owes the modern ideal of political liberty to that spirit 
of stubborn resistance which broke the power of Spain. Recent 
history, and in particular the history of democracy, claims for its 
province the several stages whereby this principle was developed 
in England and America, and its outburst in the frenzy of the 
French Revolution. It is enough here to have alluded to the part 
played by the Low Countries in the genesis of a motive force which 
may be described as the last manifestation of the Renaissance 
striving after self-emancipation. 

The insular position of England, combined with the nature 
of the English people, has allowed us to feel the vibration of 
England European movements later and with less of shock 
in the Re- than any of the continental nations. Before a 'wave 
naissance f p r0 g re ss has reached our shores we have had the 
pe ° ' opportunity of watching it as spectators, and of con- 
sidering how we shall receive it. Revolutions have passed 
from the tumultuous stages of their origin into some settled 
and recognizable state before we have been called upon to 
cope with them. It was thus that England took the 
influences of the Renaissance and Reformation simultaneously, 
and almost at the same time found herself engaged in that 
struggle with the Counter-Reformation which, crowned by 
the defeat of the Spanish Armada, stimulated the sense of 
nationality and developed the naval forces of the race. Both 
Renaissance and Reformation had been anticipated by at least 
a century in England. Chaucer's poetry, which owed so much 
to Italian examples, gave an early foretaste of the former. 
Wickliffe's teaching was a vital moment in the latter. But 
the French wars, the Wars of the Roses and the persecution 
of the .Lollards deferred the coming of the new age; and the 
year 1536, when Henry VIII. passed the Act of Supremacy 
through pariiament, may be fixed as the date when England 
entered definitively upon a career of intellectual development 
abreast with the foremost nations of the continent. The 
circumstances just now insisted on explain the specific character 
of the English Renaissance. The Reformation had been adopted 
by consent of the king, lords and commons; and this change 
in the state religion, though it was not confirmed without 
reaction, agitation and bloodshed, cost the nation comparatively 
Combined little disturbance. Humanism, before it affected the 
In /Renals' bulk of the En S usn P e °pl e > had already permeated 
sanwand I tanan and French literature. Classical erudition 
Reformat had been adapted to the needs of modern thought. 
Hon. The hard work of collecting, printing, annotating 

and translating Greek and Latin authors had been 
accomplished. The masterpieces of antiquity had been 
interpreted and made intelligible. Much of the learning 
popularized by our poets and dramatists was derived at second 
hand from modern literature. This does not mean that England 
was deficient in ripe and sound scholars. More, Colet, Ascham, 
Cheke, Camden were men whose familiarity with the classics 
was both intimate and easy. Public schools and universities 
conformed to the modern methods of study; nor were there 
wanting opportunities for youths of humble origin to obtain an 
education which placed them on a level with Italian scholars. 
The single case of Ben Jonson sufficiently proves this. Yet 
learning did not at this epoch become a marked speciality in 
England. There was no class corresponding to the humanists. 
It should also be remembered that the best works of Italian 
literature were introduced into Great Britain together with the 
classics. Phaer's Virgil, Chapman's Homer, Harrington's 
Orlando, Marlowe's Hero and Leander, Fairfax's Jerusalem 
Delivered, North's Plutarch, Hohy's Courtier— -to mention only a 
few examples— placed English readers simultaneously in posses- 
sion of the most eminent and representative works of Greece, 
Rome and Italy. At the same time •Spanish influences reached 
them through the imitators of Guevara and the dramatists; 
French influences in the versions of romances; German in- 



fluences in popular translations of the Faust, legend, Eultn- 
Spiegel and similar productions. The authorized version of the 
Bible had also been recently given to the people — so that almost 
at the same period of time England obtained in the vernacular 
an extensive library of ancient and modern authors. This was 
a privilege enjoyed in like measure by no other nation. It 
sufficiently accounts for the richness and variety of Elizabethan 
literature, and for the enthusiasm with which the English 
language was cultivated. 

Speaking strictly, England borrowed little in the region of the 
arts from other nations, and developed still less that was original. 
What is called Jacobean architecture marks indeed an 
interesting stage in the transition from the Gothic style. , s ' 
But, compared with Italian, French, Spanish, German and letters 
Flemish work of a like period, it is both timid and dry. and tbe 
Sculpture was represented in London for a brief space by drama » 
Torrigiani; painting by Holbein and Antonio More; music by 
Italians and Frenchmen of the Chapel Royal. But no Englishmen 
rose to European eminence in these departments. With literature 
the case was very different. Wyat and Surrey began by engrafting 
the forms and graces of Italian poetry upon the native stock. They 
introduced the sonnet and blank verse. Sidney followed with the 
sestine and terza rima and with various experiments in classic 
metres, none of which took root on English soil. The translators 
handled the octave stanza. Marlowe gave new vigour to the 
couplet. The first period of the English Renaissance was one of 
imitation and assimilation. Academies after the Italian type were 
founded. Tragedies in the style of Seneca, rivalling Italian and 
French dramas of the epoch, were produced. Attempts to Latinize 
ancestral rhythms, similar to those which had failed in Italy and 
France, were made. Tentative essays in criticism and dissertations 
on the art of poetry abounded. It seemed as though the Renaissance 
ran a risk of being throttled in its cradle by superfluity of foreign and 
pedantic nutriment. But the natural vigour of the English genius 
resisted influences alien to itself, and showed a robust capacity 
for digesting the varied diet offered to it. As there was nothing- 
despotic in the temper of the ruling classes, nothing oppressive in 
English culture, the literature of that a^e evolved itself freely from 
the people. ^ It was under these conditions that Spenser gave his 
romantic epic tothe world, a poem which derived its allegory from 
the middle ages, its decorative richness from the Italian Renaissance, 
its sweetness, purity, harmony and imaginative splendour from the 
most poetic nation of the modern world. Under the same conditions 
the Elizabethan drama, which in its totality is the real exponent of 
the English Renaissance, came into existence. This drama very- 
early freed itself from the pseudo-classic mannerism which imposed 
on taste in Italy and France. Depicting feudalism in the vivid 
colours of an age at war with feudal institutions, breathing into 
antique histories the breath of actual life, embracing the romance of 
Italy and Spain, the mysteries of German legend, the fictions of poetic 
fancy and the facts of daily life, humours of the moment and abstrac- 
tions of philosophical speculation, in one homogeneous amalgam 
instinct with intense vitality, this extraordinary birth of time, with 
Shakespeare for the master of all ages, left a monument of the Re- 
naissance unrivalled for pure creative power by any other product 
of that epoch. To complete the sketch, we must set Bacon, the 
expositor of modern scientific method, 'beside Spenser and Shake- 
speare, as the third representative of the Renaissance in England. 
Nor should Raleigh, Drake, Hawkins, the semi-buccaneer explorers 
of the ocean, be omitted. They, following the lead of 
Portuguese and Spaniards, combating the Counter-Re- 
formation on the seas, opened for England her career 
of colonization and plantation. All this while the political 
policy of Tudors and Stewarts tended towards monarchical 
absolutism, while the Reformation in England, modified 
by contact with the Low Countries during their struggles, 
was narrowing into strict reactionary intolerance. Puri- 
tanism indicated a revolt of the religious conscience of 
the nation against the arts and manners of the Renais- 
sance, against the encroachments of belligerentCatholicism, 
against the corrupt and Italianated court of James I., 
against the absolutist pretensions of his son Charles. In its final 
manifestation during the Commonwealth, Puritanism won a tran- 
sient victory over the mundane forces of both Reformation and 
Renaissance, as these had taken shape in England. It also secured 
the eventual triumph of constitutional independence. Milton, the 
greatest humanistic poet of the English race, lent his pen and moral 
energies during the best years of his life to securing that principle 
on which modern political systems at present rest. Thus the geo- 
graphical isolation of England, and the comparatively late adoption 
by the English of matured Italian and German influences, give 
peculiar complexity to the phenomena of Reformation and Re- 
naissance simultaneously developed on our island. The period of 
our history between 1536 and 1642 shows how difficult it is to 
separate these two factors in the re-birth of Europe, both of which 
contributed so powerfully to the formation of modern English 
nationality. 



English 
reaction 
against 
Catholl* 
cistn, 
monarch- 
ical ab- 
solutism, 
and Re- 
naissance 
culture. 



RENAIX— RENAN 



93 



It has been impossible to avoid an air of superficiality, and 
the repetition of facts known to every schoolboy, in this sketch 
New of so complicated a subject as the Renaissance, — em- 

poUtlcal bracing many nations, a great variety of topics and 
relations an indefinite period of time. Yet no other treatment 
*d*tln™ Pe was possible upon the lines laid down at the outset, 
from the where it was explained why the term Renaissance 
Reaais- cannot now be confined to the Revival of Learning 
saace * and the effect of antique studies upon literary 
and artistic ideals. The purpose of this article has been 
to show that, while the Renaissance implied a new way of 
regarding the material world and human nature, a new concep- 
tion of man's destiny and duties on this planet, a new culture 
and new intellectual perceptions penetrating every sphere of 
thought and energy, it also involved new reciprocal relations 
between the members of the European group of nations. The 
Renaissance closed the middle ages and opened the modern era, 
— not merely because the mental and moral ideas which then 
sprang into activity and owed their force in large measure to 
the revival of classical learning were opposed to medieval 
modes of thinking and feeling, but also because the political 
and international relations specific to it as an age were at 
variance with fundamental theories of the past. Instead of 
empire and church, the sun and moon of the medieval system, 
a federation of peoples, separate in type and divergent in 
interests, yet bound together by common tendencies, common 
culture and common efforts, came into existence. For obedi- 
ence to central authority was substituted balance of power. 
Henceforth the hegemony of Europe attached to no crown, 
imperial or papal, but to the nation which was capable of 
winning it, in the spiritual region by mental ascendancy, and 
in the temporal by force. 

That this is the right way of regarding the subject appears 
from the events of the first two decades of the 16th century, 
CoaservM' those years in which the humanistic revival attained its 
tive and highest point in Italy. Luther published his theses in 
stoT* 5 " I517, sixty-four years after the fall of Constantinople, 
parties ia twenty-three years after the expedition of Charles 
modern VIII. to Naples, ten years before the sack of 
Europe, Rome, at a moment when France, Spain an d 
England had only felt the influences of Italian culture but 
feebly. From that date forward two parties wrestled for 
supremacy in Europe, to which may be given the familiar 
names of Liberalism and Conservatism, the party of pro- 
gress and the party of established institutions. The triumph 
of the former was most signal among the Teutonic peoples. 
The Latin races, championed by Spain and supported by the 
papacy, fought the battle of the latter, and succeeded for a 
time in rolling back the tide of revolutionary conquest. Mean- 
while that liberal culture which had been created for Europe 
by the Italians before the contest of the Reformation began 
continued to spread, although it was stifled in Italy and Spain, 
retarded in France and the Low .Countries, well-nigh extirpated 
by wars in Germany, and diverted from its course in England 
by the counter-movement of Puritanism. The aulos da f£ of 
Seville and Madrid, the flames to which Bruno, Dolet and 
Paleario were flung, the dungeon of Campanella and the seclu- 
sion of Galileo, the massacre of St Bartholomew and the faggots 
of Smithfield, the desolated plains of Germany and the cruelties 
of Alva in the Netherlands, disillusioned Europe of those golden 
dreams which had arisen in the earlier days of humanism, and 
which had been so pleasantly indulged by Rabelais. In truth 
the Renaissance was ruled by no Astraea redux, but rather by a 
severe spirit which brought no peace but a sword, reminding 
men of sternest duties, testing what of moral force and tenacity 
was in them, compelling them to strike for the old order or the new, 
suffering no lukewarm halting between two opinions. That, 
in spite of retardation and retrogression, the old order of 
ideas should have yielded to the new all over Europe, — that 
science should have won firm standing-ground, and political 
liberty should have struggled through those birth-throes of its 
origin, — was in the nature of things. Had this not been, the 



Renaissance or re-birth of Europe would be a term without 
a meaning. ( (J. A. S.) 

Literature. — The special articles on the several arts and the 
literatures of modern Europe, and on the biographies of great men 
mentioned in this essay, will give details of necessity here omitted. 
Of works on the Renaissance in general may be mentioned Jacob 
Burckhardt, Die Cultur der Renaissance in Iialien (Eng. trans., 1878) ; 
G, Voigt, Wiederbelebung des Classischen AUerthums (2 vols. 3rd ed., 
by M. Lehnerdt, 1893); J. A. Symonds, Renaissance in Italy; Marc 
Monnier, Renaissance de Dante & Luther; Eugene Mtintz, PrScur- 
seurs de la Renaissance (1882), Renaissance en Italic et en France 
(1885), and Hist, de Vart pendant la Renaissance (1889-95); Ludwig 
Geiger, Humanismus una Renaissance in Italien und Deutschland 
(1882), and Cambridge Modern History, vol. i., " The Renaissance " 
(Cambridge, 1903), where full bibliographies will be found. 

RENAIX, a town of Belgium in the province of East Flanders, 
8 m. S. of Oudenarde. It has extensive dyeworks, bleaching 
grounds and manufactories for linen and woollen goods. Pop. 
(1904) 20,760. 

RENAN, ERNEST (1823-1892), French philosopher and 
Orientalist, was born on the 27th of February 1823 at Treguier. 
His father's people were of the fisher-clan of Renans or Ronans; 
his grandfather, having made a small fortune by his fishing 
smack, bought a house at Treguier and settled there, and his 
father, captain of a small cutter and an ardent Republican, 
married the daughter of Royalist trading-folk from the neigh* 
bouring town of Lannion. All his life Renan was divided 
between his father's and his mother's political beliefs. He was 
only five years old when his father died, and hjs sister Henriette, 
twelve years older than Ernest, a girl of remarkable character, 
was henceforth morally the head of the household. Having in 
vain attempted to keep a school for girls at Treguier, she left her 
native place and went to Paris as teacher in a young ladies' 
boarding-school. Ernest meanwhile was educated in the 
ecclesiastical seminary of his native place. His good-conduct 
notes for this period describe him as " docile, patient, diligent, 
painstaking, thorough." We do not hear that he was brilliant, 
but the priests cared little for such qualities. While the priests 
were grounding him in mathematics and Latin, his mother 
completed his education. She was only half a Breton. Her 
paternal ancestors came from Bordeaux, and Renan used to say 
that in his own nature the Gascon and the Breton were con- 
stantly at odds. 

In the summer of 1838 Renan carried off all the prizes at the 
college of Treguier. His sister in Paris told the doctor of the 
school in which she taught about the success of her brother, 
and he carriejd the news to F. A. P. Dupanloup, then engaged in 
organizing the ecclesiastical college of St Nicholas du Char- 
donnet, a school in which the young Catholic nobility and the 
most gifted pupils of the Catholic seminaries were to be educated 
together, with a view to cementing the bond between the 
aristocracy and the priesthood. Dupanloup sent for Renan at 
once. He was fifteen and a half. He had never been outside 
his Breton province. " I learned with stupor that knowledge 
was not a privilege of the church ... I awoke to the meaning 
of the words talent, fame, celebrity." Above all, religion seemed 
to him wholly different in Treguier and in Paris. The super- 
ficial, brilliant, pseudo-scientific Catholicism of the capital did not 
satisfy Renan, who had accepted the austere faith of his Breton 
masters. 

In 1840 Renan left St Nicholas to study philosophy at the 
seminary of Issy. He entered with a passion for Catholic 
scholasticism. The rhetoric of St Nicholas had wearied him, 
and his serious intelligence hoped to satisfy itself with the vast 
and solid material of Catholic theology. Reid and Malebranche 
first attracted him among the philosophers, and after these he 
turned to Hegel, Kant and Herder. Renan began to perceive 
the essential contradiction between the metaphysics which he 
studied and the faith that he professed, but an appetite for 
truths that can be verified restrained his scepticism. " Philo- 
sophy excites and only half satisfies the appetite for truth; I 
am eager for mathematics," he wrote to his sister Henriette. 
Henriette had accepted in the family of Count Zamoyski an en- 
gagement more lucrative than her former place. She exercised 



9+ 



RENAN 



the strongest influence over her brother, and her published 
letters reveal a mind almost equal, a moral nature superior, to 
his own. 

It was not mathematics but philology which was to settle the 
gathering doubts of Ernest Renan. His course completed at 
Issy, he entered the college of St Sulpice in order to take his 
degree in philology prior to entering the church; and here he 
began the study of Hebrew. He saw that the second part of 
Isaiah differs from the first not only in style but in date; that the 
grammar and the history of the Pentateuch are posterior to the 
time of Moses; that the book of Daniel is clearly apocryphal. 
It followed from his training that, if you admit one error in a 
revealed text, you incriminate the whole. Secretly, Renan felt 
himself cut off from the communion of saints, and yet with his 
whole heart he desired to live the life of a Catholic priest 
Hence a struggle between vocation and conviction; owing to 
Henriette, conviction gained the day. In October 1845 Renan 
left the seminary of St Sulpice for Stavistas, a lay college of the 
Oratorians. Finding himself even there too much under the 
domination of the church, a few weeks later he reluctantly broke 
the last tie which bound him to the religious life and entered 
M. Crouzet's school for boys as an usher. 

It is always dangerous to educate a really great mind in only 
one order of truth. Renan, brought up by- priests in a world 
ruled by authority and curious only of feeling and opinion, was to 
accept the scientific ideal with an extraordinary expansion of all 
his faculties. He was henceforth ravished by the splendour 
of the cosmos. At the end of his life he wrote of Amiel, " The 
man who has time to keep a private diary has never understood 
the immensity of the universe." The certitudes of physical and 
natural science were revealed to Renan in 1846 by the chemist 
Marcellin Berthelot, then a boy of eighteen, his pupil at M. 
Crouzet's school. To the day of Renan 's death their friendship 
continued. Renan was occupied as usher only in the evenings. 
In the daytime he continued his researches in Semitic philology. 
In 1847 he. obtained the Prix Volney — one of the principal dis- 
tinctions awarded by the Academy of Inscriptions — for the 
manuscript of his " General History of Semitic Languages." 
In 1847 he took his degree as Agrege de Philosophic; that is to 
say, fellow of the university, and was offered a place as master 
in the Iycee of Vend6me. In 1848 a small temporary appoint- 
ment to the lycee of Versailles permitted him to return to the 
capital and resume his studies. 

The revolution of 1848 aroused in Renan that side of him which 
loved the priesthood because " the priest lives for his fellows." 
He for the first time confronted the problems of Democracy. 
The result was an immense volume, The Future of Science , 
which remained in manuscript until 1890. UAvenir de la 
science is an attempt to conciliate the privileges of a necessary 
elite with the diffusion of the greatest good of the greatest 
number. The difficulty haunted Renan throughout his life. 
By the time he had finished his elaborate scheme for regenerating 
society by means of a devoted aristocracy of knowledge, and the 
diffusion of culture, the year 1848 was past, and with it his fever 
of Democracy. In 1849 the French government sent him to 
Italy on a scientific mission. He remained eight months abroad, 
during which he forgot his anxiety about the toilers' lot. 
Hitherto he had known nothing of art. In Italy the artist in him 
awoke and triumphed over the savant and the reformer. On 
his return to Paris Renan lived with his sister Henriette. A small 
post at the National Library, .together with his sister's savings, 
furnished him with the means of livelihood. In the evenings he 
wrote for the Revue des deux mottdes and the Debats the 
exquisite essays which appeared in 1857 and 1859 under the 
titles Etudes d'histoire religieuse and Essais de morale et de 
critique. In 1852 his book on Averroes had brought him not 
only his doctor's degree, but his first reputation as a thinker. 
In his two volumes of essays Renan shows himself a Liberal, but 
no longer a Democrat. Nothing, according to his philosophy, 
is less important than prosperity. The greatest good of the 
greatest number is a theory as dangerous as it is illusory. Man 
is not born to be prosperous, but to realize, in a little vanguard of 



chosen spirits, an ideal superior to the ideal of yesterday. Only 
the few can attain a complete development. Yet there is a 
solidarity between the chosen few and the masses which produce 
them; each has a duty to the other. The acceptance of this 
duty is the only foundation for a moral and just society The 
aristocratic idea has seldom been better stated. 1 

The success of the Etudes d'histoire religieuse and the Essais 
de morale had made the name of Renan known to a cultivated 
public. While Mademoiselle Renan remained shut up at home 
copying her brother's manuscripts or compiling material for his 
work, the young philosopher began to frequent more than one 
Parisian salon, and especially the studio of Ary SchefTer, at that • 
time a noted social centre. In 1856 he proposed to marry 
Cornelie SchefTer, the niece and adopted daughter of the great 
Dutch painter. Not without a struggle Henriette consented 
not only to the marriage, but to make her home with the young 
couple, whose housekeeping depended on the sum that she . 
could contribute. The history of this romance has been told - by. 
Renan in the memorial essay which he wrote some six years later, 
entitled Ma Sceur Henriette. His marriage brought much 
brightness into his life, a naturalness into his style and a greater 
attention to the picturesque. He did not forsake his studies in 
Semitic philology, and in 1859 appeared his translation of the 
Book of Job with an introductory essay, followed in 1859 by the 
Song of Songs. 

Renan was now a candidate for the chair of Hebrew and 
Chaldaic languages at the College de France, which he had 
desired since first he studied Hebrew at the seminary of St 
Sulpice. The death of the scholar Quatremere had left this post 
vacant in 1857. No one in France save Renan was capable of 
filling it. The Catholic party, upheld by the empress, would 
not appoint an unfrocked seminarist, a notorious heretic, to a 
chair of Biblical exegesis. Yet the emperor wished to conciliate 
Ernest Renan. He offered to send the young scholar on an 
archaeological mission to Phoenicia. Renan immediately accepted. 
Leaving his wife at home with their baby son, Renan left France, 
accompanied by his sister, in the summer of i860. Madame 
Renan joined them in January 1861, returning to France in 
July. The mission proved fruitful in Phoenician inscriptions 
which Renan published in his Mission de Phenicie. They form 

.the base of that Corpus Inscriptionum Semiticarum on which he 
used in later years to declare that he founded his claim to re- 
membrance. He wished to complete his exploration of the 
upper range of Lebanon; he remained, therefore, with Henriette 
to affront the dangerous miasma of a Syrian autumn. At 
Amshit, near Byblos, Henriette Renan died of intermittent 
fever on the 24th of September 186 r. ' Her brother, himself at 
death's door, was carried unconscious on board a ship waiting 
in harbour and bound for France. The sea air revived him, 
but he reached France broken apparently in heart and health. 
His sister in her last days had entreated him not to give up his 
candidature for the chair of Hebrew, and on the nth of January 
1862 the Minister of Public Instruction ratified Renan's election 
to the post. But his opening lecture, in which, amid the 
applause of the students, Renan declared Jesus Christ " an 
incomparable Man," alarmed the Catholic party. Renan's 
lectures were pronounced a disturbance of the public peace, and 
he was suspended. On the 2nd of June 1864, on opening the 
newspaper, Renan saw that he had been transferred from the 
chair of Hebrew at the College of France to the post of sub- 
librarian at the National Library. He wrote to the Minister of 
Public Instruction: " Pecunia tua tecum sit!" He refused 
the new position, was deprived of his chair, and henceforth 
depended solely upon his pen. 

Henriette had told him to write the life of Jesus. They had 
begun it together ih Syria, she copying the pages as he wrote 

, them, with a New Testament and a Josephus for all his library. 
The book bears the mark of its origin — it is filled with the 
atmosphere of the East. It is the work of a man familiar with 
the Bible and theology, and no less acquainted with the inscrip- 
tions, monuments, types and landscapes of Syria. But it is 
scarcely the work of a great scholar: Renan's debt to the school 



RENARD 



95 



of Tubingen has been exaggerated, in so far as regards the Life 
of Jesus. The book appeared on the 23rd of June 1863; before 
November sixty thousand copies of it were in circulation. 
Renan still used his literary gifts to pursue a scientific ideal. 
In the days when he had composed his huge, immature treatise 
on the Future of Science, he had written: " I envy the man who 
shall evoke from the past the origins of Christianity. Such a 
writer would compose the most important book of the century." 
He set to work to realize this project, and produced the Apostles 
in 1866, and St Paul in 1869, after having visited Asia Minor 
with his wife, where he studied the scenes of the labours of 
St Paul as minutely as v in 1861 he had observed the material 
surroundings of the life of Jesus. 

Renan was not only a scholar. In St- Paul, as in the Apostles, 
he shows his concern with the larger social life, his sense of 
fraternity, and a revival of the democratic sentiment which 
had inspired UAvenir de la science. In 1869 he presented 
himself as the candidate of the liberal opposition at the parlia- 
mentary election for Meaux. While his temper had become 
less aristocratic, his Liberalism had grown more tolerant. On 
the eve of its dissolution Renan was half prepared to accept the 
Empire, and, had he been elected to the Chamber of Deputies, 
he would have joined the group of V Empire liberal. But he 
was not elected. A year later war was declared with Germany, 
the Empire fell, and Napoleon III. went into exile. The 
Franco-German War was a turning-point in Renan's history. 
Germany had always been to him the asylum of thought and 
disinterested science. Now he saw the land of his ideal destroy 
and ruin the land of his birth; he beheld the German no longer 
as a priest, but as an invader. His heart turned to France. In 
La Reforme intellectuelle et morale (1871) he endeavoured at 
least to bind her wounds, to safeguard her future. Yet he 
was still under the influence of Germany. The ideal and the 
discipline which he proposed to his defeated country were those 
of her conqueror — a feudal society, a monarchical government, 
an elite, which the rest of the nation exists merely to support 
and nourish; an ideal of honour and duty imposed by a chosen 
few on the recalcitrant and subject multitude. The errors of 
the Commune confirmed Renan in this reaction. At the same 
time the irony always perceptible in his work grows more bitter. 
His Dialogues philosopkiqaes, written in 187 1, his Ecclesiastes 
(1882) and his Antichrist (1876) (the fourth volume of the 
Origins of Christianity, dealing with the reign of Nero) are 
incomparable in their literary genius, but they are examples of 
a disenchanted and sceptical temper. He had vainly tried to 
make his country follow his precepts. He resigned himself to 
watch her drift towards perdition. The progress of events 
showed him, on the contrary, a France which every day left a 
little stronger, and he aroused himself from his disbelieving, 
disillusioned mood, and observed with genuine interest the 
struggle for justice and liberty of a democratic society. For 
his mind was the broadest of the age. The fifth and sixth 
volumes of the Origins of Christianity l&he Christian Church and 
Mar cits Aurelius) show him reconciled with democracy, confident 
in the gradual ascent of man, aware that the greatest catastrophes 
do not really interrupt the sure if imperceptible progress of the 
world — reconciled also in some measure, if not with the truths, 
at least with the moral beauties of Catholicism, and with the 
remembrance of his pious youth. 

On the threshold of old age the philosopher cast a glance at 
the days of his childhood. He was nearly sixty when, in 1883, 
he published those Souvenirs d y enfance et de jeunesse which, 
after the Life of Jesus, are the work by which he is chiefly 
known. They possess that lyric note of personal utterance 
•which the public prizes in a man already famous. They showed 
the blase modern reader that a world no less poetic, no less 
primitive than that of the Origins of Christianity exists, or still 
existed within living memory, on the north-western coast of 
France. They have the Celtic magic of ancient romance and 
the simplicity, the naturalness, the veracity which the 19th 
century prized so highly. But his Ecclesiastes, published a few 
months earlier, his Drames phUosophiqnes, collected in 1888, ■ 



give a more adequate image of his fastidious critical, disen- 
chanted, yet not unhopeful spirit. These books arc often bitter 
and melancholy, yet not destitute of optimism. They show the 
attitude towards uncultured Socialism of a philosopher liberal 
by conviction, by temperament an aristocrat. We learn in 
them how Caliban (democracy), the mindless brute, educated 
to his own responsibility, makes after all an adequate ruler; 
how Prospero (the aristocratic principle, or, if we will, the mind) 
accepts his dethronement for the sake of greater liberty in the 
intellectual world, since Caliban proves an effective policeman, 
and leaves his superiors a free hand in the laboratory; how 
Ariel (the religious principle) acquires a firmer hold on life, and 
no longer gives up the ghost at the faintest hint of change. 
Indeed, Ariel flourishes in the service of Prospero under the 
external government of the many-headed brute. For the 
one thing needful is not destined to succumb. Religion and 
knowledge are as imperishable as the world they dignify. Thus 
out of the depths rises unvanquished the essential idealism of 
Ernest Renan. 

Renan was a great worker. At sixty years of age, having 
finished the Origins of Christianity, he began his History of Israel, 
based on a lifelong study of the Old Testament and on the 
Corpus Inscriptionum Semiticarum, published by the Academie 
des Inscriptions under Renan's direction from the year 18S1 
till the end of his life. The first volume of the History of Israel 
appeared in 1887, the third and finest volume in 1891, the last 
two only after the historian's decease. As a history of facts and 
theories the book has many faults; as an essay on the evolution 
of the religious idea it is (despite some passages of frivolity, 
irony, or incoherence) of extraordinary importance; as a reflec- 
tion of the mind of Ernest Renan it is the most lifelike of images. 
In a volume of collected essays, Feuillcs d&tacMes, published 
also in 1891, we find the same mental attitude, an affirmation 
of the necessity of piety independent of dogma. On the 12th 
of October 1892 he died after a few days' illness. In his last 
years he received many marks of honour, being made an 
administrator of the College de France and grand officer of the 
Legion of Honour. Two volumes of the History of Israel, his 
correspondence with his sister Henriette, his Letters to 21. 
Berthelot, and the History of the Religious Policy of Philippe-le~ 
Bel, which he wrote in the years immediately before his marriage, 
all appeared during the last eight years of the 19th century. 

See Desportes and Bournand, E. Renan, sa vie et son ceuvre (1892) ; 
E. Grant Duff, Ernest Renan, in memoriam (1893); Seailles, 
E. Renan, essai de biographic psychotogique (1894); G. Monod, Les 
maitres de Vhistoire (1894) ; Allier, La Phitosophie d E. Renan (1895) ; 
M. J. Darmesteter, La vie de E. R. (1898); PlatzhofT, E. Renan, ein 
Lebensbild (1900); Brauer, Philosophy of Ernest Renan (1904); W. 
Barry, Renan (1905); Sorel, Le Systeme historique de R. (1905-1906). 

(A. M. F. D.;X.) 

RENARD, ALPHONSE FRANCOIS (1842-11903), Belgian geolo- 
gist and petrographer, was born at Renaix, in Eastern Flanders, 
on the 27th of September 1842. He was educated for the church 
of Rome, and from 1866 to 1869 he was superintendent at the 
College de la Paix, Namur. In 1870 he entered the Jesuit Train- 
ing College at the old abbey of Maria Laach in the Eifel, and 
there, while engaged in studying philosophy and science, he 
became interested in the geology of the district, and especially 
in the volcanic rocks. Thenceforth he worked at chemistry 
and mineralogy, and qualified himself for those petrographical 
researches for which he was distinguished. In 1874 he became 
professor of chemistry and geology in the college of the Belgian 
Jesuits at Louvain, a few years later he was appointed one of 
the curators of the Royal Natural History Museum at Brussels, 
and in 1882 he relinquished his post at Louvain. In 1S8S he 
was chosen professor of geology at the university of Ghent, and 
retained the post until the close of his life. Meanwhile he had 
been ordained priest in 1877, and had intended to enter the 
Society of Jesus. He was known as the Abbe Renard; but, as 
remarked by Sir A. Geikie, " As years passed, the longing for 
aiental freedom grew ever stronger, until at last it overmastered 
all the traditions and associations of a lifetime, and he finally 
separated himself from the church of Rome." His first work, 



9 6 



RENAUD DE MONTAUBAN— RENAUDOT, T. 



written in conjunction with Charles de la Vallee-Poussin (1827- 
1904), was the Mimoire sur les caracteres miner alogiques et 
Mraltgraphiques des roches dites plutoniennes de la Belgique 
et de VArdenne francaise (1876). In later essays and papers 
he dealt with the structure and mineral composition of many 
igneous and sedimentary rocks, and with the phenomena of 
metamorphism in Belgium and other countries. In acknow- 
ledgment of his work the Bigsby Medal was in 1885 awarded to 
him by the Geological Society of London. Still more important 
were his later researches connected with the Challenger Expedi- 
tion. The various rock specimens and oceanic deposits were 
■submitted to him for examination in association with Sir John 
Murray, and their detailed observations were embodied in the 
Report on the Scientific Results of the Voyage of H.M.S. " Chal- 
lenger" Deep Sea Deposits (1891) The more striking additions 
to our knowledge included " the detection and description of 
■cosmic dust, which as fine rain slowly accumulates on the ocean 
floor; the development of zeolitic crystals on the sea-bottom 
at temperatures of 32 and under; and the distribution and 
mode of occurrence of manganiferous concretions and of phos- 
phatic and glauconite deposits on the bed of the ocean " (Geikie). 
Renard died at Brussels on the 9th of July 1903. 

Obituaries by Sir A. Geikie in Quart, Journ. Geol. Soc, lx. 1904, 
-and in Geol. Mag., Nov. 1903. 

RENAUD DE MONTAUBAN (Rinaldo di Montalbano), one of 
the most famous figures of French and Italian romance. His 
story was attached to the geste of Doon of Mayence by the 13th- 
century trouvere who wrote the chanson de geste of Renaits de 
Montauban, better known perhaps as Les quatre fits Aymon. 
The four sons of Aymon give their name to inns and streets in 
nearly every town of France, and the numerous prose versions 
:show what a hold the story gained on the popular imagination. 
Renaud's sword Floberge, and his horse Bayard passed with 
him into popular legend. The poem of Renaus de Montauban 
■opens with the story of the dissensions between Charlemagne 
and the sons of Doon of Mayence, Beuves d'Aigremont, Doon 
■de Nanteuil and Aymon de Dordone. The rebellious vassals 
are defeated by the imperial army near Troyes, and, peace 
established, Aymon rises in favour at court, and supports the 
■emperor, even in his persecution of his four sons, Renaud, 
Alard, Guichard and Richard. A second feud arises from a 
quarrel between Renaud and Bertolai, Charlemagne's nephew, 
over a game of chess, in the course of which Renaud kills Ber- 
tolai with the chess-board. The hero then mounts his steed 
Bayard, and escapes with his brothers to the Ardennes, where 
they build the castle of Montessor overlooking the Meuse. At 
Chateau Renaud, near Sedan, there existed in the 18th century 
a ruined castle with a tower called the " tour Maugis " and the 
reputed stable of Bayard. The outlaws are eventually persuaded 
to seek their fortune outside Charlemagne's kingdom, and cross 
the Loire to take service with King Yon of Gascony against 
the Saracens, accompanied by their cousin, the enchanter Maugis. 
Yon, however, is compelled by Charlemagne to withdraw his 
protection, and the castle of Montauban, which the brothers 
have built on the Dordogne, is besieged by the emperor. They 
next seek refuge beyond the Rhine, and sustain a third siege 
at Tremoigne (Dortmund), after which the emperor is per- 
suaded by the barons to make peace. Bayard is abandoned 
to Charlemagne, and thrown into the Meuse, only to rise again. 
He still gallops over the hills of the Ardennes on St John's 
Eve. Renaud, who throughout the story is a type of the 
Christian and chivalric virtues, makes a pilgrimage to the Holy 
Land and is invested with some of the exploits of Godfrey de 
Bouillon. On his return he gives himself up to religion, working 
as a mason on the church of St Peter at Cologne, where he 
receives martyrdom at the hands of his jealous fellow-labourers. 

The story is closely connected with the legend of Girard^ 
■de Roussillon. The chanson de geste of Renaus de Montauban 
falls into sections which had probably been originally the 
subject of separate recitals. These may have arisen at different 
■dates, and were not necessarily told in the first instance of 
the same person, the account of Renaud on the crusade being 



obviously a late interpolation. The outlaw life of the brothers 
in the Ardennes bears the marks of trustworthy popular tradition, 
and it was even at one time suggested that the Gascon and 
Rhenish episodes were reduplications of the story of Montessor. 
The connexion of the four brothers with /Montessor, Dortmund, 
Mayence and Cologne, and the abundant local tradition, 
mark the heroes as originating from the region between the 
Rhine and the Meuse. Nevertheless, their adventures in 
Gascony are corroborated by historical evidence, and this 
section of the poem is the oldest. The enemy of Renaud was 
Charles Martel, not Charlemagne; Yon was Odo of Gascony, 
known indifferently as duke, prince, or king; the victory over 
the Saracens at Toulouse, in which the brothers are alleged 
to have taken part, was won by him in 721, and in .719 he 
sheltered refugees from the dominions of Charles Martel, Chil- 
peric II., king of Neustria, and his mayor of the palace, Ragin- 
fred, whom he was compelled to abandon. In a local chronicle 
of Cologne it is stated that Saint Reinoldus died in 697, and in 
the Latin rhythmical Vita his martyrdom is said to have taken 
place under Bishop Agilolf (d. 717). Thus the romance was 
evidently composite before it took its place in the Carolingian 
cycle. 

In Italy Renaud had his greatest vogue. His connexion with 
the treacherous family of Mayence was thrust into the back- 
ground, and many episodes were added, as well as the personage 
of the hero's sister, Bradamante. Rinaldo di Montalbano had 
been the subject of many Italian poems before // Rinaldo of 
Tasso. 

Bibliography. — The chanson of Maugis d'Aigremont and the 
prose romance of the Conqueste de Trebizonde belong to the same 
cycle. The prose Ystoire de Regnault de Montauban (Lyons, c. 1480) 
had a great vogue. It was generally printed as Les quatre fits Aymon, 
and was published in English, The Foure Sonnes of Aymon, by 
William Caxton, and subsequently by Wynkyn de Worde and 
William Copland. See Hist. litt. de la France, xxii. ( analysis by 
Paulin Paris; Renaus de Montauban (Stuttgart, 1862), edited by 
H. Michelant; F. Wulff, Recherches sur les sagas de Magus et de 
Geirard (Lund, 1873); Magus saga, ed. G. Cederschiold (Lund, 
1876) ; Renout von Montalbaen, ed. J. C. Matthis (Groningen, 
1873) ; A. Longnon, in Revue des questions historiques (1879) I 
R. Zwick, t)ber die Sprache des Renaut von Montauban (Halle, 1884) ; 
F. Pfaff, Das deutsche Volksbuch von den Heymonskindern (Freiburg 
in Breisgau, 1887), with a general introduction to the study of the 
saga; The Four Sonnes of Aimon (E. E. Text. Soc., ed. Octavia 
Richardson, 1884); a special bibliography of the printed editions 
of the prose romance in L. Gautier's Bibl. des chansons de geste 
(1897); rejuvenations of the story by Karl Simrock (Frankfort, 
1845), and by Richard Steel (London, 1897); Storia di Rinaldino, 
ed. C. Minutoli (Bologna, 1865). Stage versions are: Renaud de 
Montauban, a play translated from Lope de Vega was played at the 
Th6atre italien, Paris, in 1717 ; Les quatre fils Aymon, op6ra comique 
by MM. de Leuven and Brunswick, music by Balfe, in 1884. 

RENAUDOT, EUSfiBE (1646-1720), French theologian and 
Orientalist, was born in Paris in 1646, and educated for the 
church. Notwithstanding his taste for theology and his title 
of abbe, much of his life was spent at the French court, where 
he attracted the notice of Colbert and was often employed in 
confidential affairs. The unusual learning in Eastern tongues 
which he acquired in his youth and maintained amid the dis- 
tractions of court life did not bear fruit till he was sixty-two. 
His best-known books are HistoriaPatriarcharum Alexandrinorum 
(Paris, 1 713) and Liturgiarum orientalium collectio (2 vols., 
1715-16). The latter was designed to supply proofs of the 
" perpetuity of the faith " of the church on the subject of the 
sacraments, the topic on which most of his theological writings 
turned, and which was then, in consequence of the controversies 
attaching to Arnauld's PerpituilS de lafoi, a burning one between 
French Catholics and Protestants. Renaudot was not a fair 
controversialist, but his learning and industry are unquestion- 
able. He died in 1720. 

RENAUDOT, TH^OPHRASTE (1586-1653), French physician 
and philanthropist, was born' at Loudun (Vienna), and 
studied surgery in Paris. He was only nineteen when he 
received, by favour apparently, the degree of doctor at Mont- 
pellier. After some time spent in travel he began to practise 
in his native town. In 161 2 he was summoned to Paris by 



RENDEZVOUS— RENE I. 



97 



Richelieu, partly because of his medical reputation, but more 
because of his philanthropy. He received the titles of physician 
and councillor to the king, and was desired to organize a scheme 
of public assistance. Many difficulties were put in his way, 
however, and he therefore returned until 1624 to Poitou, where 
Richelieu made him ■ " commissary general of the poor," It 
was six years before he was able to begin his work in Paris by 
opening an information bureau at the sign of the Grand Coq 
near the Pont Saint-MicheL This bureau d'adresse was labour 
bureau, intelligence department, exchange and charity organiza- 
tion in one; and the sick were directed to doctors prepared 
to give them free treatment. Presently he established a free 
dispensary in the teeth of the opposition of the faculty in Paris. 
The Paris faculty refused to accept the new medicaments pro- 
posed by the heretic from Montpellier, restricting themselves to 
the old prescriptions of blood-letting and purgation. In addition 
to his bureau d'adresse Renaud established a system of lectures 
and debates on scientific subjects, the reports of which from 
1633 to 1642 were published in 1651 with the title Recueil des 
conftrences publiques. Under the protection of Richelieu he 
started the first French newspaper, the Gazette (163 1), which 
appeared weekly and contained political and foreign news. 
He also edited the Mercure fran$ais and published all manner 
of reports and pamphlets. In 1637 he opened in Paris the first 
Mont de Piete, an institution of which he had seen the advantages 
in Italy. In 1640 the medical faculty, headed by Guy Patin, 
started a campaign against the innovator of the Grand Coq. 
After the death of Richelieu and of Louis XIII. the victory of 
Renaudot's enemies was practically certain. The parlement of 
Paris ordered him to return the letters patent for the establish- 
ment of his bureau and his Mont de Piete, and refused to allow 
him to practise medicine in Paris. The Gazette remained, and 
in 1646 Renaudot was appointed by Mazarin historiographer 
to the king. During the first Fronde he had his printing presses 
at Saint-Germain. He died on the 25th of October 1653. His 
difficulties had been increased by his Protestant opinions. His 
sons Isaac (d. 1688) and Eusebe (d. 1679) were students for ten 
years before they could obtain their doctorates from the faculty. 
They carried on their father's work, and defended the virtues 
of antimony, laudanum and quinine against the schools. 

See E. Hatin, TModore Renaudot (Poitiers, 1883),, and LaMaison 
du Coq (Paris, 1885); Michel Emery, Renaudot et V introduction de ta 
medication chimique (Paris, 1889); and G. Bonnefont, Un OubliL 
Theophraste Renaudot (Limoges, n.d.). 

RENDEZVOUS, a place of meeting appointed or arranged 
for -the assembling of troops, ships or persons. The word was 
adopted in English at the end of the 16th century from the 
French substantival use of the imperative rendez vous, i.e. 
" render or betake yourselves." 

RENDSBURG, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province 
of Schleswig-Holstein, situated on the Eider and on the Kaiser 
Wilhelm canal, in a flat and sandy district. 20 m. W. of Kiel, on 
the Altona-Vamdrup railway. Pop. (1905) 15,577. It consists 
of three parts — the crowded Altstadt, on an island in the Eider; 
the Neuwerk, on the south bank of the river; and the JCronwerk, 
on the north bank. Rendsburg is the chief place in the basin of 
the Eider, and when in the possession of Denmark was main- 
tained as a fortress. Its present importance, however, rests on 
the commercial facilities afforded by its connexion with the 
North Sea and the Baltic through the Kaiser Wilhelm canal, 
by which transit trade is carried on in grain, timber, Swedish 
iron and coals. The principal industries are cotton-weaving, 
tanning and the manufacture of artificial manures. 

Rendsburg came into existence under the shelter of a castle 
founded by the Danes about the year 11 00 on an island of the 
Eider, and was an object of dispute between the Danish kings 
and the counts of Holstein. In 1252 it was adjudged to the 
latter. The town was surrounded with ramparts in 1539, but 
the fortifications of the Kronwerk were not constructed till 
the end of the 17th century. During the Thirty Years' War 
Rendsburg was taken both by the Imperialists and the Swedes, 
but in 1645 it successfully resisted a second siege by the latter. 



The war of 1848-50 began with the capture of Rendsburg by 
the Holsteincrs by a coup de main, and it formed the centre of 
the German operations. On the departure of the German 
troops in 1852 the Danes demolished the fortifications on the 
north side. Immediately after the death of King Frederick VII. 
(15th of November 1863) the town was occupied by the Saxon 
troops acting as the executive of the German Confederation, and 
it was the base of the operations of the Austrians and Prussians 
against Schleswig in the spring of the following year. On the 
termination of the Danish war in 1864 Rendsburg was jointly 
occupied by Austrian and Prussian military until 1866, when 
it fell to Prussia. 

See Warmstedt, Rendsburg (Kiel, 1850). 

REN£ L (1409-1480), duke of Anjou, of Lorraine and Bar, 
count of Provence and of Piedmont, king of Naples, Sicily and 
Jerusalem, was born at Angers on the 16th of January 1409, 
the second son of Louis II. , king of Sicily, duke of Anjou, 
count of Provence, and of Yolande of Aragon. Louis II. died 
in 1417, and his sons, together with their brother-in-law, after- 
wards Charles VII. of France, were brought up under the 
guardianship of their mother. The elder, Louis III., succeeded 
to the crown of Sicily and to the duchy of Anjou, Ren6 being 
known as the count of Guise. By his marriage treaty (1419) 
with Isabel, elder daughter of Charles II., duke of Lorraine, he 
became heir to the duchy of Bar, which was claimed as the 
inheritance of his mother Yolande, and, in right of his wife, heir 
to the duchy of Lorraine. Rene, then only ten, was* to be brought 
up in Lorraine under the guardianship of Charles II. and Louis, 
cardinal of Bar, both of whom were attached to the Burgundian 
party, but he retained the right to bear the arms of Anjou. 
He was far from sympathizing with the Burgundians, and, 
joining the French army at Reims in 1429, was present at the 
coronation of Charles VII. When Louis of Bar died in 1430 
Rene came into sole possession of his duchy, and in the next 
year, on his father-in-law's death, he succeeded to the duchy 
of Lorraine. But the inheritance was claimed by the heir-male, 
Antoine de Vaudemont, who with Burgundian help defeated 
Rene at Bulgneville in July 1431. The Duchess Isabel effected 
a truce with Antoine de Vaud6mont, but the duke remained a 
prisoner of the Burgundians until April 1432, when he recovered 
his liberty on parole on yielding up as hostages his two sons, 
Jean and Louis of Anjou. His title as duke of Lorraine was 
confirmed by his suzerain, the Emperor Sigismund, at Basel 
in 1434. This proceeding roused the anger of the Burgundian 
duke, Philip the Good, who required him early in the next year 
to return to his prison, from which he was released two years 
later on payment of a heavy ransom. He had succeeded to 
the kingdom of Naples through the deaths of his brother Louis III. 
and of Jeanne II. de Duras, queen of Naples, the last heir 
of the earlier dynasty. Louis had been adopted by her in 
1 43 1, and she now left her inheritance to Ren6. The marriage 
of Marie de Bourbon, niece of Philip of Burgundy, with John, 
duke of Calabria, Rene's eldest son, cemented peace between the 
two princes. After appointing a regency in Bar and Lorraine, 
he visited his provinces of Anjou and Provence, and in 1438 
set sail for Naples, which had been held for him by the Duchess 
Isabel. Ren6's captivity, and the poverty of the Angevin 
resources due to his ransom, enabled Alphonso of Aragon, who 
had been first adopted and then repudiated by Jeanne II., 
to make some headway in the kingdom of Naples, especially 
as he was already in possession of the island of Sicily. In 1441 
Alphonso laid siege to Naples, which he sacked after a six months' 
siege. Rene returned to France in the same year, and though 
he retained the title of king of Naples his effective rule was never 
recovered. Later efforts to recover his rights in Italy failed. 
His mother Yolande, who had governed Anjou in his absence, 
died in 1442. Ren6 took part in the negotiations with the 
English at Tours in 1444, and peace was consolidated by the 
marriage of his younger daughter, Margaret, with Henry VI. 
at Nancy. Ren6 now made over the government of Lorraine 
to John, duke of Calabria, who was, however, only formally 
installed as duke of Lorraine on the death of Queen Isabel in 

xxra. 4 



9 8 



RENEE OF FRANCE— RENFREWSHIRE 



1453. Ren4 had the confidence of Charles VII., and is said to 
have initiated the reduction of the men-at-arms set on foot by 
the king, with whose military operations against the English 
he was closely associated. He entered Rouen with him in 
November 1449, and was also with him at Formigny and Caen. 
After his second marriage with Jeanne de Laval, daughter 
of Guy XIV., count of Laval, and Isabel of Brittany, Rene took 
a less active part in public affairs, and devoted himself more to 
artistic and literary pursuits. The fortunes of his house declined 
in his old age. The duke of Calabria, after repeated misfortunes 
in Italy, was offered the crown of Aragon in 1467, but died, 
apparently by poison, at Barcelona on the 16th of December 
1470; the duke's eldest son Nicholas perished in 1473, also 
under suspicion of poisoning; Rene's daughter Margaret was 
a refugee from England, her son Prince Edward was murdered 
in i47r, and she herself became a prisoner, to be rescued by 
Louis XI. in 1476. His only surviving male descendant was 
then Rene II., duke of Lorraine, son of his daughter Yolande, 
comtesse de Vaudemont, who was gained over to the party 
of Louis XL, who suspected the king of Sicily of complicity 
with his enemies, the duke of Brittany and the Constable Saint- 
Pol. Rene retired to Provence, and in 1474 made a will by 
which he left Bar to his grandson Rene II., duke of Lorraine; 
Anjou and Provence to his nephew Charles, count of Le Maine. 
Louis seized Anjou and Bar, and two years later sought to 
compel the king of Sicily to exchange the two duchies for 
a pension. The offer was rejected, but further negotiations 
assured the lapse to the crown of the duchy of Anjou, and the 
annexation of Provence was only postponed until the death 
of the count of Le Maine. Rene died on the 10th of July 1480, 
his charities having earned for him the title of " the good. 1 ' 
He founded an order of chivalry, the Ordre du Croissant, which 
was anterior to the royal foundation of St Michael, but did not 
survive Rene. 

The king of Sicily's fame as an amateur of painting has 
led to the attribution to him of many old paintings in Anjou 
and Provence, in many cases simply because they bear his 
arms. These works are generally in the Flemish style, and 
were probably executed under his patronage and direction, so 
that he may be said to have formed a school of the fine arts 
in sculpture, painting, gold work and tapestry. Two of the 
most famous works formerly attributed to Rene are the triptych, 
the " Burning Bush," in the cathedral of Aix, showing portraits 
of Rene and his second wife, Jeanne de Laval, and an illumin- 
ated Book of Hours in the Bibliotheque nationale, Paris. The 
" Burning Bush " was in fact the work of Nicolas Froment, a 
painter of Avignon. Among the men of letters attached to his 
court was Antoine de la Sale, whom he made tutor to his son, 
the duke of Calabria. He encouraged the performance of 
mystery plays; on the performance of a mystery of the Passion 
at Saumur in 1462 he remitted four years of taxes to the 
town, and the representations of the Passion at Angers were 
carried out under his auspices. He exchanged verses with his 
kinsman, the poet Charles of Orleans. The best of his poems 
is the idyl of Regnault and Jeanneton, representing his own 
courtship of Jeanne de Laval. Le Livre des tournois, a book 
of ceremonial, and the allegorical romance, Conquests qu'un 
chevalier nomme le Cuer d 1 amour espris feist d'une dame appeUe 
Doulce Mercy, with other works ascribed to him, were perhaps 
dictated to his secretaries, or at least compiled under his direc- 
tion. His CEuvres were published by the comte de Quatrebarbes 
(4 vols., Paris and Angers, 1845-46). 

See A. Lecoy dc la Marche, Le Rot Rene (2 vols., 1875); A. Vallet 
de Viriville, in the Nouvelte Biographie ginirale % where there is some 
account of the MSS. of his works; and J. Renouvier, Les Peintres 
et entumineurs du rot Rent (Montpellier, 1857). 

REN6E OF FRANCE (1510-1575), second daughter 'of 
Louis XII. and Anne of Brittany, was born at Blois on the 25th 
of October 1510. After being betrothed successively to Gaston 
de Foix, Charles of Austria (the future emperor Charles V.), 
his brother Ferdinand, Henry VIII. of England, and the 
elector Joachim II. of Brandenburg, she married in 1528 



Hercules of Este, son of the duke of Ferrara, who succeeded his 
father six years later. RcneVs court became a rendezvous of 
men of letters and a refuge for the persecuted French Calvinists. 
She received Clement Marot ancKCalvin at her court, and 
finally embraced the reformed religion. Her husband, however, 
who viewed these proceedings with disfavour, banished her 
friends, took her children from her, threw her into prison > 
and eventually made her abandon at any rate the outward 
forms of Calvinism. After bis death in 1559, Renee returned 
to France and turned her duchy of Montargis into a centre of 
Protestant propaganda. During the wars of religion she was 
several times molested by the Catholic troops, and in 1562 her 
chateau was besieged by her son-in-law, the duke of Guise. 
She died at Montargis. 

See B. Fontana, Renata di Francia (Rome, 1889 seq.); and E. 
Rodocanachi, Renfe de France (Paris, 1896). 

RENEVIER, EUGENE (1831- ), Swiss geologist, was born 
at Lausanne on the 26th of March 1831. In 1857 he became 
professor of geology and palaeontology in the university at 
Lausanne. He is distinguished for bis researches on the geology 
and palaeontology of the Alps, on which subjects he published 
numerous papers in the proceedings of the scientific societies in 
Switzerland and France. With F. J. Pictet he wrote a memoir 
on the Fossiles du terrain aptien de la Perte-du-RIione (1854). 
In 1894 he was appointed president of the Swiss Geological 
Commission, and also of the International Geological Congress 
held^that year at Zurich, in the previous meetings of which he had 
taken a prominent part. He published a noteworthy Tableau 
des terrains sedimentaires (1874); and a second more elaborate 
edition, accompanied by an explanatory article Chronographe 
gSologique, was issued in 1897 as a supplement to the Report of 
the Zurich Congress. This new table was printed on coloured 
sheets, the colours for each geological system corresponding 
with those adopted on the International geological map of 
Europe. 

RENFREW, a royal, municipal and police burgh and county 
town of Renfrewshire, Scotland, near the southern bank of the 
Clyde, 7 m. W. by N. of Glasgow, via Cardonald, by the Glasgow 
& South-Western and Caledonian railways (5 m. by road). 
Pop. (1891) 6777; (1901) 9296. Industries include ship-- 
building (the construction of dredgers and floating docks is a 
speciality), engineering, dyeing, weaving, chemicals and cabinet- 
making. The Clyde trust has constructed a large dock here. 
Renfrew belongs to the Kilmarnock district group of parlia- 
mentary burghs (with Kilmarnock, Dumbarton, Rutherglen 
and Port Glasgow). Robert III. gave a charter in 1396, but it 
was a burgh (Renifry) at least 250 years earlier. About 1160 
Walter Fitzalan, the first high steward of Scotland, built a castle 
on an eminence by the side of the Clyde (still called Castle Hill), 
the original seat of the royal house of Stewart. Close to the 
town, on the site of Elderslie House, Somerled, lord of the 
Isles, was defeated and slain in 1 164 by the forces of Malcolm IV., 
against whom he had rebelled. In 1404 Robert II. bestowed 
upon his son James (afterwards James I.) the title of Baron of 
Renfrew, still borne by the prince of Wales. 

RENFREWSHIRE, a south-western county of Scotland, 
bounded N. by the river and firth of Clyde, E. by Lanarkshire, 
S. and S.W. by Ayrshire and W. by the firth of Clyde. A small 
detached portion of the parish of Renfrew, situated on the 
northern bank of the Clyde, is surrounded on the landward side 
by Dumbartonshire. The county has an area of 153,332 acres, 
or 239-6 sq. m. Excepting towards the Ayrshire border on the 
south-west, where the principal heights are Hill of Stake (1 711 ft.), 
East Girt Hill (1673), Misty Law (1663) and Creuch Hill (1446), 
and the confines^ of Lanarkshire on the south-east, where a few 
points attain an altitude of 1200 ft. — the surface is undulating 
rather than rugged. Much of the higher land in the centre is 
well wooded. The Clyde forms part of the northern boundary 
of the shire. In the N.W. Loch Thom and Gryfe Reservoir 
provide Greenock with water, and Balgray Reservoir and Glen 
Reservoir reinforce the water-supply of a portion of the Glasgow 
area. The other lakes are situated in the S. and S.E. and 



RENFREWSHIRE 



99 



include Castle Semple Loch, Long Loch, Brother Loch, Black 
Loch, Binend Loch and Dunwan Dam. The Glasgow, Paisley 
and Johnstone canal has been converted since 1882 into the track 
of the Glasgow & South-Western railway. Strathgryfe is the 
only considerable vale in the shire. It extends from the 
reservoir to below Bridge of Weir, a distance of 10 m. The 
scenery at its head is somewhat wild and bleak, but the lower 
reaches are pasture land. The wooded ravine of Glenkillock, 
to the south of Paisley, is watered by Killock Burn, on which 
are three falls. 

Geology. — Carboniferous rocks form the substratum of this county. 
The hilly ground from the neighbourhood of Eaglesham north- 
westward is formed of volcanic rocks, basalts, porphy rites, tuffs 
and agglomerates of the age of the Cementstone group of the Cal- 
ciferous Sandstone scries. Here and there the sites of the volcanic 
cones are distinguishable, the best being those between Misty Law 
and Queenside Muir. Beneath the volcanic rocks are some red 
sandstones and conglomerates which occupy a small tract between 
Loch Thorn and the neighbourhood of lnverkip. Resting upon 
the volcanic rocks is the Carboniferous Limestone series which at 
the base consists of ashy^ sandstones and grits followed by the three 
subdivisions prevalent in southern Scotland. With unimportant 
exceptions, all the area north of the volcanic rocks is occupied by 
the Carboniferous Limestone series. The beds lie in a faulted 
basin around Linwood, and the following strata may be distinguished 
from below upwards: the Hurlet coal and limestone, Lillies oil 
shale, Hosie limestone, Johnstone clay ironstone and Cowglass lime- 
stone along with other beds of ironstone and coal. The sandstone 
of Giffnock, used for building; the limestone and coal of Orchard 
with a very fossiliferous shale bed; and the limestone and coal of 
Arden all belong to the same series. Besides the contemporaneous 
volcanic rocks numerous intrusive sheets are found in the Carbon- 
iferous rocks such as the large mass of basalt south of Johnstone; 
and doleritic sheet of Quarrelton and the similar sheets N.E. of 
Paisley. In the eastern part of the county, near the border the 
coals and ironstones of this series near Shawlands and Crossmyloof 
are faulted directly against the coal measures of Rutherglcn. Tertiary 
basalt dikes cut the older rocks in a S.E.-N.W. direction, for example 
those on Misty Law. Glacial striae abound on the hilly ground, 
those^in the north indicating that the ice took a south-easterly 
direction which farther south became south-westerly. Boulder 
clays, gravels and sands also cover considerable areas. Copper 
ore has been worked in the volcanic rocks near Lochwinnoch and 
in the grey sandstones near Gourock. 

Climate and Agriculture. — The climate is variable. As the 
prevailing west and south-west winds come in from the Atlantic 
warm and full of moisture, contact with the land causes heavy 
rains, and the western area of the shire is one of the wettest districts 
in Scotland, the mean annual rainfall exceeding 60 in. The 
temperature for the year averages about 48 F., for January 38°*5 F., 
and for July 58°'5 F. The hilly tract contains much peat-moss and 
moorland, but over those areas which are not thus covered the 
soil, which is a light earth on a substratum of gravel, is deep enough 
to produce good pasture. In the undulating central region the 
soil-is better, particularly in the basins of the streams, while on the 
flat lands adjoining the Clyde there is a rich alluvium which, 
except when soured by excessive rain, yields heavy crops. Of the 
total area three-fifths is under cultivation, more than half of this 
being permanent pasture. Oats are grown extensively, and wheat 
and barley are also cultivated. Potatoes, turnips and swedes, 
and beans are the leading green crops. Near the populous centres 
orchards and market gardens are found, and an increasing acreage 
is under wood. Horses are kept mostly for farming operatidns, 
and the bulk of the cattle are maintained in connexion with dairying. 
Sheep-farming, though on the increase, is not prosecuted so vigor- 
ously as in the other southern counties of Scotland, and pig-rearing 
is on the decline. 

Other Industries. — Coal, iron, oil-shale and fireclay are the prin- 
cipal minerals. Limestone is largely quarried for smelting purposes, 
and for the manufacture of lime. Sandstone is also quarried. 
The thread industry at Paisley is the most important in the world. 
Cotton^ spinning, printing, bleaching and dyeing are carried on 
at Paisley, Pollokshaws, Renfrew, Barrhead and elsewhere; 
woollens and worsteds are produced at Paisley, Greenock and 
Renfrew. Engineering works and iron and brass foundries are 
found at Greenock, Port-Glasgow, Paisley, Renfrew, Barrhead and 
Johnstone. Sugar is a staple article of trade in Greenock and 
there are chemical works at Hurlet, Nltshill and Renfrew. Brewing 
and distilling are carried on at Greenock, Paisley and other places. 
Shipbuilding is especially important at Greenock and Port-Glasgow. 
Paper mills are established in Greenock, Cathcart and Johnstone, 
and tanneries in Paisley and Kilbarchan. Numerous miscellaneous 
industries — such as the making of starch, cornflour and preserves — 
have also grown up in Paisley and elsewhere. The sea and river 
ports are Greenock, Port-Glasgow and Renfrew. 

Railway communication is ample in the north, the centre and 
towards the south-west. The Caledonian railway runs westwards 



from Glasgow by Paisley to Greenock, Gourock and VVemyss Bay; 
south-westwards to Barrhead and other stations; and southwards 
to Busby. The Glasgow & South-Western railway runs to 
Greenock by Paisley, Johnstone and Kilmalcolm; to Nitshill and 
other places south-westwards; by Lochwinnoch (for Dairy and 
Ardrossan in Ayrshire); and to Renfrew jointly with the Cale- 
donian. The Clyde and the railway steamers call at Renfrew, 
Prince's Pier (Greenock), Gourock and Wemyss Bay. 

Population and Administration. — In 1891 the population 
numbered 230,812, and in 1901 it was 268,980, or 11 23 to the 
sq. m. In 1901 there were 40 persons who spoke Gaelic only 
and 5585 Gaelic and English. Thus though the shire is 
but twenty-seventh in point of size of the ^ Scottish 
counties, it is fifth in respect of population, and only Lanarkshire 
and Mid Lothian are more densely populated. The county is 
divided into the upper ward, embracing the easterly two-thirds, 
with Paisley as district centre, and the lower ward, consisting of 
the parishes of lnverkip, Greenock, Port-Glasgow and Kil- 
malcolm, with Greenock as district centre. The chief towns 
are Paisley (pop. 79,363), Greenock (68,142), Port-Glasgow 
(16,857), Pollokshaws (11,369), Johnstone (11,331), Barrhead 
(9855), Renfrew (9296), Gourock (5261), Cathcart (5808). The 
shire returns one member to parliament for the eastern, and 
another for the western division. Paisley and Greenock return 
each one member, and Renfrew and Port-Glasgow belong to the 
Kilmarnock district, group of parliamentary burghs. Renfrew- 
shire forms a sheriffdom with Bute, and there is a resident 
sheriff-substitute at Paisley and one at Greenock*. The county 
is under school-board jurisdiction. For secondary and special- 
ized education there are an academy at Greenock and a grammar 
school and technical school at Paisley, while some of the schools 
in the county earn grants for higher education. The county 
secondary committee also makes provision for the free educa- 
tion of Renfrewshire children in Glasgow High School and the 
Spier School at Beith. The Paisley Technical School and the 
Glasgow and West of Scotland Technical College are subsidized 
out of the " residue " grant, part of which also defrays the 
travelling expenses of students and supports science and art 
and technological classes in the burghs and towns in the county. 

History. — At the time of the Roman advance from the Solway 
the land was peopled by the British tribe of Damnonii. To 
hold the natives in check the conquerors built in 84 the fort of 
Vanduara on high ground now covered by houses and streets 
in Paisley; but after the Romans retired (410) the territory 
was overrun by Cumbrian Britons and formed part of the 
kingdom of Strathclyde, the capital of which was situated 
at Alclyde, the modern Dumbarton. In the 7th and 8th cen- 
turies the region practically passed under the supremacy of 
Northumbria, but in the reign of Malcolm Canmore became 
incorporated with the rest of Scotland. During the first half 
of the 12th century, Walter Fitzalan, high steward of Scotland, 
ancestor of the royal house of Stuart, settled in Renfrewshire 
on an estate granted to him by David I. Till their accession 
to the throne the Stuarts identified themselves with the district, 
which, however, was only disjoined from Lanarkshire in 1404. 
In that year Robert III. erected the barony of Renfrew and 
the Stuart estates into a separate county, which, along with 
the earldom of Carrick and the barony of King's Kyle (both in 
Ayrshire), was bestowed upon his son, afterwards James I. 
From their grant are derived the titles of earl of Carrick and 
baron of Renfrew, borne by the eldest son of the sovereign. 
Apart from such isolated incidents as the defeat of Somerled 
near Renfrew in 11 64, the battle of Langside in 1568 and the 
capture of the 9th earl of Argyll at Inchinnan in 1685, the 
history of the shire is scarcely separable from that of Paisley or 
the neighbouring county of Lanark. 

Bibliography. — Description of the Sheriffdom of Lanark and 
Renfrew (Maitland Club, 1831); W. Hector, Lichens from an Old 
Abbey (Paisley, 1876); Vanduara (Paisley, 1881); Gilmour, 
Paisley, Weavers of Other Days (Paisley, 1879); D. Campbell, His- 
torical Sketches of the Town and Harbours of Greenock (1879-81); 
Old Greenock (Greenock, 1888); Craig, Historical Notes on Paisley 
(Paisley, 1881); A. H. Millar, Castles and Mansions of Renfreiv 
(Glasgow, 1889). 



IOO 



RENNELL— RENNEVILLE 



RENNELL, JAMES (1742-1830), British geographer, was born 
on the 3rd of December 1742, near Chudleigh in Devonshire. 
His father, an officer in the Artillery, was killed in action shortly 
after the birth of his son. He entered the navy as a mid- 
shipman in 1756, and was present at the attack on Cherbourg 
(1758), and the disastrous action of St Cast in the same year. 
At the end of the Seven Years' War, seeing no chance of pro- 
motion, he entered the service of the East India Company, and 
was appointed surveyor of the Company's dominions in Bengal 
(1764), with the rank of captain in the Bengal Engineers. To 
this work he devoted the next thirteen years. In 1766 he 
received a severe wound in an encounter with some Sannyasis, 
or religious fanatics, from which he never thoroughly recovered; 
and in 1777 he retired as major on a pension of £600 a year. 
The remaining fifty-three years of his life were spent in London, 
and were devoted to geographical research chiefly among the 
materials in the East India House. His most valuable works 
include the Bengal Atlas (1779), the first approximately correct 
map of India (1783), the Geographical System of Herodotus (1800), 
the Comparative Geography of Western Asia (1831), and im- 
portant studies on the geography of northern Africa — in intro- 
ductions to the Travels of Mungo Park and Hornemann — and 
the currents of the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. He also 
contributed papers to Archaeologia on the site of Babylon, the 
island of St Paul's shipwreck, and the landing-place of Caesar 
in Britain. He was elected F.R.S. in 1781; and he received 
the Copley medal of the Royal Society in 1791, and the gold 
medal of the Royal Society of Literature in 1825. While in 
India he had married (1772) Jane Thackeray, a great-aunt of 
the novelist. He died on the 29th of March 1830, and was 
buried in the nave of Westminster Abbey. 

See Sir Clements Markham, Major James Rennell and the Rise of 
Modern English Geography (London, 1895). 

RENNES, a town of western France, formerly the capital of 
Brittany and now the chief town of the department of Ille-et- 
Vilaine. Pop. town, 62,024; commune, 75,640. Rennes is 
situated at the meeting of the Ille and the Vilaine and at the 
junction of several lines of railway connecting it with Paris 
(232 m. E.N.E.), St Malo (51 m. N.N.W.), Brest (155 m. 
W.N.W.). A few narrow winding streets with old houses are 
left in the vicinity of the cathedral, but the town was for the 
most part rebuilt on a regular plan after the seven days' fire of 
1720. Dark granite was used as building material. The old 
town or Ville-Haute, where the chief buildings are situated, 
occupies a hill bounded on the south by the Vilaine, on the 
west by the canalized Ille. The Vilaine flows in a deep hollow 
bordered with quays and crossed by six bridges leading to the 
new town or Ville-Basse on its left bank. The cathedral of 
Rennes was rebuilt in a pseudo-Ionic style between 1787 and 
1844 on the site of two churches dating originally from the 
4th century. The west fagade with its twin towers was finished 
in 1700 and is in the Renaissance style. The interior is richly 
decorated, a German altar-piece of the 15th century being 
conspicuous for its carving and gilding. The archbishop's 
palace occupies in part the site of the abbey dedicated to St 
Melaine, whose church is the sole specimen of n-i3th cen- 
tury architecture among the numerous churches in the town. 
A colossal statue of the Virgin was placed above its dome in 
1867. The Mordelaise Gate, by which the dukes and bishops 
used to make their state entry into the town, is a curious example 
of 15th-century architecture, and preserves a Latin inscription 
of the 3rd century, a dedication by the Redones to the emperor 
Gordianus. The finest building in Rennes is the old parliament 
house (now the law-court), designed by Jacques Debrosse in 
the 17th century, and decorated with statues of legal celebrities, 
carving, and paintings by Jean Jouvenet and other well-known 
artists. The town hall was erected in the first half of the 18th 
century. It contains the library and the municipal archives, 
which are of great importance for the history of Brittany. In 
the Palais Universitaire, a modern building occupied by the 
university, there are scientific collections and important galleries 
of painting and sculpture, the chief work being the " Perseus 



delivering Andromeda " of Paul Veronese. About 2 m. from 
the town is the castle (16th century) of La Prevalaye, a hamlet 
famous for its butter. ^ rf 

Rennes is the seat of an archbishop and a prefect, head- 
quarters of the X. army corps and centre of an acadimie (educa- 
tional division). Its university has faculties of law, science and 
letters, and a preparatory school of medicine and pharmacy, 
and there are training colleges, a lyUe and schools of agriculture^ 
dairying, music, art, architecture and industry (£cole pratique). 
The town is also the seat of a court of appeal, of a court of 
assizes, of tribunals of first instance and commerce, and of a 
chamber of commerce, and has a branch of the Bank of France. 
Tanning, iron-founding, timber-sawing and the production of 
furniture and wooden goods, flour-milling, flax-spinning and the 
manufacture of tenting and other coarse fabrics, bleaching and 
various smaller industries are carried on. Trade is chiefly in 
butter made in the neighbourhood, and in grain, flour, leather, 
poultry, eggs and honey. 

Rennes, the chief c.ty of the Redones, was formerly (like some 
other places in Gaul) called Condate (hence Condat, Conde), 
probably from its position at the confluence of two streams. 
Under the Roman empire it was included in Lugdunensis Tertia,. 
and became the centre of various Roman roads still recognizable 
in the vicinity The name Urbs Rubra given to it on the oldest 
chronicles is explained by the bands of red brick in the founda- 
tions of its first circuit of walls. About the close of the 10th 
century Conan le Tort, count of Rennes, subdued the whole 
province, and his son and successor Geoffrey first took the title 
duke of Brittany. The dukes were crowned at Rennes, and 
before entering the city by the Mordelaise Gate they had to 
swear to preserve the privileges of the church, the nobles and 
the commons of Brittany. During the War of Succession the 
city more than once suffered siege, notably in 1356-57, when 
Bertrand du Guesclin saved it from capture by the English 
under Henry, first duke of Lancaster. The parlement of 
Brittany, founded in 1551, held its sessions at Rennes from 1561, 
they having been previously shared with Nantes. During the 
troubles of the League Philip Emmanuel, duke of Mercceur, 
attempted to make himself independent at Rennes (1589), but 
his scheme was defeated by the loyalty of the parlement. 
Henry IV. entered the city in state on the 9th of May 1598. 
In 1675 an insurrection at Rennes, caused by the taxes imposed 
by Louis XIV. in spite of the advice of the parlement, was 
cruelly suppressed by Charles, duke of Chaulnes, governor of 
the province. The parlement was banished to Vannes till 1689, 
and the inhabitants crushed with forfeits and put to death in 
great numbers. The fire of 1720, which destroyed eight hundred 
houses, completed the ruin of the town. At the beginning of 
the Revolution Rennes was again the scene of bloodshed, caused 
by the discussion about doubling the third estate for the con- 
vocation of the states-general. In January 1789, Jean Victor 
Moreau (afterwards general) led the law-students in their 
demonstrations on behalf of the parlement against the royal 
government. During the Reign 'of Terror Rennes suffered less 
than Nantes, partly through the courage and uprightness of the 
mayor, Jean Leperdit. It was soon afterwards the centre of the 
operations of the Republican army against the Vendeans. The 
bishopric, founded in the 5th century, in 1859 became an arch- 
bishopric, a rank to which it had previously been raised from 
1790 to 1802. In 1899 the revision of the sentence of Captain 
Alfred Dreyfus was carried out at Rennes. 

See Orain, Rennes et ses environs (Reims, 1904). 

RENNEVILLE, RENfc AUGUSTE CONSTANTIN DE (1650- 
1723), French writer, was born at Caen in 1650. In consequence 
of his Protestant principles, he left France for Holland in 1699, 
and on his return three years later he was denounced as a spy 
and imprisoned in the Bastille, where he remained until 1713* 
During his imprisonment he wrote on the margins of a copy 
of Auteurs diguisis (Paris, 1690) poems which he called Otia 
bastiliaca. These were rediscovered by Mr James Tregaski in 
1906. Renneville was set at liberty through the intercession of 
Queen Anne, and made his way to England, where he published 



RENNIE-^RENOUF 



IOI 



his Histoirede la Bastille (7 vols., 1713-24), dedicated to George I. 
v At the time of his death in 1723 he was a major of artillery in the 
v service of the elector of Hesse. His other important work is a 

Recueil des voyages qui ont servi a Vitablissement de la Compagnie 

des hides Orientales aux Provinces Unies (10 vols., new ed., 

Rouen, 1725)- 

RENNIE, JOHN (1761-1821), British engineer, was the youngest 

rson of James Rennie, a farmer at Phantassie, Haddingtonshire, 
where he was born on the 7th of June 1761. On his way to 
the parish school at East Linton he used to pass the workshop 
of Andrew Meikle (1 710-1800), the inventor of the threshing 
machine, and its attractions were such that he spent there much 

^of the time that was supposed to be spent at school. In his 
twelfth year he was placed under Meikle, but after two years he 
was sent to Dunbar High School, where he showed marked 
aptitude for mathematics. On his return to Phantassie he 
occasionally assisted Meikle, and soon began to erect corn mills 
on his own account. In 1780, while continuing his millwright's 
business, he began to attend the classes on physical science at 
Edinburgh University. Four years later he was commissioned 
by Boulton and Watt, to whom he was introduced by Professor 
John Robison (1739-1805), his teacher at Edinburgh, to super- 
intend the construction of the machinery for the Albion flour 
» mills, which they were building at the south end of Blackfriars 
Bridge, London, and a feature of his work there was the use of 
iron for many portions of the machines which had formerly been 
made of wood. The completion of these mills established his 
reputation as a mechanical engineer, and soon secured him a 
large business as a maker of mill work of all descriptions. But 
his fame chiefly rests on his achievements in civil engineering. 
As a canal engineer his services began to be in request about 
1 790, and the Avon and Kennet, the Rochdale and the Lancaster 
canals may be mentioned among his numerous works in England. 
His skill solved the problem of draining and*reclaiming extensive 
tracts of marsh in the eastern counties and on the Sol way Firth. 
As a bridge engineer he was responsible for many structures in 
England and Scotland, among the most conspicuous being three 
over the Thames — Waterloo Bridge, Southwark Bridge and 
London Bridge — the last of which he did not live to see com- 
pleted. A noteworthy feature in many of his designs was the 
flat roadway. Among the harbours and docks in the construction 
of which he was concerned may be mentioned those at Wick, 
Torquay, Grimsby, Holyhead, Howth, Kingstown and Hull, 
together with the London dock and the East India dock on the 
Thames, and he was consulted by the government in respect of 
improvements at the dockyards of Portsmouth, Sheerness, 
Chatham and Plymouth, where the breakwater was built from 
his plans. He died in London on the 4th of October 1821, and 
was buried in St Paul's. In person he was of great stature and 
strength, and a bust of him by Chantrey (now in the National 
Gallery), when exhibited at Somerset House, obtained the name 
of Jupiter Tonans. Of his family, the eldest son George, who was 
born in London on the 3rd of September 1791 and died there 
on the 30th of March 1866, carried on his father's business in 
partnership with the second son John, who was born in London 
on the 30th of August 1794 and died near Hertford on the 3rd 
of September 1874. George devoted himself especially to the 
mechanical side of the business. John completed the con- 
struction of London Bridge, and at its opening in 1831 was made 
a knight. He succeeded his father as engineer to the Admiralty, 
and finished the Plymouth breakwater, of which he published 
an account in 1848. He was also the author of a book on the 
Theory, Formation and Construction of British and Foreign 
Harbours (1851-54), and his Autobiography appeared in 1875. 
He was elected president of the Institution of Civil Engineers 
in 1845, and held the office for three years. 

RENO, a city and the county-seat of Washoe county, Nevada, 
U.S.A., in the W. part of the state, on the Truckee river, and 
about 244 m. E. of San Francisco. Pop. (1890) 3563; (1900) 
4500 (915 foreign-born); (1910 census) 10,867. It is served by 
the Southern Pacific, the Virginia & Truckee and the Nevada- 
California-Oregon railways. The city lies near the foot of the 



Sierra Nevada Mountains, 4484 ft. above the sea, and is in the 
most humid district of a state which has little rainfall. Among 
the public institutions are the university of Nevada (see Nevada), 
a United States Agricultural Experiment Station, a public library 
(1903), the Nevada Hospital for Mental Diseases (1882), the City 
and County Hospital and the People's Hospital. At Reno are 
railway shops (of the Nevada- California-Oregon railway) and re- 
duction works, and the manufactures include flour, foundry and 
machine-shop products, lumber, beer, plaster and packed meats. 
Farming and stock-raising are carried on extensively in the 
vicinity. On the site of the present city a road house was 
erected in 1859 for the accommodation of travellers and freight 
teams on their way to and from California. By 1863 this place 
had become known as Lake's Crossing, and five years later it was 
chosen as a site for a station by the Central (now the. Southern) 
Pacific railway, then building through the Truckee Valley. 
The new station was then named Reno, in honour of Gen. Jesse 
Lee Reno (1823-1862), a Federal officer during the Civil War, 
who was commissioned brigadier-general of volunteers in 
November 1861 and major-general of volunteers in July 1862," 
and led the Ninth Corps at South Mountain, where he was killed. 
The city twice suffered from destructive fires, in 1873 and 1879. 
Reno was incorporated as a town in 1879 and chartered as a city 
in 1899. Its city charter was withdrawn in 1901, but it was 
rechartered in 1903. 

RENOIR, FIRMIN AUGUSTE (1841- ), French painter, 
was born at Limoges in 1841. In his early work he followed, 
with pronounced modern modifications, certain traditions of 
the French 18th-century school/more particularly of Boucher," 
of whom we are reminded by the decorative tendency, the pink 
and ivory flesh tints and the facile technique of Renoir. In 
the 'seventies he threw himself into the impressionist movement 
and became one of its leaders. In some of his paintings he 
carried the new principle of the division of tones to its extreme; 
but in his best work, notably in some of his paintings of the 
nude, he retained much of the refined sense of beauty of colour 
of the 1 8th century. Renoir has tried his skill almost in every 
genre — in portraiture, landscape, flower-painting, scenes of modern 
life and figure subject; and though he is perhaps the most un- 
equal of the great impressionists, his finest works rank among the 
masterpieces of the modern French school. Among these are 
some of his nude " Bathers," the " Rowers' Luncheon," the 
" Ball at the Moulin de la Galette," " The Box," " The Terrace," 
" La PensSe" and the portrait of " Jeanne Samary." He is 
represented in the Caillebotte toom at the Luxembourg, in the 
collection of M. Durand-Ruel, and in most of the collections of 
impressionist paintings in France and in the United States. 
Comparatively few of his works have come to England, but the 
full range of his capacity was seen at the exhibition of impres- 
sionist art held at the Grafton Galleries in London in 1905. 
At the Viau sale in Paris in 1907? a. garden scene by Renoir, 
" La Tonnelle" realized 26,000 frs., and a little head, " Ingenue" 
25,100 frs. 

RENOUF, SIR PETER LE PAGE (1822-1897), Egyptologist, 
was born in Guernsey, on the 23rd of August 1822. He was 
educated at Elizabeth College there, and proceeded to Oxford, 
which, upon his becoming a Roman Catholic, under the influence 
of-Dr Newman, he quitted without taking a degree. Like many 
other Anglican converts, he proved a thorn in the side of the 
Ultramontane party in the Roman Church, though he did not, 
like some of them, return to the communion of the Church of 
England. He opposed the promulgation of the dogma of Papal 
Infallibility, and his treatise (1868) upon the condemnation of 
Pope Honorius for heresy by the council of Constantinople in 
a.d. 680 was placed upon the index of prohibited books. He 
had been from 1855 to 1864 professor of ancient history and 
Oriental languages in the Roman Catholic university which 
Newman vainly strove to establish in Dublin, and during part 
of this period edited the Atlantis and the Home and Foreign 
Review, which latter had to be discontinued on account of the 
hostility of the Roman Catholic hierarchy. In 1864 he was 
appointed a government inspector of schools, which position he 



102 



RENOUVIER— RENT 



held until 1886, when his growing celebrity as an Egyptologist 
procured him the appointment of Keeper of Oriental Antiquities 
in the British Museum, in succession to Dr Samuel Birch. He 
was also elected in 1887 president of the Society of Biblical 
Archaeology, to whose Proceedings he was a constant contri- 
butor. The most important of his contributions to Egyptology 
are his Hibbert Lectures on " The Religion of the Egyptians," 
delivered in 1879; and the translation of The Book of the Dead, 
with an ample commentary, published in the Transactions of the 
society over which he presided. He retired from the Museum 
under the superannuation rule in 1891, and died in London on 
the 14th of October 1897. He had been knighted the year 
before his death. He married in 1857 Ludovica von Brentano, 
member of a well-known German literary family. 

RENOUVIER, CHARLES BERNARD (1815-1903), French 
philosopher, was born at Montpellier on the 1st of January 1818, 
and educated in Paris at the ficole Polytechnique. In early 
life he took an interest in politics, and the approval extended by 
Hippolyte Carnot to his Manuel ripublicain de Vhomme et du 
citoyen (1848) was the occasion of that minister's fall. He 
never held public employment, but spent his life writing, retired 
from the world. He died on the 1st of September 1903. Ren- 
ouvier was the first Frenchman after Malebranche to formulate 
a complete idealistic system, and had a vast influence on the 
development of French thought. His system is based on Kant's, 
as his chosen term " Neo-criticisme " indicates; but it is a trans- 
formation rather than a continuation of Kantianism. The two 
leading ideas are a dislike to the Unknowable in all its forms, 
and a reliance on the validity of our personal experience. The 
former accounts for his acceptance of Kant's phenomenalism, 
combined with rejection of the thing in itself. It accounts, too, 
for his polemic on the one hand against a Substantial Soul, a 
Buddhistic Absolute, an Infinite Spiritual Substance; on the 
other hand against the no less mysterious material or dynamic 
substratum by which naturalistic Monism explains the world. 
He holds that nothing exists except .presentations, which are 
not merely sensational, and have an objective aspect no less 
than a subjective. To explain the formal organization of 
our experience he adopts a modified version of the Kantian 
categories. The insistence on the validity of personal experience 
leads Renouvier to a yet more important divergence from Kant 
in his treatment of volition. Liberty, he says, in a much wider 
sense than Kant, is man's fundamental characteristic. Human 
freedom acts in the phenomenal^not in an imaginary noiimenal 
sphere. Belief is not intellectual merely, but is determined by 
an act of will affirming what we hold to be morally good. In 
his religious views Renouvier makes a considerable approxima- 
tion to Leibnitz. He holds that we are rationally justified in 
affirming human immortality and the existence of a finite God 
who is to be a constitutional ruler, but not a despot, over the 
souls of men. He would, however, regard atheism as preferable 
to a belief in an infinite Deity. 

His chief works are: Essais de critique genirale (1854-64), Science 
de la morale (1869), Uchronie (1876), Esquisse d'une classification 
systematique des doctrines philosophiques (1885-86), Philosophic 
analytique de Vhistoire (1896-97), Histoire et solution des problemes 
metaphvsiques (1901); Victor Hugo: Le Poete (1893), Le Philo- 
sophe (1900); Les Dilemmes de la mitaphysique pure (1901); Le 
Personnalisme (1003); Critique de la doctrine de Kant (J906, pub- 
lished by L. Prat). 

See L. Prat, Les Verniers entretiens de Charles Renouvier (1904); 
M. Ascher, Renouvier und der franzosische Neu-Kriticismus (1900) ; 
E. Janssens, Le Neocriticisme de C. R. (1904); A. Darlu, La Morale 
de Renouvier (1904); G. Seailles, La Philosophic de C. R. (1905); 
A. Arnal, La Philosophic religieuse de C. R. (1907). 

RENSSELAER, a city of Rensselaer county, New York, 
U.S.A., in the eastern part of the state, on the E. bank of the 
Hudson river, opposite Albany. Pop. (1900) 7466, of whom 
1089 were foreign-born; (1910 census) 10,711. It is served 
by the New York Central and the Boston & Albany rail- 
ways, which have shops here, and is connected with Albany 
by three bridges across the Hudson. Rensselaer, originally 
called Greenbush, was first settled in 1631, and the site formed 
part of the large tract bought from the Indians by the agents 



of Killian van Rensselaer and known as Rensselaerwyck. In 
1810 a square mile of land within the present city limits was 
acquired by a land speculator, was divided into lots and offered 
for sale. Development followed, and five years later the village 
was incorporated. In 1897 Greenbush was chartered as a 
city, and its name was changed to Rensselaer. Its limits were 
extended in 1902 by the annexation of the village of Bath 
(pop. in 1900, 2504) and the western part of the township of 
East Greenbush . Rensselaer manufactures knit-goods, wool 
shoddy, felt, &c. 

RENT. Various species of rent appear in Roman Law: rent 
(canon) under the long leasehold tenure of Emphyteusis; rent 
(reditus) of a farm; ground-rent (solarium); rent of state 
lands (vectigal); and the annual rent (prensio) payable 
for the jus superficiarum or right to the perpetual enjoy- 
ment of anything built on the surface of land. (See Roman 
Law.) 

English Law. (As to the rent of apartments, &c, see 
Lodger and Lodgings.) — Rent is a certain and periodical 
payment or service made or rendered by the tenant of a corporeal 
hereditament and issuing out of (the property of) such heredita- 
ment. Its characteristics, therefore, are (1) certainty in amount; 
(2) periodicity in payment or rendering; (3) the fact that rent 
is yielded and is, therefore, said " to lie in render " as distinguished 
from profits d prendre in general, which are taken, and are, 
therefore, said to lie in prendre; (4) that it must issue out of 
(the profits of) a corporeal hereditament. A rent cannot be 
reserved out of incorporeal hereditaments such as advowsons 
(Co. Litt. 47a, 142a). But rent may be reserved out of estates 
in reversion or remainder (see Real Property) which are not 
purely incorporeal. It is not essential that rent should consist 
in a payment of money. Apart from the rendering of services, 
the delivery of hens* horses, wheat, &c, may constitute a rent. 
But, at the present day, rent is generally a sum of money paid 
for the occupation of land. It is important to notice that this 
conception of rent was attained at a comparatively late period 
in the history of the law. The earliest rent seems to have been 
a form of personal service, generally labour on land, and was 
fixed by custom. The exaction of a competition or rack rent 
beyond that limited by custom was, if one may judge from the old 
Brehon law of Ireland, due to the presence upon the land of 
strangers in blood, probably at first outcasts from some other 
group. 1 The strict feudal theory of rent admitted labour on 
the lord's land as a lower form, and developed the military 
service due to the crown or a lord as a higher form. Rent service 
is the oldest and most dignified kind of existing rent. It is 
the only one to which the power of distress attaches at common 
law, giving the landlord a preferential right over other creditors 
exercisable without the intervention of judicial authority (see 
Distress). The increasing importance of socage tenure, 
arising in part from the convenience of paying a certain amount, 
whether in money or kind, rather than comparatively uncertain 
services, led to the gradual evolution of the modern view of 
rent as a sum due by contract between two independent persons. 
At the same time the primitive feeling which regarded the 
position of landlord and tenant from a social rather than a 
commercial point of view is still of importance. 

Rents, as they now exist in England, are divided C i a ^ es t 
into two great classes — rent service and rent charge. 

Rent Service, — A rent service is so called because by it a 
tenure by means of service is created between the landlord 
and the tenant. The service is now represented by fealty, and 
is nothing more than nominal. Rent service is said to be 
incident to the reversion — that is, a grant of the reversion carries 
the rent with it (see Remainder). A power of distress is incident 

1 " The three rents are: rack rent from a person of a strange 
tribe, a fair rent from one of the tribe, and the stipulated rent which 
is paid equally by the tribe and the strange tribe." — Senchus Mor f 
p. 159, cited by Maine, Village Communities, p. 187. See also 
Vinogradoff, Vtllainage in England (Oxford, 1892), pp. 181, 188, 
215; The Growth of the Manor (by the same author) (London, 1905), 
pp- 230, 328; Pollock and Maitland, Hist. Eng. Law (Cambridge, 
1895), ii. 128-134. 



RENT 



103 



at common law to this form of rent. Copyhold rents and rents 
reserved on lease fall into this class. 

Rent Charge. — A rent charge is a grant of an annual sum 
payable out of lands in which the grantor has an estate. It 
may be in fee, in tail, for life; — the most common form— or for 
years. It must be created by deed or will, and may be either 
at common law or under the Statute of Uses (1536). The 
grantor has no reversion, and the grantee has at common law no 
power of distress, though such power may be given him by the 
instrument creating the rent charge. The Statute of Uses (1536) 
gave a power of distress for a rent charge created under the 
statute. The Conveyancing Act 1881, § 44, has given a power 
of distress for a sum due on any rent charge which is twenty-one 
days in arrear. By § 45 a power of redemption of certain per- 
petual rents in the nature of rent charges is given to the owner 
of the land out of which the rent issues. Rent charges granted 
since April 26th, 1855, otherwise than by marriage settlement 
* or will for a life or lives or for any estate determinable on a life 
or lives must, in order to bind lands against purchasers, mort- 
gagees or creditors, be registered in the Land Registry in 
Lincoln's Inn Fields (Judgments Act 1855 and Land Charges 
Act 1900). In certain other cases it is also necessary to register 
rent charges, for instance, under the Improvement of Land 
Act 1864 and the Land Transfer Acts 1875 and 1897. Rent 
charges are barred by non-payment or non-acknowledgment 
for twelve years. The period of limitation for the arrears of 
such rent is six years. 

Various Forms of Rent Charge. — Forms of rent charge of special 
interest are tithe rent charge (see Tithes), and the rent charges 
formerly used for the purpose of creating " faggot votes." The 
device was adopted of creating parliamentary voters by splitting 
up freehold interests into a number of rent-charges of the annual 
value of 40s., so as to satisfy the freeholders' franchise. But 
such rent charges are now rendered ineffective by the Repre- 
sentation of the People Act 1884, § 4, which enacts (subject to a 
saving for existing rights and an exception in favour of owners 
of tithe rent charge) that a man shall not be entitled to be 
registered as a voter in respect of the ownership of any rent 
charge. 

A rent charge reserved without power of distress is termed a 
rent-seek (reditus siccus) or " dry rent," from the absence of the 
power of distress. But, as power of distress for rents-seek was 
given by the Landlord and Tenant Act 1736, the legal effect 
of such rents has been since the act the same as that of a rent 
charge. 

Other Varieties of Rent. — Rents of assize or Quit rents are a relic 
of the old customary rents. They are presumed to have been 
established by usage, and cannot be increased or diminished. A 
Quit rent {quietus reditus) is a yearly payment made from time 
immemorial by freeholders or copyholders of a manor to the lord. 
The term implies that the tenant thereby becomes free and quit 
from all other services. Owing to the change in the value of money, 
these rents are now of little value. Under the Conveyancing Act 
1 88 1 (s. 45) they may be compulsorily redeemed by the freehold 
tenant; and the Copyhold Act 1894 provides similarly for their 
extinction in the case of manors. Quit rents, like ordinary rent 
charges, are barred by non-payment, or non-acknowledgment, for 
twelve years. Those paid oy freeholders are called chief rents. 
Fee farm rents are rents reserved on grants in fee. According to 
some authorities, they must be at least one-fourth of the value of 
the lands. They, like quit rents, now occur only in manors, 
unless existing before the Statute of Quia Emptor es or created by 
the crown (see Real Property). A rent which is equivalent 
or nearly equivalent in amount to the full annual value of the land 
is a rack rent. A rent which falls appreciably short of a rack rent 
is usually styled a ground rent (<?.r.). It is generally reserved on 
land which the lessee agrees to cover with buildings, and is calculated 
on the value of the land, though the buildings to be erected increase 
the security for the rent and revert to the lessor at the end of the 
term. A dead rent is a fixed annual sum paid by a person working 
a mine or quarry, in addition to royalties varying according to the 
amount of minerals taken. 

The object of a dead rent is twofold — first, to provide a specified 
income on which the lessor can rely; secondly (and this is the 
more important reason), as a security that the mine will be worked, 
and worked with reasonable rapidity. Rents in kind still exist 
to a limited extent; thus the corporation of London is tenant of 
some lands in Shropshire by payment to the crown of an annual 






rent of a fagot. All peppercorn, or nominal, rents seem to fall under 
this head. 1 The object of the peppercorn rent is to secure the 
acknowledgment by the tenant ot the landlord's right. In modern 
building leases a peppercorn rent is sometimes reserved as the 
rent for the first few years. Services rendered in lieu of payment 
by tenants in grand and petit serjeanty may also be regarded as 
examples of rents in kind. Grand serjeanty is a form of tenure in 
chivalry under which the king's tenants {strvientcs) in chief owed 
special military or personal services to the king; e.g. carrying his 
banner. Petit serjeanty— a form of tenure in socage — was usually 
applied to tenure of the king or a mesne lord by some fixed service 
of trivial value, e.g. feeding his hounds. These forms of tenure 
were abolished in 1660. Labour rents are represented by those 
cases, not unfrequent in agricultural leases, where the tenant is 
bound to render the landlord a certain amount of team work or 
other labour as a part of his rent. It was held in the court of 
queen's bench in 1845 that tenants who occupied houses on the 
terms of sweeping the parish church and of ringing the church bell 
paid rent within the meaning of the Limitation Act of 1833 (see 
Doe v. Benham (1845), 7 Q.B. 976). 
As to the apportionment of rents, see Apportionment. 

Payment of Rent. — Rent is due in the morning of the day 
appointed for payment, but a tenant is not in arrears until after 
midnight on that day. Rent made payable in advance 
by agreement between a landlord and his tenant is a *™ 
called forehand rent. It is not uncommon in letting payment. 
a furnished house, or as to the last quarter of the 
term of a lease of unfurnished premises, to stipulate that the 
rent shall be paid in advance. As soon as such rent is payable 
under the agreement the landlord has the same rights in regard 
to it as he has in the case of ordinary rent. If* a tenant pays 
his rent before the day on which it is due, he runs the risk of 
being called upon in certain circumstances to pay it over again. 
Such a* payment is an advance to the landlord, subject to an 
agreement that, when the rent becomes due, the advance shall be 
treated as a fulfilment of the tenant's obligation to pay rent. The 
payment is, therefore, generally speaking, a defence to an action 
by the landlord or his heirs. But if the landlord mortgages his 
reversion, either before or after the advance, the assignee will, 
by giving notice to the tenant, before the proper rent-day, to pay 
rent to him, become entitled to the rent then falling due. Pay- 
ment by cheque is conditional payment only, and if the cheque is 
dishonoured the original obligation revives. Where a cheque 
in payment of rent is lost in the course of transmission through 
the post, the loss falls on the tenant, unless the landlord has 
expressly or impliedly authorized it to be forwarded in that 
way: and the landlord's consent to take the risk of such trans- 
mission will not be inferred from the fact that payments were 
ordinarily made in this manner in the dealings between the 
parties. A tenant may deduct from his rent (i) the " land- 
lord's property tax " (on the annual value of the premises for 
income tax purposes), which is paid by the tenant, if the statute 
imposing the tax authorizes the deduction (which should be 
made from the rent next due after the payment); (ii) taxes or 
rates which the landlord had undertaken to pay but had not 
paid, payment having thereupon been made by the tenant; (iii) 
payments made by the tenant which ought to have been made 
by the landlord, e.g. rent due to a superior landlord; (iv) com- 
pensation under the Agricultural Holdings Acts 1 883-1900. 

Remedies for Non-payment of Rent. — A landlord's main remedy 
for non-payment of rent is distress (Lat. distringere, to draw 
asunder, detain, occupy), i.e. the right to seize all goods found 
upon the demised premises, whether those of the tenant or of 
a stranger, except goods specially privileged, and to detain and, 
if need be, to sell them, in satisfaction of his claim. The 
requisites of a valid distress are these: (a) There must be " a 
certain and proper rent," i.e. rent due in respect of an actual 
tenancy of corporeal hereditaments: (b) the rent must be in 
arrear; (c) there must be a reversion in the person distrain- 
ing; and (d) there must be goods on the premises liable to be 
distrained. 

1 When peppercorn rents were instituted, in the middle ages, 
they were not, however, nominal, the cost of spices being then very 
great. A peppercorn rent, generally an obligation to pay 1 lb of 
pepper at the usual rent days, constituted a substantial impost 
even as late as the 18th century. 



ic>4 



RENT 



All personal chattels are distrainable with the following excep- 
tions: (i) Goods absolutely privileged — (a) fixtures (q.v.); (&) goods 
sent to the tenant in the way of trade ; (c) things which cannot be 
restored, e.g. meat and milk; growing corn and corn in sheaves 
formerly fell within this category, but the Distress for Rent Act 
1737 (s. 8) abolished this exemption in the case of the former, 
and a statute of 1690 abolished it in that of the latter; (d) things 
in actual use, e.g. a horse while it is drawing a cart ; (e) animals 
ferae naturae (dogs and tame deer or deer in an enclosed park 
may be distrained) ; (/) things in the custody of the law, e.g. in the 
possession of a sheriff under an execution (q.v.) ; (g) straying cattle; 
(h) in the case of agricultural holdings under the Agricultural 
Holdings Acts 1883-1900 hired agricultural machinery and breeding 
stock; (i) the wearing apparel and " bedding '* — a term which 
includes " bedstead " — of tenant and his family, and the tools 
and implements of his trade to the value of £5 (Law of Distress 
Amendment Act 1 1888) ; (j) the goods of ambassadors and their 
suites (Diplomatic Privileges Act 1708). (ii) Goods conditionally 
privileged, i.e. privileged if there are sufficient goods of other kinds 
on the premises to satisfy the distress — (a) implements of trade not 
in actual use; (b) beasts of the plough and sheep; (c) agisted 
cattle; (d) growing crops sold under an execution (Landlord and 
Tenant Act 1851, s. 2); (e) lodgers' goods. The Lodgers' Goods 
Protection Act 1871 'provides that where a lodger's goods have 
been seized by the superior landlord the lodger may serve him with 
a notice stating that the intermediate landlord had no interest in 
the property seized, but that it is the property, or in the lawful 
possession, of the lodger, and setting forth the amount of the rent 
due by the lodger to his immediate landlord. On payment or 
tender of such rent the landlord cannot proceed with the distress 
against the goods in question. 

In general, a landlord cannot distrain except upon the premises 
demised, but he has a statutory right to follow things clandestinely 
or fraudulently removed from the premises within 30 days after 
their removal, unless they^ have been in the meantime sold bona 
fide and for valuable consideration. A landlord may, by statute 
(Landlord and Tenant Act 1709, s. 6), distrain within six months 
afterthe determination of the lease provided that the tenant has 
remained in possession. A distress must be made in the daytime, 
i.e. not before sunrise or after sunset. Six years' arrears of rent 
only are recoverable by distress (Real Property Limitation Act 
1833, s. 12): the Real Property Limitation Act 1874 (s. 1), which 
bars distress for rent after twelve years, applies to rent-charges 
and not to rent under a lease, and the six years' arrears may be 
recovered in spite of the lapse oi time. In the case of agricultural 
tenancies falling within the Agricultural Holdings Acts 1883-1900, 
the right of distress is confined to one year's arrears of rent. Where 
the^ tenant is bankrupt, a distress levied after the bankruptcy is 
limited to six months' rent accrued due prior to the date of adjudica- 
tion; see Bankruptcy Act 1883 (s. 42) and 1890 (s. 28). Where 
a company is being wound up, the landlord may not distrain without 
the leave of the court. An extension of time is allowed in cases 
where in the ordinary course of dealing between landlord and tenant 
the payment of rent has been allowed to be deferred for a quarter 
or half year after the rent became legally due (act of 1883, s. 4). 
The landlord may distrain in person or may employ a certificated 
bailiff (Law of Distress Amendment Act 1888, s. 7). An uncerti; 
ficated person levying a distress is liable to a fine of £10, without 
prejudice to his civil liability (Law of Distress Amendment Act 
1895, s. 2). The seizure.must not be excessive (statute of Henry III., 
1267); but enough must be taken to satisfy the claim, for the 
landlord cannot distrain twice for the same rent where he could have 
taken sufficient in the first instance. After being seized, the goods 
must be impounded (Distress for Rent Act 1707, s. 10; and see 
the statute of 1690, s. 3, on impounding of corn, straw, hay; the 
Distress for Rent Act 1737, s. 8, on impounding of growing crops; 
and^ the statute of 1554 and the Cruelty to Animals Act 1849, s. 5, 
on impounding of cattle) ; and the landlord has a statutory power 
of sale (statute of 1690, s. 5). It is illegal to proceed with a distress 
if the tenant tenders the rent before the impounding; and a tenant 
has, by statute (1690, c. 5), five clear days' grace, excluding the date 
of seizure, between impounding and sale. On the written request 
of the tenant, this period will be extended to fifteen days (Law of 
Distress Amendment Act 1888, s. 6). A tenant may, before sale, 
recover goods illegally distrained by an action of replevin (L. Lat. 
replegiare, to redeem a thing taken by another). Where no rent 
was due to the distrainer the tenant may recover by action double 
the value of the goods sold (statute 1690, s. 5); and summary 
remedies for the recovery of the property have been created by 
modern enactments (Law of Distress Amendment Act 1895, s. 4, 
on distress of privileged goods; Agricultural Holdings Act 1883, 
s. 46). Where rent was due, but the distress was irregular, the 
tenant can only recover special damage (Distress for Rent Act 1737* 
s. 19). 

Goods taken under an execution (q.v.) are not removable till 
one year's rent has been paid to the landlord (Landlord and Tenant 
Act 1709). 

The landlord has, besides distress, his ordinary remedy by action. 
In addition, special statutory remedies are given in the case of tenants 



holding over after the expiration of their tenancy. By the Distress 
for Rent Act 1737 any tenant giving notice to quit, and holding 
over, is liable to pay double rent -for such time as he continues in 
possession (see further under Ejectment). 

Ireland. — The main differences between Irish and English 
law have been caused hy legislation (see Ejectment; Land- 
lord and Tenant). 

Scotland. — Rent is properly the payment made by tenant 
to landlord for the use of lands held under lease (see Landlord 
and Tenant). In agricultural tenancies the legal terms 
for the payment of rent are at Whitsunday after the crop has 
been shown, and at Martinmas after it has been reaped. But 
a landlord and tenant may substitute conventional terms of 
payment, either anticipating (fore, or forehand rent) or post- 
poning (back, or backhand rent) the legal term. The rent paid 
by vassal to superior is called feu-duty (see Feu). Its nearest 
English equivalent is the fee farm rent. The remedy of dis- 
tress does not exist in Scots law. Rents are recovered (i) by 
summary diligence, proceeding on a clause, in the lease, of 
consent to registration for execution; (ii) by an ordinary peti- 
tory action; (iii) by an action of " maills and duties " (the 
rents of an estate in money or grain: " maills " was a coin at 
one time current in Scotland) in the Sheriff Court or the Court 
of Session; and (iv) in non-agricultural tenancies by procedure 
under the right of hypothec, where that still exists; the right 
of hypothec over land exceeding 2 acres in extent let for agri- 
culture or pasture was abolished as from November 11, i88r 
(see Hypothec); (v) hy action of removing (see Ejectment). 
Arrears of rent prescribe in five years from the time of the 
tenant's removal from the land. 

Labour or service rents were at one time very frequent in Scot- 
land. The events of 1715 and 1745 showed the vast influence over 
the tenantry that the great proprietors acquired by such means. 
Accordingly acts of 17 16 and 1746 provided for the commutation 
of services into money rents. Such services may still be created 
by agreement, subject to the summary power of commutation by 
the sheriff given by the Conveyancing Act 1874 (§§ 20, 21). " In 
the more remote parts of Scotland it is understood that there still 
exist customary returns in produce of various kinds, which being 
regulated by the usage of the district or of the barony or estate 
cannot be comprehended under any general rule " (Hunter, Landlord 
and Tenant, ii. 298). Up to 1848 or 1850 there existed in Scot- 
land " steelbow " leases — analogous to the cketel de fer of French 
law (see Landlord and Tenant) — by which the landlord stocked 
the farm with corn, cattle, implements, &c, the tenant returning 
similar articles at the expiration of his tenancy and paying in 
addition to the ordinary rent a steelbow rent of 5 % on the value 
of the stock. 

As to the rent of apartments, &c, see Lodger and Lodgings. 

United Stales. — The law is in general accordance with that 
of England. The tendency of modern state legislation is 
unfavourable to the continuance of distress as a remedy. In 
the New England states, attachment on mesne process has, to 
a* large extent, superseded it. In New York and Missouri it 
has heen abolished by statute; in Mississippi the landlord has 
a claim for one year's rent on goods seized under an execution 
and a lien on the growing crop. In Ohio, Tennessee and 
Alabama it is not recognized, but in Ohio the landlord has a 
share in the growing crops in preference to the execution creditor. 
The legislatures of nearly all the states agree with the law of 
England as to the exemption from distress of household goods, 
wearing apparel, &c. (see Dillon's Laws and Jurisprudence of 
England and America, pp. 360, 361; also Homestead). As 
to the rent of apartments, &c, see Lodger and Lodgings. 
Fee farm rents exist in some states, like Pennsylvania, which 
have not adopted the statute of Quia Emptores as a part of their 
common law (Washburn's Real Property, ii. 252). 

Other Laws. — Under the French Code Civil (art. 2102) the land- 
lord is a privileged creditor for his rent. If the lease is by authentic 
act, or under private signature for a fixed term, he has a right over 
the year's harvest and produce, the furniture of the house and 
everything employed to keep it up, and (if a farm) to work it, in 
order to satisfy all rent due up to the end of the term. If the lease 
is not by authentic act nor for a specified term, the landlord's 
claim is limited to the current year and the year next following 
(see law of 12th Feb/ 1872). The goods of a sub-lessee are protected : 
and goods bailed or deposited with the tenant are in general not 



RENTON— REPLEVIN 



105 



liable to be seized. The French law is in force in Mauritius, and 
has been reproduced in substance in the Civil Codes of Quebec 
(arts. 2005 et sea,.) and St Lucia (arts. 1888 et seq.). There are 
analogous provisions in the Spanish Civil Code (art. 1922). The 
subject of privileges and hypothecs is regulated in Belgium by a 
special law of the 16th Dec. 1851; and in Germany by ss. 11 13 
et seq. of the Civil Code. The law of British India as to rent (Transfer 
and Property Act 1882) and distress (cf. ( e.g., Act 15 of 1882) is 
similar to English law. The British dominions generally tend in 
the same direction. See, e.g., New South Wales (the consolidating 
Landlord and Tenant Act 1899); Newfoundland (Act 4 of 1899); 
Ontario (Act 1 of 1902, s. 22, giving a tenant five days for tender 
of rent and expenses after distress); Jamaica (Law 17 of 1900, 
certification of landlord's bailiffs) ; Queensland (Act 15 of 1904). 

Authorities. — English Law: Woodfall, Landlord and Tenant 
(18th ed. f London, 1907) ; Foa, Landlord and Tenant (4th ed., London, 
1907); Faweett, Landlord and Tenant (3rd ed., London, 1905); 
Gilbert on Distress and Replevin (London, 1823); Bullen, Law of 
Distress (2nd ed., London, 1899) ; Oldham and Foster, Law of Distress 
(2nd ed., London, 1889). Scots Law: Hunter on Landlord and 
Tenant (4th ed., Edin., 1876); Erskine's Principles (20th ed., by 
Rankine, Edin., 1903); Rankine's Law of Landowner ship in Scot- 
land (3rd ed., Edin., 1891); Rankine's Law of Leases in Scotland 
(2nd ed., Edin., 1893). American Law: McAdam, Law of Landlord 
and Tenant (New York, 1900); Bouvier's Law Dictionary (ed. G. 
Rawle) (London and Boston, 1897), tit. '* Distress " in " Ruling 
Cases"; Landlord and Tenant (American Notes) (London and 
Boston, 1 894-1901). (A. W. R.) 

RENTON, a manufacturing town of Dumbartonshire, Scotland. 
Pop. (1901) 5067. It is situated on the Leven, 2 m. N.N.W. 
of Dumbarton by the North British and Caledonian railways. 
The leading industry is Turkey red dyeing, and calico-printing 
and bleaching are also carried on. . A parish church stands on 
the site of Dalquhurn House, the birthplace of Tobias Smollett 
the novelist, to whose memory a. Tuscan column was erected 
in 1774, the inscription for which was revised by Dr Johnson 
when he visited Bonhill in that year with Boswell. The town 
was founded in ^782 by Mrs Smollett — previously Mrs Telfer — 
of Bonhill (sister of Tobias Smollett), who resumed her maiden 
name when she succeeded to the Smollett estates; it was named 
after Cecilia Renton, daughter of John Renton of Blackadder, 
who had married Mrs Smollett's son, Alexander Telfer. 

RENWICK, JAMES (1662-1688), Scottish covenanting leader, 
was born at Moniaive in Dumfriesshire on the 15th of February 
1662, being the son of a weaver, Andrew Renwick. Educated at 
Edinburgh University, he joined the section of the Covenanters 
known as the Cameronians about 1681 and soon became pro- 
minent among them. Afterwards he studied theology at the 
university of Groningen and was ordained a minister in 1683. 
Returning to Scotland " full of zeal and breathing forth threats 
of organized assassination," says Mr Andrew Lang, he became 
one "of the field-preachers and was declared a rebel by the 
privy council. He was largely responsible for the " apologetical 
declaration " of 1684 by which he and his followers disowned 
the authority of Charles II.; the privy council replied by 
ordering every one to abjure this declaration on pain of death. 
Unlike some of his associates, Renwick refused to join the 
rising under the earl of Argyll in 1685; in 1687, when the 
declarations of indulgence allowed some liberty of worship to 
the Presbyterians, he and his followers, often called Renwickites, 
continued to hold meetings in the fields, which were still illegal. 
A reward was offered for his capture, and early in 1688 he was 
seized in Edinburgh. Tried and found guilty of disowning 
the royal authority and other offences, he refused to apply for 
a pardon and was hanged on the 17th of February 1688. Ren- 
wick was the last of the convenanting martyrs. 

See R. Wodrow, History of the Sufferings of the Church of Scot- 
land, vol. iv. (Glasgow, 1838); and A. Smellie, Men of the Covenant 
(1904); also Renwiek's life by Alexander Shields in the Biographia 
Presbyteriana (1827). 

REP, Repp, or Reps, a cloth made of silk, wool or cotton. 
The name is said to have been adapted from the French reps, 
a word of unknown origin; it has also been suggested that it 
is a corruption of " rib." It is woven in fine cords or ribs 
across the width of the piece. In silk it is used for dresses, 
and to some extent for ecclesiastical vestments, &c. In wool 
and cotton it is used for various upholstery purposes. 



REPAIRS (from Lat. reparare, to make ready again), acts 
necessary to restore things to a sound state after damage; 
the question of repairs is important in the relations between 
landlord and tenant. (See the articles Flat; Landlord and 
Tenant.) 

REPEAL (O.F. rapel f modern rappel t from rapeler, rappeler, 
revoke, re and appeler t appeal), the abrogation, revocation or 
annulling of a law (see Abrogation and Statute). The word 
is particularly used in English history of the movement led by 
Daniel O'Connell (q.v.) for the repeal of the act of Union between 
Great Britain and Ireland in 1830 and 1841-46, which in its later 
development became known as the Nationalist or Home Rule 
movement (see Ireland, History). 

REPIN, ILJA JEFIMOVICH (1844- ), Russian painter, 
was born in 1844 at Tschuguev in the department of Charkov, 
the son of parents in straitened circumstances. He learned 
the rudiments of art under a painter of saints named Bunakov, 
for three years gaining his living at this humble craft. In 1863 
he obtained a studentship at the Academy of Fine Arts of St 
Petersburg, where he remained for six years, winning the gold 
medal and a travelling scholarship which enabled him to visit 
France and Italy. He returned to Russia after a short absence, 
and devoted himself exclusively to subjects having strong 
national characteristics. In 1894 he became professor of 
historical painting at the St Petersburg Academy. Repin's 
paintings are powerfully drawn, with not a little imagination 
and with strong dramatic force and characterization. A 
brilliant colourist, and a portrait-painter of the 'first rank, he 
also became known as a sculptor and etcher of ability. His 
chief pictures are " Procession in the Government of Kiev," 
" Home-coming," " The Arrest," " Ivan the Terrible's murder 
of his Son," and, best known of all, " The Reply of the Cossacks 
to Sultan Mahmoud IV." The portraits of the Baroness V. I. 
Ulsktil, of Anton Rubinstein and of Count Leo Tolstoy are 
among his best achievements in this class. The Tretiakov 
gallery at Moscow contains a very large collection of his work. 

See " Professor Repin," by Prince Bojidar Karageorgevich, 
in the Magazine of Art, xxiii. p. 783 (1899) ; " Russian Art," a paper 
by E. Brayley Hodgetts in the Proceedings of the Anglo-Russian 
Literary • Society (5th of May 1896); ** Ilja Jefimovieh Repin," 
by Julius Norden, in Velhagen and Klasing's Monatshefte, xx. p. 1 
(1905); also R. Muther, History of Modern Painting (ed. 1907), 
iv. 272. (E. F. S.) 

REPINGTON (or Repyngdon), PHILIP (d. 1424), English 
bishop and cardinal, was educated at Oxford and became an 
Augustinian canon at Leicester before 1382. A man of some 
learning, he came to the front as a defender of the doctrines 
taught by John Wycliffe; for this he was suspended and after- 
wards excommunicated, but in a short time he was pardoned 
and restored by Archbishop William Courtenay, and he appears 
to have completely abandoned his unorthodox opinions. In 
1394 he was made abbot of St Mary de Pre at Leicester, and 
after the accession of Henry IV. to the English throne in 1399 
he became chaplain and confessor to this king, being described 
as " clericus specialissimus domini regis Henrici." In 1404 he 
was chosen bishop of Lincoln, and in 1408 Pope Gregory XII. 
made him a cardinal. He resigned his bishopric in 1419. Some 
of Repington's sermons are in manuscript at Oxford and at 
Carnbridge. 

REPLEVIN, an Anglo-French law term (derived from replevir, 
to replevy; see Pledge for further etymology) signifying the 
recovery by a person of goods unlawfully taken out of his 
possession by means of a special form of legal process; this 
falls into two divisions — (1) the " replevy," the steps which the 
owner takes to secure the physical possession of the goods, by 
giving security for prosecuting the action and for the return 
of the goods if the case goes against him, and (2) the " action 
of replevin " itself. The jurisdiction in the first case is in the 
County Court; in the second case the Supreme Court has also 
jurisdiction in certain circumstances. The proceedings are now 
regulated by the County Courts Act 1888. At common law, 
the ordinary action for the recovery of goods wrongfully taken 
would be one of detinue; but no means of immediate recovery 

xxiii. 4 a 



io6 



REPNIN— REPORTING 



was possible till the action was tried, and until the Common 
Law Procedure Act 1854 the defendant might exercise an 
option of paying damages instead of restoring the actual goods. 
The earliest regulations with regard to the action of replevin 
are to be found in the Statute of Marlborough (Marlebridge), 
1267, cap. 21. For the early history, see Blackstone's Com- 
mentaries, in. 145 seq. Only goods and cattle can be the subjects 
of an action for replevin. Although the action can be brought 
for the wrongful taking of goods generally, as long as the initial 
taking was wrongful and it was from the possession of the 
owner; it is practically confined to goods taken by an illegal 
as opposed to an excessive distress (see Distress and Rent, 
§ Legal). 

REPNIN, the name of an old Russian princely family, the first 
of whom to gain distinction was 

Prince Anikita Ivanovich Repnin (1668-1726), Russian 
general, and one of the collaborators of Peter the Great, with 
whom he grew up. On the occasion of the Sophian insurrection 
of 1689, he carefully guarded Peter in the Troitsa monastery, 
and subsequently took part in the Azov expedition, during 
which he was raised to the grade of general. He took part in 
all the principal engagements of the Great Northern War. 
Defeated by Charles XII. at Holowczyn, he was degraded to the 
ranks, but was pardoned as a reward for his valour at Lyesna 
and recovered all his lost dignities. At Poltava he commanded 
the centre. From the Ukraine he was transferred to the Baltic 
Provinces and was made the first governor-general of Riga after 
its capture in 17 10. In 1724 he succeeded the temporarily 
disgraced favourite, Menshikov, as war minister. Catherine I. 
created him a field-marshal. 

See A. Bauman, Russian Statesmen of the Olden Time (Rus.), vol. i. 
(Petersburg, 1877). 

His grandson, Prince Nikolai Vasilevich Repnin (1734- 
1801), Russian statesman and general, served under his father, 
Prince Vasily Anikitovich, during the Rhenish campaign of 1748" 
and subsequently resided for some time abroad, where he 
acquired " a thoroughly sound German education." He also 
participated in the Seven Years' War in a subordinate capacity. 
Peter III. sent him as ambassador in 1763 to Berlin. The same 
year Catherine transferred him to Warsaw as minister pleni- 
potentiary, with especial instructions to form a Russian party 
in Poland from among the dissidents, who were to receive equal 
rights with the Catholics. Repnin convinced himself that the 
dissidents were too poor and insignificant to be of any real 
support to Russia, and that the whole agitation in their favour 
was factitious. At last, indeed, the dissidents themselves even 
petitioned the empress to leave them alone. It is clear from his 
correspondence that Repnin, a singularly proud and high- 
spirited man, much disliked the very dirty work he was called 
upon to do. -Nevertheless he faithfully obeyed his instructions, 
and, by means more or less violent or discreditable, forced the 
diet of 1 7 68 to concede everything. The immediate result was the 
Confederation of Bar, which practically destroyed the ambas- 
sador's handiwork. Repnin resigned his post for the more 
congenial occupation of fighting the Turks. At the head of an 
independent command in Moldavia and Walachia, he prevented 
a large Turkish army from crossing the Pruth (1770); distin- 
guished himself at the actions of Larga and Kagula; and 
captured Izmail'and Kilia. In 1771 he received the supreme 
command in Walachia and routed the Turks at Bucharest. A 
quarrel with the commander-in-chief, Rumyantsev, then induced 
him to send in his resignation, but in 1774 he participated in the 
capture of Silistria and in the negotiations which led to the 
peace of Kuchuk-Kainarji. In 1775-76 he was ambassador at 
the Porte. On the outbreak of the war of the Bavarian Suc- 
cession he led 30,000 men to Breslau, and at the subsequent 
congress of Teschen, where he was Russian plenipotentiary, 
compelled Austria to make peace with Prussia. During the 
second Turkish war (1787-92) Repnin was, after Suvarov, 
the most successful of the Russian commanders. He defeated 
the Turks at Salcha, captured the whole camp of the seraskier, 
Hassan Pasha, shut him up in Izmail, and was preparing to reduce 



the place when he was forbidden to do so by Potemkin (1789^ 
On the retirement of Potemkin (q.v.) in 1791, Repnin succeeded 
him as commander-in-chief, and immediately routed the grand 
vizier at Machin, a victory which compelled the Turks to accept 
the truce of Galatz (31st of July 1791). In 1794 he was made 
governor-general of the newly acquired Lithuanian provinces. 
The emperor Paul raised him to the rank of field-marshal (1796), 
and, in 1798, sent him on a diplomatic mission to Berlin and 
Vienna in order to detach Prussia from France and unite both 
Austria and Prussia against the Jacobins. On his return unsuc- 
cessful, he was dismissed the service. 

See A. Kraushar, Prince Repnin in Roland, 1764-8 (Pol.) (Warsaw, 
1900); "Correspondence with Frederick the Great and others" 
(Rus. and Fr.), in Russky Arkkiv (1865*1869, 1874, Petersburg); 
M. Longinov, True Anecdotes of Prince Repnin (Rus.) (Petersburg, 
1865). (R. N. B.) 

REPORT (O.Fr. report or raport, modern rapport, from O.Fr. 
reporter, mod. rapporter, Lat. reportare, to bring back, in poetical 
use only, of bringing back an account, news, &c), an account 
or statement of events, speeches, proceedings, the results of 
investigations, &c, " brought back " by one who was present 
either casually or sent for the specific purpose, hence reputation, 
rumour. A special sense, that of a loud noise, as of the explosion 
of firearms, appears as early as the end of the 16th century. 
For the reports of speeches, parliamentary debates, &c, in the 
daily press see Reporting below, and for the particular form of 
law reporting see English Law; American Law. 

REPORTING, the art or business of reproducing in readable 
form, mainly for newspapers, but also for such publications as 
the Parliamentary or Law Reports, the words of speeches, or 
describing in narrative form the events, in contemporary history, 
by means of the notes made by persons known generally as 
reporters. The special business of reporting is a comparatively 
modern one, since it must not be confounded with the general 
practice of quoting, or of mere narrative, which is as old as 
writing. There was no truly systematic reporting until the 
beginning of the 19th century, though there was parliamentary 
reporting of a kind almost from the time when parliaments 
began, just as law reporting (which goes back to 1292) began in 
the form of notes taken by lawyers of discussions in court. The 
first attempts at parliamentary reporting, in the sense of seeking 
to make known to the public what was done and said in parlia- 
ment, began in a pamphlet published monthly in Queen Anne's 
time called The Political State. Its reports were mere indications 
of speeches. Later, the Gentleman's Magazine began to publish 
reports of parliamentary debates. Access to the Houses of 
Parliament was obtained by Edward Cave (q.v.), the publisher 
of this magazine, and some of his friends, and they took 
surreptitiously what notes they could. These were subsequently 
transcribed and brought into shape for publication by another 
hand. Dr Johnson for some years wrote the speeches, and he 
took care, as he admitted, not to let the " Whig dogs " get the 
best of it; the days of verbatim reporting were not yet come, 
and it was considered legitimate to make people say in print 
what substantially was supposed to represent their opinions. 
There was a strict parliamentary prohibition of all public 
reporting ; but the Gentleman's Magazine appears to have 
continued its reports for some time without attracting the 
attention or rousing the jealousy of the House of Commons. 
The publisher, encouraged by immunity from prosecution by 
parliament, grew bolder, and began in his reports to give the 
names of the speakers. Then he was called to account. A 
standing order was passed in 1728, which declared " that it is 
an indignity to, and a breach of, the privilege of this House 
for any person v to presume to give, in written or printed news- 
papers, any account or minute of the debates or other proceed- 
ings; that upon discovery of the authors, printers or publishers 
of any such newspaper this House will proceed against the 
offenders with the utmost severity." Under this and other 
standing orders, Cave's reports were challenged, with the result 
that they appeared without the proper names of the speakers, 
and under the guise of " Debates in the Senate of Lilliput," 



REPORTING 



107 



or some other like title. France was Blefuscu; London was 
Mildcndo; pounds were sprugs; the duke of Newcastle was 
the Nardac secretary of state; Lord Hardwicke was the Hurgo 
Hickrad; and William Pulteney was Wingul Pulnub. 

In the latter half of the century the newspapers began to 
report parliamentary debates more fully, with the result that, 
in 1771, several printers, including those of the Morning Chronicle 
and the London Evening Post, were ordered into custody for 
publishing debates of the House of Commons. A long and 
bitter struggle between the House and the public ensued. John 
Wilkes took part in it. The lord mayor of London and an 
alderman were sent to the Tower for refusing to recognize the 
Speaker's warrant for the arrest of certain printers of parlia- 
mentary reports. But the House of Commons was beaten. 
In 1772 the newspapers published the reports as usual; and 
their right to do so has never since been really questioned. 
Both Houses of Parliament, indeed, now show as much anxiety 
to have their debates fully reported as aforetime they showed 
resentment at the intrusion of the reporter. Elaborate pro- 
vision is made in the House of Lords and in the House of Commons 
for reporters. They have a Press Gallery in which they may 
take notes, writing rooms in which those notes may be extended, 
and a special dining-room. Reporting is nowhere carried to 
such an extent as in the United Kingdom, since in most other 
countries the newspapers do not find it sufficiently interesting 
" copy " for their readers to justify the amount of space required. 
Consequently the verbatim reports, though now no longer 
hindered by law, and made possible by shorthand (which was 
first employed in the service of parliament in 1802) and by all 
the arts of communication and reproduction, are considerably 
restricted. 

But parliamentary work is only a small part of newspaper 
reporting. The newspapers in the beginning of the 19th century 
rarely contained more than the barest outline of any speech or 
public address delivered in or in the neighbourhood of the towns 
where they were published. After the peace of 181 5 a period 
of much political fermentation set in, and the newspapers began 
to report the speeches of public men at greater length. It was 
not, however, until well into what may be called the railway 
era that any frequent effort was made by English newspapers 
to go out of their own district for the work of reporting. The 
London newspapers had before this led the way. Early in the 
19th century, greater freedom of access to both Houses was given, 
and the manager of the Morning Chronicle established a staff 
of reporters. Each reporter took his "turn" — that is, he took 
notes of the proceedings for a certain time, and then gave place 
to a colleague. The reporter who was relieved at once extended 
his notes, and thus prompt publication of the debates was made 
possible. The practice grew until there was a good deal of 
competition among the papers as to which should first issue a 
report of any speech of note in the country. Reporters had 
frequently to ride long distances in post-chaises, doing their 
best as they jolted along the roads to transcribe their notes, 
so that they might be ready for the printer on arrival at their 
destination. Charles Dickens, whose efforts in the way of 
reporting were celebrated, used to tell several stories of his 
adventures of this kind while he held an engagement on the 
Morning Chronicle. One result was that the provincial news- 
papers were stimulated to greater efforts, and as daily news- 
papers sprang up in all directions, and the electric telegraph 
provided greater facilities for reporting, the old supremacy of 
the London journals in this department of newspaper work 
gradually disappeared. No public man made a speech but it 
was faithfully reproduced in print. Local governing bodies, 
charitable institutions, political associations, public companies 
— all these came in a short time to furnish work for the reporter, 
and had full attention paid to them. By the second half of the 
19th century, parliamentary reporting was a leading feature 
of the London newspapers. They had a monopoly of it. All 
the reporting arrangements in the House of Lords and in the 
House of Commons were made with sole regard to their require- 
ments. There had indeed been a long battle between The 



Times and some of the other London newspapers as to which 
should have the best parliamentary report, and The Times 
had established its supremacy, which has never been shaken. 
The provincial newspapers were in the main obliged to copy 
the London reports, and rarely made any attempt to get reports 
of their own. When the electric telegraph came into use for 
commercial purposes a change began. The company which 
first carried wires from London to the principal towns in the 
country started a reporting service for the country newspapers. 
In addition, it procured admission to the parliamentary galleries 
for reporters in its employment, and began to send short accounts 
of the debates to the newspapers in the country. These news- 
papers were thus enabled to publish in the morning some 
account of the parliamentary proceedings of the previous night, 
instead of having to take like reports a day later from the London 
journals. The telegraph companies (not yet taken over by the 
state) for a long time could or would do no more than they had 
begun by doing; and they offered no inducements to the pro- 
vincial newspapers to telegraph speeches. The public meanwhile 
wanted to know more fully what their representatives were 
saying in parliament, and gradually the leading provincial 
newspapers adopted the practice of employing reporters in the 
service of the London journals to report debates on subjects 
of special interest in localities; and these reports, forwarded 
by train or by post, were printed in full, but of course a day late. 
The London papers paid little attention to debates of local 
interest, and thus the provincial papers had parliamentary 
reporting which was not to be found elsewhere. Bit by bit 
this feature was developed. It was greatly accelerated by a 
movement which the Scotsman was the first to bring about. 
About 1865, a new company having come into existence, it was 
agreed that wires from London should be put at the disposal of 
such newspapers as desired them. Each newspaper was to 
have the use of a wire — of course on payment of a large subscrip- 
tion — from six o'clock at night till three o'clock in the morning. 
This was the beginning of the " special wire " which now plays 
so important a part in the production of almost all newspapers. 
The arrangement was first made by the Scotsman and by other 
newspapers in Scotland. The special wires were used to their 
utmost capacity to convey reports of the speeches of leading: 
statesmen and politicians; and, instead of bare summaries of 
what had been done, the newspapers contained pretty full 
reports. * 

When the telegraphs were taken over by the state in 1870 
the facilities for reporting were increased in every direction. 
The London papers, with the exception of The Times, had given 
less and less attention to parliamentary debates, while on jtbe 
other hand several of the provincial newspapers were giving 
more space than ever to the debates. These newspapers ha3 
to get their reports as best they could. The demand for such 
reporting had led, on the passing of the telegraphs into the 
hands of the state, to the formation of news agencies, which 
undertook to supply the provincial papers. These agencies 
were admitted to the reporters' galleries in the Houses of 
Parliament, but the reports which any agency supplied were 
identical; that is to say, all the newspapers taking a particular 
class of report had exactly the same material supplied to them 
— the reporter producing the number of copies required, by 
means of manifold copying paper. Accordingly attempts were 
made to get separate reports by engaging the services of some 
of the reporters employed by the London papers. The " gallery " 
was shut to all save the London papers and the news agencies. 
The Scotsman sought in vain to break through this exclusive ness. 
The line, it was said, must be drawn somewhere, and the proper 
place to draw it was at the London Press. Once that line was 
departed from every newspaper in the kingdom must have 
admission. But in 1880 a select committee of the House of 
Commons was appointed to consider the question. It took 
evidence, and it reported in favour, of the extension of the 
gallery and of the admission of provincial papers. The result 
was that three or four papers which would be satisfied with 
the same report joined in providing the necessary reporting 



io8 



REPOUSSE— REPRESENTATION 



staff. In other cases individual newspapers put themselves 
on the same footing as the London newspapers ■ by engaging 
separate staffs of reporters. 

The effect of telegraphic improvements may be partially 
gauged by the fact that in 1871 the number of words handed 
in for transmission through the British Post Office for Press 
purposes (special rates being allowed) was 22,000,000, and that 
in 1900 it had risen to 835,000,000. Meanwhile the evolution 
of the modern newspaper had brought many other kinds of 
reporting, besides parliamentary, into play. 

What is commonly called " descriptive reporting " has in some 
cases nearly shouldered the reporting of speeches out of news- 
papers. The special correspondent or the war correspondent is a 
" descriptive reporter." The *' interviewer " came into great 
prominence during the " eighties " and " nineties," and the influence 
of American journalistic methods, which made smart reporting the 
most valuable commercial asset of the popular newspaper, and 
the reporter correspondingly important, spread to other countries. 
No daily newspaper now confines its reporting to the affairs of the 
part of the country in which it is published. The electric telegraph 
has made the work of the reporter more arduous and his responsibility 
greater. The variety of work open to reporting causes considerable 
difference, of course, in the professional status of the journalists 
who do such work. This subject generally is discussed in the article 
Newspapers, but one instance of the recognition of the modern 
reporter's responsibility is worth special mention. In the year 1900, 
in the English case of Walter v. Lane (see Copyright), it was decided, 
on the final appeal to the House of Lords, that the reporter of a 
speech, printed verbatim in a newspaper, was under the Copyright 
Act of 1842 to be considered the " author." Absurd as it might seem 
to call the reporter the author of another man's speech, the decision 
gave effect to the fact that it is his labour and skill which bring into 
existence the " copy " to which alone can right of property attach. 
Strictly speaking, he is the author of the report of the speech ; but 
for literary purposes the report is the speech. It must, however, be 
borne in mind that there may be more than one verbatim report, 
and therefore more than one " author." 

See also Newspapers; Shorthand; Press Laws; Telegraph. 

REPOUSSfi (Fr. " driven back "), the art of raising designs 
upon metal by hammering from the back, while the " ground " 
is left relatively untouched (see Metal Work and Plate). 
The term is often loosely used, being applied indifferently to 
" embossing." Embossing is also called " repousse sur coquille " 
and " estampage," but the latter consists of embossing by 
mechanical means and is therefore not to be considered as an 
art process. Moreover, it reverses the method of repouss6, the 
work being done from the front, and by driving down the ground 
leaving the design in relief. Gold, silver, bronze, brass, etc., 
being easily malleable metals, are specially suitable to repouss6, 
which at the present day, in its finer forms, is mainly employed 
for silver-plate and jewelry. " The silver-plate in repousse of 
Gilbert Marks (d. 1905) in England, and the portrait-plaques 
from life by Stephan Schwartz (b. in Hungary, 1851) in 
Austria, are noteworthy modern examples of the art. 

Repousse — a term of relatively recent adoption, employed 
to differentiate the process from embossing — has been known 
from remote antiquity. Nothing has ever excelled, and little 
Jias ever approached, the perfection of the bronzes of Siris 
(4th century B.C., in the British Museum), of which the armour- 
plate — especially the shoulder-pieces — presents heroic figure- 
groups beaten up from behind with punches from the flat plate 
until the heads and other portions are wholly detached — that is 
to say, in high relief from the ground of which they form a part. 
Yet the metal, almost as thin as paper, is practically of constant 
thickness, and nowhere is there any sign of puncture. The 
" Bernay treasure," in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, 
discovered in 1830, belongs to the 2nd century B.C., and includes 
silver vases of Roman execution decorated with groups in 
mezzo-relief, beaten up in sections and soldered together. The 
best of these, of which perhaps the finest is that known from 
its subject as " La nymphe de la fontaine Pirene et Pegase," 
belong to the noblest period of Roman art. The Hildesheim 
treasure (discovered 1868) comprises a patera on the ground of 
which is a superb emblema representing Minerva in high relief. 
These repouss6 emblemala were usually of another metal and 
applied to the vase which they decorated; indeed repouss6 was 
of leading importance in caelatura, or the metallic art (statuary 



excepted) of classic times. Thus the patera of Hildesheim, the 
patera of Rennes, and the earlier shouWer-plate of the Siris 
bronze may be accepted as illustrative of the highest develop- 
ment of repousse. 

The art was not only Greek and Graeco-Roman in its early 
practice; it was pursued also by the Assyrians, the Phoenicians, 
and other oriental peoples, as well as in Cyprus and elsewhere, 
and was carried forward, almost without a break, although with 
much depreciation of style and execution, into medieval times. 
In the nth century the emperor Henry II. presented as a thank- 
offering to the Basel cathedral the altar-piece, in the Byzantine 
style, decorated with fine repouss6 panels of gold (representing 
Jesus Christ with two angels and two saints), which is now in the 
Cluny Museum in Paris. Up to this time, also, repousse instead 
of casting in metal was practised for large work, and Limoges 
became a centre for the manufacture and exportation of sepul- 
chral figures in repouss6 bronze. These were affixed to wooden 
cores. By the time of Benvenuto Cellini the art was confined 
almost entirely to goldsmiths and silversmiths (who, except 
Cellini himself, rarely cast their work) ; and to them the sculptors 
and artists of to-day are still content to relegate it. 

The elementary principle of the method, after the due prepara- 
tion and annealing of the plate, was to trace on the back of it 
the design to be beaten up, and to place it face downwards upon 
a stiff yet not entirely unresisting ground (in the primitive 
stage of development this was wood), and then with hammers and 
punches to beat up the design into relief. According to Cellini, 
his master Caradosso da Milano would beat up his plate on a 
metal casting obtained from a pattern he had previously modelled 
in wax; but he is pot sufficiently explicit to enable us to judge 
whether this casting was hollow mould, which would result in 
true repouss6, or in the round, which 'is tantamount to repoussi 
sur coquille, or embossing. 

Nowadays the plate is laid upon and affixed to a " pitch- 
block," a resinous ground docile to heat, usually composed of 
pitch mixed with pounded fire-brick, or, for coarser work such 
as brass, with white sand, with a little tallow and resin. This 
compound, while being sufficiently hard, is elastic, solid, adhesive 
and easy to apply and remove. Gold and silver are not only 
the densest and most workable but the most ductile metals, 
admitting of great expansion without cracking if properly 
annealed. The tools include hammers, punches (in numerous 
shapes for tracing, raising, grounding, chasing and texturing 
the surfaces), together with a special anvil called in French a 
recingle or ressing, in English " snarl." The recingle, or small 
anvil with projecting upturned point, was known in the 16th 
century. This point is introduced into the hollow of the vase 
or other vessel such as punch and hammer cannot freely enter, 
which it is desired to ornament with reliefs. A blow of a hammer 
on that part of the anvil where the prolongation first projects" 
from it, produces, by the return spring, a corresponding blow 
at the point which the operator desires to apply within the vase. 
The same effect is produced by the modern " snarl " or " snarling 
iron " — a bar of steel, with an inch or two of the smaller end 
upturned and ending in a knob — held firmly in a tightlyscrewed- 
up vice, whereby the blow is similarly repeated or echoed by 
vibration. The repousse work, when complete, is afterwards 
finished at the front and chased up. The same vase, to be 
worked up by embossing, would be filled with " cement " and 
laid on a sand-bag, and finally the whole would be heated and 
the cement run out. In the case of repousse the vase itself may 
be beaten up out of the metal on the pitch-block. It must be 
understood that in order to obtain a result not merely excellent 
in technique but artistic and unmechanical in effect, the blows 
of the hammer must be made with feeling and " sentiment," 
otherwise the result cannot be a work of art. 

See C. G. Leland, Repoussi Work (New York, 1885); and Gaw- 
thorp, A Manual of Instruction in the Art of Repoussi (London, 
2nd ed., 1899). (M. H. S.) 

REPRESENTATION, a term used in various senses in 
different connexions, but particularly in a political meaning, 
which has developed out of the others. 



REPRESENTATION 



109 






The word " represent " comes from Lat. re-praesentare, to 

M make present again/' or " bring back into presence," and its 

word nistor y in En g usn ma y De traced fairly well by the 

e w ° * citations given in the New English Dictionary of its 
earliest uses in literature in senses which are still common. Thus 
we find the verb meaning (1380) simply to " bring into presence," 
and Barbour uses it (1375) in the sense of bringing clearly 
before the mind, whence the common sense of " explain," 
"exhibit," "portray." In 1513 it is used as synonymous 
with " describe," or " allege to be." In 1460 we find it em- 
ployed for the performance of a play or a part in a play, whence 
comes the sense of symbolizing, standing in the place of 
some one, or corresponding to something; and in 1655 for 
acting as authorized agent or deputy of some one. This is a 
notable point in the development of the word. In Cromwell's 
speech to the parliament, January 22, 1655, he says: " I have 
been careful of your safety, and the safety of those you repre- 
sented." This strictly political use of the verb developed, it 
will be seen, comparatively late. 

The noun " representation " passed through similar stages. 
In 1425 we find it equivalent to " image," " likeness," " repro- 
duction," " picture," from which is derived a meaning hardly 
distinguishable from "pretence." In 1553 it means a "state- 
ment " or " account," a sense which leads later (1679) to that of 
a formal and serious plea or remonstrance. In 1589 it occurs for 
a performance of a play. In 1647 it is used in psychology for 
the action of mental reproduction, a technical sense which 
applies especially to the " immediate object of imagination " 
(Sir W. Hamilton), and in Kantian language becomes the 
generic term for percepts, concepts and ideas. In 1624 it comes 
to mean " substitution of one thing or person for another," 
" substituted presence " as opposed to " actual presence," or 
" the fact of standing for, or in place of, some other thing or 
person," especially with a right or authority to act on their 
account. Its application to a political assembly then becomes 
natural, but for some time it is not so found in literature, the 
sense remaining rather formal. Good instances of this use 
are:, Gataker, Transubst. 4: "The Rocke was Christ onely 
symbolically and sacramentally, by representation or re- 
semblance"; and R. Coke, Power and Subj. iii.: "So cannot 
these members be formed into one body but by the king, either 
by his Royal Presence or representation." Thus " presence " 
and " representation " are used in distinctive meanings. In 
Scots law (1693) it obtains the technical meaning of the assump- 
tion by an heir of his predecessor's rights and obligations. 

The term " representative," now specially applied to an 
elected member of a national or other assembly, deriving his 
authority from the constituency which returns him, appears 
to have been first used to denote not the member but the 
assembly itself. In the act abolishing the office of king, after 
Charles I.'s execution, 1649, section iv. runs: " And whereas 
by the abolition of the kingly office provided for in this Act, 
a most happy way is made for this nation (if God see it good) 
to return to its just and ancient right of being governed by its 
own Representatives or national meetings in council, from time 
to time chosen and entrusted for that purpose by the people, 
it is therefore resolved and declared by the Commons assembled 
in Parliament," &c, " and that they will carefully provide for 
the certain choosing, meeting and sitting of the next and 
future Representatives," &c. But the application of the term 
to the persons who sat in parliament was at all events very soon 
made, for in 1651 Isaac Penington the younger published a 
pamphlet entitled " The fundamental right, safety and liberty 
of the People; which is radically in themselves, derivatively 
in the Parliament, their substitutes or representatives." 

It is worth while to dwell on the historical evolution of the 
various meanings of " represent," " representation " and 
" representative," because it is at least curious that it was not 
till the 17th century that the modern political or parliamentary 
sense became attached to them; and it is well to remember 
that though the idea of political representation is older and thus 
afterwards is expressed by the later meaning of the word, the 



actual use of " representation " in such a sense is as modern as 
that. In Burke's speeches of 1769 1 and 1774-1775, relating 
to taxation, we find the word in this sense already in common 
use, but the familiar modern doctrine of " no taxation without 
representation," however far back the idea may be traced, is 
not to be found in Burke in those very words. The " originator 
of that immortal dogma of our {i.e. American) national greatness " 
was, according to the American writer M. C. Tyler (Amer. Lit. i. 
154), the politician and philanthropist Daniel Gookin (161 2-1687), 
an Irish settler in Virginia, who, moving to Boston and becoming 
speaker of the Massachusetts legislature, became prominent in 
standing up for popular rights in the agitation which resulted 
in the withdrawal of the colonial charter (1686). But it was 
the vogue of the " dogma " in America, not its phrase, that 
he seems to have originated; and while the precise form of the 
phrase does not appear to be attributable to any single author, 
the principle itself was asserted in England long before the 
word " representation," in a political sense, was current. In 
English constitutional history the principle was substantially 
established in 1 297 by the declaration De Tallagio non concedendo* 
confirmed by the Petition of Right in 1628. 

The growth of the parliamentary system in England is traced 
in the article Parliament, but the account there given may 
be supplemented here by a more precise reference to The idea 
the evolution of the idea of political " representa- of pontics! 
tion " as such, and of its embodiment in the word now reprexen' 
employed to express it. The simple idea of the substi- on * 
tution of one person for another, in some connexion, e.g. hostage, 
pledge, victim, is so old as to be only describable as primitive; 
it is found in the proxy system, e.g. in marriage, and in diplo- 
macy, the legate or ambassador being the alter ego of his 
sovereign; but, so far as general political legislative action, 
by one man in an assembly on behalf of others, is concerned, 
no systematic employment of a " deputy " (the word still used 
both in a general sense and in politics as a synonym for "repre- 
sentative ") is known among the ancients. So long as political 
power rests in a small privileged class, such an idea must be 
slow to develop; and the primitive notion of a law-making 
body is that of all the members present in person, as in ancient 
Greece. But, as Stubbs (Const. Hist. i. 586) points out, the early 
English jury system (see Jury) shows the germ of the true idea 
of representation in England; it was the established practice 
of electing or selecting juries to present criminal matters before 
the king's judges, and assessors to levy taxes on the county, 
that suggested the introduction of popular representation in 
the English political system, and thus brought " the commons " 
into play in addition to the Crown and the nobles. Under 
Henry III., in 1254, we have the writ (see Parliament) requir- 
ing the sheriff of each county to " cause to come 3 before the 
King's Council two good and discreet Knights of the Shire, 
whom the men of the county shall have chosen for this purpose 
in the stead of all and of each of them, to consider along with 
knights of other shires what aid they will grant the king." But 
the definite establishment of the principle of political representa- 
tion, in a shape from which the later English system of repre- 
sentation lineally descended, may be traced rather to the year 
1295, in Edward I.'s famous writ of summons to parliament, 
of which the following is the important part. In the volume 
of Select Documents of English Constitutional History (1901), 
selected by G. B. Adams and H. M. Stephens, whose version from 
the Latin we quote, the section is headed (ante-dating the use 
of the vital word), " Summons of representatives of the counties 
andhoroughs": — 

" The king to the sheriff of Northamptonshire. Since we intend 
to have a consultation and meeting with the earls, barons and other 
principal men of our kingdom with regard to providing remedies 

1 The New English Dictionary, for its first citation of " repre- 
sentation " in an assembly, quotes Burke, Late St Nat. % Works, 
ii. 138, Le. in 1769. 

* No tallage or aid shall be laid or levied by us or our heire in our 
realm, without the goodwill and assent of the archbishops, bishops, 
earls, barons, knights, burgesses and other freemen of our realm.' 

1 " Venire facias," not " elegi facias." 



no 



REPRESENTATION 



against the dangers which are in these days threatening the same 
kingdom: and on that account have commanded them to be with 
us on the Lord's Day next after the feast of St Martin in the ap- 
proaching winter, at Westminster, to consider, ordain and do as 
may be necessary for the avoidance of these dangers: we strictly 
require you to cause two knights from the aforesaid county, two 
citizens from each city in the same county and two burgesses from 
each borough, of those who are especially discreet and capable of 
labouring, to be elected without delay, and to cause them to come 
to us at the aforesaid time and place. Moreover, the said knights 
are to have full and sufficient power for themselves and for the com- 
munity of the aforesaid county, and the said citizens and burgesses 
for themselves and the communities of the aforesaid cities and 
boroughs separately, then and there, for doing what shall then be 
ordained according to the Common Council in the premises, so that 
the aforesaid business shall not remain unfinished in any way for 
defect of this power. And you shall have there the names of the 
knights, citizens and burgesses, and this writ." 

The words " Elegi facias," instead of " venire facias " (which 
were retained in 1275; see Parliament), still appear to make 
the parliament of 1295 the model, rather than that of 1275, though 
in other respects the latter appears now to have established the 
summoning of county and borough representatives. 

In this summoning by the king of the two knights and two 
burgesses with full and sufficient power for themselves and for 
G th the community ', we find therefore the origin of political 
ofrepre- representation of the commons, as opposed to the 
seatatloa actual presence and personal attendance of the peers. 
(f The older English national assemblies had consisted 

ag an . ^ ^ e privileged class fully summoned as individuals. 
The change involved has been well explained by E. A. 
Freeman (Ency. Brit. y 9th ed., viii. 297), when he says: " The 
national assemblies changed their character ... by no cause 
so much as by the growth of the practice of summons. ... In 
the great assembly at Salisbury (1086), where all the land- 
owners of England became the men .of the king (William the 
Conqueror), we see the first germs of Lords and Commons. The 
Witan are distinguished from the ' land-sitting men/ By the 
Witan, so called long after the Conquest, we are doubtless to 
understand those great men of the realm who were usually 
summoned to every assembly. The vast multitude who came 
to do their homage to the king were summoned only for that 
particular occasion. The personal right of summons is the 
essence of the peerage. . . . The earls and bishops of England, 
by never losing their right to the personal summons, have 
kept that right to personal attendance in the national assembly 
which was once common to all freemen, but which other free- 
men have lost. The House of Lords represents 1 by unbroken 
succession the Witan of the assembly of Salisbury; that is, 
it represents by unbroken succession the old assemblies of the 
Teutonic democracy. . . . The ' land-sitting men/ on the other 
hand, not summoned personally or regularly, but summoned 
in a mass when their attendance was specially needed, gradually 
lost the right of personal attendance, till in the end they gained 
the more practical right of appearing by their representatives." 

From the same authority the account of the intermediate 
stages in the adoption of the representative principle may be 
further quoted: — 

11 By the time of Henry II. the force of circumstances, especially 
the working of the practice of summons, had gradually changed the 
ancient assembly of the whole nation into a mere gathering of the 
great men of the realm. ... It is in the reign of Richard I. that 
wc begin to see the first faint glimmerings of parliamentary represen- 
tation. . . . The object of his wise ministers, of Archbishop Hubert 
among the first, was to gain the greatest amount of money for their 
master with the least amount of oppression towards the nation. 
Under Hubert's administration, chosen bodies of knights or other 
lawful men, acting in characters which became more and more dis- 
tinctly representative, were summoned for every kind of purpose. 
How far they were nominated, how far freely elected, is not always 
clear. It seems most likely that in one stage they were nominated 
by .the sheriff in the county court, while at a later stage they were 
chosen by the county court itself. In other words, the principle of 
representation was first established, and then the next stage naturally 

1 The inevitable use of the word " represent " in its wider sense 
(" corresponds to "), is worth noting in this passage from Freeman, 
side by side with the more technical one in " representative " 
(" chosen delegate "). 



was that the representatives should be freely chosen. Summoned 
bodies of knights appear in characters which are the forerunners of 
grand jurors and of justices of the peace. They appear also in a 
character which makes them ^distinctly forerunners of the knights 
of the shire which were soon to come. A chosen body of knights 
have to assess the imposts on each shire. From assessing the taxes 
the next stage was to vote or to refuse them. In 1213 the sheriffs 
are called on to summon four discreet men from each shire, to come 
and speak with the king about the affairs of the realm. When we 
have reached this stage, we have come very near to a parliament, 
name and thing. The reign of John.in short, is marked by common 
consent as the time from which Englishmen date the birth of their 
national freedom in its later form. . , - The (Great) Charter (1215) 
is the first solemn act of the united English nation after Norman 
conquerors and Norman settlers had become naturalized Englishmen. 
. . . Representation was already fast growing up; but it had 
hardly yet reached such a stage that it could be ordained in legal 
form. But rules are laid down out of which, even if it had not 
begun already, representation in the strictest sense could not fail 
shortly to arise. The distinction which had been growing up ever 
since the Conquest, and indeed before, between the Witan and the 
land-sitting men, now receives a legal sanction. The practice of 
summons makes the distinction. Certain great men, prelates, earls 
and greater barons, are to receive the personal summons. The rest 
of the king's tenants-in-chief are to be summoned only in a body. Here 
we have almost come to a separation of Lords and Commons. But in 
modern ideas those names imply two distinct houses; and it was not 
yet settled, it had not yet come into men's minds to consider, whether 
the national council should consist of one house or a dozen. But it 
is decreed in so many words that the acts of those who came would 
bind those who stayed away. On such a provision, representation, 
and not only representation but election of the representatives, 
follows almost as a matter of course. The mass stay away: a few 
appear, specially commissioned to act in the name of the rest. The 
Charter mentions only the king's tenants-in-chief; so far had things 
been marred or feudalized by the influence of the Conquest. But as 
the election could only be made in the ancient county court, every 
freeholder at least, if not every freeman, won back his ancient right. 
If lie could not come himself to say Yea or Nay, he at least had a 
voice in choosing those who could do so with greater effect." 

(Ibid. pp. 307, 308.) 

" The constitution of the (national) assembly, as defined in the 
Great Charter, did not absolutely imply representation; but it 
showed that the full establishment of representation could not be 
long delayed. The work of the period 1217-1340 was to call up, 
alongside of the gathering of prelates, earls and other great men 
specially summoned, into which the ancient Witanagemot had 
shrunk up, another assembly directly representing all other classes 
of the nation which enjoyed political rights. This assembly, 
chosen by various local bodies, communitates or universitates, having a 
quasi corporate being, came gradually to bear the name of the 
commons. The knights of the shire, the barons, citizens and 
burgesses of the towns, were severally chosen by the communa or 
communitas of that part of the people which they represented.'* J 

" The notion of local representation, by which shires and boroughs 
chose representatives of their own communities, had to some extent 
to strive with another doctrine, that of the representation of 
estates or classes of men. The 13th century was the age when the 
national assemblies, not only of England but of most other Euro- 
pean countries, were putting on their definite shape. And in most 
of them the system of estates prevailed. These in most countries 
were three, — clergy, nobles and commons. By these last were 
commonly meant only the communities of the chartered towns, 
while the noblesse of foreign countries answered to the lesser barons 
and knights, who in England were reckoned among the commons. 
The English system thus went far to take in the whole free popula- 
tion, while the estates of other countries, the commons no less than 
the clergy and nobles, must be looked on as privileged bodies. In 
England we had in truth no estates: we had no nobility in the 
foreign sense. . . . Yet the continental theory of estates so far 
worked in the development of our parliamentary system that the 
* Three Estates of England ' became a familiar phrase. m It was 
meant to denote the lords, the commons and the clergy in their 
parliamentary character. For it is plain that it was the intention 
of Edward I. to organize the clergy as a parliamentary estate, 
alongside of the lords and commons. This scheme failed, mainly 
through the unwillingness of the clergy themselves to attend in a 
secular assembly. This left, so far as there were any estates at all, 
two estates only, — lords and commons. This led to the common 

2 Professor Masterman, lecturing (1908) on the House of Commons, 
has pointed out how fortunate it was that this beginning of the 
organization of the communes into a central body did not come 
earlier than it did. Had there been one assembly representing the 
local communitates at any earlier time it would have been far too 
sectional in character and far too little conscious of any common 
interest. The organization did not begin till England had become 
a self-conscious body, realizing its common interests and the common 
destiny that belonged to it as a nation. 



REPRESENTATION 



1 1 1 



mistake of fancying the three estates to be king, lords and commons. 
The ecclesiastical members of the House of Lords kept their seats 
there;, but the parliamentary representation of the clergy as an 
estate came to nothing. So far as the clergy kept any parliamentary 
powers, they exercised them in the two provincial convocations. 
These anomalous assemblies, fluctuating between the character of 
an ecclesiastical synod and of a parliamentary estate, kept, from 
Edward I. to Charles II., the parliamentary power of self-taxation. 
For a long time lords and commons taxed themselves separately. 
So did the clergy; so sometimes did other bodies. . . . 

" During the reign of Henry III. assemblies were constantly held, 
and their constitution is often vaguely described. But in a great 
many cases phrases arc used which, however vague, imply a popular > 
element. We read of knights, of tenants in chief, of freemen, 
sometimes even of freemen and villeins, sometimes, more vaguely 
still, of * universi,' * universitas Angliae,' and the like. In some 
cases we are able better to interpret these vague phrases. For 
instance, in 1224 each shire sends four knights chosen by the 
4 milites et probi homines.' Whether these knights were or were 
not to vote along with the magnates, they were at all events to 
transact business with them. We must always remember that in 
these times formal voting in the modern sense is not to be looked 
for." 1 (Ibid. pp. 314,315-) 

This summary shows clearly how the idea of "representa- 
tion " as opposed to " presence in person " was applied to the 
Tbc English parliament, so as to give the commons a 

Theory of proper voice in it as well as the lords. It is unnecessary 
Repre* h ere to trace further the gradual increase in power of 
sentatlon. ^ e House of Commons till it became the predominant 
partner in the English bicameral constitution (see Parliament). 
But from the point of view of historical theory it is important to 
note that its representative character does not essentially depend 
upon the particular method (election by vote) by which its members 
have for so long been chosen. It is a common error to regard the 
House of Commons as having a national authority higher than 
that of the House of Lords merely on the ground that it is 
composed of elected members, and to stigmatize the House of 
Lords as "unrepresentative" because it is not elected. But in 
strictness the question of election, as such, has nothing to do 
with the matter. 2 The proper distinction (ignoring for the 
moment the later inclusion in the House of Lords of a certain 
representative element — strictly so regarded — in the Scotch and 
Irish peers) is that the House of Lords, as still constituted in 
1910, remained a presentative chamber, while the House of 
Commons was essentially a representative one; in the former 
the members, summoned personally as individuals, were entitled 
to speak in the great council of the nation, while in the latter 
the members were returned as the mouthpieces of whole communi- 
tates, to whom, in the person of the sheriffs, the summons had 
* been directed to send persons to speak for them. 3 The pre- 
ponderant authority of the House of Commons is due not to its 
members being elected — that is only one way of settling who the 
mouthpieces of the commons shall be — but to the progress of 

1 " Election " in these early times has its simple meaning of 
" choice." " We must guard ourselves from supposing that the 
citizens and burgesses, who were summoned to Parliament, were 
absolutely elected by the inhabitants of the towns as their repre- 
sentatives. Their presence in Parliament is another instance of 
representation without election. They were often nominated by the 
sheriff of the county, and even when that great officer, from negli- 
gence or favour, permitted the return to be made by those interested 
in the transaction, the nomination was confined to the small govern- 
ing body, who returned two of their members, in general very un- 
willing missionaries, to the great council " (Disraeli, Vindication of 
the British Constitution, 1835). 

2 In the American federal system the bicameral legislature is 
divided into a " House of Representatives," composed of members 
elected by popular vote in each state, and a "Senate," composed 
of members elected by the legislature in each state. In spite of the 
nomenclature, both houses are really composed of " representatives." 
But under a republican system there is no room for a purely pre- 
sentative assembly, and the term " representative " comes to 
imply a more direct choice by the " commons." 

3 There was at one time, it may be noted, a sort of " representative " 
element even in the case of the House of Lords, in so far as peers 
(including peeresses in their own right, abbesses, &c.) could send 
deputies or proxies. But it must be remembered that the privilege 
flowed directly from the personal and presentative character of the 
summons to a peer, who as such could name a deputy. It is quite 
illegitimate to strain from it an analogy with the election of a repre- 
sentative by the commons, who had no personal right to a summons. 



popular government. The two British houses have historically 
existed as assemblies of the separate estates of the realm — the 
House of Lords of the two estates of lords spiritual and temporal, 
and the House of Commons of the commons. The third estate 
has so increased in power as to become predominant in the 
country; but the authority of its own assembly simply depends 
on the powers of those it represents. If the balance of political 
power had not been shifted in the country itself, the authority 
and competence of the peers, speaking for themselves in a 
primary assembly, would in theory actually appear higher, so 
far as their order is concerned, than that of members of the 
House of Commons, who can only " represent " the popular 
constituencies. Moreover, the fact that most members of the 
House of Commons are elected by a party vote is apt to make 
them very often even less authoritative spokesmen of their 
constituencies — the communitates — than if they were selected 
by some method which would indicate that they had the full 
confidence of the whole body they " represent." It is notorious 
that many members of a modern House of Commons, or of any 
other " representative " assembly, have only been elected by 
the votes of a minority of their constituency, or (where there 
have been more than two candidates) a minority even of those 
who voted; and there always comes a time when it is certain 
that if a representative has to come again before the electorate 
for their votes he will be defeated; he, in fact, no longer reflects 
their views, while he still sits and legislates. The real desires 
of the commons in a certain British constituency may even be 
more faithfully, even if only accidentally, reflected by a local 
peer whose only right to speak in parliament is technically 
presentative. In his Vindication of the British Constitution 
(1835), Disraeh", writing of the Reform Bill of 1832, observed 
that " in the effort to get rid of representation without election, 
it wfll be well if eventually we do not discover that we have only 
obtained election without representation." A truer word was 
never spoken. A man may be representative, practically 
consensu omnium, although no vote, resulting from a division of 
opinion, has been taken for the purpose of selecting him. The 
vote is merely a method of selection when there is a definite 
division of opinion involving an uncertainty; and even in the 
modern House of Commons many members are returned " un- 
opposed," no actual voting taking place. A well-recognized 
representative character (as regards the functions involved) 
attaches, for instance, in British public life to other persons in 
whose selection the method of popular voting has had no 
place; such as the king himself, the Cabinet (in relation to the 
political party in power), or the bishops (as regards the Church 
of England). 

The question of remodelling the constitution of the British 
House of Lords was prominently before the country in 1910; 
and a large number even of those who were prepared to Ttte 

defend its actions in the past were ready to accept British 
changes which would make it in form and composi- Houses 
tion a Second Chamber representative of the nation otPariia- 
rather than presentative of its historic order. But 
it is important to remember, in connexion with the House of 
Lords question, that, in a country like England, where the con- 
stitution has provided for a Second Chamber which is composed 
of members of an estate or estates distinct in the nation from 
the estate of the commons, these persons may to a predominant 
degree nevertheless be really representative men by common 
consent; while their being so, though not theoretically the 
reason for their legislative power, is substantially the reason 
why it has so long persisted. In the absence of a written 
constitution, theoretical considerations have in England 
always been second to the force of circumstances. Most 
people regarded the House of Lords, as still unreformed 
in 1910, as purely a hereditary body; its members had been 
summoned to parliament as peers (the important question of 
their right to a summons need not here be discussed), and most 
peers enjoyed their titles by hereditary succession. But the 
constant creation of peers by both political parties had in fact 
introduced even into the constitution of the House of Lords 



112 



REPRESENTATION 



an essentially representative element (though not resulting 
from direct election), apart altogether from the fact that heredity 
maintained there a number of persons whose title had des- 
cended from men who were originally representative Englishmen, 
and whose successors, on the whole, were no less so. In the 
days when kings really governed in England, the most powerful 
check on the king, in the interest of the nation at large, was the 
peerage; the earls and barons, in parliament, were the chief 
bulwark of the people against tyranny. It was they who stood 
for the nation in extorting Magna Carta from King John; 
and as time went on, the representation of the commons in 
parliament was largely due, not to any direct popular pressure, 
but to the desire of the kings to influence the lower ranks of 
society independently of the nobles. Up to the reign of Charles I., 
at all events, the House of Lords was actually the predominant 
partner in parliament; the House of Commons was recruited 
from and returned by only a small section of the commons as 
now understood; and Oliver Cromwell — certainly a " popular " 
leader in the ordinary sense — made as short work of it as he 
did of the king himself. Up to 1832, when the first modern 
Reform Act was passed, the House of Commons was an oli- 
garchical body, and the electors themselves were a small and 
privileged class. It is only since then — except in the granting of 
supplies — that first equality, and then predominance, in respect of 
the House of Lords, has been asserted by the House of Commons, 
owing to the fact that an extended suffrage has made the estate 
of the commons more adequately coincident with the nation as a 
whole. Prior to 1832 it was the king who directly made and 
unmade ministries; in 1835 for the first time the result of a 
general election caused a change of ministry; and the modern 
view of the House of Lords as purely a revising chamber dates 
only from then. But the very fact that the responsibility 
for creating new peerages now passed to ministers dependent 
on popular suffrage may well justify the contention that hence- 
forth it indirectly included a select number of representative 
men of the nation, holding their seats in virtue of authoritative 
nomination and not by heredity. In the sixty years preceding 
1906 no fewer than'419 new peerages were created, 238 by the 
Liberal party, 181 by the Conservative, or a balance of 57 creations 
on the Liberal side. 1 It is fair to assume that all these new 
peers were created as being representative men in the nation for 
one reason or another. And an analysis of the composition of the 
House of Lords in 1906 would have led an unprejudiced outside 
observer to suppose that its competence to speak on national 
affairs had not been ' weakened by any dependence on the 
hereditary title. It included 166 men who had been M.P.'s 
(i.e. had been elected by popular vote to the House of Commons), 
172 who had held government office, 140 who had been mayors 
of county councils, 207 who had served in the army or navy, 
40 who had been judges or lawyers, 7 ex-viceroys, 16 ex- 
governors of colonies, 50 who had been eminent in art, letters, 
manufactures or trade, and 21 archbishops or bishops (appointed 
by ministerial recommendation, but only after they had worked 
up to eminence from being curates, and therefore had wide 
experience of the social life of the people). 

It is possible to compare a chamber so composed some- 
what favourably with a modern House of Commons, if 
the point at issue — the provision of " representative men " 
(i.e. men generally accepted as national spokesmen) — be strictly 
considered, apart from the method of selecting them by direct 
popular vote. 2 In the House of Lords the method is heredity 
plus selection by the political party which the popular vote 
has put in power; while in the election of members of the House 

"~ * Between January 1 906 and January 1910 thirty-five more new 
peers were created by Liberalpremiers, and seven more in June 1910. 
2 Speaking at Oldham on December 15, 1909, Lord Curzon said: 
" I have taken out the figures of the past 200 years, and 1 tell you 
this, that during that time 41 of our prime ministers have sat in the 
Lords and only 17 in the Commons; of our foreign secretaries, 56 
in the Lords and only 8 in the Commons; of our colonial secretaries, 
46 in the Lords and 25 in the Commons; of our war ministers, 29 
in the Lords and 31 in the Commons; of first lords of the Admiralty, 
48 in the Lords and>8 in the Commons/' 



of Commons the popular choice is doubly limited — first, by the 
fact that only the enfranchised commons can vote (in 191a 
about 7^ millions out of 43); and secondly, because the 
choice must be made from among candidates who are 
themselves not disqualified for various reasons (for instance 
they must not be clergymen, nor entitled to seats in the House 
of Lords). Now, to carry out the real "will of the nation" 
in parliament must require (1) a reasonable knowledge of 
the wishes of the nation, and (2) an understanding of the 
best ways of expressing those wishes in legislation and adminis- 
tration. In the case of the peers, those who sit as having been 
originally created and therefore selected for the purpose — a- 
considerable section of those actively attending — the quali- 
fications are obvious: and it is only necessary to deal with 
those qualified by inheritance of title. Here too, in a number 
of cases, preceding experience in the House of Commons, to 
which the popular vote has returned them while they were only 
in the succession to a peerage, is a frequent factor; but, apart 
from that, the art of legislation is one which may well be con- 
sidered to require *a certain special disposition and mental 
equipment. Though allowance must be made for exceptional 
cases, it is obvious that the son of a man who has been respon- 
sible for legislating, who has himself been brought up as one 
who will have to take his part in legislating, is most likely, .in 
any society, to have qualified himself for the business, as in 
the case of any profession or trade. He has been accustomed 
to breathe the parliamentary atmosphere, and as one of a 
leisured class has had the opportunity to study the subject 
of legislation, and to obtain experience of its conditions. This 
is so generally accepted that, in fact, the same theory is com- 
monly applied to candidates for the House of Commons, and 
predominantly to members of that House who are given office,. 
The names of more than one generation are writ large in English 
history in the case of the Pitts, Foxes, Grenvilles, Cannings, 
Cecils, Stanleys and Cavendishes. The sons of famous political, 
commoners, a Gladstone, a Harcourt, a Churchill, a Primrose, 
a Chamberlain, have by consent a superior claim, even within 
the radical or popular party, by no means resting originally^ 
or primarily on known personal merit or proved experience, for 
selection as candidates and then for preferment to office; and 
it is a very common occurrence for younger sons of peers to be 
selected as candidates (liberal as much as conservative) for 
parliament, even though from general intellectual considera- 
tions they may appear in no way the equals of other men. 
They have been brought up to the business; and they are 
therefore adapted for it by heredity. If the House of Commons 
were deprived of 4 those members who obtained their seats or 
their offices primarily for reasons of heredity, it would lose 
many of its best men — as indeed it occasionally does, to its 
disadvantage and possibly to the chagrin of the individuals 
themselves, when succession to a peerage forces a prominent 
parliamentarian to relinquish his seat in the Lower House and 
to take his place in the " unrepresentative " chamber. 

It remains nevertheless the fact that, in politics, " repre- 
sentative " government means not so much government by men 
really representative x>f the nation as government in Bxpre8m 
the name of the whole body of citizens (and predomi- S ion of 
nantly the estate of the commons) through a chamber the « win 
or chambers composed of elected deputies. The *j£* b f e „ 
object in view is the expression of the " will of the op 
people " — the people, that is, who are sovereign. Clearly the 
only pure case of such government can be in a republic, 
where there is only one " estate," the free citizens. The home 
and historical type of representative government, the United 
Kingdom, is strictly no such case, since the monarchy and 
the House of Lords exist and work on lines constitutionally 
independent of any direct contact with the electorate. British 
1 practice, however, is of vital importance for the theory of repre- 
sentative institutions, and it is worth while to point out that 
the " will of the people " may even so be effectively expressed — 
some people may think even more effectively expressed than 
in a pure republic. The king and the House of Lords, qut 



REPRESENTATION 



ii? 



estates of the realm, are just as much part of " the people," in 
the widest sense, as " the commons " are; they are an integral 
part of the nation. In a republic they would as individuals be 
equal citizens, able to become candidates for the representative 
chamber or chambers; but as it is, since they are expressly 
debarred from taking part in elections to the House of Commons, 
they remain entitled and expected to use their historic method 
of playing a part in the government of the state. They assist 
to constitute " the people " in the wider sense, and in the 
narrower sense " the people " (i.e. the commons) know it and 
rely on it. • Under the British constitution the commons have 
habitually relied on the monarchy and the House of Lords to 
play their part in the state, and on many occasions it has been 
proved, by various methods by which it is open to the commons 
themselves to show their real feeling, that action on the part of 
the monarch (e.g. in foreign affairs) or the House of Lords (in 
rejecting or modifying bills sent up by the House of Commons) , 
in which a popular vote has played no initiating or controlling 
part, is welcomed and ratified, by consent of a large majority, 
on the part of the nation at large. So much is this so that it is 
notorious, in the case of the House of Lords, that elected members 
of the House of Commons, tied by purely party allegiance and 
pledges, have constantly voted for a measure they did not want 
to see passed, relying on the House of Lords to throw it out. 
Ultimately, no doubt, the reconciliation of this " presentative " 
element in the British form of constitution with the -growth of 
democracy and the predominance of the " representative " 
system depends purely on the waiving of historical theory both 
by king and peers, and its adaptation to the fact of popular 
government through the recognition that their action rests for 
its efficient authority upon conformity with the " will of the 
people." Thus it has become an established maxim in England 
that while it is the proper function of the House of Lords to 
reject a measure which in their opinion is not in accordance with 
the wishes of the nation, they could not repeat such a rejection 
after a general election had shown that its authors in the House 
of Commons were supported by the country. The experience 
of politics from 183 2 to 1910 gave abundant justification to the 
House of Lords for supposing that in such cases they were 
interpreting the desire of the country better than the House of 
Commons; the case of the Irish Home Rule bill of 1893 is, of 
course, the classical example. 1 So that in practice the House 
of Lords only acts in opposition to the House of Commons, 
subject to the remedy of a dissolution of parliament (which 
depends strictly on the prerogative of the Crown, but in practice 
on the advice of the leader of the majority in the House of 
Commons), at which the view of the House of Commons might 
be confirmed and reasserted, and in that case would prevail. 
The violent attacks made on the House of Lords by the Liberal 
party, on occasions when that party has had a majority in the 
commons and has had its measures rejected or distastefully 
amended, have always been open to the criticism that if the 
majority in the House of Commons were really supported by the 
electorate in the country they had the remedy in their own hands. 
If it were shown by the result of a general election that their 
defeated measure were the " will of the people," the House of 
Lords, as was generally understood, must give way. Such a 
position, though naturally objectionable to a party in power in 
the House of Commons (because general elections are uncertain 
things in every respect but that of trouble and expense), could 
clearly be strong only in view of the confidence of the House of 
Lords in its action being more truly representative of public 
opinion. It therefore must be said to have acted, however 
clumsily and indirectly — and no direct way would be feasible 
except that of the Referendum — as a " representative " body, 
i.e. as carrying out what it judged to be the national will and 
not merely the will of the peers, although not constituted as 
1 The result of the general election of January 1910, following on 
the rejection of the Budget by the House of Lords, cannot properly 
be said to show anything to the contrary. It was notorious that 
there was no genuine majority in the new House of Commons for 
the Budget, and that the Irish Nationalists only voted for it as part 
of an arrangement for ulterior purposes. 



such in the narrower sense. In practice, and in accordance 
with this view, it has on more than one occasion (e.g. in the case 
of the Trades Disputes Act of 1906) accepted and passed measures- 
which it was notorious, and indeed avowed, that the peers- 
themselves regarded as bad. 

The immense extension of the " representative principle " 
in government, by means of popular election, and its adaptation 
to municipal as well as national councils, has in recent 
times resulted in attracting much attention to the JJ^ S Itr 
problem of making such elected bodies more accurately obtaining 
representative of public opinion than they frequently Repre* 
are. There are three distinct problems involved — bym^ 
(1) that of making the number of enfranchised citizens uon. 
correspond to a real embodiment of the nation; (2) that 
of getting candidates to stand for the office of representative 
who are competent and incorruptible exponents of the national 
will, and (3) that of adopting a system of voting which shall 
result in the elected representatives forming an assembly which 
shall adequately reflect the balance of opinion in the electorate. 

(1) The history of the gradual extension of the franchise in 
the United Kingdom is given under Parliament, and the 
conditions for other countries under their respective 
headings. But while, in countries with a representative suffrage, 
system at all, the question as to the extent to which 
the male citizens shall have the vote is mainly one of degree — as 
to property or other qualification, up to the inclusion of all 
adults (see Vote and Voting) — the question of the incapacity 
of women, as a sex, raises a distinction which is more radical. 
The facts as to the progress of the movement for women's 
suffrage are given in the article Women. It is only necessary 
to say here that, where the franchise is limited to the male 
sex, the theory of " no taxation without representation " is 
under modern conditions of life carried out in a decidedly one- 
sided way. The question of women's suffrage is, however, one of 
public policy, in whatever state it is raised; and even where, 
as in Great Britain, it has been adopted for municipal affairs,, 
a distinction is commonly made as regards the national assembly. 
So far as the historical facts as to the disability of women are 
concerned, it has been unanimously decided in England by the 
highest law-court of the realm (judgment of the House of Lords 
in the Edinburgh University case, December 1908), presided over 
on this occasion by a Liberal Lord Chancellor (Lord Loreburn), 
that, according to their authoritative statement of the common 
law, women never had in earlier times any legal right to vote 
for members of parliament; this judgment is therefore entirely 
adverse to such ingenious arguments to the contrary as are ably 
expressed in Mrs Charlotte Carmichael Stopes's British Free- 
women (1907). 

Sex, however, apart, there are various interesting questions as 
to the principles which should govern the extension of the 
suffrage and its limitations, to which a brief reference may here 
be made. It is noteworthy that John Stuart Mill, the philo- 
sophical radical whose work on Representative Government 
(first published in 1861) is a classic on the subject, and who 
regarded the representative system as the highest ideal of polity, 
made a good many reservations which have been ignored by 
those who frequently quote him. Mill's ideal was by no means 
that popular government should involve a mere counting of 
heads, or absolute equality of value among the citizens. While 
holding that " no arrangement of the suffrage can be permanently 
satisfactory in which any person or class is peremptorily excluded, 
or in which the electoral privilege is not open to all persons 
of full age who desire to obtain it," he insisted on " certain 
exclusions." Thus he demanded that universal education should 
precede universal enfranchisement, and laid it down, that if 
education to the required amount had not become universally 
accessible and thus a hardship arose, this was " a hardship 
that had to be borne." He would not grant the suffrage to 
any one who could not read, write and perform a sum in the rule 
of three. Further, he insisted on the electors being taxpayers, 
and emphasized the view that, as a condition annexed to 
representation, such taxation should descend to the poorest class 



ii4 



REPRESENTATION 



" in a visible shape/' by which he explained that he did not 
mean " indirect taxes," a " mode of defraying a .share of the 
public expenses which is hardly felt." He advocated for this 
purpose " a direct tax, in the simple form of a capitation " on 
every grown person. But even more than this, he was in favour 
of a form of plural voting, so that the intellectual classes of the 
community should have more proportionate weight than the 
numerically larger working-classes: " though every one ought 
to have a voice, that every one should have an equal voice is a 
totally different proposition." The well-informed and capable 
man's opinion being more valuable than that of the barely 
qualified elector, it should be given more effect by a system of 
plural voting, which should give him more votes than one. As 
to the test of value of opinion, Mill was careful to say he did not 
mean property — though the principle was so important that he 
would not abolish such a test where it existed — but individual 
mental superiority, which he would gauge by the rough indica- 
tion afforded by occupation in the higher forms of business or 
profession, or by such a criterion as a university degree or the 
passing of an examination of a fairly high standard. 

" Until there shall have been devised some mode of plural voting, 
which may assign to education as such the degree of superior in- 
fluence due to it, and sufficient as a counterpoise to the numerical 
weight of the least educated class, for so long the benefits of completely 
universal suffrage cannot be obtained without bringing with them, 
as it appears to me, more than equivalent evils." " Equal voting," 
he repeated, " is in principle wrong, because recognizing a wrong 
standard, and exercising a bad influence on the voter's mind. It is 
not useful, but hurtful, that the constitution of the country should 
declare ignorance to be entitled to as much political power as know- 
ledge." 

Modern democracy may ignore Mill's emphatic plea for plural 
voting, as it ignores his equally strong arguments against the 
ballot 1 — his contention being that secret voting violated the 
spirit of the suffrage, according to which the voter was a trustee 
for the public, whose acts should be publicly known — but Mill's 
discussion of the whole subject proceeds on high grounds which 
are still worth careful consideration. Where a representative 
system, as such, is extolled as the ideal polity, the reservations 
made by Mill, a liberal thinker who cannot be dismissed as a 
prejudiced reactionary, should be remembered. Mill postulated, 
in any event, a state of society which was worthy of such a 
system, no less than the necessary checks and balances which 
should make it correspond to the real conditions of rational 
government. " Representative institutions," he pointed out, 
" are of little value, and may be a mere instrument of tyranny 
or intrigue, when the generality of electors are not sufficiently 
interested in their own government to give their vote, or, if 
they vote at all, do not bestow their suffrages on public grounds, 
but sell them for money, or vote at the beck of some one who has 
control over them, or whom for private reasons they desire to 
propitiate. Popular election, as thus practised, instead of a 
security against misgovernment, is but an additional wheel in 
its machinery." When, in modern days, advocates of repre- 
sentative institutions seem ready to extend them to all countries, 
they become doctrinaires who depart widely from the standpoint 
of Mill, and forget that democracy is itself only a " form of 
government," as Sir Henry Maine insisted, for which all com- 
munities may not be ripe or fitted. The ideal form of govern- 
ment must be relative to a certain state of civilization and certain 
conditions of national life, and its advantages can only be tested 
by results and practical working. 

(2) As regards the important question of the selection of 
candidates (which depends partly on their willingness to stand, 
Selection and partly on the means available for discovering 
ofCaadi* suitable persons), modern practice is entirely dominated 
dates. k v the organization of political parties and the require- 
ments of party allegiance. Though much has been said as to 
the desirability or not of paying members for their services 
(see Payment of Members), this is certainly overshadowed by 
the question of the availability of really capable men at all to the 
number required, for all candidates become " professional " 

1 Before 1872, when the Ballot Act was passed, voting was public. 



politicians, whether paid or not. The ideal of having a " repre- 
sentative man " in the broader sense as a " representative " in 
the narrower is only very roughly .attained where the conditions 
of public life niake a capacity for electioneering a necessity. 
To a large extent the political candidate depends purely upon 
the support of a party organization. His choice rests with party 
wire-pullers, and the average individual elector is confronted 
with the task of voting for some one of whom he may personally 
know very little, except that, if returned, the candidate will in 
parliament vote for measures embodying certain general prin- 
ciples as indicated in some vague party programme. Since 
the elector as a rule himself supports a party, he votes accord- 
ingly, but there are always a good many electors who under such a 
system fail to get a chance of voting for a candidate who fully 
represents their views. The supremacy of party interests, 
resulting from the difficulty of having any other form of electoral 
organization, is apt to bring many evils in its train, including the 
corruption of the electorate, and the practice of " lobbying," 
i.e. the pressure upon members in parliament of important 
" interests " whose electoral assistance is indispensable. 

(3) The more important point to be considered here is the 
third. When a representative assembly is to be elected by a 
direct popular vote, it is obviously necessary (a) that Systems 
either there should be some system by which the whole of Votings 
body as a unit should elect all the members en bloc, or, as this 
usually appears impracticable, that the mass of electors should be 
divided within defined areas, or " constituencies "; and (b) that 
in the latter case voting shall take place for the purpose of electing 
one or more representatives of each such area according to some 
method by which due effect shall be given to the preferences of 
the electors. In theory there can be no perfectly fair arrangement 
as between constituency and constituency, where a single repre- 
sentative is to be returned, except on the terms that they are ex- 
actly 'equal in the number of electors; each elector's voice would 
then count equally with that of any other in the nation (or mutatis 
mutandis in the municipality, &c). But in practice it is difficult 
to the point of impossibility to attempt more than an arbitrary 
distribution of electoral areas, more or less approximating to 
equality; and recourse is had to the formation of constituencies 
out of geographical districts taken as units for historical or 
practical reasons, and necessarily fluctuating from time to time 
in population or influence. It may become necessary periodi- 
cally to revise these areas by what in England are called Re- 
distribution Acts, but it has to be admitted that any perfect 
system of representation is always stultified by the necessary 
inequalities involved; and what is known as " gerrymandering " 
is sometimes the result, when a party in power so recasts the 
electoral districts as to give more opportunity for its own 
candidates to be returned than for those of its opponents. 
This flaw is particularly noticeable when the arrangement for 
the method of voting is that which allots only one member 
or representative to each district (scrutin d'arrondissement). 
The essential vice of this single-member system, which prevails 
in the United Kingdom 2 and the United States, is the lack of 
correspondence between the proportions in which the elected 
members of each party stand to one another and the proportions 
in which the numbers of the electors who returned them similarly 
stand; and it may well be that the minority party in the country 
obtains a majority of representatives in the assembly, or at 
any rate that a substantial minority obtains an absurdly small 
representation. " As a result of the district system," writes Pro- 
fessor J. R. Commons of Wisconsin (Proportional Representation, 
1907), " the national House of Representatives (in America) is 
scarcely a representative body. In the Fifty-first Congress, a 
majority of representatives were elected by a minority of the 
voters "; the figured being 5,348,379 Republican votes with 164 
elected, and 5,502,581 Democratic votes with 161 elected. In 

2 The House of Commons in 1910 was elected by 643 constituencies, 
of which 27 (including three universities) returned two members each, 
and the rest one; and the Royal Commission, which reported in 
that year, recommended the abandonment of the existing two- 
member constituencies " at the earliest convenient opportunity." 



REPRESENTATION 



"5 



the case of the Fifty-second Congress, the Democrats, with 
50-6% of the votes, returned 71-1% of the representa- 
tives; the Republicans, with 42-9% oi the votes, returning 
26-5% of the representatives. Lord Avebury (Propor- 
tional Representation, 1890; new ed. 1906) has given various 
similar experiences in England; thus, at the general election 
of 1886, the Liberals, with 1,333,400 votes, only obtained 176 
seats, while the Unionists, with 1,423,500, obtained 283 (not 
counting 99 unopposed returns on the Liberal side, and m on 
the Unionist). In the general election of 1895, at which 132 
Unionist seats and 57 Liberal were unopposed, the result in the 
481 seats contested was the return of 279 Unionists and 202 
Liberals; yet the actual votes given were 1,800,000 for the 
Liberals, and 1,775,000 for the Unionists. Again, in 1906, the 
Unionist vote, though 44% of the total cast, returned only 
28% of the members, and the Liberal majority, which in 
strict proportion would have been 68, actually was 256. 

The establishment of mere party majority rule, which is char- 
acteristic of a representative system, is a necessity, no doubt, 
in popular government; but the way in which a substantial 
minority of voters may only obtain a contemptible minority 
of members, and may in practice be tyrannized over in con- 
sequence, somewhat detracts from its blessings, and leads to 
extreme party measures. The division of the whole electoral 
body into constituencies is, after all, only a device for getting 
over the difficulty of the electors voting en bloc, and it docs not 
seem to justify the conversion of a real majority in the country 
into a minority as represented in parliament, nor the complete 
exclusion of a substantial number of the electorate from parlia- 
mentary representation — so far as their views are concerned — at 
all. Yet under the English system such results are possible as the 
capture of every seat in Wales (34), in 1906, by the Liberal party, 
with 217,462 votes, the 100,547 Unionist voters having no 
representation in parliament; while in Warwickshire, though 
22,490 votes were given to the Unionist candidates against 22,021 
for the Liberal, three Liberals were returned against one 
Unionist. 

The attempt to rectify this flaw in the representative method 
has led to the suggestion of various devices by the adoption 
Prooor- °f wmcn the elected members may correspond more 
lionai equally to the divisions of opinion in the electorate. 
repre- Under the plan of scrutin de liste (or " general ticket ") 
sentation* i ar g er districts are created, each returning several 
members, and each voter has as many votes as there are 
members to elect; but while this system apparently 
provides the opportunity for the return of candidates 
.with different views, it only requires a solid party vote to 
capture the whole of the representation for a majority. 
What is known as the " limited vote " is a form of scrutin 
de liste by which the elector has less votes than there are seats 
to be filled; with (say) three to be elected, the elector has 
only two votes. Systems of " limited vote " are in force in 
Portugal, Spain and Japan. A somewhat better plan is the 
" cumulative vote, " which gives each elector as many votes 
as there arc members to be elected, but allows him to divide 
them as he pleases (instead of giving only one vote to any one 
candidate). . This enables an organized minority, by concentrat- 
ing their votes, to elect at all events some representative; but 
the " cumulative vote " works rather capriciously, and is com- 
monly defeated by careful party organization. 

A more elaborate plan, but depending like the " limited " 
vote and the " cumulative " vote on the formation of constitu- 
encies returning three or more members each, is that of the 
" transferable vote. " By this device an elector can indicate 
on his ballot paper not only his first choice, but also his second 
or third, &c. To ensure election a candidate need not obtain 
a majority of the votes polled, but only a certain number, so 
fixed that it can be obtained by a number of candidates equal 
to the number of seats to be filled, but by no more; this number 
of votes is called the " quota. " At the first count first choices 
only are reckoned, and those candidates who have received 
a " quota " or more are declared duly elected. If all the seats 



have not then been filled up, the surplus votes of those candi- 
dates who have received more than the " quota " are trans- 
ferred according to the names marked (2) on them. If these 
transfers still do not bring the requisite number of candidates 
up to the " quota, " the lowest candidate is eliminated and his 
votes transferred according to the next preferences, and so on 
till the seats are filled This system, -which is the one usually 
associated with the term " proportional representation " was 
first suggested by Thomas Hare, who published in 1857 a 
pamphlet on The Machinery of Representation, and in 
1859 a more complete scheme in his treatise on The Election 
of Representatives. John Stuart Mill, in Representative Govern- 
ment (1861) warmly endorsed Hare's proposal. Hare wished 
to treat the whole country as one constituency, but by later 
supporters of the " transferable vote " that plan was abandoned 
as impracticable; and the principle will work so long as the 
constituencies adopted each return several members. Lord 
Courtney, in his evidence before the British Royal Commission 
in 1909, said that his minimum constituency would be a three- 
membered one, but he would create a fiftecn-membered con- 
stituency without hesitation. The simple " transferable vote " 
has been adopted in Tasmania for all elections (1907), after 
experimental adoption in the constituencies of Hobart and 
Launccston in 1 896-1 901, and in the election of the Tasmanian 
members of the Commonwealth leglislature in 1900. It was 
proposed in the draft of the South African constitution, but 
abandoned. The principle has also been adopted in the " list 
systems " of Belgium, some Swiss cantons,* Sweden, Finland 
and parts of Denmark, Wurttemberg and Servia, where candi- 
dates are grouped in lists and all votes given to individual 
candidates on the list count first as votes for the list itself, the 
seats being divided among the lists in proportion to the total 
number of votes obtained by the list. The use of the general 
term " proportional representation " for all of these is", however, 
somewhat misleading; people often suppose that only one 
identical system of voting is meant, whereas in fact some 
300 possible varieties have been proposed, and each of the 
states mentioned has a different one from all the others. The 
only common element is the device of the " transferable 
vote, " Lk the method of having an " electoral quota, " and the 
filling up of seats, where a quota is not provided by the 
first choices, by votes transferred from the second choices, 
and so on. It may be noted here that the " transferable vote " 
is calculated to multiply candidates to a point at which the 
minds of the electorate may well be embarrassed as to their 
preferences (the largest Belgian constituency returns 22 mem- 
bers), and, while undoubtedly providing for " minority repre- 
sentation, " to encourage what may be called " minority 
thinking " and particularist politics. The " transferable vote " 
is commonly objected to as puzzling to the electors and too 
complicated for the scrutineers, while it is not much favoured 
by " machine " party organizations, which generally prefer 
the simpler plan of rough-and-ready majorities; but it has 
received a growing amount of theoretical support, as well as 
success in practical experiment, in recent years. 

The " second ballot " is a device for securing absolute majority, 
instead of relative majority, representation. Where the two- 
party system prevails, it is usual for only two jrhe 
candidates, one for each party, to stand for each second 
single-member constituency. But there is nothing ***toL 
to prevent a third or even a fourth candidate standing, 
and this multiplication of candidates becomes the more com- 
mon in proportion as parliamentary organization is split 
up into groups. The consequence is that the candidate who 
heads the poll may well have only a relative, not an absolute, 
majority of votes, and to meet this objection the " second ballot " 
has been introduced, and is in operation in Austria-Hungary, 
France, Germany, Italy and Russia. Under this system, if no 
candidate receives an absolute majority of all the votes, a second 
election is held, at which, as a rule, only the two candidates 
compete who received most; or in cases where more than one 
seat is to be filled, twice as many candidates compete as there 



n6 



REPRIEVE— REPRODUCTION 



are seats. In principle the second ballot has much in its favour, 
though it does not necessarily reflect the real opinion of the 
electorate, but only what is practicable; and while leading to 
political bargaining it does nothing for minority representation. 

In England the importance of the whole subject of the method 
of elections was recognized at the end of 1908 by the appoint- 
ment of a Royal Commission to inquire and report. Its con- 
clusions were published in 191 o, after much interesting evidence 
had been taken, but they attracted little attention, being in the 
main adverse to innovation. The one positive recommenda- 
tion was for the adoption of the " alternative vote " (already 
in use in Queensland and Western Australia) by which the 
electors might mark their choices 1, 2, 3, &c.; this would not be 
for the purpose already discussed as part of the method of the 
" transferable vote," but the indications of preference would only 
be used for the same purpose as the " second ballot," while 
saving the voters the trouble of further elections. One objection 
to this " alternative vote," however, as compared with the 
" second ballot," is that it does not allow the voter to change 
his mind as to his preference, as he well might do after he knew 
the result of the original voting. 

It may be said broadly that all the devices which have been 
proposed for mitigating or redressing the defects of electoral 
methods ignore the essential fact that in any case a representative 
system can only result in a rather arbitrary approximation to 
correspondence with the opinions of the electorate. It is by 
no means certain even that " proportional representation " in 
any of its forms would always result in the return of a repre- 
sentative assembly reflecting with mathematical accuracy 
the balance of opinion in the electorate; and even if it did, 
the electors have a way of changing their opinions long before 
their representatives come up for re-election. It was stated 
before the. British Royal Commission that in Belgium, in spite 
of " proportional representation," both in 1900 and in 1902 
a majority of members was returned by a minority of votes. 
While under majority rule, as Mr Augustine Birrell once re- 
marked, " minorities must suffer " — even large minorities — 
it is on the other hand»not likely to conduce to the popularity 
of representative government that minorities should obtain 
too great a share of political power. The fact is that no 
" representation " can reflect the views of those " represented " 
as accurately as " presentation " by those entitled personally 
to speak. This conclusion, while in no necessary degree qualify- 
ing the importance of " popular government," undoubtedly 
detracts from the value of the representative method. The result 
is seen in the increasing desire in really democratic countries 
to supplement representative government by some form of 
Referendum, or direct appeal to the electors for their own 
personal opinion on a distinct issue — a method which involves 
fundamentally the addition of a " presentative " element to 
the representative system. 

Literature. — The number of separate works on various aspects 
of the theory, history and practice of political representation — a 
much wider subject than representative government — is too large 
for detailed mention. A general reference can only be made here 
to the standard treatises on constitutional law. The chapter 
in Sir G. Cornewall Lewis's Remarks on the Use and Abuse of some 
Political Terms (Sir T. Raleigh's edition, 1898) should also be noted. 
In addition to works cited above, a valuable account of all parts 
of the electoral " machine' " is given in M. Ostrogorski's Democracy 
and the Organization of Political Parties (1902). The Congressional 
■Library, Washington, U.S.A., issued in 1904 a " List of Books relat- 
ing to Proportional Representation," which constitutes a complete 
bibliography of that subject up to that date. The best discussion 
of the various methods for securing adequate representation is, 
however, now to be found in the Report (1910) of the British Royal 
Commission on Systems of Election (Parliamentary Paper, Cd. 5163). 
It is chiefly valuable for its description of the devices in use in different 
countries and for its weighty criticism of the proposals for minority 
representation. (H. Ch.) 

REPRIEVE (reprise, from Fr. reprendre), in English law, 
a term which originally meant remand to prison: later and 
more usually, the suspension for a time of the execution of a 
sentence passed on conviction of crime. The term is now seldom 
or never used except with reference to sentences of death. In 



the case of capital felonies other than murder the recording of 
sentence of death has the effect of a reprieve by the court. The 
court which can award a sentence is said to possess as of common 
right a discretionary power of granting a reprieve. Courts of 
justice, however, do not grant reprieves by way of dispensation 
from the penalties of the law, which is not for the judicial 
department, but for temporary purposes, e.g. of appeal or inquiry 
as to the state of mind or health of the convict, or to enable him 
to apply for a pardon. Under the old system of transportation 
it was a common practice to reprieve convicted felons as a step 
to induce them to consent to transportation to the American 
colonies (see the Old Bailey Regulations of 1662, J. Kelyng, 
ed. 1873, p. 1). In cases of conviction of wilful murder the 
reprieve, if any, is granted by the home secretary on behalf of 
the crown, and on convictions of murder the court seems now to 
have no power to reprieve except in the case of a pregnant 
woman. 

See Hawkins, P.C. bk. 2, c. 51 ; Blackstone, Commentaries. 

REPRISALS (Fr. represaUles, from reprendre; Lat. repre- 
hendere, to take back), properly speaking, the act of forcibly 
seizing something belonging to another state by way of retalia- 
tion, but currently used for the retaliation itself. They are acts 
of violence which are a casus belli according to the manner in 
which the state against which they are exercised regards them 
and is able to resist or resent them. Two comparatively recent 
cases have occurred in which this form of redress was resorted 
to. In the one case a demand by the British government for 
an indemnity for injuries inflicted on the British vice-consul 
and certain other British subjects by Nicaraguan authorities 
in the Mosquito reserve not having been complied with, British 
naval forces were landed on April 27th, 1895, at Corinto, where 
they occupied the customs house and other public buildings 
till an agreement was arrived at. In the other case the French 
government in November 1901 ordered the occupation by French 
naval forces of the customs house at Mytilene until redress was 
obtained for divers claims of French citizens. A Hague Con- 
vention of 1907 now places h'mitations on the employment of 
force for the recovery of contract debts, and forbids recourse 
to armed force unless " the debtor state refuses or neglects to 
reply to an offer of arbitration, or after accepting the offer prevents 
any compromise from being agreed on, or after arbitration fails 
to submit to the award " (art. 1). (T. Ba.) 

REPRODUCTION, in biology, the generation of new organ- 
isms from existing organisms more or less similar. It is a special 
case of growth, and consists of an increase of living substance 
in such fashion that the new substance is either set free as a new 
individual, or, whilst remaining attached to the parent organism, 
separated by some sort of partition so as to have a subordinate 
individuality. Y. Delage has distinguished as multiplication 
those cases in which the new individual arises from a mass of 
cells which remain a part of the maternal tissues during differ- 
entiation, reserving the term reproduction for those cases in 
which the spore or cell which is the starting-point of the new 
individual begins by separating from the maternal tissues; 
but the distinction is inconvenient in practice and does not 
appear to carry with it any fundamental biological significance. 
The general relation between parent and filial organisms is 
discussed under Heredity and Embryology; many of the 
details of the cellular processes are dealt with under Cytology, 
and the modes of reproduction exhibited by different kinds of 
animals and plants are treated of in the various articles describing 
individual groups. Finally, some of the special problems involved 
are discussed under the heading Sex. As reproduction is a 
general biological phenomenon, its manifestations should be 
dealt with simultaneously in the case of animals and plants, 
but many of the special details differ so much that it is practically 
convenient to make two headings. 

Reproduction of Animals 

A. Asexual. — Many animals possess a more or less limited 
capacity to repair portions of the body that have been accident- 
ally removed (see Regeneration), and this capacity may be so 



ANIMALS1 



REPRODUCTION 



117 






■extensive that, if the whole body be cut in pieces, each portion 
may grow into a new organism. Such a mode of artificial 
propagation, familiar in horticultural operations, has been made 
use of in such animals as sponges, and has been performed 
experimentally in hydroids and some worms. In many Protozoa 
asexual reproduction by simple division is a normal event. In 
Coelentera it is common, the plane of division usually passing 
through the long axis of the body, as in Actinians and many 
Hydroids, or being horizontal, as in the repeated divisions by 
which medusae are produced from an asexual polyp; the new 
individual may separate completely, or serve to build up a 
colonial or compound organism. In some Turbellarians 
(Microstomum) and Chaetopods (Syllis, Myrianida, Nereis, 
Eunice viridis (the palolo-worm of Samoa), asexual reproduction 
•occurs in a form that is partly fission and partly budding; 
portions are constricted transversely or laterally, very much 
smaller than the whole animal, and these grow out into new 
animals which may separate or remain attached in chains. In 
Salps, chains are formed sometimes by transverse constriction, 
sometimes by budding. True budding is much more common 
than fission; it occurs in Protozoa, Coelentera, Sponges, 
Polyzoa, Tunicates and some Flatworms and Chaetopods, the 
bud being a multicellular portion of the tissues which is partly 
•or completely separated from the parent before it proliferates 
into the new form. In various larval stages of many animals, 
asexual reproduction by fission or budding may be produced 
experimentally or may occur naturally. It has been suggested 
that cases of identical twins in vertebrates and many monstrous 
forms, including even dermoid cysts, are due to embryonic 
asexual fission or budding. The artificial subdivision of young 
■embryos has been performed successfully by several investi- 
gators (see Heredity). In Lumbricus trapezoides the gastrula 
stage of the embryo divides and each half produces a complete 
individual; and multiplication by budding is common at various 
.stages of the life-history of many parasitic worms. Spore 
formation, or cellular budding, appears to be limited to the 
Protozoa amongst animals. 

B. Sexual. — Apart from the special and probably secondary 
•cases presently to be considered under the subheading partheno- 
genesis, sexual reproduction or amphimixis may be defined as 
the production of a new organism from a zygote, and a zygote 
may be defined as the cell resulting from the conjugation of two 
gametes or sexual cells derived from the specialized reproductive 
tissue of the parent or parents. In asexual reproduction by 
. spore formation, the spore proliferates without the aid of another 
spore; in true sexual reproduction the gametes may be regarded 
as special kinds of spores which appear in two forms, the egg- 
cell, ovum or female gamete not proceeding to proliferate into 
a new organism until it has been stimulated by partial or 
•complete fusion with the other form, the spermatozoon or male 
gamete. The act of fusion or conjugation in question is usually 
spoken of as fertilization, and the zygote, or starting-point of 
the new organism, is the fertilized egg-cell. Among protozoa 
and the lower plants there occur a series of forms of conjugation 
leading towards the specialized form characteristic of the sexual 
reproduction of higher animals. The conjugation may be 
isogamouSt that is to say the conjugating cells may be actually 
or at least apparently indistinguishable. T*he fusion between 
the cells may be complete, or may concern only the nuclei. The 
•conjugation may be followed by reproduction, or may apparently 
have no relation to reproduction. In true sexual reproduction 
the conjugation is heterogamous, i.e. the gametes are unlike; 
the fusion is chiefly nuclear, and the process is the prelude of the 
•development of the zygote into the. new organism. 

In all the Metazoa the gametes arise from special reproductive 
tissues which are supposed to contain (see Heredity) the 
reproductive material or germ-plasm. In the lower (or simpler 
and possibly degenerate Metazoa) the reproductive or germinal 
tissue consists of a few cells, sometimes in a group, sometimes 
scattered and sometimes migratory; in the vast majority of the 
Metazoa the germinal tissue becomes aggregated in distinct 
organs, of which those that give rise to ova or female gametes 



are known as the ovaries, and those that give rise to the sper- 
matozoa or male gametes are known as the testes. The ovary 
and the testis are the primary reproductive organs; the details of 
their anatomy and position in the various groups need not be 
discussed here (see Reproductive System). 

The male gamete or spermatozoon was first seen in 1677 by 
Ludwig van Hammen, a pupil of A. Leeuwenhoek, with the 
microscope that had been constructed by his master. Leeu- 
wenhoek, under the influence of the current preformationist 
ideas, interpreted these actively moving bodies in the seminal 
fluids as preformed germs and described them as animalculae 
spermetia or spermatozoa. Throughout the 18th century the 
general tendency was to regard them as parasites of no con- 
sequence in fertilization. In 1837 R. Wagner established that 
they were present in all sexually mature males and absent in 
infertile male hybrids, and in 1841 A. Kolliker showed that they 
were cells proliferated in the testes. The spermatozoon is one 
of the smallest of known cells, frequently being no more than one 
hundred thousandth of the size of the ovum, although the 
extraordinary case of a small Cypris has been recorded in which 
the spermatozoa are longer than the animal. It is produced in 
enormous quantities and relatively to other minute cells is 
extremely tenacious of life. It may retain its vitality in the male 
organism for a long time after it has become a separate cell, 
and may exist for lengthy periods in the female organism. The 
queen-bee is impregnated only once, and the spermatozoa may 
remain functional within her body for three years. Lord 
Avebury (Sir J. Lubbock) has described the case of a female ant 
which laid fertile eggs thirteen years after she had been im- 
pregnated. It is undoubted that in snakes, birds and many 
mammals, fertilization may not take place for many days after 
impregnation. The spermatozoa, with a few exceptions, are 
actively motile, being elongated in shape, with a vibratile tail 
sometimes provided with a swimming membrane. In a few 
cases, chiefly of crustaceans, the spermatozoa are spherical with 
radiating processes, but are capable of amoeboid movements. 
The cell nucleus is generally situated near the rounded or pointed 
extremity, with a centrosome immediately behind it, whilst the 
scanty protoplasm forms the body and vibratile tail; but there 
appears to be no general significance in the various configura- 
tions that occur amongst different animals. The process of 
spermatogenesis, or production of spermatozoa from the per- 
manent cells of the testis, varies extremely amongst different 
animals and has been the subject of many elaborate investiga- 
tions and much confusing nomenclature. Two factors are 
involved: first, the arrangements to produce a very large crop 
of cells so to provide for the enormous numbers of spermatozoa 
produced by most animals; and second, the final changes of shape 
and of nucleus by which the ripe spermatozoa arise from the 
indifferent testis-cells, and these processes may to a certain 
extent overlap. The point of general significance relates to the 
nuclear changes. The nuclear matter that occurs in the tissue 
cells of animals, when these cells divide, breaks up into a number 
of chromosomes constant for each kind of animal, and the final 
stage of cell division is such that each chromosome splits and 
contributes a half to each daughter cell, so that the latter come 
to contain the number of chromosomes peculiar to the animal in 
which they occur. In the case of spermatozoa, however, a 
" reducing " division occurs, in which the chromosomes instead 
of dividing distribute themselves equally between the two 
daughter cells, with the result that each of the latter contains 
only half the number peculiar to the species. In its simplest 
form, what occurs in the last stage of spermatogenesis is that one 
cell breaks up into four spermatozoa by two successive divisions, 
the first of which is normal and the second reducing. The 
nuclear matter of spermatozoa, therefore, contains half the 
number of chromosomes normal to the tissue cells of the species, 
and we shall see later that a similar reduction takes place in the 
formation of the egg. Further complications, however, exist, 
at least in certain forms. In 1891 H. Henking showed that in a 
Hemipteran insect of the genus Pyrrochoris t two kinds of 
spermatozoa are produced in equal numbers, and F. C. Paulmier 



n8 



REPRODUCTION 



[ANIMALS 



confirmed the observation in the case of some other insects 
a few years later, whilst other observers have extended the 
observation to over a hundred species. In all these cases half 
the spermatozoa differ from the other half by the presence of 
what E. B. Wilson calls the " X-element/' and which, in the 
simplest cases, occurs as an unpaired chromosome of the mother 
cell which passes into one and not the other of the two spermato- 
zoa formed from that mother cell. The matter is still obscure, 
and it is not certain whether the facts are peculiar to insects or 
have a parallel in spermatogenesis universally. According to 
E. B. Wilson, the facts demonstrate that eggs fertilized by 
spermatozoa with the X-element invariably produce females 
(see Sex). The female gamete or ovum is in a large number of 
cases expanded by the presence of food-yolk and protective 
swathings to form the visible mass known as an egg, and the 
production of embryos from eggs has been studied from the time 
of Aristotle and Pliny. Galen had described the human ovaries 
as testes muliebres, and W.Harvey in 165 1 showed that the chick 
arose from the cicatricula of the yolk of the egg, compared these 
early stages with corresponding stages in the uterus of mammals, 
and laid down the general proposition — ovum esse primordium 
commune omnibus animalibus — that the ovum is a starting- 
point common to all animals. In 1664 N. Steno identified the 
sexual organ of the mammalian female with that of sharks, and 
first named it the ovary. In 1672 R. De Graaf described the 
structure of the ovary in birds and mammals, observed the ovum 
in the oviduct of the rabbit, and repeated Harvey's statement as 
to the universal occurrence of ova, although he mistook for ova 
the follicles that now bear his name. In 1825 J. E. Purkyne 
described the germinal vesicle in the chick, thus distinguishing 
hetwecn the structure of the egg as a whole and the essential 
germinal area, and in 1827 K. E. von Baer definitely traced the 
ovum back from the uterus to the oviduct and thence to its origin 
within the Graafian follicle in the ovary, and thus paved the way 
for identification of the ovum as a distinct cell arising from the 
germinal tissue of the ovary. The ovum or female gamete, unlike 
the spermatozoon, is a large cell, in most cases visible to the 
naked eye even in the ovary. Also, in definite contrast with the 
spermatozoon, it is a passive non-motile cell, although in certain 
cases it is capable of protruding pseudopodia. It is usually 
spherical, contains a large nucleus, a centrosome and abundant 
protoplasm, and is generally enclosed in a stout membrane which 
may or may not have a special aperture known as the micro- 
pyle. The protoplasm of all eggs contains nutritive material 
for the nourishment of the future embryo, and this material 
may be sufficient in quantity to make the whole cell, although 
remaining microscopic, conspicuously large, or to expand it to the 
relatively enormous mass of the yellow yolk of a fowl's egg. 
Finally, the cellular nature of the ovum is frequently further 
disguised by its being enclosed in a series of membranes such as 
the albumen and shell of the fowl's egg. Such complexities are 
ancillary to the growth or protection of the future embryo, and 
from the general biological point of view the ovum is to be 
regarded as a specialized cell derived from the germinal tissue 
of the ovary, just as the spermatozoon is a specialized cell derived 
from the corresponding stock of germinal material in the testis. 
The number of ova produced varies from a very few, as in mammals 
and birds, to a very large number, as in the herring and many 
invertebrates, but in all cases the number is relatively small 
compared with that of the spermatozoa produced by the male 
of the same species. The details of ovogenesis are more sharply 
divided than in the case of spermatogenesis into processes 
connected with the production of a crop of large cells bloated 
with food-yolk, and the peculiar nuclear changes. The latter 
changes are generally spoken of as the maturation of the ovum, 
and in most cases do not begin until the full size has been 
attained. As in the nuclear changes of spermatogenesis, the 
details differ in different animals, but the salient feature is that 
the mature ovum contains, like the ripe spermatozoon, half the 
number of chromosomes normal to the tissue cells of the animal 
to which it belongs. The simplest form in which the reduction 
takes place is that the nucleus of the ovum divides by an ordinary 



division, each chromosome splitting and sharing itself between 
the daughter nuclei. Of these nuclei one is extruded from the 
egg, forming what is called a polar body, and this polar body may 
again divide by a reducing division, so as to form two polar 
bodies, each with half the normal number of chromosomes. 
Finally, the daughter nucleus, remaining in the ovum, also 
divides by a reducing division, and one of the segments remains 
to form the nucleus of the ripe ovum, with half the normal 
number of chromosomes, whilst the other is extruded as a polar 
body. Very many suggestions as to the meaning of the extru- 
sion of the polar bodies have been made, but the least fanciful 
of these is to regard the ovum ready for maturation as homo- 
logous with the cell about to divide into four spermatozoa; in 
each case the nucleus divides twice and one of the divisions is a 
reducing division, so that four daughter nuclei are formed each 
with half the normal number of chromosomes. Many sper- 
matozoa are required, and each of the four becomes the nucleus 
of a complete active cell; relatively few ova are required, but 
each has a large protoplasmic body, and only one of the four 
becomes a functional mature egg, the other three being simply 
extruded and so to say wasted. It must be remembered, 
however, that there is no inherent probability in favour of the 
apparently simplest explanation of a very complex biological 
process. It is also to be noted that in many cases the first polar 
body does not divide, and it is not clearly established that when 
the first polar body remains single, it is always the result of a 
normal nuclear division. 

When the mature ova and spermatozoa come together in one 
of the various ways to be discussed later, fertilization, the con- 
jugation of the gametes to form the zygote, occurs. Alcmaeon 
(580 B.C.) is believed first to have laid down that fertilization 
in animals and plants consisted in the material union of the 
sexual products from both sexes, but it was not until 1761 that 
it was established experimentally by J. T. Kolreuter's work on 
the hybridization of plants. In 1780 L. Spallanzani artificiajly 
fertilized the eggs of the frog and tortoise, and successfully 
introduced seminal fluid into the uterus of the bitch, but came 
to the erroneous conclusion that it was the fluid medium and 
not the spermatozoa that caused fertilization. This error was 
corrected in 1824 by J. L. Prevost and J. B. Dumas, who showed 
that filtration destroyed the fertilizing power of the fluid. In 
1843 M. Barry observed spermatozoa within the egg of the rabbit, 
whilst in 1849 R. Leuckart observed the fertilization of the 
frog's egg, and in 1851 H. Nelson noticed the entrance of sper- 
matozoa to the egg of Ascaris, whilst in 1854 a series of observa- 
tions published independently by T. L. W. Bischoff and Allen 
Thomson finally and definitely established the fact that ova were 
fertilized by the actual entrance of spermatozoa. Further 
advances in microscopical methods enabled a series of observers, 
of whom the most notable were E. van Beneden, H. Fol and 
O. Hertwig, to follow and record the details of the process. They 
made it clear that the chief event in fertilization was entrance 
into the ovum of the nucleus or head of the spermatozoon 
where it formed the " male pronucleus," which gradually 
approached and fused with the female pronucleus or residual 
nucleus of the ovum. Still later observers, of whom E. B. 
Wilson is the most conspicuous, have studied the details of 
the process in many different animals and have shown that 
the nucleus of the spermatozoon invariably enters the ovum, 
that the centrosome generally does so, and that the cytoplasm 
usually plays no part. The nucleus of the zygote or fertilized 
ovum, then, possesses the number of chromosomes normal in 
the tissue cells of the animal to which it belongs, but of these 
half belong to the female gamete and are derived from the 
germ plasm of the parental ovary, and half to the male gamete 
or spermatozoon, derived from the germ plasm of the parental 
testis. The stimulus which leads to and induces the conjugation 
'of the gametes appears to be chemotactic and to consist of some 
substance positively attractive to the male gamete, liberated 
by the mature female gamete, but the attraction is mutual, 
and in the final stages of approach a protoplasmic outgrowth of 
the ovum towards the spermatozoon frequently occurs. The 



ANIMALS] 



REPRODUCTION 



119 



fertilized zygote proceeds to form the embryo (sec Em- 
bryology). 

Parthenogenesis is the production of the new organism from 
the female gamete without previous conjugation with the male 
gamete, and is to be regarded as secondary to and degenerate 
from true sexual reproduction. Aristotle recognized that it 
occurred in the bee. In 1745 C. Bonnet showed that it must 
occur in the case of Aphides or plant-lice, in which throughout 
the summer there were developed a series of generations con- 
sisting entirely of females. R. A. F. de Reaumur repeated the 
observations, but evaded the difficulty by suggesting that the 
Aphides were hermaphrodite, an explanation soon afterwards 
disproved by L. Dufour. In 1849 (Sir) R. -Owen brought to- 
gether the facts as they were then known and made a remark- 
able suggestion regarding them. " Not all the progeny of the 
primary impregnated germ cell are required for the formation 
of the body in all animals; certain of the derivative germ cells 
may remain unchanged and become included in that body 
which has been composed of their metamorphosed and diversely 
combined or confluent brethren; so included, any derivative 
germ cell or the nucleus of such may begin and repeat the same 
processes of growth by imbibition, and of propagation by 
spontaneous fission, as those to which itself owed its origin." 
Taking hold of the recently published views of J. J. S. Steenstrup 
on alternation of generations, he correlated the sexual and 
asexual alternation in hydroids and so forth with the virgin 
births of insects and Crustacea, and regarded the one and the 
other as instances of the subsequent proliferation of included 
germ cells, applying the word parthenogenesis to the pheno- 
menon. His theory was a very remarkable anticipation of the 
germ-plasm theory of A. Weismann, but further knowledge 
showed that there was an important distinction between the 
reproduction of the asexual generations described by Steenstrup 
and the cases of Aphides and Crustacea, the germinal cells in 
the latter instances being true ova produced from the ovaries 
of true females, but capable of development without fertilization. 
In 1856 C. T. E. von Siebold established this fact and limited 
Owen's term parthenogenesis to the sense in which it is now 
used, the development without fertilization of ova produced in 
ovaries. True parthenogenesis occurs frequently amongst 
Rotifers, and in certain eases (Philodinadae) males either do not 
exist or are so rare that they have not been discovered. Amongst 
Crustaceans it is common in Branchiopods and Ostracods; in 
the case of Daphnids, large thick-shelled ova are produced 
towards winter, which develop only after fertilization and 
produce females; the latter, throughout summer, produce 
thin-shelled ova which do not require fertilization, and from 
which towards autumn both males and females are produced. 
Amongst insects it occurs in many forms in many different 
groups, sometimes occasional, sometimes as a regular occurrence. 
Apart from Aphides the classical instance is that of the bee, 
where eggs that are not fertilized develop parthenogenetically 
and produce only drones. What is ' known as pathological 
parthenogenesis has been observed occasionally in higher 
animals, e.g. the frog, the fowl and certain mammals, whilst 
in the ease of human beings, ovarian cysts in which hair and other 
structures are produced have been attributed to the incomplete 
development of parthenogenetic ova. Finally, it has been 
shown in a number of different instances, notably by J. Loeb, 
that artificial parthenogenesis may be induced by various 
' mechanical and chemical stimulations. It has been shown that 
ova may be induced to segment by the presence of spermatozoa 
belonging even to different classes of the animal kingdom — as, 
for instance, the ova of echinoderms by the spermatozoa of 
molluscs. In such cases the resulting embryos have purely 
maternal characters. A possible interpretation is that sperma- 
tozoa have two functions which may be exercised independently; 
they may act as stimulants to the ovum to segment, and they 
may convey the paternal qualities. The former function may 
be replaced by the chemical substances employed in producing 
artificial parthenogenesis. Juvenile or precocious partheno- 
genesis, in which there takes place reproduction without fer- 



tilization in immature larvae, has been observed chiefly in 
insects (Dipterous midges), and to this the term paedogenesis 
has been applied. 

The theory of parthenogenesis remains doubtful. When 
Weismann and others began to study the polar bodies, they 
made the remarkable discovery that in some parthenogenetic 
eggs only one polar body was extruded, but the meaning of this 
distinction was blurred when other cases were described in which 
two polar bodies were formed. Later on, Weismann drew 
attention to the difference between normal and reducing 
divisions, and it now appears to be clear that, with one set of 
exceptions, ova which develop without fertilization arc those in 
which no reducing division takes place and which, accordingly, 
contain the number of chromosomes normal to the tissue cells 
of the species. Such eggs, in fact, resemble the zygote except 
that all their chromosomes are of maternal origin and the 
centrosome which becomes active in the first segmentation is 
that of the ovum and not, as in normal fertilized eggs, that which 
came in with the spermatozoon. The case of the bee and other 
insects in which parthenogenetic development results in the pro- 
duction of males, is doubtful; it appears to be the case that a 
reduction division has taken place in the maturation of the egg. 
A. Petrunkevitch has made the ingenious suggestion, that after 
the reducing division the normal number of chromosomes is 
restored by the splitting of each into two. Cases of patho- 
logical and artificial parthenogenesis would fall into line, on the 
supposition that the stimulus acted by preventing the occurrence 
of a reducing division in an ovum otherwise mature. It is to be 
noticed, however, that such explanations of parthenogenesis 
are not much more than a formal harmonizing of the behaviour 
of the chromosomes in the respective cases of fertilized and 
parthenogenetic development; they do not provide a theory as 
to why the process occurs. 

Accessory Reproductive Organs and Processes. — It has been 
already stated that the primary organs of reproduction in 
animals are the germinal tissues producing respectively sper- 
matozoa and ova, and that in most cases these arc aggregated 
to form testes and ovaries. In certain animals there are no 
accessory organs, and when the reproductive products are ripe, 
they are discharged directly to the exterior if the gonads are 
external, as in some Coelentera, or if they are internal, break 
through into some cavity of the body and escape by rupture of the 
body-wall or through some natural aperture. In a majority of 
cases, however, special duets are developed, which in the male 
serve primarily for the escape of the spermatozoa, but secondarily 
may be associated with intromittent organs. Similarly, in the 
female, the primary function of the gonad ducts is to provide 
a passage for the ova, but in many cases they serve also for the 
reception of spermatozoa, for the development of embryos and 
for the subsequent exit of the young. Associated with the ovary 
and the oviducts are many kinds of yolk-glands and shell-glands, 
the function of which is to form nutritive material for the future 
embryo, to discharge this into or around the ovum, and to provide 
protective wrappings. Although, in the last resort, fertilization de- 
pends on impulses attracting the spermatozoa to the ova, probably 
chemical in their nature, the necessary proximity is secured in 
a number of ways. In many simple cases the ripe products are 
discharged directly into the surrounding water, and impregnation 
is a matter of accident highly probable because such animals 
discharge enormous quantities of ova and spermatozoa, are 
frequently sessile and live in colonies, and are mature about the 
same time. In other cases, as, for instance, Tunieates and many 
Molluscs, the spermatozoa arc discharged, and, being drawn into 
the body of the female with the inhalcnt currents, there fertilize 
the ova. In yet a number of other cases, there is sexual congress 
without intromittence. The males of many fish, such as salmon, 
attend the females about to discharge their ova, and afterwards 
pour the male fluid over the liberated eggs; whilst amongst 
other fish the males seek out a suitable locality and prepare some 
kind of nest to which the female is enticed and which receives 
first the ova and then the milt. In many other animals, again, 
as for instance the frog, the male grasps the ripe female, embracing 



120 



REPRODUCTION 



[PLANTS 



her firmly for a prolonged period, during which ova and sper- 
matozoa are discharged simultaneously. Where internal fer- 
tilization occurs, there are usually special accessory organs. In 
the female, the terminal portion of the gonad-duct, or of the cloaca, 
is modified to receive the intromittent organ of the male, or to 
retain and preserve the seminal fluid. In the male, the terminal 
portion of the gonad-duct may be modified into an intromittent 
organ or penis, grooved or pierced to serve as a channel by which 
the semen is passed into the female. In arthropods, ordinary 
limbs may be modified for this purpose, or special appendages 
developed; in spiders, the terminal joints of the pedipalps, or 
second pair of appendages, are enlarged, and are dipped into the 
semen, which is sometimes shed into a special web, and are used 
as intromittent organs; in cuttlefish, one of the " arms " is 
charged with spermatozoa, is inserted into the mantle cavity 
of the female and there broken off. In many cases there is a 
temporary apposition of the apertures of the male and female, 
with an injection from the male without a special intromittent 
organ. The females are usually passive during coitus, and there 
are innumerable varieties of clasping organs developed by the 
male to retain hold of the female. Finally, the various secondary 
sexual characters which are developed in males and females and 
induce association between them by appeals to the senses, must 
be regarded as accessory reproductive organs and processes 
(see Sex). 

Another set of accessory organs and processes are concerned 
with what may be termed in the widest sense of the phrase 
" brood-care." In many cases the relation between parent 
and offspring ceases with the extrusion of the fertilized ovum, 
whilst others display every possible grade of parental care. Many 
of the lower invertebrates choose special localities in which 
to deposit the ova or embryos, and glands, the viscid secretion 
of which serves to bind the ova together or to attach them to 
some external object, are frequently present. In many insects, 
elaborate preparations are made; special food^plants are 
selected, cocoons are woven, or, by means of the special organ 
known as the ovipositor, the eggs are inserted in the tissues 
of a living or dead host, or in other cases a supply of food is pre- 
pared and stored with the young larvae. The eggs or larvae 
may be attached to the parent and carried about with it, as 
in the gills of bivalves, the brood-pouches of the smaller Crus- 
tacea, the back of the Surinam toad, the vocal sacs of the frog 
Rhinoderma, the expanded ends of the oviducts or the mar- 
supial pouch. In a large number of cases the young are nour- 
ished directly from the blood of the mother by some kind of 
placental connexion, as in some of the sharks, in Anablebs, 
a bony fish, in some lizards and in mammals. In other cases, 
the young after birth or hatching are fed by the parents, by 
the special secretion of the mammary glands in the case of 
mammals, by regurgitated food in many birds and mammals, 
by salivary secretions or by food obtained and brought to the 
young by the parents. 

Reproductive Period. — In a general way, reproduction begins 
when the limit of growth has been nearly attained, and the 
instances of paedogenesis, whether that be parthenogenetic 
as in midges, or sexual as in the axolotl, must be regarded as 
an exceptional and special adaptation. In lower animals, 
where the period of growth is short or indefinite, reproduction 
begins earlier and is more variable. But, in all cases, surrounding 
conditions play a great part in hastening or retarding the onset 
of reproduction. Increased temperature generally acceler- 
ates reproductive maturity, excess of food retards it, and 
sudden privation favours it. In a majority of cases it endures 
to the end of life, but in some of the higher forms, such as birds 
and mammals, there is a marked decrease or a cessation of 
reproductive activity, especially in the case of females, as 
life advances. In most animals, moreover, periods of re- 
productive activity alternate with periods of quiescence in 
a rhythmical series. In its simplest form, the rhythm is 
seasonal; but although at first associated with actual seasonal 
changes, it persists in the absence or alteration of these. Many 
animals brought to Europe from the southern hemisphere come 



into reproductive activity at the time of year corresponding 
to the spring or summer of their native home. " Heat," 
menstruation and ovulation in the higher mammals, including 
man, are rhythmical, and probably physiologically linked, but 
the ancestral meaning of the periodicity is unknown. 

Reproduction and Increase of the Race, — Two distinct factors 
are involved in this question — the potential fecundity of 
organisms, and the chances of the young reaching maturity. 
The first varies with ^the actual output of zygotes, and is- 
determined partly by the reproductive drain on the individual, 
and especially the female in cases where the ova are provided 
with much food-yolk, partly on the duration of reproductive 
maturity, and partly on the various adaptive and environ- 
mental conditions which regulate the chances of the gametes 
meeting for fertilization. It is to be noted that as the gametes 
are simply cells proliferating from the germinal tissue, the poten- 
tial number that can be produced is almost indefinite; and as 
it is found that in very closely allied forms the actual number 
produced varies within very wide limits, it may be assumed 
that potential fecundity is indefinite. The possibility of zygotes 
reaching maturity varies first with the individuation of the 
organism concerned — that is to say, the degree of complexity 
of its structure — and the duration of the period of its growth; 
and secondly, with the incidence of mortality on the eggs and 
immature young. It is plain that a parasite capable of living 
only on a particular host may give rise to myriads of progeny, 
and yet, from the difficulty of these reaching the only environ- 
ment in which they can become mature, might not increase 
more rapidly than an elephant which carries a single foetus 
for about two years, and guards it for many years after birth. 
The probable adaptation of the variable reproductive processes 
to the average conditions of the race is discussed under the 
heading Longevity. It may be added here that the adapta- 
tion, in all successful cases, appears to be in excess of what 
would be required merely to replace the losses caused by death, 
and that there is ample scope for the Malthusian and Darwinian 
factors. The rate of reproduction tends to outrun the food- 
supply. 

Literature. — Almost any > zoological publication may contain 
matter relating to reproduction, but text-books on Embryology 
must be specially consulted. The annual volumes of the Zoological 
Record, under the heading " General Subject " until 1906, and 
thereafter under ' * Comprehensive Zoology, ' ' give a classified 
subject-index of the literature of the year m which references to 
the separate parts of the subject are given. Amongst the older 
memoirs referred to in this article the following are the most im- 
portant: A. Leeuwenhoek, Epistolae ad societatem regiam Angliam 
(1719); R. A. P. de R6aumur, Memoires pour servir a Vhistoire des 
insectes (Paris, 1734-1742); C. Bonnet, (Euvres d'histoire naturelle et 
de philosophic (Neuchatel, 1 779-1 783); L. Spallanzani, Dissertations 
relative to the Natural History of Animals and Vegetables (Eng. 
trans., 2nd ed. f London, 1789); J. L. Prevost et J. B. Dumas, 
" Observations relatives a l'appareil gen6rateur des abimaux males," 
Ann. Sci. Nat. i. (1824); K. E. von Baer, Epistola ad Academiam 
Scient. Petropolitanam; Heusinger, Zeitschrift t ii. (1828); Leon 
Dufour, Recherches anatomiques et physiologique sur les Himiptbres 
(Paris 1833) ; R. Wagner, " Recherches sur la generation," Ann. Sci. 
Nat. viii. (1837); A. K6lliker, tfber das Wesen der sogenannten 
Saamenthiere, , Froriep, Notizenxix. (1841) ; M. Barry, " Spermatozoa 
observed within the Mammiferous Ovum," Phil. Trans. (1743); 
J. J. S. Steenstrup, On the Alternation of Generations (Eng. trans., 
Ray Society, London, 1845); R. Leuckart, Beitr&ge zur Lehre der 
Befruchtung (Gottingen Nachrichten, 1849); (Sir) R. Owen, On 
Parthenogenesis (London, 1849); H. Nelson, " The Reproduction of 
Ascaris mystax," Phil. Trans. (1852); C. T. E. von Siebold, On a 
True .Parthenogenesis in Moths and Bees (Eng. trans., London,, 
1857); E. van Beneden, " Recherches sur la maturation de l'ceuf et 
la feeondation," Arch, de biol. (1883) ; O. Hertwig, " Das Problem der 
Befruchtung," Jen. Zeitsch. xviii. (1885). (P. C M.) 

Reproduction of Plants 
The various modes^ in which plants reproduce their species 
may be conveniently classified into two groups, namely, 
vegetative propagation and true reproduction^ the distinction 
between them being roughly this, that whereas in the former 
the production of the new individual may be effected by the 
most various parts of the body, in the latter it is always effected 
by means of a specialised reproductive cell. 



PLANTS] 



REPRODUCTION 



121 



I. Vegetative Propagation. 

The simplest case of vegetative multiplication is afforded 
by unicellular plants. When the cell which constitutes the 
body of the plant has attained its limit of size it gives rise to 
two either by division or gemmation; the two cells then grow, 
and at the same time become separated from each other, so 
that eventually two new distinct individuals are produced, 
■each of which precisely resembles the original organism. A 
.good example of this is to be found in the germination of the 
yeast plant. This mode of multiplication is simply the result 
-of the ordinary processes of growth. All plant-cells grow and 
divide at some time or other of their life; but whereas in *> 
multicellular plant the products of division remain coherent, and 
add to the number of the cells of which the plant consists, in 
a unicellular plant they separate and constitute new individuals. 
In more highly organized plants vegetative propagation may 
be effected by the separation of the different parts of the 
body from each other, each such part developing the missing 
members and thus constituting a new individual. This takes 
place spontaneously in rhizomatous plants, in which the main 
.stem gradually dies away from behind forwards; the lateral 
branches thus become isolated and constitute new individuals. 

The remarkable regenerative capacity of plant-members 
is largely made use of for the artificial propagation of plants, 
A branch removed from a parent-plant will, under appropriate 
•conditions, develop roots, and so constitute a new plant; this 
is the theory of propagation by " cuttings." A portion of a 
root will similarly develop one or more shoots, and thus give 
rise to a new plant. An isolated leaf will, in many cases, produce 
a shoot and a root, that is, a new plant; it is in this way that 
new begonias, for instance, are propagated. The production of 
plants from leaves occurs also in nature, as, for instance, in 
•certain so-called " viviparous " plants, of which Bryophylhtm 
calycimtm (Crassulaceae) and many ferns [Nephrodium (Lastraea) 
Filix-mas, Asplenium (Athyrium) Filix-foemina and other 
species of Asplenium] are examples. But it is in the mosses, 
■of all plants, that the capacity for vegetative propagation is 
most widely diffused. Any part of a moss, whether it be the 
stem, the leaves, the rhizoids, or the sporogonium, is capable, 
under appropriate conditions, of giving rise to filamentous 
protonema, on which new moss-plants are then developed as 
lateral buds. 

In a large number of plants provision is made for vegetative 
propagation by the development of more or less highly specialized 
organs. In lichens, for instance, there are the soredia, which 
are minute buds of the thallus containing both algal and fungal 
•elements; these are set free on the surface in large numbers, 
and each grows into a thallus. In the Characeae there are the 
bulbils or " starch-stars " of Char a stelligera, which are under- 
ground nodes, and the branches with naked base and the pro- 
embryonic branches found by Pringsheim on old nodes of Chara 
jragilis. In the mosses small tuberous bulbils frequently occur 
■on the rhizoids, and in many instances (Bryum annotinum, 
Aulacomnion androgynum y Tetr aphis pcllucida, &c.) stalked 
fusiform or lenticular multicellular bodies containing chlorophyll, 
termed gemmae, are produced on the shoots, either in the axils 
of the leaves or in special receptacles at the summit of the stem. 
Gemmae of this kind are produced in vast numbers in Marchantia 
and Lunularia among the liverworts. Similar gemmae are also 
produced by the prothallia of ferns. In some ferns (e.g. Nephro- 
iepis tuberosa and undulata) the buds borne on the leaves or in 
their axils become swollen and filled with nutritive materials, 
■constituting bulbils which fall off and give rise to new plants. 
This conversion of buds into bulbils, which subserve vegetative 
multiplication, occurs also occasionally among Phanerogams, 
as for instance in Lilium bulbiferum, species of Poa, Polygonum 
vivipantm, &c. But many other adaptations of the same kind 
occur among Phanerogams. Bulbous plants, for instance, 
produce each year at least one bulb or corm from which a new 
plant is produced in the succeeding year. In the potato, tubers 
are developed from subterranean shoots, each of which in the 



following year gives rise to a new individual. In the dahlia, 
Thladiantha dnbia, &c, tuberous swellings are found on the 
roots, from each of which a new individual may spring. 

II. True Reproduction. 

This is effected by cells formed by the proper reproductive 
organs. These cells are of two principal kinds. There are, 
first, those cells each of which is capable of developing by itself 
into a new organism: these are the asexual reproductive cells, 
known generally as spores. Secondly, there are the cells which 
are incapable of independent germination; it is not until these 
cells have fused together in pairs that a new organism can be 
developed: these are the sexual reproductive cells or gametes. 

In some exceptional cases the normal mode of reproduction, 
sexual or asexual, does not take place: instead, the new organism 
is developed vegetatively from the parent. When sexual 
reproduction is suppressed the case is one of apogamy; when 
asexual reproduction by spores is suppressed the case is one of 
apospory. (Apogamy and apospory are discussed below in the 
section on Abnormalities of Reproduction.) 

Asexual Reproduction. — Reproduction by means of some 
kind of spore (using the term in its widest sense, so as to include 
all asexually produced reproductive cells) is common to nearly 
all families of plants; it is wanting in certain Algae (Conjugatae, 
Fucaceae, Characeae), and in certain fungi {e.g. some Perono- 
sporeae). The structure of a spore is essentially this: it consists 
of a nucleated mass of protoplasm, enclosing, starch or oil as re- 
serve nutritive material, usually invested by a cell-wall. In those 
cases in which the spore is capable of germinating immediately 
on its development the cell-wall is a single delicate membrane 
consisting of cellulose; but in those cases in which the spore 
may or must pass through a period of quiescence before germina- 
tion the wall becomes thickened and may consist of two layers, 
an inner, the endospore, which is delicate and consists of cellulose, 
and an outer, the exospore t which is thick and rigid, frequently 
darkly coloured and beset externally with spines or bosses, and 
which consists of cutin. In some few cases among the fungi, 
multicellular or septate spores are produced ; these approximate 
somewhat to the gemmae mentioned above as highly specialized 
organs for vegetative propagation. In some cases, particularly 
among the algae, and also in some fungi (Peronosporeae, 
Saprolegnieae, Chytridiaceae, and the Myxomycetes), spores are 
produced which are usually destitute of any cell-wall, and are 
further peculiar in that they are motile, and are therefore termed 
zoospores; they move sometimes in an amoeboid manner by the 
protrusion of pseudopodia, but more frequently they are provided 
with one, two, or many delicate vibratile protoplasmic filaments, 
termed cilia, by the lashing of which the spore is propelled 
through the water. The zoospore eventually comes to rest, 
withdraws its cilia, surrounds itself with a cell-wall, and then 
germinates. 

In the simplest case a single spore is developed from the 
cell of the unicellular plant, the protoplasm of which surrounds 
itself with the characteristic thick wall. This occurs only in 
plants of low organization such as the Schizophyta. 

In other cases the contents of the cell undergo division, each 
portion of the protoplasm constituting a spore. Examples of 
this are afforded, among unicellular plants, by yea§t and the 
Protococcaceae; and in multicellular plants by the Pandorineae, 
Confervaceae, Ulvaceae, &c, where any cell of the body may 
produce spores. 

In such cases the spore-producing cell may be regarded as a 
rudimentary reproductive organ of the nature of a sporangium. 
In more highly organized plants special organs are differentiated 
for the production of spores. In the majority of cases the* 
special organ is a sporangium, that is, a capsule in the interior 
of which the spores are developed; but in many fungi the 
spores are formed by abstriction from an organ termed a 
sporophore. In the Thallophyta the sporangium is commonly 
a single cell. In the Bryophyta it is a multicellular capsule. 
In the Pteridophyta the sporangium is multicellular, but simple 
in structure, and this is true also of the Phanerogams. 



122 



REPRODUCTION 



[PLANTS 



It is important to note that in all the Bryophyta and in 
some of the Pteridophyta (most of the Filicinae, all existing 
Equisetinae, and the Lycopodiaceae and Psilotaceae) there is 
but one kind of sporangium and spore, the plants being homo- 
sporous or isosporous, whereas the rest of the Pteridophyta 
(Hydropterideae, SelagineHaceae) and the Phanerogams are 
heterosporous, having sporangia of two kinds; some produce one 
or a few large spores (megaspores), and are hence termed mega- 
sporangia, while others give rise to a larger number of small 
spores (microspores) and are hence termed micros por an gia. 
In the Phanerogams the two kinds of sporangia have received 
special names: the megasporangium, which produces as a 
rule only one mature spore (embryo-sac), is termed the ovule; 
the microsporangium, which produces a large number of micro- 
spores (pollen-grains), is termed the pollen-sac. 

The development of spores, except in the simpler Thallophyta, 
is more or less restricted to definite parts of the body. Thus 
in the Red Algae (Florideae) there are the organs known as 
stichidia, nemathecia. In the fungi the number and variety of 
such organs is very great; they may be described generally as 
simple and compound sporopkores: but for a description the 
article Fungi should be consulted. In the higher plants the 
organs are less various. In the Bryophyta the production of 
spores is restricted to the sporogonium. In the vascular plants 
(Pteridophyta, Phanerogams) the development of sporangia, 
speaking generally, is confined to the leaves. In most ferns the 
sporangiferous leaves (sporophylls) do not differ in appearance 
from the foliage leaves; but in other Pteridophyta (Equisetaceae, 
Marsiliaceae, some species of Lycopodium and Selaginella) they 
present considerable adaptation, and notably in the Phanero- 
gams. In the Phanerogams the specialization is so great that 
the sporophylls have received, special names; those which bear 
the microsporangia (pollen-sacs) are termed tbe stamens, and 
those which bear the megasporangia (ovules) are termed the 
carpels. The sporophylls are usually aggregated together on a 
short stem, forming a shoot that constitutes a flower. 

Many terms are employed to indicate the nature of the various 
kinds of spores, especially among the fungi, but the endless 
varieties of asexual (and asexually produced) reproductive 
cells may be grouped under two heads — (i) Gonidia, (2) Spores 
proper. 

The distinction between these two kinds of asexual repro- 
ductive cells is as follows. 

The gonidium is a reproductive cell that gives rise, on germina- 
tion, to an organism resembling the parent. For instance, 
among the algae, the " zoospore " of Vaucheria develops into 
a Vaucheria-plant. There is thus a close connexion between 
vegetative multiplication and multiplication by means of 
gonida. The production of gonida is entirely limited to the 
Thallophyta, and is especially marked in the fungi, though the 
nature of all the many kinds of reproductive cells formed in 
this group has not yet been fully investigated. It is, however, 
wanting in certain algae (Conjugatae, Fucaceae, Characeae) and 
fungi (some Peronosporeae and Ascomycetes). 

The spore proper is a reproductive cell that as a rule gives rise, 
on germination, to an organism unlike that which produced it. 
For instance, the spore of a fern when it germinates gives rise, 
not to a fern-plant, but to a prothallium. The apparent 
exceptions / to this rule occur only among the Thallophyta, and 
are explained below in the section on Lije-hislory. 

The true spore is developed, usually in a sporangium, after a 
process of division which presents certain features that call for 
special notice. 

Observation of the process of division of the nucleus (karyo- 
kinesis) in plants generally has shown (for details see Cytology) 
that the linin-reticulum of the resting nucleus breaks up into a 
definite number of segments, the chromosomes, each of which 
bears a series of minute bodies, the ckromatin-disks or chromo- 
meres, consisting largely of a substance termed chromatin. In 
the ordinary homotype divisions of the nuclei the characteristic 
number of chromosomes is always observable: but when the 
spore-mother-cells arc being formed the number of chromosomes 



is reduced to one-half. This, if the number of chromosomes of 
the parent plant be expressed as 2x the number in tbe spore 
will be x. To take a concrete -case: it has been observed by 
Guignard and others that in the early divisions taking place in 
the developing anther and ovule of the lily the number of 
chromosomes is 24; whereas in the later divisions which give 
rise to the pollen-mother-cells in the one case and to the motber- 
cell of the embryo-sac in the other, the number of chromosomes 
is only 12. Thus the development of a spore (as distinguished 
from a gonidium) is always preceded by a reducing- or heterotype- 
division, a process now more generally termed meiosis (Farmer). 
The reduced number of chromosomes in the nucleus of the 
spore-mother-cell persists in the spore, and in all the cells of the 
organism to which the spore may give rise. (Meiosis is discussed 
below in the section on Sexual Reproduction.) 

It should be explained that cells, to which the name " spore " 
has also been applied, are formed as the result of a sexual act: 
such are zygospores, oospores, and some carpospores. But these 
cells differ from spores proper not only in their mode of origin 
but also in that their nuclei contain the full double number (2x) 
of chromosomes; hence they may be distinguished as diplospores. 

Sexual Reproduction. — Sexual reproduction involves the 
development of sexual organs (gametangia) and sexual cells. 
(gametes). When the organism is unicellular, as in the lower 
Green Algae (e.g. Protococcaceae, Conjugatae), the cell becomes 
a sexual organ and its whole protoplasm gives rise to one or more 
sexual cells: in the higher forms certain parts of the body are 
specialized as sexual organs. In many of the lower plants the 
organs present no external distinction of sex (e.g. lower Green 
Algae: the Chytridiaceae, Mucorinae, and some Ascomycetes 
among the fungi): it is impossible to distinguish between tbe 
male and female organs, although it cannot be doubted that 
the essential physiological difference exists; consequently the 
organs are merely described as gametangia. The gap between 
these plants and those with differentiated sexual organs is, 
however, bridged over by intermediate forms, as explained in the 
article Algae. 

When the sexual organs are more or less obviously differ- 
entiated into male and female, they present considerable variety 
of form in different groups of plants, and accordingly bear 
different names. Thus the male organ is a pollinodium in most 
of the fungi, a spermogonium in others (certain Ascomycetes, 
Uredineae); in all other plants it is an antheridium. Similarly 
the female organ is an oogonium in various Thallophyta (Green 
and Brown Algae: Oomycetous Fungi); a procarp in the Red 
Algae; an archicarp in certain Ascomycetous Fungi and in the 
Uredineae; an archegonium in all the higher plants. 

It is generally the case that the protoplasm of the sexual organ 
is differentiated into one or more sexual cells. Thus the game- 
tangium usually gives rise to cells which, as they are externally 
similar, are termed isogametes or simply gametes.. Certain forms 
of the male organ, the spermogonium and the antheridium, give 
rise to male cells which are termed spermatia when they are non- 
cilia te, spermatozoids when they are ciliated and free-swimming. 
Again, the female organs termed oogonia and archegonia produce- 
one or more female cells called oospheres. But there are im- 
portant exceptions to this rule. Thus the protoplasm is not 
differentiated into cells in the gametangium of the Mucorinae; 
in the male organ (pollinodium), of fungi generally; and in the 
female organ (procarp) of the Red Algae and (archicarp) of the 
Ascomycetes and Uredineae. 

The immediate product of the fusion of cells, or of undifferenti- 
ated protoplasm, derived from sexual organs of opposite sex 
may be generally termed the zygote; but it is not always of the 
same kind. Thus when two isogametes, or the undifferentiated 
contents of two gametangia, fuse together, the process is desig- 
nated conjugation, and the product is usually a single cell 
{ermed zygospore. When an oosphere fuses with a male cell, 
or with the undifferentiated contents of a male organ, the process 
is fertilization, and the product is a single cell termed oospore. 
When, finally, a female organ with undifferentiated contents 
receives a male cell, the process again is fertilization; here the. 



PLANTS] 



REPRODUCTION 



123 



product is not a single cell, but a fructification termed cystocarp 
(Red Algae), or ascocarp (Ascomycetes) or aecidium (Uredincae), 
containing many spores (carpos pores). 

As a consequence of the diversity in the sexual organs and cells, 
in the details of the sexual act, and in the product of it, several 
modes of the sexual process have to be distinguished, which may be 
conveniently summarized as follows: — 

I. Isof>amy: the sexual process consists in the fusion of either 
two similar sexual cells (isogametes), or two similar sexual organs 
(gametangia) : it is termed conjugation, and the product is a 
zygospore. Its varieties are: — 

(a) Gametes ciliated and free-swimming {piano gametes), set 

free into the water where they meet and fuse: lower 
Green Algae (Protococcaceae, Pandorineae, most 
Siphonaceae and Confcrvaceae) ; some Brown Algae (Phaeo- 
sporeae) : 

(b) Gametangia fuse in pairs, and a gamete is differentiated in 

each : the gametes of each pair fuse, but are not set free 
and are not ciliated (the Conjugate Green Algae): or, no 
gametes are differentiated, the undifferentiated con- 
tents of the gametangia fusing (Mucorinae among the 
Fungi). 

II. Oogamy, male and female organs distinct: the protoplasm 
of the female organ is differentiated into one or (rarely) more 
oospheres which usually remain enclosed in the female organ: the 
contents of the male organ are usually differentiated into one or 
more male cells: the process is fertilization, the product is an 
oospore. 

(A) The sexual organs are unicellular (or coenocytic as in certain 
Siphonaceous Green Algae and in the Oomycetous Fungi); the 
female organ is an oogonium. 

(a) The male organ is an antheridium giving rise to one or more 
free-swimming ciliated spermatozoids: 

(1) The oogonium contains a single oosphere which is fertilized 

in situ : higher Green Algae ( Volvox, Vaucheria, 
Oedogonium, Coleochaete, Characeae); some Brown 
Algae (Tilopteris) ; among the Fungi, Monoblepharis , 
the only fungus known to have spermatozoids: 

(2) The oogonium produces a single oosphere which is extruded 

and is fertilized jn the water: Dictyota and some Fucaceae 
(Brown Algae) f 

(3) The oogonium contains several oospheres which are fertilized 

in situ : Spkaeroplea (Siphonaceous Green Alga) : 

(4) The oogonium produces more than one oosphere (2-8) which 

are extruded and are fertilized in the water: certain Brown 
Algae (Pelvetia, Ascophyllum, Fucus): 
(jS) The male organ is a pollinodium which applies itself closely 
to the oogonium : the amorphous male cell is not ciliated 
and is not set free : 

(1) The oogonium contains a single oosphere which is fertilized 

in situ : Peronosporaceae (Oomycctes) : 

(2) The oogonium contains several oospheres; Saprolegnia- 

ceae: but it is debated whether or not fertilization 
actually takes place. 

(B) The male and female organs are (as a rule) multicellular; 
the male organ is an antheridium, the female an archegonium: the 
archegonium always contains a single oosphere which is fertilized 
in situ. 

(a) The male cell is a free-swimming ciliated spermatozoid : 
the antheridium produces more than one (usually very 
many) spermatozoids, each of which is developed in a 
single cell: all Bryophyta (mosses, &c.) and Pterido- 
phyta (ferns, &c.) : the only Phanerogams in which 
spermatozoids ^ have been observed are the gymno- 
spermous species Ginkgo biloba, Cycas revoluta, Zamia 
integrifolia. 
(0) The male cell is amorphous and passes directly from the 
pollen- tube into the oosphere (siphonogamy) : all Phanero- 
gams except the species just mentioned. 
It must be explained that in the angiospermous Phanerogams, 
the male and female organs are so* reduced that each is represented 
by only a single cell : the male, by the generative celt, formed in the 
pollen-grain, which usually divides into two male cells: the female, 
by the oosphere. The gradual reduction can be traced through the 
Gymnosperms. 

Attention may here be drawn to the fact (see Angiosperms) 
that, in several cases, the second male cell has been seen to enter 
the embryo-sac from the pollen-tube, and its nucleus to fuse with 
the definitive nucleus (endosperm-nucleus) or with one of the polar 
nuclei. ^ The significance of this remarkable observation is dis- 
cussed in the section on the Physiology of Reproduction. 

III. Carpogamy: the sexual organs are (as a rule) differentiated 
into male and female: the protoplasm of the unicellular or multi- 
cellular female organ (archicarp, procarp) is never differentiated 
into an oosphere: in many cases definite male cells, spermatid, 

^are produced and are set free, but they are not ciliated, and fre- 
quently have a cell-wall: the process is fertilization: the product 
is a fructification derived essentially from the female organ con- 



taining several (sometimes very many) spores (car po spores): 
characteristic of the Red Algae and of the Ascomycetous Fungi. 

(A) There are definite male cells (spermatia) : 

(a) The female organ is a procarp, consisting of an elongated, 
closed, receptive filament, the trichogyne, and of a basal 
fertile portion, the carpogonium: on fertilization the 
latter grows and gives rise directly or indirectly to a cysto- 
carp: the spermatia are each formed in a unicellular 
antheridium and have no cell-wall at first: they fuse 
with the tip of the trichogyne: Red Algae (Rhodophyceae 
or Florideae) : 

(/8) The female organ (archicarp) resembles the preceding: in 
fertilization the fertile portion (ascogonium) develops into 
an ascocarp containing one or more asci (sporangia) each 
containing usually eight ascospores: the spermatia are 
formed by abstriction from the filaments (sterigmata) 
lining special receptacles, the spermogonia, which are the 
male organs: certain Ascomycetous Fungi (e.g. Laboul- 
beniaccae, some Lichen-Fungi, Polystigma). For the 
Uredineae, see Abnormalities of Reproduction, below). 

(B) There are no definite male cells: the more or less distinct 
male and female organs come into contact, and their undiffer- 
entiated contents fuse: the product is an ascocarp: 

(a) The male and /cmale organs are obviously different: the 
female organ is an ascogonium, the male a pollinodium: 
e.g. Pyronema, Sphaerotheca (Ascomycetes) : 
03) The male and female organs are quite similar: e.g. Eretnas- 
cus, Dipodascus (Ascomycetes). 
It may be explained that carpogamy is the expression of sexual 
degeneration. In the cases last mentioned, when the sexual organs 
are quite similar, they have reverted to the condition of gametangia. 
Still further reduction is observable in other Ascomycetes in which 
one of the sexual organs, presumably the male, is either much 
reduced or is altogether wanting. Again in the 'rusts (Uredineae), 
there are spermatia, but they are functionless (see section on 
Abnormalities of Reproduction). In the highest Fungi, the Auto- 
basidiomycetes, no sexual organs have been discovered. 

Details of the Sexual Act. — It has been already stated that the 
sexual act consists in the fusion of two masses of protoplasm, 
commonly cells, derived from two organs of opposite sex? but 
this is only the first stage in the process. The second stage is the 
fusion of the nuclei, which usually follows quickly upon the fusion 
of the cells; but nuclear fusion may be postponed so that the two 
sexual nuclei may be observed in the zygote, as " conjugate " 
nuclei, and even in the cells of the organism developed from the 
zygote (e.g. Uredineae). The result of nuclear fusion is that the 
nucleus of the zygote contains the double number of chromo- 
somes — that is, if the number of chromosomes in each of the 
fusing sexual nuclei be #, the number in the nucleus of the zygote 
will be 2x. Moreover, this double number persists in all the 
cells of the organism developed from the zygote, until it is 
reduced to one-half by meiosis preceding either the development 
of the spores, or, less commonly, the development of the sexual 
cells. But there is yet a third stage, which consists in the 
temporary fusion of the chromosomes belonging to the two 
sexual nuclei. This always takes place as a preliminary to 
meiosis; it may be in the germinating zygote, or after many 
generations of cells have been formed from it. At the onset of 
meiosis the (2%) chromosomes are seen to be double, one of each 
pair having been derived from the male and the female cell 
respectively: the chromosomes of each pair then fuse so that 
their chromomeres unite along their length, constituting the 
pseudo-chromosomes. The paired chromosomes separate and 
eventually go to form the two daughter-nuclei, one to each, which 
thus have half (x) the original number of chromosomes. The 
daughter-nuclei at once divide homotypically, retaining the 
reduced (x) number of chromosomes to form the four nuclei of a 
tetrad of spores (more rarely, e.g. Fucus, of sexual cells). 

III. Life-history. 
It will have been gathered from the foregoing sections that 
plants generally arc capable of both sexual and asexual repro- 
duction ; and, further, that in different stages of their life-history 
they possess the diploid (22) number of chromosomes in their 
nuclei, or the haploid (x) number. It may be at once stated 
that, in all plants in which sexual reproduction and true meiotic 
spore-formation exist, these two modes of reproduction are 
restricted to distinct forms of the plant; the sexual form bears 
only the sexual organs and is baploid; the asexual form only 



124 



REPRODUCTION 



[PLANTS 



produces spores and is diploid. Hence all such plants are to this 
extent polymorphic — that is, the plant assumes these two forms 
in the course of its life-history. When, as in many Thallophyta, 
one or other of these forms can reproduce itself by means of 
gonidia, additional forms may be introduced into the life- 
history, which becomes the more complicated the more pro- 
nounced the polymorphism. 

The most straightforward life-histories are those presented by 
the Bryophyta and the Pteridophyta, where there are but the 
two forms, the sexual and the asexual. In the life-history of a 
moss, the plant itself bears only sexual organs: it is the sexual 
form, and is distinguished as the gametophyte. The zygote 
(oospore) formed in the sexual act develops into an organism, 
the sporogonium, which is entirely asexual, producing only spores: 
it is distinguished as the sporophyte. When these spores germ- 
inate, they give rise to moss-plants. Thus the two forms, the 
sexual and the asexual, regularly alternate with each other — 
that is, the life-history presents that simple form of poly- 
morphism which is known as alternation of generations. Simi- 
larly, in the life-history of a fern, there is a regular alternation of 
a sporophyte, which is the fern-plant itself, with a gametophyte, 
which is the fern-prothallium. 

It is pointed out in the preceding section that, as the result 
of the sexual act, the nucleus of the zygote contains twice 
as many chromosomes as those of the fusing sexual cells. This 
2X number of chromosomes persists throughout all the cell- 
generations derived from the zygote, that is, in the cells 
constituting the sporophyte, up to the time that it begins to 
produce spores, when meiosis takes place. Again, the cell- 
generations derived from the spore, that is, the cells constituting 
the gametophyte, all have the reduced x number of chromosomes 
in their nuclei up to the sexual act. Hence the sporophyte 
may also be designated the diplophyte and the gametophyte 
the haplophyte (Strasburger) : in other words, the sporo- 
phyte is the pre-meioticy the gametophyte the post-meiotic 
generation. Twice in its life-history the plant is represented 
by a single cell: by the spore and by the zygote. The turning- 
points in the life-history, the transitions from the one genera- 
tion to the other, are (i) meiosis, (2) the sexual act. 

The course of the life-history in Phanerogams and in those 
Thallophyta which have been adequately investigated is essenti- 
ally the same as that of the Bryophyta and of the Pteridophyta 
as described above, though it is less easy to trace on account 
of the peculiar relation of the two generations to each other 
in the Phanerogams and on account of various irregularities 
that present themselves in the Thallophyta. 

In the Phanerogams, as in the Pteridophyta, the pre- 
ponderating generation is the sporophyte, the plant itself. 
Inasmuch as they are heterosporous, the gametophyte is 
represented by a male and a female organism or prothallium, 
both rudimentary. The male prothallium consists of the few 
cells formed by the germinating pollen-grain (microspore); and 
though it is quite independent, since the microspores are shed, 
it grows parasitically in the tissues upon which the microspore 
has been deposited in pollination. The female prothallium 
may consist of many cells with well-developed archegonia, as 
in the Gymnosperms, or of only a few cells with the female 
organ reduced to the oosphere, as in the Angiosperms. In 
either case it is the product of the germination of a megaspore 
(embryo-sac) which is not shed from its sporangium (ovule): 
hence it never becomes an independent plant, and was long 
regarded as merely a part of the sporophyte until its true nature 
was ascertained, chiefly by the researches of Hofmeister, who 
first explained the alternation of generations in plants. This" 
intimate and persistent connexion between the two generations 
affords the explanation of the characteristic features of the 
Phanerogams, the seed and the flower. The ovule containing 
the embryo-sac, which eventually contains the embryo, per- 
sists as the seed — a structure that is distinctive of Phanero- 
gams, which have, in fact, on this account been also termed 
Spermatophyta. With regard to the flower, it has been already 
mentioned that it is, like the cone of an Equisetum or a Lyco- 



podium, a shoot 'adapted to the production of spores. But 
it is something more than this: for whereas in Equisetum or 
Lycopodium the function of v the cone comes to an end when 
the spores are shed, the flower of the Phanerogam has still 
various functions to perform after the maturation of the spores. 
It is the seat of the process of pollination — that is, the bringing 
of the pollen-grain by one of various agencies into such a posi- 
tion that a part (the pollen-tube) of the male prothallium 
developed from it may reach and fertilize the oosphere in the 
embryo-sac. Thus the flower of Phanerogams is a reproductive 
shoot adapted not only for spore-production, but also for 
pollination, for fertilization, and for the consequences of fertiliza- 
tion, the production of seed and fruit. However, in spite of 
these complications, it is possible to determine accurately the 
limits of the two generations by the observation of the nuclei. 
The meiosis preceding the formation of the spores marks the 
beginning of the (haploid) gametophyte, male and female; 
and the sexual act marks that of the (diploid) sporophyte. 

The difficult task of elucidating the life-histories of the 
Thallophyta has been successfully performed in certain cases 
by the application of the method of chromosome-counting > 
with the result that alternation of generations has been found 
to be of general occurrence. To begin with the Algae. In 
the Dictyotaceae (Brown Algae) there are two very similar 
forms in the life-history, the one bearing asexual reproductive 
organs (tetrasporangia), the other bearing sexual organs (oogonia 
and antheridia). It has been shown (Lloyd Williams) that 
the former is undoubtedly the sporophyte and the latter the 
gametophyte, since the nuclei of the former contain 32 chromo- 
somes, and those of the latter 16. Meiosis takes place in the 
mother-cell of the tetraspores, which, on germination, give 
rise to the sexual form. Quite a different life-history has been 
traced in Fucus, another Brown Alga. Here no spores are 
produced: there is but one form in the fife-history, the Fucus- 
plant, which bears sexual organs and has, * on that account, 
been regarded as a gametophyte. The investigation of the 
nuclei has, however, shown (Farmer) that the F«£«s-plant 
is actually diploid, that it is, in fact, a sporophyte; but since 
there is no spore-formation, meiosis immediately precedes 
the development of the sexual cells, which alone represent the 
gametophyte (see below, Apospory). 

Similarly, two types of life-history have been discovered in 
the Red Algae. In Polysiphonia violacea, a species in which 
the tetraspores and the sexual organs are borne by similar but 
distinct individuals, it has been ascertained (Yamanouchi) 
that, as in Dictyota, meiosis takes place in the mother-cell of 
the tetraspores, so that the nuclei of these spores, as also those 
of the sexual plants to which they give rise, contain 20 chromo- 
somes: and further, that the nuclei of the carpospores (diplo- 
spores) produced in the cystocarp as the result of fertilization,, 
contain 40 chromosomes, as do also those of the asexual plant 
to which the carpospores give rise. Hence the sporophyte 
is represented by the cystocarp and the resulting tetraspor- 
angiate plants: the gametophyte, by the sexual plants. Though 
it is the rule in the Red Algae that the tetrasporangia and the 
sexual organs are borne on distinct individuals, yet cases are 
known in which both kinds of reproductive organs are borne 
upon the same plant; and to those the above conclusions 
obviously cannot apply. They have yet to be investigated. 

The second type of life-history has been traced in Nemalion. 
Here there is ho tetrasporangiate form, consequently meiosis 
takes place at a different stage in the life-history. It has 
been observed (Wolfe) that the nuclei of the sexual plant 
contain 8 chromosomes; those of the gonimoblast-nlaments 
of the developing cystocarp contain 16, whilst those of the 
carpospores contain 8: hence meiosis takes place in the carpo- 
sporangia. Here the plant is the gametophyte; the sporophyte 
is only represented by the cystocarp. The carpospores here are 
true spores (haplospores). 

Among the Green Algae, Coleochaete is the only form that 
has been fully investigated (Allen). Here meiosis takes place 
in the germinating oospore: consequently the plant is the 



PLANTS] 



REPRODUCTION 



"5 



gametophyte, and the sporophyte is represented only by the 
oospore, so that .the life-history resembles that of Nemalion. 
It is probable that this conclusion is generally true of the 
whole group; at any rate of those forms (Desmids, Spirogyra, 
Oedogonium, Chara) which have been more or less investi- 
gated. 

Turning to the Fungi, somewhat similar results have been 
obtained in the few forms that have been studied from, this 
point of view. In the sexual Ascomycetes it appears (Harper) 
that meiosis takes place in the ascocarp just before the develop- 
ment of the spores, so that the life-history essentially resembles 
that of Nemalion. Again, in certain Uredineae, having an 
aecidium-stage and a teleutospore-stage, which is apparently a 
sexual process has been observed (Blackman, Christman) which 
is described in the section on Abnormalities of Reproduction, and 
the life-history is as follows. The sexual act having taken 
place, a row of aecidiospores is developed in the aecidium, each 
of which contains two conjugate nuclei derived from the sexual 
nuclei. The mycelium developed from the aecidiospore, as 
well as the uredospores and the teleutospores that it bears, 
shows two conjugate nuclei. When, however, the teleuto- 
spore is about to germinate, the two nuclei fuse (thus completing 
the sexual act) and meiosis takes place. As a result the promy- 
celium developed from the teleutospore, and the sporidia that it 
produces, are uninucleate: so are also the mycelium developed 
from the sporidium, and the female organs (archicarps) borne 
upon it. Hence the limits of the sporophyte are the aecidio- 
spore and the teleutospore: those of the gametophyte, the 
teleutospore and the aecidiospore. 

Similar observations have been made upon other Uredineae 
with a more contracted life-history. Phragmidium Potentillae- 
canadensis is a rust that has no aecidium-stage: consequently 
the primary uredospores are borne by the mycelium produced 
on infection of the host by a sporidium. It has been observed 
(Christman) that the sporogenous hyphae fuse in pairs, suggest- 
ing a sexual act; then the primary uredospores are developed 
in rows from the fused pairs of hyphae which thus behave as 
sexual organs (archicarps), and each such uredospore contains 
two conjugate nuclei. Although the research has not been 
carried beyond this point, it may be inferred that in this case, as 
in the preceding, nuclear fusion and meiosis take place in the 
teleutospore. Here the sporophyte is represented by the 
uredo-form. 

Finally, in some of the fungi in which no sexual organs have 
yet been discovered, this method of investigation has made it 
probable that some kind of sexual act takes place nevertheless. 
Thus in the Uredine Puccinia tnalvacearum, which has only 
teleutospore- and sporidium-stages, it has been observed (Black- 
man) that the formation of the teleutospores is preceded by a 
binucleate condition of the hyphae. The same idea is suggested 
by the binucleate basidia of the Basidiomycetes, which corre- 
spond to the teleutospores of the Uredineae. 

The life-histories sketched in the preceding paragraphs show 
that one of the complexities met with in the Thallophyta is 
that meiosis does not always take place at the same point in the 
life-history. In the higher plants the incidence of meiosis is 
generally, though not absolutely, constant: it may be stated as 
a rule that in the Bryophyta, Pteridophyta and Phanerogams 
it takes place in the spore-mother-cells. In the Thallophyta 
this rule does not hold. In some of them, it is true, meiosis 
immediately precedes, as in the higher plants, the formation of 
certain spores, the tetraspores (Dictyotaceae, Polysiphonia), 
the teleutospores (Uredineae): but in others it immediately 
precedes the development of the sexual organs (Fucaceae), or 
follows more or less directly upon the sexual act (Green Algae, 
N emotion, Ascomycetes). 

The life-history of most Thallophyta is further complicated 
by the capacity of the gametophyte of the sporophyte to repro- 
duce themselves by cells termed gonidia, a capacity that is 
wholly lacking in the higher plants. The karyology of gonidia 
has not yet been sufficiently investigated: but when, as in the 
Green Algae and the Oomycetous Fungi, the gonidia are developed 



by and reproduce the gametophyte, it may be inferred that 
they, like the gametophyte, are haploid. One case, at any 
rate, of the reproduction of the sporophyte by gonidia is fully 
known, that of the Uredineae just described, in which the uredo- 
form, which is a phase of the sporophyte, is reproduced by the 
uredo-spores which arc binucleate, that is diploid, and may be 
distinguished as dlplogonidia. In any case the result is that 
whereas in the higher plants each of the alternating generations 
occurs but once in the life-history, in these Thallophyta the life- 
history may include a succession of gametophytic or of sporo- 
phytic forms This is, in fact, a distinguishing feature of the 
group. The higher plants present a regular alternation of 
generations: whereas, in the Thallophyta, though thcyprohably 
all present some kind of alternation of generations, yet it is 
irregular in the various ways and for the various reasons 
mentioned above. 

Sufficient information has been given in the preceding pages 
to render possible the consideration of the origin of alternation 
of generations. To begin quite at the beginning, it may be 
assumed that the primitive form of reproduction was purely 
vegetative, merely division of the unicellular organism when it 
had attained the limits of its own growth. Following on this 
came reproduction by a gonidium: that is, the protoplasm of 
the cell, at the end of its vegetative life, became quiescent, 
surrounded itself with a proper wall, or was set free as a motile 
ciliated cell, having hi some unexplained way become capable 
of originating a new course of life {rejuvenescence) on germination. 
Then, as can be well traced in the Brown and* Green Algae (see 
Algae), these primitive reproductive cells (gonidia) began to 
fuse in pairs: in other words, they gradually became sexual. 
This stage can still be observed in some of these Algae {e.g. 
Ulothrixy Ectocarpus) where the zoospores (gonidia) may either 
germinate independently, or fuse in pairs to form a zygote. 
Gradually the sexuality of these cells became more pronounced : 
losing the capacity for independent germination, they acquired 
the external characters of more or less differentiated sexual 
cells, and the gametangia producing them developed into male 
and female sexual organs. But this advancing sexual differenti- 
ation did not necessarily deprive the plant of the primitive mode 
of propagation: the sexual organism still retained the faculty 
of reproduction by gonidia. The loss- of this faculty only came 
with higher development: it is entirely wanting in some of the 
higher Thallophyta {e.g. Fucaceae, Characeae), and in all plants 
above them in the evolutionary series. 

With the introduction of the sexual act, a new kind of repro- 
ductive cell made its appearance, the zygote. This cell, as 
already explained, differs from other kinds of spores and from 
the sexual cells, in that its necleus is diploid; and with it the 
sporophyte (diplophyte) was introduced into the life-history. It 
has been mentioned that in some plants {e.g. Green Algae) the 
zygote is all that there is to represent the sporophyte, giving rise, 
or germination and after meiosis, to one or more spores. Passing 
to the Bryophyta, in the simpler forms {e.g. Riccia), the zygote 
develops into a multicellular capsule (sporogonium); and in the 
higher forms into a more elaborate sporogonium, producing many 
spores. In the Pteridophyta and the Phanerogams, the zygote 
gives rise to the highly developed sporophytic plant. 

Thus the evolution of the sporophyte can be traced from the 
unicellular zygote, gradually increasing in bulk and in in- 
dependence until it becomes the equal of the gametophyte {e.g. 
in Dictyota and Polysiphonia), and eventually far surpasses it 
(Pteridophyta, Phanerogams). Moreover, the increase in size was 
attended by the gradual limitation of spore-production to certain 
parts only, the rest of the tissues being vegetative, assuming the 
form of stems, leaves, &c. These facts have been formulated 
in the theory of " progressive sterilization " (Bower), which states 
that the sporophytic form of the higher plants has been evolved 
from the simple, entirely fertile, sporophyte of the lower, by the 
gradually increasing development of the sterile vegetative tissue 
at the expense of the sporogenous, accompanied by increase in 
total bulk and in morphological and histological differentiation. 

In connexion with the study of the evolution of the sporophyte. 



126 



REPRODUCTION 



IPLANTS 



the question arose as to its morphological significance; whether 
it is.to be regarded as a modified form of the gametophyte, or as an 
altogether new form intercalated in the life-history: in other 
words, whether the alternation is" homologous "or" antithetic." 
In certain plants there is a succession of forms which arc un- 
doubtedly homologous: for instance, in Coleochaete where a 
succession of individuals without sexual organs is produced by 
zoospores (gonidia). The main fact that has been established is 
that the sporophyte, from the simple zygote of the Thallophyta 
to the spore-bearing plant of the Phanerogams, is character- 
ized by its diploid nuclei; that it is a diplophyte, in contrast 
to the haplophytic gametophyte. Were these nuclear characters 
absolutely universal, there could be no question but that the 
sporophyte is an altogether new antithetic form, and not an 
homologous generation. But certain exceptions to the rule have 
been detected, which are described under Abnormalities of Repro- 
duction: at present it will suffice to say that such things as 
a diploid gametophyte and a haploid sporophyte have been ob- 
served in certain ferns. It can only be inferred that alternation 
of generations is not absolutely dependent upon the periodic 
halving in meiosis and the subsequent doubling by a sexual act, 
of the number of chromosomes in the nuclei, though the two 
sets of phenomena usually coincide. It must not, however, 
be overlooked that these exceptional cases occur in plants 
presenting an abnormal life-history: the fact remains that where 
there is both normal spore-formation with meiosis, and a sub- 
sequent sexual act, the haploid form is the gametophyte, the 
diploid the sporophyte. But the actual observation of a haploid 
sporophyte and of a diploid gametophyte makes it clear that 
however generally useful the nuclear characters may be in the 
distinction of sporophyte and gametophyte, they do not afford 
an absolute criterion, and therefore their value in determining 
homologies is debatable. 

IV. Abnormalities of Reproduction. 

In what may be regarded as the type of normal life-history, 
the transition from the one generation to the other is marked by 
definite processes: there is the meiotic development of spores 
by the sporophyte, and the sexual production of a zygote, or 
something analogous to it, by the gametophyte. But it has been 
mentioned in the preceding pages that the transition may, in 
certain cases, be effected in other ways, which may be regarded 
as abnormal, though they are constant enough in the plants in 
which they occur, in fact as manifestations of reproductive 
degeneration. 

In the first place, the sporophyte may be developed either 
after an abnormal sexual act, or without any preceding sexual 
act at all, a condition known as apogamy. In the second, the 
gametophyte may be developed otherwise than from a post- 
meiotic spore, a condition known as apospory. 
> Apogamy. — The cases to be considered under this head may be 
arranged in two groups: — 

' l. Pseudapogamy: sexual act abnormal. — The following abnor- 
malities have been observed: — 

(a) Fusion of two female organs : observed (Christ man) in cer- 

tain Uredineae (Caeoma nitens, Phragmidium speciosum, 
Uromyces Catadii) where adjacent archicarps fuse: male 
cells (spermatia) are present but functionless. 

(b) Fusion between nuclei of the same female organ : observed in 

the ascogonium of certain Ascomycetes, Humaria granu- 
lata (Blackman), where there is no male organ; Lachnea 
stercorea (Fraser), where the male organ (pollinodium) is 
present but is apparently functionless. 

(c) Fusion of a female organ with an adjacent tissue-cellj ob- 

served (Blackman) in the archicarp of some Uredineae 
(Phragmidium violaceum, Uromyces Poae, Puccinia 
Poarum) : male cells (spermatia) present but functionless. 

(d) There is no female organ: fusion takes place between two 

adjacent tissue-cells of the gametophyte ; the sporophyte 
is developed from diploid cells thus produced, but there is 
no proper zygote as there is in a, b and c : observed (Farmer) 
in the prothallium of certain ferns (Lastraea pseudo-mas, 
var. polydactyla): male organs (and sometimes female) 
present but functionless. Another such case is that^ of 
Humaria rutilans (Ascomycete), in which nuclear fusion 
has been observed (Fraser) in hyphae of the hypothecium : 
the^ asci are developed from these hyphae, and in them 
meiosis takes place; there are no sexual organs. 



2. Eu-apogamy: no kind of sexual act — 

(a) Thegametophyte is haploid : 

(a) The sporophyte is- developed from the unfertilized 
oosphere: no such case of true parthenogenesis has yet 
been observed. 

03) The sporophyte is developed vegetatively from the gameto- 
phyte and is haploid : observed in the prothallia of certain 
ferns, Lastraea pseudo-mas, var. cristata-apospora(F armer 
and Digby), and Nephrodium molle (Yamanouchi). 

(b) The gametophyte is diploid (see under Apospory): 

(a) The sporophyte is developed from the diploid oosphere : 
observed in some Pteridophyta, viz. certain ferns 
(Farmer), Athyrium Filix-foemina, var. clarissima, 
Scolopendrium vulgare f var. crispum-Drummondae, and 
Marsilia (Strasburger) ; also in some Phanerogams, viz. 
Compositae (Taraxacum, Murbeck; Antennaria alpina, 
Juel; sp. of Hieracium (Rosenberg): Rosaceae (Eu- 
Alchemtlla sp. r Murbeck, Strasburger): Ranunculaceae 
(Tkalictrum purpurascens, Overton). 
(/3) The sporophyte is developed vegetatively from the game- 
tophyte: observed (Farmer) in the fern Athyrium Filix- 
foemtna, var. clarissima. 

In all the cases enumerated under Eu-apogamy, 
apogamy is associated with some form of apospory except 
Nephrodium molle, full details of which have not yet been 
published. 

Many other ferns are known to be apogamous, but 
they are not included here because the details of their 
nuclear structure have not been investigated. 
Apospory. — The known modes of apospory may be arranged as 
follows : — 

i. Pseudapospory: a spore is formed but without meiosis, so that 
it is diploid— observed only in heterosporous plants, viz. certain 
speciesof Marsilia (e.g. Marsilia Drummondii) where the megaspore 
has a diploid nucleus (32 chromosomes) and the resulting prothallium 
and female organs are also diploid (Strasburger); and in various 
Phanerogams, some Compositae (Taraxacum and Antennaria alpina, 
Juel), some Rosaceae (Eu-Alchemitla, Strasburger), and occasionally 
in Thalictrum purpurascens (Overton), where the megaspore (embryo- 
sac) is diploid; in some species of Hieracium it has been found 
(Rosenberg) that adventitious diploid embryo-sacs are developed in 
the nucellus: these plants are also apogamous. 

2. Eu-apospory: no spore is formed — of this there are two 
varieties : 

(a) With meiosis: this occurs in some Thallophyta which form 

no spores; the sporophyte of the Fucaceae bears no 
spores, consequently meiosis takes place in the developing 
sexual organs; the t Conjugate Green Algae also have no 
spores, meiosis taking place in the germinating zygospore, 
which develops directly into the sexual plant. 

(b) Without meiosis: the gametophyte is developed upon the 

sporophyte by budding; • that is, spore-reproduction is 
replaced by a vegetative process: for instance, in mosses 
it has been found possible to induce the development of 
protonema, the first stage of the gametophyte, from tissue- 
celte of the sporogonium: similarly, in certain ferns 
(varieties of A thyrium Filix-foemina , Scolopendrium 
vulgare, Lastraea pseudo-mas, Polystichum angulare, and 
in the species Pier is aquilina and Asplenium dimorphum), 
the gametophyte (prothallium) is developed by budding 
on the leaf of the sporophyte, and in some of these cases it 
has been ascertained that the gametophyte so developed 
has the same number (2x) of chromosomes in its nuclei as 
the sporophyte that bears it— that is, it is diploid. 

Apospory has been found to be frequently associated 
with apogamy ; in fact, in the absence of meiosis, this 
association would appear to be inevitable. 

Combined Apospory and Apogamy. — Instances have been 
given of the occurrence of both apospory and apogamy in the 
same life-history; but in all of them there is a regular succession 
of sporophyte and gametophyte. The cases now to be con- 
sidered are those in which one or other of the generations gives 
rise directly to its like, sporophyte to sporophyte, gametophyte 
to gametophyte, the normally intervening generation being 
omitted. 

It is possible to conceive of this abbreviation of the life-history 
taking place in various ways. Thus, a sporophyte might be 
developed from a haploid spore instead of a gametophyte as is 
the normal case, but this has not been observed: again, a 
sporophyte might be developed from a diploid spore (as dis- 
tinguished from a zygote or a diploid oosphere), a possibility 
that is to some extent realized in the life-history of some 
Uredineae in which successive forms of the polymorphic sporo- 
phyte are developed from diplogonidia. Similarly a -gameto- 
phyte might be developed from a fertilized or an unfertilized 



PLANTS] 



REPRODUCTION 



127 



female cell: the latter possibility is to some extent realized in 
those Algae (e.g. Ulothrix, Ectocarpus) in which the sexual 
cells (isogametcs), if they fail to conjugate, germinate inde- 
pendently as gonidia, giving rise to gametophytes. 

The more familiar mode is that of vegetative budding, as 
already mentioned. When a " viviparous " fern or Phanerogam 
reproduces itself by a bud or a bulbil, both spore-formation and 
the sexual act are passed over: sporophyte springs from sporo- 
phyte. Remarkable cases of this have been observed in certain 
Phanerogams (Coelebogyne ilicifolla, Funkia ovata, Nothoscordtim 
jragrans, Citrus, sp. of Euonymus, Opantia vulgaris) in the ovule 
of which adventitious embryos are formed by budding from cells 
of the nucellus: with the exception of Coelebogyne, it appears 
that this only takes place after the oosphere has been fertilized. 
In other plants it is the gametophyte that reproduces itself by 
means of gemmae or bulbils, as commonly in the Bryophyta, 
the prothallia of ferns, &c. 

The abnormalities described are all traceable to reproductive 
degeneration; the final result of which is that true reproduction 
is replaced more or less completely by vegetative propagation. 
It may be inquired whether degeneration may have proceeded 
so far in any plant of sufficiently high organization to present 
spore-formation, or sexual reproduction, or both, as to cause 
the plant to reproduce itself entirely and exclusively by the vege- 
tative method. The only such case that suggests itself is that of 
Caulerpa and possibly some other Siphonaceous Green Algae. 
In this plant no special reproductive organs have yet been 
discovered, and it certainly reproduces itself by the breaking off 
of portions of the body which become complete plants: but 
it is quite possible that reproductive organs may yet be dis- 
covered. 

V. Physiology of Reproduction. 

The reproductive capacity of plants, as of animals, depends 
upon the fact that the whole or part of the protoplasm of the 
individual can develop into one or more new organisms in one 
or other of several possible ways. Thus, in the case of unicellular 
plants, the whole of the protoplasm of the parent gives rise, 
whether by simple division or otherwise, to one or more new 
plants. Reproduction necessarily closes the life of the individual : 
here, as August Weismann long ago pointed out, there is no 
natural death, for the whole of the protoplasm of the parent 
continues to live in the progeny. In multicellular plants, on 
the contrary" the reproductive function is mainly discharged by 
certain parts of the body, the reproductive organs, the remainder 
of the body being essentially vegetative — that is, concerned 
with the maintenance of the individual. In these plants it is 
only a part of the protoplasm that continues to live in their 
progeny; the remainder, the vegetative part, eventually dies. 
It is therefore possible to distinguish in them, on the one 
hand, the essentially reproductive protoplasm, which may be 
designated by Weismann's term germ-plasm, though without 
necessarily adopting all that his use of it implies, and the 
essentially vegetative, mortal protoplasm, the somatoplasm, on 
the other. In the unicellular plant no such distinction can be 
drawn, for the whole of the protoplasm is concerned in repro- 
duction. But even in the most highly organized multicellular 
plant this distinction is not absolute: for, as already explained, 
plants can, in general, be propagated by the isolation of almost 
any part of the body, that is vegetatively, and this implies the 
presence of germ-plasm elsewhere than in the special repro- 
ductive organs. 

If the attempt be made to distinguish between the organs 
of vegetative propagation and those of true reproduction, the 
nearest approach would be the statement that the former contain 
both germ-plasm and somatoplasm, whereas the latter, or at 
least the reproductive cells, consist entirely of germ-plasm. 

The question now arises as to the exact scat of the germ-plasm, 
and the answer is to be looked for in the results of the numerous 
researches into the structure and development of the reproductive 
cells that form so large a part of the biological work of recent 
years. The various facts already mentioned suffice to prove 



that the nucleus plays the leading part in the reproductive 
processes of whatever kind: the general conclusion is justified 
that no reproductive cell can develop into a new organism if 
deprived of its nucleus. It may be inferred that the nucleus 
either actually contains the germ-plasm, or that it controls and 
directs the activities of the germ-plasm present in the cell. It 
is not improbable that both these inferences may be true. At 
any rate there is no sufficient ground for excluding the co- 
operation of the cytoplasm, especially of that part of it dis- 
tinguished as kinoplasvi, in the reproductive processes. 

Pursuing the ascertained facts with regard to the nucleus, it 
is established that the part of it especially concerned is the 
linin-network which consists of the chromosomes. The be- 
haviour, as already described, of the chromosomes in the 
various reproductive processes has led to the conclusion that the 
hereditary characters of the parent or parents are transmitted 
in and by them to the progeny: that they constitute, in fact, 
the material basis of heredity (see Heredity). They can hardly, 
however, be regarded as the ultimate structural units, for the 
simple reason that their number is far too small in relation to 
the transmissible characters. It has been suggested (Farmer) 
that the chromomeres are the units, but the number of these 
would seem to be hardly sufficient. It seems necessary to fall 
back upon hypothetical ultimate particles, as suggested by 
Darwin, de Vries and Weismann, which may be generally termed 
pangens. The chromomeres may be regarded as aggregates of 
such particles, the " ids " of Weismann. 

The foregoing considerations make it possible to attempt an 
explanation of the various reproductive processes. 

Vegetative 'Propagation. — It is easily intelligible that the 
two individuals produced by the division of a unicellular plant 
should resemble the parent and each other; for, the division 
of the parent-nucleus being homotypic, the chromosomes 
which go to constitute the nucleus of each daughter-cell are 
alike both in number and in nature, and exactly repeat the 
constitution of the parent-nucleus. 

In the more complicated cases of propagation by bulbils, 
cuttings, &c, the development of the new individual, or of the 
missing parts of the individual (roots, &c), may be ascribed 
to the presence in the bulbil or cutting of the necessary pangens. 

Reproduction by Gonidia. — In this case a single cell gives 
rise to a complete new organism resembling the parent. The 
inference is that the gonidium is a portion of the parental germ- 
plasm, in which all the necessary pangens have been accumulated. 

Reproduction by Spores. — In this case, also, an entire organism 
is developed from a single cell, but with this peculiarity that 
the resulting organism is unlike that which bore the spore, a 
peculiarity which has not yet been explained. It has been 
already stated that the development of true spores involves 
meiosis, and this process is no doubt related to the behaviour 
of the spore on germination; but the nature of this relation 
remains obscure. It might be assumed that, as the result 
of meiosis, the nucleus of the spore receives only gametophytic 
pangens. But the assumption is rendered impossible by the 
fact that the spore gives rise to a sexual organism, the repro- 
ductive cells of which, after the sexual act, produce a sporo- 
phyte. Clearly sporophytic pangens must be present as well 
in* the spore as in the gametophyte and in its sexual cells. It 
can only be surmised that they exist there in a latent condition, 
dominated, as it were, by the gametophytic pangens. 

Sexual Reproduction. — Here, again, as yet unanswered 
questions present themselves. The essence of a sexual cell 
is that it cannot give rise by itself to a new organism, it is only 
truly reproductive after the sexual act: this peculiarity is 
just what constitutes its sexuality. Minute investigation has 
not yet detected any essential structural difference between 
a sexual cell and a spore; on the contrary, the results so far 
obtained have established that they essentially agree in 
being post-meiotic (haploid). Why then do they differ so 
fundamentally in their reproductive capacities? Again, 
sexual cells differ in sex; but there arc as yet no facts to 
demonstrate any essential structural difference between male 



128 



REPRODUCTION 



[PLANTS 



and female cells. What is known about them tends to prove 
their structural similarity rather than their difference. But 
it is possible that their difference may be chemical, and so 
not to be detected by the microscope. 

The normal sexual act has been described as consisting in 
the fusion, first, of two cells, then of their nuclei, and finally, 
often after a long interval, of their chromosomes and of their 
chromomeres in meiosis. What causes determined these 
fusions is a question that is only partly answered. It is known 
in certain cases (e.g. ferns and mosses) that the male cell is 
attracted to the female by chemical substances secreted for 
the purpose by the female organ; that it is a case of chemio- 
iaxis. Probably this is more common than experiment has 
yet shown it to be. It is quite conceivable that the consequent 
cell-fusion, as also the subsequent fusions of nuclei and of 
•chromosomes, are likewise cases of chemiotaxis, depending 
upon chemical differences between the fusing structures. 

The sexual process can only take place between cells which 
are related to each other in a certain degree (see Hybridism); 
that is, it depends upon sexual affinity. It is the general 
rule that it takes place between cells derived from different 
individuals of the same species; that is, cross-fertilization is 
the rule. This is necessarily the case when the male and female 
organs are developed upon different individuals, when the 
plant is said to be dioecious. When both kinds of organs are 
developed upon the same individual (monoecious), self-fertiliza- 
tion may and often does occur; but it is commonly hindered 
by various special arrangements, of which dichogamy is the 
most common; that is, that the male and female organs are 
not mature at the same time. But though these arrangements 
favour cross-fertilization, they do not absolutely prevent self- 
fertilization. In some cases, cleistogamic flowers, for instance, 
self-fertilization alone is possible (see Angiosperms). The 
general conclusion is that though cross-fertilization is the more 
advantageous form of sexual reproduction, still self-fertilization 
is more advantageous to the species than no fertilization at all. 

In considering this subject, it must be borne in mind that 
the terms used have different meanings when applied to certain 
heterosporous plants from those which they convey when 
applied to isosporus plants. In the latter cases their meaning 
is direct and simple: in the former it is indirect and somewhat 
complicated. In heterosporous plants generally the actual 
sexual organs are never borne upon the same individual, there 
is always necessarily a male and a female gametophyte; so 
that, strictly speaking, self-fertilization is impossible. But in 
the Phanerogams, where there is a process preliminary to fertiliza- 
tion, that of pollination, which is unknown in other plants, 
the terms and the conceptions expressed by them are applied, 
not to the real sexual organs, but to the spores. Thus a dioe- 
cious Phanerogam is one in which the microspores are developed 
by one individual, the megaspores by another; and again, 
self-fertilization is said to occur when the microspores (pollen) 
fall upon the stigma of the same flower (see Angiosperms) ; 
but this is really only self-pollination. 

To return to the sexual process itself. Whatever its nature, 
two sets of results follow upon the sexual act — (i) a zygote 
is formed, which is capable of developing into a new organism, 
from two cells, neither of which could so develop; (2) the 
hereditary sporophytic characters of the two parents are pos- 
sessed by the organism so developed. These two results will 
now be considered in some detail. 

(1) The Relation between the Sexual Act and Reproductive 
Capacity. — In the early days of the discovery of the sexual process, 
it was thought that the capacity for development imparted to 
the female cell was to be attributed to the doubling of its nuclear 
substance by the fusion with the male cell. Reproductive 
capacity does not, however, depend upon the bulk of the nuclear 
substance, for a spore, like an unfertilized female cell, contains 
t>ut the x number of chromosomes, and yet it can give rise to a 
new organism. Again, it has been observed (Winkler) that a 
non-nucleated fragment of an oosphere of Cysloseira (Fucaceae) 
can be " fertilized " by a spermatozoid and will then grow and 



divide to form a small embryo, though it necessarily contains only 
the x number of chromosomes. From this it would appear that 
some stimulating influence had been exerted by the male cell, 
and it is probably in this direction that the desired explanation 
is to be sought. Some important confirmatory facts have been 
recorded with regard to certain animals (sea-urchins). It has 
been observed (Loeb) that treatment with magnesium chloride 
will cause the ova to grow and segment; and similar results have 
been obtained (Winkler) by treating the ova with a watery 
extract of the male cells. Hence it may be inferred that the male 
cell carries with it, either in its cytoplasm (kinoplasm), or in 
its nucleus, extractable substances, perhaps of the nature of 
enzymes, that stimulate the female cell to growth. 

It may be mentioned that the stimulating effect of fertilization 
is not necessarily confined to the female cell; very frequently 
adjacent tissues are stimulated to growth and structural change. 
In a Phanerogam, for instance, the whole ovule grows and 
develops into the seed: the development of endosperm in the 
embryo-sac is initiated by another nuclear fusion, taking place 
between the second male nucleus and the endosperm-nucleus: 
the ovary, too, grows to form the fruit, which may be dry and hard 
or more or less succulent: the stimulating effect may extend to 
other parts of the flower; to the perianth, as in the mulberry; 
to the receptacle, as in the strawberry and the apple: or even 
beyond the flower to the axis of the inflorescence, as in the fig and 
the pine-apple. Analogous developments in other groups are 
the calyptra of the Bryophyta, the cystocarps of the Red Algae, 
the ascocarps of the Ascomycetes, the aecidia of the Uredineae, 
&c. 

(2) The Relation 0] the Sexual Act to Heredity. — The product of 
the sexual act is essentially a diploid cell, the zygote, which 
actually is or gives rise to a sporophyte. The sexual heredity 
of plants consequently presents the peculiar feature that the 
organism resultingrfrom the sexual act is quite unlike its imme- 
diate parents, which are both gametophytes. But it is clear 
that the sporophytic characters must have persisted, though in 
a latent condition, through the gametophyte, to manifest them- 
selves in the organism developed from the zygote. 

The real question at issue is as to the exact means by which 
these characters are transmitted and combined in the sexual act. 
There is a considerable amount of evidence that the hereditary 
characters are associated with the chromomeres, and that it is 
rather their linin-constituent than their chromatin which is 
functional (Strasburger) : that they constitute, in fact, the 
material basis of heredity. From this point of view it is 
probable that the last phase of the sexual act, the fusion of the 
chromomeres in meiosis, represents the combination of the two 
sets of parental characters. What exactly happens in the 
pseudo-chromosome stage is not known; at any rate this stage 
offers an opportunity for a complete redistribution of the 
substance of the chromomeres — in other words, of the parental 
pangens. It is a striking fact that, in the subsequent nuclear 
division, the distribution of the chromosomes derived from the 
male and female parents (when they can be distinguished) seems 
to be a matter of indifference: they are not equally distributed 
to the two daughter-nuclei. The explanation would appear 
to be this, that they are not any longer male and female as they 
were before meiotic fusion; and that it is because they now 
contain both male and female nuclear substance that their equal 
distribution to the daughter-nuclei is unimportant. 

The nature of this redistribution of the substance of the 
chromomeres is still under discussion. Some regard it as 
essentially a chemical process, resulting in the formation of new 
compounds: others consider it to be rather a physical process, 
a new material system being formed in the rearrangement of the 
pangens; here it must be left for the present. 

The various ways in which the parental characters manifest 
themselves in the progeny are fully dealt with in the articles 
Heredity, Hybridism, Mendelism. It will suffice to say that 
the progeny, though maintaining generally the characters of the 
species, do not necessarily exactly resemble either of the parents, 
nor do they necessarily present exactly intermediate characters: 



REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 



129 



they may vary more or less from the type. It is an interesting 
fact, the full significance of which has not yet been worked out, 
that, as a rule, plants that vary profusely are those in which 
the characteristic 2X number of chromosomes is high (60-100). 

Brief reference may be made to the cases of abnormal sexual 
or pseudo-sexual reproduction described above under Apogamy. 
Taking first the cases of true apogamy, there is clearly no need 
for any sexual process, for, since no mciotic division has taken 
place, the gametophyte is diploid; its cells, whether vegetative 
or contained in female organs, possess the capacity for both 
development and the transmission of the sporophytic characters. 
It is not remarkable that such a gametophyte should be able to 
give rise directly to a sporophyte; but it is remarkable, in the 
converse case of apospory, that a sporophyte should give rise to 
a diploid gametophyte rather than to another sporophyte. In 
the latter case the tendency to the regular development of the 
alternate form appears to override the influence of the diploid 
nucleus. 

Turning to the various forms of pseudo-apogamy, there are 
first those in which fusion takes place between two apparently 
female organs (some Uredineae; Christman), and those in 
which it takes place between nuclei within the same female 
organ (Humaria; Blackman). If these are to be regarded 
physiologically as sexual acts, it must be inferred that the fusing 
organs or nuclei have come to differ from each other to some 
extent; for it is unthinkable that equivalent female organs or 
cells should be able to fertilize, or to be fertilized by, one another. 
There are finally those cases in which apparently vegetative 
cells take part in the sexual act, as in Phragmidiam (Blackman), 
where the female organ fuses with an adjacent vegetative cell, 
and in the fem-prothallium (Farmer), where the nuclei of two 
vegetative cells fuse. They would seem to indicate that vege- 
tative cells may, in certain circumstances, contain sufficient 
germ-plasm to act as sexual organs without being differentiated 
as such. 

An interesting question is that of the origin of apogamy. It 
is no doubt the outcome of sexual degeneration; but this 
general statement requires some explanation. In certain cases 
apogamy seems to be the result of the degeneration of the male 
organ; as in Humaria, where there is no male organ, and in 
Lachnea, where the male organ is rudimentary. In others, 
as in the Uredineae, it is apparently the female organ that has 
degenerated, losing its receptive part, the trichogyne; the male 
cells (spermatia) are developed normally, and there is no reason 
to believe that they might not fertilize the female organ were 
there the means of penetrating it. In yet other cases the 
degeneration occurs at a different stage in the life-history, in 
the development of the spores. In the apogamous ferns in- 
vestigated, meiosis is suppressed and apogamy results. In the 
heterosporous plants which have been investigated (e.g. Marsilia, 
Eu-Alchemilla) it has been observed that the microspores are 
so imperfectly developed as to be incapable of germinating, so 
that fertilization is impossible; and it is perhaps to this that 
the occurrence of apogamy is to be attributed. This abnormal 
development of the spores may be regarded as a variation; and 
in most cases it occurs in plants that are highly variable and often 
have a high 2x number of chromosomes. 

It will be observed that such physiological explanation as 
can be given of the phenomena of reproduction is based upon the 
results of the minute investigation of the changes in nuclear 
structure associated with them. The explanation is often rather 
suggested than proved, and some fundamental facts still remain 
altogether unexplained. But it may be anticipated that a 
method of research which has already so successfully justified 
itself will not fail in the future to elucidate what still remains 
obscure. 

Bibliography. — This article should be read in connexion with 
the following: Algae, Angiosperms, Bryophyta, Cytology, 
Fungi, Gymnosperms,Heredity, Hybridism, Mendelism, Plants, 
Pteridophyta. 

As the bibliographies to these articles include all the publications 
containing the facts and theories mentioned here, it will suffice to 
append only a few papers of general importance: Blackman and 



Fraser. " Further Studies on the Sexuality of the Uredineae," 
Ann. Bot. (1906) vol. xx.; Farmer, " On the Structural Constituents 
of the Nucleus, and their Relation to the Organization of the In- 
dividual " (Croonian Lecture), Proc. Roy. Soc. (1907) vol. 79, series B ; 
Farmer and Digby, " Studies in Apospory and Apogamy in Ferns," 
Ann. Bot. (1907) vol. xxi.; Strasburger, Die stofflichen Grundlagen 
der Vererbung (1905); " Apogatnie bet Marsilia" Flora (1907), 
vol. 97; D. M. Mottier, Fecundation in Plants (1904), Carnegie 
Institution, Washington. (S. H. V.*) 

REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM, IN ANATOMY.— The repro- 
ductive system in some parts of its course shares structures in 
common with the urinary system (q.v.). In this article the 
following structures will be dealt with. In the male the testes, 
epididymis, vasa deferentia, vesiculae seminales, prostate, 
penis and urethra. In the female the ovaries, Fallopian tubes, 
uterus, vagina and vulva. 

Male Reproductive Organs. 

The testes or testicles are the glands in which the male repro- 
ductive cells are formed. They lie, one on each side, in the 
scrotum surrounded by the tunica vaginalis (see Coelom and 
Serous Membranes). Each is an oval gland about one and a 
half inches long with its long axis directed downward, backward 
and inward. There is a strong fibrous coat called the tunica 
albuginea, from which vertical and horizontal septa penetrate 
into the substance, thus dividing it into compartments or lobules 
in which the seminiferous tubes are coiled. It is estimated that 
the total length of these 
seminiferous tubes in the 
two glands is little short of 
a mile. (See fig. 1.) 

At the posterior part of the 
testis the fibrous sheath is 
greatly thickened to form the 
mediastinum testis, and con- 
tains a plexus of tubules 
called the rete testis (see fig. 
1), into which the semini- 
ferous tubes open. In this 
way the secretion of the gland 
is carried to its upper and 

back part, whence from fifteen From A. F. Dixon, Cunningham's Text-book 

to twenty small tubes (vasa 
efferentia) pass to the epidi- 
dymis. Each of these is 
convoluted before opening, C<P . Coni vasculosi. 



vcL, 




Fig. 1. — Diagram to illustrate the 
structure of the testis and epidi- 
dymis. 



s.t. Seminiferous 

tubule. 
vd. Vas deferens. 
v.e. Vas efferens. 
v.r. Tubuli recti. 



and forms what is known as c - , g!°t us m ? ] ' or - 

. g.m . Globus minor, 

a C01IUS VaSCUloSUS. r.v. Rete tests 

Under the microscope the << Septula testis. 
seminiferous tubules are seen 

to consist of a basement membrane surrounding several layers of 
epithelial cells, some of which are constantly being transformed 
into spermatozoa or male sexual cells. 

The epididymis (see fig. 1) is a soft body lying behind the testis; 
it is enlarged above to form the globus major or head, while 
below is a lesser swelling, the globus minor or tail. The whole 
epididymis is made up of a convoluted tube about 20 ft. 
long, from which one long diverticulum (vas aberrans) comes off. 
Between the globus major and the testis two small vesicles 
called the hydatids of Morgagni are often found. 

The vas deferens is the continuation of the tube of the epidi- 
dymis and starts at the globus minor; at first it is convoluted, 
but soon becomes straight, and runs up on the inner (mesial) 
side of the epididymis to the external abdominal ring in the 
abdominal wall. On its way up it is joined by several other 
structures, to form the spermatic cord; these are the artery 
(spermatic) and veins (pampiniform plexus) of the testis, the 
artery of the vas, the ilio-inguinal, genito-crural and sympathetic 
nerves, and the testicular lymphatics. After entering the 
external abdominal ring, these structures pass obliquely through 
the abdominal wall, lying in the inguinal canal for an inch and a 
half, until the internal abdominal ring is reached. Here they 
separate and the vas passes down the side of the pelvis and turns 

xxiii. s 



i3° 



REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 



inward to meet its fellow at the back of the bladder, just above 
the prostate. The whole length of the vas is 12 -to 18 in. and 
it is remarkable for the great thickness of its muscular walls, 
which gives it the feeling of a piece of whipcord when rolled 
between the finger and thumb. 

A little above the globus major a few scattered .tubules are 
found in children in front of the cord; these form the rudi- 
mentary structure known as the organ oj Giraldes or paradidymis. 
As the vas deferens approaches the prostate it enlarges and 
becomes slightly sacculated to act as a reservoir for the secretion 
of the testis; this part is the ampulla (see fig. 2). 



and run, side by side, through the prostate to open into the floor 
of the prostatic urethra. 

The prostate is partly a muscular and partly a glandular struc- 
ture, situated just below the bladder and traversed by the 
urethra; it is of a somewhat conical form with the base upward 
in contact with the bladder. Both vertically and transversely it 
measures about an inch and a quarter, while antero-posteriorly it 
is only about three-quarters of an inch, though its size is liable to 
great variation. It is enclosed in a fibrous capsule from which it 
is separated by the prostatic plexus of veins anteriorly. It is often 
described as formed of three lobes two lateral and a median or 

posterior, but careful 



Posterior superior 
iliac spine 



Ureter 

Great sciatic notch 

Vas deferens 

Spine of ischium 

Vas deferens 

Seminal vesicle 
Bladder wall 



Levator ani 



Prostate 
Ischio-rectal fossa- 
Tuberosity of } 
ischium ) 



Gluteus 




and recent 
throw doubt 
existence of 



Posterior superior 
iliac spine 



Cut end of rectum 
Apex of sacrum 
Great sciatic notch 
Ureter 
Peritoneum 
Spine of ischium 
Bladder wall 

Seminal vesicle 
Ampulla of vas deferens 



sections 
research 
on the 
the last. 

Microscopically the 
prostate consists of 
masses of long, slen- 
der, slightly branching 
glands, embedded in 
unstriped muscle and 
fibrous tissue ; these 
glands open by deli- 
cate ducts (about 
twenty in " number) 
into the prostatic 
urethra, which will be 
described later. In 
the anterior part of 
the gland are seen 
bundles of striped 
muscle fibres, which 
are of interest when 
the comparative ana- 
tomy of the gland 



< Cut eod of great sacro- is studied : they are 

/ sciatic ligament u~+ + ~,. „„„- :— ,.^,,-„ 

Common ejacuiatory duct better seen in young 



than in old prostates. 

The male urethra 
begins at the bladder 
and runs through the 
prostate and perineum 
to the penis, which it 
traverses as far as the 
tip. It is divided into 
a prostatic, membran- 
ous and spongy part, 
and is altogether about 
8 inches in length. 
The prostatic urethra 
The coccyx and the saero-sciatie ligaments, together with the muscles attached to them, have been removed. runs downward 

separated along the median rarjhe, and drawn outwards. A considerable .1 , ,v nrostate- 

rather nearer the an- 



Levator ani 
Tuberosity of ischium 

Ischio-rectal fossa 

Cut end of rectum 

External sphincter ani 

Glutens maximus 



From A. F. Dixon, Cunningham's Text-book of A natomy. 

Fig. 2. — View of the Base of the Bladder, Prostate, Seminal Vesicles and 
Vasa Deferentia from behind, 
gamer 
The levatores ani have been separated along the median raphe, and drawn outwards. A considerable \ 
portion of the rectum and the upper part of the right seminal vesicle have been taken away. 



The vesiculae seminales are sac-like diverticula, one on each 
side, from the lower part of the ampullae of the vasa deferentia. 
They are about 2 in. long and run outward behind the bladder 
and parallel to the upper margin of the prostate for some 
little distance, but usually turn upward near their blind 
extremity. When carefully dissected and unravelled each is 
found to consist of a thick tube, about 5 in. long, which is 
sharply bent upon itself two or three times, and also has several 
short, sac-like pouches or diverticula. The vesiculae seminales 
are muscular sacs with a mucous lining which is thrown into a 
series of delicate net-like folds. The convolutions are held 
together by the pelvic cellular tissue, and by involuntary muscle 
continuous with that of the bladder. It is probable that these 
vesicles are not reservoirs, as was at one time thought, but form 
some special secretion which mixes with that of the testes. 
Where the vesiculae join the ampullae of the vasa deferentia the 
ejaculatory ducts are formed; these are narrow and thin-walled, 



terior than the pos- 
terior part. It is about an inch and a quarter long, and 
in the middle of the gland it bends forward forming an 
angle (see fig. 5); here it is from a third to half an inch 
wide, though at the base and apex of the prostate it is 
narrower. When it is slit open from in front a longitudinal 
ridge is seen in its posterior wall, which is called the verumon- 
tanum or crista urethra, and on each side of this is a longitudinal 
depression, the prostatic sinus, into which numerous ducts of the 
prostate open, though some of them open-on to the anterolateral 
surface. Near the lower part of the verumontanum is a little 
pouch, the utricidus masculinus, about one-eighth of an inch 
deep, the opening of which is guarded by a delicate membranous 
circular fold, the male hymen. Close to the opening of the 
utriculus the ejaculatory ducts, already mentioned, open into the 
urethra by very small apertures. The part of the urethra above 
the openings of these ducts really belongs to the urinary system 
only, though it is convenient to describe it here. After leaving 



REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 



131 



the prostate the urethra runs more forward for about three- 
quarters of an inch, lying between the two layers of the triangular 




From C. S. Wallace's Prostatic Enlargement. 1 

Fig. 3. — Coronal Section through the Pelvis, showing the relations 
of the bladder above,, prostate and bulb below. 

ligament, both of which it pierces. This is known as the 
membranous urethra, and is very narrow, being gripped by the 
compressor urethrae muscle. 

The spongy urethra is that part which is enclosed in the penis 
after piercing the anterior layer of the triangular ligament. 
At first it b'es in the substance of the bulb and, later, of the 
corpus spongiosum, while finally it passes through the glans. 
In the greater part of its course it is a transverse slit, but in tra- 
versing the glans it enlarges considerably to form the fossa 
naviadaris, and here, in transverse section, it looks like an 
inverted T (J.), then an inverted Y (A), and finally at its opening 




From C. S. Wallace's Prostatic Enlargement. 

Fig. 4.. — Transverse Section of a young Prostate, showing wavy 

striped muscle in front, urethra in the middle, and the two ejacu- 

latory ducts behind. 

(external meatus) a vertical slit. Into the whole length of the 
urethra mucous glands (glands of Littri) open, and in the roof of 

1 Figs. 3, 4, 5 and 9 of this article are redrawn from Cuthbert S. 
Wallace's Prostatic Enlargement by permission of the managers of 
The Oxford Medical Publications. 



the fossa navicularis the mouth of one of these is sometimes so 
large that it may engage the point of a small catheter and is 
known as the lacuna magna. As a rule the meatus is the 
narrowest part of the whole canal. 

Opening into the spongy urethra where it passes through 
the bulb are the ducts of two small glands known as Cowper's 
glands, which lie on each side of the membranous urethra and 
are best seen in childhood. 

Tho penis is the intromit tent organ of generation, and is 
made up of three cylinders of erectile tissue, covered by skin 
and subcutaneous tissue without fat. In a transverse section 
two of these cylinders (the corpora cavernosa) are placed above, 
side by side, while one, the corpus spongiosum, is below. Pos- 
teriorly, at what is known as the root of the penis, the two 
corpora cavernosa diverge, become more and more fibrous in 
structure, and are attached on each side to the rami of the 
ischium, while the corpus spongiosum becomes more vascular 
and enlarges to form the bulb. It has already been pointed 
out that the whole length of the corpus spongiosum is traversed 
by the urethra. The anterior part of the penis is formed by 
the glans, a bell-shaped structure, apparently continuous with 
the corpus spongiosum, and having the conical ends of the cor- 
pora cavernosa fitted into depressions on its posterior surface. 
On the dorsum of the penis the rim of the bell-shaped glans 
projects beyond the level of the corpora cavernosa, and is 




From C. S. Wallace's Prostatic Enlargement. 
Fig. 5. — Sagittal Median Section of Bladder, Prostate and Rectum, 
showing one of the ejaculatory ducts. 

known as the corona glandis. The skin of the penis forms 
a fold which covers the glans and is known as the prepuce or 
foreskin; when this is drawn back a median fold, the frenulum 
praeputii, is seen running to just below the meatus. After 
forming the prepuce the skin is reflected over the glans and 
here looks like mucous membrane. The structure of the cor- 
pora cavernosa consists of a strong fibrous coat, the tunica 
albuginea, from the deep surface of which numerous fibrous 
trabeculae penetrate the interior and divide it into a number 
of spaces which are lined with endothelium and communicate 
with the veins. Between the two corpora cavernosa the sheath 
is not complete and, having a comb-like appearance, is known 
as the septum pectinatum. The structure of the corpus 
spongiosum and glans resembles that of the corpora cavernosa, 
but the trabeculae are finer and the network closer. 

Female Reproductive Organs. 

The ovary is an organ which in shape and size somewhat 
resembles a large almond, though its appearance varies con- 
siderably in different individuals, and at. different times of life. 
It lies in the side wall of the pelvis with its long axis nearly 
vertical and having its blunt end (tubal pole) upward. Its 
more pointed lower end is attached to the uterus by the h'ga- 
ment of the ovary, while its anterior border has a short reflection 
of peritoneum, known as the mesovarium, running forward to 
the broad ligament of the uterus. It is through this anterior 
border that the vessels and nerves enter and leave the gland. 

Under the microscope the ovary is seen to be covered by a 



132 



REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 



layer of cubical cells, which are continuous near the anterior 
border with the cells of the peritoneum. Deep to these is the 
ovarian stroma, composed of fibrous tissue, and embedded 
in it are numerous nests of epithelial cells, the Graafian fol- 
licles, in various stages of development. During the child- 
bearing period of life some of these will be nearing the ripe 
condition, and if one such be looked at it will be seen to con- 
tain one large cell, the ovum, surrounded by a mass of small 
cells forming the discus proligerus. At one point this is con- 
tinuous with a layer of cells called the stratum granulosum 
which lines the outer wall of the follicle, but elsewhere the two 
layers are separated by fluid, the liquor folliculi. When the 
follicle bursts, as it does in time, the ovum escapes on to the 
surface of the ovary. 

The Fallopian tubes receive the ova and carry them to the 
uterus. That end of each which lies in front of the ovary is 
called the fimbriated extremity, and has a number of fringes 
{fimbriae) hanging from it; one of the largest of these is the 
ovarian fimbria and is attached to the upper or tubal pole of 
the ovary. The small opening among the fimbriae by which 
the tube communicates with the peritoneal cavity is known as 
the ostium abdominale, and from this the lumen of the tube 
runs from four to four and a half inches, until it opens into the 
cavity of the uterus by an extremely small opening. In the 
accompanying figure (fig. 6) the Fallopian tube and ovary 

Parovarium Ligament 

Fallopian tube I Ovary of ovary Uterus a 



of uterus 



Hydatid' 




Fimbriated end 



Round ligament 



A. F. Dixon, Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 

Fig. 6. — A. The Uterus and Broad Ligament seen from behind (the broad 

ligament has been spread out). 

a, b and c, the isthmus tubae, the ligament of the ovary, and the round ligament of the 

right side cut short. 
B. Diagrammatic Representation of the Uterine Cavity opened up from in front. 

are pulled out from the uterus; this, as has been explained, 
is not the position of the ovary in the living body, nor is it 
of the tube, the outer half of which lies folded on the front 
and inner surface of the ovary. The Fallopian tubes, like many 
other tubes in the body, are made chiefly of imstriped muscle, 
the outer layer of which is longitudinal and the inner circular; 
deep to this are the submucous and mucous coats, the latter 
being lined with ciliated epithelium (see Epithelial Tissues), 
and thrown into longitudinal pleats. . Superficially the tube 
is covered by a serous coat of peritoneum. The calibre 
gradually contracts from the peritoneal to the uterine 
opening. 

The uterus or womb is a pear-shaped, very thick-walled, 
muscular bag, lying in the pelvis between the bladder and 
rectum. In the non-pregnant condition it is about three 
inches long and two in its broadest part, which is above. The 
upper half or body of the uterus is somewhat triangular with 
its base upward, and has an anterior surface which is moderately 
flat, and a posterior convex. The lower half is the neck or 
cervix and is cylindrical; it projects into the anterior wall 
of the vagina, into the cavity of which it opens by the os uteri 
externum. This opening in a uterus which has never been 
pregnant is a narrow transverse slit, rarely a circular 'aperture, 
but in those uteri in which pregnancy has occurred the slit is 
much wider and its lips are thickened and gaping and often 



scarred. The interior of the body of the uterus shows a com- 
paratively small triangular cavity (see fig. 6, B), the anterior 
and posterior walls of which are in contact. The base of the 
triangle is upward, and at each lateral angle one of the Fallopian 
tubes opens. The apex leads into the canal of the cervix, 
but between the two there is a slight constriction known as the 
os uteri internum. The canal of the cervix is about an inch 
long, and is spindle-shaped when looked at from in front; 
its anterior and posterior walls are in contact, and its lining 
mucous membrane is raised into a pattern which, from its 
likeness to a cypress twig, is called the arbor vitae. This arrange- 
ment is obliterated after the first pregnancy. On making 
a mesial vertical section of the uterus the cavity is seen as a 
mere slit which is bent about its middle to form an angle the 
opening of which is forward. A normal uterus is therefore 
bent forward on itself, or anteflexed. In addition to this, its 
long axis forms a marked angle with that of the vagina, so that 
the whole uterus is bent forward or anteverted. As a rule, 
in adults the uterus is more or less on one side of the mesial 
plane of the body. From each side of the uterus the peritoneum 
is reflected outward, as a two-layered sheet, to the side wall 
of the pelvis; this is the broad ligament, and between its layers 
lie several structures of importance. Above, there is the Fal- 
lopian tube, already described; below and in front is the round 
ligament; behind, the ovary projects backward, and just above 
Lateral angle this, when the broad . ligament is 
stretched out as in fig. 6, are the 
epoophoron and paroophoron with the 
duct of Gartner. 

The round ligament is a cord of un- 
striped muscle which runs from the 
lateral angle of its own side of the 
uterus forward to the internal abdominal 
ring, and so through the inguinal canal 
to the upper part of the labium majus. 

The epoophoron or parovarium is a 
collection of short tubes which radiate 
from the upper border of the ovary when 
the broad ligament is pulled out as in 
fig. 6. It is best seen in very young 
children and represents the vasa effer- 
ent ia in the male. Near the ovary the 
tubes are closed, but nearer the Fal- 
lopian tube they open into another 
tube which is nearly at right angles to 
them, and which runs toward the 
uterus, though in the human subject 
it is generally lost before reaching that organ. It is known 
as the duet of Gartner, and is the homologue of the male 
epididymis and vas deferens. Some of the outermost tubules 
of the epoophoron are sometimes distended to form hydatids. 
Nearer the uterus than the epoophoron a few scattered tubules 
are occasionally found which are looked upon as the homologue 
of the organ of Giraldes in the male, and are known as the 
paroophoron. 

The vagina is a dilatable muscular passage, lined with mucous 
membrane, which leads from the uterus to the external genera- 
tive organs; its direction is, from the uterus, downward and 
forward, and its anterior and posterior walls are in contact, so 
that in a horizontal section it appears as a transverse slit. As 
the orifice is neared the slit becomes H-shaped. Owing to the 
fact that the neck of the uterus enters the vagina from in 'front, 
the anterior wall of that tube is only about 2\ in., while the 
posterior is 3J. The mucous membrane is raised into a series of 
transverse folds or rugae, and between it and the muscular wall 
are plexuses of veins forming erectile tissue. The relation of the 
vagina to the peritoneum is noticed under Coelum and Serous 
Membranes. 

The vulva or pudendum comprises all the female external 
generative organs, and consists of the mons Veneris, labia 
majora and minora, clitoris, urethral orifice, hymen, bulbs of 
the vestibule, and glands of Bartholin. The mons Veneris ;s the 



Vaginal cavity 
B 



REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 



x 33 



elevation in front of the pubic bones caused by a mass of fibro- 
fatty tissue; the skin over it is covered by hair in the adult. The 
labia major a are two folds of skin, also containing fibro-fatty 
tissue and covered on their outer surfaces by hair, running down 
from the mons Veneris to within an inch,of the anus and touching 
one another by their internal surfaces. They are the homologues 
of the scrotum in the male. The labia minora are two folds of 
skin containing no fat, which are usually hidden by the labia 
majora and above enclose the clitoris, they are of a pinkish 
colour and look like mucous membrane. 

The clitoris is the representative of the penis, and consists of 
two corpora cavernosa which posteriorly diverge to form the 
crura clitoridis, and are attached to the ischium; the organ is 
about an inch and a half long, and ends anteriorly in a rudi- 
mentary glans which is covered by the junction of the labia 
minora; this junction forms the prepuce of the clitoris. 

The orifice of the urethra is about an inch below the glans 
clitoridis and is slightly puckered. 

The hymen is a fold of mucous membrane which surrounds 
the orifice of the vagina and is usually only seen in the virgin. 
As has been pointed out above, it is represented in the male by 
the fold at the opening of the uterus masculinus. Occasionally 
the hymen is imperforate and then gives rise to trouble in 
menstruation. 

The bulbs of the vestibule are two masses of erectile tissue 
situated one on each side of the vaginal orifice: above they are 
continued up to the clitoris; they represent the bulb and the 
corpus spongiosum of the male, split into two, and the fact that 
they are so divided accounts for the urethra failing to be 
enclosed in the clitoris as it is in the penis. 

The glands of Bartholin are two oval bodies about half an inch 
long, lying on each side of the vagina close to its opening; they 
represent Cowper's glands in the male, and their ducts open by 
minute orifices between the hymen and the labia minora. 

From the above description it will be seen that all the parts 
of the male external genital organs are represented in the 
female, though usually in a less developed condition, and that, 
owing to the orifice of the vagina, they retain their original 
bi-lateral form. 

For further details see Quain's Anatomy (London: Longmans, 
Green & Co.) ; Gray's Anatomy (London : Longmans, Green & Co.) ; 
Cunningham's Text-BoSk of Anatomy (Edinburgh: Young J. Pent- 
land), or Macafister's Anatomy (London*: Griffin & Co.). 

Embryology. 
The development of the reproductive organs is so closely 
interwoven with that of the urinary that some reference from 
this article to that on the Urinary System is necessary. It 
will "here be convenient to take up the development at the stage 
depicted in the accompanying figure (fig. 7), in which the genital 
ridge (a) is seen on each side of the attachment of the mesentery; 
external to this, and forming another slight ridge of its own, is 
the Wolffian duct, while a little later the Mullerian duct is 
.formed and lies ventral to the Wolffian. The early history of 
these ducts is indicated in the article on the Urinary System. 
Until the fifth or sixth week the development of the genital 
ridge is very much the same in the two sexes, and consists of 
cords of cells growing from the epithelium-covered surface into 
the mesenchyme, which forms the interior of the ridge. In 
these cords are some large germ cells which are distinguishable 
at a very early stage of development. It must, of course, be 
understood that the germinal epithelium covering the ridge, and 
the mesenchyme inside it, are both derived from the mesoderm 
or middle layer of the embryo. About the fifth week of human 
embryonic life the tunica albuginea appears in the male, from 
which septa grow to divide the testis into lobules, while the 
epithelial cords form the seminiferous tubes, though these do 
not gain a lumen until just before puberty. From the adjacent 
mesonephros cords of cells grow into the attached part of the 
genital ridge, or testis, as it now is, and from these the rete testis 
is developed. Recent research, however, points to these cords 
of the rete testis ct ovarii as being derived from the coelomic 
epithelium instead of from the mesonephros. 



In the female the same growth of epithelial cords into the 
mesenchyme of the genital ridge takes place, but each one is 



Neural tube 



ADrta— 



Mesentery 
Bloodvessel — —— 




— .SpiruJ ganglioo 



Spinal nerve 



•Yem 

•Wolffian 4wX 
a 
Intestine 



From A. F. Dixon, Cunningham's Ttxt-Book of Anatomy. 

Fig. 7. — Transverse Section through a Rat Embryo- 
a. shows position of germinal epithelium. 

distinguished by a bulging toward its middle, in which alone the 
large germ cells are found. Eventually this bulging part is 
broken up into a series of small portions, each of which contains 
one germ cell or ovum, and gives rise to a Graafian follicle. 
Mesonephric cords appear as in the male; they do not enter the 
ovary, however, but form a transitory network (rete ovarii) in the 
mesovarium. As each genital gland enlarges it remains attached 
to the rest of the intermediate cell mass by a constricted fold of 
the coelomic membrane, known as the mesorchium in the male, 
and the mesovarium in the female. Lying dorsal to the genital 
ridge in the intermediate cell mass is the mesonephros, consisting 



Ep.O, 



M.N.< 




MtK 



Fig. 8. — Diagram of the Formation of the Genito-Urinary Apparatus. 
The first figure is the generalized type, the second the male and 
the third the female specialized arrangements. Suppressed 
parts are dotted. 



Pro. N. Pronephros. 

M.N. Mesonephros. 

Mt.N. Metanephros. 

B. Bladder. 

Clo. Cloaca. 

R. Rectum. 

M.D. Mullerian duct. 

W.D. Wolffian duct. 

Ur. Ureter. 

S.H.; Sessile hydatid. 

P.H. Pedunculated hydatid. 

S.G. Sexual gland. 



N. Nephrostome. 

M. C. Malpighian corpuscle. 

T. Testis. 

E. Epididymis. 

O.G. Organ of Giraldfes. 

V.D. Vas deferens. 

U.M. Uterus masculinus. 

O. Ovary. 

Ep.O. Epofiphoron. 

Par.O. Paroophoron. 

F.T. Fallopian tube. 

U. Uterus. 



of numerous tubules which open into the Wolffian duct. This 
at first is an important excretory organ, but during development 
becomes used for other purposes. In the male, as has been 
shown, it may form the rete testis, and certainly forms the vasa 
efferentia and globus major of the epididymis: in addition to 
these, some of its separate tubes probably account for the vas 
aberrans and the organ of Giraldes (sec fig. 8, E. and O.G.). In 
the female the tubules of the epobphoron represent the main part, 



*34 



REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 



while the paroophoron, like the organ of Giraldes in the male, 
is probably formed from some separate tubes (see fig. 8, Ep. 0. 
and Par. O.). 

The Wolffian duct, which, in the early embryo, carries the 
excretion of the mesonephros to the cloaca, forms eventually the 
body and tail of the epididymis, the vas deferens, and ejaculatory 
duct in the male, the vesicula seminalis being developed as a 
pouch in its course. In the female this duct is largely done 
away with, but remains as the collecting tube of the epoophoron, 
and in some mammals as the duct of Gartner, which runs down 
the side of the vagina to open into the vestibule. 

The Miillerian duct, as it approaches the cloaca, joins its 
fellow of the opposite side, so that there is only one opening into 
the ventral cloacal wall. In the male the lower part only of it 
remains as the uterus masculinus (fig. 8, U.M.), but in the female 
the Fallopian tubes, uterus, and probably the vagina, are all 
formed from it (fig. 8, F.T. and U.). In both sexes a small hydatid 
or vesicle is liable to be formed at the beginning of both the 
Wolffian and MuTlerian duct (fig. 8, P.H. and S.H.); in the male 
these are close together in front of the globus major of the 
epididymis, and are known as the sessile and pedunculated 
hydatids of Morgagni. In the female there is a hydatid among 
the fimbriae of the Fallopian tube which of course is Miillerian 
and corresponds to the sessile hydatid in the male, while another 
is often found at the beginning of the collecting tube of the 
epoophoron and is probably formed by a blocked mesonephric 
tubule. This is the pedunculated hydatid of the male. The 
development of the vagina, as Berry Hart (J own. Anal, and 
Phys. xxxv. 330) has pointed out, is peculiar. Instead of 
the two Miillerian ducts joining to form the lumen of its lower 
third, as they do in the case of the uterus and its upper two-thirds, 
they become obliterated, and their place is taken by two solid 
cords of cells, which Hart thinks are derived from the Wolffian 
ducts and are therefore probably of ectodermal origin, though 
this is open to doubt. These cords later become canalized and 
the septum between them is obliterated. 

The common chamber, or cloaca, into which the alimentary, 
urinary and reproductive tubes open in ' the foetus, has the 
urinary bladder (the remains of -the allantois) opening from its 
ventral wall (see Placenta and Urinary System). 

During development the alimentary or anal part of the cloaca 
is separated from the urogenital, and in the article Alimentary 
System the hitherto accepted method of this separation' is 
described. The question has, however, lately been reinvesti- 
gated by F. Wood Jones, who says that the anal part is com- 
pletely shut off from the urogenital and ends in a blind pouch 
which grows toward the surface and meets a new ectodermal 
depression, the main point being that the permanent anus is 
not, according to him, any part of the original cloacal aperture, 
but a new perforation. This description is certainly more in 
harmony with the malformations occurring in this region than 
the old one, and only awaits confirmatory evidence to be gener- 
ally accepted. 

The external generative organs have at first the same appear- 
ance in the two sexes, and consist of a swelling, the genital 
eminence, in the ventral wall of the cloaca. This in the male 
becomes the penis and in the female the clitoris. Throughout 
the generative system the male organs depart most from the 
undifferentiated type, and in the case of the genital eminence 
two folds grow together and enclose the urogenital passage, 
thus making the urethra perforate the penis, while in the female" 
these two folds remain separate as the labia minora or nymphae. 
Sometimes in the male the folds fail to unite completely, and 
then there is an opening into the urethra on the under surface 
of the penis — a condition known as hypospadias. 

In the undifferentiated condition the integument surrounding 
the genital opening is raised into a horseshoelike swelling with 
its convexity over the pubic symphysis and its concavity to- 
ward the anus; the lateral parts of this remain separate in 
the female and form the labia majora, but in the male they 
unite to form the scrotum. The median part forms the mons 
Veneris or mons Jovis. 



The Descent of the Testis. — It has been shown that the testis 
is formed in the loin region of the embryo close to the kidney, 
and it is only in the later months of foetal life that it changes 
this position for that of the scrotum. In the lower part of the 
genital ridge a fibro-mu^cular cord is formed which stretches 
from the lower part of the testis to the bottom of the scrotum; 
it is known as the gubernaculum testis, and by its means the 
testis is directed into the scrotum. Before the testis descends, 
a pouch of peritoneum called the processus vaginalis passes 
down in front of the gubernaculum through the opening in the 
abdominal wall, which afterwards becomes the inguinal canal, 
into the scrotum, and behind this the testis descends, carrying 
with it the mesonephros and mesonephric duct. These, as has 
already been pointed out, form the epididymis and vas def- 
erens. At the sixth month the testis lies opposite the abdom- 
inal ring, and at the eighth reaches the bottom of the scrotum 
and invaginates the processus vaginalis from behind. Soon 
after birth the communication between that part of the pro- 
cessus vaginalis which now surrounds the testis and the general 
cavity of the peritoneum disappears, and the part which remains 
forms the tunica vaginalis. Sometimes the testis fails to pass 
beyond the inguinal canal, and the term " cryptorchism "is 
used for such cases. 

In the female the ovary undergoes a descent like that of the 
testis, but it is less marked owing to the fact that the guber- 
naculum becomes attached to the Miillerian duct where that 
duct joins its fellow to form the uterus; hence the ovary does not 
descend lower than the level of the top of the uterus, and the 
part of the gubernaculum running between it and the uterus 
remains as the ligament of the ovary, while the part running 
from the uterus to the labium is the round ligament. In rare 
cases the ovary may be drawn into the labium just as the 
testis is drawn into the scrotum. 

Comparative Anatomy. — In the Urochorda, the class to which 
Salpa, Pyrosoma and the sea squirts (Ascidians) belong, male" 
and female generative glands (gonads) are present in the same 
individual; they are therefore hermaphrodite. 

In the Acrania (Amphioxus) there are some twenty-six 
pairs of gonads arranged segmentally along the side of the 
pharynx and intestine and bulging into the atrium. Between 
them and the atrial wall, however, is a, rudimentary remnant 
of the coelom, through which the spermatozoa or ova (for the 
sexes are distinct) burst into the atrial cavity. There are no 
genital ducts. 

In the Cyclostomata (lampreys and hags) only one median 
gonad is found, and its contents (spermatozoa or ova) burst 
into the coelom and then pass through the genital pores into 
the urogenital sinus and so to the exterior. It is probable 
that the single gonad is accounted for by the fact that its fellow 
has been suppressed? 

In the Elasmobranchs or cartilaginous fishes there are usually 
two testes or two ovaries, though in the dogfish one of the 
latter is suppressed. From each testis, which in fish is popularly 
known as the soft roe, vasa efferentia lead into the mesonephros, 
and the semen is conducted down the vas deferens or mesone- 
phric duct into the urogenital sinus, into which also the ureters 
open. Sometimes one or more thin-walled diverticula — the 
sperm sacs — open close to the aperture of the vas deferens. 
In the female the ova are large, on account of the quantity of 
yolk, and they burst into the coelum, from which they pass 
into the large Miillerian ducts or oviducts. In the oviparous 
forms, such as the common dogfish (Scyllium), there is an 
oviducal gland which secretes a horny case for the egg after it 
is fertilized, and these cases have various shapes in 'different 
species. Some x of the Elasmobranchs, e.g., the spiny dogfish 
(Acanthias), are viviparous, and in these the lower part of the 
oviduct is enlarged and acts as a uterus. In male elasmo- 
branchs the anterior part of the MuTlerian duct persists. 
Paired intromittent organs (claspers) are developed on the 
pelvic fins of the males; these conduct the semen into the 
cloaca of the female. 

In the teleostean and ganoid fishes (Teleostomi) the nephridial 



REPSOLD 



135 



ducts are not always used as genital ducts, but special 
coelomic ducts are formed (see Coelom and Serous Mem- 
branes). 

In the Dipnoi or mudfish long coiled Miillcrian ducts are 
present, but the testes either pour their secretion directly into 
the coelom or, as in Protopterus, have ducts which are probably 
coelomic in origin. 

In both the Teleostomi and Dipnoi the testes and ovaries 
are paired. 

True hermaphroditism is known among fishes, the hag 
(Myxine) and the sea perch (Serranus) being examples. In 
many others it occurs as an abnormality. 

In the Amphibia both ovaries and testes are symmetrical. 
In the snakelike forms which are found in the order Gymno- 
phiona the testes are a series of separate lobules extending 
for a long distance, one behind the other, and joined by a 
connecting duct from which vasa efferentia pass into the Mal- 
pighian capsules of the kidneys, and so the sperm is conducted 
to the mesonephric duct, which acts both as vas deferens and 
ureter. The Mullerian ducts or oviducts are long and often 
coiled in Amphibia, and usually open separately into the cloaca. 
There is no penis, but in certain forms, especially the Gymno- 
phiona, the cloaca is protrusible in the male and acts as an 
intromittent organ. Corpora adiposa or fat bodies are present 
in all Amphibians, and probably nourish the sexual cells during 
the hibernating period. 

In Reptilia two testes and ovaries are developed, though 
they are often asymmetrical in position. In Lizards the yas 
deferens and ureter open into the cloaca by a common orifice; 
as they do in the human embryo. In these animals there are 
two penes, which can be protruded and retracted through the 
vent; but in the higher reptiles (Chelonia and Crocodilia) there 
is a single median penis rising from the ventral wall of the 
cloaca, composed of erectile tissue and deeply grooved on its 
dorsal surface for the passage of the sperm. 

In birds the right ovary and oviduct degenerates, and the 
left alone is functional. In the male the ureter and vas deferens 
open separately into the cloaca, and in the Ratitae (ostriches) 
and Anseres (ducks and geese) a well-developed penis is present 
in the male. In the ostrich this is fibrous, and bifurcated at 
its base, suggesting the crura penis of higher forms. 

Among the Mammalia the Monotremata (Ornithorhyhchus 
and Echidna) have bird-like affinities. The left ovary is larger 
than the right, and the oviducts open separately into the cloaca 
and do not fuse to form a uterus. The testes retain their 
abdominal position; and the Vasa deferentia open into the base 
of the penis, which lies in a separate sheath in the ventral wall of 
the cloaca, and shows an advance on that of the reptiles and 
birds in that the groove is now converted into a complete tunnel. 
In the female there is a well-developed clitoris, having the same 
relations as the penis. 

In the marsupials the cloaca is very short, and the vagina and 
rectum open separately into it. The two uteri open separately 
and three vaginae are formed,, two lateral and one median. The 
two lateral join together below to form a single median lower 
vagina, and it is by means of these that the spermatozoa pass 
up into* the oviducts. The upper median vagina at first does 
not open into the lower one, but during parturition a com- 
munication is established which in some animals remains 
permanent (see J. P. Hill, Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, 1899 
and 1900). This tripartite arrangement of the upper part of the 
marsupial vagina is of especial interest in connexion with the 
views of the. embryology of the canal detailed by Berry Hart and 
already referred to. 

When, as in marsupials, the two uteri open separately into the 
vagina by two ora, the arrangement is spoken of as uterus duplex. 
When the two uteri join below and open by one os externum, it 
is known as uterus bipartitus. When the uterus bifurcates 
above and has two horns for the reception of the Fallopian 
tubes (oviducts), but is otherwise single, the term uterus bicomis 
is given to it, while the single uterus of man and other Primates 
is called uterus simplex. From the marsupials upward the 



ovarian end of the Fallopian tube has the characteristic fimbriated 
appearance noticed in human anatomy. 

In some mammals, such as the sow and the cow, the Wolffian 
duct is persistent in the female and runs along the side of the 
vagina as the duct of Gartner. It is possible that the lateral 
vaginae of the marsupials are of Wolffian origin. 

In marsupials the testes descend into the scrotum, which lies 
in these animals in front of instead of behind the penis. In some " 
mammals, such as the elephant, they never reach the scrotum at 
all; while in others, e.g. many rodents, they can be drawn up 
into the abdomen or lowered into the scrotum. The subject 
of the descent of the testicles has been very fully treated by 
H. Klaatsche, " Ueber den Descensus testiculorum," Morph. 
Jahrb., Bd. xvi. 

The prostate is met with in its most simple forms in marsupials, 
in which it is a mere thickening of the mucous membrane of the 
urethra; in the sheep it forms a bilateral elongated mass of 
gland tissue lying behind the urethra and surrounded by a well- 
developed layer of striped muscle. In the sloth it is said to be 
altogether absent, while in many of the insectivores and rodents 
it consists of many lobes which usually show a bilateral arrange- 
ment. The vesiculae seminales are. usually present in the 
Eutheria or higher mammals, and sometimes, as in the hedge- 
hog, are very large, though they are absent in the Carnivora. 
Cowper's glands are usually present and functional throughout 




From C. S. Wallace's Prostatic Enlargement. 

Fig. 9. — Transverse Section of Sheep's Prostate. 

life. The uterus masculinus is also usually present, but there is 
grave doubt whether the large organ called by this name in the 
rabbit should not rather be regarded as homologous with part 
of the vesiculae seminales. The penis shows many diversities 
of arrangement; above the marsupials its two crura obtain an 
attachment to the ischium. In many mammals it is quite hidden 
by the skin in the flaccid condition, and its external orifice may 
range from the perineum in the marsupials to the middle of 
the ventral wall of the abdomen in the ruminants. In the 
Marsupialia, Rodentia, Chiroptera, Carnivora and some Primates 
an os penis is developed in connexion with the corpora cavernosa. 
The clitoris is present in all mammals; sometimes, as in the 
female hyena, it is very large, and at others, as in the lemur, 
it is perforated by the urethra. 

For further details and literature, see Oppers Lehrbuch der ver- 
gleich. tnikroskop. Anatomie der Wirbelfhierc, Bd. iv. (Jena, 1904); 
also Gegenbaur's Vergleich. Anat. der Wirbelthicre, and Wiedersheim's 
Comparative Anatomy of Vertebrates t translated by W. N. Parker 
(London, 1907). (F. G. P.) 

REPSOLD, JOHANN GEORG (1771-1830), German instru- 
ment maker, was born at Wremen in Hanover on the 23rd of 
September 177 1, and became an engineer and afterwards chief 
of the fire brigade in Hamburg, where he started business as an 
instrument maker early in the' 19th century. He was killed by 
the fall of a wall during a fire at Hamburg on the 14th of January 
1830. The business was continued by his sons Georg (1804-1884) 



136 



REPTILES 



[HISTORY 



and Adolf (1806-1871), and his grandsons Johann Adolf and 
Oskar Philipp. 

J. G. Repsold introduced essential improvements in the meridian 
circles by substituting microscopes (on Jesse Ramsden's plan) for 
the verniers to read the circles, and by making the various parts 
perfectly symmetrical. For a number of years the firm furnished 
meridian circles to the observatories at Hamburg, Konigs- 
berg, Pulkova, &c.; later on its activity declined, while Pistor 
and Martins of Berlin rose to eminence. But after the discon- 
tinuance of this firm that of Repsold again came to the front, not 
only in the construction of transit circles, but also of equatorial 
mountings and more especially of hehometers (see Micro- 
meter). 

REPTILES (Lat. Reptilia, creeping things, from reptilis; 
refere, to creep; Gr. 'ipireiv, whence the term " herpetology," 
for the science dealing with them). In the days before Linnaeus, 
writers comprised the animals which popularly are known as 
tortoises and turtles, crocodiles, lizards and snakes, frogs and 
toads, newts and salamanders, under the name of oviparous 
quadrupeds or four-limbed animals which lay eggs. Linnaeus, 
desirous of giving expression to the extraordinary fact that many 
of these animals pass part of their life in the water and part on 
land, 1 substituted the name of Amphibia for the ancient term. 
Subsequent French naturalists (Lyonnet 2 and Brisson 3 ) con- 
sidered that the creeping mode of locomotion was a more general 
characteristic of the class than their amphibious habits, and 
consequently proposed the scarcely more appropriate name of 
Reptiles. 

As naturalists gradually comprehended the wide gap existing 
between frogs, toads, &c, on the one hand, and the other 
oviparous quadrupeds on the other, they either adopted the 
name of Batrachia for the former and that of Amphibia for the 
latter, or they restricted the term Amphibia to Batrachians, 
calling the remainder of these creatures reptiles. Thus the term 
Amphibia, as used by various authors, may apply (1) to all the 
various animals mentioned, or (2) to Batrachians only (see 
Batrachia). The term Reptiles (Reptilia) is used (1) by some 
for all the animals mentioned above, and (2) by others, as in the 
present article, for the same assemblage of animals after the 
exclusion of Batrachians. 

Equally varying are the limits of the term Saurians, 
which occurs so frequently in every scientific treatise on this 
subject. At first it comprised living crocodiles and lizards only, 
with which a number of fossil forms were gradually associated. 
As the characters and affinities of the latter became better 
known, some of them were withdrawn from the Saurians, and at 
present it is best to abandon the term altogether. 

I. History of Herpetology 

Certain kinds of reptiles are mentioned in the earliest written 
records or have found a place among the fragments of the oldest 
relics of human art. Such evidences, however, form no part of 
a succinct Teview of the literature of the subject such as it is 
proposed to give here. We distinguish in it six periods: (1) the 
Aristotelian; (2) the Linnaean (formation of a class Amphibia, 
in which reptiles and Batrachians are mixed); (3) the period 
of the elimination of Batrachians as one of the reptilian orders 
(Brongniart) ; (4) that of the separation of reptiles and Bat- 
rachians as distinct subclasses; (5) that of the recognition of a 
class Reptilia as part of the Sauropsida (Huxley) ; (6) that of the 
discovery of fossil skeletons sufficiently well preserved to reveal, 
in its general outlines, the past history of the class. 

1. The Aristotelian' Period. — Aristotle was the first to deal 
with the reptiles known to him as members of a distinct portion 
of the animal kingdom, and to point out the character- 
istics by which they resemble each other and differ from 
other vertebrate and invertebrate animals. The plan of his 

1 " Polymorpha in his amphibiis natura duplicem vitam plerisque 
concessit." 

2 Thiologie des insectes de Lesser (Paris, I745)> i- 9 1 . note 5- 

3 Kegne animal divise en neuf classes (Paris, 1756). 



Aristotle, 



work, however, was rather that of a comparative treatise of the 
anatomical and physiological characters of animals than their 
systematic arrangement and definition, and his ideas about the 
various groups of reptiles are not distinctly expressed, but must 
be gleaned from the terms which he employs. Moreover, he paid 
less attention to the study of reptiles than to that of other 
classes. This is probably due to the limited number of kinds 
he could be acquainted with, to which only very few extra- 
European forms, like the crocodile, were added from other 
sources. But while we find in some respects a most remarkable 
accuracy of knowledge, there is sufficient evidence that he 
neglected everyday opportunities of information. Thus, he has 
not a single word about the metamorphoses of Batrachians, 
which he treats of in connexion with reptiles. 

Aristotle makes a clear distinction between the scute or scale 
of a reptile, which he describes as <j>o\is, and that of a fish, which 
he designates as Xexis. He mentions reptiles (1) as oviparous 
quadrupeds with scutes, viz. Saurians and Chelonians; (2) as 
oviparous apodals, viz. Snakes; (3) as oviparous quadrupeds 
without scutes, viz. Batrachians. He considered the first and 
second of these three groups as much more nearly related to each 
other than to the third. Accurate statements and descriptions 
are sadly mixed with errors and stories of, to our eyes, the most 
absurd and fabulous kind. The most complete accounts are 
those of the crocodile (chiefly borrowed from Herodotus) and of 
the chameleon, which Aristotle evidently knew from personal 
observation, and had dissected himself. The other lizards men- 
tioned by him are the common lizards (craupa), the common 
seps (xaXtfis or f lyvis) and the gecko (aaKaXafi&TTjs or Kopdvkos). 
Of snakes (of which he generally speaks as 6<j>is) he knew the 
vipers (exis or ex^va), the common snake (v8pos), and the 
blindworm (tv<I>Xiv7)s 6<£is), which he regards as a snake; he 
further mentions the Egyptian cobra and dragons (Spd/ow) 
— North-African serpents of fabulous size. Of Chelonians he 
describes in a perfectly recognizable manner land tortoises 
(xeXo?^), freshwater turtles (epvs) and marine turtles (x^Xobn? ^ 
OaXaTTia). 

Passing over eighteen centuries, we find the knowledge of 
reptiles to have remained as stationary as other branches of 
natural history, perhaps even more so. The reptile fauna of 
Europe was not extensive enough to attract the eneTgy of a 
Belorf or Rondelet; popular prejudice and the difficulty of 
preserving these animals deterred from their study; nor was man 
sufficiently educated not to give implicit credence to the fabulous 
tales of reptiles in the 15th and 16th centuries. The art of 
healing, however, was developing into a science based upon 
rational principles, and consequently not only those reptiles 
which formed part of the materia medica but also the venomous 
snakes became objects of study to the physician, though the 
majority of the writers were ignorant of the structure of the 
venom-apparatus, and of the distinction between non-venomous 
and venomous snakes. 

Nothing can show more clearly the small advance made by 
herpetology in this long post-Aristotelian period than a glance 
at the celebrated work, De Differ entiis Animalium Woiiont 
Libri decern (Paris, 1552), by Edward Wotton (1492- 
I55S)* Wotton treats of the reptiles which he designates as 
Quadrupedes oviparae et Serpentes in the sixth book of his work. 
They form the second division of the Quadrupedes quae sanguinem 
habent) and are subdivided in the following " genera": — 

Crocodilus et scincus (cap.- cv.)\ Testudinum genera (cvi.); Ran- 
arum genera (cvii.); Lacertde (cviii.); Salamandra et seps ouad- 
rupes (cix.); Stellio (ex.); Chamaeleo (cxl); Serpentes (cxii.), a 
general account, the following being different kinds of serpents: 
Hydrus et alii quidam serpentes aquatiles (cxiii.) ; Serpentes 
terrestres et primes as pidum genera (cxiv.); Viper a, dipsas, cerastes, 
et hammodytes (cxv.); Haemorrhus, sepedon, seps, cenchris, et 
cenchrites (cxvi.); Basiliscus et alii quidam serpentes quorumvenenum 
remedio caret (cxvii.); Draco, amphisbaena, et alii quidam serpentes 
quorum morsus minus affert periculi (cxviii.). 

Wotton's work might with propriety be termed " Aristoteles 
redivivus." The plan is the same, and the observations of the 
Greek naturalist are faithfully, sometimes literally, reproduced. 



HISTORY] 



REPTILES 



137 






It is surprising that even the reptiles rt f his native country 
were most imperfectly known to the author. 

With the enlargement of geographical knowledge that of 
reptiles was also advanced, as is sufficiently apparent from the 
Johnston. l ar g c encyclopaedic works of Gesner, Aldrovandi and 
Johnston. The last-named author especially, who 
published the various portions of his Natural History in 
the middle of the 17th century, was able to embody in his 
compilations notices of numerous reptiles observed by Francisco 
Hernandez in Mexico and by Marcgrave and Piso in Brazil. 
As the author had no definite idea of the Ray-Linnaean term 
" species," it is not possible to give the exact number of 
reptiles mentioned in his work. But it may be estimated 
at about fifty, not including some marine fishes and fabulous 
creatures. He figures (or rather reproduces the figures of) 
about forty — some species being represented by several figures. 
2. Linnaean Period: Formation of a Class Amphibia. — 
Within the century which succeeded these compilatory works 
Precur- (1650-1750) fall the labours which prepared the way 
sors of for and exerted the greatest influence on Ray and 
Linnaeus. Li nnaeus> Although original researches in the field of 
herpetology were limited in extent and in number, the authors 
had freed themselves from the purely literary or scholastic 
tendency. Men were no longer satisfied with reproducing and 
commenting on the writings of their predecessors; the pen was 
superseded by the eye, the microscope and the knife, and 
statements were tested by experiment. This spirit of the 
age manifested itself, so far as the reptiles are concerned, in 
Chara's and Redi's admirable observations on the viper, in 
Major's and Vallisnierrs detailed accounts of the anatomy 
of the chameleon, in the researches of Jacobaeus into the 
metamorphoses of the Batrachians and the structure of lizards, 
in Dufay's history of the development of the salamander 
(for Batrachians are invariably associated with reptiles 
proper); in Tyson's description of the anatomy of the rattle- 
snake, &c. The natural history collections formed by insti- 
tutions and wealthy individuals now contained not merely 
skins of crocodiles or serpents stuffed and transformed into a 
shape to correspond with the fabulous descriptions of the 
ancient dragons, but, with the discovery of alcohol as a means 
of preserving animals, reptiles entire or dissected were exhibited 
for study; and no opportunity was lost of obtaining them 
from travellers or residents in foreign countries. Fossils also 
were now acknowledged to be remains of animals which had 
lived before the Flood, and some of them were recognized as 
those of reptiles. 

The contributions to a positive knowledge of the animal 
kingdom became so numerous as to render the need of a method- 
ical arrangement of the abundance of new facts more and more 
pressing. Of the two principal systematic attempts made in 
this period the first ranks as one of the most remarkable steps 
of the progress of natural history, whilst the second can only 
be designated as a signal failure, which ought to have been a 
warning to all those who in after years classified animals in 
what is called an, " artificial system." As the latter attempt, 
originating with Klein (168 5-1 759), did not exercise any further 
influence on herpetology, it will be sufficient to have merely 
mentioned it. John Ray (1 628-1 705) had recognized 
the necessity of introducing exact definitions for the 
several categories into which the animals had to be divided, and 
he maintained that these categories ought to be characterized 
by the structure of animals, and that all zoological knowledge 
had to start from the " species " as its basis. His definition 
of reptiles as " animalia sanguinea pulmone respirantia cor 
unico tantum ventriculo instructum habentia ovipara " fixed 
the class in a manner which was adopted by the naturalists of 
the succeeding hundred and fifty years. Nevertheless, Ray 
was not a herpetologist; his knowledge of reptiles is chiefly 
derived from the researches of others, from whose accounts, 
however, everything not based upon reliable demonstration is 
critically excluded. He begins with a chapter treating of frogs 
(Rana, with two species), toads (Bufo, with one species) and 



Ray. 



tortoises 1 (Testudo, with fourteen species). The second group 
comprises the Lacertae, twenty-five in number, and includes the 
salamander and newts; and the third the Serpentes, nine species, 
among which the limbless lizards are enumerated. 

Except in so far as he made known and briefly characterized 
a number of reptiles, our knowledge of this class was not 
advanced by Linnaeus. That he associated in the 1^^^^ 
1 2th edition cartilaginous and other fishes with the 
reptiles under the name of Amphibia N antes was the 
result of some misunderstanding of an observation by Garden, 
and is not to be taken as a premonitory token of the recent 
discoveries of the relation between Batrachians and fishes. 
Linnaeus places reptiles, which he calls Amphibia, as the third 
class of the animal kingdom; he divides the genera thus: — 

Order i. Reptiles. — Testudo (15 species); Rana (17 sp.); 
Draco (2 sp.); Lacerta (48 sp., including 6 Batrachians). 

Order 2. Serpentes.— Crotalus (5 species); Boa (10 sp.); 
Coluber (96 sp.); Anguis (15 sp.); Amphisbaena (2 sp.); Caecilia 
(2 sp.). 

None of the naturalists who under the direction or influence 
of Linnaeus visited foreign countries possessed any special 
knowledge of or predilection for the study of reptiles; all, 
however, contributed to our acquaintance with tropical forms, 
or transmit ted. well-preserved specimens to the collections at 
home, so that Gmelin, in the 13th edition of the Sy sterna Naturae, 
was able to enumerate three hundred and seventy-one species. 

The man who, with the advantage of the Linnaean method, 
first treated of reptiles monographically, was Laurenti. In a 
small book 2 he proposed a new division of these £. wre/1 ^ 
animals, of which some ideas and terms have survived 
into our times, characterizing the orders, genera and species 
in a much more precise manner than Linnaeus, giving, for 
his time, excellent descriptions and figures of the species of 
his native country. Laurenti might have become for herpetology 
what Artedi was for ichthyology, but his resources were extremely 
limited. 

The circumstance that Chelonians are entirely omitted from 
his Synopsis seems due rather to the main object with which 
he engaged in the study of herpetology, viz. that of examining 
and distinguishing reptiles reputed to be poisonous, and to 
want of material, than to his conviction that tortoises should 
be relegated to another class. He divides the class into three 
orders: — 

1. Salientia, with the genera Pipa, Bufo, Rana t Hyla, and one 

species of " Proteus" viz. the larva of Pseudis paradoxa. 

2. Gradientia, the three first genera of which are Tailed Batrach- 

ians, viz. two species of Proteus (one being the P. anguinus), 
Triton and Salamandra; followed by true Saurians — 
Caudiverbera, Gecko, Chamaeleo, Iguana, Basiliscus, Draco, 
Cordylus, Crocodilus, Scincus, Stellio, Seps. 

3. Serpentia, among which he continues to keep Amphisbaena, 

Caecilia and Anguis, but the large Linnaean genus Coluber 
is divided into twelve, chiefly from the scutellation of the 
head and form of the body. 

The work concludes with an account of the experiments made 
by Laurenti to prove the poisonous or innocuous nature of those 
reptiles of which he could obtain living specimens. 

The next general work on reptiles is by Lacepede. It 
appeared in the years 1788 and 1790 under the title Histoire 
naturelle des quadriipbdes ovipares et des serpens (Paris, Lac ^ ^ de 
2 vols. 4to). Although as regards treatment of 
details and amount of information this work far surpasses the 
modest attempt of Laurenti, it shows no advance towards a 
more natural division and arrangement of the genera. The 
author depends entirely on conspicuous external characters, 
and classifies the reptiles into (1) oviparous quadrupeds with a 
tail, (2) oviparous quadrupeds without a tail, (3) oviparous 

1 In associating tortoises with toads, Ray could not disengage 
himself from the general popular view as to the nature of these 
animals, which found expression in the German Schildkrote (" Shield- 
toad "). 

1 Specimen medicum exhibens Synopsin Reptiliam emendatam cum 
experimentis circa venena et antidota Reptilium Austriacorum (Vienna* 
1768, 8vo t pp. 214, with 5 plates). 

xxni. 5 a 



138 



REPTILES 



[HISTORY 



Daudin. 



bipeds {Chiroles and Pseudopus), (4) serpents, — an arrangement 
in which the old confusion of Batrachians and reptiles and the 
imperfect definition of lizards and snakes are continued, and 
which it is worthy of remark we find also adopted in Cuvier 's 
Tableau SISmentaire de Vhistoire naturelle des animaux (1798), 
and nearly so by Latreille in his Histoire naturelle des reptiles 
(Paris, 1 801, 4 vols. 12 mo). Lacepede's monograph, however, 
remained for many years deservedly the standard work on 
reptiles. The numerous plates with which the work is illus- 
trated, are, for the time, well drawn, and the majority readily 
recognizable. 

3. The Period of Elimination of Batrachians as one of the 
Reptilian Orders. — A new period for herpetology commences 
Broag- with Alex. Brongniart, 1 who in 1799 first recognized 
start. the characters by which Batrachians differ from the 

other reptiles, and by which they form a natural passage 
to the class of fishes. Caecilia (as also Langaha and Aero- 
chordus) is left by Brongniart with hesitation in the order 
of snakes> but newts and salamanders henceforth are no more 
classed with lizards. He leaves the Batrachians, however, in 
the class of reptiles, as the fourth order. The first order com- 
prises the Chelonians, the second the Saurians (including 
crocodiles and lizards), the third the Ophidians — terms which 
have been adopted by all succeeding naturalists. Here, however, 
Brongniart 's merit on the classification of reptiles ends, the 
definition and disposition of the genera remaining much the same 
as in the works of his predecessors. 

The activity in France in the field of natural science was at 
this period, in spite of the political disturbances, so great that 
only a few years after Lacepede's work another, almost 
identical in scope and of the same extent, appeared, 
viz. the Histoire naturelle generate el particuliere des reptiles 
of F. M. Daudin (Paris, 1802-3, 8 vols. 8vo). Written and 
illustrated with less care than that by Lacepede, it is of greater 
importance to the herpetologists of the present day, as it contains 
a considerable number of generic and specific forms described 
for the first time. Indeed, at the end of the work, the author 
states that he has examined more than eleven hundred specimens, 
belonging to five hundred and seventeen species, all of which he 
has described from nature. The system adopted ■ is that of 
Brongniart, the genera are well defined, but iU arranged; it is, 
however, noteworthy that Caecilia takes now its place at the 
end of the Ophidians, and nearest to the succeeding order of 
Batrachians. 

The next step in the development of the herpetological system 
was the natural arrangement of the genera. This involved a 
stupendous amount of labour. Although many isolated con- 
tributions were made by various workers, this task could be 
successfully undertaken and completed in the Paris Museum 
only, in which, besides Seba's and Lacepede's collections, many 
other herpetological treasures from other museums had been 
deposited by the victorious generals of the empire, and to which, 
through Cuvier's reputation, objects from every part of the 
world were attracted in a voluntary manner. The men who 
devoted themselves to this task were A. M. C. Dum6ril, 
DumSrU, Oppel and Cuvier himself. Oppel was a German who, 
°^* 1 during his visit to Paris (1807-1808), attended the 
Cuvier. lectures of Dumeril and Cuvier, and at the same time 
studied the materials to which access was given to him 
by the latter in the most liberal manner. Dumeril 2 maintains 
that OppeFs ideas and information were entirely derived from 
his lectures, and that Oppel himself avows this to be the case. 
The passage, 3 however, to which he refers is somewhat ambiguous, 

1 Bull. Acad. Sci. (1800), Nos. 35, 36. 

2 ErpiU gintr., i. p. 259. 

* " Ware es nicht die Ermunterung . . . dieser Freunde gewesen, 
so wiirde ich iiberzeugt von den Mangeln, denen eine solche Arbeit 
bei aller moglichen Vorsicht doch unterworfen ist, es nie gewagt 
haben, meine Eintheilung bekannt zu machen, obwohl selbe Herr 
Dume'ril in seinen Lectionen vom Jahre 1809 schon vorgetragen, und 
die Thiere im Cabinet darnach bezeichnet hat " (preface, p. viii). A 
few lines further on he emphatically declares that the classification 
is based upon his own researches. 



and it is certain that there is the greatest possible difference 
between the arrangement published by Dumeril in 1806 (Zoologie 
Analytique, Paris, 8vo) and that proposed by Oppel in his 
Ordnungen, Familien,undGattungen der Reptilien (Munich, i8rr, 
4to). There is no doubt that Oppel profited largely by the 
teaching of Dumeril; but, on the other hand, there is sufficient 
internal evidence in the works of both authors, not only that 
Oppel worked independently, but also that Dumeril and Cuvier 
owed much to their younger fellow-labourer, as Cuvier himself 
indeed acknowledges more than once. 
Oppel's classification may be shortly indicated thus: — 

Order i. TESTUDINATA or CHfiLONIENS. 
Fam, 1. Ciielonii (gen. Mydas, Coriacea). 
Fam. 2. Amydae (gen. Trionyx, Chelys y Testudo, Emys). 

Order 2. SQUAMATA. 
Sect. A. Saurii. 
Fam. 1. Crocodilini (gen. Crocodilus, Gavialis, Alligator). 
Fam. 2. Geckoides (gen. Gecko, Stellio, Agama). 
Fam. 3. Iguanoides (gen. Camaeleo, Draco, Iguana, Basiliscus, 

Lopkyrus, Anolis). 
Fam. 4. Lacertini (gen. Tupinambis, Dracaena, Lacerta, Tachy- 

dromus). 
Fam. 5. Scincoides (gen. Scincus, Seps, Scheltopusik, Anguis). 
Fam. 6. Chalcidici (gen. Chalcides, Bimanus y Bipes, Ophisaurus). 

Sect. B. Ophidii. 
Fam. 1. Anguiformes (gen. Tortrix, Amphisbaena, Typhlops). 
Fam. 2. Constrictores (gen. Boa, Eryx). 
Fam. 3. Hydri (gen. Platurus, Hydrophis). 
Fam. 4. Pseudo-viperae (gen. Acrochordus, Erpeton). 
Fam. 5. Crotalini (gen. Crotalus, Trigonocephalus). 
Fam. 6. Viperini (gen. Vipera, Pseudoboa). 
Fam. 7. Colubrini (gen. Coluber, Bungarus). 

Order 3. NUDA or BATRACII. 

In this classification we notice three points, which indicate 
a decided progress towards a natural system. (1) The four 
orders proposed by Brongniart are no more considered co- 
subordinate in the class, but the Saurians and Ophidians are 
associated as sections of the same order, a view held by Aristotle 
but abandoned by all following naturalists. The distinction 
between lizards and snakes is carried out in so precise a manner 
that one genus only, Amphisbaena^ is wrongly placed. (2) The 
true reptiles have now been entirely divested of all hetero- 
geneous elements by relegating positively Caecilia to the 
Batrachians, a view for which Oppel had been fully prepared by 
Dumeril, who pointed out in 1 807 that " les cecilies se rapprochent 
considerablement des batraciens auxquels elles semblent lier 
Pordre entier des serpens." 4 (3) An attempt is made at 
arranging the genera into families, some of which are still 
retained at the present day. 

In thus giving a well-merited prominence to Oppel's labours 
we are far from wishing to detract from the influence exercised 
by the master spirit of this period, Cuvier. Without his guid- 
ance Oppel probably never would have found a place among the 
promoters of herpetological science. But Cuvier y s principal 
researches on reptiles were incidental or formed part of some 
more general plan; Oppel concentrated his on this class only. 
Cuvier adopts the four orders of reptiles proposed by Brong- 
niart as equivalent elements of the class, and restores the blind- 
worms and allied lizards and, what is worse, also the Caecilias, 
to the Ophidians. The chameleons and geckos are placed in 
separate groups, and the mode of dividing the latter has been 
retained to the present day. Also a natural division of the 
snakes, although the foreign elements mentioned are admitted . 
into the order, is sufficiently indicated by his arrangement of the 
" vrais serpens proprement dits " as (1) non-venomous snakes, 
(2) venomous snakes with several maxillary teeth, and (3) 
venomous snakes with isolated poison-fangs. He distinguishes 
the species of reptiles with a precision not attained in any 
previous work. x 

Cuvier's researches into the osteology of reptiles had also 
the object of discovering the means of understanding the fossil 
remains which now claimed the attention of French, English 
and German naturalists. Extinct Chelonian and Crocodilian 

4 Memoir es de zoologie et d 'anatomie comparie (Paris, 1807, 8vo), 
P. 45- 



HISTORY] 



REPTILES 



139 



Merrem. 



remains, Pterodactylus, Mosasaurtis, Iguanodon, Ichthyosaurus, 
Teleosaurus, became the subjects of Cuvier's classical treatises, 
which form the contents of the 5th volume (part 2) of his 
Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles, oil Von ritablit les caracttres 
des plusieurs animaux dont les revolutions du globe onl ditruii 
les espbees (new ed., Paris, 1824, 4to). 

All the succeeding herpetologists adopted either Oppel's 
or Cuvier's view as to the number of orders of reptiles, or as to 

the position Batraehians ought to take in their relation 
vu/f.' to r eptiles proper, with the single exception of D. de 

Blainville. He divided the "oviparous subtype" 
of Vertebrates into four classes, Birds, Reptiles, Amphibians 
and Fishes, 1 a modification of the system which is all the 
more significant as he designates the reptiles " Squammifbres 
Ornithoides, tcailleux" and the amphibians " Nudipellifbres, 
Ichthyoides nus." In these terms we perceive clear indications of 
the relations which exist to the class of birds on the one hand, and 
to that of fishes on the other; but, unfortunately, Blainville 
himself did not follow up the ideas thus expressed, and abandoned 
even the terms in a later edition of his systematic tables. 

The direct or indirect influence of the work of French anato- 
mists manifested itself in the systems of the other herpetologists 
of this period. The Crocodiles, especially, which hitherto 
(strange to say, even in Cuvier's classification) had been placed 
as one of the families of Saurians, now commence to be separated 

from them. Merrem ( Versuch eines Systems der 

Amphibien, Marburg, 1820, 8vo) distinguishes two 
classes of " Amphibians," Pholidota and Batrachia. 

The Pholidota (or Reptiles) are divided into three orders, distin- 
guished chiefly by osteological and splanchnological characters: — 

1. Testudinata. 

2. Loricata ( = Crocodiles). 

3. SQUAMATA(=Oppers Squamata, excluding Crocodiles). 
Merrem's subdivision of the Squamata into (1) Gradientia 

(=limbed Lacertilia), (2) Repentia ( = limbless Lacertilia), (3) 
Serpentia ( = Snakes and Amphisbaena), (4) Incedentia ( = Chirotes), 
and (5) Predentia ( = Chamaeleons) was based chiefly on the modi- 
fications of the limbs, and not adopted by his successors. The 
greater part of ^ his work is occupied with a synopsis of all the 
species of Reptiles known, each being shortly characterized by a 
diagnosis; but, as only a small proportion (about one hundred and 
seventy) were known to him from autopsy, this synopsis has all the 
faults of a compilation. 

Latreille, who commenced the study of reptiles as early as 
1 80 1, had kept pace with the progress of science when he 

published, in 1825, his Families naturelles du rbgne 

animal (Paris, 1825, Svo), He separated the Batra- 
ehians as a class from the Reptiles, and the latter he divides into 
two sections only, Cataphracta and Squamosa — in the former 
Crocodiles being associated with the Chelonians. He bases this 
view on the development of a carapace in both, on the structure 
of the feet, on the fixed quadrate bone, on the single organ of 
copulation. None of the succeeding herpetologists adopted a 

combination founded on such important characters 
ray ' except J. E. Gray, who, however, destroyed Latreille's 

idea of Cataphracta by adding the Amphisbaenians 2 as a third 
order. 

A mass of new materials now began to accumulate from all 
parts of the world in European museums. Among others, Spix 
had brought from Brazil a rich spoil to the Munich Museum, 

and the . Bavarian Academy charged Joh. Wagler 
ager ' to prepare a general system of reptiles and batra- 
ehians. His work, 3 the result of ten years' labour, is a simple but 
lasting monument to a young naturalist, 4 who, endowed with 
an ardent imagination, only too frequently misinterpreted the 
evidence of facts, or forced it into the service of preconceived 
ideas. Cuvier had drawn attention to certain resemblances in 

x BulL Set. Soc. PhilomaL, July 1816. 

2 Catalogue of the Tortoises, Crocodiles and Amphisbaenians in the 
Collection of the British Museum (London, 1844, i6mo), p. 2. 

8 NatUrliches System der Amphibien mit vorangehender Classifica- 
tion der Sau^ethiere und Vogel — ein Beitrag zur vergleichenden 
Zooloeie (Munich, 1830, 8vo). 

4 Wagler was accidentally killed three years after the publication 
of his System* 



some parts of the osseous structure of Ichthyosaurus and Ptero- 
dactylus to dolphins, birds, crocodiles, &e. Wagler, seizing 
upon such analogical resemblances, separated those extinct 
Saurians from the class of Reptiles, and formed of them and the 
Monotremes a distinct class of Vertebrates, intermediate between 
mammals and birds, which he called Gryphi. We must admit 
that he made free use of his imagination by defining his class of 
Gryphi as " vertebrates with lungs lying free in the pectoral 
cavity; oviparous development of the embryo (within or) 
without the parent; the young fed (or suckled?) by the parents." 
By the last character this Waglcrian class is distinguished from 
the reptiles. 

Reptiles (in which Wagler includes Batraehians) arc divided 
into eight orders: Testudines, Croeodili, Laeertae, Serpentcs, 
Angues, Caeciliae, Ranae and Iehthyodi. He has great merit in 
having employed, for the subdivision of the families of lizards, 
the structure of the tongue and the mode of insertion of the teeth 
in the jaws. On the other hand, Wagler entirely failed in arrang- 
ing snakes in natural families, venomous and non-venomous 
types being mixed in the majority of his groups. 

L. Fitzinger was Wagler's contemporary; his first work* 
preceded Wagler's system by four years. As he says in the 
preface, his object was to arrange the reptiles in FHz- 
" a natural system." Unfortunately, in order to lager, 
attain this object, Fitzinger paid regard to the most superficial 
points of resemblance; and in the tabula affinitatum generum 
which he constructed to demonstrate " the progress of nature " 
he has been much more successful in placing closely allied 
generic forms in contiguity than in tracing the relationships 
of the higher groups. That table is prepared in the form of 
a genealogical tree, but Fitzinger wished to express thereby 
merely the amount of morphological resemblance, and there is 
no evidence whatever in the text that he had a clear idea of 
genetic affinity. The Batraehians are placed at the bottom 
of the scheme, leading through Hyla to the Geckos (clearly 
on account of the digital dilatations) and through Caecilia to 
Amphisbaena. At the top Draco leads through Pterodactylus 
to the Bats (Pteropus), Ichthyosaurus to the Cetaceans (Del- 
phinus), Emys to the Monotremes, Testudo to Manis, and the 
Marine Turtles to the Divers and Penguins. 

In Fitzinger's system the higher groups are, in fact, identical with 
those proposed by Merrem, while greater originality is shown in 
the subdivision of the orders. He differed also widely from Wagler 
in his views as to the relations of the extinct forms. The order 
of Loricata consists of two families, the Ichthyosauroidea and Croco- 
diloidea, the former comprising Iguanodon, Plesiosaurus, Sauro- 
cephalus and Ichthyosaurus. In the order Squamata Lacertilians 
and Ophidians are combined and divided into twenty-two families, 
almost all based on the most conspicuous external characters: 
the first two, viz. the Geckos and Chameleons, arc natural enough, 
but in the three following Iguanoids and Agamoids are sadly 
mixed, Pterodactyles and Draco forming one family; Megalo- 
saurus, Mosasaurus, Varanus, Tejus, &c, are associated in another 
named Ameivoidea; the Amphisbaenidae are correctly defined; 
the Colubroidea are a heterogeneous assemblage of thirty genera; 
but with his family of Bungaroidea Fitzinger makes an attempt to 
separate at least a part of the venomous Colubrine Snakes from the 
Viperines, which again are differentiated from the last family, that 
of Crotaloidea. 

If this little work had been his only performance in the 
field of herpetology his name would have been honourably 
mentioned among his fellow-workers. But the promise of his 
early labours was not justified by his' later work, and -if 
we take notice of the latter here it is only because his 
name has become attached to many a reptile through the 
pedantic rules of zoological nomenclature. The labours of 
Wiegmann, Miiller, Dumeril and Bibron exercised no influence 
on him, and when he commenced to publish a new system of 
reptiles in 1843, 6 of which fortunately one fasciculus only 
appeared, he exhibited a classification in which morphological 
facts are entirely superseded by fanciful ideas of the vaguest 
kind of physiosophy, each class of vertebrates being divided 

6 Neue Classification der Reptilien nach ihren naturlichen Vcr- 
wandtschaften (Vienna, 1826, 4to). 

* Sy sterna Reptilium (Vienna, 1843, 8vo). 



140 



REPTILES 



[HISTORY 



into five " sense " series, and each series into three orders, 
one comprising forms of superior, the second of medium and 
the third of inferior development. In the generic arrangement 
of the species, to which Fitzinger devoted himself especially 
in this work, he equally failed to advance science. 

We have now arrived at a period distinguished by the appear- 
ance of a work which superseded all its predecessors, which 
formed the basis for the labours of many succeeding years, 
and which will always -remain one of the classical monuments 
of descriptive zoology— the Erpilologie generate ou histoire 
Dumtrti naiurelle compute des reptiles of A. M. C. Dumeril and 
and G. Bibron (Paris, 8vo). The first volume appeared in 

Blbron. lg34j and the ninth and lasfc m ig54 No natura j ist of 

that time could have been better qualified for the tremendous 
undertaking than C. Dumeril, who almost from the first year 
of half a century's connexion with the then largest collection 
of Reptilia had chiefly devoted himself to their study. The 
task would have been too great for the energy of a single man; 
it was, therefore, fortunate for Dumeril that he found a most 
'devoted fellow-labourer in one of his assistants, G. Bibron, whose 
abilities equalled those of the master, but who, to the great 
loss of science, died (in 1848) before the completion of the work. 
Dumeril had the full benefit of Bibron's knowledge for the 
volumes containing the Snakes, but the last volume, which 
treats of the Tailed Batrachians, had to be prepared by Dumeril 
alone. 

The work is the first which gives a comprehensive scientific 
account of reptiles generally, their structure, physiology and 
literature, and again each of the four orders admitted by the 
authors is introduced by a similar general account. In the 
body of the work 121 Chelonians, 468 Saurians, 586 Ophidians 
and 218 Batrachians are described in detail and with the greatest 
precision. Singularly enough, the authors revert to Brong- 
niart's arrangement, in which the Batrachians are co-ordinate 
with the other three orders of reptiles. This must appear 
all the more strange as Von Baer 1 in 1828, and J. Miiller 2 in 1831, 
had urged, besides other essential differences, the important 
fact that no Batrachian embryo possesses either an amnion 
or an allantois, like a reptile. 

4. Period of the Separation of Reptiles and Batrachians as 
Distinct Classes or Subclasses. — In the chronological order 
which we have adopted for these historical notes, we had to 
refer in their proper places to two herpetologists, Blainville 
and Latreille, who advocated a deeper than merely ordinal 
separation of Reptiles from Batrachians, and who were followed by 
J. Miilier F. S. Leuckart. But this view only now began to find 
*nd m ore general acceptance. J. Muller and Stannius 

stannius. were ^1^ m their classification entirely by ana- 
tomical characters, and consequently recognized the wide gap 
which separates the Batrachians from the Reptiles; yet they 
considered them merely as subclasses of the class Amphibia. 
The former directed his attention particularly to those forms 
which ^ seemed to occupy an intermediate position between 
Lacertilians and Ophidians, and definitely relegated Anguis, 
Pseudopus, Acontias to the former, and Typhlops, Rhinophis, 
Tortrix, but also the Amphisbaenoids to the latter. Stannius 
interpreted the characteristics of the Amphisbaenoids differ- 
ently, as will be seen from the following abstract of his, classi- 
fication: 3 — 

Subclassis: AMPHIBIA MONO PNOA (Leuckart). 
Sect. i. STREPTOSTYLICA (Stann.). Quadrate bone arti- 
culated to the skull; copulatory organs paired, placed out- 
side the cloacal cavity. 
ORnoi. OPH1D1A. 

Subordo 1. Eurystomata or Macrostomata (Mull.). 
The facial bones arc\loosely connected to admit of 
great extension of the wide mouth. 
Subordo 2. Angiostomata or Microstomata (Mull.)- 
Mouth narrow, not extensile; quadrate bone attached 
to the skull and not to a mastoid. 

1 Entwicklungsgeschichte der Thiere, p. 262. 

2 Tiedemann s Zeitschrift fur Physiologic, vol. iv. p. 200. 

8 Siebold and Stannius, Handbuch der Zootomie — Zootomie der 
Amphibien (2nd ed., Berlin, 1856, 8vo). 



ORD0 2. SAURIA. 

Subordo 1. Amphisbaenoidea. 
Subordo 2. Kionocrania (Stann.) = Lizards. 
Subordo 3. Chamaeleonidea. 
Sect. 2. MONIMOSTYLICA (Stann.). Quadrate bone sutur- 
ally united with the skull; copulatory organ simple, placed 
within the cloaca. 
Ordo 1. CHELON1A. 
Ordo 2. CROCOD1LIA. 

This classification received the addition of a fifth Reptilian 
order which with many Lacertilian characters combined im- 
portant Crocodilian affinities, and in certain other respects 
differed from both, viz. the New Zealand Hatteria, which 
by its first describers had been placed to the Agamoid Lizards. 
A. Gunther, 4 who pointed out the characteristics of this 
reptile, considered it to be co-ordinate with the other four 
orders of reptiles, and characterizes it thus: — 

Rhynchocephalia.— Quadrate bone suturally and immovably 
united with the skull and pterygoid; columella present. Rami 
of the mandible united as in Lacertilians. Temporal region with 
two horizontal bars. Vertebrae amphicoelian. Copulatory organs, 
none. 

5. Period of the Recognition of a Class of Replilia as Pari of 
the Sauropsida. — Although so far the discovery of every new 
morphological and developmental fact had prepared naturalists 
for a class separation of Reptiles and Batrachians, it was left 
to T. H. Huxley to demonstrate, not merely that the weight of 
facts demanded such a class separation, but that the reptiles 
hold the same relation to birds as the fishes to Batrachians. 
In his Hunterian Lectures (1863) he divided the vertebrates into 
Mammals, Sauroids and Ichthyoids, subsequently substituting 
for the last two the terms Sauropsida and Ichthyopsida. 6 The 
Sauropsida contain the two classes of birds and reptiles, the 
Ichthyopsida those of Batrachians and fishes. 

6. Period of the Consideration of Skeletons of Extinct Reptiles. — 
Sir R. Owen, while fully appreciating the value of the osteological 
characters on which Huxley based his division, yet 
admitted into his consideration those taken from the "* 
organs of circulation and respiration, and reverted to Latreille's 
division of warm- and cold-blooded (haematothermal and 
haematocryal) vertebrates, thus approximating the Batrachians 
to reptiles, and separating them from birds. 6 The reptiles (or 
Monopnoa, Leuck.) thus form the highest of the five subclasses 
into which, after several previous classifications, Owen 7 finally 
divided the Haematocrya. His division of this subclass, however, 
into nine orders, makes a considerable step in the progress of 
herpetology, since it takes into consideration for the first time 
the many extinct groups whose skeletons are found fossil. He 
shows that the number of living reptilian types bears but a small 
proportion to that of extinct forms, and therefore that a sys- 
tematic arrangement of the entire class must be based chiefly 
upon osteological characters. His nine orders are the follow- 
ing: 

a. Ichthyopterygia (extinct)— Ichthyosaurus. 

b. Sauropterygia (extinct) — Plesiosaurus, Pliosaurus, Notho- 

saurus, Placodus. 

c. Anomodontia (extinct)— Dicynodon, Rhynchosaurus, Ouden- 

odon. 

d.CHELONIA. 

e. Lacertilia (with the extinct Mosasaurus). 

f. Ophidia. 

g.CROCODiLiA (with the extinct Teleosaurus and .Streptospon- 

dylus). 
h. Dinosauria (extinct) — Iguanodon, Scelidosaurus and Megalo- 

saurus. 
i. Pterosauria (extinct)— Dimorphodon, Rhamphorhynchus and 

Pterodactylus. 

Owen was followed by Huxley and E. D. Cope, who, however, 
restricted still more the selection of classificatory characters by 
relying for the purposes of arrangement on a few parts of the 

4 " Contribution to the Anatomy of Hatteria (Rkynchocephalus 
Owen)," in Phil. Trans. (1867), part ii. 

6 An Introduction to the Classification of Animals (London, 1869, 
8vo), pp. 104 seq. 

* Anatomy of Vertebrates (London, 1866, 8vo), vol. i. p. 6. 

7 Op. cit. p. 16. 



GENERAL CHARACTERS] 



REPTILES 



141 



Huxley. 



skeleton only. They attempted a further grouping of the 

orders which in Owen's system were merely serially enumerated 
as cosubordinate groups. Huxley used for this purpose 
almost exclusively the position and character of the 

rib-articulations to the vertebral centra, the orders themselves 

being the same as in Owen's system: — 

A. PLEUROSPONDYLIA. Dorsal vertebrae devoid of trans- 
verse processes and not movable upon one another, nor are the ribs 
movable upon the vertebrae. A plastron. Order i, Chelonia. 

B. The dorsal vertebrae (which have either complete or rudi- 
mentary transverse processes) are movable upon one another, and 
the ribs upon them. No plastron. 

a. The dorsal vertebrae have transverse processes which are 

either entire or very imperfectly divided into terminal 

facets (ERPETOSPONDYLU). 

a. Transverse processes long; limbs well developed, pad- 
dles; sternum and sternal ribs absent or rudiment- 
ary. Order 2, Plesiosauria ( = Sauropterygia, Ow.). 

0. Transverse processes short. 

aa. A pectoral arch and urinary bladder. Order 3, 

Lacertilia. 
bb. No pectoral arch and no urinary bladder. Order 
4, Ophtdia. 

b. The dorsal vertebrae have double tubercles in place of trans- 

verse processes (PEROSPONDYLIA). Limbs paddle-shaped. 
Order 5, Ichthyosauria ( = Ichthyopterygia, Ow.}. 

c. The anterior dorsal vertebrae have elongated and divided 

transverse processes, the tubercular being longer than the 

capitular division (SUCHOSPONDYLIA). 

a. Only two vertebrae in the sacrum. Order 6, Croco- 

dilia. 
0. More than two vertebrae in the sacrum. 

aa. Manus without a prolonged ulnar digit. 

aa. Hind limb Saurian. Order 7, Dicynodon- 

tia ( — Anomodontia, Ow.). 
/3|S. Hind limb Ornithic. Order 8, Ornitho- 
scelida {^Dinosauria, Ow.). 
bb. Manus with an extremely long ulnar digit. Order 
9, Pterosauria. 

Cope, 1 by combining the modifications of the quadrate and 
supporting bones with the characters used by Huxley, further 
developed Owen's classification, separating the 
Pythonomorpha and Rhynchocephalia as distinct orders 
from the Lacertilia. He eventually 2 elaborated the following 
classification, based entirely on osteological characters: — 

I. The quadrate bone immovably fixed to the adjacent elements 
by suture. 

A. Scapular arch external to ribs; temporal region with a 
complex bony roof; no longitudinal postorbital bars. 
A tabular and supramastoid bones and a presternum; 
limbs ambulatory; vertebrae amphicoelous. Order 1, 
Cotylosauria. 
AA. Scapular arch internal to ribs; temporal region with com- 
plex roof and no longitudinal bars. 
A presternum; limbs ambulatory. Order 2, Chelydo- 
sauria. 
AAA. Scapulararch internal to ribs; sternum extending below 
coracoids and pelvis; one postorbital bar. 
No supramastoid; a paroccipital ; clavicle not articulating 
with scapula. Order 3, Testudinata. 
AAAA. Scapular arch external to ribs; one longitudinal post- 
orbital bar (Synaptosauria). 
A supramastoid and paroccipital bones; ribs two-headed 
on centrum; carpals and tarsals not distinct in form 
from metapodials; vertebrae amphicoelous. Order 4, 

ICIITIIYOPTERYGIA. 

A supramastoid; paroccipital not distinct; a postorbito- 
squamosalarch; ribs two-headed ; a clavicle; obturator 
foramen smalt or none; vertebrae amphicoelous. Order 
5, Theromora. 
No supramastoid; paroccipital not distinct; a quadrato- 
jugal arch; scapula triradiate; no clavicle; ribs one- 
headed. Order 6, Plesiosauria. 
AAAAA. Scapular arch external to ribs; two longitudinal post- 
orbital bars (paroccipital arch distinct) (Archosauria). 
a. A supramastoid bone. 
Ribs two-headed; a clavicle and interclavicle ; aceta- 
bulum closed; no obturator foramen; ambulatory; 
vertebrae amphicoelous. _ Order 7, Pelycosauria. 
aa. No supramastoid. 

1 Proc. Amer. Assoc, for the Advancement of Science, 10th meeting 
(Cambridge, 1871, 8vo), pp. 230 sq.; Amer. Naturalist (1889), vol. 
xxiii. p. 863. 

2 Syllabus of Lectures on the Vertebrata (Philadelphia, 1898, 8vo), 
P-54- 



Cope. 



Osbora. 



Ribs two-headed ; interclavicle not distinct; external 
digits greatly elongated to support a patagium for flight. 
Order 8, Ornitiiosauria. 

Ribs two-headed; no interclavicle; acetabulum open; 
ambulatory. Order 9, Dinosauria. 

Ribs two-headed; an interclavicle; acetabulum closed; 
ambulatory. Order 10, Loricata. 

Ribs one-headed; an interclavicle; acetabulum closed, 
a targe obturator foramen; ambulatory. Order 11, 
Rhynchocephalia. 
II. The quadrate bone loosely articulated to the cranium and at 
the proximal end only (Streptostylica). 

No distinct supramastoid, nor opisthotic; one or no post- 
orbital bar; scapular arch, when present, external to 
ribs; ribs one-headed. Order 12, Squ am at a. 

While this classification was being considered and prepared, 
both Cope and G. Baur made a special study of the bones which 
surround the quadrate and arch over the biting muscles in the 
various groups of reptiles. This led to a series of discussions 
which ended in the idea, that the class could be most naturally 
divided into two great subclasses, the one culminating in 
tortoises and mammals, the other in crocodiles, lizards, snakes 
and birds. Professor H. F. Osborn in 1903 a therefore 
proposed the following classification : — 

Subclass Synapsida. Primarily with single or undivided temporal 
arches. Giving rise to the mammals through some unknown 
member of the Anomodontia. 

Orders Cotylosauria, Anomodontia, Testudinata and Sauropterygia. 

Subclass Diapsida. Primarily with double or divided temporal 
arches.^ Giving rise to the birds through some unknown type 
transitional between Protorosauria and Dinosauria. 

Orders Diaptosauria (= Protorosauria , Pelycosauria and Rhyn- 
chocephalia), Phytosauria ( = Belodon, &c), Ichthyosauria, Crocodilia, 
Dinosauria, Squamata and Pterosauria. 

The most exhaustive and modern general work on reptiles is 
by Dr C. K. Hoffmann in Bronn's Klassen und Ordnungen des 
Thierreichs (1879-90). A most useful and less technical 
treatise is the volume on Amphibia and Reptiles contri- noff- 
buted by Dr H. Gadow to the Cambridge Natural History maaa * 
(London, 1902). (A. C. G.; A. S. Wo.) 

II. General Characters of the Class Reptilia 
Reptiles, as known in the existing world, are the modified, 
and in many respects degenerate, representatives of a group of 
lung-breathing vertebrate animals which attained its maximum 
development in the Mesozoic period. So far as can be judged 
from the skeleton, some of the members of this group then living 
might have become mammals by very slight change, while 
others might as readily have evolved into birds. It is therefore 
probable that the class Reptilia, as now understood, comprises 
the direct ancestors both of the Mammalia and Aves. Assuming 
that its extinct members, which are known only by skeletons, 
were organized essentially like its existing representatives, the 
class ranks higher than that of the lowest five-toed vertebrates 
(class Batrachia) in the investment of the foetus by two 
membranous envelopes (the amnion and allantois), and in the 
total absence of gills even in the earliest embryos. It ranks 
below both the Mammalia and Aves in the partial mixture of 
the arterial blood with the venous blood as it leaves the heart, 
thus causing the organism to be cold-blooded; it also differs 
both from Mammalia and Aves in retaining a pair of aortic 
arches, of which only the left remains in the former, while the 
right one is retained in the latter. No feature in the endoskeleton 
is absolutely distinctive, except possibly the degeneration of the 
parasphenoid bone, which separates the Reptilia from the 
Amphibia. In the exoskeleton, however, the epidermis forms 
horny scales, such as never occur in Amphibia, while thore are 
no traces of any structures resembling either hairs or feathers, 
which respectively characterize Mammalia and Aves. 

There is little doubt that true reptiles date back to the latter 
part of the Palaeozoic period, but at that epoch the Amphibia 
approached them so closely in the characters of the skeleton that 
it is difficult to distinguish the members of the two classes 
among the fossils. Some of the Palaeozoic Amphibia — a few of 
the so-called Labyrinthodonts — are proved to have had well- 
developed gill-arches in their immature state, while there are 
conspicuous marks of slime-canals on their skulls. Others are 
1 Mem. American Mus. Nat. Hist. (November 1903), vol. i. art. viii. 



142 



REPTILES 



[GENERAL CHARACTERS 



merely regarded as Amphibia because they closely resemble the 
genera which are proved to have been gill-breathers when 
immature. All these genera, however, so far as known, agree 
with the existing Amphibia in the production of their large 
parasphenoid bone as far forwards as the vomers to form a 
rigid and complete basicranial axis (fig. 1, A). Those genera 





After Credner. After C. W. Andrews. 

Fig. 1. — A, Palate of Palaeozoic Amphibian (Archegosaurus decheni). 
B, Palate of Mesozoic Reptile (Plesiosaurus macrocephalus). 
b.occ, basioccipital ; bs, basisphenoid ; eept, ectopterygoid ; i.pt, inter- 
pterygoid vacuity; j, jugal; wis, maxilla; pas, parasphenoid ; pi, palatine ; s kuil conVract ec? Tnto a single broa57ygomatTc arch Jeaving 
pmx, premaxilla; £t, pterygoid; pi. nar, posterior nares; qu t quadrate; a superior-temporal vacuity. Pineal foramen present. No 



of the upper, bar, some members of this series eventually pass 
into the order Squamata (Lacertilia-f-Ophidia), in which the 
quadrate bone is completely exposed and loosely attached to 
the skull (fig. 2, E); other reptiles exhibiting a similar modi- 
fication may readily have acquired the typical Avian skull 
(fig. 2, F) by the loss of the upper and the retention of the lower 
temporal bar in question. 

In view of these and other palaeontological con- 
siderations, the Reptilia may be classified into orders as 
follows : — 

Orders of Class Reptilia 

1. Anomodontia. — Bones of postero-lateral region of 
skull forming a complete roof over the temporal and 
masseter muscles, or contracted into a single broad zygo- 
matic arch, leaving a superior-temporal vacuity. Pineal 
foramen present. Ribs completely or imperfectly double- 
headed. No abdominal ribs. A large separately ossified 
epicoracoid. Limbs for support as well as progression; 
third and fourth digits with not more than three phalanges. 
Dermal armour feeble or absent. Range. — Permian and 
Triassic. 

2. Chelonia. — Postero-lateral region of skull as in Anomo- 
dontia, except bones of ear-capsule more modified. No 
pineal foramen. Ribs single-headed. No sternum. Pectoral 
and pelvic arches unique in being situated completely inside 
the ribs. No epicoracoid. Abdominal ribs replaced by 
three or four pairs of large plates, which, with the clavicles 
and interclavicle, form a plastron. Limbs only for pro- 
gression; third and fourth digits with not more than three 
phalanges. A regular dorsal carapace of bony plates in- 
timately connected with the neural spines, and ribs of 
seven to nine dorsal vertebrae. Range, — Upper Triassic to 
Recent. 

3. Sauropterygia. — Bones of rjostero-lateral region of 



s.o, suborbital vacuity; v, vomer. 

which less resemble the typical Labyrinthodonts are charac- 
terized by the reduction of the parasphenoid bone so that it no 
longer reaches the vomers; in these animals the weakened skull 
exhibits a secondary basicranial axis formed by the approxima- 
tion of the pterygoids to the median line (fig. 1, B). The 
latter condition is universal in existing reptiles, and may there- 
fore perhaps be regarded as a diagnostic feature. If so, the 
oldest known undoubted reptile is Palaeohatteria, from the 
Lower Permian of Saxony. 

In the structure of the skull Palaeohatteria is much like the 
existing Spkenodon, the cheek-plates which cover the temporal 
and masseter muscles on each side being pierced by two great 
vacuities, one superior-temporal, the other lateral -temporal. 
The majority of the earliest reptiles, however, either resemble the 
Labyrinthodonts in having the biting muscles completely 
covered with a roof of bony plates, or exhibit a slight shrinkage. 
of this investment so that a superior-temporal vacuity appears. 
As the various groups or orders become differentiated, this 
shrinkage or reduction continues, while the shape of the ossify- 
ing ear-capsule changes, and the squamosal bone, which covers 
the organ of hearing in the fishes, and presumably also in the 
Palaeozoic Batrachia, is gradually thrust outwards from all 
connexion with this capsule except at its hinder angle. The 
resultant modifications are diagrammatically represented in 
fig 2. In one series of orders, comprising the Anomodontia, 
Chelonia, Sauropterygia and Ichthyopterygia (fig. 2, B, C), 
the superior- temporal vacuity (s) first appears, and the cheek- 
plates in the broad temporal arch thus formed may be variously 
fused together, sometimes even irregularly perforated — showing 
at first, indeed, the usual inconstancy of a new and not com- 
pletely established feature. From the earliest members of this 
series of reptiles, palaeontology seems to demonstrate that the 
Mammalia (with one robust temporal arcade or zygomatic arch) 
arose. In a second series, comprising the orders Rhyncho- 
cephalia, Dinosauria, Crocodilia and Ornithosauria (fig. 2, D) ; 
the broad arch of cheek-plates is regularly pierced by a lateral- 
temporal vacuity, which leaves a narrow bar above, another 
narrow bar below, and uncovers the middle part of the quadrate 
bone. By the constant loss of the lower, and the frequent loss 



fused sacral vertebrae. All dorsal ribs single-headed, 
articulating with transverse processes of the neural arches. 
Abdominal ribs forming dense plastron. Apparently r no sternum. 
Coracoid, pubis and ischium in form of much-expanded plates. 
Limbs modified as paddles, with not more than five digits, of which 
the third and fourth always have more than three phalanges; all 
digits usually consisting of numerous phalanges. No dermal armour. 
Range. — Upper Triassic to Cretaceous. 

4. Ichthyopterygia. — Bones of postero-lateral region of skull 
contracted into a single broad zygomatic arch, leaving a superior- 
temporal vacuity. Pineal foramen present. Vertebral centra short 
and deeply biconcave, with feeble neural arches which are almost 
or completely destitute of zygapophyses. No fused sacral vertebrae. 
Cervical and dorsal ribs double-headed, articulating with tubercles 
on the vertebral centra. Abdominal ribs forming dense plastron. 
Apparently no sternum. Coracoid an expanded plate, probably 
with cartilaginous epicoracoid. Pelvis very small, not connected 
with vertebrae. Limbs modified as paddles, with digits of very 
numerous short phalanges, which are # closely pressed together, 
sometimes with supplementary rows of similar ossicles. No dermal 
armour. A vertical triangular caudal fin, not supported by skeletal 
rays. Range. — Triassic to Cretaceous. 

5. Rhynchocephalia. — Bones of postero-lateral region of skull 
contracted into two slender zygomatic bars, leaving a superior- 
temporal and a lateral-temporal vacuity, and partly exposing the 
quadrate bone from the side. Pineal foramen present or absent. 
Ribs single-headed. Abdominal ribs present. Sternum present. 
Epicoracoid cartilaginous. Limbs only for progression ; third and 
fourth digits with four or five phalanges. Dermal armour feeble or 
absent. Range. — Lower Permian to Recent. 

6. Dinosauria. — Postero-lateral region of skull as in Rhyncho- 
cephalia. No pineal foramen. Cervical and dorsal ribs double- 
headed. Rarely abdominal ribs. Sternum present, but apparently 
no clavicular arch. Limbs for support as well as progression; third 
and fourth digits with four and five phalanges respectively. Dermal 
armour variable. Range. — Triassic to Cretaceous. 

7. Crocodilia. — Postero-lateral region of skull as in Rhyncho- 
cephalia. No pineal foramen. Cervical and dorsal ribs double- 
headed. Abdominal ribs present. Sternum present; also inter- 
clavicle, but no clavicles. Limbs only for progression on land or 
swimming; third and fourth digits with four or five phalanges. 
Dermal armour variable. Range. — Lower Jurassic to Recent. 

8. Ornithosauria. — All bones extremely dense, light and hollow, 
the organism being adapted for flight. Postero-lateral region of 
skull as in Rhynchocephalia. No pineal foramen. Cervical and 
dorsal ribs double-headed. Abdominal ribs present. Sternum 
present, and keeled for attachment of pectoral muscles; no clavi- 
cular arch. Fifth digit of hand much elongated to support a wing- 
membrane, but with only four phalanges. Hind limb feeble, 
dermal armour. Range. — Lower Jurassic to Cretaceous. 



No 



GENERAL CHARACTERS] 



REPTILES 



H3 



9. Squamata. — Bones of postero-Iateral region of skull much 
reduced and partly absent, never forming more than a slender 
superior-temporal bar, thus completely exposing the quadrate, 
which is only loosely attached to the cranium at its upper end. 
Pineal foramen present. Ribs single-headed. No abdominal ribs. 
Sternum present when there are limbs. Limbs, when present, only 
for progression; third and fourth digits at least with more than 
three phalanges. Dermal armour feeble or absent. Range. — 
Cretaceous to Recent. 

Order 1. Anomodontia. — The Anomodonts are so named in 
allusion to the peculiar and unique dentition of the first-dis- 
covered genera. They are precisely intermediate between the 



and India, but they are best represented in the Karoo formation 
(Permian and Triassic) of South Africa. The Pariasauria most 
closely resemble the Labyrinthodont Amphibia, but have a single 
occipital condyle. Pariasauria itself is a massive herbivorous 
reptile, with a short tail, and the limbs adapted for excavating 
in the ground. It is known by several nearly complete skeletons, 
about 3 metres in length, from South Africa and northern 
Russia. Elginia y found in the Elgin sandstones of Morayshire, 
Scotland, is provided with horn-like bony bosses on the skull. 
Another apparently allied genus (Otocoelus) has a carapace 
suggesting that it may be an ancestral Chelonian. The Thcrio- 







From A. S. Woodward, Outlines of Vertebrate Palaeontology, 

Fig. 2. — Diagram of the Cranial Roof in a Labyrinthodont Amphibian, various types of Reptiles, and a Bird. A, Labyrin- 
thodont Amphibian {Mastodonsaurus giganteus). B, Generalized Anomodont or Sauropterygian, passing with slight 
modification into the Chelonian (sutures dotted to denote inconstancy in fusion of elements), C, Ichthyosaurus. D, 
Generalized Rhynchocephalian, Dinosaurian, Crocodilian, or Ornithosaurian. E, Generalized Lacertilian, often losing 
even the arcade here indicated. F, Generalized Bird. 

/r, frontal; j, jugal; /, lateral temporal vacuity; la, lachrymal; mx, maxilla; n, narial opening; na, nasal; o, orbit; 
pa, parietal; ptnx, premaxilla; prf, prefrontal; ptf t postirontal; pto, postorbital; qj, t quadra to-jugal; qu, quadrate; 
s, supratemporal vacuity; s.t, supratemporals and prosquamosal ; sq, squamosal. Vacuities shaded with vertical lines, 
cartilage bones dotted. 



Labyrinthodont Batrachia and the lowest or Monotreme 
Mammalia. They flourished at the period when the former are 
known to have reached their culmination, and when the latter 
almost certainly began to appear. Many of them would, indeed, 
be regarded as primitive Mammalia, if they did not retain a 
pineal foramen, a free quadrate bone, and a complex mandible. 
The term Theromorpha or Theromora is thus sometimes applied 
to the order they represent. So far as known, they are all 
land-reptiles, with limbs adapted for habitual support of the 
body, and their feet are essentially identical with those of 
primitive mammals. Most of them are small, and none attain a 
gigantic size. They first appear in the Permian of Europe and 
North America, and also occur in the Triassic both of Europe 



dontia exhibit the marginal teeth differentiated (in shape) into 
incisors,* canines and molars (fig. 3). They have two occipital 
condyles, as in mammals. They seem to have been all carni- 
vorous, or at least insectl rorous, but the malariform teeth vary 
much in shape in the different genera. Cynognathus (fig. 3) and 
Lycosaurus have cutting teeth, while Tritylodon and Gompho- 
gnathus possess powerful grinders. The Dicynodontia have one 
pair of upper tusks or are toothless: their occipital condyle is 
trefoil-shaped, as in Chelonia. Dicynodon itself occurs in the 
Karoo formation of S. Africa, while other genera arc represented 
in India, N. Russia and Scotland. 

Order 2. Chelonia. — This order occurs first in the Upper 
Triassic of Wurttembcrg, where a complete " shell" has been 



144 



REPTILES 



[GENERAL CHARACTERS 



found (Proganochelys). Its members are proved to have been 
toothless since the Jurassic period, and have only changed very 




From A- S. Woodward, Outlines of Vertebrate Palaeontology. 

Fig. 3. — Skull of an Anomodont (Theriodont) Reptile (Cynognathus 
crateronotus), one-fifth natural size. — Karoo formation (Permian 
or Triassic), South Africa. 

d, dentary; j, jugal; l.t.f, incipient lateral temporal vacuity; 
la, lachrymal; mx, maxilla; na, nasal; orb, orbit; pa, parietal; 
pmx, premaxilla; prf, prefrontal; pto., postorbital; ptf, post- 
frontal; s.t, supratemporal (prosquamosal) ; $g, squamosal. 

slightly since their first appearance. The marine turtles seem 
to have first acquired elongated paddles and vacuities in the 
shell during the Cretaceous period, and the Trionychia, destitute 
of epidermal shields, apparently arose at the same time. 

Order 3. Sauropterygia. — These are amphibious or aquatic 
reptiles (fig. 4). The head is comparatively small in most 




FlG. 4. — Plesiosaurus rostratus: restoration of skeleton by W. G. Ridewood. — 
Lower Lias, Dorsetshire. 

genera, and the neck is usually elongated though not flexible. 
The tail is insignificant, generally short, and both pairs of 
paddles seem to have been concerned in progression. The order 
appears to have arisen from a group of land-reptiles, for its 
earliest members, from the Triassic of Europe {Lariosaurus) 
and from the Permo-Carboniferous of S. Africa (Mesosaurtis) and 
Brazil (Slereosternum), are all amphibious animals. They are 
comparatively small, and their limbs are only just becoming 
paddle-like. The skull suggests affinities with the terrestrial 



effective paddles with elongated digits, and as the genera are 
traced upwards in the geological formations it is possible to 
observe how .the arches supporting the limbs become more rigid 
until the maximum of strength is reached. A few genera, such 
as Pliosaurus from the Jurassic and Polyptychodon from the 
Cretaceous of Europe, are distinguished by their relatively large 
head and stout neck. Some of the largest Upper Jurassic and 
Cretaceous species must bave been 10 metres in length. They 
were cosmopolitan in their distribution, but became extinct 
before the dawn of the Tertiary period. 

Order 4. Ichthyopterygia. — The Ichthyosaurians are all 
fish-shaped, with a relatively large head and very short neck. 
Both pairs of paddles are retained, but the hinder pair is usually 
very small, and locomotion seems to have been chiefly effected 
by a large caudal fin. This fin, as shown in impression by certain 
fossils from Wiirttemberg and Bavaria, is a vertical, triangular, 
dermal expansion, without any skeletal support except the 
hindermost part of the attenuated vertebral column, which 
extends along the border of its lower lobe (fig. 5). Another 
triangular fin, without skeletal support, is known to occur on the 
back, at least in one species (fig. 5). Some of the genera are 
proved to have been viviparous." Like the Sauropterygia, the 
Ichthyopterygia appear to have originated from terrestrial 
ancestors, for their earliest Triassic representatives (Mixosaurus) 
have the teeth less uniform and the limbs slightly less paddle- 
shaped than the latter genera. In this connexion it is noteworthy 
that their hollow conical teeth exhibit curious infoldings of the 
wall, like those observed in many Labyrinthodonts, while their 
short, biconcave vertebrae almost exactly resemble those of 
the Labyrinthodont Maslodonsaurus and its 
allies. As the Ichthyosaurs are traced up- 
wards in geological time, some genera become 
almost, or quite, toothless, while the paddles 
grow wider, and are rendered more flexible 
by the persistence of cartilage round their 
constituent bones (Ophlhalmosaurus). They 
were cosmopolitan in distribution, but dis- 
appeared from all seas at the close of the 
Cretaceous period. The largest forms, with 
a skull 2 metres in length, occur in the Lower 
Lias. 
Order 5. Rhynchocephalia. — These are small lizard-shaped 
reptiles, which have scarcely changed since the Triassic period. 
Though now represented only by Sphenodon or Hatteria, which 
survives in certain islands off New Zealand, in the Mesozoic 
epoch they ranged at least over Europe, Asia and North America. 
They comprise the earliest known reptile, Pcdaeohatteria, from 
the Lower Permian of Saxony, which differs from the Triassic 
and later genera in having an imperfectly ossified pubis and 
ischium, more numerous abdominal ribs, and the fifth metatarsal 




Fig. 5. — Ichthyosaurus quadriscissus: outline of specimen showing dorsal and caudal fins, about one-sixth natural size. — Upper 
Lias, Wiirttemberg. (After E. Fraas.) The irregularities behind the triangular dorsal fin are torn pieces of skin. 



Anomodontia, and the shape of the scapula seems to show some 
connexion with the Chelonia. The truly aquatic Sauropter- 
ygians of the Jurassic (fig. 4) and Cretaceous periods possess most 



bone normal. They are also represented in the Permian, chiefly 
of North America, by the so-called Pelycosauria, which have 
sharp teeth in sockets, and are remarkable for the extreme 



GENERAL CHARACTERS] 



REPTILES 



: 45 



elongation of the spines of their cervical and dorsal vertebrae 
(Dimetrodon, fig. 6). They seem to include various Triassic 




From Prof. E. C- Case's Revision of the Peiycosauria of North America, by 
permission of the Carnegie Institution of Washington. 

Fig. 6. — Dimetrodon incisivus: restoration of skeleton by E. C. Case, 
about one-eighteenth natural size. 



nearly similar, and is represented by at least one complete skele- 
ton in the Yale University Museum. There are also members of 
the same group with a heavy armour of bony plates and spines, 
sometimes termed Stegosauria. Stegosaurus itself occurs in 
the Upper Jurassic of Colorado, and Omosaurus f from the 
Kimmcridge and Oxford clays of England, is a nearly similar 
reptile. Polacanthus, from the Wcalden of the Isle of Wight, 
has the hip-region armoured with a continuous bony shield. 
Triceratops (fig. 8) and its allies, from the Upper Cretaceous 
(Laramie) of western N. America, are the latest members of the 
group, with a bony frill over the neck, a pair of bony horn- 
cores above the eyes, and a median bony horn-core on the 
nose. The skull with the bony frill sometimes measures nearly 
two metres in length. Another suborder of herbivorous Dino- 
saurs, that of Sauropoda, comprises the largest known land 
animals of any age, some measuring from 17 to 25 metres in 
total length. They have a small head, long neck, and long 
tail, and must have been quadrupedal in gait. Their teeth 
are adapted for feeding on succulent water weeds, perhaps 
with an admixture of small animals living among these; 
and their vertebrae are of very light construction, while the 
ribs are raised high on the neural arches to increase the size 
of the body cavity, perhaps for unusually large lungs or air 
sacs. Their massive limbs have five toes, of which the three 
inner alone bear outwardly curved claws. Diplodocus and 
Brontosatirus, from the Jurassic of Wyoming and Colorado, 
U.S.A., are the best-known genera. Atlantosaurns, from the 
same formation, is usually noteworthy for siz*e. Cetiosaurus, 
from the Jurassic of England, is also known by large parts of 
the skeleton in the British Museum and the Oxford Museum, 
indicating species nearly 20 metres in length. 



genera (e.g. Aetosaurus, Belodon), which may perhaps belong to 
the ancestral stock of the Dinosauria and Crocodilia. Other 
Triassic genera (Hyperodapedon, Rhynchosaurus) 
scarcely differ from Sphenodon, except in the denti- 
tion and in the absence of the pineal foramen in the 
skull. In the late Cretaceous and early Eocene 
periods one genus (Champsosaunis) was truly aquatic, 
with- ga vial-shaped head. 

Order 6. Dinosauria. — The dinosaurs are land 
reptiles which flourished on all the continents during 
the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods, in the interval 
between the decline of the Anomodontia and the 
dominance of the Mammalia. They first appeared 
as carnivorous reptiles in the Triassic period in 
Europe, India, S. Africa, and N. America, but after- 
wards comprised numerous massive herbivores in 
nearly all parts of the world except the Australian 
and New Zealand regions. The skeleton in the 
carnivorous dinosaurs, or Theropoda, is of very light 
construction, the vertebrae and limb bones being 
hollow, with thin, dense walls and often perfectly 
fitting joints. The fore limbs are small, and the 
hind limbs are adapted for running, jumping or 
hopping on the toes. The sabre-shaped cutting 
teeth are fixed in sockets, and all the claws are 
sharp. Anchisaurus and Hallo pus , from the Trias 
of N. America, and Scleromochlus from the Elgin 
sandstones of Scotland, are comparatively small 
animals. Ceratosaurus and Megalosaurus y from the 
Jurassic of North America and western Europe re- 
spectively, must have attained a length of from 5 to 
6 metres. Tyrannosaurus, from the Cretaceous of 
Montana, U.S.A., has a skull more than a metre in 
length. The herbivorous Dinosaurs of the suborder 
Ornithopoda resemble the Theropoda in general 
shape, but are heavier in build, with a pelvis con- 
structed more nearly on the plan of that of a run- 
ning bird. It has, indeed, been suggested that 
certain arboreal Dinosaurs of bipedal gait may have 
been the ancestors of the class Aves. The best- Fig. 8.— Triceralof>s prorsus: restoration of skeleton by 0. C. Marsh, 

known Ornithopod is Iguanodon (fig. 7), from the one-e.ghtietn natural size.-Cretaceous, Wyoming. 

Wealden of W. Europe, with species from 5 to 10 metres in I Order 7. Crocodilia.— Typical crocodiles can be traced 
length. Claosaurus, from the Cretaceous of N. America, is I downwards to the Lower Lias at the base of the Jurassic 




Fig. 7. — Iguanodon bernissartensis : restoration of skeleton by O. C. Marsh, 
one-eightieth natural size. — Wealden, Bernissart, Belgium. 




146 



REPTILES 



[GENERAL CHARACTERS 



formations, but all the Jurassic and some of the Cretaceous genera 
have the secondary bony plate less extended backwards than 
that in the Tertiary and existing genera, while their vertebrae 
have flattened or concave ends, instead of exhibiting a ball- 
and-socket articulation. Some of the Upper Jurassic crocodiles 
{Metriorhynchus) were more truly aquatic than any now living, 
with the fore limbs degenerate, the hind limbs much enlarged 
for swimming, and the dermal armour lacking. The end of 
the vertebral column is bent downwards, as in Ichthyosaurus, 
so they doubtless possessed a similar triangular tail-fin. Typical 
crocodiles and alligators date back to the close of the Cretaceous 
period, and they did not become extinct in Europe until the 
beginning of the Miocene period. Remains of an extinct 
alligator (Diplocynodon) are common in the Upper Eocene 
sands of the Hordwell cliffs, Hampshire. 

Order 8. Ornithosauria. — The flying reptiles or Ptero- 
dactyls (fig. 9) are completely evolved at their earliest known 




Fig. 9. — Pterodactylus spectabilis, natural sire, from the Litho- 
graphic Stone, h, humerus; ru, radius and ulna; tnc, metacarpals; 
pU pteroid bone; 2, 3, 4, digits with claws; 5, elongated digit for 
support of wing-membrane; st, sternum, crest not shown; is, 
ischium; pp t prepubis. The teeth are not shown. (After H. von 
Meyer.) 

appearance in the Lower Lias (Dimorphodon), and exhibit 
little essential change as they are traced upwards through the 
Mesozoic formations. The latest Cretaceous genera, however, 
comprise the largest species, which have been found in Europe, 
N. America and Brazil. Some of these (Pteranodon) are tooth- 
less, and their wings are so large that for adequate support the 
pectoral arch is fixed to the vertebrae like a pelvis. The wings 
occasionally have a span of from 5 to 6 metres. The wing- 
membranes are only known in the European Jurassic genus, 
Rhamphorhynchus (fig. 10), found well preserved in the fine- 
grained lithographic stone of Bavaria. In this genus there is 
also a rhomboidal flap of membrane at the end of the tail. 

Order 9. Squamata. — The ancestors of the lizards and snakes 
can only be traced back definitely to the latter part of the 
Cretaceous period. They were then represented by two' 
suborders of aquatic reptiles, the Dolichosauria and Pythono- 
morpha(or Mosasauria), which are in many respects intermediate 
between the existing Lacertilia and Ophidia. The Dolichosauria, 
from the Upper Cretaceous of Europe, are small and snake-like 



in shape, but with completely formed limbs. The Pythono- 
morpha are known from Europe, N. and S. America and New 
Zealand, and sometimes attained a very large size, the typical 
Mosasaurus camperi from Maastricht being about 15 metres in 
length. Their limbs are powerful paddles. Their trunk and 




Fig. 10. — Rhamphorhynchus phyllurus, from the Solenhofen 
Lithographic Stone, one-fourth natural size, with the greater part 
of the wing-membranes preserved, x, caudal membrane; si, 
sternum ; h % humerus ; sc, scapula and coracoid ; wm t wing- 
membrane. (After O. C. Marsh.) 

tail are often much elongated, so that their shape is snake-like, 
as shown by Clidastes (fig. 11), from the Chalk of Kansas, U.S.A. 
The Lacertilia and % Ophidia, so far as known, are exclusively 
Tertiary and Recent reptiles. Marine snakes {Palaeophis) occur 
in the Eocene of the London and Hampshire basins. 

Authorities. — General Works on Extinct Reptiles. — K. A. v. 
Zittel, Handbuch der Palaeontotogie, vol. iii. (Munich, 1 887-1 889). 
— H. A. Nicholson and R. Lydekker, Manual of Palaeontology, 
vol. ii. (Edinburgh, 1889). — R. Lydekker, Catalogue of the Fossil 
Reptilia and Amphibia in the British Museum, vols, i.-iv. (London, 
1 888-90). — A. S. Woodward, Outlines of Vertebrate Palaeontology 
(Cambridge, 1898).— K. A. v. Zittel, Text-book of Palaeontology, ed. 
C. R. Eastman, vol. ii. (London, 1902). Anomodontia: R. Owen. 
Catalogue of the Fossil Reptilia of South Africa in the Collection of the 
British Museum (London, 1876). — E. D. Cope, " The Reptilian 
Order Cotylosauria," Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc. vol. xxxiv. (1896), 
p. 436, and vol. xxxv. (1896), p. 122. — E. T. Newton, " Some New 
Reptiles from the Elgin Sandstones," Phil. Trans., vol. 184B (1893), p. 
431. — Various papers by R. Owen in Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc, 1876- 
1884, by H. G. Seeley in Phil. Trans. (1889-1895), and by R. Broom 
in Proc. Zool. Soc, Ann. S. African Museum and Trans. 5. African 
Phil. Soc (from 1900 onwards). Chelonia: G. Baur, " Bemerkungen 
liber die Phylogenie . der Schildkroten," Anat. Anzeiger, vol. xn. 
(1896), p. 561.— Technical papers by F. A. Quenstedt in Wurtt 
Jahresh. vol. xlv. (1889), p. 120 {Proganochelys).— G. R. Wieland 
in Amer. Journ. Sci. ser. 4, vol. ii. (1896), p. 399 (gigantic Cretaceous 
leathery turtle), and E. C. Case, Journ. Morphol. vol. xiv. (1897), 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



H7 



p. 21 (ditto). Sauropterygia: G. A. Boulenger, "On a Notho- 
saurian Reptile from tne Trias of Lombardy, apparently referable 
to Lariosaurus," Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. xiv. (1896), p. 1. — H. G. 
Seeleyj " The Nature of the Shoulder Girdle and Clavicular 
Arch in Sauropterygia," Proc. Roy. Soc. vol. li. (1892), p. 119, 




\Z-V2** 



Fig. 11. — Skeleton of Clidastes. (After Cope.) 



the supra-, infra-, and post-temporal, which subdivide the whole 
temporal fossa into four foramina. The supratemporal bridge 
is formed by the squamosal and post-orbital, the latter (/in 
fig. 12) being continued forwards and fused with the post-frontal. 

These three bones, 
with the parietal, . 
enclose the supra- 
temporal foramen. 
The postorbital 
joins an ascending 
branch of the jugal, 
both together form- 
ing the hinder 
border of the orbit, 
and this is bordered 
below chiefly by the 
maxillary. The pos- 
teriortemporal 
bridge is formed 
by the parietal and 
squamosal, extends 
laterally over the 



and vol. liy. (1893), p. 160. Ichthyopterygia: [E. Fraas, Die \ quadrate and encloses a wide space between itself and the 
Ichthyosaurter der juddeutschen Trtas- unS _ Jura-Ablagerungen buttress . like transverse expansion of the lateral occipital 



(Tubingen, 1891). — J. C. Merriam, " Triassic Ichthyosauria," Mem. \ 
Univ. California, vol. i. No. 1 (1908). — Also technical papers by^ 
E. Fraas on fins in Wilrtt. Jahresh. (1894), p. 493, and Fbldtani 
Kozlony, vol. xxviii. (Budapest, 1898), p. 169. Rhynchocephalia: 
G. A. Boulenger, " On British Remains of Homoeosaurus, with 
Remarks on the Classification of the Rhynchocephalia, " Proc. Zool. 
Soc. (1891), p. 167.-— J. H. McGregor, The Phytosauria," Mem. 
Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist. vol. ix. pt. h. (1906) — E. C. Case, Revision 
of the Pelycosauria of North America (Carnegie Institution, Washing- 
ton, 1907). — Technical papers by H. Crcdner in Zeitschr. deutsch. 
geol. Ges. vol. xl. (1888), p. 488 (Palaeohatteria) , T. H. Huxley in 
Quart. Journ. GeoL Soc. vol. xliii. (1887), p. 675 (Hyperodapedon), 
and L. Dollo in Bull. Soc. Belg. Geol. vol. v. (1891), Mem. p. 151 
(Champsosaurus). Dinosauria: O. C. Marsh, " The Dinosaurs 
of North America," Sixteenth Attn. Rep. U.S. Geol. Survey (1896). — 
Technical papers by L. Dollo in Bull. mus. toy. d'hist. nat. Belg. 
vols, i- — ill- (1882-8A) (Iguanodon), O. C. Marsh in Amer. Journ. Sci. 
ser. 3, vol. 1. (1895), pi. viii. (restorations), J. B. Hatcher in Mem. 
Carnegie Museum, vol. i. No. 1 (1901), and W. J. Holland in Mem. 
Carnegie Museum, vol. ii. No. 6 (1906). Crocodilia: T. H. Huxley, 
" On Stagonolepis robertsoni, and on the Evolution of the Croco- 
dilia," Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc. vol. xxxi. (1875), p. 42 j. — E. Koken, 
" Thoracosaurus macrorhynchus, Bl., aus der Tuffkreide von Maas- 
tricht," Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges. (1888), p. 754. — E. Fraas, 
" Thattosuchia," Palaeontogr. vol. xlix. (1902), p. 1. — L. Dollo, 
" Premiere note sur les crocodiliens de Bernissart," Bull. mus. 
roy. d'hist. nat. Belg. vol. ii. (1883), p. 309. — G. A. Boulenger, 
Catalogue of the Chelonians f Rhynchocephalians and Crocodiles in 
the British Museum (London, 1889). Ornithosauria: K. A. von 
Zittel, " Ueber Flugsaurier aus dem lithographischen Schiefer," 
Palaeontogr. vol. xxix. (1882), p. 49. — E. T. Newton, "On the 
Skull, Brain and Auditory Organ of a New Species of Pterosaurian," 
Phil. Trans, vol. 179B (1888), p. 503 — H. G. Seeley, Dragons of 
the Air (London, 1901). — Technical papers by O. C. Marsh in Amer. 
Journ. Sci. ser. 3, vol. xxiii. (1882), p. 251 (wing-membranes), S. W. 
Williston in Kansas Univ. Quarterly, vol. vi. (1897), p. 35 (restora- 
tion of Pteranodon), and G. F. Eaton in Amer. Journ. Set. ser. 4, 
vols, xvi., xvii. (1903-4). Squamata: R. Owen, " On the Rank 
and Affinities of the Reptilian Class of the Mosasauridae, Gervais," 

?>uart. Journ. Geol. Soc. vol. xxxiii. (1877), p. 682, and vol. xxxiv. 
1878), p. 748. — G. A. Boulenger, Catalogue of the Lizards in the 
British Museum, vols, i.-iii. (London, 1885-87); Catalogue of the 
Snakes in the British Museum, vols, i., ii. (London, 1893-94). — 
Technical papers by A. Kornhuber in Abh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst. 
Wien. vol. v. (1873), No. 4, and vol. xvii. (1893), No. 3 (Dolicho- 
sauria), F. Noposa in Beitr. Palaont. Oesterr.-Ungarns, vol. xxi.(i908), 
and S. W. Williston in Kansas Univ. Quarterly, vols, i., ii., vi. 
(1892-1897) (Mosasauria). (A. S. Wo.) 

III. Anatomy of Reptiles 
The Skull. 
Sphenodon has the most primitive and still most complex 
skull, the salient features of which it is easy to derive from 
Stegocephalian and early, generalized reptilian conditions; 
whilst in other directions, mostly by reduction, the skull of this 
"living fossil" affords the key to that of all the other groups 
of at least recent reptiles. The main features are the following. 
There are, in the temporal region, three complete bony arches, 




xp 



After Gunther. Fig. 12.— Skull of Sphenodon. 

1, Ventral aspect; 2, lateral aspect; 3, lateral aspect of mandible. 
ar. articular; bo, basioccipital ; bs, basisphenoid ; c, coronoid; ca, 
columella auris; d, dentary; j, postorbital; m, maxilla; n, nasal; 
pa, parietal; pi, palatine; ptn, premaxilla; pr t prefrontal; ps, 
postfrontal; pt, pterygoid; q, quadrate in the upper figure, 
quadrato-jugal in the middle figure; qj, jugal; s, squamosal; sp, 
splenial ; v, vomer. 

bone (these " parotic processes " are made up of the lat. 
occipital, parotic and opisthotic bones); this is the post- 
temporal foramen. The space enclosed between this occipital 
buttress, the quadrate and the ptcrygoidal support of the 
latter represents the wide and large cavity of the middle ear, 

23 



i 4 8 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 



and as such is crossed by the auditory columellar chain. The 
infra-temporal bridge or jugal arch is formed by the jugal (qj in 
fig. 12), which joins the descending process of the squamosal, 
and the quadrato-jugal, which is very small and partly fused with 
the lateral side of the quadrate. Now, between the quadrate on 
the one side and the squamoso+quadrato-jugal+ jugal on the 
other, is enclosed a gap, met with only in Sphenodon of recent 
reptiles. This fourth, or quadrato-squamosal foramen, with its 
squamoso-quadrato-jugal bridge, is, as a rule, not mentioned, 
being too small to be obvious. The quadrate is very firmly 
fixed. On the ventral side of the cranium we notice the broad 
and long bony palate, the large vomers, and the pterygoids 
meeting in the middle line; aside of the vomers are the long 
posterior nares; posteriorly the pterygoids diverge to rest upon 
short basi-sphenoid processes, and they articulate by short 
flanges with the quadrates. 

'The occipital condyle is kidney-shaped, triple, composed of 
the basi and the lateral occipitals. The dorsal median roof of the 
cranium is formed by the paired parietals, near their anterior 
symphysis with the large pineal foramen, the paired frontals, 
nasals and premaxillaries. The outer nares are surrounded 
by the premaxillaries, maxillaries and nasals. Prefrontals and 
postfrontals exist. There is a* complete cartilaginous, inter- 
orbital septum, and a cranial columella, a pair of upright 
buttresses arising in the alisphenoidal walls, connecting the 
parietals with the pterygoids. The hyoid apparatus consists of 
a narrow base, with three pairs of arches; of these the first 
or hyoid arch is variously connected with the cranium near the 
paroccipital process, or with the extracolumella (see Middle 
Ear, below) ; the others are a long and stout pair of first and a 
smaller pair of second branchial arches. 

Crocodiles. — The temporal region is still bridged over by three 
arches, dividing the whole fossa into three, very much as in 
Sphenodon. The supratemporal foramen is bordered by the 
parietal, postfrontal (postorbital absent) and squamosal. The 
posttemporal foramen is very much reduced, sometimes to a 
• narrow passage between the parietal, occipitals and squamosal, 
because the latter bone forms an extensive suture with the 
paroccipital process. The infratemporal or lateral fossa is wide 
and rather shallow, bordered above by the postfrontal and 
squamosal, in front by the postfrontal and jugal, below by the 
jugal and quadrato-jugal, behind by the latter, the quadrate, 
tip of the paroccipital and the squamosal. The quadrato-jugal 
being long and in an almost horizontal position, being wedged 
in between the jugal and nearly the whole length of the lateral 
edge of the quadrate, and there being no squamoso-quadrato- 
jugal bridge, the fourth foramen of Sphenodon is absent. The 
middle-ear cavity is reduced to a complicated system of narrow 
passages; one for the passage of the extra-columellar-mandi- 
bular string of the auditory chain (see Ear, below), between the 
quadrate, paroccipital and lateral occipital bones; another 
passage (Eustachian) opens in the roof of the mouth, between 
basioccipital and basisphenoid; a .third joins that of the other 
side and forms with it a median opening between the same 
bones, just behind the posterior pterygoid border of the choanae. 
These nares, being in the recent crocodiles shifted as far back 
as possible, communicate with the outer nostrils by very long 
passages, formed by the whole length of the pterygoids, palatines, 
maxillaries, vomers and pre-maxillaries, all of which form a long 
median suture. But this long bony palatal roof is interrupted 
by a pair of large palatal foramina, bordered usually by palatine, 
pterygoid, ectopterygoid, or transverse bone. and maxillary. 
On the dorsal side of the cranium we notice the parietals fused 
into an unpaired bone, without a pineal hole and the likewise 
unpaired frontal. There are a pair of postfrontals, prefrontals 
and lacrymals perforated by the naso-lacrymal duct. The 
nasals vary much in length, mostly in conformity with that of 
the maxillaries; as a rule they reach the short premaxillaries; 
but not always the nasal groove. (For taxonomic detail see 
under Crocodile.) 

The occipital condyle is formed mainly by the basioccipital, 
which always borders part of the foramen magnum, but the 



lateral occipitals each send a flange to it, which in immature 
specimens still partakes of the articulation with the atlas. The 
opisthotic and epiotic bones fuse early with the lateral and with 
supraoccipital bones; only the prootic remains longer as a 
separate element, anteriorly with a large hole for the exit of the 
third branch of the trigeminal nerve. The basisphenoid is 
scarcely visible, being overlaid by the pterygoids. The pre- 
sphenoid is larger, continued forwards and upwards into the 
inter-orbital septum, which remains mostly cartilaginous. Near 
the anterior and upper margin of the pre-sphenoid is a large notch 
on either side for the passage of the optic nerve, the three eye- 
muscle nerves and the first branch of the trigeminal. The place 
of the orbitosphenoids is taken by membrane or cartilaginous 
continuations of the interorbital septum, but the alisphenoids 
are large and abut upwards against the frontals and with a lateral 
flange against the postfrontals. These send down a conspicuous 
process which forms sutures with an upward process of the jugal 
and another of the ectopterygoid; it is this compound pillar 
which partly divides the orbit from the infratemporal or lateral 
fossa. The size of these and the upper temporal fossae stand in 
an inverse ratio to each other. The upper fossae are still 
comparatively large in the long-snouted Gavialis and Tomis- 
tonia, whilst these holes almost completely disappear in the 
alligators, namely, in the broad- and short-snouted members of 
the order, which chew their prey. In extinct Crocodilians the 
upper fossae were the larger. The temporo-mandibular muscle 
which lifts or shuts the lower jaw arises from the walls of the 
upper fossa, passes beneath the jugal-arch and is inserted upon 
the supra-angular portion of the lower jaw. In the more recent 
crocodiles this muscle is more and more superseded by the 
pterygo-mandibular muscle, which, arising chiefly from the dorsal 
surface of the much-broadened pterygoid, fills the widened space 
between the latter and the quadrate, and is inserted into the outer 
surface of the angular bone. The arrangement of this muscle 
secures a more advantageous leverage of the jaw, and is capable 
of more powerful development than the other, which is con- 
sequently on the wane — a nice illustration of onward, ortho- 
genetic evolution. The dentary bones of the under jaw form a 
suture, later a symphysis; this is very long in the long-snouted 
genera, in which the splenials likewise form a long symphysis; 
in the others the mandibular symphysis is much shorter and the 
splenials remain widely separated. The articular bone is short, 
forms a transverse cup for the quadrate, or a saddle-shaped cup, 
and is perforated by the Siphonium (see below under Ear). The 
angle is upturned, formed by the articular, angular and, 
laterally, by the supra-angular bone; the opercular or counter- 
part of the splenial lies on the outer side, forming part of the 
anterior border of the oval foramen in the jaw. 

The Chelonian skull agrees in many important features with 
that of Sphenodon and of the crocodiles, but it is composed of 
fewer bones, the ectopterygoids, lacrymals and postorbitals 
being absent, often also the nasals, unless they are fused with the 
prefrontals. The vomer is unpaired and forms a septum between 
the nasal passages, which, except in Sphargis, are ventrally 
roofed over to a variable extent by wings sent out by the 
palatines, joining the sides of the vomer. Most of the con- 
figurations of the other cranial bones are well represented in the 
accompanying figures. The palatines form a continuous broad 
floor with the pterygoids, which are extensively and firmly r 
joined to the quadrates and to the basisphenoid. There are no 
Eustachian tubes. The occipital condyle is distinctly triple and 
the basioccipital is frequently excluded from the foramen 
magnum. The lateral occipitals early send out a pair of stout 
wings, the ventral of which joins a stout ventrilateral process 
of the basioccipital, both forming a thick knob especially in 
Chelone, and a dorsolateral wing, which broadly joins the large 
opisthotic bone. This connects the lateral occipital and the 
supraoccipital with the upper portion of the quadrate. On the 
top of the quadrate and upon the lateral dorsal portion of this 
compound transverse process (which of course corresponds to 
the paroccipital process of crocodiles, &c.) lies the squamosal, 
about which more presently. The two wings of the lateral 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



149 



occipital, part of the opisthotic, the quadrate, and part of the 
pterygoids, form the bony borders of the middle ear-cavity, 



*?> 




Fig. 13. — Dorsal aspect of skull of 
Testudo tabulata (from nature). ^ an, 
anterior nares; /, frontal, on either 
side of which are the orbits, bounded 
behind by ps, the postfrontal; bo, 
basioccipital; ep, epiotic; so, supra- 
occipital; q, quadrate; s, squamosal; 
pa } parietal ; po, pcriotic bones. 



FlG. 14. — Ventral surface of skull of Tes- 
tudo tabulate (from nature), bo, basi- 
occipital ; 6s, basisphenoid ; ep, epiotic ; 
m, maxilla; pi, palatine; pm, pre- 
maxilla; pi, pterygoid; q, quadrate; 
gj.quadrato-jugal; so, supraoccipital. 



which is open behind; through it extends horizontally the 
columellar rod, received with its outer portion by a notch on the 
posterior side of the quadrate. This is of very complicated 
shape. Its outer margins form most of the tympanic frame; 
the posterior margins being curved backwards leave a wide notch 
behind in the Cryptodira and in Sphargis, but in the Pleurodira 
this part of the quadrate is transformed into a trumpet, the rim 
of which, forming a complete ring, carries the tympanic mem- 
brane. The tympanic cavity thus formed often leads into a 
deep recess which extends into the hollowed-out squamosal 
{e.g. in Testudo) towards the opisthotic and bears some resem- 
blance to the intricate tympanic recesses which pervade that 
region of the crocodile's skull. With its upper anterior and 




Fig. 15. — Side view of skull of Testudo tabulata (from nature). 
an, angular; ar, articular; d, dentary; /, frontal; j, jugal; m, 
mandible; n, naso-prefrontal ; pa, parietal; pi, palatine; ps, 
postfrontal; q, quadrate; qj, quadra to- jugal. 

inner portion the quadrate joins the large prootic bone which is 
usually completely fused with the rest of the opisthotic, but in 
Sphargis it remains separate, and in this turtle the sutures 
between the otic bones and the supraoccipital also persist. In 
front of the prootics the bony lateral walls of the brain-case end 
in Sphargis, but- in most of the other Chelonians bony ali- 
sphenoids are represented by a pair of epipterygoids which rest 
upon short upward processes of the pterygoids and are joined by 
much longer, rather thin, but broad descending lamellae from 



the parietals. They represent of course the columcllae cranii or 
pterygoidal columcllae; if they are of alisphcnoidal origin the 
term epipterygoids is a misnomer; the same applies 
to these structures in other reptiles. Through the 
space enclosed by the pterygoid, basioccipital, 
opisthotic and quadrate, enters the cranial carotid 
artery, sometimes piercing the posterior rim of the 
pterygoid; then the canal runs along the dorsal side 
of this bone and opens near the cranial columella. 
The arcades over the temporal region arc most vari- 
able. Potentially Chelonians possess all the three 
arcades of the crocodiles, but it so happens that 
never more than one fenestra is present. The 
false roof over the temporal region is most complete 
in Sphargis and in the Chclonidae. Excepting 
Sphargis the supraoccipital extends far beyond the 
back of the cranium in shape of a long unpaired 
crest, which never diverges, or sends out lateral 
processes, but it is joined, and partly overlaid for a 
great part of its length, by the parietals in Chelonidae 
and Sphargis. In these genera the much-enlarged 
parietal, the equally large postfrontal, with the 
squamosal behind, the jugal below, and a large 
quadrato-jugal, form one continuous bony roof over 
the whole temporal fossa, which is widely open 
behind, the space being bordered by supraoccipital, 
opisthotic, squamosal and parietal. All other 
Chelonians show a great reduction of this roof. 
The parietal does not send out dorsolateral expan- 
sions; and the postfrontal likewise forms no ex- 
pansions. It joins the rather short malar, forming 
the posteriororbital bridge, which posteriorly is 
connected by the quadrato-jugal with the upper 
portion of the quadrate and with the squamosal. The latter 
rests upon the quadrate and is in no connexion with the parietal. 
Consequently the whole temporal fossa is quite open. The hori- 
zontal bridge or arcade is to a certain extent homologous with the 
infra-temporal arcade. All the bones which border the temporal 
fossa vary much in extent. The greatest reduction has taken 
place in Cistudo and in Geoemyda, the latter an Indian genus of 
Testudinidae, in which the quadrato-jugal is lost, leaving a wide 
gap in the horizontal arcade. — The Chelonians form an instruc- 
tive parallel to mammalian conditions by the broad contact of 
the squamosal with the malar, e.g. in Chelone, whilst the quad- 




Fig. 16. — Dorsal Aspect of Skull of Chelys malamata. bo, basi- 
occipital; eo, exoccipital; /, frontal; j, jugal; m, maxilla; pm, 
premaxilla ; pa, parietal ; pr, prefrontal ; ps, postfrontal ; pi, 
pterygoid; q, quadrate; s, squamosal; so, supraoccipital. 

rato-jugal, having in all Chelonians lost its original ventral 
connexion with the jugal, may actually get lost as in all the 



i5° 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 



Lacertilia. The zygomatic arch of the Mammalia is formed 
(cf. also Agamidae) out of the supratcmporal arch of Sphenodon, 

pm 




Fig. 17. — Ventral Aspect of Skull of Chelys matamaia. bo, basi- 

occipital ;_ bs, basisphenoid ; mdl, mandible ; oh, opisthotic ; 

pi, palatine ; pm, premaxilla ; po, prootic ; pbj pterygoid ; q, 
quadrate; s, squamosal; v, vomer. 




Fig. 18. — Lateral Aspect of Skull of Chelys matamaia. an, an- 
gular; ar, articular; bo, basioccipital ; d, dentary; op, opisthotic; 
m, maxilla; pa, parietal; pm, premaxilla; pr, prefrontal; ps, 
postf rontal ; pt, pterygoid ; q, quadrate ; s, squamosal ; sg, 
supra-angular. 

after the loss of the postorbital element and of the quadrato- 
jugal, the squamosal gaining connexion with the upper, not 
posterior and ventral, branch of the jugal or malar bone. 

The mandibular halves form a complete osseous symphysis, 
the only instance in reptiles; all the other elements retain their 
sutures. The articular portion of the articular bone forms 
several shallow cups and a slight anterior knob, best developed 
in Chelone. The angular bone does not help to form the posterior 
upper angle. The coronoid, or complementary element, is 
often small; the supra-angular and the splenial or opercular 
are always present, mostly also a pre-splenial wanting in 
Testudinidae (cf. G. Baur). 

The hyoid apparatus is well developed, and sometimes 
assumes large dimensions, especially in Chelys. The two pairs 
of " horns " are the first and second branchial arches, whilst 
the hyoid arches are reduced to a pair of small, frequently only 
cartilaginous nodules, attached near the anterior corners of the 
basis linguae, which generally fuses with the os entoglossuni in 
the tip of the tongue. In Chelydidae the long median basal or 
copular piece forms a semi-canal for the reception of the trachea. 

In the skull of the Lacertilia the arcades over the temporal 
region vary much in composition and numbers. There are at 
most two arcades and two windows. First the posttemporal 
arcade, enclosing the posttemporal fenestra, which is. framed 
mainly by the large paroccipital process below and the long 
parietal process above, both meeting distally, and the quadrate 
is carried by the paroccipital process. In the corner, in front, 
where the three bones meet, lies the squamosal, connecting 
parietal and quadrate. This squamosal, when not too much 



reduced, has an upper parietal and an anterior horizontal arm ; 
the latter is essential for the formation of the second horizontal 
arcade, which makes the lower border of the supra-temporal 
window. The infra-temporal arcade, namely a quadrato- jugal 
+ jugal arch, is absent in all Laccrtilians owing to the complete 
absence of the quadrato-jugal element. 

In Heloderma and Geckos the posttemporal is the only arcade. 
In the Amphisbaenids and in Aniella, practically also in 
Anelytropsis, all the arcades are lost. All the other families 





Fig. 19. — Skull of Chlamydosaurus kingii (old male), showing 
much differentiated teeth. I, ventral aspect; 2, posterior; 
3, profile, showing the enormous process at the hinder end of the 
lower jaw. 

of lizards and the chameleons have two arcades. We begin the 
description of the horizontal arcade with those families in which 
it is most complete, and most like that of Sphenodon. In 
Varanus it is formed by four bones. The postfrontal is short; 
to it is attached the postorbital, which sends a long horizontal 
process to join the squamosal 1 splint,* and this connects with the 

1 There is a much-debated question of the homologies^ of the one 
or two elements, both apparently membrane bones, which connect 
the upper end of the quadrate with the parietal and with the supra- 
temporal arch. The question becomes acute in the snakes, whether 
the single element connecting skull and quadrate has to be called 
squamosal or supratemporal. Space forbids here to expound the 
matter, which has been very ably reviewed by S. W. Williston 
(" Temporal Arches in the Reptiha," Biolog. Bulletin, vii. No. 4, 
1904, pp. 175-192 ;\;f. also F. W. Thyng, Tufts College Studies, II. 
2, 1906). About ten different names have been applied to these two 
elements, and two, namely, squamosal and supratemporal, are 
being used quite promiscuously. When only one element is present, 
the present writer uses the term squamosal, and there are reasons 
making it probable that this element is the squamosum of mammals. 
When both elements are present, the more ventral or lateral of the 
two is termed squamosal, that which always helps to form the 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



151 




upper anterior end of the quadrate; between the quadrate, 
the squamosal and the long parietal process lies the likewise 
splint-like supratemporal, attached by most of its length to the 
parietal process. The jugal has only one arm, and this connects 
the maxilla with the postorbital, completing the posterior 
orbital border. There is a wide gap between jugal and quadrate. 
In Tejidae the arcade is the same, but the squamosal reaches the 
jugal, both meeting the postorbital. In Lacerta the arcade is 
essentially the same, but the window is completely filled up by 
the postfrontal, which extends so far back as to reach the supra- 
temporal. In the Agamidae the 
arcade is strong and simplified. 
Postfrontal and postorbital are 
represented by one forked piece. 
This squamosal and the post- 
frontal mass are connected by the 
upper, much up-curved end of- the 
jugal, which is thrust between 
them. This arrangement is 
further emphasized in Iguana, the 
upper end of the jugal being much 
enlarged so as to form the greater 
portion of the arcade, and keeping 
the postfrontal mass and the 
*y simple squamosal widely asunder. 
In Heloderma post- and prefrontals 
are in contact with each other, 
Fig. 20, — Dorsal aspect of separating the frontal bone from 
skuttolHelodermahorridum. the orbit; the jugal joins only 
/, frontal ;j, jugal ;/,lachry- the pre f r0 ntal, and there is no 
mal; m, maxilla; n, nasal; , .^ ; , t A 

pa, parietal, fm, premax- further arcade whatever. A 
ilia; £r, prefrontal ;ps, post- vestige of a supratemporal (?) 
frontal; pt, pterygoid; q, lies on the outside of the base 
quadrate; j, squamosal ;w, of the squam osal, between s and 
supraoccipital. • n 

*^ q in fig. 20. 

The chameleons are peculiar. The posttemporal arcade, 
spanning a wide space, is formed by a long process of the supra- 
temporal - squamosal, 
** which is directed up- 

and backwards to join 
the parietal, which ex- 
tends back by a long 
unpaired process. The 
horizontal arch is broad 
and short, squamosal 
and postfrontal, form- 
ing a broad suture; 
w below they are joined 
by the jugal; above 
the suture lies, in cham- 
eleon, a tiny piece, 
perhaps a vestige of 
the dislodged post- 
orbital. 

The jugal bones, 
to continue the descrip- 
tion of the appendi- 
cular parts of the skull, are firmly joined to lateral processes 
of the pterygoids by the ectopterygoids; further forwards 
they are extensively connected with the maxillaries. These 
rest against strong transverse palatine processes. The pal- 
atines form a medium symphysis; posteriorly they diverge 
together with the pterygoids, which articulate with the quad- 
supratemporal bridge, generally with the postorbital, sometimes 
also with the jugal. The more dorsal element is mentioned as 
supratemporal ; it is always smaller, and mostly restricted to the 
corner between the squamosal and the parietal process against 
which it rests. Either of these two elements articulate with the 
quadrate. Both elements are present in Labyrinthodonts and in 
most of the extinct groups 01 reptiles; among recent forms in 
Lacertidae, Varanidae, Tejidae; one three-armed piece in Sphenodon, 
chameleons and crocodiles, without, in Sphenodon at least, any trace 
of a compound nature; one piece, forked, in Agamidae; one simple 
piece in most of the other Laccrtilia, and in snakes. 




Fig. 21. — Skull of Chamaeleon vulgaris. 
ag, angular; ar, articular; bs, basisphe- 
noid ; 3, dentary ; j, jugal ; w, maxilla ; 
me, median ethmoid ; p l and p 1 , parie- 
tals; pl, palatine; pr, prefrontal; pt, 
pterygoid ; q, quadrate; sg, supra-angu- 
lar; so, supraoccipital; sq, squamosal. 



rates and with the basisphenoid by a pair of strong basiptery- 
goid processes. A slender vertical rod of bone, the columella 
cranii, arises from the dorsal surface of each pterygoid and, 
passing at a distance from the cranial capsule, is sutured to a 
short lateroventral process of the parietals Such a pair of 
columella; exists in nearly all Lacertilia (distinguished by many 
systematists as Kionocrania) with the exception of the chame- 
leons and the Amphisbaenidae. In many lizards, however, 
this columella, or epipterygoid, does not quite reach the parietal, 
leaning instead against the prootic; possibly it has been evolved 
out of the alisphenoid, and Chelonians seem to support this 
view. The premaxillary bone is single, except in the Skinks 
and in some Geckos; ventrally it touches the vomers which 
vary much in size; they are always paired although suturally 
connected; posteriorly they pass into, and fuse with, the 
palatines before these send off their maxillary processes. Be- 
tween the vomer and its maxillary is a longitudinal hole. Often, 
e.g. in Lacerta, the vomers enclose a median hole near their 
anterior end, for Jacobson's organ. Dorsally the premaxilla 
sends a median process backwards to the nasals. These are 
paired, and fuse together only in Uroplates and in Varanus. 
The external nasal fossae are sometimes very large, and their 
anterior half appears blocked by the ossified turbinals, e.g. in 
Varanus and Tejus. Prefrontals are always present, often 
fused with the lacrymals; in Heloderma, in Aniella and in 
chameleons the prefrontals extend so far back as to meet the 
postfrontals, excluding thereby the frontals from the orbital 
rim. The frontals are either paired, as in Varanus, Lacertidae, 
Heloderma, Anguidae, Scincidae, Anelytropsidae, Aniella, Amphis- 
baenidae, and in some Geckoninae; or they are fused into one 
bone, as in the Eublepharinae, chameleons, Tejidae, Iguanidae, 
Agamidae, Xenosaurus. The parietals are double in the 
Geckos, in Uroplates and Xantusia; in all the others they 
form one coossified mass, generally with a pineal foramen, 
except in Eublepharinae, Amphisbaenidae, Tejidae, in Aniella 
and other degraded forms. In the majority the pineal fora- 
men lies in the middle of the parietal, but in the Iguanidae it 
is near the frontal, and actually in the frontal in chameleons. 

As regards the brain-case, there is a cartilaginous inter- 
orbital septum, connected posteriorly with the slender, bony 
presphenoid; ventrally on to this is fused a vestige of the 
parasphenoid, a narrow and thin splint which sometimes can 
be dislodged. The whole of the anterior wall of the brain-case 
is membranous, excepting a pair of separate ossifications, 
which do but rarely touch any of the cranial bones, as frontal, 
parietal or probtics. The ossifications are irregular in shape, 
each sending out a downward process which curves inwards 
almost to meet its fellow; between these issue the olfactory 
lobes. W. K. Parker recognized them as the alisphenoids; 
E. D. Cope named them postoptics, and remarked that in 
Sphenodon they coexist with an. orbitosphenoid bone. The 
prootic has a notch in its anterior lateral margin for the passage 
of the trigeminal nerve. The opisthotic portion of the petrosal 
mass is intimately fused with the lateral occipital bones and 
their paroccipital process, and sometimes, e.g. Tejus, encloses 
with them many intricate recesses of the middle ear-chamber, 
which extend also into hollow and swollen thick downward 
processes of the basioccipital. These cavities of both sides 
communicate with each other through the cancellous substance 
of the basioccipital and basisphenoid. There are no Eustachian 
tubes opening into the mouth through the base of the skull. 

The occipital condyle is tripartite, the lateral occipitals 
partaking of the articulation; very rarely, e.g. in Amphis- 
baenidae (see fig. 22), the basioccipital portion is so much 
reduced that the skull articulates by two very broad condyles. 

The halves of the under jaw are but loosely united, either 
by ligament only or by an at least very movable suture. The 
jaw is compound and the numerous constituent bones mostly 
retain their sutures. Besides the dentary and articular, angular 
and supra-angular on the lateral side, and the opercular 
or splenial on the inner side, there lies on the dorsal side the 
coronoid, six pairs in all. The posterior angle of the jaw 



152 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 




is always formed by the articular bone, not by the angular 
which lies on the ventral side, about the middle of the 

jaw; it is fused 
with the articular 
in Geckos, some 
Tejidae, Amphis- 
baenidae, and 
some other bur- 
rowing kinds. The 
splenial is absent 
in chameleons; 
near the vanish- 
' ing point in some 
of the Agamidae. 
The coronoid is 
always present, 
for the insertion 
of masseter 
muscles. * In the 
pleurodont lizards 
the outer wall of 
the dentary forms 
a ledge, against 
the inner side of 
which are fixed 
the teeth with 
cementum. 

The snakes' 
skull shows many 
peculiarities, and 
most of the bones 
of the cranial capsule fuse together without sutures. The 
occipital condyle is triple, the lateral occipitals and the basi- 
occipital taking equal share in its composition; the basioccipital 
is excluded from the foramen magnum ; frequently one common 
epiphysial pad covers this tripartite condyle. The supra- 
occipital is likewise excluded from the margin of the foramen 
magnum by the lateral occipitals. The basisphenoid is prolonged 
forwards into a long presphenoidal rostrum, on the upper sur- 
face of which the trabcculae cranii, which persist as cartilages, 
extend forwards to blend with the median ethmoidal cartilage. 
There are no ali- and no orbitosphenoids, their places being 
taken by downward extensions of the frontal bones, which 
descend to this sphenoidal rostrum and then turn inwards 
to meet together on the floor of the cranial cavity. There is 
consequently no interorbital septum. The parietals also de- 
scend laterally, but unite with the basisphenoid by suture. On 



Fig. 22. — Skull of Monopeltis sphenorhynchus. 
i, dorsal aspect; 2, ventral aspect; 3, lateral 
aspect; 4, posterior aspect, ar articular; bs, 
basisphenoid ; d, dentary;/, frontal ; m, max- 
illa; n, nasal; oc, oc, occipital condyles; of, 
occipital foramen ; pal, palatine; pa, parietal ; 
pm, premaxilla; ptg, pterygoid; q, quadrate; 
so, supraoccipital ; sq, squamosal; v, vomer. 




Fig. 23. — Skull of Python sebae. ar, articular; ca, columella 
auris; d, dentary; /, frontal; m, maxilla;' p, parietal; pm, pre- 
maxilla; po, prootic; pr, prefrontal; ps, posttrontal; pt, ptery- 
goid; q, quadrate; s, squamosal; t, transversum; tb, turbinal. 

the base of the skull we note various processes for the insertion 
of ventral cervicooccipital muscles, much used during the 
act of vigorous striking. Boidae have a long sphenoidal ridge 
and thick basipterygoid processes; others have one or more 
median knobs or crests, and the Viperidae have a very pro- 
minent and large ridge. The parietals fuse together into an 
unpaired mass whence arises mostly a strong median crest 




Fig. 24. — Skull of Vipera nasicornis. ar t 
articular; ca, columella auris; d, dent- 
ary ;/, frontal ; m, maxilla ; pf, poison fang ; 
pm, premaxilla; pr, prefrontal; ps, post- 
frontal ; pt, pterygoid ; q , quadrate ; s, squa- 
mosal ; t, transversum or ectopterygoid. 



which projects a little beyond the occiput; there is no parietal 
or pineal foramen. There are paired frontals, postfrontals, 
prefrontals and ^-^ f 
nasals; the latter 
are said to coossify 
in Charina only. 
The position of the 
prefrontals is vari- 
able. In the boas, 
for instance, they 
meet, separating the 
nasals from the 
frontals; they are 
in contact with the 
nasals in the boas, 
burrowing snakes 
and- in Xenopeltis, 
but more or less 
widely separated 
from them, and 
often from each other, in the Colubridae and Viperidae. The 
premaxillary is single-, and only in Glauconiidae connected 
with the maxillaries; in the others it is but loosely connected 
with the ethmoidal end of the skull, for instance, with the 
turbinate, which are osseous and well developed in pythons. 

The whole appendicular apparatus is most loosely attached 
to the skull, at least in the typical snakes, and since they do not 
chew their prey but only hook it in, so to speak, during the act 
of swallowing, the whole apparatus is as movable as possible. 

The whole palatal apparatus shows many modifications, but 
the maxillaries, palatines and pterygoids always remain widely 
asunder, and from the mid-line. Some of the modifications, 
so far as they are used for taxonomic purposes, are mentioned 
in the article Snakes: Classification. In the majority of snakes 
the maxillaries form the borders of the mouth, and they are but 
loosely attached to the other bones, to their palatine processes, 
to the palatines, and with their posterior ends, by the ectoptery- 
goids to the pterygoids. In the Viperidae the maxillaries are 
much shortened and articulate extensively with the prefrontals; 
they can be erected, or rather pushed forwards, by the ectoptery- 
goids (see Snakes) ; they are not connected with the palatines. 
The pterygoids diverge posteriorly and articulate loosely with 
the quadrates; in the original condition the articulation is near 
the distal end of the quadrate, e.g. in Boidae, and the pterygoids 
may form an additional attachment with the mandibles; in the 
Viperidae the pterygoids are somewhat shortened and are attached 
to about the middle of the quadrate shafts; in the Amblycepha- 
lidae they are still shorter and do not reach these bones. The 
ectopterygoids are lost by the burrowing Typhlopidae and Glau- 
coniidae. The quadrate is always extremely movable; besides 
being in a most curious way connected with the outer end of the 
columellar rod (see below, Ear), it is suspended from the skull 
by the squamosal. The squamoso-quadrate connexion is very 
loose; that of the squamosal with the skull varies much. In 
the majority of snakes it slides quite freely upon the parietal; 
it is much longer than the quadrate in the boas, much shorter 
than the elongated and slender quadrate in most of the poisonous 
snakes. Lastly, in most of the ancient burrowing snakes, e.g. 
Typhlops, Glaucoma, Ilysia and Uropeltis, the squamosal has 
worked its way into the cranial wall so that the quadrate, itself 
also much shortened, rests directly upon the cranium. 

The Vertebral Column. 
The vertebrae of all reptiles are gastrocentrous, that is to say, 
the centra or bodies of the vertebrae are formed by the originally 
paired, interventral cartilages, while the basiventrals are reduced, 
persisting either as so-called intercentra or wedge-bones, or as 
intervertebral pads, or disappearing altogether; the basidorsal 
elements form the neural arch. At the earlier stages of develop- 
ment the gastrocentrous vertebrae behave in the same way as 
in the Urodela, except that the interdorsal pair of elements is 
suppressed from the beginning (the very elements which in 



ANATOMY) 



REPTILES 



J 53 






Stegocephali and most Anura form the centre), therefore the 
typical batrachian vertebrae are notocentrous. If the re- 
maining three pairs of constituent elements of each vertebra 
(the neural arch, the centrum and the intercentra) remain 
separate, the vertebrae are called temnospondylous (re/wco, 
I cut, <tw6v8v\qs> a vertebra) . If the neural arches and the centra 
are suturally united, or are fused with each other, the vertebrae 
are called stereospondylous (orepeos, solid). In many fossil 
reptiles most or many of the vertebrae are temnospondylous; 
in most of the recent Amnio ta 1 they are consolidated, but the 
atlas or first vertebra remains usually in a relatively primitive 
condition, and is temnospondylous but for the usual modification 
that its centrum becomes attached to that of the second vertebra 
and forms its odontoid process. The composition of gastrocent- 
rous vertebrae is best illustrated by the first and second cervical 
vertebrae of crocodiles, whence by reduction and fusion the 
structure of every other vertebra can be explained. We have 
only to add that the ribs are geneticaUy derived from lateral 
outgrowths of the basiventral elements, whilst the chevron bones 
are mere ventral outgrowths from the same basal cartilages. 
The most primitive vertebral column is that of the Geckos. The 



N -i — i 

tP. f~]|B.PJ 
Chord*. 

tv.EJf^vl 



4p q§ M m& % 




8 / 9 

Fig. 25. — Composition of Vertebrae of Reptiles. In all the 
figures the right side looks towards the head. 

1 . Diagram showing the relative position of the four pairs of arcualia 
which constitute a complete quadripartite vertebra. B.D., Basi- 
dorsal; B.V., basiventral; I.D., interdorsal; I.V., interventral, shaded 
vertically in all figures; N., position of axil of the spinal nerve, i.e. 
behind the neural arch of its vertebra. 2, 3. Side views of the 
constituent cartilaginous blocks of a caudal vertebra (2) and a trunk 
vertebra (3) of Archegosaurus, as typical examples of temnospondyl- 
ous quadripartite and tripartite vertebrae. For comparison with 
Reptilian vertebrae. 4. Temnospondylous tripartite vertebra of 
the trunk of Eryops, a Permian reptile. 5. Composition of the 
second vertebra of a crocodile. 6. A vertebra of whiGh the vasi- 
ventrals are reduced to an " interventrum." 7. Side view of the 
first and second i cervical vertebra of a crocodile. 8. The same 
analysed. Ni, N2 and N3, position of the first, second and third 
spinal nerves; S.D., occasionally called Proatlas, the detached 
spinous process, or supradorsal, of the atlas or first vertebra. 9. 
The first three vertebrae of Spkenodon. 10. The complete atlas 
vertebra of an adult Trionyx, still typically temnospondylous. 

vertebra consists chiefly of a large neural arch which rests broadly 
upon the centrum; this is a tube, more or less calcified and 
ossified, with a narrow waist in the middle, widening head- and 
tail wards. The tube is hollow, the chorda dorsalis passing 
through the whole column, and there are ho proper joints 
between the centra, which are amphicoelous. Between the 
centra lies a separate element, the so-called intercentrum, which 
is ring-shaped and acts as an interarticular pad instead of a 
joint. The first of these rings forms the ventral half of the atlas 
ring; the second is attached to the cranial surface of the second 
centrum, and produces, like some of the next following ones, a 
vertical median blade of bone, a true hypapophysis. Such 
intercentra exist throughout the length of the vertebral column; 
in the tail they are enlarged and carry a pair of chevrons, which 
are cartilaginous and have the tendency of fusing by superficial 

1 There remained a flaw in the correctness of the view that the 
bodies of the amniotic vertebrae are formed by the paired interven- 
tral pieces, since the bodies were known always to appear from the 
first as unpaired, cartilaginous masses, until G. B. Howes found 
them to consist of a right and left pair in the embryos of Spkenodon* 




Fig. 26. — Vertical section of 
four (7th to 10th) caudal 
vertebrae of Spkenodon. a, 
line passing through the 
middle of centrum and 
through part of the neural 
arch, where the vertebrae 
break off. (After Giinther.) 



ossification on to the caudal ends of the centrum next in front, 
to which they do not belong genetically. Exactly in the middle 
of each vertebra the thin shell of the centrum forms a cartil- 
aginous septum, of what is often wrongly called chordal car- 
tilage. When this septum is complete, and this seems to be 
the normal condition in the tail, the chorda is here rent 
asunder, otherwise it is only constricted. This septum is but 
slightly invaded by ossification, and consists of large cells 
which retain the appearance of young or embryonic cartilage. 
It coincides exactly with the line of transverse division of 
most of the caudal vertebrae into 
an anterior and a posterior half, 
the division gradually extend- 
ing right through the bone of 
the neural arch. The same kind 
of division, and from the same 
causes, exists in Spkenodon 
and in many lizards, in fact 
in all those reptiles which can 
reproduce their broken-off tail. 
It is from the septal cartilage 
that the regeneration starts 2 
(fig. 26). 

Spkenodon also has biconcave vertebrae owing to the per- 
sistence of the chorda dorsalis in the intervertebral region; 
otherwise the vertebrae are solid. Intercentra occur from the 
atlas regularly into the tail, where they carry chevron bones. 
The atlas-ring (fig. 25, 9) is composed of the first intercentrum 
and a pair of neural arches which remain quite separate and 
carry on the dorsal side a pair of ossicles, the disconnected 
supradorsal elements of the atlas, erroneously supposed to be 
the remnants of the " proatlas." 

Crocodiles. — Remnants of the chorda persist in the middle of 
the centra, which, in recent species, are mostly procoelous, and 
with a convex knob behind, but the first caudal is strongly 
biconvex.' Cartilaginous intercentral rings, pads or menisci, 
occur throughout the column; in the tail they carry chevrons. 
For the instructive detail of the composition of the first and 
second cervical vertebrae see fig. 25, 7 and 8. Some of the 
posterior neck and anterior thoracic vertebrae have an unpaired 
hypapophysis arising from the centrum. The vertebrae have 
the usual processes, viz. spinous process, a pair of anterior and 
posterior zygapophyses arising from the neural arch, diapophyses 
likewise from this arch for the articulation with the tubercular 
portion of the rib; short parapophyses from the centra for the 
capitular ends of the ribs; the transverse processes of the 
1 2th vertebra, and following, carry the whole rib, and are like 
the processes of the lumbar vertebrae diapapophyses; the 
so-called transverse processes of the tail are mainly the anchy- 
losed or fused ribs themselves. 

Ckelonians. — The vertebrae are sometimes in the various 
regions of the same column opistho-pro-or amphicoelous, or even 
biconvex. Intercentra occur regularly on the first two or three 
cervicals, and on the tail as paired or unpaired nodules, or as 
chevrons, which articulate mostly with the previous centra and 
occasionally fuse with them. Intercentral, fibrocartilaginous 
disks occur regularly, mostly in the shape of rings; the first is 
the transverse ligament of the atlas-ring. In the Trionychidae 
(fig. 25, 10), but also in some other tortoises, the various pieces 
of the atlas do not anchylose, and the first centrum remains also 
movably attached to the second, although it sometimes carries, 

2 Regeneration of the tail can take place in Spkenodon, all Geckos, 
Anguidae, Gerrhosauridae, Lacertidae, most Scincidae, and in many 
Tejidae and Iguanidae; certainly not in chameleons, Varanus, 
Agamidae, snakes, crocodiles and tortoises. Often the tail is so 
brittle and the muscular cones are so loosely connected that part 
can be thrown off by the muscular exertion of the creature itself. 
The reproduced tail is, however, only a sham tail, since neither 
centra nor arches, but only^ a non-segmented rod or tube of fibro- 
cartilage is produced. It is, however, invested with new muscles 
and with skin, but the scales often differ considerably from those of 
the normal organ, sometimes showing reversion to an ancestral 
form. For further detail see G. A. BouTenger, P.Z.S. (1888), p. 351, 
and (1891), p. 466. 



154 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 



and fuses with, the second intcrcentral piece. The entire atlas 
remains in a primitive, typically temnospondylpus condition. 
On the other hand, in some Pleurodira, e.g. Platemys and Ckelys, 
all the constituent parts of the atlas coossify and form a com- 
plete, solid vertebra, which articulates by a concave-convex 
joint with the true centrum of the second vertebra. The 
normal number of cervical vertebrae is eight in all Chelonians. 
The last cervical has sometimes, e.g. Chelydra, a very peculiar 
shape with strangely modified articular facets, in correlation 
with the retractile neck. The neural spines of the trunk verte- 
brae broaden out and fuse with the neural plates of the carapace. 
A tertiary modification takes place in many Pleurodira with 
the reduction of the ncurals by the costal plates, which then 
meet in the dorsal line and cover the neural spinal processes. 
The caudal vertebrae are often much reduced in size, although 
not always in numbers, when the tail is very short, as in the 
marine turtles. In various species of Testudo about half a dozen 
of the last caudal vertebrae fuse together into a Veritable 
urostyle, which is covered with a claw- or nail-shaped sheath 
of horn. In some of the gigantic tortoises of Mauritius this 
caudal vertebral complex is fully 3 in. long and 2 in. broad, of 
an extraordinary appearance. 

The vertebrae of the Lacertae, or Lizards proper, are a direct 
further development of those of Sphenodon. The chorda dis- 
appears; the vertebrae are procoelous, with an articulating 
knob behind. Intercentrals, in the shape of osseous, unpaired 
nodules or wedges, persist on most of the cervical vertebrae; 
they are absent in the trunk and reappear in the tail, either 
as wedges or with chevrons. The first inter central forms the 
central half of the atlas, with the neural half of which it is con- 
nected by suture. The second fuses mostly with the cranial 
end of the second centre and with the caudal and ventral surface 
of the odontoid, forming a downward-directed hook. Fre- 
quently the fusion remains incomplete, or the wedges may 
completely merge into the epistropheal mass without leaving 
any outward traces. Boulenger has made the important 
observation that the intercentra of the tail are sometimes paired, 
e.g. in Heloderma. When the caudal vertebrae are strongly 
procoelous, the knob is very long and the chevrons are attached 
to its neck, having shifted on to the vertebra in front, while 
their basal intercentral piece, or pieces, remain in the original 
position. In Ophisaurus the chevrons are absolutely fused with 
the caudal ends of the centra and thus assume a superficial 
resemblance to the vertebrae of Urodela. The splitting of the 
tail-vertebrae and regeneration have been described on a previous 
page. The trunk-vertebrae of the Tejidae and the larger 
Iguanidae possess additional articulating processes and facets, 
besides the usual processes. The Zygosphene is a wedge-shaped 
process with two articular facets, which projects forward from 
the anterior side of each neural arch. The Zygantrum forms a 
corresponding excavation with a pair of articular surfaces on the 
hinder side of the arch. The crests on the tail and trunk of 
many lizards, e.g. Iguanidae, are entirely tegumentary structures 
and not supported by the axial skeleton, except in some chame- 
leons, e.g. CL cristatus, and in the peculiar genus Brookesia; 
in these the accessory much-complicated processes are enor- 
mously elongated and support the high cutaneous crest which 
arises from the back, especially in B. ebenaud. 

The. vertebrae of the snakes are procoelous (figs. 27, 
28, 29). Besides the zygapophyses, they have zygosphenes on 
the neural arches; the ribs articulate with the parapophyses. 
Long, unpaired hypapophyses arise from the centre of the 
anterior neck and trunk vertebrae to a variable extent. In 
Dasypeltis and Rhackiodon a considerable number of these 
processes perforate the oesophagus and act as crushers of the 
shell of the eggs which these snakes swallow. The often- 
repeated statement that these processes are capped with enamel 
is erroneous. The caudal vertebrae are devoid of chevron 
bones, but they carry paired hypapophyses, and they have 
transverse processes which also are generally bent downwards. 

Lastly, the numbers of vertebrae composing the whole column 
and its various regions. In the snakes we can distinguish only 



between atlas and epistropheus, trunk and tail. The numbers 
vary exceedingly, in the trunk up to several hundred. 





Fig. 27. — Lateral aspect 
of two trunk vertebrae 
of Python, a, articular 
processes of the zyga- 
pophyses ; na, neural 
arches ; ns % neural 
spines ; /, parapophyses. 
zs, zygosphene. 



Fig. 28. — Posterior aspect 
of a trunk vertebra of 
Python (from nature). 
a, zygapophyses; b % ball 
on the surface of the 
centrum ; /, parapo- 
physis; zg, zygantrum. 




The tail may contain only a few, 
e.g. in the burrowing Typhlops, 
Glauconia, Uropellis; or it may be 
very long, as for instance in Boa. 
There is no obvious reciprocal cor- 
relation between the length of the 
trunk and the tail. In the other 

orders of reptiles the neck is well F A . 

marked, except in the snake-shaped f a "trunk vertebraof 
lizards. If we define as first thoracic 
vertebra that which is the first con- 
nected with the sternum, all those 
anterior being cervical, the neck- 
vertebrae number 5 in chameleons, 7 in Sphenodon, 8 in 
the Chelonians and in the lizards, with the exception of the 
majority of Varanus, which have 9 like the Crocodilia* 

The Number of Vertebrae of some Specimens in the 
Museum of Zoology, Cambridge, England 



Python (from nature). 
a, zygapophyses; c, cup 
on the surface of the 
centrum. 















Serial 








.y 


*rt 






Numbers 






3 


'5 

2 



X 




of the 

Sacral 

Verlebrae. 


Caudal. 


Sphenodon punctatutn 


7 


3.4 


15 


r 14111 


all. 


26,27 


=±=30 


Crocodilus vulgaris . 


9 


5 


3 


2 


5 


25,26 


33 


Alligator misstssippien. 


9 


5 


3 


2 


5 


25,26 


40 


Gaviatis gangeticus . 


9 


7 


2 


3 


3 


25,26 


33 


Chelone viridis . 


8 


9 











19,20,21 


16+py- 
gostylc 


Macrolerftys temmincki 


8 


9 








1 


19,20 


27 


Chelys matamata 


8 


8 











17,18 


17 


Varanus niloticus 


8 


4 


4 


11 


2 


30,31 


75 + 


„ giganteus 


9 


2 


1 


16 


1 


30,31 


99 


Iguana tubercutata . 
Uromastix spinipes . 


8 


4 


2-3 


10-9 


1 


26,27 


46 


8 


4 


1 


11 





25,26 


24 


Trachysaurus rugosus 


6 


4 


1 


25 





37,38 


7+py- 

gostyleof 
about 6 


Cyclodus gigas . 


7 


4 


2 


21 





35,36 





Lacerta viridis . 


7 


3 


2 


15 





28,29 


40+ 


Ophisaurus apus 

Chamaeleo vulgaris , 

















55,56 





5 


2 


1 


12 


2 


23, 24, 


=^50 


Rhampholeon spectrum 


5 


1 


3 


8 


2 


20, 21 


17 



The ribs, having arisen as lateral, separated off processes from 
the basiventral elements, show many modifications in their 
proximal attachments. These can be best studied on the 
skeleton of a young crocodile (fig. 25, 7 and 8). The first pair 
of ribs is very long and broad, attached to the unpaired ventral 
piece of the atlas-ring; the tubercular portion is indicated by a 
very small rugosity. The second pair of ribs is still larger; the 
capitulum attached to the second intercentral piece which fuses 
with the odontoid process; the tubercular process is weak or 
represented only by a ligamentous connexion with a small knob 
of the odontoid process; consequently the tuberculum has 
shifted its attachment away from the second vertebra. The 
other cervical, and the anterior thoracic, ribs have complete 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



155 




capitular and tubercular processes, which, articulating with 
the bodies and with dorsolateral processes of the neural 

arches of their vertebrae, 
enclose typical transverse 
canals. In the posterior 
thoracic region L tbe ribs 
are attached entirely to 
transverse processes of 
the neural arches, both 
capitular and tubercular 
portions having left the 
bodies or centra; the 
same arrangement pre- 
vails in the tail, but the 
ribs are very short and 
soon fuse with the pro- 
cesses. The two sacral 
ribs are very thick, 
Fig. 30.— Lateral aspect of Three Thor- articulating with the 
acic Vertebrae of Crocodilus vulgaris centra and the bases of 
(after Mivart). coupon the anterior their neural arch, and 
surface of centrum; cp, capitula of th f f 

ribs; ns f neural spines; t, tuber- . J . " f . 

cula of ribs; «, uncinate processes; the intervertebral Joint ! 
it, dorsal or vertebral portions of In Sphenodon the first 
the ribs; re, ventral or sternal carti- three ribs are repre- 
laginous portions of ribs. sented by band& of con , 

nective tissue only, with similar attachments as in crocodiles. 
The other cervical ribs are osseous; their short capitula retain 
their partly intercentral attachment, while the tubercula are 
carried by low processes of the centra. In the thorax both 
capitulum and tuberculum merge into one facet, which is 
gradually shifting farther tailwards and upwards until the 
attachment reaches them, and then lies upon the neuro-central 
suture. The first caudal vertebrae also possess ribs, very short 
and soon fusing with the diapophyses of the neural arches. In the 
cervical region of the Chelonia the ribs seem to be absent. In 
the thorax they retain their primitive intercentral position 
throughout life, assuming (except the first pair, which remains 
short and least modified) an absolutely intervertebral position. 
From the lumbar or presacral region backwards the capitula 
are gradually shifting upon short processes of the centra, until 
in the tail the vestigial ribs are carried by the diapophyses of 
the neural arches. In Sphargis (fig. 31) all the ribs are free; in 

the other Chelonians 
the ribs, generally in 
the recent species, 
flatten and become sur- 
rounded by the grow- 
ing membrane bone 
of the dorsal plates, 
and the cartilage of the 
ribs (except the capit- 
ular and neck portion 
Fig. 3 i.-Three Vertebrae of Sphargis of the rib which cannot 
coriacea. c, vertebral centra; «, neural be S ot at b y the dermal 
arches; r f ribs. bones) undergoes a pro- 

cess of calcification . 
Ultimately this is resorbed and its place is taken by the dermal 
bone, which forms, so to speak, a cast of the rib. Several of the 
short presacral ribs, and of course the postsacrals, are not drawn 
into these enormous changes, although the carapace covers, 
and indirectly affects, them. 

Certain changes initiated in Sphenodon are more marked in 
the ribs of the Lacertilia; cervical ribs are often long in the lower 
neck. In the trunk the capitular portions are often much 
reduced, and in these cases the ribs are suspended mainly by 
their tubercular portions, usually from the diapophyses of the 
neural arches near the anterior end. 

In the snakes all the vertebrae, from the second cervical to 
the tail, carry ribs. These are very movable, articulating 
with a rather large, more or less vertically placed facet, which is 
borne by the parapophysis or transverse process; sometimes the 




rib retains traces of the original division into a capitular and 
tubercular portion. The ribs of the snakes, although long, 
consist only of their dorsal portions. In snake-shaped lizards, 
e.g. PscudopuSj rather long ribs begin with the fourth vertebra. 

Uncinate processes are developed only in Sphenodon and in the 
Crocodilia. They arc not homologous structures, arising in the 
former from the posterior margin of the middle of the dorsal 
portions of the ribs, overlapping the shaft of the next following 
rib; in the crocodiles they arise out of the middle portion of the 
ribs, remaining cartilaginous, whilst the middle portion codssifies 
with the dorsal. Only in Sphenodon and Crocodiles the thoracic 
ribs consist of three successive pieces; in the Lacertilia they 
consist only of the dorsal and the ventral or costostcmal. The 
latter remain cartilaginous, or they calcify, but they never 
ossify. 

The sternum and further modifications of the ribs of the trunk. 
— The sternum of most reptiles consists (1) of an anterior portion 
(presternum, Parker; prosternum, Furbringer; mesosternum of 
Gegenbaur), which is generally broad, more or less rhomboid 
and carries the shoulder-girdle, and on its posterior sides several 
pairs of ribs; (2) of a posterior portion (mesosternum and xiphi- 
sternum of Parker; xiphisternum of Furbringer; metasternum of 
Gegenbaur), which is narrow, sometimes metameric, carries 
several pairs of ribs, and generally divides into a right and left 
xiphoidal half, each of which is continued into one or more ribs. 
These ribs tend to lose their connexion, and in these cases the 
sternum ends in two typical xiphoid processes. The distinction 
between pre- and metasternum is arbitrary. In Sphenodon the 
broad sternal plate carries only three pairs of ribs, the 8th to 
10th, and there is no xiphisternum. The other ribs of the trunk 
are long and compound, but they remain free and do not approach 
the mid-line. From the posterior edge of the sternum to the 
pelvis extends the complicated parasternum> embedded in the 
abdominal wall; it is composed of about two dozen sets of 
abdominal ribs, each set containing a right and a left and a 
median chevron-shaped piece. In the Crocodilia the presternum 
carries only two or one pair of ribs, always that of the 10th 
vertebra. The narrow, more or less metameric metasternum 
carries seven or eight ribs, the last one to three being xiphoidal. 
The post-thoracic ribs gradually decrease in length; about three 
presacral vertebrae have no ribs, and so are typically lumbar. 
The sacral ribs are generally the 25th and 26th in Crocodilus 
and Alligator \ sometimes the 24th and 25th in Gavialis. The 
parasternum consists of only seven or eight transverse sets, each 
composed of two right and two left narrow splint-bones. All 
these parasternal elements belong to the category of dermal 
bones, together with those of the plastron of tortoises, inherited 
from Stegocephalian conditions. 

The Lacertilia present an almost endless variety. The 
presternum is rhomboid and broad; it carries from three to six 
pairs of ribs, mostly four or five; the first thoracic rib is that of 
the 9th vertebra, the only exceptions being the chameleons with 
only five cervical vertebrae, and Varanus, which has usually 
nine cervicals like the crocodiles. The last cervical rib in these 
long-necked tfzards is very long and has all the appearance of 
having but recently severed its connexion with the sternum. 
The presternum of Lacertilia sometimes has a window, e.g. 
some species of Lacerla, Phrynosoma, Iguana t or a pair of 
windows, e.g. Agama, Liolepis, G otocephalus. The xiphi- 
sternum carries a variable number of ribs; it is either scarcely 
distinguished from the anterior plate, or it is long, and in these 
cases either double, e.g. Iguana, Gerrhonotus, Varanus f Zommis, 
Agama, Cyclodus y Lacerta; or single, e.g. Zonosanrus. The post- 
sternal ribs shorten gradually in the majority of the Lacertae, 
and there is sometimes a ribless lumbar vertebra, e.g. in Iguana; 
in many Lacertilia, however, the ventral cartilaginous halves 
of the ribs are connected with those of the other side, either 
by ligaments, or they join together, forming complete hoops 
of thin cartilages. Such ribs occur in all Geckones and Cha- 
meleons, but also in many Iguanidae, Scincidae, and even 'in 
the Anelytropidae; their numbers vary much, from 27 in the 
Scincoid Acontias mcleagris, 7-10 in Polychrus t 8 in Chamaelco 



1 5 6 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 



vulgaris } 4 or 5 in Anolis, to 1-3 in some other iguanids, skinks 
and geckos. Ur opiates fimbriatus has 14, and the last four 
pairs are separated from the dorsal portions of their ribs; 
similar discontinuity occurs in geckos, the median portions 
bearing a striking, although not fundamental, resemblance to 
parasternal ribs. 

In the lizards with much reduced fore limbs, the sternum 
loses its connexion with the ribs from behind forwards; two 

^ sternal ribs existing in the Tejid 

Jr^ V"i f^ Ophiodes and in the Scincoid 

* AconliaSy one only in Pygopus, 

Fig. 3 2.-Rudiments of pec- f ne ™ pphisaurus s Pseudo- 
toral arch— 1, of Acontias pus and Angms (m the latter one 
meleagris ; 2, of Typhlo- rib is still connected in the 
saurus aurantiacus (after embryo). The sternum is like- 
Furbringer). wise quite free ^ Qhirotcs in spite 

of its functional limbs; the sternum is still a large plate, with 
a window, and ending in two long, xiphoid processes. 

Lastly, the sternum has vanished without a trace, as in the 
snakes, in some species of Acontias, in the Anelytropidae, 
Dibamus and Aniella (Furbringer). In the limbless genera 
of Amphisbaenidac the sternum is very much reduced; in 
Trogonophis alone it is still represented by a narrow trans- 
verse bar connecting the ossicular vestiges of the shoulder-girdle; 
in the other genera the sternum has shrunk to a pair of 
nodules or to a single nodule. 

The pectoral or shoulder-girdle in its completest condition 
consists of a right and left scapula, coracoid, precoracoid and 
clavicles, and an unpaired interclavicle or episternum. The 
dorsal portion of the scapula remains cartilaginous, with or 
without calcification, and is usually distinguished as supra- 
scapula. The ventral portion of the precoracoidal and cora- 
coidal mass remains likewise more or less cartilaginous, rather 
unnecessarily distinguished as epicoracoid. Ossification begins 
near the glenoid cavity and thence spreads, eventually with 
the formation of a dorsal and a ventral centre. The resulting 
suture separates the dorsal or scapular from the ventral or 
coraco-precoracoidal mass. A kind of landmark, not always 
reliable, between coracoid and precoracoid is the exit of the 
supra-coracoidal nerve. The ventral margins of the coracoids 
articulate in tenon and mortice fashion with the antero-lateral 
margins of the sternum. The interclavicle, usually T-shaped, 
is a dermal bone and rests upon the ventral side of the girdle. 
The paired clavicles, sometimes fused together, rest upon the 
anterior end of the interclavicle and extend transversely to the 
acromial process of the scapula; the detail of the attachments 
varies much. 

The girdle is most complete in Sphenodon and in Lacertilia. 
In Sphenodon the coracoid forms one continuous mass with 
the precoracoid, without further differentiation; the clavicles 
are fused with the interclavicle into one T-shaped mass, the 
cross-arms of which are attached to the acromia by ligaments. 
In the lizards (except Heloderma) the much-broadened central 
and anterior halves of the girdle are fenestrated; the windows, 
always closed by membranes, are bordered by bony processes, 
distally by unossified cartilage. The first window to appear, 
or the most constant, lies between the coracoid and its pre- 
coracoid; in Anguis it is the only window, in this case not a 
primary feature. In other lizards, e.g. Uromastix, a second 
window occurs between precoracoid and scapula, and even 
a third window can appear in the scapula itself, causing in 
many Iguanidae, e.g. Amblyrhynchus (see fig. $$ } ms.), the so- 
called mesoscapula; an analogous window within the coracoid 
produces the mesocoracoid; unnecessary distinctions of little 
morphological value considering the great variability of these 
fenestrations in closely allied genera. 

The chameleons have lost the clavicles and the interclavicle, 
and the scapula, which is very slender and long, is devoid of 
an acromial process. The coracoid forms one mass with the 
precoracoid, through the middle of which "passes the supra- 
coracoidal nerve; the coracoids articulate by their whole 
bases with the sternum. 



Geckos possess a complete shoulder-girdle; the ventral por- 
tion shows, e.g. Hemidactylus, three pairs of windows; only 




Fig. 33. — Sternum and Shoulder-Girdle of Amblyrhynchus subcris- 
tatus (after Steindachner). cl y clavicle; co, coracoid; h, humerus; 
ic t interclavicle; mc, mesocoracoid; ms t mesoscapula; pc, pre- 
coracoid; 5, scapula; st t sternum. 

one in Uroplates. In the latter the interclavicle is much re- 
duced; the clavicles meet each other and are slender rods. 
In the Geckoninae and Eublepharinae the ventral halves of 
the clavicles are dilated and possess each a foramen; the inter- 
clavicle is cross-shaped. 

In the more or less limbless genera of lizards the shoulder- 
girdle is much reduced. In Chirotes, which still has functional 
fore limbs, the clavicles and the interclavicle are absent, the 
coracoids are not divided from the precoracoids; in the limb- 
less Amphisbaenidae the girdle is reduced to a pair of cylindrical 
ossicles in Amphisbaena, Blanus and Trogonophis ; no vestiges 
exist in Rhineura, Lepidosternon and Anops. 

Foramina in the broadened clavicles occur also in various 
Lacertae, for instance in the Iguanid Lacmanctus, in the Scin- 
coid Tr achy saurus, in Plestiodon, Zonasaurus and in Lacerta 
simonyij but not in L. agilis. In Mabaia the median portions 
are especially broad and show each two foramina. Their pres- 
ence can be of but very doubtful taxonomic value. 

The girdle of the Crocodiles is considerably simplified. 
Scapula and coracoidae, movably united, at least in younger 
specimens. The precoracoid is slightly indicated by a process 
of the coracoid, which is perforated by the supra-coracoidal 
nerve near the glenoid cavity. Clavicles are absent. The 
interclavicle is reduced to a long, fiat splint-bone, which is 
firmly fused on to the sternal cartilage. The Chelonian shoulder- 
girdle shows several very remarkable modifications. Instead 
of lying outside the trunk, it has been transferred into the cavity 
of the trunk, the carapace with the ribs covering it from the 
outside. An explanation of the changes implied in this trans- 
position is still extant. Chelonians are, moreover, the only 
reptiles besides Pterosauria in which the scapula is attached 
to the skeleton of the trunk. The scapulae stand in a more 
or less vertical position, and their dorsal end rests against the 
inside of the nuchal plate, where this is sutured to the first 
neural and the first costal plate, a little in front of and side- 
wards from the first short rib. From near its ventral end the 
scapula sends off a long process, which converges transversely 
with its fellow. This process, the clavicle(!) or the precora- 
coid of many authors, is the acromial process, the Plesiosauri 
giving the clue as to how an acromion can assume such an 
abnormal position. The coracoid, with a suture between it 
and the scapula, is very long and extends horizontally back- 
wards, not meeting that of the other side. The sternum being 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



J 57 






absent, and clavicles and interclavicles forming the epi-and 
endo-plastral elements of the plastron, the shoulder-girdle is 
nowhere in contact with the skeleton except at its dorsal end. 

The Fore Limbs. — The humerus has near its upper end a median 
process, and at a variable distance a lateral process, near which 
is the biceps-fossa. Above the radial or outer condyle exists 
a foramen for the passage of the radial nerve in Sphenodon, in 
the Lacertilia, and 'in many Chelonians, e.g. Cholone and Sphargis) 
such an ectepicondylar foramen is absent in crocodiles. Above 
the ulnar condyle exists, but only in Sphenodon, the entepi- 
condylar foramen, for the passage of the nervus medianus and 
brachial vessels. Thus Sphenodon alone possesses both foramina, 
the crocodiles neither. 

Ulna and radius always remain distinct; the former is 
generally the stouter although not always the larger bone. The 
carpus may contain as many as 12 separate elements: 
ulnare, intermedium, radiale, 2 centralia, a pisiform on the 
ulnar and a small nodule in a corresponding ■ position on the 
medial side, and 5 distal carpals. In Sphenodon the centralia 
are sometimes fused into one, and the radial nodule is absent ; 
the numbers of phalanges are, 2, 3, 4, 4 and 3 proceeding from 
the first to the fifth finger. The carpus of the Chelonia is like- 
wise primitive, with various unimportant reductions; Chelydra 
possesses one or two centralia, whilst pisiform and extra radial 
are absent; both these bones are present in Emys, but the 
centrale fuses with the radial carpal, and the fourth and fifth 
distal carpal are fused together. In Testudo the pisiform is small ; 
intermedium, centrale and radiale are represented by one bone 
only, and the first, second and third distal carpals are fused, 
whilst the two remaining are free. In the marine turtles the 
fore limbs are transformed into paddles; the ulna is considerably 
shorter than the radius; all the normal nine carpal elements 
remain distinct; the pisiform is much enlarged, helping to 
increase the paddling surface, and it has moved from the ulnar 
carpal to the side of the fifth distal carpal. The three middle 
fingers and toes have mostly 3 phalanges; the pollex and hallux 
have always 2 ; the number of phalanges of the fifth finger 
varies from 3 to 1, of the fifth toe from 2 to o. The greatest 
reduction occurs in Teshido and its allied genera of typical 
land-tortoises, Homoptts, Pyxis and Cinixys, the formula for the 
fingers being 2, 2, 2, 2, 2 or 1, and 2, 2, 2, 2, o for the toes. In 
Pelomedusa all the fingers possess 2 free phalanges only, owing to 
fusion of the first and second phalanges with each other. 

Considerable advance is marked by the Crocodiles. The 
intermedium and centrale are lost, the pisiform is small, ulnar 
and radiale are considerably elongated and enlarged. Of the 
distal carpals the two last are fused into one bone, and the 
three first, together with the central, are transformed into a 
pad-like cartilaginous and ligamentous piece between the large 
radial and the first and second finger, to which the pad is firmly 
attached. The other fingers articulate with the " humatum." 
The result of the whole arrangement is the formation of two 
main joints, one between fore arm and carpus, the other inter- 
carpal. The number of phalanges is 2, 3, 4, 4, 3. 

The conditions prevailing in Lacertilia are connected with 
those of Sphenodon. The intermedium is lost, the other normal 
carpalia are present, also the pisiform; the first distal carpal 
is much reduced and the correspondingly enlarged radial carpal 
comes into articulating contact with the first metacarpal. The 
numbers of phalanges are 2, 3, 4, 4, and 2 or.3 for the fifth finger. 
The hand of the chameleons is most modified; the first three 
fingers form an inner bundle opposed to the outer or fourth and 
fifth fingers; in correlation herewith the third and fourth distal 
carpals are fused into one rather large mass; the other elements 
remain free, and A. Stecker has found a small intermedium 
present in the young, in a position which indicates that its 
subsequent absence is due to loss, not fusion with neighbouring 
elements. 

The Pelvic Girdle. — The ilium is attached to the vertebral 
column by* means of the two sacral jribs. 1 The ischia and the 

1 In all reptiles, except a few fossil groups, the ilio-sacral connexion 
is post-acetabular, i.e. it lies in a transverse plane tailwards from 



pubic bones join the ilium at the acetabulum, which is not 
perforated, except in crocodiles. The ischia and pubes invariably 
form symphyses at their ventral ends, except the so-called pubes 
of the crocodiles, and these two symphyses are further con- 
tinuous with each other, dividing the pubo-ischiadic space into 
a right and left foramen obturatum of very variable size. They 
are small and round in Testitdo, divided by a broad, bony bridge, 
larger in Chelone, separated by a chiefly ligamentous, partly 
cartilaginous string; largest they are in Sphenodon and in the 
Lacertilia. Frequently the symphysial portion at the anterior 
end of the pubic symphysis remains cartilaginous, unpaired, 
e.g. in most Chelonians and Lacertilians, comparable with the 
epipubis of Urodela. A corresponding cartilage, the os cloacae 
or hypoischium, is continued backwards, from the ischiadic 
symphysis towards the vent, serving for the attachment of 
sphincter muscles; it occurs in many lizards and tortoises. 
In the Chelonians the pubic bones are generally much stronger 
than the ischia, and they send out each a strong lateral pubic 
process, directed forwards and outwards; the obturator nerve 
passes through the wide obturator foramen. In the pleuro- 
dirous tortoises the ends of the ilia and those of the lateral 
processes of the pubes are much broadened and firmly anchy- 
losed with the posterior costal plates and with the xiphiplastron 
respectively. The whole pelvis, like the shoulder-girdle, lies 
inside the body. The pelvis of Sphenodon is essentially like 
that of the Lacertilia. The pubes are slender ; they send out a 
pair of lateral processes, near the base of which the obturator 
nerve pierces the shaft of its pubis. This lateral process is the" 
homologue of the long, slender pubis of birds. The chameleons' 
pelvis is peculiar. The pubes are devoid of lateral processes, 
but from their anterior end arises a pair of small cartilages, in 
a transverse direction; their ends are connected by ligament 
with the median anterior portion of the ischiadic symphysis. 
The crocodilian pelvis is very aberrant. The ilium is broad 
and sends two processes to the acetabulum, which retains a 
foramen;' the posterior process articulates movably with the 
ischium; the preacetabular process fuses in very young speci- 
mens with a separate, ossifying, cartilaginous piece, which then 
forms a rough joint with the anterior portion or process of the 
ischium, which closes the acetabulum on its ventral side. To this 
anterior ischiadic process is attached the freely-movable, club- 
shaped bone, generally called pubis. The homologies of these 
club-shaped bones and of the small bone mentioned above are 
not clear. The club-shaped bones remain asunder; the ischia 
form a long and firm symphysis. The obturator nerve passes 
out of the pelvis between the ischium and the club-shaped bone, 
close to the posterior margin of the latter. 

The posterior limbs show essentially the same composition 
as the fore limbs, but the modifications in the various reptilian 
orders are much greater. The femur has generally a well- 
marked neck. Fibula and tibia remain distinct; the former 
usually shows a reduction in thickness. In the tarsus we 
observe never more than two proximal tarsal elements, a re- 
duction due either to the suppression of the intermedium or to 
its enlargement and concomitant loss of the tibial element. 
The least-modified foot-skeleton is that of the Chelydridae, the 
lowest Chelonians. The proximal row is composed of a fibulare, 
and a much larger piece articulates with both tibia and fibula, 
the " astragalus" ; the centrale is present; the first threo distal 
tarsals remain separate, each carrying a toe. The fused fourth 
and fifth tarsals carry the fourth toe, and, laterally attached, 
the hook-shaped fifth metatarsal. Chelone shows the same 
arrangement, except that the centrale is fused with the astra- 
galus; in Testudo , Emys, the fibulare, astragalus and centrale 
are fused into one broad mass, with the result of forming a cruro- 
tarsal and an intertarsal joint. The same arrangement reached 
by the Testudinidae is universal in the Lacertae, with the further 
modification that the three first distal tarsals fuse on to the 
proximal ends of their respective metatarsals. Most aberrant 
is the tarsus of Chameleons, in which the first and second toe 

one passing through the acetabulum. In birds it is likewise post- 
in mammals pre-acetabular. 



i 5 8 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 






form a bundle opposed to the rest; the fibulare and tibiale are 
fused into one bone; the fused fifth and fourth distal tarsals form 
a very large half-globular piece for the three outer toes, whilst 
the second toe is carried by the third distal tarsal, besides which 
there are three more small cartilages, one of which may be the 
displaced second tarsal or the still independent central. The 
tarsus of Sphenodon is like that of typical lizards, but none of its 
distal tarsals are fused on to metatarsals. The Crocodilian foot 
marks an advance. The astragalus is large, articulating well 
with tibia and fibula, and against the fibulare, which forms a 
typical, heel-shaped calcaneum. The fifth and fourth distal 
tarsals carry the fourth toe and the hook-shaped fifth meta- 
tarsal to which the fifth toe is reduced. The third, second and 
first distal tarsalia scarcely contain osseous nodules; they form 
together a wedge-shaped cartilaginous pad between the astra- 
galus and the first and second toes. This attachment of the 
distal tarsals to the metatarsals reminds us of the Lacertilian 
condition, the result in either case being a still more marked 
intertarsal joint in addition to the cruro-tarsal. 

Most well-footed reptiles retain all the five toes; only the 
crocodiles and a few tortoises have lost all the phalanges of the 
fifth toe. The phalangeal numbers are in the Lacertilia 2, 3, 4, 
5 and 3 in the fifth toe; in chameleons 2, 3, 4, 4, 3; in most 
tortoises 2, 3, 3, 3, 2; but in Homopus, Pyxis and Cinixys 2, 2, 
2, 2, o; in the crocodiles 2, 3, 4, 4, o. The embryos of crocodiles 
are said to be hyperphalangeal; i.e. as many as 7 phalanges on 
the fourth; 5 or 6 on the fifth finger; 6 on the fourth toe, and 
there are traces of the fifth toe. In the adult the fourth toe 
remains without a claw. Burrowing and living in sand, or humus, 
is in many lizards correlated with reduction of the limbs and 
their girdles. The vestiges of the hind limbs come to lie as near 

the vent as possible. The 

reduction occurs in various 

families, independently. 

In most cases the fore 

limbs disappear first, but 

in the Amphisbaenidae, 

Fig. 34.— Vestiges of pelvic limb— 1, ci. ^Chirotes, and in the 

of Lialis bartonii; 2 , of Anguis fra- Tejidae, the reverse takes 

gilts \ 3, of Atnphisbaena fuliginosa. place. Whilst degeneracy 

i f ^Ws-f t til3^ ; ** iMOPeCtillCUm; of the should er-girdle is 

' * ' delayed long after the loss 

of the anterior limbs, that of the pelvic arch precedes the loss 
of the hind limbs. Cope has drawn up a tabular statistic of 

the loss of digits, limbs and 
their girdles on pp. 202-3 oi 
his work, Crocodiles^ Lizards 
and Snakes of Norlh America 
(Washington, 1900). The 
peculiar hind limbs of the 
Dibamidae are described in 
the article Lizard. 

The majority of snakes 
have lost all traces of the 
limbs and their girdles, ex- 
cept the so-called Peropoda 
(see Snakes: Classification). 
The vestiges of a Boa and 
of a Glauconia are shown in 
fig- 35- 
Tegumentary System. 

The skin of reptiles is characterized by the strong development 
of its horny stratum; on the outside of it exists a thin cuticular 
or epitrichial layer. An important feature in most lizards and 
in the snakes is the existence of a " subepirdemoidal " or transi- 
tional layer which is produced by the migration of ectodermal 
cells into the cutis. The immigration takes place during the 
embryonic development, observed first by Kerschner, who, 
however, misinterpreted the process. Pigment cells, black 
chromatophores also, make their first appearance in the epiderm 
and then migrate into the transitional stratum, as has been first 





Fig. 35. — 1, Vestigial pelvis and 
limb of Glauconia macrolepis. 

2, The same parts of Boa (after 
Fiirbringer). f t femur; il t ilium ; 
ip t bone called " iliopectineum. " 
by Fiirbringer; p % pubis; /, tibia. 



correctly stated by F. Maurer. The horny stratum is shed 
periodically, several times during the year, and as one entire 
piece in snakes and a few lizards, e.g. Anguidae; in most lizards, 
chameleons, geckos and in Sphenodon the thin, transparent 
colourless layer comes off in flakes. In crocodiles it is not shed 
except for the usual wear and tear, nor in tortoises, although in 
some e.g. Chrysemys/ a periodical peeling of the large shields- 
has been observed. 

In all reptiles the cutis is raised into papillae, or folds. When 
the papillae are small the skin appears granular; when they are 
large, flat, mostly imbricating, they form scales; when they are 
very broad-based and still larger, they are called scutes or 
shields. The overlying epidermal covering partakes of these 
elevations, often e.g. in many snakes, with a very fine system of 
ridges of its own. Such a scale, cutis and horny sheath, may 
form spikes, or crests. They all have only basal growth. Thus, 
for instance, a shield of a tortoise-shell is a much flattened scale, 
or cone, with the apex more or less in the centre, surrounded 
by marginal ridges which indicate the continuous additional 
growth at the base. The central " areola " represents in fact 
the size of the shield at the time of hatching. 

Of very common occurrence is the development of bone in 
the cutaneous portion of the scales; such osteoderms occur in 
many lizards, very strongly developed in the scutes of the 
crocodiles, especially on the back; they also occur in the skin 
of tortoises especially on their legs and on the tail, and they 
probably constitute the peculiar shell of Sphargis, the leathery 
turtle (see Tortoise). Sphenodon and chameleons are devoid 
of such osteoderms, in geckos they are likewise absent, but 
calcifications occur in their tubercular skin. A similar process 
seems to have produced the egg-tooth of crocodiles and tortoises 
(see under Teeth below). Calcareous deposits, or at least 
deposits of guanine and more commonly of carbonate of lime, 
play a considerable role in the skin of lizards and snakes. These 
waste products of the metabolism are always deposited within 
cells, and a favourite place is the subepidermal layer. In 
combination with superimposed yellow or red pigment, and with 
the black chromatophores as a foil, partial or complete screen 
to the light, as the case may be, these mineral deposists are to a 
great extent answerable for the colours and their often mar- 
vellous changes in the skin (see Chameleon). 

Peculiar pits in the scales of snakes and crocodiles are 
described under Sense-Organs below. 

The skin of reptiles is very poor in glands, but the few which 
exist are well developed. Crocodiles possess a pair of glandular 
musk bags which open by rather large slits on the under jaw, 
against the inner side of the jaw. Another pair of musk glands 
are the anal glands. During great excitement all these glands 
can be everted by the crocodiles. Sphenodon and snakes have 
only the anal pair. Water tortoises have inguinal glands, which 
secrete a strongly scented fluid, opening near the posterior rim 
of the bridge. Trionyx has additional glands opening near 
the anterior part of the plastron. Peculiar glandular structures 
are the femoral pores of many lizards. They lie in a line from 
the inner side of the knee to the anterior margin of the anal 
region, to which they are restricted in the limbless Amphis- 
baenidae. Each pore leads into a subcutaneous pocket, sometimes 
with slightly acinous side chambers, the walls of which produce 
a smeary, yellowish matter consisting chiefly of the debris of 
disintegrated cells which dries or hardens on the surface in the 
shape of a little projecting rod. They occur in both sexes, but 
are most active in males during the pairing season. Their use 
is unknown. It would be far-fetched to liken them to fore- 
runners of the sebaceous portions of milk glands, although not 
so imaginary as to see in them and in the sensory pits of snake 
scales the foreruriners of the mammalian hairs! 

Claws, scarcely indicated in Batrachia, are fully developed in 
all limbed reptiles. The base is sunk into the skin like our 
own finger nails; the dorsal and ventral halves are differenti- 
ated into a harder, more curved dorsal sheath-like portion^ and 
into the beginning of a sole, especially in crocodiles and in 
blunt-toed tortoises. The first claw to be reduced is that of 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



J59 



the fifth digit. The claws of many geckos are " retractile," like 
those of cats; the adhesive lamellae on the under side of their 
digits have already been described (sec Gecko). 

Nervous System. 

The hemispheres are still much longer than broad, and pass, 
especially in lizards, gradually into the olfactory lobes, 
into which continue the ventricles of the hemispheres. 
The dorsal walls of these are thin, especially in crocodiles, 
although they possess already a considerable amount of grey 
matter. The basal masses of the fore-brain bulge into the 
roomy ventricles like cushions. Fibres refcrahle to a corpus 
callosum are scarcely separated from those of the still much 
stronger anterior commissure. The epiphysis comes to the 
surface between the hinder parts of the hemispheres. The 
pineal eye is described below under Sense Organs. The hypo- 
physis has tjut a shallow infundibulum. The mid-brain shows 
a pair of dorsal globular swellings, each with a cavity; they 
separate the hemispheres from the cerebellum. Of the hind- 
brain, the middle portion is by far the largest; although the 
dorsal wall of this cerebellum is thick, and rich in grey matter, 
it's surface is still quite smooth and it shows no trace of an 
arbor vitae. It covers but a small portion of the wide fourth 
ventricle. 

The spinal cord shows a brachial and a lumbar longitudinal 
swelling, especially marked in tortoises, but without a rhom- 
hoidal sinus. The cord is continued into the end of the tail. 

The cranial nerves of the reptiles agree in their arrangement 
and distribution more with those of birds and mammals than 
with those of the Batrachia. The facial nerve sends a palatine 
branch to the palate and to the superior maxillary of the trige- 
minus, and a strong mandibular branch joins the third of the 
trigeminal, and further ramifications supply the sphincter 
muscle of the neck. The vagus and glossopharyngeus leave 
the cranium separately. The vagus then goes towards the 

heart, which in the 
" J ^L*^ t °sf Sauropsida is far re- 

moved from the head, 
and there possesses 
another ganglion , vari- 
ously called ganglion 
trunci vagi or g. 
nodosum. It is con- 
nected by a nerve 
with the large gang- 
lion supremum of the 
sympathetic. From 
the cardiac ganglion, 
and from the con- 
tinuation of the 
vagus, are sent off 




Fig. 36. — Brain of Lacerta agilis. (After Le^- 
dig.) 1, Dorsal aspect; 2, vertical longi- 
tudinal section. cb f cerebellum; ch, 
cerebral hemisphere; m y medulla oblon- 
» gata; olf, olfactory lobes; on, optic nerve; va 5 ua > <" c ac " t 
opl, optic lobes; p t pineal body or several branches in 
epiphysis; py, base of pituitary body. succession, which, 

having to pass below 
or tailwards from the transverse carotic, aortic and Botal- 
lian vessels, have to take again a headward course to the 
larynx and pharynx; a side branch enters the heart by its 
truncus. The main mass of the vagus then supplies 
lungs, stomach and further viscera. The accessory or nth 
cranial nerve arises with about half a dozen roots which extend 
often beyond the second cranial nerve; they collect into a 
thin stem which leaves the cranium together with the vagus, 
with which it is often fused; it supplies the cucullaris s. trarepius 
muscle. 

The hypoglossus arises by two ventral roots, leaving the 
skull by two holes through the lateral occipital bone, near 
the condyle. The united stem is invariably joined by strong 
branches from cervical nerves, always from the first, mostly 
also from the second, sometimes also from the third. The details 
vary much; occasionally there are three cranial roots and 
foramina, and then only the first cervical joins the hypo- 
glossus; this often fuses with the glossopharyngeal or with 



the vagus. In the broad and well-muscularized tongue of the 
crocodiles the right and left hypoglossal branches form a com- 
plete ansa, an arrangement in which A. Schneider saw the 
infraocsophageal nerve ring of Invertebrata! 

The spinal nerves each issue behind, or through, the neural 
arch of the vertebra to which they belong genetically. The 
first spinal, or suboccipital, nerve has no dorsal roots, and, 
having lost its vertebra, an apparently anomalous arrangement 
has come to pass, in this way, that there arc x cervical vertebrae, 
but x + 1 cervical nerves, a condition prevailing in, and char- 
acteristic of, all Amniota. The hypoglossal-cervical plexus is 
separated from the brachial plexus by several metameres, 
according to the length of the neck. The brachial plexus 
is composed of about 5 nerves; the variations have been studied 
chiefly by M. Furhringer. It is interesting to note that the 
brachial plexus still persists in snakes, although they have 
completely lost the anterior girdle and the limbs (Albertina 
Carlsson). A disturbance in the pelvic region likewise indi- 
cates in snakes the former existence of a pelvic or lum bo-sacral 
plexus, which in limbed reptiles is composed of about 5 nerves, 
the last of which is weak and in many cases (hy no means the 
rule) issues between the two sacral vertebrae, sending one 
branch to the ischiadic, another to the public plexus which 
supplies the cloacal region. (For details of these plexuses see 
the papers by Mivart, Jhering and Gadow.) 

The sympathetic system shows considerable modifications 
in the various orders and even families of the reptiles. In the 
neck region, in Sphenodon and most lizards it is', on the right 
and left side, composed of two portions. One, more lateral 
and placed deeply, runs along the side of the vertebral column, 
starting from the first and second spinal nerves, with which 
it is connected by. so-called rami communicantes; it is not con- 
nected with the other spinal nerves until it reaches, in the 
thorax, the first stem of the brachial plexus, and hereabout 
lies the so-called second thoracic ganglion. The other, super- 
ficial and more ventral, portion arises from the petrosal gan- 
glion of the glossopharyngeal, and from the vagus ganglion, and 
then forms a long loop which joins the second thoracic gan- 
glion. In its long course it sometimes, e.g. in Varanus, forms 
one common stem with the vagus before it splits off. At a 
variable distance, but not far above the heart, the vagus pos- 
sesses a big swelling, the ganglion trunci vagi, and the sym- 
pathetic stem, in the same level, or farther down, has likewise 
a large ganglion, the g. supremum vagi, or first thoracic gan- 
glion. The vagus ganglion receives several nerve strands from 
this big sympathetic ganglion, and then divides as described 
above. 

In the crocodiles the deep portion of the sympathetic hegins 
at the vagus and extends in rope-ladder fashion into the thorax, 
there being, as in hirds, regular transverse communicating 
branches with the spinal nerves, and the longitudinal strands 
run through the transverse foramina between the capitular and 
tubercular portions of the cervical ribs. The other, ventral, por- 
tion starts by a right and a left branch from the vagus ganglia, 
but both branches unite at once into one unpaired stem, which 
is deeply embedded in the middle line between the ventral 
muscles of the cervical vertebrae. Very thin branches connect 
this unpaired stem with the right and left sympathetic portions; 
small ganglia are embedded in the unpaired nerve. 

The so-called second thoracic ganglion is in reality a compound 
of all the sympathetic ganglia of the four or five metameres of 
the brachial plexus. It forms the point of juncture of the deep 
and the superficial cervical sympathetic portions. From the 
posterior region of the thorax backwards the right and left 
strands run along their side of the vertebral column, with a 
communicating branch and a ganglion for each metamere; 
sometimes one or more successive ganglia are combined, for 
instance near the cloaca. After having supplied the latter, the 
sympathetic system appears exhausted and is continued into the 
tail by but a very thin strand, which runs between the caudal 
vein and artery. The best illustrations of the sympathetic 
system are those by Vogt (neck of crocodile), J. G. Fischer (many 



i6o 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 



lizards), H. Gadow (cloaca of crocodile), J. F. v. Bemmelen 
{Sphenodon and others), W. H. Gaskell and H. Gadow (heart of 
tortoise). 

Sense Organs. 

i . Tegumentary Organs of some Tactile or other Sense. — Reptiles 
possess apparently no traces of those tegumentary sense organs 
which, belonging to the domains of the trigeminal and vagus 
nerves, have spread far over the body in fishes and batrachia. 
They were developed by those classes in correlation with their 
essentially aquatic life. This does not apply to the reptiles 
which, as a class, are of absolutely terrestrial origin. Never- 
theless all recent reptiles possess numerous low sense-organs, 
u tactile bodies," in most parts of the skin, connected with 
the regional, spinal nerves. They are most obvious in snakes, 
appearing as one or more little colourless spots near the apex of 
each scale on the back. The spot is formed by a little cluster 
of epidermal cells, connected with a sensory nerve. Their 
lowest stage they show in Sphenodon and in lizards, whilst in 
crocodiles they have reached a higher stage, at the bottom of 
the pit, since the tactile bodies, mostly several together, have 
sunk into the cutis, below the epiderm, forming a little pit, 
mostly near to the anterior margin of the flat scutes. They are 
most obvious on the belly of crocodiles, whilst in the American 
alligator such pits are scarcer, not because the organs are 
absent, but because these have sunk still farther into the skin. 
The last stage is that met with in tortoises, which possess such 
tactile bodies in considerable numbers in the softer subepidermal 
layers, beneath the large horny shields which themselves show no 
traces of them. 

2. Taste. — The respective organs do not seem to have been 
investigated. That they exist is amply proved by the careful 
predilection for certain kinds of food which is shown especially 
by vegetarian tortoises and lizards, independent of smell. 
Many lizards are, for instance, very fond of sugar. 

3. Nose. — The sense of smell is well developed in all rep- 
tiles. In none is the olfactory organ degraded; that the nasal 
passages, the nose itself, are never degraded is explained by the 
fact that all reptiles invariably breathe through the nose, except 
snakes during the act of swallowing their prey. The nostrils, 
always paired, are frequently provided with valves, to shut out 
the water, or sand. In some water tortoises, e.g. Trionyx, 
ChelySj the nostrils are prolonged into a soft, unpaired proboscis. 
Double tubes exist in the snake Herpeton (see Snakes, Opis- 
thoglypha). The nostril leads into an antrum or vestibulum, 
this again into the nasal cavity proper, at the dorsal farther end 
enters the olfactory nerve, whilst ventrally it leads into the naso- 
laryngeal duct, with its posterior narial opening, or choana. 
The ducts are short in snakes and lizards, the choanae lying in the 
front part of the palate, but in tortoises and crocodiles they are 
placed far backwards, as- has been described under Skull above. 
Into the nasal cavity projects, from the septum, a concha, least 
developed in tortoises, most in lizards and snakes. Crocodiles 
show a beginning of separation into several conchae as in birds 
and mammals. A large nasal gland lies against the lateral, or 
ventral, side of the outer wall of the nasal cavity, into which also 
opens the naso-lacrymal duct. Jacobson's organ, of uncertain 
function, is present in most reptiles. It is paired. In tortoises 
it is still placed within its nasal cavity, against the median wall, 
and is still nothing but a recess of the same and its mucous 
lining. In lizards and snakes the organ has become completely 
separated from the nasal cavity, lying below it and opening, 
each by a separate passage, into the palate mouth, close to or still 
within the choanae. In snakes it is mushroom-shaped, with a 
very short stalk. It lies immediately below the floor of the 
nasal capsule, and the membranous wall of the cavity on which 
it lies is covered and protected by a bone, commonly called the 
turbinal, which extends out from the median nasal system to 
the maxilla. In crocodiles these organs are vestigial and soon 
disappear: 

4. Ear. — In crocodiles the outer ear lies in a recess, dorsally 
overhung by the lateral edge of the bony squamoso-frontal 



bridge; it carries a flap of skin, provided with muscles, to close the 
ear tightly. In lizards the outer ear is quite unprotected, and 
when the meatus is very short and wide, the drum is quite 
exposed. No reptiles possess cartilages comparable to the 
mammalian outer ear. Sphenodon, chameleons, snakes have 
no outer ear, the skin passing over the region. So also in 
tortoises, but in some" of the aquatic kinds its position is well 
indicated by softer and thinner skin; in others, for instance 
marine turtles, a thick leathery plug, or a bigger scale 
marks the former position. In various lizards, chiefly burrow- 
ing in sand, the ear passage is very narrow, or closed. The 
middle ear or tympanic cavity is quite obliterated in snakes, 
Amphisbaenas and some other snake-shaped lizards. In 
Anguls may exist individual traces. The cavity communicates 
with the mouth. In lizards the communication is a wide recess, 
lined with black pigment, so that in these creatures the whole 
auditory chain can easily be inspected from the opened mouth. 
In tortoises the recesses are contracted into the Eustachian 
tubes, each of which opens by a separate aperture into the roof 
of the mouth. In the crocodiles part of the cavities is trans- 
formed into an intricate system of canals and passages. The two 
Eustachian tubes open together in the mid-lines protected by a 
valve, between the basioccipital and basisphenoid; thence arises 
a median passage which with lateral arms and loops extends 
upward through the occiput into the cranial roof, communicating 
with the tympanic cavity, and further continued through the 
quadrates and beyond into the mandibles, by the siphonium. 

In spite of the obliterated tympanic cavity of snakes, and the 
closed up outer ear passage and absence of a tympanic membrane 
in snakes and tortoises, these creatures can hear very well. The 
same applies to Sphenodon, but it seems doubtful whether 
chameleons can hear. 

Through the whole middle ear, from the fenestra ovalis to the 
drum-membrane, stretches the chain of auditory ossicles or 
cartilages, partly attached to the posterior wall by the common 
lining membrane. The arrangement appears simplest in 
snakes, in chameleons and in tortoises, not because it is primitive 
but because it is so much reduced, partly in correlation with the 
abolition of the outer ear. In these creatures the columella 
goes as a bony, slender rod straight to the middle of the quadrate, 
against which it leans, or with which it articulates by a short 
piece of cartilage, the extra-columella. Here the whole chain 
ends. It looks like a proof that columella = stapes, extra- 
columella = incus, and quadrate = malleus; or, with the usual 
ignoring of the little extra-columellar piece, that quadrate = 
incus, Gegenbaur's favourite impossibility. In those lizards 
which have a tympanic membrane conditions are far less reduced. 
The extra-columellar piece sends out three distal processes; one 
leans on to the middle of the tympanic membrane, the second 
usually is fastened to the bony dorsal rim of the meatus, the 
third is directed downwards and is continued as a thin ligament 
towards the inner angle of the articular of the mandible, but 
before reaching this it comes to grief, being squeezed in between 
the quadrate and the posterior end of the pterygoid. The 
hyoid proper is of no account in snakes and tortoises, since 
it is reduced to very short distal pieces attached to the base 
of the tongue; but in lizards it remains in its original Jength, or 
it even lengthens, and shows many vagaries in its position and 
attachments. In embryos of Sphenodon and lizards it arises from 
near the junction of the columella with the extra-columella. It 
becomes very long, too long for the available space (perhaps 
correlated with lingual functions), and it forms a high loop, 
thereby causing the peculiar loop of the chorda tympani; the 
upward bend of the hyoid becomes connected with the parotic 
process of the cranium. Next aborts the portion between this 
connexion and the original proximal end of the hyoid, near the 
columellar mass. The upper end of the hyoid either remains 
attached to the parotic process (various lizards and Sphenodon) 
whence the lingual apparatus remains suspended, or the hyoid, 
having broken loose, leaves a little cartilage, Versluy's cartilage, 
behind, at the end of the parotic process, and the hyoid horn 
remains free, in the majority of lizards. In Sphenodon, whilst 



ANAT0MY1 



REPTILES 



161 






passing the distal portion of the extra-columella, part of the 
hyoid fuses with it, often forming thereby a little hole, the 
remnant of imperfect fusion. 

In the crocodiles the arrangement is at first complete and 
diagrammatically clear, not obscured by vagaries of the hyoid, 
which is free and much reduced. In the embryo the large 
extra-columellar cartilage, abutting against the tympanic 
membrane, and with another process against the quadrate, 
sends its third, downward, process as a thick rod of cartilage 
to the posterior inner angle of the mandible with which it is 
directly in cartilaginous continuity. It was W. K. Parker's 
mistake to call this cartilage the cerato-hyal. In young embryos 
it looks like an upward continuation of Meckel's cartilage, much 
resembling mammalian conditions. But in nearly ripe embryos 
this cartilage is already reduced to a string of connective tissue, 
cartilage remaining only at the upper end, and where this string 
enters the mandible lies the siphoniunt t the tube which connects 
the air cavities of the mandible with the Eustachian passages, 
the long connecting channel becoming — side by side with the 
extracolumellar-mandibular ligament — embedded into a canal 
of the quadrate, so that in older stages, and above all in the 
adult, the proper display of the whole arrangement requires a 





sT-<# 






Fig. 37. — Diagram showing Evolution cf the Ossicular Chain of the 
Ear. 1. Hyostylic Elasmobranch. H, hyoid; Hm, hyomandible; 
M, mandible; P Q, palatoquadrate. 2. Lacertilian. Co, colu- 
mella or stapes; and E, extra-columella with supra-, extra- and 
infra- "stapedial" processes. 3. Hypothetic stage between 2 
and 4, Sphenodon. Par = parotic bone. 5. Lacertilian. Parotic pro- 
cess with a piece of cartilage at its end, remnant of piece of the 
hyoid; connexion of intra-stapedial process with mandible vanish- 
ing. 6. Embryo of Crocodile. Continuous cartilaginous connexion 
of extra-columella with Meckel's cartilage. 7. Embryonic 
Mammal; for comparison. Cd, the new condyle, articulating 
with Sq, squamosal; Cor, coronoid process; quadrate trans- 
forming into tympanic ring. 

little anatomical skill. The whole string, whether cartilaginous 
or ligamentous, which connects the downward extracolumellar 
process with the articulare, is of course homologous with the 
continuation of Meckel's cartilage into the malleus of foetal and 
young mammals; and the chain of bones and cartilages between 
the auditory capsule, fenestra ovalis, and the proximal part of 
the mandible is also homologous wherever such a chain occurs; 
lastly, fenestra ovalis and membrana tympani are fixed points. 
Consequently columella = stapes, extracolumelJa of Sauropsida— 
lentiform+incusH- malleus of Mammalia. 

The inner ear has been studied minutely and well by C. Hasse, 
E. Clason and G. Retzius. It is enclosed by the periotic bones. 
The fenestra rotunda is surmounted by the opisthotic, the fenestra 
ovalis by the same and by the pro-otic, and this protects also 
the anterior vertical semicircular canal. The posterior canal is 
opisthotic, the horizontal is pro- and opisthotic. The anterior 
canal is the largest of the three, a feature characteristic of the 
Sauropsida. The lagena, with its own acoustic papilla, begins 
to show a basilar membrane with papilla, at the expense of 
that in the sacculus. In Sphenodon and lizards a slight curving 
of the lagena indicates the beginning of a cochlea, and a scala is 
developed in crocodiles, but neither cochlea nor scala is specially 
twisted. The endo-lymphatic ducts end as closed sacs, in lizards 
and snakes, in the roof of the skull, between tbe occipital and 



parietal bones. They reach an enormous development in many- 
geckos, where they form large twisted sacs beneath the skin, 
covering the sides of the neck, which then assumes a much 
swollen appearance. They contain white otolithic masses, with 
lymph. It is remarkable that the extent of these sacs varies 
not only in allied species, but even individually, independent of 
sex and age, although they are naturally liable to increase with 
age. 

5. Eyes are present in all reptiles, although in many of the 
burrowing snakes and lizards they may be so completely covered 
by the skin as to have lost their function. Most reptiles have 
upper and lower lids, moved by palpebral muscles, and a third 
lid, the nictitating membrane, which can be drawn over the front 
of the cornea from the inner angle obliquely up and backwards. 
Its mechanism is simplest in lizards. A muscle, a split from the 
retractor muscle of the eyeball, arises from the posterior part of 
the orbit, is attached to the posterior wall of the eyeball, and 
there forms a pulley for the long tendon which arises from the 
median side of the orbit and passes over the back of the ball 
forwards into the nictitating [membrane. Contraction of this 
muscle draws the membrane backwards and over the eye. In 
crocodiles and tortoises the tendon of the nictitating membrane 
broadens out into a muscle (M. pyramidalis), which arises from 
the median side of the posterior portion of the ball; above the 
optic nerve it crosses over the broad insertion of the retractor 
of the ball, without being much guided by it, although this 
muscle by its contraction slightly prevents the nictitating tendon 
and muscle from touching the optic nerve. 

It is easy to recognize the mechanism of birds as a combina- 
tion of the two types just described; their ,musc. quadrates s. 
bursalis is of course the single muscle of the lizards, but now 
restricted to, and broadened out upon, the eyeball. 

Special Modifications of the Lids. — In the snakes the upper and 
lower lids are reduced to the rim, and the nictitating membrane 
has become the permanent cover, which protects the eye like a 
watch-glass, leaving between itself and the cornea a space, 
drained by the naso-lacrymal duct, and behind this space the 
eyeball moves as freely as in other animals. A similar arrange- 
ment exists in th,e true geckos, not in the Eublepharidae, which 
still possess the outer lids. In some lizards, especially such as 
live in deserts, the middle of the lower lid has a transparent 
disk, and it is always the lower lid which is drawn over the eye, 
the upper in nearly all Sauropsida being much smaller and less 
movable; for instance, some specimens of the Lacertine genus 
Eremias in Africa and India. In the Indian genus Cabrita, and 
in Ophiops of Africa and India, the lower lid is permanently 
fused with the rim of the shrunken upper lid and forms a trans- 
parent window superficially looking like that of the snakes. 
Exactly the same arrangement has been developed by Ablepharus, 
one of the Scincidae. 

The eyeball is provided with the usual rectus and obliquus 
muscles, in addition to a retractor oculi. Apparently all reptiles 
possess a pair of Harderian or nictitating glands, which open in 
front, in the nasal, inner corner, and lacrymal glands which 
open likewise into the conjunctival sac, but near the outer or 
temporal corner. The secretion of both is drained off through 
the lacrymal canals,' which in lizards open below in the outer 
wall of the posterior nares; in snakes they open into the 
mouth by a narrow aperture on the inner side of the pala- 
tine bone. 

The walls of the anterior half of the sclerotic of lizards, 
tortoises and Sphenodon contain numerous cartilaginous or 
osseous plates, which imbricate in ring shape; they are absent 
in snakes and crocodiles. Internally the eye of most reptiles 
possesses at least traces of a pecten; very small indeed in 
tortoises, or in crocodiles where it is represented by only a few 
mosslike, pigmented vessels. In many lizards these vessels, 
arising from near the optic nerve, form a network which extends 
right up to the posterior side of the lens; in others, especially 
in Iguanidae, is developed a typical, large pecten, deeply 
pigmented with black, fan-shaped or umbrella-shaped, some- 
times folded. In chameleons it is a short cone; apparently 

xxm. 6 



l62 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 



quite absent in Sphenodon. A falciform process and other 
remnants of a campanula are absent. In most of those reptiles 
which have but a rudimentary pecten, the retina is supplied by 
hyaloid vessels which spread over the surface of the vitreous 
body; such superficial vessels disappear with a greater develop- 
ment of the pecten, and the retina receives a choroid supply; 
special retinal arteries from the a. centralis retinae, and veins, 
exist in snakes. 

Ciliary processes of the choroid are usually small, a proper 
ciliary body being least* developed in crocodiles; all reptiles 
have a ciliary muscle. The shape of the contracted pupil varies 
from round to a vertical slit; the latter is most marked in 
Sphenodon. 

The retina shows usually a fovea centralis, sometimes but 
slightly indicated by a shallow depression; it is well marked 
in chameleons. The retina contains only cones, rods being 
absent; fat-drops on the apex of the cones are common; their 
usual colours are green and blue. 

6. The pineal, median or parietal eye is the terminal organ of 
the epiphysis of the brain, with which it is connected by a 
nerve-containing string. Among recent reptiles it exists in 
Sphenodon and in the Lacertilia, with vestiges in snakes. It is 
embedded in the median parietal foramen. Externally its 
presence is generally marked by the scales being arranged in a 
rosette, with a transparent central scale. The organ itself is 
distinctly a dioptric apparatus, with all the essential features of 
an eye; a pigmented retina of the arthropodous simple type 
surrounds an inner chamber which is nearly filled by a cellular 
globular mass which projects into it from above; this is the 
so-called lens, in reality much more like the corpus vitreum in 
its still cellular condition, while the real lens has to be looked 
for in the superimposed tissue. The whole organ is best 
developed in Sphenodon, even in the adult; but whether it is 
still functional, and what its function is, remain unknown. 
The throwing of a beam of light upon this eye, by means of a 
lens, produces no effect. Whilst in Sphenodon the " lens " is 
rather dull and the efferent nerve is still present, in various 
lizards the " lens " is more perfect, but the nerve is degenerated. 
We conclude that the whole organ is now without the least visual 
function, whilst in various extinct groups of reptiles and Stego- 
cephali it was fully developed. It has been well investigated by 
de Graaff, W. B. Spencer and A. Dendy. 

The Muscular System. 

A useful account of the differentiation of the muscles in the 
main reptilian groups, with their almost endless modifications 
in correlation with walking, climbing, swimming, gliding and 
burrowing, with limbs complete or absent, would fill several 
pages of this article and would necessitate many illustrations. 
The literature is great; it comprises many good detailed de- 
scriptions of various kinds of reptiles, and several monographs. 
M. Fiirbringer has devoted a whole series to the muscles of the 
neck, shoulder-girdle and fore limbs. Hand in hand with these 
investigations went that of the innervation, without which 
myology would lack scientific value. The present writer has 
devoted much time to the muscles and nerves of the pelvis and 
hind limbs, and has, in tabular form, compared them with those 
of other vertebrates. The results of all these labours are rather 
disappointing, except for the study of myology as such, which 
raises many interesting questions. Broadly speaking, the muscles 
of typical reptiles, crocodiles and lizards are more highly 
differentiated (by no means always more numerous, but more 
individualized by origin and insertion, the behaviour of the 
tendons), more effectively disposed according to mechanical 
principles, than in Batrachia, and less than in birds and mammals. 
This can easily be proved, whether we take for comparison the 
muscles of the neck, of the larynx or hyoid, or limbs. Lowest.in 
general stands Sphenodon, next to it the lizards, highest the 
crocodiles, while tortoises and snakes show the greatest reduction 
and specialization. In the tortoises it is the non-yielding box of 
carapace and plastron which has caused great changes within the 
region of the trunk proper. First, all the epiaxial muscles have 



vanished; the same applies to the costal muscles; but traces of 
dorso-lateral muscles occur on the inside of the posterior half of 
the carapace, extending' as a longitudinal system from one 
transverse process to the next in many of the lower aquatic 
tortoises, as perfectly useless vestiges; or more striking, these 
muscles exist in the young, and disappear with age, for instance 
in Testudo. Secondly, it is rather surprising that the rigid 
shell has offered solittle or no inducement to the muscles of the 
girdles, neck and tail to transfer their origins upon it. Thirdly, 
the retractile neck of the typical cryptodirous tortoises is 
correlated with a pair of long retractor muscles, which in the 
shape of a pair of broad, vertical ribbons (between which is 
received the S-kinked neck) extend far back along the vertebral 
column, almost to the level of the pelvis. 

In snakes, owing to the loss of limbs and girdles, only the spinal 
and costal muscles remain, besides of course those of the abdomen 
and the visceral arches. The vestigial muscles of the limbless 
lizards and of the peropodous snakes have been monographed by 
Fiirbringer in much detail without great results. 

Respiratory Organs. 

All reptiles breathe by lungs, and they possess no vestiges 
of gills, not even during their embryonic stages, although 
gill clefts are invariably present in the embryo. Nor does 
any part of the outer skin assist respiration, as is so commonly 
the case in Batrachia; yet, strictly speaking, the lungs are 
not the only organs of* respiration in the class of reptiles, 
since various tortoises possess additional breathing apparatus 
in. the anal sacs and in certain recesses of the throat, to be 
mentioned farther on. 

The Larynx, instead of lying at' the bottom and, far back 
in the throat, as in the Batrachia, is considerably moved for- 
wards so as to rest upon the hyoid and to project into the 
pharyngeal cavity. A pair of arytenoid cartilages, enclosing 
the glottis, rest upon several more or less fused tracheal cartil- 
ages, which thus represent the cricoid, but there is no thyroid 
cartilage. A small process from the anterior median edge of 
the cricoid is the beginning of an epiglottis. Vocal chords 
are indicated by lateral projecting folds of the inner membran- 
ous lining of the larynx, and are in a few cases effective in 
producing a voice. Crocodiles and alligators have a powerful, 
loud, bellowing voice; many tortoises utter weak, piping 
sounds, especially during the pairing season; and also various 
lizards can emit a feeble squeak, for instance, Psammodromus 
hispanicus, and the geckos. Sphenodon, at least the males, 
can grunt. Snakes have no voice; they can only hiss like 
all other reptiles, but a curious modification exists in the 
larynx of the North American Coluber s. Pityophis, e.g. C. 
melanoleucus: the epiglottis is more enlarged, and laterally 
compressed so that the hissing sound is much strengthened 
by the vibration of the epiglottis. The larynx possesses a 
constrictor and a dilator muscle, which arise from the ary- 
tenoids and from the cricoid respectively, and are attached 
to the hyoid. Chameleons have bladder-shaped sacs which 
can be filled with air from a slit immediately below the larynx. 
For further modifications see G. Tornier. 

The Trachea is furnished with cartilaginous rings and semi- 
rings, which extend to the lungs. As a rule the trachea is 
straight; in Crocodilus americanus it forms a loop; and similar 
curvings occur in various tortoises in correlation with the 
retractile neck. The two bronchi are shortest in Sphenodon, 
very long in most tortoises, where they begin frequently already 
half down the neck. In Sphargis most of the trachea is divided 
by a longitudinal partition. It is an advance upon amphibian 
conditions that^the bronchus enters 'its lung no longer at its 
apex, since an anterior, pre-bronchial lung-portion has come 
into existence. This is still very short in Sphenodon, while in 
crocodiles, tortoises and in the highly developed Varanidae 
the bronchus enters near the middle of its lung, so that the 
anterior portion is nearly as long as the posterior. The shape 
of the trunk influences that of the lungs. In the snake-shaped 
forms, both snakes and lizards alike, the lungs have become 



ANAT0MY1 



REPTILES 



very asymmetrical, one of them being much larger than the 
other, which is often quite aborted. 

The simplest form of lungs is that of Sphenodon; the pre- 
bronchial part is still small. Each lung is still a sac with one 
large lumen, the walls being honeycombed. In the lizards 
the walls are more spongy, and several septa begin to extend 
more or less far from the walls into the lumen, towards each 
bronchus. Some of these septa begin to cut the lung into 
lobes, especially in Varanus and in chameleons. In the latter 
exists a further specialization, a side-departure, in the shape 
of several long, hollow processes which are sent out from the 
posterior portions of the lungs and extend far into the body- 
cavity and between the viscera. By means of them these 
creatures can " blow " themselves out. They are of mor- 
phological interest since they are first stages of air-sacs so 
marvellously developed in birds, and possibly also in various 
Dinosaurs. In the Amphisbaenids the left lung alone remains. 
The lungs of crocodiles have reached a considerably higher 
stage. They alone in reptiles are, on the ventral side, com- 
pletely shut off from the viscera by a pleural, partly mus- 
cularized, membrane. From each bronchus extend a number 
of broad septa towards the periphery, dividing the originally 
single lumen into many chambers, perhaps a dozen, from the 
walls of which wide secondary or parabronchial canals extend 
into the alveolar meshwork, in very regular arrangement, in 
series like organ-pipes. 

The lungs of the tortoises are, in adaptation to the peculiar 
shape of the body, stowed away along the back, as far as the 
pelvis, and only their ventral surface is covered by a strong 
peritoneal membrane which receives muscular, diaphragmatic 
fibres. The inner division of the lungs into chambers has pro- 
gressed so much that a sort of mesobronchus has become dis- 
cernible; the arrangement of the side-bronchi is far less regular 
than in crocodiles; the whole lung is much more honeycombed, 
meshy and spongy. 

The mechanism of breathing of tortoises is not such a puzzle 
as it is sometimes stated to be. Of course the rigid box of the 
trunk excludes any costal, or abdominal breathing, but by pro- 
truding the limbs or the neck, piston-like, an effective vacuum 
is produced in the box. Moreover, the throat is distended and 
worked considerably by the unusually large and very movable 
hyoid apparatus, by which air is pumped into the lungs. 

The lungs of the snakes are very thin-walled, with a very 
wide lumen, and only for about the first half from the heart 
backwards the walls are alveolar enough for actual respiratory 
function, while towards the blind end the sacs are so thin and 
sparsely vascularized that they act mainly as reservoirs of a large 
amount of air. Frequently their posterior portions receive 
blood vessels not from the pulmonary arteries but directly from 
those of the trunk. In correlation with tlfe long, cylindrical 
body, the lungs are much elongated and they are not equally 
developed. The asymmetry shows great differences in the 
various groups, consequently the asymmetry has been developed 
independently in those groups. It is usually stated that the 
left lung is much smaller than the right. This is but rarely 
the case. The most recent observations are those of E. D. 
Cope (Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. (1894), xxxiii. 217). In Boidae 
both lungs are large, although unequal: the left or more 
dorsally placed one being the larger. In Ilysia the right is 
functional, the left is ventral and vestigial. In Rhinopkis the 
right is very small, the left larger. In Glauconia and Typhlops 
the right lung alone is developed: the left is -quite aborted. In 
Colubridae the left lung alone is functional, while the right is 
vestigial. There is no trace of the right in Elapinae and Hydro- 
phinae and most Viperidae. In the Colubridae the right, or 
ventral, lung is, when present at all, reduced to a length of 
from 2-5 mm., and it then communicates with the anterior 
portion of the left lung by a foramen, in level of the heart, 
whilst the right bronchus is aborted. 

A further complication is the so-called tracheal lung, which is 
present in Typhlopidae, Ungalia of the Boidae, in Chersydrus of 
the Acrochordinae, in the Hydrophinae and Viperidae. This 



163 



peculiar organ is a continuation of the anterior portion of the 
functional lung, extending far headwards, along the trachea, 
with the lumen of which it communicates by numerous openings. 
In Chersydrus this mysterious organ is "composed of coarse 
cells and without lumen, extends from the heart to the head, 
and is discontinuous with the true lung; the trachea communi- 
cates with it by a series of symmetrical pores on each side." 
In Typhlops it extends likewise from the heart to the throat, as 
a cellular body but without lumen or connexion with either 
trachea or lung. 

Thyroid and Thymus. 

The Thyroid of the reptiles is a single, unpaired organ, 
placed ventrally upon the trachea and one or other of the arterial 
trunks, more or less distant from the heart. In snakes it lies 
on the mid-line near the heart; a little farther up in Sphenodon; 
still farther in lizards, and chameleons near the root of their 
gular sac. In tortoises it is globular, at the division of the 
carotic trunk. In crocodiles it is bilobed. 

The Thymus is paired. It is largest in crocodiles, extending 
on either side of nearly the whole neck, along the carotids and 
jugulars. In the tortoises they are much shorter; in Sphenodon 
and lizards are two pairs, more or less elongated; in the snakes 
are sometimes as many as three pairs, elongated but small, 
attached to the carotis near the heart. As usual the thymus 
bodies become much reduced with age. 

The Spleen. 

The Spleen varies much in shape and position. In lizards 
it is mostly roundish, elongated in Sphenodon, and placed 
near the stomach; in crocodiles it lies in the duodenal loop 
behind the pancreas; similarly situated in snakes, but in 
the tortoises it is much concentrated, large and attached to 
the hind-gut. 

The Body Cavily. 

The body cavity of the reptiles is subdivided into several sacs 
or cavities by serous membranes of peritoneal origin. The 
number of these subcavities differs much in the various groups. 
The pericardial sac is always complete. In tortoises the lungs 
are retro-peritoneal, a dense serous membrane spreading over 
their ventral surface from the walls of the carapace forwards 
to the liver and shutting off a saccus hepato-pulmonalis from 
the rest of the peritoneal cavity. Snakes possess, besides the 
modifications mentioned above, separate chambers for the 
stomach, right and left liver, and for the gut, whilst the pleural 
cavities as such have been destroyed. In lizards a " post-hepatic 
septum " divides liver, lungs and heart from the rest of the 
intestines. This transverse vertical septum is best developed, 
almost complete, in some of the Tejidae, in others it seems to be 
more imperfect, and it is probably a further development of the 
suspensorial ligament of the liver, which is ultimately inserted 
upon the ventral wall of the body. 

The subdivisions have reached their highest development in 
the crocodiles, there being, besides the pericardial and the two 
pleural cavities and the usual peritoneal room, a right and left 
hepato-pericardiac, an hepato-gastric, and an hepato-pulmonal 
sac. The caudal and ventral edges of these liver-sacs are fused 
on to the ventral body-wall, thus producing a complete trans- 
verse partition, headwards of which lie the lungs, liver and 
heart. This partition, morphologically not homologous with 
the mammalian diaphragm, more resembling the imperfect 
structure in birds, acts, however, as a perfect diaphragm, since 
it is well furnished with muscular fibres. These are attached 
to its whole periphery, with centripetal direction, especially 
on the ventral half. These fibres are transgressors upon this 
septum from a broad sheet of muscles, which, inserted together 
with the septum upon the body-wall, arise from the iliac bones, 
the pubes, and the greater portion of the last pair of abdominal 
ribs. This broad muscular sheet, covering the intestines, is 
the so-called abdominal diaphragm or peritoneal muscle. Its 
continuation upon the transverse septum is the crocodilian 
muse, diaphragmaticus, and in functional effect very similar 



164 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 



to that of the Mammalia, whilst the abdominal diaphragm 
undoubtedly causes abdominal respiration. We have seen 
that these crocodilian conditions do not stand quite alone, but 
are connected with simpler features in the other reptiles. Two 
recent, very lengthy papers have been written on this subject 
by I. Bromann (1904) and by F. Hochstetter (1906), besides two 
in 1902 by G. Butler. 

The Heart 

The Heart of all reptiles is removed from the head and is 
placed well in the thorax, in the Varanidae even a little beyond 
it. Only in snakes the heart lies headwards from the hilus of 
the lungs, not cauda'lwards, generally at about the end of the 
first fifth of the body. The batrachian conus arteriosus is 
reduced, one set of semilunar valves guarding the entrances 
into the truncus arteriosus which now issues directly from the 
heart. A sinus venosus exists still in Sphenodon and Chelonians, 
in which it may even receive separate hepatic veins, but in 
crocodiles, lizards and snakes the sinus as such exists no 
longer, forming part of the right atrium. All the hepatic veins 
enter the stem of the posterior vena cava, which henceforth 
enters the heart as inferior vena cava. This, the largest, and 
the right and left anterior vena cavae, are the only three veins 
which enter the right atrium. Into the left open the two pul- 
monary veins. Right and left atrium have in all reptiles a 
complete septum between them. The ventricular portion shows 
considerable steps towards the differentiation into a right and 
a left ventricle, but the partition is very incomplete in tortoises, 
lizards and snakes, quite complete only in the crocodiles. The 
most important character of the reptilian heart, absolutely 
diagnostic of it, is the fact that the systemic vessel which leaves 
the right ventricle turns to the left to form the left aorta, while 
the stem which comes from the left ventricular half arches over 
to the right as the right aorta. It is not at all necessary to 
conclude that this fact excludes the reptiles from the mammalian 
ancestry and to hark back to conditions as indifferent as are 
those of the batrachia. The Foramen Panizzae shows the way 
to a solution, how ultimately all the arterial blood from the 
left ventricle may pass, first through the root of the right arch, 
then through this hole into the left, whilst the rest of the right 
arch, and the root of the left, obliterate. The difficulty is not 
much greater than that of deriving the birds' condition from 
the reptilian. The Foramen Panizzae, which exists only in 
the Crocodilia, lies exactly where the right crosses dorsally over 
the left aorta. The whole is not the last remnant of the originally 
undivided truncus, as is taught generally, but it is a new foramen, 
a hole dug by the left arterial blood into the venous right aorta. 
According to the recent observations made by F. Hochstetter 
the foramen comes into existence in a very late embryonic 
stage. 

Whilst the batrachian single ventricle possesses only one 
ostium ventriculare or outlet into the truncus, in the reptiles 
the inter-atrial. septum extends considerably downwards into 
the base of the ventricle, so as to produce a right and a left 
niche, and correspondingly two ostia instead of one. The atrio- 
ventricular valves are still membranous, even in crocodiles; 
attached to them are muscles, trabeculae carneae, from the 
very trabecular walls of the ventricle; they are especially 
spongy in tortoises. By means of the arrangement of some of 
these trabeculae, perhaps still more through the confluence of 
their basal portions, an imperfect ventricular septum is initiated. 
Certainly even in tortoises, which represent the lowest stage, 
the venous blood is received into and sent out by the same right 
side of the ventricle, while the arterial blood is correspondingly 
managed and dodged by the left side. That there is not very 
much mixture of the two kinds of blood, in spite of the wide 
communication in the ventricle, is further due to the peristaltic 
systole and diastole of the various divisions of the heart. — The 
heart of Chelonians is broader than long. In correlation with 
the very much flattened body of Trionyx and its allied genera, 
the whole heart is dislodged from the middle line, far over to the 
right side; the vessels of the left side are correspondingly much 



elongated and have to cross the neck, trachea and oesophagus. — 
The apex of the heart is attached to the pericardium by a special 
ligament in the Crocodilia and in many Chelonia, e.g. Testudo, 
but it is absent in Clemmys. Sometimes this little ligament 
sends a tiny blood vessel into the liver. 

Arterial System. 

Crocodiles. — Th€*left aorta crosses obliquely beneath the right 
and gives off only the coeliac, just before joining the right aorta 
in the level of the eighth thoracic vertebra. The aorta 
descendens sends off, besides intercostals and other segmentals 
into the body-wall, the mesenteric, right and left iliac, a pair of 
renal and ischiadics, a cloacal and the caudal artery. The right 
aorta forms the main root of the a. descendens. Close to the 
heart it sends off two coronaries and a short carotis primaria 
which divides at once into two anonymae, the left of which is the 
stronger. The right anonyma divides into the subclavia and 
collateralis colli, the left into subclavia and carotis subverte- 
bralis. Each subclavia sends off an a. vertebralis communis, 
which runs headwards and, with another longer branch, down- 
wards, giving off intercostals, and then joins the descending 
aorta. 

Tortoises. — The left aorta is rather more separated from the 
truncus, which it crosses ventrally in an oblique forward direc- 
tion; it sends off a left cardiac to stomach and oesophagus, 
a coeliac and mesenteric, and then a communicating branch 
to the right aorta. The a. descendens gives off paired supra- 
renals, spermatics, very large iliacs, then a pair of renals, 
hypogastrics and the caudal. Each iliac artery divides into a 
recurrent intercostal anastomosing with the axillaries, an 
epigastric (sending off the crural and anastomosing with 
thoracics and numerals), and other arteries to abdominal 
muscles and to the shell. The hypogastrics supply the cloacal 
region and then continue as the ischiadics. But there are many 
anastomoses which cause great variation in the different 
tortoises. The right aorta sends off a right cardiac, the coronary, 
and the right and left anonymae which are quite symmetrical, 
each dividing into subclavia and carotis; in the angle lies the 
thymus. 

Lizards. — Two common carotids arise either side by side, or 
by one carotis primaria, from the right aortic root. In the 
majority each common carotis ascends the neck and then divides 
into the vessels for the head and another branch which turns 
back and goes into the descending part of the aortic arch. In 
chameleons two carotid stems ascend the neck and there is no 
recurrent vessel. In the Varanidae the two common carotids 
start from a long carotis primaria; there is no recurrent vessel. 
The vertebral arteries come from the origin of the subclavians 
and run to the head in a very lateral position. The subclavian 
arteries (which occur also in limbless lizards) arise far away from 
the carotids out of the descending arch of the right aorta, in a 
level often far behind the heart. " Anonymous " arteries are 
consequently absent in lizards. 

Snakes. — The left aorta is stronger than the right, both com- 
bining soon to form the descending aorta. Owing to the absence 
of fore limbs and shoulder-girdle the conditions are much simpli- 
fied. In most snakes the right aorta sends off but one strong 
carotic vessel which represents the left carotis communis whilst 
the right is much reduced or even quite absent; further, there is 
only one vertebral artery, which either runs along the right side 
of the vertebral column or it divides soon into a right and a 
left vessel along the neck. In conformity with the reduction 
of one lung there is usually but one pulmonary vessel. 

Venous System. 

Crocodiles. — E^ach, right and left, anterior vena cava is com- 
posed of a subclavian (axillary and external jugular), an internal 
jugular, common vertebral and an internal mammary vein. 
The posterior vena cava is composed of the two revehent renals, 
veins from the genital glands and ducts, revehent veins of the 
suprarenals (which, like birds, still have a portal system), and 
the big vein from the fat body. Thus the vena cava posterior 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



165 



perforates the right liver, receiving from it many hepatic reve- 
hent veins and also the big revehent vessel from the left lobe; 
next it receives the coronary vein and then enters the heart 
as inferior vena cava. The portal vein arises out of the 
coccygo-mesenteric (which comes out of the bifurcation of the 
caudal), collecting the blood from most abdominal viscera and 
from the thorax and breaks up in the right liver. The rest of 
the venous system is rather complicated. The big caudal vessel 
divides near the vent, receives an unpaired cloacal and a rectal 
vessel, and goes off to the right and left, each of which trunks 
receives an ischiadic and an inter-sacral vein and then divides 
into the v. renalis advehens which breaks up in the kidney, and 
the abdominal vein. The latter are interesting; they run in the 
abdominal wall, receive the obturator and other pelvic veins, 
intervertebrals and intercostals, the crurals, and the epigastrics 
out of the body- wall. Then these two abdominals (Rathke's 
internal epigastrics) go to the liver, which they enter to either 
side of the gall bladder, collecting also blood from the stomach 
and from the vertebral column. Both break up in the liver. 
Consequently all the blood from " below the heart " passes 
through some portal system — renal or hepatic — except that 
which comes from the genital glands and ducts and from the fat 
body. 

Tortoises. — The venous system much resembles that of the 
crocodiles, but many and wide anastomoses, especially on the 
inside of the carapace and plastron, exist between often distant 
vessels, so that one lucky injection may fill the whole system. 
There are three advehent renal veins which collect on the back 
of their kidney into one stem; they dissolve completely into a 
portal system, and leave the kidney on its ventral surface as one 
v. renalis revehens. The right and left then' form the v. c. 
posterior which perforates the posterior margin of the right liver, 
then headwards of the liver takes up the hepatic and enters the 
heart. The three pairs of afferent renal veins are composed as 
follows. The externa collects from the shell and the abdominal 
muscles; the posterior collects along the rectum from the genital 
glands, the bladder, and from parts of other pelvic viscera; the 
anterior comes from the anterior part of the shell and runs back- 
wards to the kidney, with frequent anastomoses with the other 
advehent renal veins. The abdominals arise, as in the crocodiles, 
with the external advehent renal from the lateral continuation 
of the bifurcated caudal, which takes up vessels from the pelvis, 
the shell and the crural. The abdominal itself takes up a 
femoral vein, vessels from the abdominal and pelvic muscles, 
and from the plastron, and then dives into the body-cavity, 
receives veins from the fore limbs, and enters the right lobe of 
the liver, there to break up.' The hepatic portal collects from the 
intestinal tract, spleen and pancreas. Consequently in tor- 
toises all the blood from below the heart passes through some 
portal system. 

The most important peculiarity of the Lizards is the condition of 
the abdominal veins ; they combine into a single stem (after having 
collected the blood from the fat body and from the ventral 
body- wall of the pelvic region) which dives into the body-cavity 
to join, embedded in the ventral hepatic ligament, the left 
branch of the portal vein. The chief characteristic of the 
abdominal is that it does not communicate directly with the 
caudal, and that it forms an unpaired stem. The renal portal 
system receives its blood from the tail, the hind limbs, the 
abdominal wall and the urino-genital organs, all the blood 
passing into a right and a left advehent vein. The suprarenal 
portal system drains from the abdominal wall and the supra- 
renal bodies, and issues into the revehent renals. These, with 
some intervertebrals and with hepatics, constitute the inferior 
vena cava. 

Lymphatic System. 

The lymphatic vessels frequently accompany the big arteries 
of the trunk, either surrounding them with a meshwork or 
ensheathing them completely, .especially ' in tortoises. The 
lymphatics from the head and neck combine with stems which 
accompany the veins of the fore limbs; they join the thoracic 



ducts and these open into the brachiocephalic veins, as they do in 
birds. The lymph from the tail flows into the ischiadic veins 
or into the advehent renal veins. Reptiles possess only a posterior 
pair of lymph-hearts; they are placed near the root of the tail 
against the ends of one of the transverse processes. In snakes 
they lie in a space protected by the ribs and transverse processes 
of the original sacral vertebrae. Lymph glands proper are 
not developed in reptiles, except in the shape of the so-called 
mesenteric j;land of crocodiles. 

Blood. 
The red corpuscles are invariably oval, and, since they still 
possess a nucleus, biconvex. Numerous measurements have 
been made by G. Gulliver (P.Z.S., 1845, pp. 93-102), their long 
and short axes range between 0-015-0-023 and o-ooo-o-2i mm. 
respectively. That means to say they are very much larger 
than those of mammals, considerably larger than those of most 
birds, and in turn much smaller than those of amphibia. 

Digestive System. 

Teeth. — All the groups of recent reptiles have teeth, except the 
tortoises, which have lost even embryonic traces of them. In 
the under jaw they are restricted to the dentary bones. In the 
upper they are almost universal in the maxilla and premaxilla, 
although the latter has lost them in most of the snakes. The 
pterygoids are toothed in most snakes and in a few lizards, e.g. 
Lacerta and Iguana. The palatines are toothed- in Sphenodon 
and in some lizards. 

Only the young of Sphenodon and the chameleons have a few 
small teeth on the vomer. The teeth themselves consist of 
dentine with a cap of enamel and with cementum around their 
base. In the crocodiles they are planted into separate alveoles 
in the maxilla, premaxilla and under jaw. In lizards they are 
either pleurodont, i.e. they stand in a series upon a longitudinal 
ridge which projects from the lingual side of the supporting bone, 
or they stand upon the upper rim of the bone, acrodont. In 
either case they are, when full grown, cemented on to the bone. 
Acrodont are amongst lizards only the Agamidae; the Tejidae 
are intermediate, almost acrodont. All the snakes and Sphe- 
nodon are acrodont. The latter is in so far peculiar as its broad- 
based, somewhat triangular teeth are much worn down in old 
specimens; originally there are several in the premaxilla, but the 
adults bite with the somewhat curved-down portions of the 
premaxillaries themselves, or with what remains of the anchy- 
losed bases of the original teeth, which then, together with the 
bone, look like a pair of large chisel-shaped incisors. The 
lateral edges of the palatines of Sphenodon likewise carry teeth, 
those of the mandibles fit into a long slit-like space between 
the palatine and the maxillary teeth. This is a unique arrange- 
ment. Further, it is surprising that in this old, Rhyncho- 
cephalian type the supply of teeth has become exhausted, whilst 
in the other recent reptiles the supply is continuous and appar- 
ently inexhaustible. The new teeth lie on the lingual side of the 
old set, and long before the new tooth is finished part of the 
base of its older neighbour is absorbed, so that the pulp-cavity 
which persists in nearly all reptilian teeth becomes free. Ulti- 
mately the old tooth is pushed off and the new is cemented into 
its place. In the crocodiles it has come to pass that several 
sets of teeth are lodged more or less into one another's bases. 
Where crocodiles and alligators collect habitually the ground 
is sometimes found strewn with thousands of teeth, large and 
small, every creature shedding about seventy teeth many times 
during its long life. 

Some or all teeth of various families of lizards and snakes 
have a more or less pronounced groove or furrow along their 
anterior convex curve. The usefulness of this furrow in facili- 
tating the entering of saliva into the bitten wound is merely 
incidental, but this preformed feature has in many snakes 
been improved into a fearful weapon. In the Opisthoglypha 
a few of the most posterior teeth in the maxilla are enlarged, 
have deeper furrows, and lie in the vicinity of the poison ducts. 
In the Proteroglypha one or two of the most anterior maxillary 



1 66 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 




of a Tooth of Helo- 
derma horridum 
(after Bocourt). 1, 
antero - internal as- 



teeth are enlarged and furnished with a deep groove for the 
reception of poison. In the Solcnoglypha or "Viperidae the 
enlarged teeth of the Opisthoglypha 
have moved to the front, owing to re- 
duction of the anterior portion of the 
maxilla. The latter, much shortened, 
moves with the firmly anchylosed poison 
fang upon the prefrontal as its pivot, 
being pushed forward, or " erected," by 
the ectopterygoid bone, which con- 
nects it with the pterygoid, and this 
Fig. 38^-Two Aspects j n turn c^ be moved forwards and 
backwards, together with the quad- 
rate. (See fig. 24, skull of Vipera 
nasicornis and the diagram of the 
pect of the tooth, mechanism in article Snakes.) In 

- SKSfirass ^ he stiU , unfin ^ hed , fai * ** fur r 

2, postero- external is open, later the edges close together 
aspect of the same and the end of the duct of the gland 
tooth, # showing a itself is surrounded by the substance 
TnaT roove g of the growing basal portion of the tooth, 

so that the furrow is converted into 
a canal continuous with that of the gland. The poison is 
now sure to be projected into the very deepest part of the 
wound with the precision of a surgical instrument. The Pro- 
teroglypha, with their long, non-erectile maxillae, bite, or, like 
ElapSy deliberately chew their victim; the Viperidae rather 
strike with the mouth widely open. The teeth of snakes and 
lizards are often of irregular size; but it is rare that a kind of 
differentiation into incisors, canines and molars occurs. In 
many lizards, especially in Iguanidae, some teeth are multi- 
cuspid, trilobed, or somewhat serrated; in Tiliqua, universally 
known as Cyclodus, most of the hinder teeth are roundish 
crushers. 

Lizards and snakes are born with an " egg-tooth " which 
is lost a day or two after hatching. Its function is the filing 
through of the eggshell. This tooth, always unpaired, is in 
Tropidonotus natrix one millimetre long and half a millimetre 
broad at its base, which rests upon a middle depression of the 
premaxillary bone; it stands forward above the mouth and 
is curved upwards. In crocodiles and tortoises the same effect 
is produced by another organ, which, as in birds, lies well out- 
side the mouth on the top of the end of the snout and consists 
of a little cone of calcified epidermis. 

Tongue. — The tongue of the crocodiles is very broad and flat, 
and with nearly its whole broad base attached to the floor of the 
mouth; however, in its whole circumference its edge is well 
marked, and it arises on its hinder border as a transverse fold 
which meets a similar fold descending from the palate in front 
of the posterior nares. By these folds the mouth can be com- 
pletely shut off from the nasal passages into the trachea. The 
upper surface of the tongue contains several dozen large flat 
papillae, each with a central pit-like opening; it is not known 
whether they are gustatory organs. Besides scarce mucous 
glands on the tongue, there is an absence of salivary glands 
in the mouth. The tongue of tortoises is likewise short, broad, 
and not protractile, and there appears to be only a sublingual 
gland; the surface of the tongue is 'covered with velvety papillae 
in the terrestrial, with larger folds in the marine Chelonians. 
In the Lacertilia the tongue presents a number of variations 
which have been referred to as diagnostic characters of the 
various families of Lizards (q.v.). The chief modifications 
are the following: Either flat and broad, not protractile, e.g. 
Agamidae; or the body of the tongue is somewhat cylindrical, 
elongated, and the whole organ can be protruded; lastly, the 
anterior half of the tongue, which can be protruded, is retractile 
or telescoped into the posterior portion, e.g. Anguidae. Jn 
nearly all cases the posterior dorsal end of the body of the 
tongue is well marked off by a margin raised above the root, 
a character which does not occur in any snake. The upper 
surface is either smooth or curved with velvety, flat, or scaly, 
always soft, papillae. In the majority the tip of the tongue 



is bifid, either slightly niched or deeply bifid. The tips con- 
tain tactile corpuscles, although sometimes covered with a 
horny epithelium. The most specialized is the tongue of 
the chameleon. -The body of this tongue is very thick, club- 
shaped, fleshy and full of large mucous glands which cover it 
with a sticky secretion. The base or root is very narrow, 
composed of extremely elastic fibres and supported by a much 
elongated copular piece of the ' hyoid. This elastic part is, 
so to speak, telescoped over the style-shaped copula, and the 
whole apparatus is kept in a contracted state like a spring in 
a tube. A pair of wide blood vessels and elastic bands extend 
from the base into the thick end, which in an ordinary chame- 
leon can be shot out to a distance of about 8 in. 

The tongue of the snakes is invariably slender, smooth and 
almost entirely retractile into its posterior sheath-like portion. 
It is always bifid and contains many tactile and other 
sensory corpuscles by which these creatures seem to investi- 
gate. The tongue is always protruded during excitement. 
How this is done is not very obvious, since the hyoid apparatus 
itself is much reduced. There is a niche in the middle of the 
rostral shield to permit protrusion of the tongue whilst the mouth 
is shut, and probably herewith is correlated the almost uni- 
versal absence of teeth in the premaxilla. The tongue and 
the larynx are placed very far forwards in the mouth and, 
during the act of swallowing, the larynx approaches the chin, 
or it may even protrude out of the mouth to secure breathing 
during the often painfully protracted act. 

Of Glands, sublingual glands are of general occurrence in 
reptiles; they open near the root or in the sheath of the tongue. 
Labial glands seem to be absent in crocodiles and tortoises, 
but upper and lower labial glands exist in lizards and snakes, 
generally in considerable numbers. Heloderma is the only 
lizard in which some of these glands — those along the lower 
jaw — produce a poisonous secretion, each small gland conducting 
its secretion towards the base of one of the somewhat furrowed 
teeth. In the snakes, upper and lower labial glands are well 
developed for salivation. It is the upper series which attracts 
our interest by its eventual modification into the deadly poison 
glands. Probably the saliva of most snakes, like their serum, 
possesses toxic properties. In most of the harmless Colubrine 
snakes the glands extend in a continuous series from behind 
the premaxilla along the whole of the upper jaw, with numer- 
ous openings. In the Opisthoglypha a gradual differentiation 
takes place into an anterior, middle and posterior portion; 
the middle, extending from below and behind the eye back- 
wards, is the thickest and yellowish in colour; behind it follows 
a small portion, reddish grey like the anterior portion, with 
which it is more or less continuous below the middle complex. 
Thus, still rather indifferent, is Dryophis. In Dipsas, e.g. 
D. fusca, the middle portion has become predominant; some 
of its enlarged ducts lead to the pair of posterior, enlarged and 
well-grooved, maxillary teeth. It is this middle portion which 
becomes the characteristic poison gland with one long duct. 
The gland itself retains its position; all the other upper labials, 
except the anterior series, abort. In the Viperidae the poison 
duct opens near the base of the perforated fangs, which, owing 
to the shortening of the anterior portion of the maxilla with 
its teeth, have come to be the only teeth in the upper jaw. In 
the Elapine, still more in the Hydrophine snakes, the position 
of the gland and its duct is the same, but the duct has been 
carried past the smaller harmless teeth which stand in the 
maxilla and open at the base of the anterior maxillary teeth. 
The effect is the same, although the poison fangs are not 
homologous, in the one case the most posterior, in the other 
the most anterior, of the maxillary' series. In Doliopkis, one of 
the Malay genera of Elapine snakes, each poison gland sends 
an enormously elongated recess far into the body-cavity. (For 
some other details see Snakes; Viper; and Rattlesnake. 
The best account of the buccal glands and teeth of poisonous 
snakes is that by G. S. West, P.Z.S., 1895, pp. 812-826.) 

Stomach, &c. — In lizards and in Sphenodon the wide pharynx 
and oesophagus passes gradually into the stomach, which is 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



167 



more or less spindle-shaped, never transversely placed. The 
walls of the stomach are thrown into longitudinal folds which 
contain the specific gastric glands, whilst glands are absent in 
the oesophagus, excepting scattered and very simple slime 
glands. The circular muscular fibres of the stomach are much 
stronger than the longitudinal fibres. The end of the stomach 
is generally marked by a pyloric valve. The walls of the mid 
gut arc said to be devoid of glands. The end gut, marked by 
a circular valve, is considerably wider and there is a caecum, 
mostly left-sided, largest in leaf-eating lizards, rarely absent, as, 
for instance, in Anguis. The absorbent portion of the rectum 
is always strongly marked off from the cloaca by a circular fold 
or sphincter, which projects into the widened coprodaeum of the 
cloaca. In those lizards which, like Varanus, have no urinary 
bladder, there are two successive sphincters, marking off two 
chambers, one, the upper or innermost, for the reception of the 
faeces, the lower for that of the urine. In adult crocodiles the 
stomach is transformed into a gizzard; it is more or less oval, 
with a wide fundus and with two opposite apo-neurotic or 
tendinous disks whence radiate the muscular fibres. The 
muscular walls remain, however, comparatively thin, like those 
of bir^s of prey. There is a distinct pyloric stomach and then 
follows the pylorus. The inner lining of the stomach is velvet- 
like with numerous gastric glands which form groups with net- 
like interstices. There is a distinct duodenal loop which contains 
the pancreas. The more convoluted mid gut is lined with net-like 
meshes which farther back assume a longitudinal zigzag arrange- 
ment; .towards the end gut the walls become quite smooth, 
but in the end gut the walls again show a very narrow-meshed 
structure. None of these folds of the mid and hind gut is said 
to contain digestive glands; they seem to be entirely absorbent. 
The oesophagus of most tortoises shows longitudinal folds with 
very numerous mucous glands. In the Chelonidae the pharynx 
and adjoining; part of the gullet are covered with little tubercles 
upon each of which opens a small gland. Farther down they 
give way to large, more or less conical papillae, which assume a 
considerable size, point backwards, and are covered with a 
somewhat horny epithelium. Similar conical, horny papillae 
exist also in Sphargis, in which the oesophagus, moreover, makes 
a long loop half round the stomach before passing into it, an 
absolutely unique feature. The transition into the stomach 
is quite gradual. The latter is strongly muscular, partly 
transversely placed, and possesses often a very distinct pyloric 
stomach. In Chelone conical papillae extend into the cardiac 
portion. In the majority of tortoises the inner lining shows 
longitudinal folds with numerous small glands, mucous and 
gastric, but their distribution differs much in the various 
families and even genera. The lining of the mid gut shows 
either longitudinal folds or a network, without glands, except 
in some cases, Lieberkiihn crypts, e.g. in Trionyx, not in Tesiudo 
and Chelone. The hind gut begins suddenly, but there is no 
caecum; its inner walls contain numerous glands in Tesiudo, 
Emys, not in Chelys, Trionyx, Cinosternum. 

In the snakes the oesophagus is very thin-walled and passes 
imperceptibly into the stomach, which continues in a longitudinal 
direction, scarcely wider in the middle. Its muscular coating 
is surprisingly weak. There is a small pyloric portion. Mucous 
and especially long-bodied gastric glands are numerous. The 
wall of the mid gut carries numerous papillae variably arranged, 
velvet-like, or densely crowded little blades supported by 
longitudinal or by meshy folds. The hind gut is short, often 
constricted into several successive chambers, mostly smooth 
inside; there is a short, rather wide caecum which seems best 
developed in Viperidae; sometimes absent. The total length 
of the snakes' gut is always short, there being only short folds 
possible or necessary in the body cavity, which itself is of extra- 
ordinary length. Yet, while in Typhlops the gut is almost 
straight, it forms numerous convolutions in Tortrix. 

Whilst in all other reptiles the gut, ^t least stomach, liver and 
mid gut, are suspended by the mesentery from the vertebral 
column and hang free into the body cavity, in some snakes, 
especially often described in Boa and Python, the body cavity 



is cut up into numerous spaces, by peritoneal folds which connect 
neighbouring twists of the canal into bundles and attach them 
to the ventral surface of the body-wall. Probably the gut is 
thereby secured against dislocations in adaptation to the 
peculiar twisting contortions of the body, especially in the act 
of climbing. The mesentery of reptiles is remarkable for the 
possession of smooth, non-striated, muscular fibres. In most 
lizards, not in other orders, the peritoneum so far as it covers 
the abdominal cavity shows a deep black pigmentation; this 
pigment is situated in the connective tissue, not in the epithelial 
layer; it stops suddenly towards the thorax. In some lizards, 
e.g. in Anguis, the black pigment extends, more or less scattered, 
upon the mesentery and thence upon the intestines. The same 
pigment colours the pharynx with its recesses entirely black in 
many lizards. There is no compensating correlation between 
this internal pigment and that in the outer skin. 

The Liver of lizards is more or less bilobed; more so in 
crocodiles; while in tortoises the broad right and left lobes are 
connected by a narrow isthmus. In the snakes it is much 
elongated and extends from the heart backwards along the right 
side of the oesophagus, closely connected in its long course 
with numerous short branches into, or from, the inferior vena 
cava and the portal vein. A gall bladder is always present. 
The ducts into and from the cyst sometimes form a complicated 
network, for instance in Varanus (F. E. Beddard); the bile is 
carried by one or more ducts into the duodenal portion of the 
mid gut. The microscopic structure of the reptilian liver has 
been compared with that of monotremes by M. Fiirbringer. 

The Pancreas is a compact body attached to the duodenal 
region, which surrounds it by a loop ii the crocodiles, as is the 
case in birds and mammals. 

The Cloaca of the reptiles shows a great advance upon the 
simple batrachian arrangement. ■ It is no longer one common 
chamber, but consists of three successive chambers with the 
further tendency of separating the temporary retention and the 
passage of the faecal, urinary and genital products from each 
other. The arrangement is simplest and most typical in the 
lizards. There is first the proclodaeum or vestibulum of the 
cloaca, epiblastic in origin. ' Its outer boundary is formed by 
the cloacal lips, covered so far by the usual scaly integument. 
Just within this chamber arise the paired copulatory organs, 
and, when they are present, as in Sphenodon and snakes, the 
two anal glands. Secondly, the urodaeum, middle or urino- 
genital chamber, hypoblastic in origin. It is separated from 
the proctodaeum by a more or less circular fold which is pro- 
vided with sphincter muscles, which form the true vent, and 
this is always round; whilst the outermost opening in lizards 
and snakes is a transverse slit. Farther inwards, head wards, 
the urodaeum is shut off by another circular fold, generally very 
well marked, especially in its dorsal half, which is higher and 
.thicker. Into the dorsal, and innermost, recess of this urodaeum 
open the genital and urinary ducts; on the ventral side arises 
the urinary bladder. The whole chamber is always empty, 
being only a passage room, and in the female the copulatory 
chamber. The urine is of course collected in the bladder; 
when this is absent the fluid is pressed into the third chamber, 
the coprodaeum, which is often subdivided into two, or even 
three, successive rooms by circular folds. This coprodaeum 
serves for the temporary storage of the faeces, eventually mixed 
with the urine. Micturition and defaecation are in most 
lizards two successive separate acts. 

The snake's arrangement is a side-departure of that prevailing 
in lizards. The urodaeum is transformed into a dorsal recess 
into which open above the oviducts, while the ureters open 
below, in the caudal corner. A horizontal fold imperfectly 
shuts off the wide urino-genital chamber or recess from the 
ventral half of the original urodaeum. The coprodaeum is 
marked above and below by strong sphincters. There is no 
urinary bladder. 

In crocodiles the protodaeum is rather shallow, but long; 
from its ventral wall arises the unpaired copulatory organ, 
the basal investing membranes of which continue into the ventral 



i68 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 



half of the uro-proctodaeal fold, near which open the male 
ducts. Very young crocodiles possess a typical middle chamber 
or urodaeum, into the dorso-lateral corners of which open the 
ureters, but soon the strong circular fold between urodaeum 
and coprodaeum disappears completely, so that both chambers 
now form one large oval room, which is used solely for the 
storage of the urine, there being no bladder. The faeces are 
kept in the not specially dilated rectum. 

The cloacal arrangement of the Chelonia is a further develop- 
ment of early crocodilian conditions, but it has become rather 
complicated and shows a surprising resemblance to that which 
still prevails in the Monotremes. The proctodaeum is deep 
and very long, especially in the males. From its innermost 
and ventral walls arises the large copulatory organ. From the 
urodaeum is separated off a deep ventral recess into which open 
the ureters and the genital ducts, and it is continued by a long 
neck into the large bladder. Between the dorsal wall of this 
recess and the ventral wall of the main portion of the urodaeum 
arises a horizontal fold which, diverging, is continued on to the 
investing skin of the penis, helping to form the edges of the deep 
longitudinal furrow on its morphologically dorsal surface. If 
the lips of this furrow were closed, urine and all the genital 
products would pass through this urethral canal, but in reality 
only the semen is conducted through it (the furrow during the 
state of turgescence being transformed into a closed tube), 
whilst urine and eggs escape through the wide slit near its 
inner end. This is an arrangement almost the same as that 
of Ornithorhynchus. The urodaeum is separated from the 
rectum by a strong sphincter, and there is, as in the crocodiles 
and mammals, no special coprodaeum. The Chelonian urodaeum 
is further complicated by the occurrence of a pair of large anal 
sacs, thin-walled diverticula on the dorsal side. Such sacs, 
not to be confounded with the anal glands of other reptiles, 
exist in many water tortoises, especially in the Chelydidae, 
also in various aquatic Testudinidae, e.g. Etnys, in Platysternum, 
and sometimes in Trionyx; they are absent in the Chelonidae 
and in the typically terrestrial tortoises. These sacs have highly 
vascularized walls and a considerable layer of circular and 
longitudinal non-striped muscular' fibres; their inside is some- 
times villous, never glandular. They are incessantly filled and 
emptied with water through the vent, and act as additional 
respiratory organs, like a kind of water lungs. When such a 
tortoise is suddenly taken out of the water it squirts out a 
stream of water, which is not, as is usually supposed, the urine 
from the bladder. 

In connexion with the cloaca may be mentioned the frequent 
occurrence of peritoneal canals. In the tortoises their abdominal 
openings are situated in a recess of the peritoneal cavity close 
to either side of the neck of the bladder; in the females they 
extend as funnels, generally blind, into the cloaca on or near 
the base of the clitoris. In the males they extend, without 
having communication with the cavities of the corpora cavernosa, 
and without ramifications, as canals along the dorsum penis 
and either terminate blindly in the glans (Testudo, Ckelone), 
or they open, each by a small orifice, in the groove at the base of 
the glans. In crocodiles these canals are short and open near the 
base of the copulatory organ, protected by a small papilla. They 
are present in both sexes, but are still closed in newly hatched 
and very immature specimens. In an adult Nile crocodile they 
are wide enough to pass an ordinary lead pencil. The 'function 
of these outlets from the body cavity is obscure. In Sphenodon 
the writer has found them as closed funnels which project as 
soft papillae into the proctodaeum a little to the right and left 
and caudalwards from the urino-genital papillae. 

Urinary Organs. 

The kidneys of the reptiles show, like those of the birds 
and mammals, a considerable advance upon those of the 
Batrachia. They are, in the adult, represented entirely by the 
metanephros; the segmental tubes have no longer any nephro- 
stomes opening into the body cavity, not even during any 
time of their development, and it has come to a complete 



separation of the efferent genital ducts from the kidneys and 
from their ureters. Yet these differences are but of degree, 
there being a continuous bridge from Batrachian to Lacer- 
tilian conditions. In Lacerta, for instance, in which these 
features have been studied most thoroughly, the mesonephros 
continues as the, only functional excretory organ during the 
first year of the ybung creature until and during its first hiber- 
nation, when the formation of the metanephros takes place, 
and with it the complete separation of the vasa deferentia 
from tne kidneys. Until then the segmental canals remain 
in the male as common carriers of semen and urine, at least 
morphologically, not physiologically, since in the immature 
there is no occasion for the conduction of semen. The kidneys 
of these young lizards show precisely the same arrangement 
as that of the Batrachia, excluding the Discoglossidae. 

Clearly the metanephros is developed from, and is part of, the 
posterior portion of the mesonephros, the glomeruli of which no 
longer open into the segmental duct, but become connected with 
a new canal, the future ureter, which sprouts from the distal 
portion of the segmental duct and grows headwards. Or let 
us put these important changes in smother way. Since there are 
originally several segmental ducts (permanent in the male, newt) 
which tailwards more and more lose their connexion with the 
testes, until — in the posterior portion of the mesonephros — 
they become entirely urinary ducts, the hindmost of these 
sprouts (in lizards postembryonic, much earlier in birds and 
mammals) independently, but at the same time as the neigh- 
bouring mass of the mesonephros, the growing glomeruli of 
which then connect with the sprouting processes of the ureter. 
Phylogenetically and ontogenetically it is evident enough that 
the kidneys are essentially one organ, the anterior portion of 
which is the oldest and decays, whilst farther backwards new 
and more differentiated portions continue to grow. Pro-, meso- 
and metanephros and successive wave-like stages, of the same 
organ with morphological and functional continuity, until the 
next, improved portion is ready. It is important that in the 
Discoglossidae, especially in the male Alytes, an arrangement has 
come to pass which much resembles that of the Amniota. The 
mesonephros has, by a simple contrivance, become a metane- 
phros, provided we define the former as a kidney which is still 
connected with true segmental ducts. 

The supra-renal bodies , adrenals, head-kidneys or Nebennieren, 
are yellowish bodies which lie more in connexion with the 
generative glands than with the kidneys, always closely attached 
to the vena cava posterior just above the kidneys. They are 
very elongated in the snakes, in a io-foot python they measure 
about one inch in length; they are flattened in tortoises, roundish 
in crocodiles. 

In all reptiles the kidneys are retroperitoneal, and they do not 
project into the body cavity. Their position is different in the 
various groups, and their general shape is much affected by the 
shape of the body. In the Ophidia they are much elongated, and 
of course far in front of the pelvic region, which has been moved 
to the cloaca. They are placed asymmetrically, the right 
extending farthest forwards. They consist of many transverse 
lobes, sometimes in such a way as to appear spirally twisted. 
Each terminates considerably in front m of the cloaca. Each 
ureter begins at the anterior end of the kidney, and thence 
proceeds on its inner and dorsal border, receiving ducts from the 
interspaces of the numerous lobes. In the male each ureter 
opens upon a papilla, together with the vas deferens; in the 
female the ureter is joined by a blind canal, the vestige of the 
male duct. No snake has a urinary bladder. The urinary 
excretion is white, chalky, consisting mainly of uric acid in 
crystals, with very little fluid. 

In the Lacertilia the kidneys are more posteriorly placed than 
in snakes. They lie between the pelvis and the cloaca and are 
generally close together, sometimes partly fused with each other. 
Only in the Amphisbaenids the right kidney extends more 
forwards. They are usually transversely furrowed. The 
ureters open dorso-laterally into the urodaeum upon papillae as 
in the snakes. In the females the remnants of the segmental 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



169 



ducts, or vestigial representatives of the vasa efferentia, are often 
of considerable length, persistent in chameleon and Uromastix, 
much reduced in geckos, or disappearing with age as in Lacerta. 
The urine of most lizards contains much solid uric acid, which 
is retained in the urodaeum and voided as a rather solid, white 
mass, not united with the faeces. Those which have a greater 
amount of fluid urine have a bladder which receives the fluid 
portion. The opening of this bladder is on the ventral side of the 
cloaca, not in direct connexion with the ureters. The bladder 
is very rarely absent, e.g. in Varanidae and Amphisbaenidae. 

The Crocodilia have the kidneys placed below the pelvis; their 
surface shows meandering convolutions separated by furrows. 
The ureters are for the greater part of their length deeply sunk 
into the substance of the kidneys, which they leave near the 
hinder ends, to run freely for a short distance along the dorsal 
sides of the cloaca, and they open, each separately, and away 
from the vasa deferentia, into the dorsal side of the urodaeum, 
which, together with the coprodaeum, forms a large oval chamber, 
and this being filled with the very fluid urine, functionizes instead 
of the absent bladder. 

In Chelonia the kidneys lie in the pelvis, short and thick, more 
or less trihedral; the surface is marked with many shallow 
meandering grooves and fewer deeper furrows. Each ureter, 
composed of several large successive canals, leaves its kidney 
near the inner hinder end, and then runs free for a short space, 
crossing the gut to open into the neck of the urinary bladder, 
which arises ventrally out of the urodaeum, which itself has 
become a recess of the cloaca. The bladder is large, often more 
or less two-horned, attached to the pelvic wall by a peritoneal 
fold, and it contains very fluid urine. 

The kidneys of Sphenodon are very small and far removed 
from the generative organs. The ureters open, each close to 
the vas deferens of its side, beneath a little papilla, on the dorsal 
side, rather near the midline of the urodaeum, whence arises 
a long-necked bladder. 

Reproductive System. 

The Ovaries are always in pairs, placed headwards at a distance 
from the kidneys in Sphenodon, lizards and snakes; in the 
latter the right ovary lies farther forward. In tortoises, and 
especially in the crocodiles, where they are very long and much 
twisted or lobated, they are situated close to the kidneys and 
even accompany them. The ovaries of lizards and snakes con- 
tain many and large lymph spaces; those of the other reptiles 
are much denser in structure. The ripening eggs always cause 
them to assume the shape of a bunch of grapes. The oviducts are 
each held by a peritoneal fold which arises from near the dorsal 
midline. The abdominal ostia are long slits and are turned 
towards the side, away from the ovaries. The walls of the ducts 
gradually become thicker, glandular and much folded. Whilst 
the ripe eggs, often in considerable numbers, receive their shell, 
each egg lies in a separate chamber; in the geckos, which lay 
only one pair of eggs, the two respective chambers have become 
permanent features. In Sphenodon each oviduct opens together 
with the ureter of its side near the dorsomedian line of the 
urodaeum. In most lizards the two oviducts and the two 
ureters have four separate openings in the dorsal wall of the 
rather deep dorsal recess of the urodaeum. But in Lophura 
both oviducts unite (like the ureters) and have only one opening, 
which is placed a little nearer towards the pelvis than the 
urinary opening, but they are divided by a longitudinal septum 
which extends almost to their common orifice. In the snakes 
the oviducts likewise open into the dorsal recess, sometimes by a 
common ostium, which is provided with a strong sphincter. The 
whole recess acts like a vagina for the reception of one of -the 
copulatory organs. The oviducts of the crocodiles open in a 
decidedly ventral position, on either side close to the base of the 
clitoris, a considerable distance from the openings of the ureters. 
In the tortoises the oviducts open separately into a wide ventral 
urino-genital sinus, at the base of the neck of the bladder. 

The Testes correspond in position with the ovaries; in 
snakes and Amphisbaenids the right is placed farther head- 



wards than the left. The usual shape is elongated, sometimes 
pointed forwards. The Epididymis is sometimes of the same 
size as the testis and then consists of many meandering con- 
volutions of the vas deferens which is composed of several 
canals from the testis. The convolutions are held together by a 
peritoneal lamella. Towards the cloaca they become much 
smaller and shorter, and the vas deferens passes along the median 
side of the ureter. In Sphenodon these open separately, each 
near and below the same papilla near which opens the ureter of 
the same side. In most lizards the vas deferens unites with its 
ureter into one short canal which opens beneath or upon a small 
papilla in the upper corner of the urodaeal recess, far away from 
the perns. In snakes vas deferens and ureter of each side are 
likewise commonly united. In the crocodiles each vas deferens 
passes from the dorsal side of the cloaca to the ventral side, not 
accompanied by the ureter, and opens into the blind sac which 
forms the basal continuation of the deep groove on the dorsal 
side of the penis. In the tortoises the epididymis is very large 
and the vas deferens is also much convoluted; each opens 
separately near the neck of the large urinary bladder close to 
the backward continuation of the deep longitudinal groove of 
the copulatory organ. 

Remnants of the Miillerian ducts run parallel with the vasa 
deferentia, and similar remnants of the Wolffian ducts accompany 
the oviducts in crocodiles and tortoises, least degenerated of 
course in young specimens. Such reciprocal vestiges occur 
most likely also in lizards, and in female snakes a. vestige of the 
male duct joins its ureter. In a nearly adult male Sphenodon the 
present writer missed the female remnants. 

The copulatory organs- show very important modifications. 
Sphenodon is the only recent reptile which is devoid of such an 
organ; its imperfect substitute is an unpaired, thin, but high 
membranous fold which arises from the dorsal middle of the 
circular fold between urodaeum and coprodaeum. During 
copulation this part of the cloaca is probably everted to secure 
conception, a striking resemblance to the arrangement found 
in the Caecilia. The organs of all lizards and snakes are paired, 
in their quiescent state withdrawn into deep pockets which 
open on the right and left posterior corners of the proctodaeum 
or outer chamber of the 
cloaca, which for this reason 
has assumed the shape of 
a transverse slit in all 
lizards and snakes. Hence 
these have sometimes been 
called Plagiotremata. Each 
organ can be everted and 
tucked in like the linger 
of a glove, a muscle being 
attached^ to the inside of 
the apex*; when everted, the 
muscle extends through the 
length of the organ; each 
muscle arises from the ven- 
tral side of several trans- 
verse processes of the tail 
vertebrae, at a consider- 
able distance from the between them is the anal aperture; 
cloaca. In the embryo each PP* preanal plate, 
organ arises as a conical protuberance, or papilla, which 
projects out of the vent. Later it becomes inverted. Prob- 
ably this ontogenetic feature recapitulates the phylogeny 
of these organs, which have to be looked upon as swell- 
ing flaps or portions of the walls of the cloaca which were pro- 
truded during copulation, and which in time borrowed, and 
specialized, muscular fibres from the ventral tail muscles. On 
the outer everted side of each organ is a furrow for the reception 
of the semen. The apex is either single or more or less deeply 
bifurcated, each arm being followed by the likewise divided 
furrow.. The outer investing membrane of these^very muscular 
erectile bodies is epidermal; often, especially in snakes, pro- 
vided with numerous papillae, folds or other excrescences. In 

xxm. 6 a 




Fig. 39. — Male copulatory organs of 



Lacerta agtlis (after Leyd\gJ.p u p tt 
organs of right and left side 



•170 



REPTILES 



[ANATOMY 



many snakes these are spiny and hard, but according to Leydig 
this hardness is not due to a horny substance but to the deposi- 
tion of calcifying matter. E. D. Cope has investigated the 
almost endless minor modifications of these penial features and 
uses them for taxonomic purposes in the snakes. Vestiges of 
these organs occur in females of snakes and lizards. Close to 
these organs of the snakes lies a pair of anal glands of some size, 
which pour their very offensive secretion through an opening 
close to the base' of each penis. The same glands occur in the 
same position in Sphenodon, which has no copulatory organs, 
and in crocodiles they appear as evertible musk glands. Hence 
J. E. V; Boas, not knowing of their existence in both sexes of 
snakes, tried to homologize them with the paired penes of 
reptiles, an error which has been repeated in C. Gegenbaur's 
Lehrbueh, vol. ii. p. 533. 

The crocodiles and tortoises possess a single, median copula- 
tory organ ; it lies on the ventral or anterior end of the cloaca, 
the outer opening of which is therefore a longitudinal slit, 
hence the term ucthotremata. In the crocodiles the organ is 
attached to the caudal corner of the ischiadic symphysis by a 
strong and roundish fibrous band, which arises single from the 
ventral sides and forms partly the continuation of the two 
fibrous halves of the organ; the bulk of the crura, comparable 
to corpora cavernosa, is not attached to the pelvis, as generally 
stated, but projects backwards towards and into the pelvic 
cavity. This portion is especially rich in venous cavernosities. 
The outer coating of the glans possesses various papillary pro- 
jections, which are furnished with sensory, hedonic corpuscles. 
On the morphologically dorsal side of the organ, not on the 
dorsum penis, is a deep groove which ends towards the crura 
in a blind sac, into the farther corner of which open the vasa 
deferentia. In a full-grown Nile crocodile the whole organ 
is about 10 in. long. In young females up to a total length 
of 3 or 4 ft. the clitoris is nearly of the same size as the male 
organ, but it remains stationary and appears very small in 
large specimens. 

The organ of the tortoises is essentially of the same type 
as that of the crocodiles, but it is nowhere directly attached 
to the pelvis or to any other skeletal part. The whole organ, 
when withdrawn, lies in a ventral, long recess of the wide outer 
cloacal chamber, and its crura extend so far back as to form 
the continuation of the ventral and lateral walls of the recessus 
which is continued into the neck of the urinary bladder. Its 
orifice and those of the seminal ducts are enclosed by the walls 
of the deep groove which runs along the underside of the organ. 
This is always of considerable size, surprisingly large in Trionyx. 
The clitoris is small, sometimes tiny. 

The sexual act is extremely prolonged in Chelonians and 
still more so are the preliminaries, but in crocodiles it is the 
deed of a few seconds. Lizards and snakes insert only one 
side. 

There remains the question whether the unpaired organ 
of the crocodiles and tortoises, which is the prototype of the 
mammalian organ in every essential point, and the paired 
organs of the lizards and snakes, are to a certain extent homo- 
logous organs in so far as they can both be derived from the 
same indifferent condition. \Yith this view we assume that 
originally the protrusihle walls of the outer cloacal chamber 
became specialized into a right and left imperfect intromittent 
organ, that subsequently, in lizards, those hemipenes were 
shifted back towards the tail and were henceforth bound to 
develop separately, while ( in the crocodiles, tortoises, mammals 
and birds the two primitive lateral evertile flaps approached 
each other towards the ventral anterior side of the cloaca, 
and that this led to a fusion, beginning probably at the basal 
part, which at the same time was farther withdrawn from the 
surface and secured the reception of the sperma from both 
vasa deferentia into one canal. This hypothesis t has been 
objected to by Boas, but accepted by Gegenbaur (p. 538) after 
having been rejected on p. 533 of his Lehrbueh. 

The Fat bodies belong at least physiologically to the genera- 
tive system. They are placed outside the peritoneum. In 



lizards they appear as two masses in the pelvic region, the 
black peritoneal lining covering only their dorsal side. They 
consist of a network of arteries and connective tissue, the 
meshy spaces of which are filled with " fat "; they each receive 
an artery from the femoral vessel which enters them in the 
inguinal region; the veins collect into the abdominal. In 
snakes the fat bodies are very long, extending from the cloaca 
to the liver. Tortoises seem to have only traces of them, but 
in Sphenodon and in crocodiles they resemble those of lizards. — 
The peculiar organ suspended from the right abdominal wall 
of crocodiles, variously mentioned as mesenteric gland or body, 
or fatty spleen, by Butler, is possibly related to the same 
category. The' fat bodies of reptiles are sometimes vaguely 
alluded to, as hibernating bodies; like the fat bodies which are 
attached to the generative glands of Amphibia they do not 
become reduced during the eventual hibernation but are largest 
before the pairing season, by the end of which they are 
exhausted, looking reddish or grey after the loss of their stores 
of fat and probably other important contents 

The Embryonic Development. 

Fertilization of the egg always takes place internally, and 
the egg containing a large amount of food-yolk is of course 
meroblastic* It is sufficient to mention that many lizards, 
some chameleons and many snakes (not Sphenodon, geckos, 
crocodiles and Chelonians) retain their, in these cases very 
thin-shelled, eggs in the oviducts until the embryo is 'ready 
to burst the egg-membrane during the act of parturition or 
immediately after it. Such species are usually called ovo- 
viviparous, although there is no difference between them and 
other viviparous creatures, for instance the marsupials. 
The majority of reptiles are oviparous and the egg is enclosed 
in a strong parchment shell, with or without calcareous 
deposits. Only gas exchange can take place between such 
an egg and the outside, and it loses by evaporation, whilst in 
the batrachian egg various other exchanges are easy through 
the thin membrane. The salamander embryo, within its thin 
egg-membrane, even grows to a size many times larger than 
the original egg, it does not only breathe, but it is also nourished 
through the gills, and by some means or other the waste 
products are partly eliminated without filling the bladder. 
The amphibia are born as larvae and live as such for a long 
time, often in a most imperfect condition. Nothing of all 
this applies to the reptile, which leaves the egg as a perfect 
little imago. A great amount of yolk supplying the material, 
and a large " bladder " to receive the waste products and to 
act as respiratory organ, have made this possible. That the 
allantois and the amnion behave precisely in the same way 
in the mammals with their much reduced yolk, only testifies to 
the superior value of these organs, and after all there is no 
difference in this respect between a monotreme and a reptile. 
These two organs seem to have come into existence with the 
reptiles and constitute the most reliable diagnostic feature 
between higher and lower vertebrates. All reptiles, birds 
and mammals have a navel, a feature unknown and impossible 
in Batrachia and fishes. A few remarks on these important 
embryonic organs may not be superfluous, especially concerning 
their possible origin. 

Whilst the urinary bladder of the Batrachia remains within 
the body throughout the embryonic stage, this organ undergoes 
in the higher vertebrates, reptiles, birds and mammals, con- 
siderable modifications, and it assumes, henceforth as Allantois, 
new important functions besides that of being the receptacle 
of the embryonic urine. The development of the Allantois is 
in -intimate causal connexion with that of the Amnion. All 
the Allantoidea are also Amniota and vice versa, but the term 
Amniota is preferable, since the basal portion of the Allantois 
remains in the adult as the urinary bladder, as an organ hence- 
forth equivalent to and homologous with that of the Anamnia. 
The primary feature seems to be the allantois which leaves the 
body cavity, remains without the amniotic folds, even after 
these have enclosed the body within the amniotic bag, and 



ANATOMY] 



REPTILES 



I 7 I 



then spreads nearly all over the. inner side of the egg-shell. 
Having thus come into the closest possible contact with the 
atmospheric air, the vessels of the allantois can exchange their 
carbon dioxide for oxygen and the allantois becomes the re- 
spiratory organ of the embryo. Herewith stands in direct 
correlation the complete absence of any internal and of external 
gills in the embryonic reptiles. The blood vessels of the allan- 
tois are fundamentally the same as those of the batrachian 
bladder, namely, branches from the pelvic arteries (later hypo- 
gastrics) and veins which return from the base of the bladder 
to the abdominal wall and thence to the liver. 

In the normal reptilian egg, surrounded by its non-yielding 
shell, space is absolutely limited, and whilst the yolk is being 
diminished and increased secretion of urine distends the bladder, 
this soon protrudes out of the body cavity proper into the 
extra-embryonal coelomatic space between the true amnion and 
the false amnion or serous membrane. It fills this space so 
far as the yolk-sac allows it. It seems reasonable to suppose 
that this growth of the allantois has been one of the causes of 
the caudal amniotic fold; the sinking of the embryo into the 
space of the diminishing yolk-sac is no doubt another cause, 
but the fact remains that the amnion is the chief hindrance to 
the closing of the body-wall at the region of the future navel. 

The life-histories of embryonic development are the domain 
of the embryographers. They are the imperfect accounts of 
the ways and means (often crooked and blurred, owing to short 
cuts and in adaptation to conditions which prevail during the 
embryonic period) by which the growing creature arrives at 
those features which form the account of the anatomical structure 
of the adult. Comparative anatomy, with physiology, alone 
lead through the maze of the endless embryonic vagaries and 
afford the clues for the reconstruction of the real life-history 
of an animal and its ancestry. For detail the reader is referred 
to numerous papers quoted in the list of literature, and to the 
various text-books, above all to the Handbuch d. vcrgleichenden 
Entwicklungsgeschichte d. Wirbelthiere, edited by O. Hertwig, 
Berlin. 

Authorities on Anatomy: Bibliography. — The appended list 
of papers (many with shortened titles) represents but a fraction of 
the enormous literature dealing with the anatomy of reptiles. 
Special stress has been laid upon the more recent publications. A 
great amount of information, general and detailed, is contained in 
Bronn's^ Klassen u. Ordnungen d. Thierreichs, the three volumes 
concerning reptiles having been written by C. K. Hoffmann (Leipzig, 
1878-1890); E. D. Cope's Crocodilians, Lizards and Snakes of North 
America, U.S. Nat. Mus., Washington, 1900; H. Gadow's "Am- 
phibia and Reptiles/' vol. xiii. of The Cambridge Natural History 
(London, 1901); above all in C. Gegenbaur's Vergleichende Anatomte 
d. Wirbelthiere (Leipzig, 1 898-1901). 

Skeletal. — J. F. v. Bemmelen, " Schaedelbau v. Dermochclys 
coriacea," Festschr.f. Gegenbaur (1896); E. Gaupp, " Morphologie d. 




O^O^w^v, ^i;,. 0/ n Dt ui iiupiuuuuiu?, *(/-«*. \io/yy, ivy, py. ^05—41/, 

pis.; "Crocodilia," Trans. ZooL Soc. (1885), xi. pp. 263-310, pis.; 
."Chamaeleons," ibid. (1885), xi. pp. 77-105, pis. 15-19.; F. 
Siebenrock, " Kopfskelet d. Scincoiden, Anguidcn u. Gerrhosaur- 
iden," Ann. Nat. Hofmuseum (Wien, 1892), vii. 3. Of the enormous, 
still increasing, literature concerning the homologies of the auditory 
ossicles, a few only can be mentioned; the papers by Kirtgsley and 
Versluvs contain most of the previous literature : W. Peters, 
several most important papers in Monatsber. Ak. Wiss. (Berlin, 
2 1 st Nov. 1867, 5th Dec. 1867, 7th Jan. 1869, 17th Jan. 1870, 
15th Jan. 1874). H. Gadow, " Modifications of the First and Second 
Visceral Arches, and Homologies of the Auditory Ossicles," Phil. 
Trans. 179 (1888), B. pp. 451-485. pis. 71-74 ; " Evolution of the 
Auditory Ossicles," Anat. Anz. (1901), xix. No, 16. J. Versluys, 
" Mittlere u. aussere Ohrsphare d. Lacertilia u. Rhynchocephalia," 
ZooL Jahrb. Anat. (1898), 12, pp. 161-406, pis. (most exhaustive 
and careful); ibid., " Entwickl. d. Columella auris b. Lacertiliern," 




sentatives of the Malleus and Incus of the Mammalia in the other 
Vertebrata," P.Z.S., 1869. W. K. Parker, "Struct, and Develop- 
ment of Crocodilian Skull," Trans. Zool. Soc. (1883), xi., especially 
pis. 68 and 69. H. Gadow," Evolution of the Vertebral Column of 
Amphibia and Amniota," Phil. Trans. (1896), 136, pp. 1-57 (with a 
list of ninety-three papers). G. B. Howes and H. H. Swinnerton, 



Development of the Skeleton of Sphenodon," Trans. Zool. Soc. 
(1901), xvi. pp. 1-86, pis. 1-6. G. A. Boulenger, Catalogue of 
Chelonians, Rhynchocephalians and Crocodiles, Brit. Mus. 1889- 
Cat. of Lizards (3 vols., 1885-1887); Cat. of Snakes (3 vols., 1893- 
1896); these volumes contain a great body of osteological obser- 
vations, ignored by most compilers of anatomical text-books; 
" Osteol. of Heloderma, and Vertebrae of Lacertilia," P.Z.S., 
pp. 109-118 (1891). L. Calori, "Skeleton of Varanus, Lacerta," 
Mem. Ace. Sci. Instit. Bologna (8, 1857, and 9, 1859). E. D. Cope, 
11 Osteology of Lacertilia, Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. (1892), 30, pp. 
185-221 ; " Degeneration of Limbs and Girdles/' Journ. 
Morph. (1892), vii. pp. 223-244. E. Ficalbi, OsUologia del Plati- 
dathlo (Pisa, 1882). A. Goette, " Beitrage z. Skeletsystcm," Arch. 



(1895), x. pp. 17-41 ;■* Skeiet d-Aramidac"," Skzb. "Ak."\Vi's's7wien 
L I . 8 95). j i04, pp. 1089-1 196. F. Siebenrock, " Skeiet v. Brookesia,' 




Zool. X1885), 42, pp. 126-202. A. Voeltzkow, " Biolog. u. Entwickl.* 
von Crocodilus," Abh. Senckenb. Ges. (1899), 26, pp. 1-150, 17 pis. 
E. A. Case, " Osteology and Relationships of Protostega," Journ. 




(1898). 32, pp. 920-948. G. Baur, " Morphol. Unterkiefer d. Rept.," 
Anat. Anz. (1896), xi. pp. 410-415. M. Furbringer, " Brustschulter- 
apparat und Schultermuskcln. Reptilien," Jena Zeitschr. (1900), 
34, pp. 215-718, pis. 13-17 (with a list of many titles of papers con- 
cerning reptiles; and a new, unsatisfactory classification of the whole 
class). C. K. Hoffmann, " Beckcn d. Amphib. u. Reptil.," Niederl. 
Arch.f. Zool., iii. E. Mehnert, " Beckenguertel d. Emys lutaria," 
Morph. Jahrb. (1890), 16, pp. 537"57l f pi.; " Os hypoischtum, &c. 
d. Eidechsen," Morph. Jahrb. (1891), 17, pp. 123-144, pi. VV. K. 
Parker, *' Shoulder Girdle and Sternum," Roy. Soc. London, 1868. 
A. Rosenberg, " Development of Skeleton of Reduced Limbs," 
Zeitschr. wiss. Zool. (1873), 23, pp. 116-170, pis. A. Sabatier, 
Comparaison des ceintures ct des membres ant. et post," M£m. 
Ac. Montpellier (1880), xix. C. Gegenbaur, Untersuch. z. verg. Anat., 
m I. Carpus u. Tarsus " (1864), II. " Schulterguertel " (1865) (the most 
important monographs). A. Banchi, " Parafibula," Monitore Zool. 
Italtano (1900), xi. No. 7 (A nodule ][ between femur and fibula in 
Lacerta). G. Baur, " Carpus u. Tarsus d. Reptil.," Anatom. Anzeig. 
iv. No. 2. G. Born, " Carpus u. Tarsus d. Sauricr," Morph. Jahrb. 
(1876), 2, pp. 1-26, pi. A. Carlsson, " Gliedmassenreste bei Schlan- 
gen," Svensk. Vetensk. Ac. Handlingar, ii. (1886). A. Johnson, 
" Development of Pelvic Girdle," Q.J.M.S. (1883), 23, pp. 399-411. 
G. Kehrer, " Carpus u. Tarsus," Ber. Nalurf. Ges. (Freiburg, i. 1886). 
W. Kuekenthal, " Entwickl. d. Handskelets des Crocodiles," Morph. 
Jahrb. (1892), 19, pp. 42-55. H. F. Sauvage, " Membre anterieur 
du Pseudopus," Ann. Sci. Nat.-Zool. 7. art. 15 (1878). A. Stccker, 
11 Carpus u. Tarsus bei Chamaeleon," Sitzb. Ak. Wtss. (1877), 75, 2, 
pis. R. Wiedersheim, Gliedmassenskelett, Schulter u. Beckenguertel 
(Jena, 1892). K. Baechtold, Ober die Giftwerkzeuge der Schlangen 
(Tubingen, 1843). A. Duges, " Venin de 1'Heloderma," Jubil. Soc. 
Biol. (1899), pp. 34-137. D. F. Weinland, " On the Egg-tooth of the 



Snakes," Proc. Essex Institute (Salem, 1856); and in WUrttemb, 
—heft. Verein vaterl. Naturk. (1856). G. S. " 
eeth of Poisonous Snakes." P.Z.S. 
44-46. 



Jahresheft. Verein vaterl. Naturk. (1856). G. S. West, " Buccal Glands 
and Teeth of Poisonous Snakes," P.Z.S. (1895), pp. 812-826, pis. 



Tegumentary.—h. Batelli, " Bau der Reptiltenhaut," Arch. mikr. 
Anat. (1880), 17, pp. 346-361, pis. J. E. V. Boas, " Wirbelthier- 
kralle," Morph. Jahrb. (1894), xxi. pp. 281-311, pis. A. Haasc, 
11 Bau d. Haftlappen bei den Geckoticlen," Arch. Naturg. (1900), 61, 
pp. 321-345. Pis. R. Keller, " Farbenwechse! d. Chamaeleons," 
Arch. %es. Physiol. (1895), 61, pp. 123-168. C. Kcrbert, " Haut der 
Reptilien," Arch. mikr. Anat. (1876), 13, pp. 205-262. F. Maurer, 
Epidermis und ihre Abkoemmlinge (Leipzig, 1895). F- Schaefer, 
" Schenkeldruesen d. Eidechsen, Arch. Naturg (1902), 68, pp. 
27-64, pis. F. Todaro, Ricerchef. nel labor, di anal. norm, di Roma 
(1878), II. 1. F. Toelg, " Driiscnartige Epidermoidalorganc d. 
Eidechsen u. Schlangen," Arb. Zool. Inst. Wien (1904), 15, pp. 
II9-I54- pis. 

Nervous System. — J. F. Bemmelen, "Beitr. Kenntniss d. Halsgegend 
bei Reptilien Medcdeel," Natura Artis Maeistra (Amsterdam, 1887). 
L. Edinger, " Zwischcnhirn d. Reptilien," Abh. Senckenb. Ges. (1899), 
20, pp. 1 61-197, pis. J. G. Fischer, " Gehirnnerven d. Saurier," 
Abhandl. Naturwiss. Verein, Hamburg, II. (1852), pp. 1 15-212 
(with many excellent illustrations). M. Furbringer, " Spino- 
occipital Nervcn," &c, Festschr. f. Gegenbaur, iii. (1896). S. P. 
Gage, "Brain of Trionyx," Proc. Am. Micr. Soc. (1895), xvii. 
pp. 185-222. .E. Gaupp, "Anlage d. Hypophyse b. Saurtern," 
Arch. mikr. Anat. (1893), 42, pp. 560-680. Giuliani, " Struttura d. 
midolla.spinale d.. Lacerta vindis, Ric. Lab. di Anat. Roma, ii. 
J.Grimm," Ruckcnmark v. Viperaberus f "^4rc/t.i4«a/.P/tys. (1864), 



172 



REPTILES 



[DISTRIBUTION 



pp. 502-51 1, pi. 12. C. L. Herrick, " Brain of Certain Reptiles/' Journ. 
comp. Neurol (1891), i, pp. 1-36, iii. (1893), pp. 77~io6, 1 19-140, 
with many plates. O. D. Humphry, " Brain of Chelydra," Journ. 



PP- 513-532, pis. 66, 67. H. F. Osborn, " Origin of the Corpora 
callosa," Morph. Jahrb. xii. pp. 530-543. H. Rabl-Riickhard, 
" Central nervensystem d. Alligator, Zeitschr. wiss. Zool. (1878), 
xxx- PP- 336-373. Pis- *9 and 20 - " Python," ibid. (1894), lviii. pp. 
694-717, pi. 41. G. Ruge, 44 Peripher. Gebiet. d. N. facialis " (masti- 
cator muscles, &c), Festschr. f. Gegenbaur (1896), iii. L. Stieda, 
14 Centralnervensystemd. Emys, ff Zeitschr. wiss. Zool. (1875), xxv. PP- 
361-408. 

Sense Organs. — R. Hoffmann, 44 Thraenenwege d. Vogel u. Reptil.," 
Zeitschr. f. Naturw. (Nat. Verein Sachsen u. Thiiring., 1882). 
C. Rose, 44 Nasendriise u. Gaumendrtisen d. Crocodils," Anat. 
Anz. (1893), viii. pp. 745~75i- C. Ph. Sluitez, " Jacobson's Organ v. 
Crocodilus," inat. Anz. (1892), vii. pp. 540-545- O. Seydel, ,4 Nasen- 
hohle u. Jacobson's Organ d. Schildkroten, Festschr. /. Gegenbaur 
(1896), ii. B. Solger, 44 Nasenwand u. Nasenmuschelw. d. Reptil.," 
Morph. Jahrb. (1876), i. pp. 467-494, pi. E. Beraneck, " Parietal- 
auge d. Rept.," Jen. Zeitschr. (1887), xxi. pp. 374-410, pis.; ibid., 
Anat. Anz. (1893), No. 20. P. Francotte, 44 L'OEil parietal, &c. 
chez les Lacertiliens/' Mem. couronnS Ac. Belgique (1898), 55, No. 3. 
H. W. de Graaf, Structure and Development of the Epiphysis in Amph. 
and Rept. (Leiden, 1886; written in Dutch). W. B, Spencer, 
44 Presence and Structure of the Pineal Eye in Lacertilia," Q.J. M.S. 
(1886), 27, pp. 165-237, 7 pis. H. Strahl u. E. Martin, 44 Entwickl. 
d. Parietalauges b. Anguis u. Lacerta, " Arch, f, Anat. u. Phys. 
(1888), pp. 146-165, pi. 10. A. Dendy," Development of Parietal 
Eye of Sphenodon," Q.J. M.S. (1899), 42, pp. 1-87 and pp. 111-153, 

13 plates. H. Mtiller, Schriften z. Anat. u. Physiol, d. Auges, edit. 
O. Becker (Leipzig, 1872). E. Ficalbi, " Palpebralapparat d. 
Schlangen u. Geckonen," Alt. Soc. Tosc. Pisa, ix. C. K. Hoff- 
mann, 44 Anatomie d :> Retina d. Amph. Rept. u. Vogel. Niederl.," 
Arch. Zool. (1875), iii, M. Borysiekiewicz, Retina v. Chamaeleo 
vulgaris (Leipzig, 1889), 7 pis. M. Weber, 44 Nebenorgane d. Auges 
d. Reptil.," Arch. f. Naturg. (1897), 43- E. Clason, 44 Gefiororgan 
d. Eidechsen," Anatom.'Studien (Leipzig, 1873). C. Hasse, 4I Gehor- 
organ d. Krokodile," &c, ibid; 44 Gehororgan d. Schildkroeten, 
von Tropidonotus natrix," ibid. G. Retzius, Gehororgan d. Wir~ 
bclthiere, i. (Stockholm, 1881). 

Muscles.— O. C. Bradley, " Muscles of Mastication of Lacertilia," 
Zool. Jahrb. Anat. (1902), 18, pp. 475-488. M. Furbringer, 44 Ver- 
gleich. Anatomie d. Schultermuskeln," Jena Zeitschr. (1873), vii. 
PP- 237-320; (1874), vii. pp. 175-280; (1900), xxx. pp. 215-718; 
Morph. Jahrb. (1875), j. pp. 636-816; Knochen u. Muskeln d. 
schlangenahnlichen Saurier (Leipzig, 1870). H. Gadow, 44 Bauch- 
mu skein d. Crocod. Eidechs. Schildkroeten," Morph. Jahrb. (1882), 
vii. pp. 57-100, pi.; I4 Myologie d. hinteren Extremitaet d. Rep- 
tilien," ibid. (1882), vii. pp. 327-466, pis. G. M. Humphrey, 

14 Muscles of Pseudopus," Journ. An. Phys. (1872), vii. G. Killian, 
11 Ohrmuskeln d. Crocodile," Jen. Zeitschr. (1890), xxiv. pp. 632- 
656, pi. F. Maurer, 4I Ventrale Rumpfmuskulatur d. Reptil.," 
Festschr. f. Gegenbaur (1896), i. St G. Mivart, " Muscles of Iguana," 
P.Z.S. (1867), p. 766; "of Chamaeleon," ibid. (1870), p. 850. N. 
Ros6n, 4I Kaumuskeln d. Schlangen u. Giftdruese," Zool. Anz. 
(1906), 28, pp. 1-7. A. Sanders, " Muscles of Platydactylus," 
P.Z.S. (1870), p. 413; 4< of Liolepis," ibid. (1872), p. 154; 44 of Phry- 
rosoma," ibid. (1874), p. 71; F. Walther, 4I Visceral skelett u. Mus- 
kulatur b. Amph. u. Rept.," Jen. Zeitschr. (1887), xxi. pp. 1-45, pis. 

Respiratory System. — F. E. Beddard, " Trachea and Lungs of 
Ophiophagus bungarus," P.Z.S. (1903), pp. 319-328. G. Butler, 
44 Suppression of one Lung in various Reptiles," ibid. (1895), 
p. 691. S. H. Gage, " Pharyngeal Respiration in the Soft-shelled 
Turtle," Proc. Am. Ass. Adv. Sci. (1884), pp. 316-318; and Amer. 
Nat. (1886), xx. pp. 233-236. J. Henle, Vergl. anat. Beschreibung 
d. Kehlkopfes (1839). F. Siebenrock, 44 Kehlkopf 'u. Luftroehre d. 
Schildkroeten," Sitzb. Ak. Wien (1899), 108, pp. 563-595, pis. 
G. Tornier, " Kopflappen u. Halsluftsaecke bei Chamaeleonen," 
Zool. Jahrb. Anat. (1904), 21, pp. 1-40, pis. D. Bertelli, " Pieghe 
dei reni primitivi nei Rettili. Contribute alio sviluppo del dia- 
framma,'M//t Soc. Toscan (Pisa, 1896), 15, (1898), 16. I. Bromann, 
Entwicklung d. Bursa omentalis und aehnlicher Recessbildungen 
(Wiesbaden, 1904). G. Butler, 4< Subdivision of Body-cavity in 
Lizards, Crocodiles and Birds," P.Z.S. (1892), pp. 452-474, 4 pis.; 
*' Subdivision of Body-cavity in Snakes," ibid. (1892), pp. 477- 
497, pi. 6; "The Fat Bodies of the Sauropsida," ibid. (1889), 
p. 602, pis. 59-60. F. Hochstetter, Scheidewandbildungen in d. 
Leibeshohle der Krokodile, Voeltzkow, Reise in Ostafrika, vol. iv. 
pp. 141^206, pis. 11-15 (Stuttgart, 1906). 

Vascular System. — F. E. Beddard, various papers on vascular 
system of Ophidia and Lacertilia, P.Z.S. (1904); "Notes on 
Anatomy of Boidae," ibid. (1903), pp. 107-121. F. Et Beddard 
and P. C. Mitchell, 44 Structure of Heart of Alligator," ibid. 
1895). A. Greil, " Herz u. Truncus arteriosus d. Wirbelthiere 
teptilien," Morph. Jahrb. (1903), 3i» pp. 123-310, pis. O. Grosser 
and E. Brezina, 44 Entwickl. Venen d. Kopfes u. Halses bei Reptil.," 



i 



Morph. Jahrb. (1895), pp. 289-325, pis. 20 and 21. F. Hochstetter, 



,, 1902J; " Blutgefa_ 
System d. Krokodile," Voeltzkow, Reise in Ostafrika (Stuttgart, 
1906, iv.). A. Langer, 44 Entwickl. Bulbus cordis bei Amph. u. 
Rept.," Morph. Jahrb. (1894), pp. 40-67. J. Y. Mackay, '* Arterial 
System of Vertebrates, homologically considered," Memoirs and 
Memoranda in Anatomy (London and Edinburgh, 1889), i. B. 
Panizza, Sopra il sistema linfatico dei rettili (Pavia, 1833). C. 
Roese, 44 Vergl. Anat. d. Herzens d. Wirbelthiere," Morph. Jahrb. 
(1890), 16, pp. 27-96, pis. A. Sabatier, £tudes sur le cceur el la 
circulation centrale (Paris, 1873); " Transformat. du systdme 
aortique," Ann. Sc. Nat. Ser. (1874), 5, T. 19. H. Watney, " Minute 
Anatomy of Thymus," Phil. Trans. (1882), 173, pp. 1063-1123, 
pis. 83-95. ' 

Urino-genital System. — J. E. V. Boas, " Morphol. d." Begattungs- 
organe d. Wirbelth.," Morph. Jahrb. (1891), xvii. pp. 171-287, 
pi. 16. J, Budge, 4i Das Harnreservoir d. Wirbelthiere," Neu 
Vort>ommern, Mittheil. 7J1875), pp. 20-128, p], W. R. Coe and 
B. W. Kunkel, 4i Reproduct. Org. of Amelia," Amer. Natural. (1904), 
38, pp. 487-400. H. Gadow, rt Cloaca and Copulatory Organs of 
the Amniota, Phil. Trans. B. (1887), pp. 5-37, pis. 2-5. K. 
Hellmuth, " Kloake u. Phallus d. Schildkroeten u. Krokodile," 
Morph. Jahrb. (1902), 30, pp. 582-613. F. v. Moeller, " Urogenital- 
system d. Schildkroeten," Zeitschr. wiss. Zool., 65, pp. 573-598, 
pis. F. W. Pickel, "Accessory Bladders* of Testudinata," Zool. 
Bull. (1899), ii. pp. 291-301. F. Schoof, Zur Kenntniss d. Uro- 
genitalsystems d. Saurter. Arch. f. Naturg. (1888), 54, p. 62. P. 
Unterhoessel, 44 Kloake u. Phallus d. Eidechsen u. Schlangen," 
Morph. Jahrb. (1902), 30, pp. 541-581. O. Schmidtgen, 41 Cloake 
und ihre Organe bei Schildkroter," Zool. Jahrb. (1907), pp. 357-412, 
pl- 32, 33- (H. F. G.) 

IV. Distribution in Space 

This zoo-geographical review deals only with modern reptiles. 
We begin with a survey of the faunas of some of the most obvious 
land-complexes which bear close resemblance to the now 
classical " regions " of P. L. Sclater and A. R. Wallace. None of 
these " regions " has definable frontiers, and what acts as a bar to 
one family may be totally ignored by another. According to the 
several orders of reptiles the world is mapped out in very different 
ways. The African fauna does not stop at the Suez Canal, 
nor even at the Red Sea; there is a transitional belt notice- 
able in the countries from Syria to Arabia, Persia and India. 
To the north, Indian influence extends right into Turkestan, 
or vice versa; the Central Asiatic fauna passes into that of India. 
On the Chinese side prevailing conditions are still almost un- 
known; Wallace's line is more or less rigidly respected by 
Trionychidae, hooded Elaps, vipers and Lacertidae, while it has 
not the slightest influence upon crocodiles, pit vipers, Varanidae, 
Agamidae, &c. In the western hemisphere we have a grand 
illustration of the interchange of two faunas and of the fact 
that it is neither a narrow strait nor an equally narrow isthmus 
which decides the limitation of two regions. Central America 
and the Antilles form one complex with S. America. The nearctic 
region ends at the edge of the great Mexican plateau, which 
itself is a continuation of the north continent. Many nearctic 
forms have passed southwards into the tropics, even into far- 
off S. America, but the majority of the southerners, in their 
northern extension, have been checked by this plateau and have 
surged to the right and left along the Pacific and Atlantic 
tropical coastlands. The present writer happens to have made 
a special s^udy of this part of the world (cf. "The Distribution of 
Mexican Amphibians and Reptiles," P.Z.S., 1905, pp. 191-294); 
the N. and S. American faunas have therefore been more fully 
treated in the following review of the various faunas. No 
doubt others can be treated in a similar manner, but the physical 
features between N. and S. America are unique, and the results 
are closely paralleled by those' of the fauna of birds. The 
narrow and long neck of the isthmus of Panama (once no doubt 
much broader) is no boundary; if the meeting of N. and S. 
had taken place there, that narrow causeway would be crowded, 
and this is not the case. 

New Zealand. — The only recent reptiles are Sphenodon (q.v.) t 
which testifies to the great age of these islands; about half a dozen 
Scincidae of the genus Lygosoma, members of a cosmopolitan 
family; and some few geckos, e.g. Naultinus, of a family of great 



DISTRIBUTION] 



REPTILES 



*73 



age, world-wide distribution and with exceptional facilities of 
distribution. 

Australian Region,— Of crocodiles only C. johnstoni in N. 
Australia and Queensland; C. porosus on the N. coast, and occur- 
ring on various Pacific islands, as far E. as the Fiji Islands. Tor- 
toises are represented only by the plcurodirous Chelydidae, e.g. 
Chelodina; they are absent in Tasmania and on the Pacific islands. 
New Guinea possesses the aquatic Carettochelys, sole type of a 
family. 

The bulk of the Laccrtilian fauna is composed of skinks, geckos, 
agamoids and Varanidae, with the addition of a small family 
which is peculiar to the region, the Pygopodidae. A peculiar type, 
Dibamus, inhabits the borderlands, namely, New Guinea, the 
Moluccas, Celebes and the Nicobar Islands; and, finally, a single 
iguanoid, Brachylophus, is common in the Fiji Islands; how it 
came there, or how it survived its severance from the American 
stock, is a mystery. The skinks are in this region more highly 
developed and more specialized than in any other part of the world ; 
they exceed in numbers the geckos, which generally accompany the 
skinks in their range over the smaller islands of the Pacific; in these 
islands members of these two families represent the whole of the 
Lacertilian fauna. The Australian agamoids are chiefly peculiar 
and partly much 'differentiated forms (e.g. Moloch and Chlamy- 
dosaurus), but some have distinct affinities to, or are even identical 
with, Indian genera. The Varanidae are also closely allied to 
Indian species. 

Of snakes, amounting to about one hundred species only, we note 
about one dozen Typhlopidae, and of Python inae simply Python, 
and the Boine Eny^rus on the islands from New Guinea to Fiji. 
There arc but surprisingly few innocuous colubrine snakes, scarcely 
a dozen, and all belonging to Indian genera. The bulk of the 
snakes belong to the poisonous Elapinae, all of genera peculiar to 
the region, e.g. Acanthophis, Pseudechis, Notechis. Such a prepon- 
derance of poisonous over harmless snakes is found nowhere else 
in the world. Tasmania is tenanted by poisonous snakes only. 
In Australia 'we meet, therefore, with 'the interesting fact that, 
whilst it is closely allied to S. America, but totally distinct from 
India by its Chelonians, its lizards and colubrine snakes connect 
it with this latter region. With regard to the other Ophidians, 
they have their nearest allies partly in India, partly in Madagascar, 
partly in S. America; and the character of the Australian snake 
fauna consists chiefly in its peculiar composition, differing thereby 
more from the other equatorial regions than those do among them- 
selves. ^ Wallace's line marks the boundary between India and 
Australia only as far as Chelonians are concerned, but it is quite 
effaced by the distribution of lizards and snakes. Thus in New 
Guinea lizards of the Indian region are mixed with Pygopodidae, 
and an island as far E. as Timorlaut is inhabited by snakes, some of 
which are peculiarly Indian, whilst the others are as decidedly 
Australian. The islands N. of New Guinea and of Melanesia are 
not yet occupied by the Ophidian type, and only species of Enygrus 
have penetrated eastwards as far as the Low Archipelago, whilst 
the Fiji Islands and the larger islands of Melanesia have sufficiently 
long been raised above the level of the sea to develop quite peculiar 
genera of snakes. 

Indian Region.— Of Crocodilia C. paluslris, the " mugger " or 
marsh crocodile, and C. porosus ; Gavialis gangelicus; Tomistoma 
schlegeli in Borneo, Malacca and Sumatra. Of tortoises Platy- 
sternum megacephalum, type of a family from Siam to S. China; 
many Trionychidae and Testudinidae, mostly aquatic; whilst the 
terrestrial Testudo is very scantily represented. One sDecies which 
is common in the Indian peninsula (T. stellata) is so similar to an 
African species as to have been considered identical with it; the 
Burmese tortoise is also closely allied to it, and the two others 
extend far into western-central Asia. Thus this type is to be 
considered rather an immigrant from its present headquarters, 
Africa, than a survivor of the Indian Tertiary fauna, which com- 
prised the most extraordinary forms of land tortoises. Wallace's 
line marks the E. boundary of Trionyx; species of this genus are 
common in Java and Borneo, and occur likewise in the Philippine 
Islands, but are not found in Celebes, Amboyna or any of the other 
islands E. of Wallace's line. Agamidae are exceedingly numerous, 
and are represented chiefly by arboreal forms, e.g. Draco (q.v.) is 
peculiar to the region, Ceratophora and Lyriocephalus exclusively 
Ceylonese; terrestrial forms, like Agama and Uromastix, inhabit 
the hot and sandy plains in the N.W., and pass uninterruptedly 
into the fauna of western-central Asia and Africa. The Geckonidae, 
Scincidae and Varanidae are likewise well represented, but without 
.giving a characteristic feature to the region by special modification 
of the leading forms except the gecko Ptychozoon homalocephalum 
in Malaya. The Lacerticlae are represented by one characteristic 
genus, Tachydromus — Ophiops and Cabrita being more developed 
beyond the limits assigned to this region. Finally, the Euble- 
pharidae and Anguidae, families whose living representatives are 
probably the scattered remains of once widely and more generally 
distributed types, have retained respectively two species in W. 
India, and one in the Khasi Hills, whilst the presence of a single 
species of chameleon in S. India and Ceylon reminds us again of the 
relations of this part of the fauna to that of Africa. 



The Indian region excels all the other tropical countries in the great 
variety of genuine types and numbers of species of snakes. Boulenger 1 
recognizes 267 species, i.e. about one-fifth of the total number of 
snakes known. India is the only country in the world possessing 
viperinc, crotaline and elapine poisonous snakes (their proportion 
to harmless snakes being about 1 : 10), e.g. Vipera russelli, the 
"daboia " (see Viper) ; Lachesis, e.g. gramineus, an arboreal 
pit viper; Naja tripudians, the cobra; Bungarus coeruleus, the 
1 krait " ; ^ Catlophis ; and Hydrophinac along the coasts of the 
whole region. Several sub-families and families arc peculiar to 
the region: the Uropeltidae with Rhinophis in southern India, 
and Uropeltis confined to Ceylon; llysiidae in Ceylon and Malay 
Islands, elsewhere only in S. America; the opisthoglyphous Elachis- • 
todon westermanni of Bengal; the Homalopsinae, with many species 
from Bengal to N. Australia; further the Amblycephalidae; 
Xenopeltis unicolor, sole type of a family; and the Acrochordinae, 
a sub-family of aglyphous Colubridae, ranging from the Khasi 
Hills to New Guinea. Of other Colubridae, we notice numerous 
Tropidonotus, Coronella and Zamenis, the latter one of the most 
characteristic types of the warmer parts of Eurasia. Tree-snakes, 
e.g. Dipsas and Dendrophis, are common. Of other families we note 
a great number of Typhlopidae, of which 7\ braminus occurs even 
on Christmas Island. Lastly various species of Python , but no 
Glauconiidae, the only family not represented in the Indian region, 
which claims the Uropeltidae, Xenopeltidae and Amblycephalidae 
as peculiar to itself. 

Giinthcr remarks that to this region Japan has to be referred. 
This is clearly shown by the presence of species oi Ophites, Callophis, 
Trimeresurus s. Lachesis, Tachydromus, characteristically Indian 
forms, with which species of Clemmys, Trionyx, Gecko, Halys, 
and some Colubrines closely allied to Chinese and Central Asiatic 
species are associated. Halys is a central Asiatic pit viper. The 
few reptiles inhabiting the northern part of Japan are probably 
of palaearctic origin. 

The African Continent.— Of crocodiles, C. vulgaris in the E., 
C. cataphractus and Osteolaemus tetraspis in the W. There are many 
Chelonians, especially small land tortoises of Testudo, and with 
Cinyxis which is peculiar to this continent; the freshwater Clemmys 
only in the N.W. corner; several genera of the pleurodirous Pclo- 
medusidae, Pelomedusa galeata, which is equatorial and southern, 
with an outlying occurrence in the Sinai peninsula, and Sternothaerus 
with several tropical and southern species; of Trionychidae the 
tropical Cycloderma and Cyclanorbis peculiar to the country, and 
the large Trionyx triunguts which ranges from the Senegal and 
Congo into the Nile system with its big lakes, but occurring also in 
Syria. 

Of Lacertilia the geckos and skinks, and the typically old world 
families of Lacertidae and Varanidae are well represented; also 
Amphisbaenidae; Gerrhosauridae and Zonuridae, peculiar to Africa 
and Madagascar; a few Eublepharinae and a few of the so-called 
Anelytropidae in West Africa. But the most important feature 
of this Lacertilian fauna is the almost universal distribution of 
chameleons in numerous and some highly specialized forms, Chame- 
leon and Rhampholeon. We note the entire absence of Iguanidae 
and of Anguidae, the latter represented by Ophisaurus only in the 
north-western corner. % 

p{ snakes only one sub-family is peculiar, the Rhachiodontinae 
with the sole species Dasypeltis scabra, the egg-swallowing snake. 
Many Typhlopidae and Glauconiidae, but no llysiidae; large 
pythons, Eryx in the N., and a boa, Pelophilus fordt in the W. of 
Africa. Of poisonous snakes there is an abundance, notably the 
Viperinae have their centre in this continent; besides Echis, which 
is also Indian, there ace peculiar to the continent Bitis, the puff- 
adder, Causus, Atractaspis, Cerastes, and Atheris which is an arboreal 
genus, alllof which see under Viper. The pit vipers are entirely 
absent. Elapinae are numerous, e.g. hooded cobras like Naja 
haje and Sepedon the " ringhals." Many opisthoglyphous tree 
snakes and a considerable number of innocuous colubrines, e.g. 
Lycodon, Psammophis and Coronella or closely allied genera all also 
in India, but Coluber-\ike forms and Tropidonotus are very scantily 
represented, chiefly in the N. 

On the whole the reptilian fauna of Africa is not rich, considering 
the huge size of the continent, but this may be accounted for by the 
great expanse of desert in the N. half and of veld in the S. Lastly, 
the enormous central forests are still scarcely explored. 

Madagascar and certain other islands have a fauna which is as 
remarkable for its deficiencies as it is for its present forms. The 
following well-defined groups are absent: Trionychidae and Chely- 
didae ; Agamidae, Lacertidae, Anguidae, Amphisbaenidae, Varanidae 
and Eublepharinae; all the Viperidae and Elapinae, so that this 
large island enjoys perfect absence of poisonous snakes, not counting 
the practically harmless opisthoglyphous tree snakes; there are 
further no pythons and no ilysias. 

The actual fauna consists of: Crocodilus vulgaris, which is said 
to be extremely abundant; of Chelonians, Pelomedusa galeata and 



^The same # authority enumerates 536 species of reptiles for~ 
British India, i.e. about one-sixth of all the recent species of reptiles 
(Fauna of British India, edit. W. T. Blanford, London, 1890). 



174 



REPTILES 



[DISTRIBUTION 



Sternothaerus, both also in Africa, Podocnemis, which elsewhere 
occurs in South America onry, and several Testudinidae ; of these 
Pyxis is peculiar to Madagascar, while Testudo has. furnished the 
gigantic tortoises of Aldabra, the Seychelles, and recently extinct 
in Mauritius and Madagascar. Of lizards are present a few Gerrho- 
sauridae and Zonuridae, both African types; the remarkable 
occurrence of two iguanid genera Chalarodon and Hoplurus, both 
peculiar to the island; skinks, many geckos, and Uroplates, sole 
type of the Uroplatinae and an abundance of chameleons, of the 
genera Chameleon, with Ch. parsoni, the giant of the family, and the 
small species of Brookesia, a genus peculiar to Madagascar. Of 
snakes we note Typhlopidae and Glauconiidae, and the remarkable 
occurrence of Boinae, two of the genus Boa (Pelophilus) , one of 
Corallus on the main island and Casarea on Round Island. There 
are opisthoglyphous mostly arboreal snakes, and the rest are 
innocuous colubrines, some few with Indian and African affinities, 
e.g. Zamenis s. Ptyas, more with apparently S. American relation- 
ship, or at least with resemblance in taxonomic characters. 

An analysis of this peculiarly compound and deficient fauna 
gives surpnsing results, namely, the almost total absence of affinity 
with the Indian region, close connexion with Africa by the posses- 
sion of Gerrhosaundae, Zonuridae, Chameleons and Pelomedusidae ; 
lastly, the presence of several tree boas, of Podocnemis and of Iguani- 
dae, i.e. families and^ genera which we are accustomed to consider 
as typically neo-tropical. Peculiar to Madagascar, autochthonous 
and very ancient, is only Uroplates. Ancient are also the tortoises, 
chameleons, geckos, boas, typhlops, gerrhosaurids and zonurids. 
The absent families may be as ancient as the others, but most of 
them," notably Varanus, lacertids and agamids are of distinctly 
northern, palaeotropical origin, and we can conclude with certainty 
that they had not spread into S. Africa before Madagascar and its 
satellites became severed from the continent. 

Europe and Temperate Asia. — The present reptilian fauna 
of this vast area is composed almost entirely of the leavings of those 
groups which are now flourishing with manifold differentiations 
under more genial climes, in Africa and India. Fossils, none too 
numerous, tell us that it was not always thus, since crocodiles, 
alligators and long-snouted gavials, all the main groups of chelo- 
nians, iguanoids, &c, existed in England^ the crocodilians persisting 
even towards the end of the Tertiary period. 

There are no crocodiles now in the Eurasian sub-region, excepting 
small survivors in the Jordan basin, on the borderland of Africa; 
but the Yang-tse-Kiang is inhabited by an alligator, A. sinensis, while 
all its congeners are now in America. This finds, to a certain 
extent, a parallel in Trionyx, of which one species lives in the Eu- 
phrates basin, likewise borderland, and another, T. maacki, in rivers 
of N. China, e.g. in the Amoor. Of other Chelonians we note several 
species of Testudo, two of them European; Emys europaea, chiefly 
in Europe, with the other species E. btandingi in the eastern United 
States; and a few species of Clemmys, a truly periarctic genus. 

*Of Lacertilia we exclude the chameleon. Of geckos Hemidac- 
tylus turcicus extends from Portugal to Karachi; Platydactylus 
facetanus is at home in most S. Mediterranean countries; Teratos- 
cincus is peculiar to the steppes and deserts of Turkestan and 
Persia; other geckos in the transitional region from Asia Minor 
to India. Of Lacertaewe have Anguidae, Agamidae, Lacertidae, 
Amphisbaenidae and Scincidae, most of them in Europe represented 
by but one or two species. Thus Blanus cinereus in Mediterranean 
countries, Asia Minor and Syria, represents the Amphisbaenidae 
which are found nowhere else in Europe or Asia, but plentiful in 
Africa and both Americas. Of the Anguidae, Anguis fragilis is 
peculiar to Europe, Ophisaurus apus in S.E. Europe, another in 
Indo-Burman countries, with the rest of the species in N. America. 
Of Scincidae few in Europe, e.g. Chalcides s. Seps s. Gongylus, others 
from Asia Minor eastwards, e.g. Scincus, and Ablepharus in Turke- 
stan. Agamidae do not^ occur in Europe but they exist in considerable 
numbers from Asia Minor and Turkestan to China, with Phryno- 
cephalus peculiar to central Asia. Lastly, the Lacertidae, of which 
several species of Lacerta, Psammodromus, Acanthodactylus in 
Europe, but the majority in Africa and warmer parts of India; in 
a similar manner the Manchurian forms are related to Chinese. 

The total number of palaearctic snakes amounts to about sixty, 
the majority living in the Mediterranean countries and in W. Asia. 
One Typhlops in the Balkan peninsula and in W. Asia, in Persia 
also Glauconia; Eryx jaculus extends into Greece from S.W. Asia 
as sole representative of the Boidae. Several vipers, the common 
viper, V. oerus, from Wales to Saghalien Island, V. aspis, V. latastei 
and V, ammodytes in S. Europe; a pit viper, Ancistrodon, e.g. halys, 
in the Caspian district, thence this genus through China and again in 
N. America. Echis extends N. into Turkestan. The Indian cobra 
ranges N. to Transcaspia and far into China. All the other snakes 
belong to the aglyphous and opisthoglyphous Colubridae; of the 
latter Coelopeltis is peculiar to S. Europe and S.W. Asia; Macro- 
protodon cucullatus to.S. Spain, the Balearic Islands and N. Africa; 
Tephrometopon peculiar to Turkestan and neighbouring countries; 
none extending into E. Asia. Of the aglyphous colubrines the most 
characteristic genus is Zamenis inch Zaocys, very widely spread and 
including more species than any other palaearctic genus; several 
species of the wide-ranging genus Tropidonotus, besides Coluber, 



with Rhinechis scalar is in S.W. Europe. There are, besides, other 
genera, especially in the debatable countries of S.W. Asia, Persia 
and Afghanistan, and speaking generally the colubrines show less 
affinity to African than to Indian forms, just as we should expect 
from the prevailing geographical conditions. If it were not for the 
N.W. corner of Africa and portion of its N. coast, the European 
fauna would have very little in common with Africa. 

North America. — Of this huge continent only the United States 
and Mexico come into consideration, since N. of 45 latitude reptilian 
life is very scarce. The area, however, with these restrictions, is 
larger than the Indian and Malay countries, and larger than the 
Australian region. Yet the fauna is comparatively poor, very poor 
indeed, if it were not for Mexico and the Sonoran province, wnich 
seems to be the ancient centre of distribution of much of the present 
typically N. American fauna. 

Characteristic of the area is the abundance 'of Chelonians and 
Iguanidae, to which Tejidae have to be added in the S.; equally 
characteristic is the complete absence of Pleurodirous Chelonians, 
of Chameleons, Agamidae, Lacertidae, Varanidae and Viperinae. 
The fauna is composed as follows: Crocodilia, with Crocodilus 
americanus and Alligator mississippiensis in the S. Of Chelonians 
the Chelydridae, peculiar to the E. half but for the reappearance of 
a species of Chelydra in Central America; many Cinosternidae like- 
wise almost peculiar to the area; of Testudinidae an abundance of 
freshwater forms, notably Chrysemys, and Emys in common with 
Europe, whilst terrestrial tortoises are extremely scanty, namely 
one species of Testudo, T. polyphemus, the gopher, and two of 
Cistuajo, e.p C. carolina\ lastly^ two Trionyx in the whole of the 
Mississippi basin and thence N. into Lake Winnipeg, 51 N. Lacer- 
tilia : Geckos are very scarce ; N. ^ America has received only 
Sphaerodactylus notatus from the Antilles into Florida, and Phyllo- 
dactylus tuberculosus into California from the Pacific side of Mexico ; 
Eublepharinae are absent. Of Iguanidae we have a typically 
Sonoran set, e.g. Crotaphytus, Holbrookia, Uta, Phrynosoma, Scelo- 
porus, and a S. set of which only Anolis extends out of the tropics. 
It is significant that only a few species of Sceloporus and Phrynosoma 
extend into the United States, although far N.; ofthe large genus 
Anolis only A. carolinensis enters Texas to Carolina. Sceloporus 
may be called the most characteristic genus of Sonoraland and 
Mexico. Of the tropical ^ family of ^ Tejidae only Cnemidophorus, 
with many species in Mexico, a few in the adjoining N. states, and 
with C. sexltneatus over the greater part of the Union. Anguidae: 
Ophisaurus ventralis in the United States; the other species in the 
Old World. Diploglossus peculiar to mountains of Mexico. Gerrho- 
natus, the main genus, centred in Mexico, but G. coeruleus ranges 
from Costa Rica along the Pacific side right into British Columbia, 
the most northern instance of a New World reptile. 

Xenosaurus grandis of Mexican mountains is the monotype of a 
family, and the same would apply to Heloderma (H. suspectum, the 
Gila monster of the hottest lowland parts of Arizona and New 
Mexico; and H. horridum of Mexico) if it were not for Lanthanotus 
of Borneo. Scincidae*. of this cosmopolitan family America 
possesses the smallest number, and it is significant that the number 
of species decreases from N. to S.; Eumeces from Minnesota and 
Massachusetts through Mexico, with many species, and Lygosoma s. 
Mocoa laterale from S.E. and Central States to Mexico. Xantusiidae, 
a small family, is composed of a N. or Sonoran and a S. or Central 
American-Antillean group; e.g. Xantusia of the deserts of Nevada 
and California. Amelia, monotype of a family of California to El 
Paso, Texas, i.e. peculiar to Sonoraland, Amphisbaenidae with 
Rhineura in Florida and the marvellous Chirotes in Lower California 
and the^ Pacific side of Mexico; the other members of this family 
are tropical so far as America is concerned. 

Snakes: of Typhlopidae only Anomalepis mexicana, peculiar to 
Nuevo Leon; of Glauconiidae several extending N. into Texas and 
Florida. Boinae continue N. as the arenicolous Lichanura of Lower 
California and Arizona, and the likewise arenicolous Charina bottae 
which extends from California to the state of Washington; the 
other members of the family are all tropical, extra-regional. Of 
Viperidae only pit vipers occur, but of them rattlesnakes cover the 
whole of the habitable area; Ancistrodon, without a rattle, e.g. the 
moccasin snake and the water viper, has other species in central 
and E. Asia. Of Elapinae, far into the E. United States only the 
genus Elaps with a few species, of which E. fulvius, the commonest, 
ranges from S. Brazil far into the S. and E. states. A few opis* 
thoglyphous, terrestrial, snakes just enter the United States^ from 
Mexico, e.g. Trimorphodon. Of aglyphous colubrines species of 
genera like or resembling Tropidonotus, Coronella and Coluber, in- 
cluding Pityophis and Spilotes, are abundant, the latter being very 
characteristic; Ischnognathus and Contia, Ficimia and Zaments 
likewise are clearly nearctic, or Sonoran. 

The Greater Antilles have essentially neotropical, is* Central 
American and S. American affinities, but there is also some^ Sonoran 
infusion. — There is Crocodilus americanus*, no Chelonians are 
natives except one or two Chrysemys. Of Lacertilia, geckos are 
abundant; of Iguanidae several arboreal forms, notably the large 
Iguana, and Melopoceras of Haiti, and Cyclura, both peculiar; 
of Anguidae Celestus, peculiar, but closely allied to Diploglossus; 
of Xantusiidae the peculiar genus Cricosaura s. Cricolepts. Of 



DISTRIBUTION] 



REPTILES 



!75 



Amphisbaenidae Amphisbaena itself occurs in Puerto Rico and on 
the Virgin Islands. Of Tejidae only Ameiva, not Cnemidophorus. 
Snakes : a Typhlops in Puerto Rico ; of boas Epicrates, Ungalia and 
Corallus, the latter re-occurring in Madagascar. Absent are: 
Viperidae, Elapinae and Opisthoglyphs; of aglyphous colu- 
bnnes the Central American genera Urotheca, Dromicus, Drymobius 
and Leptophis; the genera of distinctly northern origin. 

South and Central America. — The fauna is very rich. It 
is advisable first to mention those groups which are either confined 
to Central America (including the hot lowlands of Mexico), e.g. the 
Dermatemydidae, Eublephannae, Anelytropsis and the aglyphous 
colubrines: Urotheca, Dromicus^ Drymobius, Leptophis, Rkadinea, 
Streptophorus, or which, from their N. centre have sent some genera 
into Central America, or beyond into the S. continent; eg. Chelydra 
rossignoni, ranging from Guatemala to Ecuador; one Cinosternum 
extending into Guiana; Testudo tabulate, the only terrestrial 
tortoise of S. America, besides the gigantic creatures of the Gala- 
pagos Islands; a few Eublepharinae reaching Ecuador; of Anguidae 
Gerrhonotus coeruleus, extending S. to Costa Rica; of Scincidae, 
Mabuia and Lygosoma, which extend far into S. America, and the 
same applies to the Amphisbaenidae. Immigrants from the N. are 
probably also the Iguanidae, although they have found a congenial 
home in the S. countries, where they are now represented by an 
abundance of genera and species, e.g. Laemanctus and Corytho- 
phanes of Mexico, A nolis, Iguana, Basiliscus, Ctenosaura, Polychrus, 
Hoplurus, Chalarodon. Amongst snakes the following appear to 
be of N. origin: Boidae (with the Pythonine Loxocaetnus tricolor in 
Mexico), in spite of their great development of boas and anacondas 
in the S. ; certainly Crotalinae, of which only one species, C. terrificus, 
is found in S. America; further, some aglyphous colubrines, which 
have sent a few species only into Central, and still fewer into 
S. America,* e.g. Tropidonotus, Ischnognathus, Contia* Ficimia, 
Coluber, Spilotes, Pityophis, Coronella* and Zamenis. 

After these numerous restrictions we^ should expect the genuine 
autochthonous fauna of the S. American continent to be very 
scanty, especially if we remember those important Old World groups 
which are absent in America, e.g. Varanidae, Lacertidae, Agamidae 
and chameleons, and that Central and S. America have no Triony- 
chidae. The oldest S. American reptilian fauna is composed as 
follows. It is the only part of the world which possesses Chelydidae 
in abundance, e.g. of Chelys the Matamata, Hydromedusa, and of 
Pelomedusidae, Podocnemis, which re-occurs in Madagascar. Cro- 
codilia are represented by Crocodilus americanus and C. moreleti 
in the N. and by about five species of Caiman. Of LacertiHa geckos 
are rather few, mostly in the N.W. of the continent, more numerous 
in Central America and the Antilles. The Tejidae are clearly a 
neotropical family, with several dozen genera in S. America; of all 
these, only Ameiva and the closely allied Cnemidophorus extend 
through and beyond Central America: Ameiva into the E. and W. 
hot lands of Mexico and into the Antilles, Cnemidophorus through 
Mexico far into most of the United States with a few species. Of 
snakes there is an abundance. Typhlopidae and Glauconiidae are 
well represented. Of aglyphous colubrines many genera, some of 
these extending northwards into Mexico, but not to the Antilles, 
e.g. A trades f Tropidodipsas, Dirosema, Geophis, Xenodon. 

Opisthoglypha are very numerous in genera and species both in 
S. and Central America, whence many of the arboreal forms extend 
into the hot countries of Mexico, while a few terrestrials have 
spread over the plateau and thence into the United States, none 
entering the Antilles; such typical neotropical genera are Himan- 
todes, Leptodira, Oxyrhopus, Erythrolamprus, Conophis, Scolecophis, 
Homalocranium, Petalognathus, Leptognathus. Most of the Ambly- 
cephalidae are neotropical, the others in S.E. Asia. Of Elapinae 
only the genus Elaps occurs, but with many species. Of the Cro- 
talinae, Lachesis is the essentially neotropical genus, with many 
species, some of which enter the hot lands of Mexico, e.g. LAansbergi 
s. lanceolatus, a very widely distributed species, the only pit viper 
which has entered the Lower Antilles. 

The above survey of the world shows that but very few of the 
principal families of reptiles are peculiar to only one of the main 

regions." The occurrence of some freak, constituting a little 
family or sub-family by itself in some small district, and therefore 
put down as peculiar to a whole wide region, cannot be much of 
a criterion, e.g. Rhachiodon, Elachistodon, Acrochordinae, Uroplates, 
Xenosaurus t Heloderma, Aniellidae, Dibamus, Anelytropidae, 
Platysternum. They are not characteristic of large countries, but 
rather local freaks. Quite a number of very ancient families have 
such a wide distribution that they also are of little critical value, 
notably the peropodous snakes, which have survivors in almost any 
tropical country; such cosmopolitans are also geckos and skinks. 

A difficulty which is ever present in such zoogeographical in- 
vestigations is the uncertainty as to whether our zoological families 
and sub-families and even genera are genuine units, or heterogeneous 
compounds, as for instance the Anelytropidae, of which degraded 
skinks there is one in Mexico, two others in W. Africa. Heloderma 
in Mexico and Lanthanotus in Borneo are both without much doubt 
descendants of some Anguid stock, but when we now combine them, 
in deference to our highest authority, as one family, we thereby 
raise the tremendous problem of the present distribution of this 



family. Boas and pythons are likewise not above suspicion, cf. 
some boas in Madagascar and the python Loxocaetnus in Mexico. 
The opisthoglyphous coldbrines are almost certainly not a natural 
group, not to speak of numerous genera of the aglyphous assembly. 
To avoid arguing in a circle, such doubtful units had better be 
avoided whilst building hypotheses. 

G. Pfeffer has recently endeavoured to show by an elaborate 
careful paper (" Zoogeographische Beziehungen Stidamerikas," Zool. 
Jahrb. % Suppl. viii., 1905), " that nearly all the principal groups of 
reptiles, amphibians and fishes had formerly a universal or sub- 
universal distribution, and that therefore it is not necessary to 
assume a direct land connexion of S. America with either Africa or 
Australia, with or without an Antarctic." Many cases of such a 
former universal distribution are undoubtedly true, but the question 
remains how the respective creatures managed to attain it. 

For true characterization of large areas we must resort to the 
combination of some of the large wide-ranging families, and equally 
important is the absence of certain large groups; both to be 
selected from the following table. 





1 

1 


«4 


II 


1 

3 


1 


11 


if 

~2 


< 


Chelydridae l . 


• 


+ 


+ 

















Testudinidae . 


o* 


+ 


+ 


+ 


+ 


+ 


+ 





Chelydidae 





+ 

















+ 


Pelomedusidae 





+ 








+ 


+ 








Trionychidae 








+ 


+ 


+ 





+ 





Chamaeleonidae 














+ 


+ 








Varanidae 











o* 


+ 





+ 


+ 


Agamidae 











+ 


+ 





+ 


+ 


Iguanidae 


+ 


+ 


+ 








+ 








Lacertidae 











+ 


Vr- 





+ 





Zonuridae ^ ) 
Gerrhosauridae ) 






























+ 


+ 








Anguidae 


+ 


+ 


+ 


+ 


+» 





+ 





Amphisbaenidae 


+ 


+ 


+ 5 


+ 4 


+ 











Tejidae .... 


+ 


+ 

















0* 


Pygopodidae . 























+ 


Viperinae 











+ 


+ 





+ 





Crotalinae 





+ 


+ 


+• 








+ 





Elapinae 





+ 


+ 


+ 5 


+ 





+ 


+ 



1 Including the related Dermatemydidae and Cinosternidae. 

2 With an exception. 

3 Entering, or in the borderland. 

4 Mediterranean countries. 

6 Rhineura; formerly wider distribution. 
• In Asia. 

Deductions from this table show, for instance, that Australia is 
quite sufficiently characterized by the possession of Chelydidae 
and Varanidae; Madagascar by the presence of chameleons and 
Pelomedusidae. On the other hand, the separation of the whole of 
Africa from Asia, or the diagnosis of the palaearctic " region," would 
require the combination of several positive and negative characters. 

Chelonians are very diagnostic, expressed by the following com- 
binations of families: — 

America as a whole: Chelydridae and Cinosterridae and Der- 
matemydidae. 

N. America: Chelydridae and Trionychidae, but only E. of the 
Rockies. 

S. America: Chelydidae and Pelomedusidae. 

Africa: Trionychidae and Pelomedusidae. 

Madagascar: Pelomedusidae and Testudinidae. 

India and Eurasia: Trionychidae and Testudinidae. 

Australia: Chelydidae only. ^ 

That the Chelonians are regionally so very diagnostic that their 
main families are still in rational agreement with the main divisions 
of land, is perhaps due, first, to their being an ancient group ; secondly, 
to their limited means of distribution (none across the seas, omitting 
of course Cheloniidae, &c); and lastly, to their being rather in- 
different to climate. Note, for instance, Trionyx ferox from the 
Canadian lakes to the Gulf of Mexico, Cinosternum pennsylvanicum 
from New York to New Orleans. It may be taken for certain 
that wherever a Testudo occurs as a genuine native, it has got there 
by land, be the locality the Galapagos, Aldabra, Madagascar or 
some Malay islands. The Trionychidae reveal themselves as of 
periaortic origin, being debarred from Australia, Madagascar and 
the neotropical region (alleged from Eocene Patagonia). Testu- 
dinidae are cosmopolitan, excluding Australia, and practically also 
the Antilles; and Testudo is most instructive withits almost similar 
distribution; but something has gone wrong with this genus in 
America, where it flourished in mid-Tertiary times. 

Pleurodira are less satisfactory than they appear to be from a 
merely statistical point of view. The Pelomedusidae, being known 
from European Trias and from nearctic cretaceous formations, 



176 



REPTON— REPUBLIC 



may have had a world-wide distribution;^ but Chelydidae may 
well have centred in an antarctic continent. Chelydridae were 
periarctic and have disappeared from Eurasia; -N. American 
offshoots are the Cinosterridae and Dermatemydidae, the latter now 
restricted to Central American countries. 

Crocodilia, probably once universal, afford through the Chinese 
alligator an instance of the original intimate connexion of the 
whole holarctic region, paralleled by many other animals which 
now happen to be restricted to E. Asia and to eastern N. America. 

Lacertilia are less satisfactory^ for short diagnoses. America 
alone combines Iguanidae and Tejidae: — 

N. America: Iguanidae, Anguidae, Tejidae (and Rhineura in 
Florida). 

S. America: Iguanidae, Anguidae, Tejidae and many Amphis- 
baenidae. 

Africa and Madagascar: Chameleons and Zonuridae and Gerrho- 
sauridac. 

Madagascar: Chameleons and Iguanidae. 

India : Varanidae, Agamidae and Lacertidae, all of which also 
in Africa. 

Australia alone has Pygopodidae. 

The Lacertilia are now distributed upon principles very different 
from those of the tortoises. According to the lizards the world is 
divided into an E. and a W. half. The W. alone has Iguanidae 
and Tejidae, the E. alone that important combination of Varanidae 
and Agamidae. Further subdivision is in most cases possible only 
by exclusion, e.g. exclusion of Lacertilia and chameleons _ from 
Australia; of Varanidae and Agamidae from Madagascar. Lizards 
are rather susceptible to climatic conditions, infinitely more than 
water tortoises. 

As regards Ophidia, America has Crotalinae and Elapinae, but no 
Viperinae. Eurasia and India alone combines Viperinae, Crotalinae 
and Elapinae. Africa, Viperinae and Elapinae but no Crotalinae. 
Australia only Elapinae. Madagascar none of these groups. 

The Viperinae must have had their original centre in the palae- 
arctic countries, and they have been debarred only from Australia 
and Madagascar, Both vipers and pit vipers are still in Asia, 
but true vipers are absent in America, with their fullest develop- 
ment now in Africa, whilst pit vipers went E., covering now the 
whole of America, and having developed the rattlesnakes in Sonora- 
land. The Elapinae are undoubtedly of Asiatic origin; they have 
overrun Africa, were too late for Madagascar, but early enough for 
Australia, where they are only poisonous snakes; and only one 
genus, Elaps, has got into, or rather, has differentiated in America, 
in the S. of which it is abundant. 

Opisthoglypha are useless for our purpose; they are cosmopolitan, 
with the exception of Australia, but probably they have one 
ancient centre in S. America, and another in the ojd world. 

Amblycephalidae afford another of those curious instances of 
apparent affinity between S.E. Asia and Central America; paral- 
leled by Pelamis bicolor, which ranges from Madagascar to Panama, 
while all the other Hydrophinae belong to the Indian Ocean and 
the E. Asiatic seas. Aglyphous Colubrines show undoubted 
affinity between N. America and Eurasia; the whole group is 
absolutely cosmopolitan, and many of the genera, e.g. Coluber, 
Tropidonotus and Coronella, have proved their success by having 
acquired an enormous range. Snakes have comparatively few 
enemies, and they possess exceptional means of distribution. It 
is rare for a terrestrial species to have such a wide range as Crotalus 
terrificus, from Arizona to Argentina, or as the India cobra, which, 
like the tiger, is equally at home in Malay islands, Manchuria and 
Turkestan. 

The tortoises divide the habitable world into a S. and a N. world, 
much as do the anurous Batrachians; the lizards split it into an 
E. and a W. hemisphere. The poisonous snakes, the most recent 
of reptiles in their full development and distribution, allow us to 
distinguish between Australia, America and the rest of the world. 

(H. F. G.) 

REPTON, a village in the S. parliamentary division of Derby- 
shire, England, 8 m. S.W. of Derby, on the Midland railway. 
Pop. (1901) 1695. It is famous for its school, founded in 1557 
by Sir John Port, of the neighbouring village of Etwall, which has 
valuable entrance scholarships, and two leaving exhibitions to 
the universities annually. The number of boys is about 300. 
The school buildings are modern, but incorporate considerable 
portions of an Augustinian priory established in n 72. There was 
an ecclesiastical establishment on this site in the 7th century, 
the first bishop of Mercia being established here. This was 
destroyed by the Danes in 874. In the second half of the 10th 
century, during the reign of Edgar, another church was founded. 
The existing parish church of St Wystan retains pre-Conquest 
work in the chancel, beneath which is a remarkably fine vaulted 
crypt, probably dating from the reign of Edgar, its roof sup- 
ported on fluted columns. The monastery was dissolved by 
Henry VIII. 



REPUBLIC (Lat. respublica, a commonweal or common- 
wealth), a term now universally understood to mean a state, 
or polity, in which the head of the government is elective, and 
in which those things which are the interest of all are decided 
upon by all. This is notoriously a very modern interpretation 
of the term. In the ancient world of Greece and Rome the 
franchise was in the hands of a minority, who were surrounded 
by, and who governed, a majority composed of men personally 
free but not possessed of the franchise, and of slaves. Modern 
writers have often used respublica, and literal translation, as 
meaning only the state, even when the head was an absolute 
king, provided that he held his place according to law and ruled 
by law. " Republic," to quote one example only of many, was 
so used by Jean Bodin, whose treatise, commonly known by its 
Latin name De Republica Libri Sex, first appeared in French 
in 1577. Englishmen of the middle ages habitually spoke of 
the commonwealth of England, though they had no conception 
that they could be governed except by a king with hereditary 
right. The coins of Napoleon bear the inscription "Republique * 
jranqaise, Napoleon EmpereurP Except as an arbitrary term 
of art, or as a rhetorical expression, " republic " has, however, 
always been understood to mean a state in which the head 
holds his place by the choice of his subjects. Poland was 
a republic because its king had in earlier times to be accepted, 
and in later times was chosen by a democracy composed of 
gentry. Venice was a republic, though after -the "closing of 
the great council " the franchise was confined to a strictly 
limited aristocracy, which was itself in practice dominated by a 
small oligarchy. The seven states which formed the confederation 
of the United Netherlands were republics from the time they 
renounced their allegiance to Philip II., though they chose to be 
governed by a stadtholder to whom they delegated large powers, 
and though. the choice of the stadtholder was made by a small 
body of burghers who alone had the franchise. The varieties 
are many. What, however, is emphatically not a republic is a 
state in which the ruler can truly tell his subjects that, the 
sovereignty resides in his royal person, and that he is king, or 
tsar, " pure and absolute," by the grace of God, even though he 
may hasten to add that " absolute " is not " despotic," which 
means government without regard to law* The case of Great 
Britain, where the king reigns theoretically by the grace of God, 
but in fact by a parliamentary title and under the Act of Settle- 
ment, is, like the whole British constitution, unique. 

There is in fact a fundamental incompatibility between the 
conceptions of government as a commonwealth and as an 
institution based on a right superior to the people's will. Where 
the two views endeavour to live together one of two things must 
happen. The ruler will confiscate the rights of the community 
to himself and will become the embodiment of sovereignty, 
which is what happened -in most of the states of Europe at the 
close of the middle ages; or the community, acting through 
some body politic which" is its virtual representative, will 
confine the head of the government to defined functions. 

The question of representation is dealt with separately (see 
Representation), but the conception of a republic in 
which all males, who do not belong to an inferior and 
barbarous race, share in the suffrage is one which would 
never have been accepted in the ancient or medieval world, 
for it is based on a foundation of which they knew nothing, 
— the political rights of man. When the Scottish reformer 
John Knox based his claim to speak on the government of 
the realm on the fact that he was " a subject born within the 
same" he advanced a pretension very new to. his generation. 
But it was one which was fated to achieve a great fortune. The 
right of the subject, simply as a member of the community,, to a 
voice in the commimity in which he was born, and on which his 
happiness depended, implied all " the rights of man " as they 
were to be stated by the American Declaration of Independence, 
and again by the French in 1789. As they could be vindicated 
only by revolt against monarchical governments in the old 
world and the new, and as they were incompatible with all the 
convictions which make monarchy possible, they embodied 



REPUBLICAN PARTY 



177 



themselves in the modern democratic republics of Europe and 
America. It is a form of government not much more like the 
republic of antiquity and the middle ages than the French sans- 
culottes was like Harmodius and Aristogeiton, whom he admired 
for being what they most decidedly were not — believers in 
equality and fraternity. But it does, subject to the imper- 
fections of human nature, set up a government in which all, 
theoretically at least, have a voice in what concerns all. 

REPUBLICAN PARTY. Of the three important American 
parties which have called themselves Republican, 1 this article 
deals only with that one which was organized during the years 
1854 to 1856 and has been in control of the government of the 
United States during the larger portion of the half century 
since the presidential election of i860 

Origin and Character. — Sectionalism, the movement which 
tended to break the Union into two separate republics, one 
based on free labour, the other on that of slaves, had gained 
before the middle of the 19th century such headway as to 
compel a reconstruction of the party system. The beginning 
of this reconstruction was heralded by the rise of the Liberty 
party (q.v.), in 1840, its completion by the disruption in i860 
of the Democratic party along sectional lines, and the election 
of Abraham Lincoln by a sectional vote. 

The event which determined the date of the birth of the 
Republican party was the repeal by the Kansas-Nebraska Bill of 
1854 of that provision of the Compromise of 1820 which excluded 
slavery from national territory N. of the geographical line 36 30' 
and theformal substitution in that bill of " squatter " for national 
sovereignty, in deciding the question of slavery in the Territories. 
The enactment of this bill introduced a new and highly critical 
stage in the relations between North and South. Down to 
1850 the differences of the two sections over slavery had always 
been arranged by mutual concessions. In 1854 this expedi- 
ent was set aside. Without giving anything in return, Douglas 
and his supporters took from the free-labour section an invalu- 
able barrier against the extension of slavery: and through the 
doctrine of " squatter sovereignty " denied to Congress the 
power to erect such barriers in the future. But this only hast- 
ened a crisis that could not have been greatly delayed. Cal- 
houn had already discerned the true source and deadly nature 
of the growing sectional estrangement, and Lincoln was soon 
to utter the prophetic words: "This government cannot 
endure permanently, half slave and half free." 

The immediate result of the agitation over the repeal was 
to convince a large number — which soon became a majority — 
of the best citizens of the North, irrespective of party, that the 
restriction of slavery was essential to the well-being both of the 
North and of the Union as a whole.* In order to give effect 
to this conviction it was necessary toj form a new party. The 
agitation which prepared the way for its rise began in Congress 
during the debates on the Kansas-Nebraska Bill, and spread 
thence throughout the North. The IWest was more quickly 
responsive than the East. 'But everywhere large elements 
of the existing parties came together and agreed to unite in 
resisting the extension of slavery. Before the discussion of 
the repeal in Congress had reached its later stages, a mass 
meeting of Whigs, Democrats and Free Soilers at Ripon, Wis- 
consin, resolved that if the Kansas-Nebraska Bill should pass: 
" They would throw old party organizations to the winds and 
organize a new party on the sole issue of the non-extension 
of slavery." The name Republican was formally adopted at 
a state convention of the new party held at Jackson, Michigan, 
on the 6th of July 1854, and by other Western state conven- 
tions on the 13th of the same month. 

The great majority of the new party had been either Whigs 
or Democrats. In two cardinal points they were agreed, 
namely, opposition to slavery and belief in the national, as 
opposed to the federative, nature of the Union. In other 
points there was at the beginning much disagreement. For- 

1 The party organized by Thomas Jefferson; the National 
Republicans, 1824-1834; and the Republican party of the present. 



tunately the issues on which there was agreement overshadowed 
all others long enough to bring about a fusing of the two ele- 
ments. It was the union of the Whig who believed in making 
government strong and its sphere .wide, with the Democrat 
who believed in the people and the people's control of govern- 
ment, that made the Republican party both efficient and popular. 

History.— Before its advent to power, from 1854 to i860, 
the tasks of the Republican party were three: to propagate 
the doctrine of slavery restriction by Congressional action; to 
oppose the extension of slavery under the operation of the 
doctrine of squatter sovereignty; and to obtain control of 
the Federal government. In each it was successful. Through- 
out the North and under such leaders as Seward, Lincoln, Chase, 
Sumner, Henry Ward Beecher and Horace Greeley, all the 
resources of the press, the platform, the pulpit and (an institu- 
tion then powerful but now forgotten) the lyceum or citizens' 
debating club, were fully enlisted in the propaganda. Other 
events that turned to the advantage of the Republicans were 
the brutal assault upon Charles Sumner in the Senate Chamber 
in 1856, the Ostend Manifesto, advising in the interest of 
slavery the acquisition of Cuba by force if Spain should refuse 
to sell, the enforcement — sometimes brutal and always hateful 
— of the Fugitive Slave Law (q.v.), and the quarrel of Douglas 
with the administration and the South over the application of 
squatter sovereignty to Kansas. On the other hand, the decision 
of the Supreme Court in the case of Dred Scott, which the Re- 
publicans refused to accept as good law, and the raid of John 
Brown at Harper's Ferry, which they condemned,' brought them 
into serious embarrassment. ' 

In the prosecution of the third task, the attainment of office, 
the party followed wise counsels- and was fortunate. In its 
first national platform, that of 1856, the party affirmed its 
adherence to the principles of Washington and Jefferson, 
denied the constitutional right 'of Congress or a Territory to 
establish slavery, and declared that it was " both the right and 
duty of Congress to prohibit in the Territories those twin relics 
of barbarism, polygamy and slavery." At the close of the 
resolutions there was a demand for government aid to a Pacific 
railway and for the improvement of rivers and harbours. 

The platform of i860 was more comprehensive. It added to 
the planks of the first, an arraignment of the administration 
and the Dred Scott decision, and demands for a protective 
tariff and a homestead act. Although the popular vote for 
Abraham Lincoln was more than a half-million greater than 
that for John C. Fremont, the party's candidate in 1856, never- 
theless it was the disruption of the Democratic party that made 
the Republican triumph possible. On the other hand, the 
Republican party was the strongest member of the new party 
system as reorganized on the sectional principle. Moreover, 
in character and purpose, as well as numerical strength, it was 
better qualified than its rivals to meet the impending crisis. 

The War Period, 1861-1865. — Between the election of Mr 
Lincoln in November i860, and his inauguration on the following 
4th of March, seven of the slave-holding states seceded, formed 
a Confederacy and withdrew their representatives from the 
national legislature. All attempts to arrange a compromise 
failed. The vacillation of President Buchanan, and the position 
taken in his annual message that the national government had 
no right to coerce a seceding state, gave strong support to the 
disunion movement. These events forced upon the Republican 
party a change of policy. Hitherto its efforts had been directed 
chiefly to excluding slavery from the Territories. Now the 
first duty was to save the Union from disruption.. In order to 
do this it was necessary to unite the North, and to bring to 
the support of the Union a large proportion of those border 
slave states, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee 
and Missouri, in which there was considerable Union sentiment. 
Hence the party laid aside completely the earlier issue of slavery 
restriction and accepted as the sole issue of the hour the main- 
tenance of the Union. Indeed, in order to secure more easily 
the co-operation of loyal Democrats, it even gave up its own 
name for a time and called itself the Union party. 



178 



REPUBLICAN PARTY 



During the early period of the war the President checked all 
efforts on the part of zealous subordinates, civil and military, 
to make the war for the Union even incidentally a war upon 
slavery. In his efforts to unionize the border states Mr Lincoln 
in March 1862 urged that Congress should co-operate with any 
state in providing for a voluntary, gradual and compensated 
emancipation. Congress acceded, but not one of the border 
states would undertake emancipation. Many of the Republican 
leaders rejected the border state policy of the President and 
urged a more radical course towards slavery. In replying to 
Horace Greeley, who voiced the discontent in a public letter, to 
which he gave the title, The Prayer of Twenty Millions 0$ People, 
Mr Lincoln in August 1862 wrote: "My paramount object is 
to save the Union and not either to save or destroy slavery." 

But as evidence accumulated that slavery was a strong 
military support of the Confederacy the policy of destroying 
slavery as a means of saving the Union grew in favour. To 
this policy Mr Lincoln on the 22nd of September 1862 com- 
mitted himself, the Republican party and the cause of the 
Union. The first response was distinctly unfavourable. The 
immediate effect was " to unite the South and divide the 
North." A considerable element of the Democratic party 
became disloyal, while the party as a whole opposed all measures 
looking to the destruction of slavery. The autumn elections 
greatly reduced the Republican majority in Congress. But the 
new policy steadily gained ground until the Republican party 
in its third national convention, which met on the 7th of June 
1864, resolved: " that as slavery was the cause and now 
constitutes the strength of this rebellion, justice and national 
safety demand its utter and complete extirpation from the soil' 
of the republic." In the following year slavery was finally 
abolished by the Thirteenth Amendment. 

On the Republican party, since it had an effective majority 
in each house of Congress, rests the responsibility for the legisla- 
tion of the war period. The theory of loose construction of 
the Constitution was accepted. Throughout the Civil War, 
Congress, proceeding upon this theory, made prompt provision 
for the prosecution of the war. It passed Legal Tender Acts; 
it established a system of national banks; greatly raised the 
tariff rates; and in order to hasten the settlement of the Far 
West and to make that section an integral part of the Union, 
it passed a Homestead Act and an act providing for a railway to 
the Pacific. For a time, while disloyalty was most rife in the 
North, there was a sharp curtailment of the rights of the 
individual citizen through the suspension, initiated by the 
President 'and approved by Congress, of the writ of Habeas 
Corpus. Most of the acts, which their opponents held to be 
violations of the Constitution, were in general acts of question- 
able utility. The results of the war, which came to a close early 
in 1865, vindicated in a signal way the principles, policies 
and leadership of the Republican party. It haa saved the 
Union; it had established the national character of the Union 
so firmly as to bring to an end the doctrine of the right of 
secession; and it had destroyed slavery. 

The party had been singularly fortunate in its founders and 
leaders. Of these three were pre-eminent: Horace Greeley, 
William H. Seward and Abraham Lincoln — Greeley in the field 
of journalism, Seward in the two realms of idealistic and practical 
politics, and, greatest of all, Abraham Lincoln who won and held 
the people. 

Reconstruction. — The larger tasks of the period from the close 
of the Civil War in r i865 to the inauguration of Rutherford B. 
Hayes in 1877 were three: first, to accomplish with the least 
possible disturbance the transition from war to peace; second, 
to settle certain matters of dispute with France and England 
that had arisen during the progress of the war; and third, to 
reconstruct the South. Full responsibility for the way in which 
these .tasks "were discharged rests upon the Republican party, 
for it was in control of the presidency and the Senate throughout 
the period and of the House until December 1875. In the first and 
second it was notably successful. The soldiers of North and South 
returned at once to the fields of productive labour. The colossal 



war establishment was quickly reduced to the requirements 
of peace. The French withdrew from Mexico. The Alabama 
Claims were submitted to arbitration. But the reconstruction 
of the South proved difficult in the extreme. The strain of a 
prolonged and exhausting war, the upheaval of emancipation, 
and the utter collapse of the Confederate government, had 
thrown the elements of social, economic and civil life in the 
South into almost hopeless disorder. To restore these to normal 
relations and working was but part of the task; the other and 
more important part was to apply those methods* of reconstruc- 
tion which would tend to make one nation out of hitherto 
discordant sections. In his third annual message, Dec. 8th, 1863, 
Lincoln brought forward the so-called presidential plan of 
reconstruction. This was rejected on the ground that recon- 
struction was a Congressional rather than an executive function; 
and on the v 4th of July 1864 Congress passed a bill making 
Congress instead of the president the chief agent in the work 
of reconstruction. President Johnson adopted Lincoln's plan, 
and put it into operation with such vigour that when Congress 
met in December 1865 all the states that had seceded were quite 
or nearly ready to demand the readmission of their represen- 
tatives to the House and Senate. 

From the standpoint of party the situation was highly critical. 
The men whom the newly reconstructed states had sent to 
Washington represented the old South and would naturally 
join the opposition. Although the ratification of the Thirteenth 
Amendment, which abolished slavery, was assured, and a fort- 
night later was officially proclaimed, nevertheless the recon- 
structed legislatures were busy enacting police regulations 
which, in the opinion of most Republicans, threatened to re- 
enslave the freedmen. With an earnestness like that which the 
party in earlier days had shown in opposing the extension of 
slavery, it now resolved to secure full civil rights to the freedmen. 
Another consideration of great weight in shaping party policy 
was the need of maintaining the rights of Congress against 
executive encroachment. Owing to the war and Lincoln's 
masterful personality, the presidency had gained in prestige 
at the expense of Congress. The tendency thus established 
would be strengthened to a dangerous degree, it was thought, 
if the President were to take the leading part in reconstructing 
as well as in saving the Union. There now took place within the 
party a change of great importance* Hitherto the conservatives, 
represented by such leaders as Lincoln and Seward, had always 
won in struggles with the radical elements; but now the tide 
changed, and the radicals who were more narrowly national and 
more strongly partisan gained control, and ruled the party to the 
end of the period. This revolution within \the Republican party 
between the years 1865 and 1867 was fostered by a marked re- 
crudescence of sectional feeling in the North, and by the character 
of the successor of President Lincoln and of the party leaders in 
Congress. President Johnson while eminently patriotic and 
courageous, was tactless and imprudent to the last degree. Mr 
Sumner, the leader of the Senate, was not conciliatory in manner, 
and while incapable of revengeful feeling seemed more con- 
siderate of the freedman than of the Southern white. Thaddeus 
Stevens, whose influence over the House of Representatives was 
stronger than that of Sumner over the Senate, regarded the South 
as " a conquered province," and his personal feelings towards the 
ruling class of the South were harshly vindictive. The policy 
adopted by the Republican majority in each house of Congress 
was to refuse admission to the men chosen by the states that 
had been reconstructed under the presidential plan, until a joint- 
committee of both houses should investigate conditions in the 
South. In this rebuff there was distinct intimation of a purpose 
to set aside altogether the reconstructive work of the President. 
Congress proceeded at once to enact measures to continue and 
extend the earlier temporary provision for helpless freedmen 
whom emancipation had set adrift, and to give them full 
civil rights. By passing the Fourteenth Amendment in June 
1866 Congress committed itself to the policy of securing the 
civil rights of the negro by constitutional guarantee. Each of 
these acts was vetoed by the President, between whom and 



REPUBLICAN PARTY 



x 79 



Congress political disagreement ripened soon into bitter enmity. 
As the quarrel developed Congress ignored the recommendations 
of the President, repassed by the requisite majority and without 
due consideration of his objections each measure that he 
vetoed, took from him the power to remove subordinates which 
had been exercised by his predecessors, deprived him of his 
constitutional rights as commander-in-chief of the army, and 
finally in 1868 undertook to drive him from office by impeach- 
ment. 

In 1867 Congress, under the control of the radical wing of the 
Republican party, set aside nearly all reconstructive work that 
had been accomplished previously and put into execution a plan 
of its own, under which the Southern States were reconstructed 
anew and admitted to representation in Congress between the 
years 1867 and 1870. Inevitable consequences of the Con- 
gressional plan of reconstruction were: first, the erection of 
state governments that were inefficient, corrupt, ruinously 
wasteful and shamefully oppressive; second, the extreme 
demoralization of the freedmen suddenly transformed from 
slaves into rulers of their former masters; third, the demoraliza- 
tion, in many cases also extreme, of the great body of the Southern 
whites by the expedients to which they resorted in order to 
escape from the rule of the freedman, led by the " Carpet 
Bagger " his Northern, and the " Scalawag " his Southern, white 
ally; fourth, the alienation of the white and coloured races in the 
South, — an alienation which was to each a source of immeasurable 
evils; fifth, the speedy overthrow on the withdrawal of military 
support of the governments set up under the Congressional 
plan, and the creation of a South " solid ",in resentful opposition 
to the North and the Republican party. And sixth, as the out- 
come of all these results, an unfortunate delay in reuniting 
North and South. The Republican party suffered during this 
period a moral decline, seen in the frequent efforts to gain party 
advantage by kindling anew the earlier sectional animosities, 
a growing arrogance, the increasing weight of the partisan and 
spoilsman in party management, and the widespread corruption 
that came to light in the " scandals " of the second administra- 
tion of General Grant. The mismanaged Liberal Republican 
movement of 1870-1872 was a reaction against this moral 
decline and a protest against the Southerri policy of the party 
and its support of the " Spoils " system* The service of the 
Liberal Republicans consisted mainly in the aid they gave to 
the reform of the Republican party and in the influence they 
exerted to induce the Democratic party to accept the results of 
the war. 

But despite the warnings it received, the prestige it had gained 
during the war and the popularity of President Grant, the 
Republican party lost ground steadily during the second half 
of the period. In the election of 1874 the Democratic party 
gained control of the House of Representatives; and in the 
election of 1876 came within a hair's breadth of winning the 
presidency. 

Election of Mr Hayes to that of Mr McKinley, 1876-18Q6. — 
During these twenty years the subsidence of old and the rise of 
new issues led to a reconstruction of the party system, which, 
although less radical than that of 1840 to 1860, brought into 
existence several new parties and changed in important- respects 
the character and policies of those already in the field. From 
the standpoint of party history the chief interest of these twenty 
years lies in the answer to the question, How did the discredited 
Republican party secure in 1896 a new and prolonged lease of 
power? The task was not easy. The reconstruction policy 
of the party had alienated many Northern supporters and had 
made the South solidly Democratic. The prevalence of the 
spoils system and the scandals of the second administration 
of General Grant had hurt the prestige of the party as a 
guardian of public morals and of the national honour. What 
gave the Republicans a fighting chance were: its record down 
to the close of the- Civil War; its proven aptitude for the 
tasks of government; and the growth among the people of a 
more vital national feeling which turned instinctively to the 
party that had saved the nation. Despite these substantial 



advantages over their Democratic rivals the Republicans lost 
the presidential elections of 1884 and 1892, and the entire 
Democratic party — some Republicans agreeing — has always 
held that a just decision of the contested election of 1876 
would have seated Samuel J. Tilden, the Democratic candi- 
date, instead of Mr Hayes. In the Senate the Republicans 
were in a majority during fourteen years. In the House, 
whose members are chosen by popular vote, these figures 
were reversed, the Democrats having control during fourteen 
years. In each of five successive presidential elections, 
those of 1876, 1880, 1884, j 888 and 1892, the Democratic 
popular vote was larger than the Republican. Marked features 
of the party situation were the apparent similarity for a time 
of the principles of the two great parties, the influence on 
their policy exerted by the stronger minor parties, and the rise 
of the Mugwumps (not strictly a party), who claimed the right to 
vote for the best candidate' independently of party and were in 
the main of Republican origin. 

Of the issues of the period one, the reform of the civil service, 
was served by both of the great parties with imperfect fidelity. 
Each of the Republican presidents, Hayes, Garfield, Arthur and 
Harrison gave it efficient and steadfast support; and so did 
Cleveland, the Democratic president, although under stronger 
pressure from party hunger. The same was true in the case of 
the more important questions of foreign policy and, to a degree 
in its early stage, of the question of silver coinage. It was not so 
with the treatment of the South. President Hayes # withdrew the 
national troops from S. Carolina and Louisiana and thus brought 
to an end Federal military interference with state governments. 
For this course a considerable section of the Republican party gave 
him thereafter a support which* was half-hearted and inconstant. 
Further disaffection resulted 'from efforts to reform the civil 
service of New York which brought the President into conflict 
with the powerful Republican party machine in that state. 1 The 
high character of the President and his firm, wise and upright 
course raised the reputation of the party. His veto of the Silver 
Bill and the resumption of specie payments tended to the same 
result. The failure in 1889 of the third term movement for 
General Grant worked for the health of the party. The struggle of 
President Garfield with New York spoilsmen and his assassina- 
tion by a disappointed office-seeker, gave a fresh impetus to the 
movement for the reform of the civil service. President Arthur 
maintained the high standard established by Presidents Hayes 
and Garfield. 

• In the election of 1884 the old parties were competitors for the 
confidence of the conservative and reforming elements of the 
country. Mr Blaine, the Republican candidate, who in 
brilliancy, popularity, patriotism, and disappointing personal 
fortunes recalled the Whig leader, Henry Clay, lost the election 
by a narrow margin because, while meeting the requirements of 
the conservatives, he had lost in a measure the confidence of 
the reformers. 

In the election of 1888 Mr Cleveland, by making tariff reform 
►the issue, turned the manufacturing interests to the support of Mr 
Harrison, the candidate of the Republicans, who thereby won the 
election. Mr Harrison, while not personally popiilar, maintained 
the best traditions of his Republican predecessors. The highly 
protective McKinley tariff, framed in obedience to the people's 
mandate in 1888, proved somewhat disappointing, and in the 
election of 1892, Mr Cleveland, as the champion of lower tariff 
rates, was successful for the second time; Mr Cleveland, at the 
beginning of his second term, secured the repeal of the act for the 
purchase of silver, and thus strengthened himself with the con- 
servatives of both parties. Democratic defection in the Senate 
nullified largely the downward revision of the tariff urged by 
the President and supported by the House. 

The election of 1896 marked the close of the period of party 

1 In the course of this conflict, which continued to disturb the 
harmony of the Republican party until the death of President 
Garfield, the term " Stalwarts '' was used to designate the supporters 
of Senator Conkling, who was in control of the Republican machine 
in New York state, and the term " Half-Breeds " to designate the 
supporters of the administration. 



i8o 



REQUENA— REQUEST, LETTERS OF 



readjustment. The leading issue was the free coinage of silver 
under conditions which would have made the monetary standard 
silver instead of gold, and would have lowered its value. The 
Democratic convention repudiated Mr Cleveland, accepted free 
coinage, and nominated W. J. Bryan. The Republicans, at the 
cost of a formidable party defection, endorsed the gold standard 
and a highly protective tariff, and nominated William McKinley, 
whose record and character made him an exceptionally strong 
candidate. In doing this the Democratic organization became 
the party of radicalism, the Republican, the party of conservat- 
ism. The committal of the Republican party to the mainten- 
ance of the gold standard far more than its continued support 
of high protection, established its position in the reconstructed 
party system. In doing this it allied its fortunes with those of 
all the property-holding classes of the country, while retaining 
in a high degree the confidence of the wage-earners. 

Period 18Q7-1910. — During this period there was first a rapid 
recovery from economic depression, and then ten years of almost 
unexampled prosperity, followed by two years of moderate 
depression. But the period is chiefly memorable for the war 
•of 1898 with Spain; for the oversea territorial expansion that 
followed; for the rise of the so-called policy of imperialism; for 
the assumption of a far more prominent international role; for 
wide-reaching measures of internal reform; and, lastly, for the 
■establishment of the policy of conserving the natural resources 
•of the nation. 

Throughout this period the Republican party had undis- 
puted control of the national government. One of the earliest 
acts in the administration of Mr McKinley was the enactment 
in 1897 of the highly protective Dingley Tariff. The provision 
for Reciprocity proved at first of little use. But the need of 
foreign markets for the rapidly growing output of manufactured 
products, the rising demand that the interests of the home 
consumer, as well as those of the producer, should be considered, 
and the conviction that high protection fostered monopolies, 
brought about a change of sentiment in the party. Mr McKin- 
ley, in his last speech, made at the Buffalo Exposition on the 
5th of September 1901, gave voice to this change: " The period 
•of exclusiveness is past. The expansion of our trade and com- 
merce is the pressing problem. Commercial wars are unpro- 
fitable. A policy of good will and friendly trade relations 
will prevent reprisals. Reciprocity treaties are in harmony 
with the spirit of the times. Measures of retaliation are not." 
These views gained headway against the strenuous opposition 
of the "stand-patters," 1 until revision of the tariff down- 
ward was demanded in the platform of 1908, and achieved to 
.a moderate degree in the Tariff Act of 1909. The party has 
.also fulfilled its promise to establish the gold monetary standard 
■on a firm basis. During the war with Spain and in meeting 
the new problems of colonial empire, the RepubUcan party 
lias again justified its reputation for efficiency. Not less 
noteworthy has been the policy of the party, initiated and 
urged by President Theodore Roosevelt and developed by 
President W. H. Taft for the regulation of railways and all 
corporations and trusts engaged in interstate business. The 
latest important event in the history of the Republican party 
is the rise of the " Insurgents," a group of senators and 
congressmen whose professed aims are to resist centralization 
in both party and national government, to lessen the influ- 
ence of the money power over public policy, to regulate tariff 
schedules largely in the interest of the consumer, and in brief 
to emphasize anew the subordination of party and government 
to the will and service of the people. 

Bibliography. — See Francis Curtis, History of the Republican 
Party (2 vols., New York, 1904); J. F. Rhodes, History of the 
United States from the Compromise of 1850 (ibid., 1 893-1 904); 
J. W. Burgess, The Middle Period (New York, 1897), The Civil 
War and the Constitution (ibid., 1899), and Reconstruction and the 
Constitution (ibid., 1902); T. C. Smith, The Parties and Slavery, 
i8$i-i8$g (ibid., 1006); Henry Wilson, Rise and Fall of the Slave 
Power in America (3 vols., Boston, 1872-77); J. G. Blaine, Twenty 

1 Those members of the" Republican oarty who would maintain 
as far as possible the high protective duties of the Dingley Tariff. 



Years of Congress (2 vols., Norwich, Conn., 1884-1886); Horace 
Greeley, The American Conflict (2 vols., Hartford, 1864-66); 
'. G. Nicolay and John Hay, Abraham Lincoln, A History (10 vols., 
Tew York, 1890); J. T. Morse, Life of Lincoln (2 vols., Boston, 
1893); F. Bancroft, Life of W. H. Seward (New York, 1900); 



T. G. Nicolay and John^Hay, Abraham Lincoln, A History (10 vols., 

Ne 

1893); 

H. E. Von Hoist, Political and Constitutional History of the United 

States (Chicago, 1899); and E. Stanwood, History of the Presidency 

(Boston, 1898). (A. D. Mo.) 

REQUENA, a town of E. Spain, in the province of Valencia; 
on, .the left bank of the river Magro, and on the railway 
from Valencia to Utiel. Pop. (1900) 16,236. The town was 
formerly a Moorish fortress, occupying a strong position in the 
mountainous region of Las Cabrillas (3400 ft). It is dominated 
by the ancient citadel of the Moors, and still has traces of the 
original town walls. There are three ancient parish churches; 
San Nicolas, the oldest, dates from the 13th century, but was 
partly restored in 1727. Near the town are the sulphurous 
springs of Fuentepodrida. The chief industries are the cultiva- 
tion of grain, fruit and saffron, and the manufacture of wine 
and silk. 

REQUESENS, LUIS DE ZUNIGA Y (? -1576), Spanish 
governor of the Netherlands, had the misfortune to succeed 
the duke of Alva (q.v.) and to govern amid hopeless difficulties 
under the direction of Philip II. His early career was that 
of a government official and diplomatist. In 1563 he gained 
the king's confidence as his representative at Rome. In 1568 
he was appointed lieutenant-general to Don John of Austria 
during the suppression of the Morisco revolt in Granada, and 
he also accompanied Don John during the Lepanto campaign; 
his function being to watch and control his nominal commander- 
in-chief, whose excitable temperament was distrusted by the 
king. Philip must have been satisfied with Requesens, for 
he named him viceroy in Milan, a post usually given to a great 
noble. Requesens was only " a gentleman of cloak and sword " 
(caballero de capa y espada), though by the king's favour he 
was " grand commander " of the military order of Santiago 
in Castile. He was credited with having shown moderation 
at Milan, but it is certain that he came into sharp collision 
with the archbishop, Saint Charles Borromeo, who took up 
the cause of his flock. His docility rather than his capacity 
marked him out to succeed Alva. The king wished to 
pursue a more conciliatory policy, without, however, yielding 
any one of the points in dispute between himself and the 
revolted Netherlanders. Requesens came to Brussels on the 
17th of November 1573, and till his death on the 5th of March 
1576 was plunged into insuperable difficulties. With an empty 
treasury and unpaid mutinous troops, no faculty could have 
helped Requesens to succeed; and he was only an honest 
official who was worn out in trying to do the impossible. 

Authorities. — Documentos InHitos para la historia de Espana 
(Madrid, 1892); and Nueva Coleccion de documentos, vols. iv. and v. 
(Madrid), 

REQUEST, LETTERS OF. The legal terms "letters 
rogatory," or "of request " (commission rogatoire), express a 
request made by one judge for the assistance of another in 
serving a citation, taking the deposition of a witness, executing 
a judgment, or the performance of any other judicial act. The 
later law of Rome imposed a duty of mutual assistance on the 
courts of the Empire, and this was extended to the courts of 
different states when, and so far as, Roman law came to rule 
the modern world. Consequently, outside ecclesiastical law 
(see below), the only trace of such a practice to be found in 
England or the United States, independent of statutory enact- 
ment, is in the admiralty doctrine that the sentence of a foreign 
court of admiralty may be executed on letters of request from 
the foreign judge or on a libel by a party for its execution. See 
the authorities collected by Sir R. Phillimore in The City of 
Mecca, 5 P.D. 28. The need of assistance in taking the deposi- 
tions of witnesses outside their jurisdiction was long in being 
felt by the British and United States courts, because they 
issued commissions for that purpose to private persons, some- 
times to foreign judges in their private capacities. But an 
increasing sensitiveness as to the rights of sovereignty led to 



REQUESTS, COURT OF— RESEARCH 



181 



objection being taken to the execution of such commissions by 
persons who in that employment were officers of courts foreign 
to the countries in which they acted, besides which those com- 
missions could give no power to compel the attendance of 
witnesses abroad. Consequently both in the mother country 
and in the United States acts have been passed empowering 
the courts to issue commissions for taking evidence to colonial or 
foreign courts, and to execute such commissions when received 
by them from the courts of the colonies or of foreign countries. 
The British statutes are 13 Geo. in. c. 63; 1 Will. IV. 
c. 22; 3 & 4 Vict. c. 105, 6 & 7 Vict. c. 82, 22 Vict. c. 20 and 
49 & 40 Vict. c. 74. But neither in England nor in the United 
States have commissions of the old kind been entirely disused. 
In the practice under the Anglo-American statutes, the leading 
rules are that all the acts of the judge whose services are 
required, and all things done before him, are governed by the 
law of the country in which the execution takes place (locus 
regit actum) t while the admissibility of the evidence and all else 
which concerns the conduct of the action is governed by the 
law of the country in which it is pending (lex fori). Details 
may be seen for England and the United States in the usual 
books of practice, and in Wharton's Conflict of Laws (2nd ed., 
1881), §§ 722-31, and Sir R. Phillimore's International Law 
(3rd ed., 1889), v. 4, §§ 882-85; f° r other countries in von Bar's 
Private International Law, translated by Guthrie (2nd ed., 1892), 
§§ 39 1 * 392, 409, 410. In ecclesiastical law, letters of request 
are issued for the purpose of sending causes from one court to 
another. Where a diocesan court within a province has juris- 
diction over the parties concerned, the plaintiff may apply to 
the judge of such court for letters of request, in order that the 
cause may be instituted either in the court of arches or the 
chancery court of York, as the case may be. When the judge 
of the diocesan court consents to sign such letters and they have 
been accepted by the judge of the higher court, a decree issues 
under his seal, calling upon the defendant to answer to the 
plaintiff in the suit instituted against him. Letters of request 
are also issued for other purposes, being sometimes sent from 
one-judge to another to request him to examine witnesses who 
are out of the jurisdiction of the former, but in that of the 
latter; to enforce a monition, &c. 

REQUESTS, COURT OF, a minor court of the king's council 
in England, under the presidency of the lord keeper of the 
privy seal. Its possible origin has been assigned to an order 
in council of 1390 directing the lords of the council to form a 
committee to examine the petitions of the humble people. Its 
jurisdiction was chiefly equitable, and owing to the small expenses 
of* procedure it grew in popularity, especially for cases not of 
sufficient importance to bring into the court of chancery itself. 
Under Wolsey the court was fixed permanently at Whitehall. 
The judges of the court were styled masters of requests. In 
the reign of Queen Elizabeth there were two masters ordinary 
and two masters extraordinary. In James I.*s reign there were 
four masters ordinary. In Henry VIII.'s reign the judges of 
the court had ceased to be privy councillors, and towards the 
end of Elizabeth's reign the court incurred the hostility of the 
common law courts, as having neither a statutory nor prescriptive 
title to jurisdiction. Notwithstanding a decision in 1598 as 
to the illegality of its jurisdiction, and subsequent decisions 
to the same effect in the reigns of James I. and Charles I., it 
continued to flourish until the suppression of the Star Chamber 
in 1640 virtually put an end to it. Although it sat until 1642, 
and masters of requests were appointed even after the Restora- 
tion, it ceased to exercise judicial functions. There were also 
courts of requests or, as they were sometimes called, courts of 
conscience, established in London in the reign of Henry VIII. 
with jurisdiction in matters of debt under forty shillings. These 
courts were extended in the reigns of George I. and George II. 
to various places in England, but they were abolished by an 
act of 1846 (County Courts Act), which established in their 
place the tribunal of the county court (q.v.). 

REQUIEM, the name of a solemn mass for the dead (Missa 
pro defunctis) in the Roman Church, appointed to be sung on 



All Souls' Day, in memory of all " faithful departed," at funeral 
services, and at the anniversaries of the death of particular 
persons. The name is taken from the first words of the Introit, 
Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine. The term is specially 
applied to the musical setting of the mass. The most celebrated 
Requiem Masses are those of Palcstrina, Mozart and Cherubini. 
The word has been also used of memorial services held in honour 
of a deceased person in churches other than the Roman. 

REREDOS (Anglo-Fr. areredbs, from arere, behind, and dos, 
back), an ornamental screen of stone or wood built up, or 
forming a facing to the wall behind an altar in a church. 
Reredoses are frequently decorated with representations of the 
Passion, niches containing statues of saints, and the like. In 
England these were for the most part destroyed at the Reforma- 
tion or by the Puritans later; a few medieval examples, however, 
survive, e.g. at Christchurch, Hants. In some large cathedrals 
e.g. Winchester, Durham, St Albans, the reredos is a mass of 
splendid tabernacle work, reaching nearly to the groining. In 
small churches the reredos is usually replaced by a hanging or 
parament behind the altar, known as a dossal or dorsal. (See 
also Altar.) For the legality of images on reredoses in the 
Church of England, see Image. 

The use of the word reredos for the iron or brick back of an 
open fire-place is all but obsolete. 

RESCHEN SCHEIDECK. This Alpine pass is in some sort 
the pendant of the Brenner Pass, but leads from the upper valley 
of the Inn or Engadine to the upper valley of the Adige. It 
is but 4902 ft. in height. Near the summit ' is the hamlet 
of Reschen, while some way below is the former hospice of 
St Valentin auf der Haid, mentioned as early as 1140. Start- 
ing from Landeck, the carriage road runs up the Inn valley to 
Pfunds, whence it mounts above the gorge of Finstermtinz to 
the village of Nauders (27} m.) where the road from the Swiss 
Engadine falls in (53$ m. from St Moritz). Thence the road 
mounts gently to the pass, and then descends, with the infant 
Adige, to Mais (15$ m.), whence the pass is sometimes wrongly 
named Malserheide. The road now descends the upper Adige 
valley, or Vintschgau, past Meran (37} m.) to Botzen (20 m. from 
Meran, or 100 m, from Landeck) where the Brenner route is 
joined. (W. A. B. C.) 

RESCUE (in Middle Eng. rescous, from O. Fr. rccousse, 
Low Lat. rescussa, from reexcussa, reexcutere, to shake off again, 
re, again, ex, off, quatere, to shake), the forcible setting at liberty 
of a person or thing. To constitute the legal offence of rescue, 
the person rescued must be in the custody of a constable or 
private individual, but in the latter case the rescuer must know 
that the prisoner is in lawful custody. The punishment for 
the offence is fine and imprisonment, with or without hard 
labour, if the party rescued has not been convicted of the offence 
for which- he was in custody. But if the prisoner has been 
imprisoned on a charge of, or under sentence for, high treason, 
felony or misdemeanour, the rescue is high treason, felony or 
misdemeanour. The punishment for a felonious rescue may be 
penal servitude for not more than seven or less than three years, 
or imprisonment for not more than two years, with or without 
hard labour. The forcible rescue of goods legally distrained or 
the rescuing of cattle by pound breach are misdemeanours 
indictable at common law, but the more usual procedure is a 
civil action under 2 W. & M. c. 5, s. 3 (1690), which makes an 
offender liable for treble damages. 

RESEARCH (0. Fr. recerche, from recercher t re- and cercer, 
mod. ckercker, to search; Late Lat. circare, to go round in a 
circle, to explore), the act of searching into a matter closely 
and carefully, inquiry directed to the discovery of truth, and 
in particular the trained scientific investigation of the principles 
and facts of any subject, based on original and first-hand 
study of authorities or experiment. Investigations of every 
kind which have been based on original sources of knowledge 
may be styled " research," and it may be said that without 
" research " no authoritative works have been written, no 
scientific discoveries or inventions made, no theories of any 
value propounded; but the word also has a somewhat restricted 



182 



RESENDE, ANDRE DE— RESHT 



meaning attached to it in current usage. It is applied more 
particularly to the investigations of those who devote them- 
selves to the study of pure as opposed to applied science, to 
the investigation of causes rather than to practical experiment; 
thus while every surgeon or physician who treats an individual 
case of cancer may add to our sum of knowledge of the disease, 
the body of trained investigators which is endowed by the 
Cancer Research Fund are working on different lines. Again, 
the practical engineers who are building aeroplanes, and those 
who are making practical tests by actual flight in those machines, 
cannot be called "researchers"; that term should be con- 
fined to the members, for example, of the scientific committee 
appointed by the British Government in 1909 to make investiga- 
tions regarding aerial construction and navigation. Further, 
the term is particularly used of a course of post-graduate study 
at a university, for which many universities have provided 
special Research Studentships or Fellowships. These act as 
endowments for a specific period, and are conditional on the 
holder devoting his time to the investigation at first hand of 
some specified subject. 

RESENDE, ANDR6 DE (1498-1573), the father of archae- 
ology in Portugal, began life as a Dominican friar, but about 
1540 passed over to the ranks of the secular clergy. He spent 
many years travelling in Spain, France and Belgium, where he 
corresponded with Erasmus and other learned men. He was 
also intimate with King John* III. and his sons, and acted as 
tutor to the Infante D. Duarte. Resende enjoyed considerable 
fame in his lifetime, but modern writers have shown that he is 
neither accurate nor scrupulous. In Portuguese he wrote: 

(1) Historia da antiguidade da cidade de Evora {ibid, 1553); 

(2) Vida do Infante D. Duarte /Lisbon, 1789). His chief Latin 
work is the De Antiquitatibus Lusitaniae (Evora, 1593). 

See the " Life " of Resende in Farinha's Colleccao das antipiidades 
de Evora (1785), and a biographical-critical article by Rivara in 
the Revista Litter aria. (Oporto, 1839), iii. 340-62; also Cleynarts, 
Latin Letters. (E. PR.) 

RESENDE, GARCIA DE (1470-1536), Portuguese poet and 
editor, was born at Evora, and began to serve John II. as a page 
at the age of ten, becoming' his private secretary in 1491. He 
was present at his death at Alvor on the 25th of October 1495. 
He continued to enjoy the same favour with King Manoel, whom 
he accompanied to Castile in 1498, and from whom he obtained 
a knighthood of the Order of Christ. "In 15 14 Resende went to 
Rome with Tristao da Cunha, as secretary and treasurer of the 
famous embassy sent by the king to offer the tribute of the East 
at the feet of Pope Leo X. In 1516 he was given the rank of a 
nobleman of the royal household, and became escrivdo de fazenda 
to Prince John, afterwards King John III., from whom he 
received further pensions in 1525. Resende built a chapel in 
the monastery of Espinheiro near Evora, the pantheon of the 
Alemtejo nobility, where he was buried. 

He began to cultivate the making of verses in the palace of 
John II., and he tells us how one night when the king was in 
bed he caused him (Resende) to repeat some " trovas " of Jorge 
Manrique, saying it was as needful for a man to know them as to 
know the Pater Noster. Under these conditions, Resende grew 
up no mean poet, and moreover distinguished himself by his 
skill in drawing and music; while he collected into an album 
the best court verse of the time. The Cancioneiro Geral y probably 
begun in 1483 though not printed until 1516, includes the com- 
positions of some three hundred fidalgvs of the reigns of kings 
Alphonso V., John II. and Manoel. The main subjects of its 
pieces are love, satire and epigram, and most of them are written 
in the national redondilha yerse, but the metre is irregular and 
the rhyming careless. The Spanish language is largely employed, 
because the literary progenitors of the whole collection were 
Juan de Mena, Jorge Manrique, Boscan and Garcilasso. As a 
rule the compositions were improvised at palace entertainments, 
at which the poets present divided into two bands, attacking 
and defending a given theme throughout successive evenings. 
At other times these poetical soirees took the form of a mock 
trial at law, in which the queen of John II. acted as judge. 



Resende was much twitted by other rhymesters on his corpulence, 
but he repaid all their gibes with interest. 

The artistic value of the Cancioneiro Geral is slight. Con- 
ventional in tone, the greater part are imitations of Spanish 
poets and show no trace of inspiration in their authors. The 
Cancioneiro is redeemed from complete insipidity by Resende 
himself, and his fine verses on the death of D. Ignez de Castro 
inspired the great episode in the Lusiads of Camoens (q.v.). 
Resende is the compiler of a gossiping chronicle of his patron 
John II., which, though plagiarized from the chronicle by Ruy 
de Pina (q.v.), has a value of its own. The past lives again in 
these pages, and though Resende's anecdotes may be unim- 
portant in themselves, they reveal much of the inner life of the 
15th century. Resende's Miscellanea, a rhymed commentary 
on the most notable events of his time, which is annexed to his 
Chronicle, is a document full of historical interest, and as a poem 
not without merit. The editions of his Chronicle are, those of 
1545, 1554, 1596, 1607, 1622, 1752 and 1798. 

His Cancioneiro appeared in 1516, and was reprinted by Kausler 
at Stuttgart in 3 vols., 1846-52. A new edition has recently come 
from the university press at Coimbra. For a critical study of his 
work, see Excerptos % seguidos de uma noticia sobre sua vida e obras t 
um juizo critico, apreciacao de bellezas e defeitos e estudo da lingua, 
by Antonio de Castilho (Paris, 1865). Also As sepulturas do 
Espinheiro, by Anselmo Braamcamp, Freire Lisbon, 1901, passim, 
especially pp. 67-80, where the salient dates in Resende's lile are 
set out from documents recently discovered; and Dr Sousa Viterbo, 
Diccionario dos Architectos . . . Portuguezes, ii. 361-74. (E. Pr.) 

RESERVATION (Lat. reservare, to keep back), the act or 
action of keeping back or withholding something. There are 
some technical uses of the term. In English law " reservation " 
is used of the retention by the vendor or lessor, in a conveyance 
or lease, of some right or interest, which without such reservation 
would have passed to the purchaser or tenant; such " reserva- 
tions " usually are concerned with rights of way or other ease- 
ments or sporting rights. In ecclesiastical usage, the term is 
applied to the practice of preserving unconsumed a portion of 
the consecrated elements after the celebration of the Eucharist. 
For the history of this practice and its usage in the Roman, 
Greek and English churches, see Eucharist,§ -Reservation of the 
Eucharist. In the Roman Church, where the pope retains for 
himself the right to nominate to certain benefices, that action is 
termed, technically, " reservation." When in making a state- 
ment, taking an ' oath, &c, a person qualifies that statement in 
his mind, or withholds some fact, word or expression which, if 
expressed, would materially alter the effect of his statement or 
oath, such qualification is termed a " mental reservation," or, 
in the technical language of casuistry, " mental restriction " 
(see LiGUORi). The system of providing special tracts of land 
exclusively for the tribes of American Indians, adopted in the 
United States of America and in Canada, is known as the Reser- 
vation system, and such tracts are styled Indian Reservations. 
(See United States and Canada.) 

RESHT, the capital of the province of Gilan in Persia, in 
37 17' N., and 49 36' E., on the left bank of the Siah-rud (Black 
river), which is a branch of the Sefid-rud (White river), and flows 
into the Murdab, lagoon of Enzeli. The distance from Enzeli, 
the port of disembarcation from Russia, on the S. shore of the 
Caspian, to Resht is 14 m. in a direct line, and is accomplished in 
an open boat, or (since 1892), depth of water permitting, in a 
small steamboat to Pir-i-Bazar and thence 6 m. on a good road 
by carriage. Resht has a population of 60,000 and is the residence 
of English, Russian, French and Turkish consuls and the seat of 
the governor-general of the province of Gilan. The town is 
situated in low, malarious ground, and was originally buried in 
jungle, but the Russians during their occupation of the place in 
!7 2 3~34 cleared much timber and jungle and made some open 
spaces. The houses are red-tiled and raised from the ground, 
with broad verandahs and overhanging eaves. Conflagrations 
arc frequent, particularly in the months of January and De- 
cember, when hot, dry winds resembling the Fohn of the Alps 
come down from the snow-capped Elburz. A good carriage 



RESIDENCE— RESORCIN 



183 



toad constructed and worked by a Russian company and 
opened to traffic in 1899 connects Resht with Teheran via 
Kazvin. , 

The value of trade probably exceeds £2,000,000, principal 
exports being rice, raw silk, dry fruit, fish, sheep and cattle, 
wool and cotton, and cocoons, the principal imports sugar, 
cotton goods, silkworm " seed " or eggs (£70,160 worth in 
1906-7), petroleum, glass and china. The trade in dried silk- 
worm cocoons has increased remarkably since 1893, when only 
.76,150 lb valued at £6475 were exported; during the year 
1906-7 ending 20th March, 2,717,540 ft) valued at £238,000 were 
exported. There are telegraph and post offices and branches of 
the Imperial Bank of Persia and Banque d'Escompte. 

Enzeli, the port of Resht in the S.E. corner of the Caspian, 
is 14 m. N. of Resht, in 37 29' N., 49 28' E. Pop. 4000. 
Between it and other ports in the Caspian communication is 
maintained by the mail-steamers of the Caucasus and Mercury 
Steam Navigation Company and many vessels of commercial 
firms with head offices chiefly at Baku. (A. H.-S.) 

RESIDENCE (Latin residere, to remain behind, to dwell, 
reside), in general, a place of abode. In law, it usually means 
continuance in a place. The ordinary meaning of the word has 
been defined as " the place where an individual eats, drinks and 
sleeps, or where his family or his servants eat, drink and sleep " 
(R. v. North Curry, 1825, 4 B. & C. 959). For certain purposes, 
however, a man may be said to have his residence not only 
where he sleeps, but also at his place of business. See Abode ; 
Domicile. In ecclesiastical law residence is the continuance 
of a spiritual person upon his benefice. As a general rule, it is 
necessary for every rector or vicar to reside within his parish, 
even though there may be no house of residence annexed to the 
benefice. But under certain circumstances the bishop of the 
diocese may grant a licence of non-residence (Pluralities Act 
1836). 

RESIDENT, a political agent or officer representing the 
Indian government in certain native states in India. He resides 
in the state and advises on all matters of government, legislative 
or executive. Residents are divided into three classes or ranks. 
In certain other dependencies or protectorates of the British 
Empire the representative of the government is termed a resident 
or political agent, notably in Nepaul, Aden, Sarawak, British 
North Borneo, &c. In general, where the state to which a 
resident is attached is not an independent one, he exercises 
consular and magisterial functions. 

For " Resident " as the title of a diplomatic agent see Diplo- 
macy. 

" RESIDUE (through the French, from the Lat. residuum, a 
remainder, from residere, to remain), in law, that which remains 
of a testator's estate after all debts and legacies are discharged, 
and funeral, administration and other expenses paid. The 
•person to whom this residue or surplus is left is termed the 
residuary legatee; should none be mentioned in the will the 
residue goes to the next of kin (see Executors and Admini- 
strators; Legacy; Will). 

RESIN (through O.Fr. resine, modern risine, from Lat. 
resina, probably Latinized from Greek farter), resin), a secretion 
formed in special resin canals or passages of plants, from many 
of which, such as, for example, coniferous trees, it exudes in 
soft tears, hardening into solid masses in the air. Otherwise it 
may be obtained by making incisions in the bark or wood of 
the secreting plant. It can also be extracted from almost all 
plants by treatment of the tissue with alcohol. Certain resins 
are obtained in a fossilized condition, amber being the most 
notable instance of this class; African copal and the kauri 
gum of New Zealand are also procured in a semi-fossil con- 
dition. The resins which are obtained as natural exudations 
are in general mixtures of different, peculiar acids, named the 
resin acids, which dissolve in alkalis to form resin soaps, from 
which the resin acids are regenerated by treatment with acids. 
They are closely related to the terpenes, with which they occur 
in plants and of which they are oxidation products. Examples 
of resin acids are abietic (sylvic) acid, C19H28O2, occurring in 



colophony, and pimaric acid, C 2 oHao0 2 , a constituent of gallipo 
resin. Abietic acid can be extracted from colophony by means 
of hot alcohol; it crystallizes in leaflets, and on oxidation 
yields trimellitic, isophthalic and terebic acid. Pimaric acid 
closely resembles abietic acid into which it passes when dis- 
tilled in a vacuum; it has been supposed to consist of three 
isomers. Resins when soft are known as oleo-resins, and when 
containing benzoic or cinnamic acid they are called balsams. 
Other resinous products are in their natural condition mixed 
with gum or mucilaginous substances and known as gum-resins. 
The general conception of a resin is a noncrystalline body, 
insoluble in water, mostly soluble in alcohol, essential oils, ether 
and hot fatty oils, softening and melting under the influence of 
heat, not capable of sublimation, and burning with a bright but 
smoky flame. A typical resin is a transparent or translucent 
mass, with a vitreous fracture and a faintly yellow or brown 
colour, inodorous or having only a slight turpentine odour and 
taste. Many compound resins, however, from their admixture 
with essential oils, are possessed of distinct and characteristic 
odours. The hard transparent resins, such as the copals, 
dammars, mastic and sandarach, are principally used for 
varnishes and cement, while the softer odoriferous oleo-resins 
(frankincense, turpentine, copaiba) and gum-resins contain- 
ing essential oils (ammoniacum, asafoetida, gamboge, myrrh, 
scammony) are more largely used for therapeutic purposes and 
incense. Amber (q.v.) is a fossil resin. 

RESOLUTION, a word used in the two main senses, separa- 
tion and decision, of the verb " to resolve " (Lat. resolverc, to 
loose, unfasten), to separate anything into its constituent 
elements or component parts, hence, through the subsidiary 
meaning of to clear up doubts or difficulties, to settle, determine. 
The principal applications of the term in its first sense are to the 
separation of a body into its component parts by chemical 
process, or, to the eye, by the lens of a microscope or telescope; 
similarly, in mathematics, to the analysis of a velocity, force, 
&c, into components. In the second sense, beyond the general 
meaning of determination, firmness of character, a " resolution " 
is specifically a decision of opinion formally submitted to a 
legislative or other assembly and adopted or rejected by votes. 

RESORCIN (meta-dioxybenzene), C«H4(OH) 2 , one of the 
dihydric phenols. It is obtained on fusing many, resins 
(galbanum, asafoetida, &c.) with caustic potash, or by the 
distillation of Brazil-wood extract. It may be prepared 
synthetically by fusing meta-iodophenol, phenol meta-sulphonic 
acid, and benzene meta-disulphonic acid with potash; by the 
action of nitrous acid on meta-aminophenol ; or by the action 
of 10% hydrochloric acid on meta-phenylene diamine (J. Meyer, 
Ber., 1897, 30, p. 2569). Many ortho and para-compounds of 
the aromatic scries (for example, the brom-phenols, benzene 
para-disulphonic acid) also yield resorcin on fusion with caustic 
potash. It crystallizes from benzene in colourless needles which 
melt at 119 C. and boil at 276-5° C. (L. Calderon), or 280° C. 
(C. Graebe), and is readily soluble in water, alcohol and ether, 
but insoluble in chloroform and carbon bisulphide. It reduces 
Fehling's solution, and ammoniacal silver solutions. It does 
not form a precipitate with lead acetate solution, as the isomeric 
pyrocatechin does. Ferric chloride colours its aqueous solution 
a dark violet, and bromine water precipitates tribromrcsorcin. - 
Sodium amalgam reduces it to dihydroresorcin, which when 
heated to 1 50-160° C. with concentrated baryta solution gives 
7-acetylbutyric acid (D. Vorlander); when fused with caustic 
potash, resorcin yields phloroglucin, pyrocatechin and diresorcin. 
It condenses with acids or acid chlorides, in the presence of 
dehydrating agents, to oxyketones, e.g. with zinc chloride and 
glacial acetic acid at 145° C. it yields resacetophenone 
(HO) 2 C 6 H3-CO-CH s (M. Nencki and N. Sieber, Jour. prak. Chem., 
1SS1 [2], 23, p. 147). With the anhydrides of dibasic acids 
it yields fluoresceins (q.v.). When heated with calcium chloride- 
ammonia to 200° C. it yields meta-dioxydiphenylamine (A. 
Seyewitz, Bull. Soc. Chim., 1890 [3], 3, p. 811). With sodium 
nitrite it forms a water-soluble blue dye, which is turned red by 
acids, and is used as an indicator, under the name of lacmoid 



184 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



[ANATOMY 



(M. C. Traub and C. Hock, Ber. ,'1884, 17, p. 2615). It condenses 
readily with aldehydes, yielding with formaldehyde, on the 
addition oL a little hydrochloric acid, methylene diresorcin 
[(HO) 2 'C 6 H 3 ]2*CH2, whilst with chloral hydrate, in the presence 
of potassium bisulphate, it yields the lactone of tetra-oxydiphenyl 
methane carboxylic acid (J. T. Hewitt and F. G. Pope, Jour. 
Chem. Soc, 1897, 71, p. 1084). In alcoholic solution it con- 
denses with sodium acetoacetate to form /3-methylumbelliferone, 
Ci H 8 O3 (A. Michael, Jour. prak. Chem., 1888 [2], 37, 470). 
With concentrated nitric acid, in the presence of cold concen- 
trated sulphuric acid, it yields trinitro-resorcin (styphnic acid), 
which forms yellow crystals, exploding violently on rapid 
heating. 

In medicine, resorcin, which is official in the United States 
under the name of resorcinol, was formerly used as an anti- 
pyretic, but it has been given up. The dose is 2 to 8 grs. 
Used externally it is an antiseptic and disinfectant, and is 
used 5 to 10% in ointments in the treatment of chronic skin 
diseases such as psoriasis and eczema of a sub-acute character. 
Weak, watery solutions of resorcin (10 or 15 grs. to the ounce) 
are useful in allaying the itching in erythematous eczema. A 
2% solution used as a spray has been used with marked effect 
in hay fever and in whooping-cough. In the latter disease 
10 minims of the 2% solution has been given internally. It 
has also been employed in the treatment of gastric ulcer in 
doses of 2 to 4 grs. in pill, and is said to be analgesic and 
haemostatic in its action. In large doses it is a poison causing 
giddiness, deafness, salivation, sweating and convulsions. It 
is also worked up in certain medicated soaps. Mono-acetyl 
resorcin, C c H4(OH)*OCOCH 3 , is used under the name of 
" euresol." 

Resazurin, Ci2H 7 N04, obtained by the action of nitrous acid on 
resorcin (P. Weselsky and R. Benedikt, Mortals., 1880, 1, p. 889), 
forms small dark red crystals possessing a greenish metallic 
glance. When dissolved in _ concentrated sulphuric acid and 
warmed to 210 C, the solution on pouring into water yields a 
precipitate of resorufin, C12H7NO3, an oxyphenoxazone, which is 
insoluble in water, but is readily soluble in hot concentrated hydro- 
chloric acid, and in solutions of caustic alkalis. The alkaline 
solutions are of a rose-red colour and show a cinnabar-red fluor- 
escence. A tetrabromresorufin is used as a dye-stuff under the name 
of Fluorescent Resorcin Blue. 

Thioresorcin is obtained by the action of zinc and hydrochloric 
acid on the chloride of benzene meta-disul phonic acid. It melts 
at 2 7 ° C. and boils at 213 C . Resorcin disulphonic A cid 
(HO) 2 C6H2(HSOjt)2, is a deliquescent mass obtained by the 
action of sulphuric acid on resorcin (H. Fischer, Monats., 1881, 
2, p. 321). It is easily soluble in water and decomposes when 
heated to ioo° C. 

RESPIRATORY SYSTEM, (1). Anatomy— The respiratory 
tract consists of the nasal cavities, the pharynx, the larynx, the 
trachea, the bronchi and the lungs, but of these the two first 
parts have been treated in separate articles (see Olfactory 
System and Pharynx). 

The larynx is the upper part of the air tube which is specially 
modified for the production of notes of varying pitch, though 
it is not responsible for the whole of the voice. Its frame- 
work is made up of several cartilages which are moved on one 
another by muscles, and it is lined internally by mucous mem- 
brane which is continuous above with that of the pharynx and 
below with that of the trachea or windpipe. The larynx is 
situated in the front of the neck and corresponds to the. fourth, 
fifth and sixth cervical vertebrae. For its superficial anatomy 
see Anatomy, Superficial and Artistic. 

The thyroid cartilage (see fig. 1) is the largest, and consists 
of two plates or alae which are joined in the mid-ventral line. 
At the upper part of their junction is the thyroid notch and just 
below that is a forward projection, the pomum Adami, best 
marked in adult males. From the upper part of the posterior 
border of each ala the superior cornu rises up to be joined 
to the tip of the great cornu of the hyoid bone by the lateral 
thyro-hyqid ligament, while from the lower part of the same 
border the inferior cornu passes down to be fastened to the 
cricoid cartilage by the crico-thyroid capsule. From the upper 



border of each ala the thyro-hyoid membrane runs up to the 
hyoid bone, while near the back of the outer surface of each 
the oblique line of 

the thyroid cartilage /g\ Epiglottis 

runs downward and 
forward. 

The cricoid carti- 
lage (see figs. 1 and 
2) is something like 
a signet ring with 
the seal behind; its 
lower border, how- 
ever, is horizontal. 
To the mid-ventral 
part of its upper 
border is attached 
the mesial part of 
the crico - thyroid 
membrane, which 
attaches it .to the 
lower border^ of the 
thyroid cartilage 
though the lateral 
parts of this mem- 
brane pass up in- 
ternally to the 

thyroid cartilage .After D. J. Cunningham, from Cunningham's Text-Book 

and their upper _ _ C1 ^natomy ' 

f rpp P ,Wc form flip FlG " J — Profile View of the Cartilages and 

tree edges torm the Ligaments of the Larynx. 

true vocal cords. On 

the summit of the signet part of the cricoid are placed 

the two arytenoid cartilages (see fig. 2), each of which 




Hyoid booe 



.CartUago 

triticca 
-Thyro-byoid 

membrane 

Superior cornu 
of thyroid 
cartilage 

[Superior 
tubercle on the- 
alaofibyroid 
cartilage 
■Oblique Boe 

Inferior tubercle 
Inferior cornu of 

thyroid cartilage 
.Crico-thyroid 

membrane 
Cricoid cartilage 



Hyoid bone 




CartiJago triticea 

Thyro-epiglottidean 
ligament 

Superior cornu of 
thyroid cartilage 



ilage of Santorini 

Arytenoid cartilage 

.Muscular process of 
arytenoid cartilage 



Inferior^ cornu of 
thyroid cartilage 



After D. J. Cunningham, from Cunningham's Textbook of Anatomy. 

Fig. 2. — Cartilages and Ligaments of Larynx, as seen from behind. 

forms a pyramid with its apex upward and with an 
anterior posterior and internal or mesial surface. The base 
articulates with the cricoid by a concave facet, surrounded 
by the crico-arytenoid capsule, and the two arytenoids are 
able to glide toward or away from one another, in addition 
to which each can rotate round a vertical axis. From the 
front of the base a delicate process projects which, as it is 
attached to the true vocal cord, is called the vocal process, 
while from the outer part of the base another stouter process 



ANATOMY] 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



185 



attaches the two crico-arytenoid muscles and so is known as 
the muscular process. Above each arytenoid are two smaller 
cartilages known as the cornicula laryngis or cartilages of San- 
torini and the cuneiform cartilages, but they are not of any 
practical importance. 

The epiglottis (see fig. 3), on the other hand, is a very important 
structure, since it forms a lid to the larynx in swallowing: only 

the box moves up to 




, Hyoid bone 

Hyo-epiglottidean ligament 



Cartilage of epiglottis 
Fauy pad 
Thyro-hyoid membrane 

Thyroid cartilage 

Elevation produced by 

cuneiform cartilage 
False vocal cord 
Philerum ventrical! 
Elevation produced by 

arytenoid ctmit.ige 
Laryngeal xinus 

■True vocal cqrd 
ylenoid muscle 

Processus vocal Is 

Cricoid cartilage 
Cricoid cartilage 



After D. J. Cunningham, from Cunningham's Text-Book 
of A natomy. 

Fig. 3. — Mesial Section through Larynx to 
show the outer wall of the right half. 



the lid instead of the 
lid moving down to 
the box. It is leaf- 
shaped, the stalk 
(thyro-epiglottid e a n 
ligament) being at- 
tached to the junc- 
tion of the thyroid 
cartilages inside the 
larynx, while the 
anterior surface of 
the leaf is closely 
attached to the root 
of the tongue and 
body of the hyoid 
bone. The posterior 
or laryngeal surface 
is pitted for glands, 
and near the point 
where the stalk joins 
the leaf is a con- 
vexity which is 
known as the cus- 
hion of the epiglottis. 
All the cartilages of 
the larynx are of 
the hyaline variety 
except the epi- 
glottis, the corni- 
cula laryngis and 
the cuneiform carti- 
lages, which are 
yellow elastic. The 
to ossify as middle 



result is that all except these three tend 
age is approached. 

The muscles of the larynx are: (1) the crico-thyroids, which are 
attached to the lower border of the thyroid and the anterior 
part of the cricoid, by pulling up which they make the upper part 
of the signet, with the arytenoids attached to it, move back 
and so tighten the vocal cords. (2) The thyro-arytenoids (see 
fig. 4), which run back from the- junction of the thyroid alae to 
the front of the arytenoids and side of the epiglottis; they pull 
the arytenoids toward the thyroid and so relax the cords. 

(3) The single aryten'oideus muscle, which runs from the back of 
one arytenoid to the other and approximates these cartilages. 

(4) The lateral crico-arytenoids (see fig. 4) which draw the muscular 
processes of the arytenoids forward toward the ring of the 
cricoid and, by so doing, twist the vocal processes, with the 
cords attached, inward toward one another; and (5) the posterior 
crico-arytenoids (see fig. 4) which run from the back of the signet 
part of the cricoid to the back of the muscular processes of the 
arytenoid and, by pulling these backward, twist the vocal 
processes outward and so separate the vocal cords. All these 
muscles are supplied by the recurrent laryngeal nerve, except 
the crico-thyroid which is innervated by the external branch 
of the superior laryngeal (see Nerves, Cranial). 

The mucous membrane of the larynx is continuous with that of 
the pharynx at the aryteno-epiglottidean folds which run from the 
sides of the epiglottis to the top of the arytenoid cartilages (see 
(fig- 3)- To the outer side of each fold is the sinus pyriformis 
(see Pharynx). From the middle of the junction of the alae 
of the thyroid cartilage to the vocal processes of the arytenoids 
the mucous membrane is reflected over, and closely bound to, 
the true vocal cords which contain elastic tissue and, as has 



been mentioned, are the upper free edges of the lateral parts 
of the crico-thyroid membrane. The chink between the two 

Epielouu Arytenc-aplgtottidean muscle 

Hyoid 

Cuneiform cart i lag* 

Thyro-epiglottidean muscu 

Thyrohyoid membrane 

Saccule of larynx 
Muscular process of 
arytenoid cartilage 

Thyroarytenoid muscl* 
Thyroid cartilage 

Crlco*aryteooideus lateralis 



Crtco-arytenoideui postlcua 
Crico-thyroid membrtna 

Cricoid cartilage 




After D. J. Cunningham, from Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 

Fig. 4. — Dissection of the Muscles in the Lateral Wall 
of the Larynx. The right ala of the thyroid 
cartilage has been removed. 

true vocal cords is the glottis or ritna glottidis. Just above the 
true vocal cords is the opening into a recess on each side which 
runs upward and backward and is known as the laryngeal 
saccule) its opening is the laryngeal sinus. The upper lip of 
this slit-like opening is called the false vocal cord. 

The mucous membrane is closely bound down to the epiglottis 
and to the true vocal cords, elsewhere there is plenty of sub- 
mucous tissue in which the products of inflammation may 
collect and cause " oedema laryngis," a condition which is 
mechanically prevented from passing the true vocal cords. In 
the upper part of the front and sides of the larynx and over the 
true vocal cords the mucous membrane is lined by squamous 
epithelium, but elsewhere the epithelium is of the columnar 
ciliated variety: it is supplied by the superior laryngeal branch 
of the vagus nerve and above the glottis is peculiarly sensitive. 

The Trachea or windpipe (see fig. 5) is the tube which carries 
the air between the larynx and the bronchi; it is from four to 
four and a half inches long anql lies partly in the neck and partly 
in the thorax. It begins where the larynx ends at the lower 
border of the sixth cervical, and divides into its two bronchi 
opposite the fifth thoracic vertebra. The tube is kept always 
open by rings of cartilage, which, however, are wanting behind, 
and, as it passes down, it comes to lie farther and farther from 
the ventral surface of the body, following the concavity of the 
thoracic region of the spinal column. In the whole of its 
downward course it has the oesophagus close behind it, while in 
front are the isthmus of the thyroid, the left innominate vein, 
the innominate artery and the arch of the aorta. On each side 
of it and touching it is the vagus nerve. 

The cervical part of the tube is not much more than an inch 
in length, but it can be lengthened by throwing back the head. 
This, of course, is the region in which tracheotomy is performed, 
and it should be remembered that in children, and sometimes 
in adults, the great left innominate vein lies above the level of 
the top of the sternum. 

In transverse section the trachea is rather wider from side to 
side than from before backward. In life the former measure- 
ment is said to be about 12-5 mm. and the latter n mm. It 
is made up of an external fibro-clastic membrane in which the 
cartilaginous rings lie, while behind, where these rings are 
wanting, is a layer of unstriped muscle which, when it contracts, 



i86 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



[ANATOMY 



draws the hind eniis of the rings together and so diminishes the 
calibre of the tube. Inside these is plentiful submucous tissue 



■Thyroid cartilage 



T— Crico-ihyroid membrane 

* 
i 

j— Cricoid cartilage 

/ Part of trachea covered by 
/ isthmus of thyroid body 



Common carotid artery 




Pulmonary Artery 
After D. J. Cunningham, from Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 

Fig. 5. — The Trachea and Bronchi. The thyroid body is indicated 
by a dotted line. 

containing mucous glands and quantities of lymphoid tissue, 
while the whole is lined internally by columnar ciliated epithelium. 

The Bronchi (see fig. 5) are the two tubes into which the 
trachea divides, but, since the branches, which these tubes 
give off later, are also called bronchi, it may be clearer to speak 
of primary, secondary and tertiary bronchi. Each primary 
bronchus runs downward and outward, but the right one is 
more in a line with the direction of the trachea than the left. 
The right primary bronchus has also a greater calibre than the 
left because the right lung is the larger, and for these two reasons 
when a foreign body enters the trachea it usually enters the 
right bronchus. 

The first secondary bronchus comes off about an inch from 
the bifurcation of the trachea on the right side and, as it lies 
above the level of the pulmonary artery, it is known as the 
eparterial bronchus. On the left side the first branch is about 
two inches from the bifurcation and, like all the remaining 
secondary bronchi, is hyparterial: the left primary bronchus 
is therefore twice as long as the right. After the eparterial 
secondary bronchus is given off the direction of the right primary 
bronchus is carried on by the hyparterial secondary bronchus, 



and this, just before reaching the hilum of the lung, divides 
into upper and lower tertiary bronchi, while the left lower 
secondary hyparterial bronchus does not divide before reaching 
the hilum of its lung. Into the hilum or root of the right lung, 
therefore, three bronchial tubes enter, while on the left side 
there are only two. The firmly rooted habit of associating the 
term bronchi with those parts of the main tubes which lie between 
the bifurcation of the trachea and the point where the first 
branch comes off makes it very difficult to suggest a nomen- 
clature which calls up any picture of the actual state of things 
to the mind. Certainly the classification into primary, secondary 
and tertiary bronchi only goes a very little way toward this, 
and it should be realized that, call them what we may, there 
are two long tapering tubes which run from the bifurcation of 
the trachea to the lower and back part of each lung, and give 
off a series of large ventral and small dorsal branches. The 
upper part of each of these long tubes or stem bronchi is outside 
the lung and in the middle mediastinum of the thorax, the 
lower part embedded in the substance of the lung. The structure 
of the bronchi is practically identical with that of the trachea. 
(See G. S. Huntington's " Eparterial Bronchial System of the 
Mammalia," Am. Journ. Med. Set. (Phila. 1898). See also- 
Quain's Anatomy, London, last edition.) 

The Lungs are two pyramidal, spongy, slate-coloured, very 
vascular organs in which the blood is oxygenated. Each lies 
in its own side of the thorax and is surrounded by its own pleural 
cavity (see Coelom and Serous Membranes), and has an apex 
which projects into the side of the root of the neck, a base which 
is hollowed for the convexity of the diaphragm, an outer surface 
which is convex and lies against the ribs, an inner surface 
concave for the heart, pericardium and great vessels, a sharp 
anterior border which overlaps the pericardium and a broad, 
rounded posterior border which lies at the side of the spinal 
column. Each lung is nearly divided into two by a primary 
fissure which runs obliquely downward and forward, while the 
right lung has a secondary fissure which runs horizontally* 
forward from near the middle of the primary fissure. The left 
lung has therefore an upper and lower or basal lobe, while the 
right has upper, middle and lower lobes. On the inner surface 
of each lung is the root or hilum at which alone its vessels, 
nerves and ducts (bronchi) can enter and leave it. The structures- 
contained in the root of each lung are the branches and tribu- 
taries of (1) the pulmonary artery, (2) the pulmonary veins T 
(3) the bronchi, (4) the bronchial arteries, (5) the bronchial veins, 
(6) the bronchial lymphatic vessels and glands, (7), the pulmonary 
plexuses of nerves. Of these the first three are the largest and, 
in dividing the root from in front, the veins are first cut, then 
the arteries and last the bronchi. As has been pointed out 
already, the eparterial bronchus on the right side is above 
the level of the artery, but all the others (hyparterial) are on a 
lower level. 

The bronchial arteries supply the substance of the lung;, 
there are usually two on each side, and they lie behind the 
bronchi. The blood which they carry is chiefly returned by 
the pulmonary veins bringing oxidized blood back to the heart, 
so that here there is a normal and harmless mixture of arterial 
and venous blood. If there are any bronchial veins (their 
presence is doubted by some, and the writer has himself carefully 
but unsuccessfully searched for them several times), they open 
into the azygos veins of their own side. The bronchial lymphatic 
vessels lie behind the pulmonary vessels and open into several 
large glands which are black from straining off the carbon left 
in the lungs from the atmosphere. 

There is an anterior and posterior pulmonary plexus of nerves 
on each side, the fibres of which are derived from the vagus and 
the upper thoracic ganglia of the sympathetic. 

Structure of the Lungs. — As the bronchi become smaller and 
smaller by repeated division, the cartilage completely surrounds 
them and tends to form irregular plates instead of rings — they 
are therefore cylindrical, but when the terminal branches (lobular 
bronchi) are reached, the cartilage disappears and hemispherical 
bulgings called alveoli occur (fig. 6 A). At the very end of 



PHYSIOLOGY] 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



187 




Fig. 6. — Diagram of Two Lobules of the 
Lung. B. Bronchus. A. Alveolus, I. 
lnfundibulum. L.B. Lobular bron- 
chus. At. Atrium. Lob. Lobule. 



each lobular bronchus is an irregular chamber, the atrium 
(fig. 6 At), and from this a number of thin-walled sacs, about 

1 mm. in diameter, open 
out. These are called 
the infundibula (fig. 6 I), 
and their walls are 
pouched by hemispherical 
air-cells or alveoli like 
those in the lobular 
bronchi. Each lobular 
bronchus with its atrium 
and infundibula forms 
what is known as a lobule 
of the lung, and these 
lobules are separated by- 
connective tissue, and 
their outlines are evident 
on the surface of the lung. 
The muscular tissue, which in the larger tubes was confined 
to the dorsal part, forms a complete layer in the smaller; but 
when the lobular bronchi are reached, it stops and the mucous 
membrane is surrounded by the elastic layer. In the lobular 
bronchi, too, the lining epithelium gradually changes from the 
ciliated to the stratified or pavement variety, and this is the 
only kind which is found in the infundibula and alveoli. Sur- 
rounding each alveolus is a plexus of capillary vessels so rich 
that the spaces between the capillaries are no wider than .the 
capillaries themselves, and it is here that the exchange of gases 
takes place between the air and the blood. 

Embryology. — The respiratory system is developed from the 
ventral surface of the forcgut as a long gutter-like pouch which 
reaches from just behind the rudiment of the tongue to the 
stomach. Limiting the anterior or cephalic end of this is a 
(I -shaped elevation in the ventral wall of the pharynx which 
separates the ventral ends of the third and fourth visceral bars 
and is known as the furcula) it is from this that the epiglottis, 
aryteno-epiglottidean folds and arytenoid cartilages are developed. 
Later on the respiratory tube is separated from the digestive 
by two ridges, one on each side, which, uniting, form a transverse 
partition. In the region of the furcula, however, the partition 
stops and here the two tubes communicate. The caudal end 
of the respiratory tube buds out .into the two primary bronchi, 
and the right one of these, later on, bears three buds, while the 
left has only two; these are the secondary bronchi, which keep 
on dividing into two, one branch keeping the line of the parent 
stem to form the stem bronchus, while the other goes off at an 
angle. By the repeated divisions of these tubes the complex 
" bronchial tree " is formed and from the terminal shoots the 
infundibula bud out. The alveoli only develop in the last three 
months of foetal life. The thyroid cartilage is probably formed 
from the fourth and fifth branchial bars, while the cricoid seems 
to be the enlarged first ring of the trachea. Before birth the 
lungs are solid and much less vascular than after breathing is 
established. Their slaty colour is gradually gained from the 
deposit of carbon from the atmosphere. (For further details 
see Quain's Anatomy, vol. i., Lond. 1908.) 

Comparative Anatomy. — It has been shown (see Pharynx) 
that in the lower vertebrates respiration is brought about by 
the blood vessels surrounding the gill clefts. In the higher 
fishes (Ganoids and Teleosteans) the " swim bladder " appears 
as a diverticulum from the dorsal wall of the alimentary canal, 
and its duct (d. pneumaticus) sometimes remains open and at 
others becomes a solid cord. In the former case it is probable 
that the blood is to some extent oxidized in the vascular wall 
of this bladder. In the Dipnoi (mud-fish) the opening of the 
swim bladder shifts to the ventral side of the pharynx and the 
bladder walls become sacculated and very vascular, so that, 
when the rivers are dried up, the fish can breathe altogether 
by means of it. In the S. American and African species of 
mud-fish the bladder or lung, as it may now be called, is divided 
by a longitudinal septum in its posterior (caudal) part into right 
-and left halves. In this sub-class of Dipnoi, therefore, a general 



agreement is seen with the embryology or ontogeny of Man's 
lungs. In the Amphibia the two lungs are quite separate though 
they are mere sacculated bags without bronchi. A trachea, 
however, appears in some species (e.g. Siren) and a definite 
larynx with arytenoid cartilages, vocal cords and complicated 
muscles is established in the Anura (frogs and toads). In most 
of the Reptilia the bag-like lungs are elaborated into spongy 
organs with arborizing bronchi in their interior. From the 
crocodiles upward a main or stem bronchus passes to the caudal 
end of the lung, and from this the branches or lateral bronchi 
come off. The larynx shows little advance on that of the Anura. 

The respiratory organs of birds are highly specialized. The 
larynx is rudimentary, and sound is produced by the syrinx, a 
secondary larynx at the bifurcation of the trachea; this may 
be tracheal, bronchial or, most often, tracheo-branchial. The 
lungs are small and closely connected with the ribs, while from 
them numerous large air sacs extend among the viscera, muscles 
and into many of the bones, which, by being filled with hot air, 
help to maintain the high temperature and lessen the specific 
gravity of the body. This pneumaticity of the bones is to a 
certain extent reproduced by the air sinuses of the skull in 
crocodiles and mammals, and it must be pointed out that the 
amount of air m the bones does not necessarily correspond with 
the power of flight, for the Ratitae (ostriches and emeus) have 
very pneumatic bones, while in the sea-gulls they are hardly 
pneumatic at all. 

In mammals the thyroid cartilage becomes an important 
element in the larynx, and in the Echidna the 'upper and lower 
parts of it, derived respectively from the fourth and fifth 
branchial bars, are separate (R. H. Burne, Joum. Anat. and 
Phys. xxxviii. p. xxvii.). The whole larynx is much nearer the 
head than in Man, and in young animals the epiglottis is 
intra-narial, i.e. projects up behind the soft palate. This pre- 
vents the milk trickling into the larynx during suckling, and 
is especially well seen in the Marsupials and Cetacea, though 
evidences of it are present in the human embryo. In the lower 
mammals an inter-arytenoid cartilage is very frequent (see J. 
Symington, "The Marsupial Larynx," /. Anat. and Phys. 
xxxiii. 31, also " The Monotreme Larynx," ib. xxxiv. 90). 

The lungs show a good deal of variation in their lobulation; 
among the porcupines as many as forty lobes have been counted 
in the right lung, while in other mammals no lobulation at all 
could be made out. The azygous lobe of the right lung is a 
fairly constant structure and is situated between the post-caval 
vein and the oesophagus. It is supplied by the terminal branch 
of the right stem bronchus and, although it is usually absent in 
Man, the bronchus which should have supplied it is always to be 
found. (F* G. P.) 

(2) Physiology 

So far as is known, the intake of oxygen, either free or combined, 
and the output of carbon dioxide, are an essential part of the 
life of all organisms. The two processes are so closely associated 
with one another that they arc always included together under 
the designation of respiration, which may thus be defined as the 
physiological process which is concerned in the intake of oxygen 
and output of carbon dioxide. According to the evidence at 
present available, it is only within living cells that the respiratory 
oxygen is consumed and the carbon dioxide formed. The mere 
conveying of oxygen from the surrounding air or water to these 
cells, and of carbon dioxide from them to the air or water, is, 
however,' in itself a complex process in the higher animals; and 
accordingly an account of animal respiration naturally falls into 
two divisions, the first of which (I.) is concerned with the manner 
in which oxygen and carbon dioxide are conveyed to and from 
the living tissues, and the second (II.) with the consumption of 
oxygen and formation of carbon dioxide by the living tissues 
themselves. . 

I. In all the more highly organized animals there are special 
respiratory organs: the lungs in the higher vertebrates; the 
gills in fishes; The tracheae in insects; and various rudimentary 
forms of lungs or gills in other higher invertebrates. In the 



i88 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



[PHYSIOLOGY 



present article attention will be specially confined to the case of 
the higher vertebrates, and in particular to man. 

Air is brought into the lungs by the movements of breathing 
(see above, Movements of Respiration). Oxygen from this 
air passes through the delicate lining membrane of the air-cells 
of the lungs into the blood, where it enters into loose chemical 
combination with the haemoglobin of the red corpuscles (see 
Blood). In this form it is conveyed onwards to the heart, and 
thence through the arteries to the capillaries, where it again 
parts from the haemoglobin, and passes through the capillary 
walls to the tissues, where it is consumed. Carbon dioxide 
passes out from the tissues into the blood in a corresponding 
manner, enters into loose combination as bicarbonate, and 
possibly in other ways, in the blood, and is conveyed by the 
veins to the lungs, whence it passes out in the expired air. 
Pure atmospheric air contains 20-93% of oxygen, -03% of 
carbon dioxide and 79-04% of nitrogen (with which is mixed 
about 0.9% of argon). The dried expired air in man contains 
about 3-5% of carbon dioxide and 17% of oxygen, so that 
roughly speaking the carbon dioxide is increased by about 
3-5% and the oxygen diminished by 4%. Expired air as it 
leaves the body contains about 6% of moisture, compared with 
usually about 1 % in the inspired air. The added moisture and 
higher temperature of expired air make it decidedly lighter than 
pure air. 

Owing to the unpleasant effects often produced in badly 
ventilated rooms it was for long supposed that some poisonous 
volatile " organic matter " is also given off in the breath. Careful 
investigation has shown that this is not the case. The un- 
pleasant effects are partly due to heat and moisture, and partly 
to odours which are usually not of respiratory origin. The 
carbon dioxide present in the air of even very badly ventilated 
rooms is present in far too small proportions to have any 
sensible effect. 

The average volume of air inspired per minute by healthy 
adult men during rest is about 7 litres or *2$ cub. ft. In 
different individuals the frequency of breathing varies con- 
siderably — from about 7 to 25 per minute, the depth of each 
breath varying about inversely as the frequency. During mus- 
cular work the volume of air breathed may be six or eight times 
as much as during rest. The volume of carbon dioxide given 
off varies from about half a cubic foot per hour during complete 
rest to 5 cub. ft. during severe exertion, but averages about 
0-9 cub. ft. per hour, and will reach or exceed 1 cub. ft. per 
hour during even very light exertion. The volume of oxygen 
consumed is about a seventh greater than that of the carbon 
dioxide given off. 

The breathing is regulated from a nervous centre situated 
in the medulla oblongata, which is the lowest part of the brain. 
If this centre is destroyed or injured the breathing stops and 
death rapidly results. From the respiratory centre rhythmic 
efferent impulses proceed down the motor nerves supplying 
the diaphragm, intercostals and other respiratory muscles. 
Afferent impulses through various nerves may temporarily 
affect the rhythm of the respiratory centre. Of these afferent 
impulses by far the most important are those which proceed up * 
the vagus nerve from the lungs themselves. On distention of 
the lungs with air the inspiratory impulses from the respiratory 
centre are suddenly arrested or " inhibited "; on the other hand, 
collapse of the lung strongly excites to inspiratory effort. On 
section of the vagus nerve these effects disappear, and the 
breathing becomes less frequent and much more laboured. 
The vagus nerve is thus the carrier of both inhibitory and 
exciting stimuli. 

As the physiological function of breathing is to bring oxygen 
to and remove carbon dioxide from the blood, it would naturally 
be expected that breathing would be regulated in accordance 
with the amount of oxygen required and of carbon dioxide 
formed; but until quite recently the actual mode of regulation 
was by no means clear. It was commonly .supposed that 
afferent nervous impulses in some way regulated the otherwise 
automatic action of the centre, want of oxygen or excess of 



CO2 in the blood being only an occasional and relatively unim- 
portant factor in the regulations. The phenomenon of "apnoea" 
or complete cessation of natural breathing which occurs after 
forced breathing, was attributed mainly to the already 
mentioned distension effect through the vagus nerves. To ga 
further back still, it was even supposed that the rate and depth of 
breathing, and the percentage of oxygen in the inspired air, 
determine the consumption of oxygen and formation of carbon 
dioxide in the body, just as the air-supply to a fire determines 
the rate of its combustion. This old belief is still often met 
with — for instance, in the reasons given for recommending 
" breathing exercises " as a part of physical training. 

It is evident that if the breathing did not increase correspond- 
ingly with the greatly increased consumption of oxygen and 
formation of CO2 which occurs, for instance during muscular 
work, the percentage of oxygen in the air contained in the lung 
cells or alveoli (alveolar air) would rapidly fall, and the per- 
centage of carbon dioxide increase. The inevitable result 
would be a very imperfect aeration of the blood. Investigation 
of the alevolar air has furnished the key to the actual regulation 
of breathing. Samples of this air can be obtained by making 
a sudden and deep expiration through a piece of long tube, and 
at once collecting some of the air contained in the part of this 
tube nearest the mouth. By this means it has been found that 
during normal breathing at ordinary atmospheric pressure the 
percentage of carbon dioxide (about 5-6% on an average for 
men) is constant for each individual, though different persons 
vary slightly as regards their normal percentage. The breathing 
is thus so regulated as to keep the percentage of carbon dioxide 
constant ; and under normal conditions this regulation is 
surprisingly exact. The ordinary expired air is a mixture of 
alveolar air and air from the " dead space " in the air passages. 
The deeper the breathing happens to be, the more alveolar air 
there will be in the expired air, and the higher, therefore, the 
percentage of carbon dioxide in it, so that the expired air is 
not constant in composition, though the alveolar air is. If air 
containing 2 or 3 % of carbon dioxide is breathed, the breathing 
at once becomes deeper, in such a way as to prevent anything 
but a very slight rise in the alveolar carbon dioxide percentage. 
The difference is scarcely appreciable subjectively, except during 
muscular exertion. The effect of 1% of carbon dioxide in the 
inspired air is so slight as to be negligible, and there is no founda- 
tion for the popular belief that even very small percentages of 
carbon dioxide are injurious. With 4 or 5 % or more of carbon 
dioxide, however, much panting is produced, and the alveolar 
carbon dioxide percentage begins to rise appreciably, since 
compensation is no longer possible. As a consequence, headache 
and other symptoms are produced. If, on the other hand, the 
percentage of carbon dioxide in the alveolar air is abnormally 
reduced by forced breathing, the condition of apnoea is produced 
and lasts until the percentage again rises to normal, but no longer. 
Forced breathing with air containing more than about 4% of 
carbon dioxide causes no apnoea, as the alveolar carbon dioxide 
does not fall. 

If oxygen is breathed instead of air there is no appreciable 
change in the percentage of carbon dioxide in the alveolar air, 
and no tendency towards apnoea. Want of oxygen is thus 
not a factor in the regulation of normal breathing. During 
muscular work the depth and frequency of breathing increase in 
such a way as to prevent the alveolar carbon dioxide from rising 
more than very slightly. It is still the carbon dioxide stimulus 
that regulates the breathing, although with excessive muscular 
work other accessory factors may come in to some extent. 

Under increased barometric pressure the percentage 'of 
carbon dioxide in s the alveolar air no longer remains constant; 
it diminishes in proportion to the increase of pressure. For 
instance, at a 'pressure of 2 atmospheres it is reduced to- 
half, and at 6 atmospheres to a sixth; while at less than 
normal atmospheric pressure it rises correspondingly unless 
symptoms of want of oxygen begin to interfere with this rise. 
These results show that it is not the mere percentage, but 
the pressure (or " partial pressure ") of carbon dioxide in the 



PHYSIOLOGY] 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



189 



alveolar air that regulates breathing. The pressure exercised 
by the carbon dioxide in the alveolar air is of course propor- 
tional to its percentage, multiplied by the total atmospheric 
pressure. It follows from this law that at a pressure of 
6 atmospheres 1 % of carbon dioxide in the inspired air would 
have the same violent effect as 6% at the normal pressure of 
1 atmosphere. To take a concrete practical application, if a diver 
whose head was just below water were supplied with sufficient 
air to keep the carbon dioxide percentage in the air of his helmet 
down to 3% at most, he would be quite comfortable. But if, 
with the same air supply as measured at surface, he went down 
to a depth of 170 ft., where the pressure is 6 atmospheres, he 
would at once experience great distress culminating in loss of 
consciousness, owing, not to the pressure of the water, which 
has trifling effects, but to the pressure of carbon dioxide in the 
air he was breathing. The air supply must be increased in 
proportion to the increase of pressure if these effectsare to be 
avoided, and ignorance of this has led to the common failure 
of diving work at considerable depths. 

The foregoing facts enable. us to understand the regulation 
of breathing under normal conditions. The pressure of carbon 
dioxide in the alveolar air evidently determines that of the 
carbon dioxide in the arterial blood, and the latter in its turn 
determines the carbon dioxide pressure in the respiratory centre, 
which is very richly supplied with blood. The centre itself is 
extremely sensitive to' the slightest increase or diminution in 
carbon dioxide pressure; and thus it is that the alveolar carbon 
dioxide pressure is so important. That the stimulus of carbon 
dioxide is from the blood and not through nerves is proved by 
many experiments. The function of the vagus nerves in regulat- 
ing the breathing is apparently to, as it were, guide the centre 
in the expenditure of each separate inspiratory or expiratory 
effort; for as soon as inspiration or expiration is completed the 
inspiratory or expiratory effort is cut short by impulse pro- 
ceeding up the vagus nerve, and much waste of muscular work 
and risk of injury to the lungs is thereby prevented. 

Under ordinary conditions the regulation of carbon dioxide 
pressure in the alveolar air ensures at the same time a normal 
pressure of oxygen, since absorption of" oxygen and giving off 
of carbon dioxide normally run parallel to one another. If, 
however, air containing abnormally little oxygen is breathed, 
the normal relation between oxygen and carbon dioxide in the 
alveolar air is disturbed. A similar state of affairs is brought 
about by any considerable diminution of atmospheric pressure. 
Not only does the partial pressure of oxygen in the inspired air 
fall, but this fall is proportionally much greater in the alveolar 
air; and the effects of want of oxygen depend on its partial 
pressure in the alveolar air. It has been known for long that 
any great deficiency in the proportion of oxygen in the air 
breathed increases the depth and frequency of the breathing; 
but this effect is not apparent until the percentage of oxygen 
or the barometric pressure is reduced by more than a third, 
which corresponds to a reduction of more than half in the 
alveolar oxygen pressure. In contrast with this an increase of 
a fiftieth in the alveolar carbon dioxide pressure has a marked 
effect on the breathing. Along with the increased breathing 
caused by deficiency of oxygen there is more or less blueness 
of the skin and abnormal effects of various kinds, such as partial 
loss of sensibility, memory and power of thinking. Long 
exposure often causes headache, nausea, sleeplessness, &c. — 
a train of symptoms known to mountaineers as " mountain 
sickness." That the primary cause of " mountain sickness " is 
lack of oxygen owing to the low atmospheric pressure there is 
not the slightest doubt. Lack of oxygen is thus not only an 
important, but also an abnormal form of stimulus to the re- 
spiratory centre, since it is accompanied by quite abnormal 
symptoms. A further analysis of the special effect of lack of 
oxygen on the respiratory centre has shown that this effect 
still depends on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the 
alveolar air. The lack of oxygen appears, in fact, to have 
simply increased the sensitiveness of the centre to carbon 
dioxide, so that a lower partial pressure of carbon dioxide 



excites the centre, and the breathing is correspondingly increased. 
By prolonged forced breathing so much carbon dioxide is washed 
out of the body that the subsequent apnoea lasts until the 
oxygen in the alveolar air is nearly exhausted. The subject 
of the experiment becomes very blue in the face and is partially 
stupefied by want of oxygen before he has any desire to breathe. 
The probable explanation of these facts is that want of oxygen 
does not itself excite the centre, but that some substance — 
very probably lactic acid, which is known to be formed abundantly 
— is produced abnormally in the body during exposure to want 
of oxygen and aids the carbon dioxide in exciting the centre. 
It is known that the blood becomes less alkaline at high altitudes, 
and that acids in general excite the centre. A person on a high 
mountain thus gets out of breath much more easily than at 
sea-level. The extra stimulus to the centre during work still 
comes from the extra carbon dioxide formed, but has a greater 
effect than usual on the breathing. If the extra stimulus came 
directly from want of oxygen the person on the mountain would 
probably turn blueand loseconsciousnessontheslightestexertion. 
By analysing the alveolar air it can be shown that after a time 
even a height of 5000 to 6000 ft., or a diminution of only a 
sixth in the barometric pressure, distinctly increases the sensitive- 
ness of the respiratory centre to carbon dioxide, so that there 
seems to be a slow accumulation of acid in the blood. The 
effect also passes off very slowly on returning to normal pressure, 
although the lack of oxygen is at once removed. 

The blueness of the skin (" cyanosis ") produced by lack of 
oxygen is due to the fact that the haemoglobin of the red 
corpuscles is imperfectly saturated with oxygen. Haemo- 
globin which is fully saturated with oxygen has a bright red 
colour, contrasting with the blue colour which it assumes 
when deprived of oxygen. According to the existing evidence 
the saturation of the haemoglobin is practically complete 
under normal conditions in the lungs, or when thoroughly 
shaken at the body temperature and normal atmospheric 
pressure with air of the same composition as normal alveolar 
air. As the partial pressure of the oxygen in this air falls, 
however, the saturation of the haemoglobin becomes less 
and less complete, and the arterial blood assumes a more and 
more blue tinge, which imparts a blue or leaden colour to 
the skin, accompanied by the symptoms, already referred to, 
of lack of oxygen. Normal arterial blood in man yields 
about 19 volumes of physiologically available oxygen for 
each 100 volumes of blood. Of these 19 volumes about 185 are 
loosely combined with the haemoglobin of the red corpuscles, 
the small remainder being in simple solution in the blood. 
Venous blood, on the other hand, yields only about 12 volumes. 
The combination of haemoglobin with oxygen is only stable 
in the presence of free oxygen at a pressure of about that in 
normal alveolar air. As this pressure falls the compound 
is progressively dissociated. From this it can be readily 
understood why the blood loses its oxygen in passing through 
the tissues, which are constantly absorbing free oxygen, and 
regains it in the lungs. The marked effects produced by 
abnormal deficiency in the pressure of oxygen in the alveolar 
air are also readily intelligible; for even although the arterial 
blood still contains sufficient oxygen to cover the normal 
difference between the oxygen content of arterial and that of 
venous blood, yet this oxygen is given off to the tissues less 
readily — i.e. at a lower pressure, and thus fails to supply their 
demands completely. It is evident also that in pure air at 
normal pressure increased ventilation of the lungs does not 
appreciably increase the supply of oxygen to the blood, whereas 
in air largely deprived of its oxygen, or at low pressure, the 
increased alveolar oxygen pressure produced by deep breath- 
ing helps greatly in saturating the blood with oxygen, and 
may thus relieve the symptoms of want of oxygen. Hence 
it is that the increased sensitiveness of the respiratory centre 
to carbon dioxide, and consequent increased depth of breath- 
ing, at high altitudes compensates to a large extent for de- 
ficiency in the oxygen pressure. Addition of carbon dioxide 
to the inspired air produces exactly the same result. Indeed 



190 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



[PHYSIOLOGY 



Professor Angelo Mosso was led by observation of* the beneficial 
effects of carbon dioxide at low atmospheric pressure to attri- 
bute mountain sickness to lack of carbon dioxide, a condition 
which he designated by the word " acapnia. " When impure 
air is vitiated, not only by deficiency of oxygen, but also by 
carbon dioxide, the carbon dioxide causes panting, which not 
only gives warning of any danger, but prevents the alveolar 
oxygen percentage from falling in the way it would do if the 
carbon dioxide were absent. In this way the carbon dioxide 
greatly lessens the danger. To give instances, air progressively 
and very highly vitiated by respiration is much less likely to 
cause danger if the carbon dioxide is not artificially absorbed, 
and not nearly so dangerous as the great diminution of atmo- 
spheric pressure (and consequently of oxygen pressure) which 
occurs in a very high balloon ascent. Indeed the dangers of 
a very high balloon ascent are notorious, and a number of 
deaths or very narrow escapes are on record. 

Just as oxygen forms a dissociable compound with the 
haemoglobin of the blood, so does carbon dioxide form dis- 
sociable compounds. One of* these compounds appears to be 
with haemoglobin itself, and another is sodium bicarbonate, 
which is far more easily dissociated in the blood than in a 
simple watery solution, owing to the presence of proteid and 
possibly other substances which act as weak acids and thus 
help the dissociation process. The whole of the carbon di- 
oxide can therefore be removed from the blood by a vacuum 
pump, just as pie whole of the oxygen can. Venous blood 
contains roughly speaking about 40 volumes of carbon di- 
oxide per 100 of blood, and arterial blood about 34 volumes. 
Of this carbon dioxide only about 3 volumes can be in free solu- 
tion, the rest being loosely combined. The conveyance of carbon 
dioxide from the blood to the lungs is thus readily intelligible, 
as well as the fact that any increase or diminution of the pres- 
sure of carbon dioxide in the alveolar air will naturally lead 
to a damming back or increased liberation of carbon dioxide 
from the blood, and that by forced breathing carbon dioxide 
can be washed out of the blood to such an extent that a pro- 
longed cessation of natural breathing (apnoea) follows, since 
even in the venous blood the partial pressure of carbon di- 
oxide has become too low to excite the respiratory centre. 

It will be evident from the foregoing that in order to supply 
efficiently the respiratory requirements of the tissues not only 
must the breathing, but also the circulation, be suitably regu- 
lated. In hard muscular work the consumption of oxygen 
and output of carbon dioxide may be increased eight or ten 
times beyond those of rest. Unless, therefore, the blood 
supply to the active tissues were correspondingly increased, 
deficiency of oxygen would at once arise, since the amount 
of oxygen carried by a given volume of the arterial blood is 
very limited, as already explained. It is known that the 
supply of blood to each organ is always increased during its 
activity. This increase can, for instance, readily be seen 
and measured in the case of contracting muscles or secreting 
glands; and the volume and frequency of the pulse are greatly 
increased during muscular work. But while it is evident 
enough that the flow of blood through the body is determined 
in accordance with the metabolic activities of each tissue, 
our knowledge is as yet very scanty as to the means by which 
this determination is brought about. Probably, however, 
carbon dioxide may be nearly as important a factor in the 
regulation of the circulation as in that of breathing. Just as 
the rate of breathing was formerly . supposed to determine, 
and not to be determined by, the fundamental metabolic 
processes of the body, so the circulation was supposed to be 
another independent determining factor; and under the 
influence of these mechanistic conceptions the direction of 
investigation into the phenomena of respiration and circula- 
tion has been largely diverted to side issues. 

Since the circulation, no less than the breathing, is con- 
cerned in the supply of oxygen to and removal of carbon 
dioxide from the tissues, it can readily be understood that 
defective circulation, such as occurs, for instance, in uncom- 



pensated valvular affections of the heart, may affect the 
breathing and hinder the normal respiratory exchange. Con- 
versely, also, defects in the aeration or oxygen-carrying power 
of the blood may be compensated for by increase in the cir- 
culation. For instance, in the very common condition known 
as anaemia, where the percentage of haemoglobin, and con- 
sequently the oxygen-carrying power of the blood, is often 
reduced to a third or less, the respiratory disturbances may 
be so slight that the patient is going about his or her ordinary 
work. A miner suffering from the now well-known " worm- 
disease," or ankylostomiasis (q.v.), may be working under- 
ground, or a housemaid suffering from chlorosis may be doing 
her work, with only a third of the normal oxygen-carrying 
power of the blood. There seems to be no doubt that in such 
cases an increased rate of blood circulation compensates for the 
diminished oxygen-carrying power of the blood. It is well 
known that at high altitudes a gradual process of adaptation 
to the low pressure occurs, and the shortness of breath and 
other symptoms experienced for the first few days gradually 
become less and less. This adaptation is partly, at least, 
due to a marked increase in the percentage of haemoglobin in 
the blood, though probably circulatory and perhaps other com- 
pensatory changes are also involved. 

In connexion with respiration the action of certain poisons 
is of great interest. One of these, carbon monoxide, is of very 
common occurrence, and causes numerous cases of poisoning. 
Like oxygen, it has the property of combining with the haemo- 
globin of the blood, but its affinity for haemoglobin is far more 
strong than that of oxygen. In presence of air containing as 
little as -05% of carbon monoxide, the haemoglobin will become 
about equally shared between oxygen and carbon monoxide, 
so that, since air contains 20.9% of oxygen, the affinity of 
carbon monoxide for haemoglobin may be regarded as about 
400 times greater than that of oxygen. The blood of a person 
breathing even a small percentage of carbon monoxide may 
thus become gradually saturated to a dangerous extent, since 
the haemoglobin engaged by the carbon monoxide is for the 
time useless as an oxygen-carrier. Air containing more than 
about 0.1% of carbon monoxide is thus more or less dangerous 
if breathed for long; but the blood completely recovers in the 
course of a few hours if pure air is again breathed. The 
poisonous action of carbon monoxide can be abolished by placing 
the animal exposed to it in oxygen at an excess pressure of 
about an atmosphere. The reason for this is that, in consequence 
of the increased partial pressure of the oxygen, the amount of 
this gas in free solution in the blood is greatly increased in 
accordance with Dal ton's law, and becomes sufficient to supply 
the tissues with oxygen quite independently of the haemoglobin. 
Even at ordinary atmospheric pressure the extra oxygen 
dissolved in the blood when pure oxygen is breathed is of con- 
siderable importance. Carbon-monoxide poisoning is the chief 
cause of death in colliery explosions and fires, and the sole cause 
in poisoning by lighting gas and fuel gas of various kinds. Its 
presence in dangerous proportions may be readily detected with 
the help of a small bird, mouse or other small warm-blooded 
animal. In such animals the respiratory exchange is so rapid 
that symptoms of carbon-monoxide poisoning are shown far 
more quickly than in man. The small animal can thus be em- 
ployed in mines, &c, to indicate danger from carbon monoxide. 
A lamp is useless for this purpose. There are various other 
poisons, such as nitrites, chlorates, dinitrobenzol, &c, which 
act by disabling the haemoglobin, and so cutting off the oxygen 
supply to the tissues. 

Between the air in the air-cells of the lungs and the blood 
of the lung capillaries there intervenes nothing but a layer of 
very thin, flattened cells, and until recently it was very generally 
believed that it was by diffusion alone that oxygen passes inwards 
and carbonic acid outwards through this layer. Similar simple 
physical explanations of processes of secretion and absorption 
through living cells have, however, turned out to be incorrect in 
the case of other organs. It is known, moreover, that in the 
case of the swimming-bladder of fishes oxygen is secreted into 



PHYSIOLOGY] 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



191 



the interior against enormous pressure. Thus, in the case of a 
fish caught at a depth of 4500 ft., the partial pressure of the 
oxygen present in the swimming bladder at this depth was 127 
atmospheres, whereas the partial pressure of oxygen in sea-water 
is only about 0*2 atmosphere. Diffusion can therefore have 
nothing to do with the passage of gas inwards, which is known to 
be under the control of the nervous system. The cells lining 
the interior of the swimming bladder are developed from the 
same part of the alimentary tract as those lining the air-cells 
of the lungs, so that it seems not unlikely that the lungs should 
possess the power of actively secreting or excreting gases. The 
question whether such a power exists, and is normally exercised, 
has been investigated by more than one method; and although 
it is not possible to go into the details of the experiments, there 
can be no doubt that the balance of the evidence at present 
available is in favour of the view that diffusion alone is incapable 
of explaining either the absorption of oxygen or the excretion 
of carbon dioxide through the lining cells of the lungs. The 
partial pressure of oxygen appears to be always higher, and of 
carbon dioxide often lower, in the blood leaving the lungs than 
in the air of the air-cells; and this result is inconsistent with the 
diffusion theory. As to the causes of the passage of oxygen and 
carbonic acid through the walls of the capillaries of the general 
circulation, we are at present in the dark. Possibly diffusion 
may explain this process. 

II. Although we cannot trace the exact changes which occur 
when oxygen passes into living cells, yet it is possible to obtain 
a clear general view of the origin and destiny of the material 
concerned in the process, and of the physiological conditions 
which determine it. 

The oxidizablc material within the body consists, practically 
speaking, of proteids (albumen-like substances, with which the 
collagen of connective tissue may be included), fats and carbo- 
hydrates (sugars and glycogen). All of these substances contain 
carbon, hydrogen and oxygen in known, though different, 
proportions, and the former also contains a known amount 
of nitrogen and a little sulphur. Nitrogen is constantly leaving 
the body as urea and other substances in the urine and faeces; 
and a small but easily measurable proportion of carbon passes 
off in the same manner. The rest of the carbon passes out as 
carbon dioxide in respiration. Now carbohydrates and fats 
are oxidized completely in the body to carbon dioxide and water. 
This follows from the fact that, practically speaking, no other 
products into which they might have been converted leave the 
body except carbon dioxide and water. Moreover, a given 
weight of carbohydrate requires for its oxidation a definite 
weight of oxygen, and produces a definite weight of carbon 
dioxide. There is thus a definite relation between the weight 
of oxygen used up and the weight of carbon dioxide formed in 
this oxidation. The same is true for the oxidation of fat and 
of proteid, allowing in the latter case for the fact that the 
nitrogen, together with part of the carbon and hydrogen, passes 
out as urea, &c, in an incompletely oxidized form. From all 
this it follows that if we measure over a given period (1) the 
discharge of nitrogen from the body, (2) the intake of oxygen 
and (3) the output of carbonic acid, we can easily calculate 
exactly what the ultimate destiny of the oxygen has been, and 
at the ultimate expense of what material the carbonic acid has 
been formed. What the intermediate stages may have been we 
cannot say, but this in no way affects the validity of the calcula- 
tion. If, during the period of measurement, food is taken, the 
basis of the calculation is still substantially the same, as the 
oxidizable material in food consists of practically nothing else 
except proteids, carbohydrates and fats. 

Liberation of Energy. — From experiments made outside the 
body, we know that in the oxidation of a given weight of proteid, 
carbohydrate or fat, a definite amount of energy is liberated. 
In the article on Dietetics it is shown that precisely the same 
liberation of energy occurs in the living body, due allowance 
being made for the fact that the oxidation of proteid is not 
quite complete. The following table shows the respiratory 
quotients (the respiratory quotient being the ratio between 



the volume of carbon dioxide .formed and that of oxygen used 
up) and energy expressed in units of heat (calories) liberated 
per gramme of carbon dioxide produced and oxygen consumed 
in the living body during the oxidation of proteid, fat and a 
typical carbohydrate: — 



Substance oxidized. 


Respiratory 
quotient. 


Calories per 
gramme of 
COj pro- 
duced. 


Calories per 
gramme of 

oxygen 
consumed. 


Proteid 
Fat 
Cane-sugar . 


•78 

•7i 

i-oo 


2.78 
3*35 
2-59 


300 

3-27 
3*56 



In the oxidation of non-living substances the rate varies, 
within wide limits, according to that at which oxygen is 
supplied. Thus a fire burns the faster the more air is supplied, 
and the higher the percentage of oxygen in the air. It was for 
long believed that in the living body also the rate of oxidation 
must vary according to the oxygen supply. It has been found, 
however, that this is not the case. Provided that a certain 
minimum of oxygen is present in the air breathed, or in 
the blood supplied to the tissues, it is, practically speaking, 
indifferent whether the oxygen supply be increased or diminished : 
only a certain amount is consumed. It might be supposed that 
the reason for this is that the available oxidizable material in 
the body is limited, and that if the food supply were increased 
there would be a corresponding increase in the rate of oxidation. 
This hypothesis is apparently supported by the fact that, 
when an increased supply of proteid is given as food, the amount 
of nitrogen discharged in the urine is almost exactly corre- 
spondingly increased, so that evidently the oxidation of proteid 
increases correspondingly with the supply. Similarly, when 
carbohydrate food is given, the alteration in the respiratory 
quotient shows that more carbohydrate than before is being 
oxidized. Closer investigation in recent times has, however, 
brought out the very striking fact that, if oxidation be measured 
in terms of energy liberated by it in the body, it makes hut 
little difference, other things being equal, whether the animal 
is fasting or not. If more proteid or carbohydrate is oxidized 
at one time, correspondingly less fat is oxidized, but the total 
energy liberated as heat, &c, in the body is about the same, 
unless the diet is very excessive, when there is a slight increase 
of oxidation. Even after many days of starvation, the rate of 
oxidation per unit of body weight has been found to remain sensibly 
the same in man. When more food is taken than is required, the 
excess is stored up, chiefly in the form of fat, into which carbo- 
hydrate and possibly also proteid are readily converted in the 
body. When less food is taken than is needed, the stock of fat is 
drawn upon, and supplies by far the greater proportion of the 
energy requirements of the body. 

During the performance of muscular work oxidation is greatly 
increased, and may amount to ten times the normal or more. 
Even the slight exertion of easy walking increases oxidation to 
three times. When the energy represented by the external 
work done in muscular exertion is compared with the extra 
energy liberated by oxidation in*the body, it is found, as would 
be expected, that the latter value largely exceeds the former. 
In other words, much of the energy liberated is wasted as heat. 
Nevertheless the muscles are capable of working with less waste 
than any steam or gas engine. In the work of climbing, for 
instance, it has been found in the case of man that 35 % of 
the energy liberated is represented in the work done in raising 
the body. Muscular work, if at all excessive, leads to fatigue, 
and consequent rest. On the other hand, unnatural abstinence 
from muscular activity leads to restlessness and consequent 
muscular work. Hence on an average of the twenty-four hours 
the expenditure of energy by different individuals, with different 
modes of life, does not as a rule differ greatly. 

The rate of oxidation per unit of body weight varies consider- 
ably according to size and age. If we compare different warm- 
blooded animals, we find that the rate of oxidation is relatively 



192 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



[MOVEMENTS 



to their weight far higher in the. smaller ones. In a mouse or 
small bird, for instance, the rate is about twenty times as great 
as in a man. The difference is in part due to the fact that the 
smaller an animal is the greater is its surface relatively to its 
mass, and consequently the more heat does it require to keep 
up its temperature. The smaller animal must therefore produce 
more heat. Even in cold-blooded animals, however, oxidation 
appears to be more rapid the smaller the animal. In the case 
of man, oxidation is relatively more than twice as rapid in 
children than in adults, and the difference is greater than would 
be accounted for by the difference in the ratio of surface to mass. 
Allowing for differences in size, oxidation is about equally rapid 
in men and women. 

It was for long believed that the special function of respiratory 
oxidation was (1) the production of heat, and (2) the destruction 
of the supposed " waste products." Further investigation has, 
however, tended to show more and more clearly that in reality 
respiratory oxidation is an essential and intimate accompani- 
ment of all vital activity. To take one example, secretion and 
absorption, which were formerly explained as simple processes 
of nitration and diffusion, are now known to be* accompanied, 
and necessarily so, by respiratory oxidation in the tissues con- 
cerned. The respiratory oxidation of an animal is thus a very 
direct index of the activity of its vital processes as a whole. 
Looking at what is known with regard to respiratory oxidation, 
we see that what is most striking and most characteristic in 
it is its tendency to persist — to remain on the whole at about 
a normal level for each animal, or each stage of development 
of an animal. The significance of this cannot be over-estimated. 
It indicates clearly that just as an organism differentiates itself 
from any non-living material system by the manner in which 
it actually asserts and maintains its specific anatomical structure, 
50 does it differentiate itself from any mere mechanism by the 
manner in which it asserts and maintains its specific physiological 
activities. 

Authorities. — For further general information the reader may 
be referred to the sections by Pembrey and by Gamgee in Schafer's 
Handbook of Physiology, vol. i., and by Bohr in Nagel's Handbuck 
der Physiologic, vol. i. The following additional references are to 
recent investigations: Regulation of Breathing, Haldane and 
Priestley, Journal of Physiology, xxxii. 225 (1905). Respiration 
at High Altitudes and Effects of Want of Oxygen, Zuntz, Loewy, 
Caspari, and Mtiller, Das Hohenklima (1905) ; Boycott and Haldane, 
Ward, and Haldane and Poulton, Journal of Physiology, xxxvii.(iQo8). 
Respiration at High Pressures, " Report to the Admiralty of the 
Committee on Deep Diving " (1907). Respiratory Exchange and 
Secretion, Barcroft, Journal 0} Physiology, xxvii. 31 (1901); Bar- 
croft and Brodie, Journal of Physiology, xxvii. 18, and xxxiii. 52 
(1905). Excretion of C0 2 by the Lung Epithelium, Bohr, Zentral- 
blattfur Physiologie, xxi. 337 (1907). " Normal Alveolar C0 2 Pressure 
in Man," Mabel Fitzgerald and J. Haldane in Physiological Journal 
(1905). (J. S. H.) 

(3) Movements of Respiration 

Normal Respiration. — If the naked body of a person asleep 
or in perfect inactivity be carefully watched, it will be found 
that the anterior and lateral walls of the chest move rhythmi- 
cally up and down, while air passes into and out of the nostrils 
(and mouth also if this be open) in correspondence with the 
movement. If we look more closely wc shall find that with 
every uprising of the chest walls the membranous intercostal 
portions sink slightly as if sucked in, while at the same time 
the flexible walls of the abdomen bulge as if protruded by some 
internal force. If respiration be in the slightest degree hurried, 
these motions become so marked as to escape the attention of 
no one. The elevation of the chest walls is called inspiration, 
their depression expiration. Inspiration is slightly shorter 
than expiration, and usually there is a slight pause or momentary 
inaction of the chest between expiration and the following 
inspiration. Apparatuses for measuring the excursion of a 
given point of the chest wall during respiration are called 
ihoracometers or stethometers. Apparatuses for recording the 
movements of the chest are called stethographs or pneumo- 
graphs. 

Frequency of Respiration. — The frequency of respiration 



during perfect rest of the body is 16 to 24 per minute, the 
pulse rate being usually four times the rate of respiration; 
but the respiratory rhythm varies in various conditions of 
life. The following are the means of many observations made 
by Lambert Adolphe Quetelet (1796-1874): at the age of one 
year the number of respirations is 44 per minute; at 5 
years, 26; from 15 to 20 years, 20; from 25 to 30, 16; from 
30 to 50, i8-i. Muscular exertion always increases the fre- 
quency of respiration. The higher the temperature of the 
environment the more frequent is the respiration. Paul Bert 
( 1 833-1 886) has shown that with higher atmospheric pressures 
than the normal the frequency of respiration is diminished 
while the depth of each inspiration is increased. The frequency 
of respiration diminishes until dinner-time, reaches its maximum 
within an hour of feeding, and thereafter falls again; if dinner 
is^omitted, no rise of frequency occurs. The respiratory act 
can be interrupted at any stage, reversed, quickened, slowed 
and variously modified at will, so long as respiration is not 
stopped entirely for more than a short space of time; beyond 
this limit the will is incapable of suppressing respiration. 

Depth of Respiration. — The depth of respiration is measured 
by the quantity of air inspired or expired in the act; but 
the deepest expiration possible does not suffice to expel all 
the air the lungs contain. The following measurements have 
been ascertained, and are here classified according to the con- 
venient terminology proposed by John Hutchinson (1811-1861). 
(1) Residual air t the volume of air remaining in the chest ■ 
after the most complete expiratory effort, ranges from 100 
to 130 cub. in. (2) Reserve or supplemental air, the 
volume of air which can be expelled from the chest after 
an ordinary quiet expiration, measures about 100 cub. in. 
(3) Tidal air} the volume of air taken in and given out at 
each ordinary respiration may be stated at about 20 cub. 
in. (4) Complemental air, the volume of air that can be 
forcibly inspired over and above what is taken in at a normal 
inspiration , ranges from about 1 00 to 130 cub . in. By 
vital capacity, ; which once had an exaggerated importance 
attached to it, is meant the quantity of air which can be ex- 
pelled from the lungs by the deepest possible expiration after 
the deepest possible inspiration; it obviously includes the 
complemental, tidal and reserve airs, and measures about 
230 cub. in. in the Englishman of average height, i.e. 
5 ft. 8 in. (Hutchinson). It varies according to the height, 
body weight, age, sex, position of the body and condition as to 
health of the subject of observation. 

Vital capacity is estimated by means of a spirometer, a gradu- 
ated gasometer into which air may be blown from the lungs. 
The residual air, which for obvious reasons cannot be actually 
measured, may be estimated in the following way (Emil Harless," 
1820-1862; Louis Grehant, b. 1838). At the end of ordinary 
expiration, apply the mouth to a mouthpiece communicating 
with a vessel filled with pure hydrogen, and breathe into and 
out of this vessel half a dozen times — until, in fact, there is 
reason to suppose that the air in the lungs at the time of the 
experiment has become evenly mixed with hydrogen. Then 
ascertain by analysis the proportion of hydrogen to expired 
air in the vessel and estimate the amount of the air which the 
lungs contained by the following formula: — 

v : V+v=p : 100 ; 
XT _ v(ioo-p) 

p • 

where V= volume of air in the lungs at the time of experiment, 
v= volume of the vessel containing hydrogen, p= proportion of 
air to hydrogen in the vessel at the end of the experiment. V, 
then, is the volufne of air in the lungs after an ordinary expira- 
tion; that is, it includes the residual and the reserve air; if 
we subtract from this the amount of reserve air ascertained 
by direct measurement, we obtain the 100-130 cub. in. which 
Hutchinson arrived at by a study of the dead body. 

Volume of Respiration. — It is clear that the ventilation of 
the lungs in ordinary breathing does not merely depend on 



MOVEMENTS] 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



193 



the quantity of air inspired at each breath, but also on the 
number of inspirations in a given time. If these two values 
he multiplied together we get what might be called the volume 
of respiration {Athmungsgrosse, Isidore Rosenthal, b. 1836), 
in contradistinction to depth of respiration and frequency of 
respiration. Various instruments have heen devised to 
measure the volume of respiration, all more or less faulty for 
the reason that they compel respiration under somewhat ab- 
normal conditions (Rosenthal, Gad, Peter Ludwig, Panum 
(1820-1885), Ewald Hering (b. 1834). From the data ob- 
tained we may conclude that the respiratory volume per 
minute in man is about 366 cuh. in. (6000 cub. centim.). 
In connexion with this subject it may be stated that, after 
a single ordinary inspiration of hydrogen gas, 6-10 respirations 
of ordinary air must occur before the expired air ceases to 
contain some trace of hydrogen. 

Types of Respiration. — The visible characters of respiration 
in man vary considerably according to age and sex. In men, 
while there is a moderate degree of upheaval of the chest, 
there is a considerable although not preponderating degree 
of excursion of the ahdominal walls. In women the chest 
movements are decidedly most marked, the excursion of the 
abdominal walls being comparatively small. Hence we may 
distinguish two types of respiration, the costal and the ab- 
dominal, according to the preponderance of movement of 
one or the other part of the body wall. In forced respiration 
the type is costal in both sexes, and so it is also in sleep. The 
cause of this difference between men and women has been 
variously ascribed (a) to constriction of the chest by corsets 
in women, (6) to a natural adaptation to the needs of child- 
bearing in women, and (c) to the greater relative flexibility 
of the ribs in women permitting a wider displacement under 
the action of the inspiratory muscles. 

Certain Concomitants of Normal Respiration. — If the ear 
be placed against the chest wall during ordinary respiration 
we can hear with every inspiration a sighing or rustling sound, 
called " vesicular," which is probably caused by the expansion 
of the air vesicles; and with every expiration a sound of a 
much softer sighing character. In children the inspiratory 
rustle is sharper and more pronounced than in adults. If a 
stethoscope be placed over the trachea, bronchi or larynx, 
so that the sounds generated there may be separately com- 
municated to the ear, there is heard a harsh to-and-fro sound 
during inspiration and expiration which has received the 
name of " bronchial." 

In healthy hreathing the mouth should be closed and the 
ingoing current should all pass through the nose. When 
this happens the nostrils become slightly expanded with each 
inspiration, probahly by the action of the M. dilatatores naris. 
In some people this movement is hardly perceptible unless 
breathing be heavy or laboured. As the air passes at the 
back of the throat hehind the soft palate it causes the velum 
to wave very gently in the current; this is a purely passive 
movement. If we look at the glottis or opening into the larynx 
during respiration, as we may readily do with the help of a 
small mirror held at the back of the throat, we may notice 
that the glottis is wide open during inspiration and that it 
hecomes narrower by the approximation of the vocal chords 
during expiration. This alteration is produced by the action 
of the laryngeal muscles. Like the movements of the nostril, 
those of the larynx are almost imperceptible in some people 
during ordinary breathing, but are very well marked in all 
during forced respiration. 

The Mechanics of Respiration. — The thorax is practically 
a closed box entirely filled by the lungs, heart and other struc- 
tures contained within it. If we were to freeze a dead body 
until all its tissues were rigid, and then were to remove a 
portion of the chest wall, we should observe that every corner 
of the thorax is accurately filled by some portion or other 
of its contents. If we were to perform the same operation of 
removing a part of the chest wall in a body not first frozen 
we should find, on the other hand, that the contents of the 



thorax are not by any means in such circumstances bulky 
enough to fill up the space provided for them. If we were 
to measure the organs carefully we should find that those 
which are hollow and whose cavities communicate with the 
regions outside the thorax are all larger in the frozen corpse 
than in that which was not frozen. In other words, the organs 
in the thorax are distended somewhat in order that they may 
completely fill the chest cavity; and the nature of this curious 
and important condition may best be illustrated by the simple 
diagrams, figs. 7 and 8 (from Hermann's Physiologic des 





Fig. 7. 



Fig. 8." 



Menschen), — where / is the trachea, / the lung, v the auricle 
of the heart, k the ventricle, i an intercostal space with its 
flexible membranous covering. When the interior of the 
vessel is rendered vacuous by -exhaustion through the tube 
o, the walls of the lungs and heart are expanded until the 
limits of the containing vessel are accurately filled, while all 
flexible portions of the walls of the vessel (corresponding to 
the intercostal membranes and the diaphragm of the thorax) 
are sucked inwards. 

From this description it follows that the lungs, even when 
the thorax is most contracted, are constantly over-distended, 
and that, when the cause of this over-distension is removed, 
the lungs, being elastic, collapse. It further follows that 
if the thorax is dilated, the flexible hollow organs it contains 
must perforce be still more distended — a distension which in 
the case of the lungs is followed by an indrawing of air through 
the trachea in all cases where the trachea is open. Thus, 
as the act of respiration is primarily a dilatation of the thorax, 
the part played by the lungs is, as Galen knew, a purely passive 
one. 

How is dilatation of the thorax effected? It has been pointed 
out that the rib-planes decline from the horizontal in two 
directions, viz. from behind forwards, and from the antero- 
posterior mesial plane outwards; a glance at fig. 9 will make 
this double sloping clear to the reader. It has, moreover, 
been explained that the diaphragm arches upwards into the 
thorax in such a manner that the lateral parts of the arch 
are vertical and in contact with the inner face of the thoracic 
walls. This being the structure of the thorax, the enlarge- 
ment of its cavity is brought about (1) by raising the rib- 
planes until they approach the horizontal, and (2) by depressing 
the diaphragm and making its rounded dome more cone-like 
in outline. A moment's consideration will show how these 
actions enlarge the boundaries of the thorax, (a) When the 
postero-anterior slope of the rib-planes is diminished by the 
raising of the anterior ends of the ribs, the whole sternum 
is thrust upwards and forwards, and the antero-posterior 
diameter of the thorax is increased. (6) When the lateral 
slope of the rib-planes is diminished by the ribs being moved 

xxm. 7 



194 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



(MOVEMENTS 




From Hermann's Handbuch. 

Fig. 9. — Showing Slope of Ribs, 



upwards about an axis passing through their sternal and 
vertebral extremities, it is evident that the lateral diameter 

of the thorax must be 
increased, (c) When the 
muscular portion of the 
diaphragm contracts, the 
curves of its dome-like 
shape are straightened , 
the whole diaphragm 
comes to look more conical 
on section, and the ap- 
position of its lateral parts 
to the inner surface of the 
thorax is destroyed ; the 
two apposed surfaces are 
drawn apart much as the 
leaves of a book might be, 
and a space is formed 
between them, into which 
some portion of the lung 
slips, (d) When the dia- 
phragm descends it draws 
with it the whole con- 
tents of the thorax; in- 
asmuch as the contents as 
a whole are conical in 
shape with the apex up- 
ward and are fitted into 
Uhe conical space of the 
thoracic cavity, it is clear that the descent of the contents 
will tend to create a space between them and the thoracic 
walls; for each stratum of lung, &c, which is adapted to 
fit a certain level of thorax, will thereby be brought into a 
lower and (as the thorax is conical) a more spacious level. 
Hence the descent of the diaphragm causes a much greater 
enlargement of the thorax than is measured by the mere 
elongation of the vertical diameter. In this manner the thorax 
is distended and air is drawn into the lungs. The contraction 
of the thorax, in expiration is brought about by the return 
of the ribs and diaphragm to their original position of rest. 

How the Inspiratory Movements are Produced. — The Rib Move- 
ments. — These are caused by the contraction of muscles which 
are fixed either to the central axis of the body (including 
under that term the head and vertebral column) or to some 
point rendered sufficiently stable for the purpose by the action 
of other adjuvant muscles. Thus the M. leva tores costarum 
arise from the transverse processes of the 7th cervical and eleven 
upper dorsal vertebrae, and are attached to the ribs below in 
series; the M. scaleni spring from the cervical vertebrae, and 
are attached to the anterior parts of the first and second ribs; 
the M. sternocleido-mastoidei arise from the side and back of the 
skull, and are inserted into the upper part of the sternum and the 
clavicle; the M. pectoralis minor arises from the coracoid 
process of the scapula, and is inserted into the anterior ends of 
some of the ribs; the M. serratus posticus superior arises from 
certain of the cervical and dorsal vertebrae, and is inserted into 
the posterior part of certain of the ribs; the M. cervicalis 
ascendens (part of the M. erector spinae) arises from certain 
of the cervical vertebrae, and is inserted into the posterior part 
of certain ribs. The M. serratus magnus and the M. pectoralis 
major, which are affixed on the one hand to the upper arm and 
to the scapula respectively, and on the other to the ribs and to 
the sternum respectively, may in certain elevated positions of 
the arm and shoulder act as inspiratory muscles. When all 
these muscles contract, the ribs are raised in the twofold way 
already described, some pulling up the anterior ends of the 
ribs, and others causing the arched ribs to rotate about an axis 
passing through their vertebral and sternal joints. 

In addition to the muscles just enumerated, the M. inter- 
costales externi are undoubtedly inspiratory muscles. Every 
external intercostal muscular fibre between a pair of ribs must, 
when it contracts, of necessity raise both ribs, as is clearly shown 



by the accompanying diagram (fig. 10). Here a'b f must be 
snorter than ab t for if angle BAa = x t then 

a& 2 =ABM-(B&-Aa) l +2AB(B6-Aa)cos *; 
hence ab will be larger the smaller the angle x, for the cosine 
increases as the angle diminishes. 




Fig. 11. 



By a similar geometrical treatment of the question it may be 
shown that the internal intercostal muscles when they contract 
must of necessity depress both the ribs to which they are 
attached. If the angle BAc' = #(fig. 11), then 

c'd'^ABt+iAc'-Bdy^ABiAc'-Bd') cos x; 
hence c'd f will be larger the larger the angle x. 

The case, however, is not so clear with reference to the anterior 
portions of the internal intercostals which lie between the 
cartilages; for it is evident that these fibres have the same 
direction with regard to the sternum as an axis as the external 
intercostals have with regard to the vertebral column as an 
axis; that is to say, the geometrical diagram in fig. 10 applies 
to the inter-cartilaginous internal intercostals as perfectly as it 
does to the inter-osseous parts of the external intercostals, the 
inference being that the inter-cartilaginous internal intercostals 
tend to elevate the pair of ribs between which they stretch. 
The geometrical argument is, however, overborne by physio- 
logical experiment: Martin and Hartwell have observed in the 
dog and the cat that the internal intercostals throughout their 
whole extent contract (not synchronously) but alternately with 
the diaphragm; hence we must conclude that their function 
throughout is not inspiratory like that of the diaphragm, but 
expiratory. y 

The Movements of the Diaphragm. — The muscular fibres of 
the diaphragm are arranged in a radial manner, or, more strictly 
speaking, in a manner like the lines of longitude on a terrestrial 
globe. The central tendon of the diaphragm corresponds to 
the pole of such a globe. The contraction of the fibres is ex- 
pended on straightening the longitudinal curves rather than on 
pulling down the central tendon to a lower level; in fact, the 
central tendon moves very little in ordinary respiration. 

How the Expiratory Movements are Produced. — The action 
of inspiration disturbs many organs from the position of rest 
into which gravity and their own physical properties have 
thrown them. The ribs and sternum are raised from the position 
of lowest level; the elastic costal cartilages are twisted; the 
elastic lungs are put upon the stretch; the abdominal organs, 
themselves elastic, are compressed and thrust against the 
elastic walls of the belly, causing these to bulge outwards. In 
short the very act of inspiration stores up, as it were, in sundry 
ways the forces which make for expiration. As soon as the 
inspiratory muscles cease to act these iorces come into play, and 
the position of rest or equilibrium is regained. It is very doubtful 
whether any special expiratory muscles are called into action 
during ordinary respiration. The internal intercostals may in 
man be exercised in ordinary expiration (although they are 
certainly not so exercised in the dog and the cat); but in 
laboured expiration many muscles assist in the expulsive effort. 
The muscles forming the belly-walls contract and force the 
abdominal contents against the relaxed diaphragm in such a 
manner as to drive it farther and farther into the thorax. At 
the same time by their attachment to the lower edge of the 



PATHOLOGY] 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



195 



thorax these same muscles pull down the ribs and sternum. The 
M. triangularis sterni, which arises from the back or thoracic 
aspect of the sternum and lower costal cartilages and is inserted 
into the costal cartilages higher up, can obviously depress the 
ribs. So also can the M. serratus posticus inferior, which arises 
from the thick fascia of the loins and is inserted into the last 
four ribs. So also can the M. quadrat us lumborum, which 
springs from the pelvis and is attached to the last rib. Indeed 
there is hardly a muscle of the body but may be called into play 
during extremely laboured respiration, either because it acts on 
the chest, or because it serves to steady some part and give a 
better purchase for the action of direct respiratory muscles. 

Certain Abnormal Forms of Respiration. 

Coughing. — There is first a deep inspiration followed by 
closure of the glottis. Then follows a violent expiratory effort 
which bursts open the glottis and drives the air out of the lungs 
in a blast which carries away any light irritating matter it may 
meet with. The act is commonly involuntary, but may be 
imitated exactly by a voluntary effort. 

Hawkingy or Clearing the Throat. — In this act a current of air 
is driven from the lungs and forced through the narrow space 
between the root of the tongue and the depressed soft palate. 
This action can only be caused voluntarily. 

Sneezing. — There is first an inspiration which is often un- 
usually rapid; then follows a sudden expiration, and the blast is 
directed through the nose. The glottis remains open all the 
time. The act is generally involuntary, but may be more or 
less successfully imitated by a voluntary effort. 

Snoring is caused by unusually steady and prolonged inspira- 
tions and expirations through the open mouth, — the soft palate 
and uvula being set vibrating by the currents of air. 

Crying consists of short deep inspirations and prolonged 
expirations with the glottis partially closed. Long-continued 
crying leads to sobbing, in which sudden spasmodic contractions 
of the diaphragm cause sudden inspirations and inspiratory 
sounds generated in larynx and pharynx. 

Sighing is a sudden and prolonged inspiration following an 
unusually long pause after the last expiration. 

Laughing is caused by a series of short expiratory blasts 
which provoke a clear sound from the vocal chords kept tense 
for the purpose, and at the same time other inarticulate but 
very characteristic sounds from the vibrating structures of the 
larynx and pharynx. The face has a characteristic expression. 
This act is "essentially involuntary, and often is beyond control; 
it can only be imitated very imperfectly. 

'Yawning is a long deep inspiration followed by a shorter 
expiration, the mouth, fauces and glottis being kept open in a 
characteristic fashion. It is involuntary, but may be imitated. 

Hiccough is really an inspiration suddenly checked by closure 
of the glottis; the inspiration is due to a spasmodic contraction 
of the diaphragm. The closure of the glottis generally leads 
to a characteristic sound. (A. G.*) . 

(4) Pathology of the Respiratory System 

In the following article we have to give an account of the 
more important pathological processes which affect the lungs, 
pleurae and bronchial tubes. In the aetiology of pulmonary 
affections, the relations between the lungs and the external air, 
and also between them and the circulatory system, are im- 
portant. The lungs are, so to speak, placed between the right 
and left cavities of the heart, and the only way for the blood 
to pass from the right ventricle to the left side of the heart, 
except in cases of a patent foramen ovale or other congenital 
defect forming a communication between the two sides of the 
organ, is by passing through them. The result is that not only 
may they become diseased by foreign material carried into them 
by the blood, but any obstruction to the flow of blood through 
the left side of the heart tends sooner or later to engorge or con- 
gest them, and lead to further changes. Through the nose and 
mouth they are in direct connexion with the external atmo- 
sphere. Hence the variable condition of the air as regards 



temperature, degree of moisture, and density, is liable to produce 
directly various changes in the lungs, or to predispose them to 
disease; and the contamination of the air with various patho- 
genic germs and irritating particles in the shape of dust, is a 
direct source of many lung affections. 

Bronchitis^ or inflammation of the mucous membrane of the 
bronchial tubes, has been generally attributed to exposure 
to atmospheric changes. It occurs with great frequence in the 
extremes of life, and it is in early childhood and in old age that 
it is more liable to be fatal. Bronchitis may often follow 
exposure to cold, but that low temperature in itself is not 
sufficient to cause it is shown by the fact that the crews of 
arctic expeditions have been singularly free from diseases usually 
attributed to cold, but on their return to moist germ-laden 
atmospheres have at once been affected. Children reared in 
heated rooms with lack of ventilation are peculiarly susceptible 
to attacks on the slightest change of temperature. Bronchitis 
is also frequently caused by cardiac and renal diseases, and by 
the extension of inflammatory diseases of the upper air passages 
(as rhinitis, laryngitis or pharyngitis), while blockage of the 
nasal passages by adenoid or other growths may, by causing 
persistent mouth-breathing, lead to bronchial infection. Before 
the bacterial origin of disease was understood, bronchitis was 
attributed solely to what is termed " catching cold, " and the 
exact relation of the chill to the bacterial infection is still 
unknown. It is probable that the chilling of the surface of the 
body by exposure causes congestion of the mucous membrane, 
the presence of a virulent micro-organism being then all that is 
required to produce bronchitis. It is generally accepted that in 
persons living in the pure air of the country the small bronchi 
and air-cells are sterile (Barthel in the Zentralblatt fur Bakterio- 
logie t vol. xxiv.). Bacteria are arrested on their way by the 
leucocytes of the nasal mucous membrane and by the vibration 
of the ciliated epithelium of the upper air passages. The mucous 
membrane of the upper bronchi is, however, tenanted by various 
micro-organisms such as the diplo-bacillus of Friedlandcr, 
bacillus coli communis, micrococcus tetragenus, &c, and it is 
considered by William Ewart that these organisms may in 
certain conditions of their host become virulent. " Specific " 
bronchitis occurs in the course of a specific infective disease 
(e.g. influenza, measles or whooping cough) and is due to the 
specific micro-organism gaining access by the mucous membrane 
of the respiratory tract. Cases have been known in which the 
diphtheria bacillus has been so localized. In glanders, small-pox, 
syphilis and pemphigus, the infective micro-organism is carried 
to the bronchi by the blood stream. In common or " non- 
specific " bronchitis, streptococci, pneumococci and staphylococci 
are found in the sputum together with Friedlander's bacillus 
and the bacillus coli communis. Microscopically the bronchi 
show hyperaemia of the mucous and submucous coats, and the 
whole wall becomes infiltrated with polymorphonuclear 
leucocytes and round cells. Many cells undergo mucoid de- 
generation, and there is abundant epithelial proliferation. A 
large quantity of mucus is secreted by the glands, and the 
lumen of the bronchi contains an exudate consisting of mucus, 
degenerated leucocytes and cast-off epithelial cells. 

In the rare form of bronchitis known as fibrinous or plastic 
bronchitis a membranous exudate is formed which forms casts 
of the bronchi, which may be coughed up. The casts vary from 
an inch to six or seven inches in length, with branches corre- 
sponding to the divisions of the bronchi from which they come. 
The cast consists of mucus and fibrin in varying proportions. 
The exact pathology of this variety is still undetermined. 

Bronchitis may affect the whole bronchial tract, or more 
especially the larger or the smaller tubes. It may occur as an 
acute or as a chronic affection. In the acute form the inflamma- 
tion may remain limited to the bronchial tubes and gradually 
subside, or it may lead to inflammation of the surrounding lung 
tissue, giving rise to disseminated foci of inflammation of greater 
or less extent throughout the lungs (catarrhal or broncho- 
pneumonia). This is a common complication of bronchitis, 
especially where the smaller tubes are affected, and is more 



196 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



[PATHOLOGY 



frequently seen in children than adults. In cases of chronic 
bronchitis the affection, as a rule, begins as a slight ailment during 
the winter, and recurs in succeeding winters. The intervals of 
freedom from the trouble get shorter, and in the course of a 
few years it persists during the summer as well as the winter 
months. A condition of chronic bronchitis is thus established. 
The persistent cough which this occasions is one of the chief 
causes of the development of the condition of emphysema, where 
there is a permanent enlargement of the air-cells of the lungs 
with an atrophy of the walls of the air vesicles. The emphysema 
occasions an increase in the shortness of breath from which the 
person had previously suffered, and later, in consequence of 
the greater difficulty with which the blood circulates through the 
emphysematous lungs, the right side of the heart becomes 
dilated, and from that we have the development of a general 
dropsy of the subcutaneous tissues, and less and less perfect 
aeration of the blood. 

The death rate from bronchitis in England and Wales during 
1908 was: males 1102, females 1083 per million living. The 
death rate for the five years 190 1- 1905 was 1237 per million for 
all sexes. The death rate for the twenty years 1888-1908 con- 
sistently showed a slight decline. 

Diseases of Occupations. — We all inhale a considerable amount 
of carbonaceous and other foreign particles, which in health are 
partly got rid of by the action of the ciliated cells fining the 
bronchial tubes, and are partly absorbed by cells in the wall of - 
the tubes, and carried in the lymph channels to the bronchial 
lymphatic glands, where they are deposited, and cause a more 
or less marked pigmentation of the tissues. Part of such pig- 
ment is also deposited in the walls of the bronchial tubes and the 
interstitial tissue of the lungs, giving rise to the grey appearance 
presented by the lungs of all adults who live in large cities. 
In certain dusty occupations, such as those of stone masons, 
knife-grinders, colliers, &c, the foreign particles inhaled cause 
trouble. The most common affection so produced is chronic 
bronchitis, to which becomes added emphysema. In some cases 
not only is bronchitis developed, but the foreign particles lead 
to an increase of the fibrous tissue round the bronchi and in the 
interstitial tissue of the lungs, and so to a greater or lesser extent 
of fibroid consolidation. As this fibrous tissue may later under- 
go ' softening and cavities be formed, a form of consumption is 
produced, which is named according to the particular occupation 
giving rise to it; e.g. stonemasons' phthisis, knife-grinders' 
phthisis, colliers' phthisis. It should, however, be pointed out 
that these dusty occupations are probably not so frequently the 
cause as was at one time taught of these simple inflammatory 
fibroid changes in the lungs with their subsequent cavity for- 
mation; individuals engaged in such occupations are apt to 
suffer from a chronic . tuberculosis of the lung associated with 
the formation of much fibrous tissue, and the occupation simply 
predisposes the lung to the attacks of the tubercle bacillus. 

The term pneumonia is frequently used of different forms 
of inflammation of the lungs, and includes affections which 
_ run different clinical courses, present diverse appear- 

monia. ances after death, and probably have different excit- 
ing causes. It would be better if the term acute 
pneumonia or pneumonic fever were reserved for that form of 
acute inflammation of the lungs which is usually characterized 
by sudden onset, and runs an acute, course, which terminates 
generally by crisis from the fifth to the tenth day, the inflam- 
mation leading to the consolidation by fibrinous effusion of 
the greater part or whole of one lobe of a lung. Acute pneu- 
monia usually occurs in a sporadic form, and is most prevalent 
in the United Kingdom from November to March. Occasion- 
ally it is epidemic, and there is evidence to show that 
sometimes it is an infective disease. There is great difficulty, 
however, in being quite certain that the occurrence of the 
disease in those who have been attending upon or brought 
into intimate connexion with sufferers from pneumonia is 
the result of infection, for such cases may be due to an epidemic 
of the disease, or to the various individuals attacked having 
been exposed to the same cause. 



Formerly acute croupous or lobar pneumonia was thought 
to be due to " catching cold "; we now know it to be an 
infectious disease resultant on the invasion of one or more 
specific micro-organisms. The chief micro-organisms which 
have been found to be present during an attack of acute pneu- 
monia are the micrococcus lanceolatus or pneumococcus of 
Frankel and Weichselbaum, which is found in the inflamed 
lung in a large majority of cases and is capable of produc- 
ing pneumonia when inoculated into guinea-pigs. Sternberg 
demonstrated the presence of g the pneumococcus in the saliva 
of healthy individuals; it tends, however, in this case to vary 
in form. The micro-organism differs in virulence in given 
strains; thus one epidemic may be more severe than another; 
and it tends to increase in virulence in its passage through 
the human subject. . The exact conditions necessary for the 
production of increased virulence in the organism causing an 
attack of lobar pneumonia are not yet determined, but are 
usually ascribed to lowered states of the health and to atmo- 
spheric conditions. The pneumococcus produces in the 
human organism an intracellular toxin, but the question as 
to whether it can also produce a soluble toxin in the living 
body is still debated. The difficulty of obtaining sufficient 
quantities of the toxins of this organism has prevented the 
production of antisera of high potency. In lower animals, 
less potent sera have proved successful in protecting against 
a fatal dose of pneumococci. The change effected by the 
administration of a serum is produced by causing a change in 
the pneumococci, which causes them to be more easily destroyed 
by the phagocytes. The element which brings about this 
change is termed an opsonin; see Blood and Bacteriology 
(ii). The bacillus pneumoniae of Friedlander is also said to 
be found in a certain percentage of cases, but a number of 
observers deny its presence in pure culture in primary croupous 
pneumonia. 

Unlike many acute diseases, pneumonia does not render a 
person less liable to future attacks; on the contrary, those 
who have been once attacked must be looked upon as more 
prone to be affected again. Acute pneumonia usually attacks 
the whole or greater part of one lobe of one lung, but more 
than one lobe may be affected, or both lungs may be involved. 
The disease produces a solid and airless condition of the affected 
part owing, to a fibrinous exudation taking place into the air- 
cells and smaller bronchial passages. In favourable cases 
the exudation is partly absorbed and partly expectorated, 
and the lung returns to its normal healthy condition; in others, 
death may ensue from the extent of lung affected, or from 
the spread of the inflammation to other parts, as for instance 
the pericardium or meninges of the brain. In such cases it is 
interesting to note that the same micro-organism has been found 
in the inflammatory exudation in the pericardium or on the 
meninges as in the pneumonic lung; probably the organism 
had been absorbed from the lung, and was the cause of the 
secondary inflammations. In cases of death from uncom- 
plicated pneumonia a very variable extent of lung is involved. 
In some cases this result may be ascribed to the weakness of 
the individual and especially of the heart, but in others the 
virulence of the micro-organisms and the toxins which they 
have produced is probably the more correct explanation. The 
improvement in a patient suffering from pneumonia usually 
commences suddenly, with a rapid fall in the temperature. 
The day on which this " crisis" takes place varies, but most 
commonly it appears to be the seventh from the initial rigor 
(22 % of the cases, Jurgensen). It may, however, occur a 
few days earlier or later, being observed in about 74% between 
the fifth and the ninth day of the disease (Jurgensen). . The 
disease occasionally ends in the formation of an abscess, in 
gangrene, or in fibroid induration of the lung, but these ter- 
minations are rare. 

The death rate of acute pneumonia for England and Wales 
in 1908 was 1383 per million living of the population. 

Broncho-pneumonia. — It is usual to recognize a form of inflam- 
mation of the lungs which differs from the above lobar pneumonia. 



PATHOLOGY] 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



197 



and in which small patches of consolidation are usually scattered 
throughout the lower lobes of both lungs. This broncho- or 
catarrhal 1 pneumonia is usually preceded by an attack of bronchitis, 
to which it bears an intimate relation. In some cases the small 
foci of inflammation may run together so as to affect the greater 
part of a lobe of a lung, and the distinction between such a form 
of broncho-pneumonia and lobar pneumonia presents such diffi- 
culties in the view of some observers, that they have refused to 
recognize any essential difference between the two. Usually, 
however, it is not difficult to distinguish the two affections both 
clinically and anatomically. Broncho-pneumonia is especially 
seen as a complication of bronchitis, andwhile it more frequently 
attacks children than young adults, it is not uncommon in old 
people, especially secondary to bronchitis. It is frequent in children 
after acute infectious fevers, especially measles and diphtheria, 
and in cases of whooping-cough. It differs from the above-mentioned 
pneumonia in that it does not usually attack the whole of a lobe 
of a lung, but occurs in small disseminated patches more especially 
throughout the lower lobe of both lungs. The accompanying 
fever is more irregular than in the preceding form, and the disease 
usually runs a more prolonged course. It is an extremely fatal 
affection in both the very young and old. Young persons who have 
suffered from it are not unfrequently attacked by pulmonary 
tuberculosis subsequently. It must be admitted that we are even 
less certain of its bacteriology than we arc of that of lobar pneu- 
monia. In some cases Frankel's pneumococcus is found, and in 
others various other micro-organisms. Many of the latter are 
doubtless saprophytic, and are not the essential cause of the disease, 
but it is not probable that any one particular form of organism 
accounts for all forms of broncho-pneumonia. 

The bacteriology of broncho-pneumonia presents no one 
micro-organism which can be definitely said to cause the disease. 
The micro-organism most frequently found, either alone or 
associated with other bacteria, is the pneumococcus, which 
occurred in 67% of a series investigated by Wollstein. Other 
organisms found are the streptococcus, particularly in broncho- 
pneumonia following infectious fevers, the staphylococcus 
aureus and albus, and Friedlander's- bacillus. In some cases 
the bacillus influenzae alone has been found, and the Klebs- 
Loffler bacillus in cases following upon diphtheria. When the 
disease is associated with pulmonary tuberculosis the tubercle 
bacillus is found. 

The tuberculous virus, the tubercle bacilli, may gain entrance 
to the lungs through the inspired air or by means of the blood 
or lymph currents. Also in some cases it has been 
cuiosis. demonstrated that tubercle bacilli may infect the 
glands of the mesentery following the ingestion of 
the milk of tuberculous cattle. In this the Government Com- 
missions of Great Britain and Germany as well as the United 
States Bureau of Animal Industry confirm the findings of 
private investigators. It may be well here to summarize the 
views generally held as to infection. In the first place, the 
doctrine of inherited disease is discredited, and the doctrine 
of specific susceptibility is in doubt. Infants are known to 
be extremely susceptible, and this susceptibility lessens with 
increasing age, adults requiring prolonged exposure. As a 
mode of infection the sputum of diseased persons is of great 
importance. Infected food, especially milk, comes next, 
together with food infected by flies; and the mother's milk 
is a minor source. Infection is not often received through 
the skin, but most frequently through the mucous membrane 
of the mouth, air passages and intestine; occasionally the 
infection is alveolar. Pulmonary tuberculosis is often second- 
ary to a latent lymphatic form. The tubercle bacillus was 
discovered by Koch in 1882, and since then it has become 
generally accepted that the bacillus varies in type. The 
bacilli have been classified by A. G. Foullerton into (a) occur- 
ring in fishes and cold-blooded animals, (&) in birds, (c) in 
rats, (d) in cattle, (e) in man. Exactly how far they 

1 The term catarrhal pneumonia has been usually regarded as 
synonymous with the term broncho-pneumonia, and this usual 
nomenclature has been maintained in the present article. We must, 
however, recognize that all simple acute broncho-pneumonias are 
not purely catarrhal in the strict pathological sense. For instance, 
a considerable amount of fibrinous exudation is not unfrequently 
present in the patches of broncho-pneumonia, and some of the cases 
of septic broncho-pneumonia can scarcely be accurately termed 
catarrhal. 



are interchangeable and can affect the human race is not 
definitely settled. They may be different varieties of the 
same species caused by differentiated strains of a common 
stock, or may be distinct but generically allied species. Von 
Behring considers that the bovine type may undergo modifica- 
tion in the human body, a theory which may lead to a complete 
change in our beliefs in the mode of entry of the bacillus. Re- 
cent investigators have put forward the view that the tubercle 
bacillus is not a bacterium, but belongs to the higher group 
known as strep to tricheae or mould fungi. 

The action of the tubercle bacillus upon the tissues, like 
most other infectious agents, gives rise to inflammatory pro- 
cesses and anatomical changes, varying with the mode of entry 
and virulence of the micro-organism. The most character- 
istic result is the formation throughout the lungs in the form 
of small scattered foci forming the so-called miliary tubercles. 
Such miliary tuberculosis of the lungs is frequently only a 
part of a general tuberculosis, a similar tuberculous affection 
being found in other organs of the body. In other cases the 
lungs may be the only or the principal seat of the affection. 
The source whence the tuberculous virus is derived varies in 
different cases. Old tubercular glands in the abdomen, neck 
and elsewhere, and tuberculous disease of bones or joints, are 
common sources whence tubercule bacilli may become ab- 
sorbed, and occasion a general dissemination of miliary tubercles- 
in which the lungs participate. Where the source of infection 
is an old tuberculous bronchial gland or a focus* of old tubercle 
in the lung, the pulmonary organs may be the only seat of the 
development of miliary tuberculosis for a time; but even 
then, if life is sufficiently prolonged, other parts of the 
body become 5 involved. Acute miliary tuberculosis of the 
lungs is not infrequently a final stage in the more chronic 
tuberculous lesions of the different forms of pulmonary 
phthisis. 

In pulmonary phthisis, or consumption, the disease usually 
commences at the apex of one lung, but runs a very variable 
course. In a large majorjty of cases it remains confined to 
one small focus, and not only does not spread, but undergoes 
retrograde changes and becomes arrested. In such cases 
fibrous tissue develops round the focus of disease and the 
tuberculous patch dries up, often becoming the seat of the 
deposit of calcareous salts. This arrest of small tuberculous 
foci in the lung is doubtless of very frequent occurrence, and 
in post 'mortem examinations of persons who have died from 
injuries or* various diseases other than tubercle it is common 
to find in the lungs arrested foci of tubercle, which in the 
majority of instances have never been suspected during life, 
and probably have occasioned few, if any, symptoms. It has 
been shown that in more than 37% of persons, over 21 years 
of age, dying in a general hospital of various diseases, there 
is evidence of arrested tubercle in the lungs. As such persons 
are chiefly drawn from the poorer classes, among whom tubercle 
is more common than among the well-to-do, this high percentage 
may not be an accurate indication of the frequency with which 
pulmonary tubercle does become arrested. It does, however, 
show that the arrest and the healing of tuberculosis of the 
lungs is by no means unfrequent, and that it occurs among 
those who are not only prone to become infected, but whose 
circumstances are least favourable to the arrest of the disease. 
These facts indicate that the human organism does offer a 
resistance to the growth of the tubercle bacilli. 

A focus of pulmonary tubercle may become arrested for 
a time and then resume activity. In many cases it is difficult 
to say why this is so, but often it is clearly associated with 
a lowering in the general health of the individual. It can- ' 
not be too strongly insisted that the arrest of a tuberculous 
focus in the lung is a slow process and requires a long time. 
Commonly a person in the early stage of phthisis goes away 
to a health resort, and in the course of a few weeks or months 
improves so much that he returns to a densely populated 
town and resumes his former employment. In a short time 
the disease shows renewed activity, because the improved 



198 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



[PATHOLOGY 



conditions were not maintained long enough to ensure the com- 
plete arrest of the disease. 

Instead of the tuberculous focus becoming arrested, it may 
continue to spread. The original focus and the secondary 
ones are at first patches of consolidated lung. Later, their 
central parts soften and burst into a bronchus; then the 
softened portion is coughed up, and a small cavity is left, 
which tends gradually to increase in size by peripheric ex- 
tension and by merging with other cavities. This process is 
repeated again and again, and sooner or later the other lung 
becomes similarly affected. At any stage of the softening 
process the blood vessels may become involved and give rise 
by rupture to a large or a small haemorrhage {haemoptysis). 
It not unfrequently happens that such haemoptysis may 
be the first symptom that seriously attracts attention. At a 
later period haemorrhage frequently takes place in large or 
small amounts from the rupture of vessels, which frequently 
are dilated and form small aneurysms in the walls of cavities. 
A fatal termination may be hastened by the absorption by 
means of the blood vessels and lymphatics of the tuberculous 
virus from some of the foci of disease, and the occurrence 
therefrom of a local miliary tuberculosis of the lungs or a 
general tuberculosis of other organs. The rapidity with which 
the destructive process spreads throughout the lung varies con- 
siderably. We therefore recognize acute phthisis, or galloping 
consumption, and chronic phthisis. In the acute cases the soften- 
ing progresses rapidly and is associated with the development 
of very little fibrous tissue; probably various forms of micro- 
organisms other than the tubercle bacilli assist in the rapid 
softening. In the more chronic cases there is development 
of much fibroid tissue, and the disease is associated with periods 
of temporary arrest of the tubercular process. 

The expectoration from cases of pulmonary phthisis contains 
tubercle bacilli, and is a source of danger to healthy individuals, 
in whom it may produce the disease. Attendance on persons 
suffering from pulmonary phthisis involves very little risk of 
infection if proper care^ is taken to prevent the expectoration be- 
coming dry and disseminated as dust; perfect _ cleanliness is there- 
fore to be insisted upon^ in the rooms inhabited by a phthisical 
person. The tubercle bacilli soon lose their virulence in the presence 
of fresh air and sunshine, and therefore these agents are not only 
desirable for the direct* benefit of the phthisical patient, but also 
are agents in preventing the development of fresh disease in healthy 
individuals. 

Although the tubercle bacilli are the essential agents in the 
development of pulmonary tuberculosis, there are other conditions 
which must be present before they will produce the disease. It 
is probable that large numbers of individuals are exposed to the 
action of tubercle bacilli which gain entrance to the pulmonary 
tract, and yet do not give rise to the disease, because the conditions 
of their growth and multiplication do not exist. In such cases we 
may consider that the seed is present, but that the soil is unsuit- 
able for its growth. Certain families appear more predisposed to 
tuberculosis than others. 

The most important circulatory disturbances met with in 
the lungs are those seen in cases of dilated heart, with or with- 
out disease of the mitral valve, when engorgement 
of the pulmonary vessels sets up a condition of venous 
engorgement of the lungs. This may lead to various 
changes. After it has lasted a variable time, and if it is very 
intense, serous transudation occurs into the substance of the 
lung and the alveoli, and thus a condition of pulmonary dropsy 
or oedema is established. The venous engorgement also pre- 
disposes the subjects of such heart affections to bronchitis 
and pneumonia. In disease of the mitral valve, in cardiac 
dilatation and in simple feebleness of the heart, such as is 
seen in old age and after debilitating fevers, especially typhoid, 
there is commonly developed a venous congestion of the bases 
of the lungs, forming the so-called hypostatic congestion of 
those organs, and to this is frequently added pneumonia. 
In long-standing cases of pulmonary congestion brought about 
by disease of the mitral valve and dilatation of the heart, 
a certain amount of fibrous tissue may be found in the inter- 
stitial tissue of the lungs, and from transudation of certain 
elements of the blood we get the formation in the newly formed 
fibrous tissue of blood pigment. In these cases blood pigment 



Con- 
gestion. 



is found in the cells, in the pulmonary alveoli, and such cells 
also carry the pigment into the interstitial tissue. This con- 
dition constitutes the state known as brown induration of the 
lungs. Acute congestion of the lungs occurs as part of the 
first stage of pneumonia. It also probably exists during 
violent exertion, and may possibly be brought about by 
excitement. 

Another circulatory disturbance of great importance is 
that arising from blocking of the pulmonary artery or its 
branches by an embolus or a thrombus. Where the Embo usm 
obstruction takes place in the main vessel, death and 
rapidly ensues. Where, however, a small branch of Throm- 
the vessel is occluded, as frequently occurs from a bOMts * 
coagulum forming in the right side of the heart, or in the 
pulmonary vessels in cases of disease of the mitral valve, 
or in dilatation of the heart, or from the detachment of a 
small vegetation from disease of the tricuspid or pulmonary 
valves, a haemorrhagic exudation takes place, forming a 
patch of consolidation in the lung {haemorrhagic infarct). As 
this haemorrhagic exudation takes place not only into the 
substance of the lung, but also into the bronchial tubes, such 
lesions are usually associated with spitting of blood {haemop- 
tysis). The increased tension produced in the pulmonary 
vessels in cases of mitral disease may also probably lead to 
the formation of haemorrhagic exudations into the lungs, 
apart from the occurrence of embolism or thrombosis. Usually 
the occurrence of pulmonary embolism and the formation of 
haemorrhagic infarcts in the lungs mark an important epoch 
in the course of a case of heart disease. It usually occurs 
at a late stage of the affection, and not unfrequently contri- 
butes materially to a fatal termination. It is probable that 
many of the cases of pneumonia and pleuritic effusion, coming 
on in cases of valvular heart disease and of cardiac dilatation, 
owe their origin to an embolus and to the formation of a haemor- 
rhagic infarct. 

The term asthma is commonly applied to a paroxysmal 
dyspnoea of a special type which is associated with a variety 
of conditions. In true spasmodic asthma there 
may be no detectable organic disease, and the par- 
oxysms are generally believed to be due to a nervous influence 
which, acting upon the bronchial muscles, produces a spasm 
of the tubes, or, acting through the vaso-motor branches of 
the sympathetic, produces a congestion of the bronchial mucous 
membrane. The most probable theory is that lately advanced, 
that it is caused by a profound toxaemia. An organism has 
been isolated, which is said to be the cause of certain cases of 
asthma, and the fact that benefit has been said to follow 
treatment by a vaccine is in favour of this view. The exciting 
cause may not be at all apparent, even on the most careful obser- 
vation and examination of the sufferer, but in other cases the 
attacks may be brought about by some reflex irritation. Nasal 
polypi and other diseases of nasal mucous membrane have 
been shown in some cases to be a cause of asthma. Irritation 
of the bronchial mucous membrane appears to be "one of the 
most common, but it is usually difficult to say exactly in what 
the irritation consists. 

The sputum in true asthma is typical, consisting of white 
translucent pellets like boiled tapioca. These pellets consist 
of mucus arranged in a twisted manner and known as Cursch- 
mann spirals; they also contain Charcot-Leyden crystals, 
degenerated epithelium and leucocytes, of which the majority 
are eosinophiles. The spirals consist of a central solid thread 
round which the mucus is arranged in spiral form. The twisting 
has been attributed to a rotatory motion of the cilia, helped by 
the spasm of thq bronchial muscles. Allied to true asthma is 
the bronchial asthma frequently met with in the subjects of 
bronchitis and emphysema. In such cases the irritation evi- 
dently proceeds from the inflamed bronchial mucous membrane. 
Hay asthma is the variety in which the pollen of certain plants, 
especially grasses, is the exciting cause of the paroxysms. In 
cardiac feebleness, in valvular disease of the heart, and in cardiac 
dilatation, we may get dyspnoeic attacks of a more or less 



SURGERY) 



RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 



199 



paroxysmal nature, to which the term cardiac asthma has been 
applied. Similarly, to a form of dyspnoea met with occasionally 
as a manifestation of uraemia in chronic B right's disease the 
term of renal asthma has been given. 

Pleurisy, or inflammation of the pleura, is a very common 
affection, and is met with under different forms. In many 
Pieuris instances we have simply the pouring out, over a 
greater or less area of the surface of the pleura, 
of a fibrinous exudation which may become absorbed or 
undergo organisation, a certain amount of thickening of the 
pleura, and adhesions of the two layers resulting. Such cases 
form the group known as cases of dry pleurisy. In other 
instances a greater or lesser amount of serous exudation takes 
place into one or other pleural cavity, forming the cases of 
serous pleuritic effusion. In others the exudation into the 
pleural cavity is purulent, giving rise to the condition known 
as empyema or purulent pleuritic effusion. The occurrence 
of dry pleurisy is probably very frequent, and leads to small 
pleural adhesions which cause little or no inconvenience. In 
post-mortem examinations of persons who have died from 
various diseases it is common to find such pleural adhesions 
present, although they have never been suspected during life. 
Pleurisy in one or other of the above forms may come on in a 
person apparently in good health (idiopathic pleurisy), or it may 
follow a fracture of the ribs or other injury to the chest. It is 
not uncommonly secondary to some other disease; thus it is 
almost a constant accompaniment of acute lobar pneumonia. 
In such cases the effusion is most commonly a simple fibrinous 
one, which with the subsidence of the primary disease is in 
great part absorbed. In other cases of pneumonia we get a 
certain amount of serous effusion into the pleura; and some- 
times, especially in children, the pneumonia is followed by the 
development of an empyema. Pleurisy with effusion is also 
frequently a complication of valvular heart disease and dilatation 
of the heart, and in such cases is often associated with the forma- 
tion of superficial pulmonary infarcts. It is also seen in many 
other diseases of the lungs. For instance, in chronic pulmonary 
phthisis pleuritic adhesions over various parts of the lungs are 
the rule; and we also frequently get serous effusion into the 
pleura as a complication of the various forms of pulmonary 
tuberculosis. Purulent effusion is less common in phthisis, 
but it is the rule where the pleura is perforated by the necrosis 
of a tuberculous focus in the lung and the establishment of a 
communication between the pleura and a tuberculous cavity 
and the bronchial tubes (pyopneutnonothorax), a combination in 
which there is both air and pus in the pleural cavity. Secondary 
pleurisy is also seen in an extension of the disease from neigh- 
bouring parts, as from peritonitis, sub-diaphragmatic abscess, 
and suppuration in the liver or spleen. As a secondary disease, 
pleurisy is also known in the course of various forms of nephritis, 
rheumatism, and the acute specific diseases. 

Cases formerly classed as idiopathic pleurisy are now "known 
to be caused by certain micro-organisms. These vary in rela- 
tion to the character of the effusion. The most frequent is the 
tubercle bacillus, which is generally present in sero-fibrinous 
effusions. In this case the pleurisy is really secondary to a 
possibly unrecognized tuberculous infection either of the lung 
or pleura. In purulent effusions the pneumococcus may occur 
as a pure infection, or the streptococcus pyogenes or the staphy- 
lococcus may be present. Mixed infections occur in 21% of 
purulent effusions, and varieties of other organisms, such as the 
influenza bacillus, the typhoid bacillus, the Klebs-Loffler 
bacillus and the colon bacillus, have been occasionally found. 

There are at least five types of pulmonary emphysema; 

(1) hypertrophic, idiopathic or large-lunged emphysema; 

(2) senile or small-lunged emphysema; (3) compensatory 
emphysema; (4) acute vesicular emphysema; (5) interstitial 
or interlobular emphysema. Two points are usually admitted: 
that emphysema appears only in lungs that are congenitally 
weak, and that the exciting cause is increased intravesicular 
tension. When one or more lobules are cut off from the working 
part of the lung the neighbouring vesicles become distended. 



Should the plugging of the lobule remain permanent, typical 
emphysema results. This happens in illnesses inducing violent 
respiratory efforts, such as chronic bronchitis, whooping cough 
and asthma. In large-lunged emphysema the lung is excessively 
large, and does not collapse on opening the chest wall. Micro- 
scopically two lesions are notable. -The septa between the 
vesicles are atrophied, many have disappeared and the vesicles 
have coalesced; the loss in lung tissue diminishes the vascular 
field of the lung and tends to imperfect aeration, whence the 
dyspnoea. The elastic tissue of the lung is also lost. In small- 
lunged emphysema there is a condition of senile atrophy. The 
lung is smaller than normal, and the intravesicular septa are 
destroyed. In this case the primary cause is atrophy of the 
bronchi, and increased air pressure is not a factor. Com- 
pensatory emphysema is that which develops in a portion of a 
lung in which the other portion is the seat of a lesion, such as 
pneumonia. Occasionally it is merely physiological, but some- 
times here too the septa undergo atrophic changes. Acute 
vesicular emphysema is hardly a pathological variety, and is 
really rapid distension coming on during an attack of asthma 
or angina pectoris. The variety is temporary only. Interstitial 
emphysema is characterized by the presence of air in the inter- 
stitial connective tissue of the lung. It is usually due to rupture 
of the air vesicles during paroxysms of coughing. 

(T. H.*; H. L. H.) 

(5) Surgery of the Respiratory System 

About the middle of the 19th century, Manuel Garcia demon- 
strated the working of the vocal cords in the living subject, by 
placing a flat mirror of about the size of a shilling at the back of 
the mouth, and throwing strong light on to it from a concave 
mirror fixed upon the observer's forehead. By the use of a 
laryngoscope and a cocaine spray the most irritable throat can 
now be made tolerant of the presence of the small mirror, and 
thus the medical man is enabled to make a prolonged and 
thorough examination of the interior of the larynx and even to 
perform delicate operations upon it. Foreign bodies which have 
become caught in the larynx can thus be seen and extracted, * 
and small growths can be satisfactorily removed even from 
the vocal cords themselves. 

A foreign body in the air-passages may be impacted above the 
vocal cords, and the prompt thrusting down of a finger may 
dislodge it and save the person from death by suffocation. If 
there is doubt as to the site of the impaction, and the symptoms 
are urgent (as is likely to be the case) immediate laryngotomy 
should be done. In this operation a tube is introduced through 
the crevice which can easily be felt in the middle line of the neck, 
between the thyroid and cricoid cartilages. The procedure is 
easily and quickly accomplished. It is, moreover, often resorted 
to when the surgeon is about to perform some extensive opera- 
tion in the mouth which must needs be accompanied by free 
haemorrhage. Laryngotomy having been done, and the 
pharynx having been plugged with gauze, the air passages can 
be kept free of blood during the whole operation. 

If the foreign body be such a thing as a button, cherry-stone, 
sugar-plum or coin, it may at once set up alarming symptoms 
of spasmodic suffocation. But when the first alarm has quieted 
down, the attacks are likely to be only occasional, as when the 
article, drawn up with the expired air, comes in contact with 
the under aspect of the vocal cords. It may be that in a violent 
fit of coughing it will be expelled, but, if not, the surgeon must 
be at hand ready to perform tracheotomy when the urgency of 
the symptoms demands it. Tracheotomy is the making of an 
opening into the trachea, the air-tube below the larynx. It is 
unsafe to leave a child with a foreign body loose in its windpipe, 
on account of the risk of sudden and fatal asphyxia. Possibly 
the X-rays may show its exact position and give help in its 
removal. But, in any case, the safest thing will be to perform 
tracheotomy and to leave the edges of the opening into the 
windpipe wide asunder, so that the object may be coughed out 
— the nurse being on guard all the while. The operation of 
tracheotomy is sometimes urgently called for in the case in 



200 



RESPITE— RESTOUT 



which the air-way has become blocked by a child having sucked 
hot water from the spout of a kettle or teapot, or in the case 
of obstruction by the swelling of the acute inflammation of 
laryngitis or of diphtheria. Should the air-way through the 
larynx become narrowed by the presence of a growth which 
does not diminish under the influence of iodide of potassium, the 
question may arise as to whether it should be dealt with by 
splitting the thyroid cartilage and holding the wings apart, or 
by the removal of the whole larynx. For such growths are often 
malignant. If the wide infection of the lymphatic glands of 

• the neck suggests that no radical operation should be undertaken, 

• a bent silver tube may be introduced below the growth (trache- 
otomy) in order to provide for the entrance of air. This will get 
over the difficulty of breathing, but it cannot, of course, do more 
than that. 

A cute laryngitis is very often due to diphtheria. The symptoms 
are those of laryngeal obstruction, together with constitutional 
disturbances of various kinds. The old-fashioned nurse called 
the disease " croup " — a term devoid of scientific meaning (see 
Diphtheria). In an ordinary catarrhal case, leeches and 
fomentations may suffice, though sometimes tracheotomy or 
intubation is called for. But if bacteriological examination 
shows the presence of diphtheritic bacilli, antitoxin must at 
once be injected. (See also Lung.) (E. O.*) 

RESPITE (O. Fr. respit, modern ripit, Lat. respectus, regard, 
consideration, respicere, to look back at), properly a delay, given 
for the further consideration of some matter, hence relief. In 
law the term is used of the postponement of the immediate 
execution of the law in criminal cases, e.g. by binding a con- 
victed prisoner over to come up for judgment when called upon, 
or when a case is " respited" from one quarter sessions to 
another. The word is loosely used in the sense of a " reprieve " 
(q.v.). 

RESPOND, in architecture, the term given to the half-pier 
or semi-detached column at the end of a range of piers or columns 
carrying an architrave or arcade. In Greek temples the respond 
is known as the anta. The term is also given to the wall pilaster 
which in Roman and Renaissance work is frequently placed 
behind the detached columns forming the decoration of a 
wall. 

- RESPONDENT (from Lat. respondere, to answer), strictly, 
one who answers; in law one called upon to answer a petition 
' or other proceeding. In a matrimonial cause the defendant in 
the suit is called the respondent. The defendant to a quarter 
sessions appeal is called the respondent, and so generally in 
appeals is the party, whether plaintiff or defendant, against 
whom the appeal is brought. 

REST (0. Eng. rcest, teste, bed, cognate with other Teutonic 
forms, e.g. Ger. Rast, Rilste, rest, and probably Gothic Rasta, 
league, i.e. resting or stopping place), a cessation from active 
or regular work, hence a time of relief from mental or manual 
labour. Specific meanings are for an interval of silence in music, 

• marked by a sign indicating the length of the pause; for the 
forked support with iron-shod spike carried by the soldier till 
the end of the 17th century as a rest for the heavy musket; 
and for the support for the cue in billiards to be used when the 
striking ball is out of reach of the natural rest formed by the 
hand. In the medieval armour of the horsed man-at-arms, and 
later in the armour of the tournament, a contrivance was fixed to 
the side of the body-armour near the right arm-pit, in which the 
butt-end of the lance was placed to prevent the lance being driven 
back after striking the opponent at full charge; hence a knight, 
as a preliminary to the charge, " laid his lance in rest." This 
" rest" is a shortened form of " arrest," to check, stop, as is 
seen by the French equivalent, arril. Further, " rest," that 
which remains over and above, is derived from the' French 
tester, to remain over, Lat. reslare, to remain, literally, to stay 
behind. The principal specific use of this word is in com- 
merce for the balance of undivided profit; it has thus always 
been the term used by the Bank of England for that which in 
other banks and companies is called the " reserve " (Hartley 
Withers, The Meaning of Money (1909), p. 298). The Bank of 



England " rest " is never allowed to fall below £3,000,000 
(see Banks and Banking). 

RESTIF, NICOLAS EDME (1734-1806), called Restif de la 
Bretonne, French novelist, son of a farmer, was born at Sacy 
(Yonne) on the 23rd of October 1734. He was educated by the 
Jansenists at Bic£tre, and on the expulsion of the Jansenists 
was received by one of his brothers, who was a cure. Owing to 
a scandal in which he was involved, he was apprenticed to a printer 
at Auxerre, and, having served his time, went to Paris. Here he 
worked as a journeyman printer, and in 1760 he married Anne or 
Agnes Lebdgue, a relation of his former master at Auxerre. It 
was not until five or six years after his marriage that Restif 
appeared as an author, and from that time to his death, on the 
2nd of February 1806, he produced a bewildering multitude of 
books, amounting to something like two hundred volumes, many 
of them printed with his own hand, on almost every conceivable 
variety of subject. Restif suffered at one time or another the 
extremes of poverty and was acquainted with every kind of 
intrigue. He drew on the episodes of his own life for his books, 
which, in spite of their faded sentiment, contain truthful pictures 
of French society on the eve of the Revolution. The most 
noteworthy of his works are Le Pied de Fanchette, a novel (1769); 
Le Pornographe (1769), a plan for regulating prostitution which is 
said to have been actually carried out by the Emperor Joseph II., 
while not a few detached hints have been adopted by continental 
nations; Le Paysan perverti (1775), a novel with a moral purpose, 
though sufficiently horrible in detail; La Vie de mon plre (1779); 
Les Contemporaines (42 vols., 1 780-1 785), a vast collection of short 
stories; Ingfnue Saxancour, also a novel (1785); and, lastly, 
the extraordinary autobiography of Monsieur Nicolas (16 vols., 
1 794-1 797; the last two are practically a separate and much less 
interesting work), in which at the age of sixty he has set down 
his remembrances, his notions on ethical and social points, his 
hatreds, and above all his numerous loves, real and fancied. The 
original editions of these, and indeed of all his books, have long 
been bibliographical curiosities owing to their rarity, the beautiful 
and curious illustrations which many of them contain, and the 
quaint typographic system in which most are composed. In 
1795 he received a gratuity of 2000 francs from the government, 
and just before his death Napoleon gave him a place in the 
ministry of police, which he did not live to take up. 

Restif de la Bretonne undoubtedly holds a remarkable place in 
French literature. He was inordinately vain, of extremely relaxed 
morals, and perhaps not entirely sane. His books were written 
with haste, and their licence of subject and language renders them 
quite unfit for general perusal. 

The works of C. Monselet, Retif de la Bretonne (1853), and P. 
Lacroix, Bibliographie et iconograpnie (1875), J. Assezat's selection 
from the Contemporaines, with excellent introductions (3 vols., 1875), 
and the valuable reprint of Monsieur Nicolas (14 vols., 1883-1884), 
will be sufficient to enable even curious readers to form a judgment 
of him. His life, written by his contemporary Cubieres-Palmezeaux, 
was republished in 1875. Se e also Eugen Duhren, Ritif de la 
Bretonne^ der Mensch, der Schriftstelter f der Reformator (Berlin, 1906), 
and a bibliography, Retif-Bibliothek (Berlin, 1906), by the same 
author. 

RESTOUT, JEAN (1692-1768), French painter, born at 
Rouen on the 26th of March 1692, was the son of Jean Restout, 
the first of that name, and of Marie M. Jouvenet, sister and pupil 
of the well-known Jean Jouvenet. In 171 7, the Royal Academy 
having elected him a member on his work for the Grand Prix, 
he remained in Paris, instead of proceeding to Italy, exhibited at 
all the salons, and filled successively every post of academical 
distinction. He died on the 1st of January 1768. His works, 
chiefly altar-pieces (Louvre Museum), ceilings and designs for 
Gobelin tapestries, were engraved by Cochin, D revet and 
others; his diploma picture may still be seen at St Cloud. 

His son, Jean Bernard Restout (173 2-1 797), won the Grand 
Prix in 1758, and on his return from Italy was received into the 
Academy; but his refusal to comply with rules led to a quarrel 
with that body. Roland appointed him keeper of the Garde 
Meuble, but this piece of favour nearly cost him his life during 
the Terror. The St Bruno painted by him at Rome is in the 
Louvre. 



RESTRAINT— RETAINER 



20I 



RESTRAINT (from "to restrain," Lat. restringere, to hold 
back, prevent), in law, a restriction or limitation. The word is 
used particularly in three connexions: i. Restraint on Anticipa- 
tion. Although it is a principle of English law that there can 
be no restriction of the right of alienation of property vested in 
any person under an instrument, equity makes an exception in 
the case of a married woman, and has laid down the rule that 
property may be so settled to the separate use of a married 
woman that she cannot, during coverture, alienate it or anticipate 
the income. Restraint on anticipation attaches only during 
coverture and is therefore removed on widowhood, but it may 
attach again on remarriage. By the Conveyancing Act 1881, 
s. 39, a court may however, if it thinks fit, by judgment or order 
bind a married woman's interest in her property, with her 
consent, if it appears to be for her benefit, notwithstanding that 
she is restained from anticipating. 

2. Restraint of Marriage. — A gift or bequest to a person may 
have a condition attached in restraint of marriage. This 
condition may be either general or partial. A condition in 
general restraint of marriage is void, as being contrary to public 
policy, although a condition in restraint of a second marriage 
is not void. A condition in partial restraint of marriage is 
valid, and may be either to restrain marriage with a particular 
class of persons, e.g. a papist, a domestic servant, or a Scotsman, 
or under a certain age. 

3. Restraint of Trade. — A contract in general restraint of. 
trade is void as being against public policy. In the leading 
case of Mitchell v. Reynolds , 1711, r Smith L.C., it was laid down 
that " it is the privilege of a trader in a free country, in all 
matters not contrary to law, to regulate his own mode of carry- 
ing it on according to his own discretion and choice. If the law 
has regulated or restrained his mode of doing this, the law must 
be obeyed. But no power short of the general law ought to 
restrain his free discretion." It has been suggested that the 
rule dates from a time when a covenant by a man not to exercise 
his own trade meant a covenant not to exercise any trade at 
all — every man being obliged to confine himself to the trade 
to which he had been apprenticed. However, contracts which 
are only in partial restraint of trade are good. A contract not 
to carry on the business of an ironmonger would be bad; but a 
contract made by the seller of an ironmonger's business not to 
compete with the buyer would be good. To make such a contract 
binding it must be founded on a valuable, consideration and must 
not go beyond what is reasonably necessary for the protection 
of the other party. This is the tendency also of the law in the 
United States. 

See Matthew on Restraint of Trade (1907). 

RESZKE, JEAN DE (1850- ), operatic singer, was born 
at Warsaw on the 14th of January 1850. His parents wete 
Poles; his father was a state official and his mother a capable 
amateur singer, their house being a recognized musical centre. 
After singing as a boy in the Cathedral of Warsaw, he studied 
law in the university there, but in a few years he abandoned 
this and went to Italy to study singing. He made his first 
public appearance, as a baritone, at Venice in January 1874, 
as Alfonso in La Favorita, and in the following April he sang 
for the first time in London, appearing at Drury Lane Theatre, 
and a little later in Paris. He was not entirely successful and 
retired for a further period of study, during which his voice 
gained remarkably in the upper register; so that when he made 
his first reappearance at Madrid in 1879 it was as a tenor, in 
the title-r61e of Robert le Diable. Jean de Reszke's great fame 
as a singer dates from this time. For several seasons he sang 
regularly in Paris, and he reappeared at Drury Lane in 1887 as 
Radames. In the next year he was again in London, this time 
at Co vent Garden as Vasco da Gama; this appearance was 
mainly responsible for the revival of the opera as a fashionable 
amusement in London. He appeared in London nearly every year 
from this date until 1900. In 1891 he visited America, and from 
1893 to 1899 ne was welcomed each year at the Metropolitan 
Opera House in New York. Jean de Reszke's most successful 
parts were the title-r6Ie of Le Cid, which was written for him by 



Massenet, and those of Romeo, Lancelot in Elaine, and Lohengrin, 
Walther von Stolzing, Siegfried and Tristan in Wagner's operas. 
In 1904 illness compelled him to retire from the stage, and he 
subsequently divided his time between teaching singing in Paris . 
and breeding race-horses in Poland. 

Jean de Reszke's younger brother, Edouard, born at Warsaw 
on the 23rd of December 1855, is also famous as an operatic 
singer. He appeared for the first time in Paris in April 1896, 
and has since sung with his brother for many seasons both in 
London and in New York. His magnificent bass voice and 
admirable technique earned him fame in such parts as those of 
Mephistopheles in Faust, Charles V. in Marchetti's Don Qiovanni 
d 1 Austria, Walter in Tell, the Count in Sonnambula, Prince Gudal 
in Demonio, and Hans Sachs, King Mark, Hunding and Hagen 
in Wagner's operas. 

RETABLE (Fr. rStable, a shortened form derived from Med. 
Lat. reirotabulum) , a term of ecclesiastical art and architecture, 
applied in modern English usage to an altar-ledge or shelf, 
raised slightly above the back of the altar or communion table, 
on which are placed the cross, ceremonial candlesticks and 
other ornaments. Retables may be lawfully used in the church 
of England (Liddell 6* Beale, i860, 14 P.C.). 

Foreign usage of the term, as in French, is different, and where 
the word is kept with this foreign application, the distinction 
should be observed. The Med. Lat. reirotabulum (modernized re* 
tabulum) was applied to an architectural feature set up at the back 
of an altar, and generally taking the form of a screen framing a 
picture, carved or sculptured work in wood or stone, or mosaic, 
or of a movable feature such as the famous Pala d* Oro in St Mark's, 
Venice, of gold, jewels and enamels. The foreign " r6table " is, 
therefore, what should in English be called a " reredos " (q.v.), though 
that is not in modern usage a movable feature. 

RETAIL, the sale of goods or commodities in small quantities 
to the immediate consumer, opposed to a sale wholesale or 
in gross. The 0. Fr. retaille, from which the word is taken, 
meant a piece cut off, from tailler, to cut, Med. Lat. taleare, 
Lat. talea, a rod, cutting for planting. The English meaning 
appears in Anglo-French and in the Italian retaglio, selling by 
the piece. The other meaning of " retail," to repeat a story, 
is a transferred sense of an early meaning, " to sell at second 
hand." The Latin source is also seen in the related words 
"entail," "tailor," "detail" and "tally." 

RETAINER (from " retain," Lat. retinere, to hold back, 
keep), properly the act of retaining or keeping for oneself, 
or a person or object which retains or keeps; historically, a 
follower of a house or family, and particularly used of armed 
followers attached to the barons of the middle ages. John 
Cowell, in The Interpreter (1607), defines " retainer " as a 
" servant not meniall nor familiar, that is, not continually 
dwelling in the house of his lord or master, but onely using or 
bearing his name or livery." 

Retainer of Counsel. — When it is considered desirable 
by a litigant that the services of any particular counsel (bar- 
rister) should be obtained for the conduct of his case, it is 
necessary to deposit with counsel a form of retainer together 
with the necessary fee in cash, from which time counsel is 
bound to give the party who has thus retained him the first 
call on his services in the matter in which he has been retained. 
Retainers are either general or special. A general retainer is 
one which retains counsel for all proceedings in which the. 
person retaining is a party, and lasts for the joint lives of client 
and counsel. If any other person offers a special retainer 
or brief against the general retainer, counsel must give the 
general retainer notice of such offer — and if after a reasonable 
time the general retainer does not himself specially retain 
or brief counsel, the general retainer is forfeited. A special 
retainer is one which only applies to some particular cause 
or action. It can only be delivered after "the action is begun, 
and gives the client a right to the services of counsel throughout 
the course of the action^ and counsel is entitled to be briefed on 
all occasions to which the re tain er_ applies. Retainer rules 
were drawn up in 1001 by the Bar Committee, read by the Bar 
Council and approved by the Attorney-General and the Council 

xxin. 7 a 



202 



RETALIATION— RETHEL 



of the Incorporated Law Society in 1902. They may be found 
in the Annual Practice. 

Retainer of Debt.— In connexion with the administration 
of an estate under a will, it is the right of the personal repre- 
sentative^ — whether executor or administrator — of a deceased 
person to retain legal assets which have come into his hands 
towards the payment of a debt due to himself as against 
creditors of an equal degree, and this even though his debt is 
barred by the Statutes of Limitation. The privilege arose in 
all probability from the inability of the representative to sue 
himself, though it has been suggested that it is merely a corollary 
to the right of the representative to prefer one creditor to 
another of equal degree. 1 The principle of retainer is not 
looked upon with favour by courts of equity, and consequently 
it has long been the rule that there is no right to retain out of 
equitable assets. It was thought that the effect of the Land 
Transfer Act 1897 was to make all the assets of the deceased 
legal assets, and so extend the privilege to reality which had till 
then been exempt; this view, however, has been repudiated by 
the courts of equity, and it must now be taken that "there is 
still no right to retain out of real estate. 2 It is a rule of the 
probate division to require a creditor administrator, to whom 
letters of administration are granted, to enter into a bond with 
two sureties not to prefer himself. This course, however, is 
not followed where administration is granted to a person as next 
of kin who happens also to be a creditor. 

The privilege is not lost by judgment for an account being 
given in a suit by other creditors for the administration of 
assets, and the representative may retain out of assets which 
come to his hand subsequent to such judgment. On the other 
hand, the appointment of a receiver deprives the representative 
of his right except as regards assets which come to his hands 
prior to the appointment of the receiver. 

RETALIATION, repayment of like with like, especially the 
return of hostile action, injuries or wrongs by similar action or 
injury, as in the primitive theory of punishment, an " eye for 
an eye," " tooth for a tooth." The Late Lat. retaliare was formed 
from taltSy such as, of the same quality as ; and this source also 
gave talio, talionis, the name of this type of punishment. (See 
Punishment, Theory of, and Roman Law, § The Twelve Tables!) 
A special form of retaliation is familiar in the imposition of 
differential import duties against the goods of a particular 
country (see Tariffs and Protection). 

RETENE (methyl isopropyl phenanthrene), CisHis, a hydro- 
carbon present in the coal-tar fraction, boiling above 360 C; 
it also occurs in the tars obtained by the distillation of resinous 
woods. It crystallizes in large plates, which melt at 98-5° C. and 
boil at 390 C. It is readily soluble in warm ether and in hot 
glacial acetic acid. Sodium and boiling amyl alcohol reduce 
it to a tetrahydroretene, Jwhilst if it be heated with phos- 
phorus and hydriodic acid to 260 C. a dodecahydride 
is formed. Chromic acid oxidizes it to retene quinone, 
phthalic acid and acetic acid. It forms a picrate which melts 
at 123-124 C. 

RETFORD (officially East Retford),, a market town and 
municipal borough in the Bassctlaw parliamentary division of 
Nottinghamshire, England, 138J m. N. by W. from London by 
the Great Northern railway, the station being a junction with 
the Great Central railway. Pop. (1901) 12,340. The church 
of St Swithin dates from the 13th century, but was rebuilt 
in 1658 by a brief granted by Richard Cromwell. Modern 
buildings are the town hall, the corn exchange, the court house, 
and the covered markets. There is a large trade in corn and 
cheese, and the town possesses iron foundries, paper and corn 
mills, and india-rubber works. The town is governed by a 
mayor, 6 aldermen, and. 18 councillors. Area, 4656 acres. 

The situation of Retford {Redjorde, Ratford), near one of the 
Roman roads and on the river Idle", where there was possibly a 
ford, may account for its origin. In 1086 the archbishop of York 

1 Per Jessel, M.R. Talbot v. Frere (1879), L.R. 9. CD. 568, 574. 

2 In re Williams; Holder v. Williams (1904), 1 Ch. 52. 



owned a mill at Retford, and Roger de Busli had rights here. 
Retford was a borough by prescription, and was in the hands of 
the crown when, in 1276, Edward I. granted it to the burgesses 
in fee-farm with the right of electing bailiffs. This charter was 
confirmed by Edward III., Henry VI. and Elizabeth. In 1607 
Tames I. granted a charter of incorporation to the bailiffs and 
burgesses, under which the town was governed until 1835, when 
it was reincorporated under a mayor. East Retford returned two 
members to parliament in 1315* and again from 1572 till 1885, 
when it was disfranchised. Henry III. granted the burgesses 
an eight-days' fair at Holy Trinity, altered by Edward II. to 
St Gregory. Edward III. granted a six-days' fair at St Margaret, 
and Henry VI. a four-days' fair at St Matthew. Fairs are now 
held in March, June, July and December. The market held on 
Saturdays by prescription was sanctioned by Edward III. and 
still exists. 

RETHEL, ALFRED (1816-1859), German historical painter, 
was born at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1816. He very early showed an 
interest in art, and at the age of thirteen he executed a drawing 
which procured his admission to the academy of Diisseldorf. 
Here he studied for several years, and produced, among other 
works, a figure of St Boniface which attracted much attention. 
At the age of twenty he removed to Frankfort, and was selected 
to decorate the walls of the imperial hall in the Romer with 
figures of famous men. At the same period he produced a 
series of designs illustrative of Old Testament history. Four 
years later he was the successful competitor for the work of 
ornamenting the restored council house of his native city with 
frescoes depicting prominent events in the career of Charlemagne, 
but the execution of this work was delayed for some six years. 
Meanwhile Rethel occupied himself with the production of easel 
pictures and of drawings; and in 1842 he began a striking series 
of designs dealing with the " Crossing of the Alps by Hannibal," 
in which the weird power which animates his later art becomes 
first apparent. In 1844 Rethel visited Rome, executing, along 
with other subjects, an altar-piece for one of the churches of 
his native land. In 1846 he returned to Aix, and commenced 
his Charlemagne frescoes. But mental derangement, remotely 
attributable, it is believed, to an accident from which he suffered 
in childhood, began to manifest itself. While he hovered between 
madness and sanity, Rethel produced some of the most striking, 
individual and impressive of his works. Strange legends are 
told of the effect produced by some of his weird subjects. He ■ 
painted " Nemesis pursuing a Murderer " — a flat stretch of land- 
scape, with a slaughtered body, while in front is the assassin speed- 
ing away into the darkness, and above an angel -of vengeance. 
The picture, so the story goes, was won in a lottery at Frankfort 
by a personage of high rank, who had been guilty of an undis- 
covered crime, and the contemplation of his prize drove him 
mad. Another design which Rethel executed was " Death the 
Avenger," a skeleton appearing at a masked ball, scraping 
daintily, like a violinist, upon two human bones. The drawing 
haunted the memory of his artist friends and disturbed their 
dreams; and, in expiation, he produced his pathetic design of 
" Death the Friend." Rethel also executed a powerful series of 
drawings — " The Dance of Death " — suggested by the Belgian 
insurrections of 1848. It is by such designs as these, executed in 
a technique founded upon that of Diirer, and animated by an 
imagination akin to that of the elder master, that Rethel is 
most widely known. He died at Diisseldorf on the 1st of 
December 1859. 

His picture of " Peter and John at the Beautiful Gate of the 
Temple," is preserved in the Leipzig Museum, and his " St Boni- 
face " and several of his cartoons for the frescoes at Aix in the 
Berlin National Gallery. His Life, by Wolfgang Miiller von 
Konigswinter, was published in 1861. See also Art Journal, 
November 1865. 

RETHEL, a tow^n of N. France, capital of an arrondissement 
in the department of Ardennes, on the right bank of the Aisne 
and the Ardennes canal, 31 m. S.W. of Mezieres by rail. Pop. 
(1906) 5254. The church of St Nicholas was formed by the 
amalgamation of two churches, the oldest of which dates from 
the 13th century. Rethel has a subprefecture, a tribunal of 
first instance, a board of trade arbitration, a chamber of arts 
and manufactures and a school of agriculture, and carries on 



REUNITE— RETZ, CARDINAL DE 



wool-spinning, the weaving of light woollen fabrics, and the 
manufacture of millboard and farm implements. 

Rethel (Castrum'Retectum), of Roman origin, was from the end of 
the ioth century the seat of a eountship which passed successively 
to the families of Flanders, Burgundy, Cleves, Foix and Gonzaga. 
In 1 58 1 it was erected into a duchy in favour of the latter. In 1663 
it was sold by Charles VI. de Gonzaga to Mazarin, whose family 
held it till the Revolution. 

REUNITE (Gr. farivr), resin), a general name applied to 
various resins, particularly those from beds of brown coal, 
which are near amber in appearance, but contain little or no 
succinic acid. It may conveniently serve as a generic name, 
since no two independent occurrences prove to be alike, and 
the indefinite multiplication of names, no one of them properly 
specific, is not to be desired. 

RETINUE (O. Fr. retenue, from retenir, Lat. retenere, hold back, 
retain), a body of persons " retained " in the service of a noble 
or royal personage, a suite of " retainers." Such retainers 
were not in the domestic service of their lord, but were his 
" livery " and claimed his protection. They were a source 
of trouble and abuse in the 15th and early 16th century (see 
Livery and Maintenance). 

RETORT (Lat. retorquere, to twist or turn back), a word used 
in two distinct meanings: (1) a sharp reply, answer to an 
argument, statement or charge; (2) a vessel used in chemistry 
and manufacture. The chemical retort is a flask-shaped or 
bulbous vessel made of glass, earthenware or metal, with a neck, 
bent downwards, which leads to a receiver; such vessels are 
particularly used for distillation (q.v.). The name is also given 
to the apparatus, varying in size and shape, used in the dis- 
tinctive distillation of various substances, such as coal, in the 
manufacture of gas (q.v.). 

RETREAT (0. Fr. retrele, mod. retraite, from Lat. retrahere, 
to draw back), a withdrawal, especially of a body of troops 
after a defeat or in face of a superior enemy. In military 
usage " retreat " is also the term for a signal, given by bugle 
and drum at or about sunset. It is the last general signal 
before " tattoo." In religious usage, a " retreat " is a period 
and place set apart for prayer, self-examination and other 
spiritual exercises. Such " retreats " conducted by a director 
have long been the practice in the Roman Church. They were 
introduced into the English Church by Pusey. The word is 
also used of an institution or home where insane persons or 
habitual inebriates may be treated. For the law relating to 
" licensed retreats " for inebriates, see Inebriety, Law of. 

RETRENCHMENT (Fr. retrenchement, an old form of 
retranchetnentylrom retrancher, to cut down, cut short), an act 
of cutting down or reduction, particularly of expenditure; 
the word is familiar in this, its most general sense, from the 
motto of the Gladstonian Liberal party in British politics, 
" Peace, Retrenchment and Reform." A special technical use of 
the term is in fortification, where it is applied to a work or series 
of works constructed in rear of existing defences in order to bar 
the further progress of the enemy should he succeed in breach- 
ing or storming these. A modern example may be found in 
the siege of Port Arthur in 1904. When early in the siege 
Fort Panlung fell into the hands of the Japanese, the Russians 
connected up the two adjacent first-line forts to a fort in the rear 
by means of new works, the whole forming a rough semicircle 
facing tbe lost fort. This retrenchment prevented the Japanese 
from advancing, and remained in the hands of the defenders 
up to the fall of the whole line of forts. 

RETRO-COGNITION (from Lat. retro, back, cognilio, the 
acquiring of knowledge), a word invented by F. W. H. Myers 
to denote a supposed faculty of acquiring direct knowledge 
of the past beyond the reach of the subject's ordinary memory. 
The alleged manifestations of the faculty are of several kinds, 
of which the most important are as follows: (1) There are 
many recorded cases in which an impression has been received 
in dream or vision representing some recent event — shipwreck, 
death-bed scene, railway accident — outside the knowledge of 
the percipient. (2) Analogous to the transmission of habits 



203 

and physical peculiarities in particular families, it is alleged 
that there are also cases of the transmission of definite memories 
of scenes and events in the life of some ancestor. (3) It is 
asserted that pictures of past scenes may be called up in certain 
cases by the presence of a material object associated with those 
scenes — e.g. a vision of the destruction of Pompeii by a piece 
of cinder from the buried city, or the scene of a martyrdom 
by a charred fragment of bone — the percipient being unaware 
at the time of the nature of the object. For this supposed 
faculty the American geologist, Professor Denton, has suggested 
the name " psychometry." There are also cases recorded in 
which pictures of historical scenes unknown to the seer have 
been described in the crystal. (4) Some spirit mediums profess 
to realise incidents belonging to their previous incarnation. 
Thus Flournoy's medium, H61e*ne Smith, represented herself 
as having been successively incarnated as a Hindoo Princess, 
Simandini, and as Marie Antoinette, and gave vivid descriptions 
of scenes in which she had figured in these capacities. 

It will be gathered that the facts afford little warrant for the 
assumption of a faculty of retro-cognition. The cases described 
in the first class, though apparently exhibiting knowledge not 
within the range of the percipient's ordinary faculties, hardly 
call for such an extreme hypothesis. In the other cases the result 
recorded may plausibly be attributed to the imagination of the 
percipient, working upon hints given by bystanders, or aided 
by the emergence of forgotten knowledge. 

Bibliography.— See W. Denton, The Soul of Things (Wellesley, 
Mass., B U.S.A., 1863); F. W. H. Myers, article* " The Subliminal 
Self " in Proc. S. P. R. vol. xi.; Human Personality (London, 1903); 
Th. Flournoy, Des Indes & la plankte Mars (Geneva, 1900). 

(F. P.) 

RETROGRADE (from the Lat. retro, backwards, gradiri, 
to go), in astronomy, the direction of the apparent motion of a 
planet from E. to W.; the opposite of its regular motion around 
the sun, and due to the motion of the earth. 

RETZ, SEIGNEURS AND DUKES OF. The district of Retz 
or Rais, in S. Brittany, belonged in early times to a house 
which bore its name, and of which the eldest branch became 
extinct in the 13th century in the Chabot family. From the 
Chabot family the lordship passed to the Lavals. Gillcs de 
Laval, sire de Retz (1404-1440), the comrade-in-arms of Joan 
of Arc and marshal of France, gave himself over to the most 
revolting debauchery, and was strangled and burned at Nantes. 
The barony of Retz passed successively to the families of 
Tournemine, Annebaut and Gondi. In 1581 it was erected 
into a duchy in the peerage of France (duchf-pairie) for Albert 
de Gondi, marshal of France and general of the galleys. Pierre 
de Gondi, brother of the first due de Retz, became bishop of 
Paris in 1570 and cardinal in 1587. He was succeeded by his 
nephews, Henri (d. 1622) and Jean Francois de Gondi (d. 1654), 
for whom the episcopal see of Paris was erected into an arch- 
bishopric in 1622, and by his great-nephew, Jean Francois Paul 
de Gondi, the famous cardinal de Retz. With the death of the 
last male of the house of Gondi in 1676 the duchi-pairie became 
extinct; the lordship passed to the house of Neuville-Villeroy. 

(M. P.*) 

RETZ, JEAN FRANCOIS PAUL DE GONDI, Cardinal de 
(1614-1679), French churchman and agitator, was born at 
Montmirail in 16 14. The family was one of those which had been 
introduced into France by Catherine de' Medici, but it acquired 
great estates in Brittany and became connected with the noblest 
houses of the kingdom. It may be added that Retz himself 
always spelt his designation " Rais." He was the third son, 
and according to Tallemant des Reaux was made a knight of 
Malta on the very day of his birth. The death of his second 
brother, however, destined him for a closer connexion with the 
church. The family of Retz had military traditions, but it had 
also much church influence, and, despite the very unclerical 
leanings of the future cardinal, which were not corrected by the 
teachings of his tutor St Vincent de Paul, the intentions of his 
family never varied respecting him. By unanimous consent 
his physical appearance was not that of a soldier. He was 



204 



REUBEN— REUCHLIN 



short, near-sighted, ugly and exceptionally awkward. Retz, 
however, despite the little inclination which he felt towards 
clerical life, entered into the disputes of the Sorbonne with 
vigour, and when he was scarcely eighteen wrote the remarkable 
Conjuration de Fiesque, a little historical essay, of which he drew 
the material from the Italian of Augustino Mascardi, but which 
is all his own in the negligent vigour of the style and the audacious 
insinuation, if nothing more, of revolutionary principles. Retz 
received no preferment of importance during Richelieu's life, 
and even after the minister's death, though he was presented to 
Louis XIII. and well received, he found a difficulty in attaining 
the coadjutorship with reversion of the archbishopric of Paris. 
But almost immediately after the king's death Anne of Austria 
appointed him to the coveted post on All Saints' Eve, 1643. 
Retz, who had, according to some accounts, already plotted 
against Richelieu, set himself to work to make the utmost 
political capital out of his position. His uncle, who was old, 
indolent and absurdly proud, had lived in great seclusion; 
Retz, on the contrary, gradually acquired a very great influence 
with the populace of the city. This influence he gradually 
turned against Mazarin. No one had more to do than Retz with 
the outbreak of the Fronde in October 1648, and his history 
for the next four years is the history of that confused and, as a 
rule, much misunderstood movement. Of the two parties who 
joined in it Retz could only depend on the bourgeoisie of Paris. 
The fact, moreover, that although he had some speculative 
tendencies in favour of popular liberties, and even perhaps of 
republicanism, he represented no real political principle, in- 
evitably weakened his position, and when the break up of the 
Fronde came he was left in the lurch, having more than once in 
the meanwhile been in no small danger from his own party. 
One stroke of luck, however, fell to him before his downfall. 
He was made cardinal almost by accident, and under a mis- 
apprehension on the pope's part. Then, in 1652, he was arrested 
and imprisoned, first at Vincennes, then at Nantes; he escaped, 
however, after two years' captivity, and for some time wandered 
about in various countries. He made his appearance at Rome 
more than once, and had no small influence in the election of 
Alexander VII. He was at last, in 1662, received back again 
into favour by Louis XIV. and on more than one occasion 
formally served as envoy to Rome. Retz, however, was glad 
in making his peace to resign his claims to the archbishopric 
of Paris. The terms were, among other things, his appointment 
to the rich abbacy of St Denis and his restoration to his other 
benefices with the payment of arrears. 

The last seventeen years of Retz's life were passed partly in 
his diplomatic duties " (he was again in Rome at the papal 
election of 1668), partly at Paris, partly at his estate of Com- 
mercy, but latterly at St Mihiel in Lorraine. His debts were 
enormous, and in 1675 ne resolved to make over to his creditors 
all his income except twenty thousand livres, and, as he said, to 
" live for " them. This plan he carried out, though he did not 
succeed in riving very long, for he died at Paris on the 24th 
August 1679. One of the chief authorities for the last years of 
Retz is Madame de Sevigne, whose connexion he was by marriage. 

Retz and La Rochefoucauld, the greatest of the Frondeurs 
in literary genius, were personal and political enemies, and each 
has left a portrait of the other. La Rochefoucauld's character 
of the cardinal is on the whole harsh but scarcely unjust, and 
one of its sentences formulates, though in a manner which has a 
certain recoil upon the writer, the great defect of Retz's conduct: 
" II a suscit6 les plus grands desordres dans l'etat sans avoir 
un dessein forme de s'en prevaloir." He would have been less, 
and certainly less favourably, remembered if it had not been 
for his Memoirs. They were certainly not written till the last 
ten years of his life, and they do not go further than the year 
1655. They are addressed in the form of narrative to a lady 
who is not known, though guesses have been made at her identity, 
some even suggesting Madame de Sevigne herself. In the be- 
ginning there are some gaps. They display, in a rather irregular 
style and with some oddities of dialect and phrase, extraordinary 
narrative skill and a high degree of ability in that special art 



of the 17th century — the drawing of verbal portraits or characters. 
Few things of the kind are superior to the sketch of the early 
barricade, of the Fronde in which the writer had so great a 
share, the hesitations of the court, the bold adventure of the 
coadjutor himself into the palace and the final triumph of the 
insurgents. Dumas, who has drawn from this passage one of 
his very best scenes in Vingt ans apres, has done little but throw 
Retz into dialogue and amplify his language and incidents. 
Besides these memoirs and the very striking youthful essay of 
the Conjuration de Fiesque, Retz has left diplomatic papers, 
sermons, Mazarinades and correspondence in some considerable 
quantity. 

The Memoirs of. the cardinal de Retz were first published in a 
very imperfect condition in 1717 at Nancy. The first satisfactory 
edition was that which appeared in the twenty-fourth volume of 
the collection of Michaud and Poujoulat (Paris, 1836). They were 
then re-edited from the autograph manuscript by Ge*ruzez (Paris, 
1844), and by Champollion-Figeac with the 'Mazarinades, &c. (Paris, 
1859). l n x ^7° a complete edition of the works of Retz was be^un 
by M. A. Feillet in the collection of Grands Hcrivains. The editor 
dying, this passed into the hands of M. Gourdault and then into 
those of M. Chantelauze, who had already published studies on the 
connexion of St Vincent de Paul with the Gondi family, &c. (1882). 

(G. Sa.) 

REUBEN, a tribe of Israel named after the eldest " son " 
of Jacob and of Leah. Both the meaning of the name (see Gen. 
xxix. 3 2) and the history of the tribe are extremely obscure. In 
one version of the story of Joseph, Reuben appears in a some- 
what favourable light (Gen. xxxvii. 22, 29, xlii. 37), but in 
Gen. xxxv. 22 he is charged with a grave offence, which in 
Gen. xlix. 4 is given as a reason why the tribe which called 
him father did not take in Hebrew history the place proper to 
its seniority (cp. 1 Chron. v. 1). Dathan and Abiram were 
Reubenites (Num. xvi.; Deut. xi. 6), and in Deut. xxxiii. 6 the 
tribe appears as threatened with extinction. In Judg. v. 1 5 seq. 
it is described as a pastoral tribe which took no share in the 
patriotic movement under Barak and Deborah. The district ' 
allotted to Reuben (Josh. xiii. 15-23; Num. xxxii. 37 seq.) is 
detailed in late passages which have little historical value for 
the age to which they are attributed. The tribe is represented 
as settled E. of the Jordan on the Moabite border, but no mention 
is made of it in the inscription of the Moabite king Mesha 
(see Gad; Moab). The references to the tribe's wars against 
Arabians (1 Chron. v. 10, 18 sqq.) in the time of Saul have 
caused much fruitless speculation. 

For mythological elements in the tribe's history, see especially 
,E. Stucken, MittheiL d. vorderasiat. Gesell. (1902), pt. iv. pp. 46 sqq.; 
and for a full discussion of the biblical data, see H. W. Hogg, Ency. 
Bib. s.v., also E. Meyer, Die Israeliten und ihre Nackbarstdmme, 
PP- 530 sqq. 

REUCHLIN, JOHANN (1455-1522), German humanist and w 
Hebraist, was born on the 22nd of February 1455 at Pforzheim 
in the Black Forest, where his father was an official of the 
Dominican monastery. In, the pedantic taste of his time the 
name was graecicized by his Italian friends into Capnion, a 
form which Reuchlin himself uses as a sort of transparent mask 
when he introduces himself as an interlocutor in the De Verbo 
Mirijico. For his native place Reuchlin always retained an 
affection; he constantly writes himself Phorcensis, and in the 
De Verbo he does not forget to ascribe to Pforzheim his first 
disposition to letters. Here he began his Latin studies in the 
monastery school, and, though in 1470 he was a short time in 
Freiburg, that university seems to have taught him little. 
Reuchlin's career as a scholar appears to have turned almost 
on an accident; his fine voice gained him a place in the house- 
hold of Charles I., margrave of Baden, and by-and-by, having 
already some reputation as a Latinist, he was chosen to accom- 
pany to the university of Paris Frederick, the third son of the 
prince, a lad some years bis junior, who was destined for an 
ecclesiastical career. This new connexion lasted but a year or 
so, but it determined the course of Reuchlin's life. He now 
began to learn Greek, which had been taught in the French 
capital since 1470, and he also attached himself to the leader 
of the Paris realists, Jean Heynlin, or a Lapide (d. 1496), a 



REUCHLIN 



•205 



worthy and learned man, whom he followed to the vigorous 
young university of Basel in 1474. At Basel Reuchlin took 
his master's degree (1477), and began to lecture with success, 
teaching a more classical Latin than was then common in 
German schools, and also explaining Aristotle in Greek. His 
studies in this language had been continued at Basel under 
Andronicus Contoblacas, and here too he formed the acquaint- 
ance of the bookseller, Johann Amorbach, for whom he prepared 
a Latin lexicon {V ocabtdarius Brevitoquus, 1st ed., 1475-76), 
which did good service in its time and ran through many editions. 
This first publication and Reuchlin's account of his teaching at 
Basel in a letter to Cardinal Adrian (Adriano Castellesi) in 
February 1518 show that he had already found the work which 
in a larger sphere occupied his whole life. He was no original 
genius, but a born teacher. But this work of teaching was not 
to be done mainly from the professor's chair. Reuchlin soon 
left Basel to seek further Greek training with George Hieronymus 
at Paris, and to learn to write a fair Greek hand that he might 
support himself by copying MSS. And now he felt that he 
must choose a profession. His choice fell on law, and he was 
thus led to the great school of Orleans (1478), and finally to 
Poitiers, where he became licentiate in July 1481. From Poitiers 
Reuchlin went in December 1481 to Tubingen, with the inten- 
tion of becoming a teacher in the university, but his friends 
recommended him to Count Eberhard of Wiirttemberg, who 
was about to journey to Italy and required an interpreter. 
Reuchlin was selected for this post, and in February 1482 left 
Stuttgart for Florence and Rome. The journey lasted but a 
few months, but it brought the German scholar into contact 
with several learned Italians, especially at the Medicean Academy 
in Florence; his connexion with the count became permanent, 
and after his return to Stuttgart he received important posts 
at Eberhard's court. About this time he appears to have 
married, but little is known of his married life. He left no 
children; but in later years his sister's grandson Melanchthon 
was almost as a son to him till the Reformation estranged them. 
In 1490 he was again in Italy. Here he saw Pico della Mirandola, 
to whose Cabbalistic doctrines he afterwards became heir, and 
also made the friendship of the pope's secretary, Jakob Quest en- 
berg, which was of service to him in his later troubles. Again 
in 1492 he was employed on an embassy to the emperor Frederick 
at Linz, and here he began to read Hebrew with the emperor's 
Jewish . physician Jakob ben Jehiel Loans. He knew something 
of this language before, but Loans's instruction laid the basis of 
that thorough knowledge which he afterwards improved on his 
third visit to Rome in 1498 by the instruction of Obadja Sforno 
of Cesena. In 1494 his rising reputation had been greatly 
enhanced by the publication of De Verbo Mirifico. 

In 1496 Eberhard of Wiirttemberg died, and enemies of 
Reuchlin had the ear of his successor, Duke Eberhard. He was 
glad, therefore, hastily to follow the invitation of Johann von 
Dalberg (1445-1503), the scholarly bishop of Worms, and flee 
to Heidelberg, which was then the seat of the " Rhenish Society." 
In this court of letters Reuchlin's appointed function was to 
make translations from the Greek authors, in which his reading 
was already extremely wide. Though Reuchlin had no public 
office as teacher, and even at Heidelberg was prevented from 
lecturing, he was during a great part of his life the real centre 
of all Greek teaching as well as of all Hebrew teaching in 
Germany. To carry out this work he found it necessary to 
provide a series of helps for beginners and others. He never 
published a Greek grammar, though he had one in MS. for use 
with his pupils, but he put out several little elementary Greek 
books. Reuchlin, it may be noted, pronounced Greek as his 
native teachers had taught him to do, i.e. in the modern Greek 
fashion. This pronunciation, which he defends in Dialogus de 
Recta Lai. Graecique Serm. Pron. (1519), came to be known, in 
contrast to that used by Erasmus, as the Reuchlinian. 

At Heidelberg Reuchlin had many private pupils, among 
whom Franz von Sickingen is the best known name. With the 
monks he had never been liked; at Stuttgart also his great 
enemy was the Augustinian Conrad Holzinger. On this man he 



took a scholar's revenge in his first Latin comedy Scrgius, a 
satire on worthless monks and false relics. 

Through Dalberg, Reuchlin came into contact with Philip, 
elector palatine of the Rhine, who employed him to direct the 
studies of his sons, and in 1498 gave him the mission to Rome 
which has been already noticed as fruitful for Reuchlin's pro- 
gress in Hebrew. He came back laden with Hebrew books, 
and found when he reached Heidelberg that a change of govern- 
ment had opened the way for his return to Stuttgart, where his 
wife had remained all along. His friends had now again the 
upper hand, and knew Reuchlin's value. In 1500, or perhaps 
in 1502, he was given a very high judicial office in the Swabian 
League, which he held till 151 2, when he* retired to a small estate 
near Stuttgart. 

For many years Reuchlin had been increasingly absorbed in 
Hebrew studies, which had for him more than a mere philological 
interest. Though he was always a good Catholic, and even 
took the habit of an Augustinian monk when he felt that his 
death was near, he was too thorough a humanist to be a blind 
follower of the church. He knew the abuses of monkish religion, 
and was interested in the reform of preaching as shown in his 
De Arte Predicandi (1503) — a book which became a sort of 
preacher's manual; but above all as a scholar he was eager that 
the Bible should be better known, and could not tie himself to 
the authority of the Vulgate. The key to the Hebraea Veritas 
was the grammatical and exegetical tradition of the medieval 
rabbins, especially of David Kimhi, and when he had mastered 
this himself he was resolved to open it to others. In 1506 
appeared his epoch-making De Rudimentis Hebraicis — grammar 
and lexicon — mainly after Kimhi, yet not a mere copy of one 
man's teaching. The edition was costly and sold slowly. One 
great difficulty was that the wars of Maximilian I. in Italy 
prevented Hebrew Bibles coming into Germany. But for this 
also Reuchlin found help by printing the Penitential Psalms 
with grammatical explanations (151 2), and other helps followed 
from time to time. But his Greek studies had interested him 
in those fantastical and mystical systems of later times with 
which the Cabbala has no small affinity. Following Pico, he 
seemed to find in the Cabbala a profound theosophy which might 
be of the greatest service for the defence of Christianity and the 
reconciliation of science with the mysteries of faith — an unhappy 
delusion indeed, but one not surprising in that strange time of 
ferment. Reuchlin's mystico-cabbalistic ideas and objects were 
expounded in the De Verbo Mirifico, and finally in the De Arte 
Cabbalistica (15 17). 

Unhappily many of his contemporaries thought that the first 
step to the conversion of the Jews was to take from them their 
books. This view had for its chief advocate the bigoted Johann 
Pfefferkorn (1460-15 21), himself a baptized Hebrew. Pfeffer- 
korn's plans were backed by the Dominicans of Cologne; and 
in 1509 he got from the emperor authority to confiscate all 
Jewish books directed against the Christian faith. Armed with 
this mandate, he visited Stuttgart and asked Reuchlin's help 
as a jurist and expert in putting it into execution. Reuchlin 
evaded the demand, mainly because the mandate lacked certain 
formalities, but he could not long remain neutral. The execu- 
tion of Pfefferkorn's schemes led to difficulties and to a new 
appeal to Maximilian. In 15 10 Reuchlin was summoned in the 
name of the emperor to give his opinion on the suppression of 
the Jewish books. His answer is dated from Stuttgart, October 6, 
1510; in it he divides the books into six classes — apart from 
the Bible which no one proposed to destroy — and, going through 
each class, he shows that the books openly insulting to Chris- 
tianity are very few and viewed as worthless by most Jews 
themselves, while the others are either works necessary to the 
Jewish worship, which was licensed by papal as well as imperial 
law, or contain matter of value and scholarly interest which 
ought not to be sacrificed because they are connected with 
another faith than that of the Christians. He proposed that the 
emperor should decree that for ten years there be two Hebrew 
chairs at every German university for which the Jews should 
furnish books. The other experts proposed that all books 



206 



REUMONT— REUNION 



should be taken from the Jews; and; as the emperor still hesi- 
tated, the bigots threw on Reuchlin the whole blame of their 
ill success. Pfefferkom circulated at the Frankfort fair of 1511 
a gross lihel (Handspiegel wider und gegen die Juden) declaring 
that Reuchlin had heen bribed; and Reuchlin retorted as 
warmly in the Augenspiegel (1511). His adversary's next move 
was to declare the Augenspiegel a dangerous book; the Cologne 
theological faculty, with the inquisitor Jakob von Hochstraten 
(d. 1527) took up this cry, and on the 7th of Octoher 1512 they 
obtained an imperial order confiscating the Augenspiegel. 
Reuchlin was timid, but he was honesty itself. He was 
willing to receive corrections in theology, which was not his 
subject, but he could riot unsay what he had said; and as his 
enemies tried to press him into a corner he met them with open 
defiance in a Defensio contra Calumnialores (1513). The uni- 
versities were now appealed to for opinions, and were all against 
Reuchlin. Even Paris (August 1514) condemned the Augen- 
spiegel, and called on Reuchlin to recant. Meantime a formal 
process had - begun at Mainz before the grand inquisitor, but 
Reuchlin by an appeal succeeded in transferring the question 
to Rome. Judgment was not finally given till July 1516; and 
then, though the decision was really for Reuchlin, the trial was 
simply quashed. The result had cost Reuchlin years of trouble 
and no small part of his modest fortune, but it was worth the 
sacrifice. For far above the direct, importance of the issue was 
the great stirring of puhlic opinion which had gone forward. 
And if the obscurantists escaped easily at Rome, with only a half 
condemnation, they received a crushing hlow in Germany. No 
party could survive the ridicule that was poured on them in the 
Epistolae Obscurorum Virorum, the first volume of which written 
chiefly by Crotus Rubeanus appeared in 1514, and the second 
by Ulrich von Hutten in 151 7. Hutten and Franz von Sickingen 
did all they could to force Reuchlin 's enemies to a restitution 
of his material damages; they even threatened a feud against 
the Dominicans of Cologne and Spires. In 1520 a commission 
met in Frankfort to investigate the case. It condemned 
Hochstraten. But the final decision of Rome did not indemnify 
him. The contest ended, however; public interest had grown 
cold, absorbed .entirely hy the Lutheran question, and Reuchlin 
had no reason to fear new attacks. Reuchlin did not long 
enjoy his victory in peace. In 1519 Stuttgart was visited by 
famine, civil war and pestilence. From November of this 
year to the spring of 1521 the veteran statesman sought refuge 
in Ingolstadt and taught there for a year as professor of Greek 
and Hebrew. It was forty-one years since at Poitiers he had 
last spoken from a public chair; but the old man of sixty-five 
had not lost his gift of teaching, and hundreds of scholars 
crowded round him. This gleam of autumn sunshine was again 
broken hy the plague; but now he was called to Tubingen and 
again spent the winter of 1521-22 teaching in his own systematic 
way. But in the spring he found it necessary to visit the baths 
of Liebenzell, and here he was seized with jaundice, of which he 
died on the 30th of June 1522, leaving in the history of the new 
learning a name only second to that of his ypunger contemporary 
Erasmus. 

The authorities for Reuchlin's life are enumerated in L. Geiger, 
Johann Reuchlin (1871), which is the standard biography. The 
controversy about the books of the Jews is well sketched by D. F. 
Strauss, Ulrich von Hutten. See also S. A. Hirsch, " John Reuchlin, 
the Father of the Study of Hebrew among the Christians," and his 
"John Pfefferkorn and the Battle of Books," in his Essays (London, 
1905). Some interesting details about Reuchlin are given in the 
autobiography of Conrad Pellicanus (q.v.), which was not published 
when Geiger's book appeared. See also the article on Reuchlin in 
Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopadie % and literature there cited. 

(W. R. S.) 

REUMONT, ALFRED VON (1808-1887), German scholar and 
diplomatist, the son of Gerhard Reumont (1765-1829), was born 
on the 15th of August 1808 and was named Alfred after the 
English king, Alfred the Great. Educated at the universities of 
Bonn and Heidelberg, he obtained a position in Florence through 
the influence of an Englishman, William Craufurd, but soon he 
entered the Prussian diplomatic service and was employed in 



Florence, in Constantinople and in Rome. He also spent some 
time in the Foreign Office in Berlin. From 185 1 to i860 he 
represented his country in Florence. Reumont was the friend 
and adviser of Frederick William IV. In 1879 he founded the 
Aachener Gesckichlsverein, and having spent his concluding 
years at Bonn and at Aix-la-Chapelle, he died in the latter city 
on the 27th of April 1887. 

Reumont's numerous writings deal mainly with Italy, in which 
country he passed many years of his life. On the history of Florence 
and of Tuscany he wrote Tavole cronologiche e sincronc delta storia 
fiorentina (1841; Supplement, 1875); Geschichte Toscanas sett dem 
Ende des florentinischen Freistaats (Gotha, 1876-77); and Lorenzo 
dc' Medici (Leipzig, 1874, and again 1883). This last book has been 
translated into English by R. Harrison (1876). He remembered 
his connexion with Florence when he wrote Romische Briefe von 
einem Florentiner (Leipzig, 1840-44), and his residence in Rome 
was also responsible for his Geschichte der Stadt Rom (3 vols., 1 867-70). 
Turning his attention to the history of Naples, he wrote Die Carafa 
von Maddaloni: Neapel unter spanischer Herrschaft (1851; Eng. 
trans., 1854), and more general works on Italian history are: Beit- 
rage zur italienischen Geschichte (6 vols., Berlin, 1853-57), and 
Cnarakterbilder aus der neueren Geschichte Jtaliens (1886). More 
strictly biographical in their nature are: Die Jugend Caterinas de 9 
Medici (1854), which has been translated into French by A. Baschet 
(1866); "%E>te Grafin von Albany O860) and a life of his close 
friend Capponi, Gino Capponi f ein Zeit- und Lebensbild (Gotha, 1880). 
His Ganganelli: Papst Clemens XIV., seine Briefe und seine Zeit 
(Berlin, 1847) is valuable for the relations between this pope and 
the Jesuits. Other works which may be mentioned are Zeitgenossen, 
Biografien und _ Charakteristiken (Berlin, 1862); BiUiografia dei 
lavori pubblicati in Germania sulla storia d* Italia (Berlin, 1863); 
Biographische DenkUatter nach persdnlichen Erinnerungen (Leipzig, 
1878) ; and Saggi di storia e letteratura (Florence, 1880). Reumont s 
other important work, one which he was peculiarly fitted to write, 
was his Aus Friedrich Wilhelms IV. gesunden und kranken Tagen 
(Leipzig, 1885). 

See H. Huner, Alfred von Reumont (Cologne, 1 904) ; and the same 
writer's article in the Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, Band xxviii. 
(1889). 

REUNION, known also by its former name Bourbon, an 
island and French colony in the Indian Ocean, 400 m. S.E. of 
Tamatave, Madagascar, and 130 S.W. of Port Louis, Mauritius. 
It is elliptic in form; its greatest length is 45 m. and its greatest 
breadth 32 m., and it has an area of 965 sq. m. It lies between 
20 51' and 21 22' S. and 55 15' and 55 54' E. 

The coast-line (about 130 m.) is little indented, there are no 
natural harbours and no small islets round the shore. The 
narrow coast-lands are succeeded by hilly ground which in 
turn gives -place to mountain masses and tahleland, which 
occupy the greater part of the island. The main axis runs 
N.W. and S.E., and divides the island into a windward (E.) 
district and a leeward (W.) district, the dividing line being 
practically that of the watershed. The form of the mountains 
is the result of double volcanic action. First there arose from 
the sea a mountain whose summit is approximately represented 
by Piton des Neiges (10,069 ft.), a denuded crater of immense 
proportions, and at a later date another crater opened towards 
the E., which, piling up the mountain mass of Le Volcan, turned 
what was till then a circle into an ellipse. The oldest erupted 
rocks belong to the type of the andesites; the newest are 
varieties of hasalt. The two massifs are united by high table- 
lands. In the older massif the most striking features are now 
three areas of subsidence — the cirques of Salazie, Riviere des 
Galets and Cilaos — which lie N.W. and S. of the Piton des 
Neiges. The first, which may be taken as typical, is surrounded 
by high almost perpendicular walls of hasaltic lava, and its 
surface is rendered irregular hy hills and hillocks of debris fallen 
from the heights. Towards the S. lies the vast stratum of 
rocks (150 to 200 ft. deep) which, on the 26th of November 
1875, suddenly sweeping down from the Piton des Neiges and 
the Gros Morne (a "shoulder" of the piton), buried the little 
village of Grand Sable and nearly a hundred of its inhabitants. 
Besides the Piton des Neiges and the Gros Morne the chief 
heights in this part of the island are the pyramidical Cimandef 
(7300 ft.), another shoulder of the piton, and the Grand Bernard 
(9490 ft.), separating the cirques of Mafate and Cilaos. 

The second massif, Le Volcan, is cut off from the rest of the 
island by two " enclosures," each ahout 500 or 600 ft. deep. 



REUNION 



207 






The outer enclosure runs across the island in a N. and S. direc- 
tion; the inner forms a kind of parabola with its arms (Rempart 
du Tremblet on the S. and Rempart du Bois Blanc on the N.) 
stretching E. to the sea and embracing not only the volcano 
proper but also the great eastward slope known as the Grand 
Brule. The 30 m. of mountain wall round the volcano is per- 
haps unique in its astonishing regularity. It encloses an area 
of about 40 sq. m. known as the Grand Enclos. There are 
two principal craters, each on an elevated cone, — the more 
westerly, now extinct, known as the Bory Crater (8612 ft.), 
after Bory de St Vincent, the geologist, and the more easterly 
called the Burning Crater or Fournaisc (8294 ft.). The latter 
is partially surrounded by an " enclosure " on a small scale 
with precipices 200 ft. high. Eruptions, though not infrequent 
(thirty were registered between 1735 and' i860), are seldom 
serious; the more noteworthy are those of 1745, 1778, 1791, 
1812, i860, 1870, 1881. Hot mineral springs arc found on the 
flanks of the Piton des Neiges; the Source de Salazie (discovered 
in 1 831) lies 2860 ft. above sea-level, has a temperature of 90 , 
and discharges 200 to 220 gallons per hour of water impregnated 
with bicarbonate of soda, and carbonates of magnesium and 
lime, iron, &c; that of Cilaos (discovered in 1826) is 3650 ft. 
above the sea with a temperature of ioo°; and that of Mafate 
2238 ft. and 87 . 

Vertically Reunion may be divided into five zones. The 
first or maritime zone contains all the towns and most of the 
villages, built on the limited areas of level alluvium occurring 
at intervals round the coast. In the second, which lies between 
2600 and 4000 ft., the sugar plantations made a green belt 
round the island and country houses abound. The third zone 
is that of the forests; the fourth that of the plateaus, where 
European vegetables can be cultivated; and above this extends 
the region of the mountains. 

Climate. — The year divides into two seasons — that of heat and 
rain from November to April, that of dry and more bracing weather 
from May to October. The prevailing winds are from the S.E., 
sometimes veering round to the S., and more frequently to the 
N.E. ; the W. winds are not so steady (three hundred and seven 
•days of E. to fifty-eight of W. wind in the course of the year). It 
is seldom calm during the day, but there is usually a period of 
complete repose before the land wind begins in the evening. 
Several years sometimes pass without a cyclone visiting the island; 
at other times they occur more than once in a single " winter.'* 
The raz de marte occasionally does great damage. On the leeward 
side of the islandthe winds are generally from the W. and S.W., 
and bring little rain. Mist hangs almost all day on the tops of the 
mountains, but usually clears off at night. On the coast and lower 
zones on the windward side the mean temperature is about 73 ° F. 
in the " winter " and 78 F. in the " summer.** On the leeward 
side the heat is somewhat greater. In the Salazie cirque the mean 
annual average is 66° F.; at the Plaine des Palmistes 62 ° F. The 
rainfall is very heavy on the windward side, some stations registering 
160 in. a year, while on the *' dry " side of the island not more than 
50 in. are registered. On the mountain heights snow falls every 
year, and ice is occasionally seen. In general the island is healthy, 
but fever is prevalent on the coast. 

Fauna and Flora. — The fauna of Reunion is not very rich in 
variety of species. The mammals are a brown maki (Lemur mongoz, 
Linn.) from Madagascar, Pteropus edwardsii now nearly extinct, 
several bats, a wild cat, the tang or tamec (Centetes setosus, Denn.), 
several rats, the hare, and the goat. Among the more familiar 
birds are the " oiseau de la vierge " (Muscipeta borbonica), the tec- 
tec (Pratincola sybUla), Certhia borbonica, the cardinal (Foudia 
madagascariensis), various swallows, ducks, &c. The visitants 
from Madagascar, Mauritius and even India, are very numerous. 
Lizards and frogs of more than one species are common, but there 
is only one snake (Lycodon aulicum) known in the island. Various 
species of Gobius, a native species of mullet, Nestis cyprinoides f 
usphronamus olfax and Doules rupestris are among the freshwater 
fishes. Turtles, formerly common, are now very rare. 

In the forest region of the island there is a belt, 4500-5000 ft. 
above the sea, characterized by the prevalence of dwarf bamboo 
(Bambusa alpina); and above that is a similar belt of Acacia 
heterophylla. Besides this last the best timber-trees are Casuarina 
laterifolia, Foetida mauritiana, Imbricaria petiolaris, Elaeodendron 
orientate, Calophyllum spurium (red tacamahac), Terminalia bor- 
bonica, Parkia speciosa. The gardens of the coast districts display 
a marvellous wealth of flowers and shrubs, partly indigenous and 
partly gathered from all parts of the world. Among the indigenous 
varieties may be noted the vacoa (Pandanus utilis) and the aloe. 



A species of coffee plant is also indigenous. Fruits grown in the 
island are: the banana, the coco-nut, bread-fruit and jack-fruit, 
the bilimbi, the carambola, the guava, the litchi, the' Japanese 
medlar, the mango-steen, the tamarind, the Abelmoschus esculentus, 
the chirimoya, the papaya, &c. Forests originally covered nearly 
the whole island ; the majority of the land has been cleared by the 
inhabitants, but there arc still some 200 sq. m. of forest land and the 
administration has in part replanted the higher districts, such as 
Salazie, with eucalyptus and caoutchouc trees. 

Inhabitants. — The inhabitants are divided into various classes, 
the Creoles, the mulattoes, 1 the negroes, and Indians and other 
Asiatics. The Creole population is descended from the first French 
settlers, chiefly Normans and Bretons, who married Malagasy 
women. Later settlers included European women, but the presence 
of non-European blood is so common among: the Creoles that the 
phrase " Bourbon white *' was given in Mauritius to linen of doubt- 
ful cleanness. Three kinds of Creoles are recognized — those of the 
towns and coasts, those of the mountains, and the petits cr boles, 
originally a class of small farmers living in the uplands, now reduced 
to a condition of poverty and dependence on the planters. The 
crtoles blancs de miles, the typical inhabitants of the island, are in 
general of a somewhat weak physique, quick-witted and of charming 
manners, brave and very proud of their island, but not of strong 
character. The mixed races tend to approximate to a single type, 
one _ in which the European strain predominates. The Creole 
patois is French mixed with a considerable number of Malagasy 
and Indian words, and containing many local idioms. The popu- 
lation, about 3§»ooo towards the close ol the 18th century, was in 
1849, at the penod of the liberation of the slaves, 120,000, of whom 
60,800 were newly freed negroes. Thereafter coolies were intro- 
duced from India, and in 1870 the population had increased to 
212,000. In 1882 the government of India ceased to authorize 
the emigration of coolies to Reunion, and in consequence of that 
and other economic causes the population decreased. In 1902 
the inhabitants numbered 173,315. Of these 13,492 were British 
Indians, 4496 Malagasy, 9457 foreign-born negroes, and 1378 
Chinese. Of the native born the Creoles numbered about 3000, the 
remainder being negroes or of mixed race. Among the Indian 
population the males are as three to one to the females, and the 
birth-rate is lower than the death-rate. 

Towns and Communication. — St Denis, the capital of the island, 
lies on the N. coast. It had in 1902 a population of 27,392. It 
is built in the form of an amphitheatre, and has several fine public 
buildings and centrally, situated botanic gardens. It is the seat 
of a bishopric, a court of first instance and an appeal court. It 
has an abundant supply of pure water. The only anchorage for 
vessels is an open road stead. _ St Pierre (pop. 28,885), the chief 
town on the leeward side of the island, has a small artificial harbour. 
Between St Pierre and St Denis, and both on the leeward shore, 
are the towns of St Louis (pop. 12,541) and St Paul (pop. 19,617). 
A few miles N. ol St Paul on the S. side of Cape Pointe des Galets 
is the port of the same name, the only considerable harbour in the 
island. It was completed in 1886 at a cost of £2,700,000, covers 
40 acres, is well protected, and has 28 ft. of water. A railway 
serving the port goes round the coast from St Pierre, by St Paul, 
St Denis, &c, to St Benolt (a town on the E. side of the island with 
a pop. of 12,523), a distance of 83} m. This line is carried through 
a tunnel nearly 6£ m. long between La Possession and St Denis. 
Besides the railway the lower parts of the island are well provided 
with roads. There is regular steamship communication between 
Pointe des Galets^ Marseilles, Havre and Madagascar. Telegraphic 
communication with all parts of the world was established in 1906 
when a cable connecting Reunion with Tamatave and Mauritius 
was laid. (£<_ 

Industries. — The Sugar Plantations. — The area of the cultivated 
lands is estimated at 148,200 acres (or 230 sg. m.), of which 86,4.50 
acres are under sugar-cane, the remainder being under either maize, 
manioc, potatoes, haricots, or coffee, vanilla and cocoa. The 
sugar-cane, introduced in 1711 by Pierre Parat, is now the staple 
crop. In the 18th century the first place belonged to coffee (intro- 
duced from Arabia in 1715) and to the clove tree, brought from the 
Dutch Indies by Poivre at the risk of his life. Both are now culti- 
vated on a very limited scale. Vanilla, introduced in 181 8, was not 
extensively cultivated till about 1850. Bourbon vanilla, as it is 
called, is of high character, and next to sugar is the most important 
article Of cultivation in the island. There are small plantations 
of cocoa and cinchona; cotton-growing was tried, but proved un- 
successful. 

The sugar industry has suffered greatly from the competition 
with beet sugar and the effects of bounties, also from the scarcity 
of labour, from the ravages of the phylloxera (which made its 
appearance in 1878) and from extravagant methods of manu- 
facture. It was notuntil 1906 that steps were taken for the creation 
of central sugar mills and refineries, in consequence of the com- 
pulsory shutting down of many small mills. Rum is largely dis- 
tilled and forms an important article of export. There are also 
manufactories for the making of geranium essence, St Pierre being 
the centre of this industry. Other articles exported are aloe fibre 
and vacoa casks. The mineral wealth of the island has not been 



208 



REUS— REUSCH, F. H. 



exploited, except for the mineral springs which yield waters highly 
esteemed. Almost all the products of the island are exported, 
so that tHe import trade is very varied. Cattle are imported from 
Madagascar; rice, the chief article of food, from Saigon and India; 
petroleum, largely used in manufactories, from America and Russia; 
almost everything else comes from France, to which country go 
the great majority of the exports. Over 75 % of the shipping is 
under the French flag. 

Commerce. — The total trade amounted in i860 to the value of 
£4,464,000 (the highest during the century); in 1900, to £1,533,240. 
In 1905 the imports were valued at £727,000 and the exports at 
''•" £428,000. Of the imports £500,000 were from France or French 
colonies; of the exports £388,000 went to France or French colonies. 
The currency consists of notes of the Banquede la Reunion (guaran- 
teed by the government) and nickel token money. Neither the notes 
nor the nickel money have any currency outside Reunion; the rate 
of exchange varies from 5 to 20%. 

Administration and Revenue. — Reunion is regarded practically 
as a department of France. It sends two deputies and one senator 
to the French legislature, and is governed by laws passed by that 
body. All inhabitants, not being aliens, enjoy the franchise, no 
distinction being made between whites, negroes or mulattoes, all 
of whom are citizens. At the head of the local administration is 
a governor who is assisted by a secretary-general, a procureur 
giniral, a privy council and a council-general elected by the 
suffrages of all citizens. The governor has the right of direct 
communication and negotiation with the government of South 
Africa and all states east of the Cape. The council-general has wide 
powers, including the fixing of the budget. For administrative 
purposes the island is divided into two arrondissements, the Wind- 
ward, with five cantons and nine communes, and the Leeward, 
with four cantons and seven communes. The towns are subject 
to the French municipal law. The revenue, largely dependent on 
the prosperity of the sugar trade, declined from an average of 
£163,765 in the five years 1895-99 to an average of £147,225 in the 
five years 1900—4. For the same periods the average colonial 
expenditure, which includes the loss incurred in maintaining the 
harbour and railway, increased from £224,508 to £225,088. De- 
ficits are made good by grants from France. 

History. — Reunion is usually said to have been first discovered in 
April 1513 by the Portuguese navigator Pedro Mascarenhas, and his 
name, or that of Mascarene Islands, is still applied to the archi- 
pelago of which it forms a part ; but it seems probable that it must 
be identified with the island of Santa Apollonia discovered by 
Diego Fernandes Pereira on the 9th of February 1507. It was 
visited by the Dutch towards the close of the 16th century, and 
by the English early in the 17th century. When in 1638 the island 
was taken possession of by Captain Gaubert, or Gobert, of Dieppe, it 
was still uninhabited; a more formal annexation in the name of 
Louis XIII. was effected in 1643 by Jacques Pronis, agent of the 
Compagnie des Indes in Madagascar; and in 1649 fitienne de 
Flacourt, Pronis's more eminent successor, repeated the ceremony 
at a spot which he named La Possession. He also changed the 
name of the island from Mascarenhas to Bourbon. By decree of 
the Convention in 1793, Bourbon in turn gave place to Reunion, 
and, though during the empire this was discarded in favour of lie 
Bonaparte, and at the Restoration people naturally went back to 
Bourbon, Reunion has been the official designation since 1848. 

The first inhabitants were a dozen mutineers deported from 
Madagascar by Pronis, but they remained only three years (1646-49). 
Other colonists went thither of their own will in 1654 and 1662. In 
1664 the Compagnie des Indes orientates de Madagascar, to whom a 
concession of the island was granted, initiated a regular colonization 
scheme. Their first commandant was fitienne Regnault, who in 
1689 received from the French crown the title of governor. The 
growth of the colony was very slow, and in 171 7 there were only 
some 2000 inhabitants. It is recorded that they lived on excellent 
terms with the pirates, who from 1684 onward infested the neigh- 
bouring seas for many years. In 1735 Bourbon was placed under 
the governor of the lie de France (Mauritius), at that time the illus- 
trious Mah6 de Labourdonnais. The Compagnie des Indes orien- 
tates gave up its concession in 1767, and under direct administration 
of the crown liberty of trade was granted. The French Revolution 
effected little change in the island and occasioned no bloodshed; 
the colonists successfully resisted the attempts of the Convention 
to abolish slavery, which continued until 1848 (when over 60,000 
negroes were freed), the slave trade being, however, abolished in 
1817. During the Napoleonic wars Reunion, like Mauritius, served 
the French corsairs as a rallying place from which attacks on Indian 
merchantmen could be directed. In 1809 the British attacked the 
island, and the French were forced to capitulate on the 8th of July 
1 810; the island remained in the possession of Great Britain 
until April 1815, when it was restored to France. From that period 
the island has had no exterior troubles. The negro population, 
upon whom in 1870 the Third Republic conferred the full rights of 
French citizenship including the vote, being unwilling to labour in 
the plantations, the immigration of coolies began in i860, but in 
1882 the government of India prohibited the further emigration 
of labourers from that country, in consequence of the inconsiderate 



treatment of the coolies by the colonists. Reunion has also suffered 
from the disastrous effects of cyclones. A particularly destructive 
storm swept over the island in March 1879, and in 1904 another 
cyclone destroyed fully half of the sugar crop and 75% of the 
vanilla crop. 

See A. G. Garsault, Notice sur la Riunion (Paris, 1900), a mono- 
graph prepared for the Paris exhibition of that year; E. Jacob de 
Cordemoy, Etude sur rile de la Riunion, geographie, richesses natur- 
ettes, &c. (Marseilles, 1905); W. D. Oliver, Crags and Craters; 
Rambles in the island of Riunion (London, 1896); C. Keller, Natur 
und Volksleben der Insel Riunion (Basel, 1888); J. D. Brunet, 
Histoire de V association ginirale des francs crioles de Vile Bourbon 
(St Denis, Reunion, 1885); Trouette, L'lle Bourbon pendant la 
piriode revolutionnaire (Paris, 1888). Of earlier works consult 
Demanet, Nouv. Hist, de VAfrique frangaise (1767); P. U. Thomas, 
Essai de statistique de Vile Bourbon (1828); Dejean de la Batie, 
Notice sur Vile Bourbon (1847); J. Mauran, Impressions dans un 
voy. de Paris £ Bourbon (1850); Maillard, Notes sur Vile de la Ri- 
union (1862); Az6ma, Hist, de Vile Bourbon (1862). The geology 
and volcanoes of Reunion were the object of elaborate study by 
Bory de St Vincent in 1801 and 1802 (Voyases dans les quatre prin- 
cipalis iles des mers d'Afrique, Paris, 1804), and have since been 
examined by R. von Drasche (see Die Insel Reunion, &c M Vienna, 
1878, and C. V&ain, Descriptions giologique de . . . Vile de la Riunion 
. . ., Paris, 1878). The best map is Pau Lepervanche's Carte de la 
Riunion 1*100,000 (Paris, 1906). 

REUS, a city of N.E. Spain, in the province of Tarragona, 
on the Saragossa-Tarragona railway, 4 m. N. of Salou, its port 
on the Mediterranean. Pop. (1900) 26,681. Reus consists of 
two parts, the old and the new, separated by the Calle Arrabal, 
which occupies the site of the old city wall. The old town 
centres in the Plaza del Mercado, from which narrow and 
tortuous lanes radiate in various directions; the new one dates 
from about the middle of the 18th century, and its streets are 
wide and straight. There is an active trade in the agricultural 
products of the fertile region around the city. The local 
industries developed considerably hetween 1875 and 1905, and 
the city has important flour, wine and fruit export houses. 
There is a model farm belonging to the municipality in the 
suburbs. Reus has excellent primary, normal and higher- 
grade state schools, many private schools, an academy of fine 
arts and a public library. The hospitals and foundling refuge, 
the institute and the town hall are handsome modern buildings. 

The earliest records of Reus date from ahout the middle of 
the 13th century. Its modern prosperity is traced to about 
the year 1750, when a colony of English settled here and estab- 
lished a trade in woollens, leather, wine and spirits. The 
principal incidents in its political history arose out of the 
occurrences of 1843 ( see Spain, History), in connexion with 
which the town received the title of city, and Generals Zurbano 
and Prim were made counts of Reus. The city was the birth- 
place of General Prim (1814-1870) and of the painter Mariano 
Fortuny (1830-1874). 

REUSCH, FRANZ HEINRICH (1823-1900), Old Catholic 
theologian, was born at Brilon, in Westphalia, on 4th December 
1823. He studied general literature at Paderborn, and theology 
at Bonn, Tubingen and Munich. The friend and pupil of 
Dollinger, he took his degree of Doctor in Theology at Munich, 
the university of which Dollinger was so long an ornament. 
He was ordained priest in 1849, and was immediately after- 
wards made chaplain at Cologne. In 1854 he became Privat- 
dozent in the exegesis of the Old Testament in the Catholic 
Theological Faculty at Bonn; in 1858 he was made extra- 
ordinary, and in 1861 ordinary, professor of theology in the 
same university. From 1866 to 1877 he was editor of the 
Bonner Theologisches Liter alurblatl. In the controversies on 
the Infallibility of the Pope, Reusch attached himself to 
Dollinger's party, and he and his colleagues Hilgers, Knoodt 
and Langen were interdicted by the archbishop of Cologne in 
187 1 from pursuing their courses of lectures. In 1872 he was 
excommunicated. For many years after this he held the post 
of Old Catholic cure* of Bonn, as well as the position of vicar- 
general to the Old Catholic Bishop Reinkens, hut resigned both 
in 1878, when, with Dollinger, he disapproved of the permission 
to marry granted by the Old Catholic Church in Germany to 
its clergy. From that time he retired into lay communion. 



REUSCH, H. H.— REUSS 



209 



but continued to give lectures as usual in the Old Catholic 
Faculty of Theology in the university of Bonn, and to write 
on theological subjects. He was made rector of that university 
in 1873. In 1874 and 1875 he was the official reporter of 
the memorable Reunion Conferences held at Bonn in those 
years and attended by many distinguished theologians of the 
Oriental and Anglican communions. 

Reusch was a profound scholar, an untiring worker and a 
man of lovable character. Among his voluminous works were 
contributions to the Revue Internationale de thiologie, a review 
started at Bern at the instance of the Old Catholic Congress at 
Lucerne. He wrote also works on the Old Testament; a 
pamphlet on Die Deutschen Bischofe und der Aberglaube; and 
another on the falsifications to be found in the treatise of 
Aquinas against the Greeks; as well as essays on the history of 
the Jesuit Order, and a book of prayers. But his fame will 
mainly rest on the works which he and Dollinger published 
jointly. These consisted of a work on the Autobiography of 
Cardinal Bellarmine, the Geschichte der Moralstreitigen in der 
Romisch-Katholischen Kirche seit dem XVI. Jahrhundert, and 
the Erorterungen iiber Leben und Schriften des hi. Liguori. 
During the last few years of his life he was smitten with paralysis. 
He died on the 3rd of March 1900, leaving behind bim in manu- 
script a collection of letters to Bunsen about Roman cardinals 
and prelates, which has since been published. (J. J. L. *) 

REUSCH, HANS HENRIK (1852- ), Norwegian geologist, 
was born at Bergen on the 5th of September 1852. He was 
educated at Christ iania, Leipzig and Heidelberg, and graduated 
Pb.D. at Christiania in 1883. He joined the Geological Survey 
of Norway in 1875, and became Director in 1888. He is dis- 
tinguished for his researches on the crystalline schists and the 
Palaeozoic rocks of Norway. He discovered Silurian fossils 
in the highly altered rocks of the Bergen region; and in 1891 
he called attention to a palaeozoic conglomerate of glacial origin 
in the Varanger Fiord, a view confirmed by Mr A. Strahan 
in 1896, who found glacial striae on the rocks beneath the 
ancient boulder-bed. Reusch has likewise thrown light on 
the later geological periods, on the Pleistocene glacial pheno- 
mena and on the sculpturing of the scenery of Norway. Among 
his separate publications are Silur fossiler og pressede Kon- 
glomerater (1882); Dei nordlige Norges Geologi (1891). 

REUSS, AUGUST EMANUEL VON (1811-1873), Austrian 
geologist and palaeontologist, the son of Franz Ambrosius 
Reuss (1761-1830), was born at Bilin in Bohemia on the 8th 
of July 1811. He was educated for the medical profession, 
graduating in 1834 at the university of Prague, and afterwards 
practising for fifteen years at Bilin. His leisure was devoted to 
mineralogy and geology, and the results of his researches were 
published in Geognostische Skizzen aus Bohmen (1840-44) and 
Die Versteinerungen der Bohmischen Kreideformation (1845-46). 
In 1849 he gave up his medical practice, and became professor 
of mineralogy at the university of Prague. There he estab- 
lished a fine mineralogical collection, and he became the first 
lecturer on geology. In 1863 he was appointed professor of 
mineralogy in the university of Vienna. He investigated 
the Cretaceous fauna of Gosau, and studied the Crustacea, 
including entomostraca, the corals, bryozoa, and especially 
the foraminifera of various geological formations and countries. 
He died at Vienna on the 26th of November 1873. 

REUSS, 6D0UARD GUILLAUME EUGENE (1804-1891), 
Protestant theologian, was born at Strassburg on the 18th of 
July 1804. He studied philology in his native town (1810-22), 
theology at Gottingen under J. G. Eichhorn; and Oriental 
languages at Halle under Wilbelm Gesenius, and afterwards at 
Paris under Silvestre de Sacy (1827-28). In 1828 he became 
Privatdozenl at Strassburg. From 1829 to 1834 he taught 
Biblical criticism and Oriental languages at the Strassburg 
Theological School; he then became assistant, and afterwards, 
in 1836, regular professor of theology at that university. The 
sympathies of Reuss were German rather than French, and 
after the annexation of Alsace to Germany he remained at 
Strassburg, and retained his professorship till, in 1888, he retired 



on a pension. Amongst his earliest works were: De libris 
veteris Testamenti dpocryphis plebi non negandis (1829), Ideen 
zur Einleitung in das Evangelium Johannis (1840) and Die 
Johanneische Theologie (1847). In 1852 he published his 
Histoire de la thiologie chritienne an siecle apostolique, which was 
followed in 1863 by UHistoire du canon des saintes Ventures dans 
I'Sglise chritienne. In 1874 he began to publish his translation 
of the Bible, La Bible , nouvelle traduction avec commentaire. It 
was the criticism and exegesis of the New Testament which 
formed the subject of Reuss's earlier labours — in 1842, indeed, 
he had published in German a history of the books of the New 
Testament, Geschichte der heiligen Schriften N. Test.; and though 
his own views were liberal, he opposed the results of the Tiibingen 
school. After a time he turned his attention also to Old Testa- 
ment criticism, for which he was especially fitted by his sound 
knowledge of Hebrew. In 1881 he published in German his 
Geschichte der heiligen Schriften A. Test., a veritable encyclopaedia 
of the history of Israel from its earliest beginning till the taking 
of Jerusalem by Titus. He died at Strassburg on the 15th of 
April 1 891. 

Reuss belonged to the more modern section of the Liberal 
party in the Lutheran Church. His critical position was to 
some extent that of K. H. Graf and J. Wellhausen, allowing for 
the circumstances that he was in a sense their forerunner, and 
was actually for a time Graf's teacher. Indeed, he was really 
the originator of the new movement, but hesitated to publish 
the results of his studies. For many years Reuss edited with 
A. H. Cunitz (b. 181 2) the Beitr&ge zu den theologischen Wissen- 
schaften. With A. H. Cunitz and J. W. Baum (1800-1878), 
and after their death alone, he edited the monumental edition 
of Calvin's works (38 vols., 1863 ff.). His critical edition of 
the Old Testament appeared a year after his death. His son, 
Ernst Rudolf (b. 1841), was in 1873 appointed city librarian 
at Strassburg. 

See the article in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie, and cf. 
Otto Pfleiderer, Development of Theology in Germany since Kant 
(1890). 

REUSS, the name of two small principalities of the German 
empire, called Reuss, elder line, or Reuss-Greiz, and Reuss, 
younger line, or Reuss-Schleiz-Gera. With a joint area of 
441 sq. m. they form part of the complex of Thuringian states, 
and consist, roughly speaking, of two main blocks of territory, 
separated by the Neustadt district of the duchy of Saxe-Weimar. 
The more southerly, which is much the larger of the two portions, 
belongs to the bleak, mountainous region of the Frankenwald 
and the Vogtland, while the northern portion is hilly, but fertile. 
The chief rivers are the Weisse Elster and the Saale. About 
35% of the total surface is occupied by forests, while about 
40% is under tillage and about 19% under meadow and 
pasture. Wheat, rye and barley are the principal crops grown, 
and the breeding of cattle is an important industry. 

Reuss-Greiz, with an area of 122 sq. m., belongs to the larger 
of the two divisions mentioned above, and consists of three 
large and several small parcels of land. On the whole, the soil 
is not favourable for agriculture, but the rearing of cattle is 
carried on with much success. About 63% of the inhabitants 
maintain themselves by industrial pursuits, the chief products 
of which are the making of woollen fabrics at Greiz, the capital, 
and of stockings at Zeulenroda. Other industries are machine- 
building, printing and the making of paper and porcelain. In 1905 
the population of the principality was 70,603. The constitution of 
Reuss-Greiz dates from 1867, and provides for a representative 
chamber of twelve members, of whom three are appointed by 
the prince, while two are chosen by the landed proprietors, 
three by the towns and four by the rural districts. The revenue 
and expenditure amount to about £76,000 a year, and there is no 
public debt. The reigning prince is Henry XXIV. (b. 1878), 
but as he is incapable of discharging his duties, these are now 
undertaken by a regent. 

Reuss-Schleiz-Gera, with an area of 319 sq. m., includes part 
of the southern and the whole of the northern of the two main 
divisions mentioned above; it touches Bavaria on the south 



2IO 



REUTER, F. 



and Prussian Saxdny on the north. The former portion is 
known as the Oherland and the latter as the Unterland. Owing 
to the fertility of the Unterland, quite one-quarter of the people 
are supported by agricultural pursuits, although there is also 
much industrial activity. The chief industrial product consists 
of woollen goods, and the manufacture centres in the capital 
Gera, the largest of the six towns of the principality. Other 
industries are jute-spinning, dyeing and brewing, and the 
manufacture of musical instruments, chemicals, tohacco, 
cigars, porcelain and machinery. A considerable trade is 
carried on in these goods and also in timber, cattle and slate. 
Iron is mined in the Oberland, and large quantities of salt are 
yielded by the brine springs of Heinrichshall. In 1905 Reuss- 
Schleiz contained 144,584 inhabitants. Its annual revenue 
and expenditure amount to about £129,000, and in 1908 it had 
a public deht of £52,027. The constitution, which rests on 
laws of 1852 and 1856, provides for a representative assembly 
of 16 members which possesses limited legislative powers, the 
administrative duties being discharged by a cabinet of three 
members. The reigning prince is Henry XIV. (h. 1832), but 
since 1892 his duties have heen undertaken by a regent. The 
states of Reuss return one member each to the Bundesrat, and 
one each to the Reichstag of the German empire. 

History. — The history of Reuss stretches back to the times 
when the German kings appointed vogts, or hailiffs (advocati 
imperii) t to administer their lands. One of these vogts was a 
certain Henry, who died about 1 1 20, after having been entrusted 
by the emperor Henry IV. with the vogtship of Gera and of 
Weida, and he is generally recognized as the ancestor of the 
princes of Reuss. His descendants called themselves lords of 
Weida, and some of them were men of note in their day, serving 
the emperors and German kings and distinguishing themselves 
in the ranks of the Teutonic order. The land under their rule 
gradually increased in size, and it is said that the name of 
Reuss was applied to it owing to the fact that one of its princes 
married a Russian princess, their son being called " der Russe," 
or the Russian. Another version is that the prince received 
this sobriquet because he passed many years in Russia. The 
district thus called Reuss was at one time much more extensive 
than it is at present, and for some years its rulers were margraves 
of Meissen. In 1564 the family was divided into three branches 
by the sons of Henry XVI. (d. 1535). One of these hecame ex- 
tinct in 1616, but the remaining ones are those of Reuss-Greiz 
and Reuss-Schleiz-Gera, which are flourishing to-day. Although 
there have been further divisions these have not been lasting, 
and the lands of the former family have been undivided since 
1768 and those of the latter since 1848. The lords of Reuss 
took the title of count in 1673 ; and the head of the elder line became 
a prince of the Empire in 1778, and the head of the younger 
line in 1806. In 1807 the two princes joined the Confederation 
of the Rhine and in 181 5 the German confederation. In 1866 
Reuss-Greiz was compelled to atone for its active sympathy 
with Austria by the payment of a fine. In 1871 both princi- 
palities became members of the new German empire. The 
princes of Reuss are very wealthy, their private domain including 
a great part of the territory over which they rule. In the 
event of either line becoming extinct, its possessions will fall 
to the other. 

A curious custom prevails in the house of Reuss. The male 
members of both branches of the family all bear the name of 
Henry (Heinrich), the individuals being distinguished by 
numbers. In the elder line, according to an arrangement made 
in 1 701, the enumeration continues until the number one 
hundred is reached when it begins again. In the younger line 
the first prince born in a new century is numbered I., and the 
numbers follow on until the end of the century when they 
begin again. Thus Henry XIV. of Reuss younger line, who 
was born in 1832, was the son of Henry LXVII. (1 780-1867), 
the former being the 14th prince born in the 19th century, and 
the latter the 67th prince born in the 18th. 

See B. Schmidt, Die Reussen, Cenealogie des Gesamthauses Reuss 
(Schleiz, 1903); H. von Voss, Die Ahnen des reussischen Hauses 



(Lobenstein, 1882); C. F. Collmann, Reussische Geschichte. Das 
Vogttand im Mittelalter (Greiz, 1892), and O. Liebmann, Das Stoats- 
recht des Furstenthums Reuss (1884). 

REUTER, FRITZ (1810-1874), German novelist, was born 
on the 7th of November 18 10, at Stavenhagen, in Mccklenburg- 
Schwerin, a small country town where his father was hurgo- 
master and sheriff (Stadtrichter) , and in addition to his official 
duties carried on the work of a farmer. He was educated at 
home by private tutors and subsequently at the gymnasiums 
of Friedland in Mecklenburg-Strelitz, and of Parchim. In 
1 83 1 he began to attend lectures on jurisprudence at the uni- 
versity of Rostock, and in the following year went to the university 
of Jena. Here he was a member of the political students' club, 
or German Burschenschaft, and in 1833 was arrested in Berlin 
by the Prussian government; although the only charge which 
could be proved against him was that he had been seen wearing 
its colours, he was condemned to death for high treason. This 
monstrous sentence was commuted by King Frederick William III. 
of Prussia to imprisonment for thirty years in a Prussian 
fortress. In 1838, through the personal intervention of the 
grand-duke of Mecklenburg, he was delivered over to the 
authorities of his native state, and the next two years he spent 
in the fortress of Dbmitz, but in 1840 was set free, an amnesty 
having been proclaimed after the accession of Frederick William 
IV. to the Prussian throne. 

Although Reuter was now thirty years of age, he went to 
Heidelberg to resume his legal studies; but he soon found it 
necessary to return to Stavenhagen, where he aided in the 
management of his father's farm. After his father's death, 
however, he abandoned farming, and in 1850 settled as a 
private tutor at the little town of Treptow in Pomerania. Here 
he married Luise Kunze, the daughter of a Mecklenburg pastor. 
Reuter's first publication was a collection of miscellanies, 
written in Plattdeutsch, and entitled Lauschen un Riemels 
("anecdotes and rhymes," 1853; a second collection followed 
in 1858). The book, which was received with encouraging 
favour, was followed by Polterabendgedichte (1855), and De 
Reis 1 nah Belligen (1855), the latter a humorous poem describing 
the adventures of some Mecklenburg peasants who resolve to 
go to Belgium (which they never reach) to learn the secrets of 
an advanced civilization. In 1856 Reuter left Treptow and 
established himself at Neubrandenburg, resolving to devote his 
whole time to literary work. His next book (published in 1858) 
was Kein HUsung t an epic in which he presents with great force 
and vividness some of the least attractive aspects of village life 
in Mecklenburg. This was followed, in i860, by Hanne Nute 
un de liltte Pudd, the best of the works written by Reuter in 
verse. In 1861 Reuter's popularity was largely increased by 
Schurr-Murr y a collection of tales, some of which are in High 
German, but this work is of slight importance in comparison 
with the series of stories, entitled Olle Kamellen (" old stories 
of bygone days "). The first volume, published in i860, con- 
tained Woans ick tau'ne Fru ham and Ut de Franzosentid. Ut 
mine Festungstid (1861) formed the second volume; Ut mine 
Stromtid (1864) the third, fourth and fifth volumes; and Dorch- 
lauchting (1866) the sixth volume — all written in the Plattdeutsch 
dialect of the author's home. Woans ick tau y ne Fru ham is a 
bright little tale, in which Reuter tells, in a half serious half 
bantering tone, how he wooed the lady who became his wife. 
In Ut de Franzosentid the scene is laid in and neai Stavenhagen 
in the year 1813, and the characters of the story are associated 
with the great events which then stirred the heart of Germany 
to its depths. Ut mine Festungstid is of less general interest 
than Ut de Franzosentid, a narrative of Reuter's hardships 
during the term of his imprisonment, but it is not less vigorous 
either in conception or in style. Ut mine Stromtid is by far 
the greatest of Reuter's writings. The men and women he 
describes are the men and women he knew in the villages and 
farmhouses of Mecklenburg, and the circumstances in which he 
places them are the circumstances by which they were surrounded 
in actual life. As in Ut de Franzosentid he describes the deep 
national impulse in obedience to which Germany rose against 



REUTER, BARON DE— REVAL 



211 



Napoleon, so in Ut mine Stromtid he presents many aspects of 
the revolutionary movement of 1848. 

In 1863 Reuter transferred his residence from Neubranden- 
burg to Eisenach; and here he died on the 12th of July 1874. 
In the works produced at Eisenach he did not maintain the high 
level of his earlier writings. 

Reuter's Sdmtliche Werke, in 13 vols., were first published in 1863- 
68. To these were added in 1875 two volumes of Nachgelasscnc 
Schriften, with a biography by A. Wilbrandt; and in 1878 two 
supplementary volumes to the works appeared. A popular edition 
in 7 vols, was published in 1877-78 (last edition, 1902); there are 
also editions by K.F.Miiller (18 vols., i905) ) and\V.Seelmann (7 vols., 
1905-6). See O. Glagau, F, Reuter und seine Dichtuneen (1866; 
2nd ed., 1875); H. Ebert, F. Reuter und seine Werke (1874); 
F. Latendorf, Zur Erinnerung an F. Reuter (1879); K. T. Gadertz, 
Reuter-Studien (1890); by the same, Aus Reuters alten und jungen 
Tagen (3 vols., 1 894-1 900); Brief e F. Reuters an seinen Vater, 
edited by F. Engel (2 vols., 1895); A. Romer, F. Reuter in seinem 
Leben und Schaffen (1895); G. Raatz, Wahrheit und Dichtung in 
Reuters Werken (1895); E. Brandes, Aus F. Reuters Leben (1899); 
K. F. Muller, Der Mecklenburger Volksmund und F. Reuters Schrtften 
(1902). A complete bibliography of F. Reuter will be found in the 
Ntederdeutschc Jahrbuch for 1896 and 1902. 

REUTER, PAUL JULIUS, Baron de (1821-1899), founder of 
Reuter's News Agency, was born at Cassel, Germany. At the 
age of thirteen he became a clerk in his uncle's bank at Gottingen, 
where he chanced to make the acquaintance of Professor Gauss, 
whose experiments in telegraphy were then attracting some 
attention. Reuter's mind was thus directed to the value of 
the speedy transmission of information, and in 1849, on the 
completion of the first telegraph lines in Germany and France, 
he found an opportunity of turning his ideas to account. There 
was a gap between the termination of the German line at Aix- 
la-Chapelle and that of the French and Belgian lines at Venders. 
Reuter organized a news-collecting agency at each of these 
places, his wife being in charge of one, himself at the other, and 
bridged the interval by a pigeon-post. On the establishment 
of through telegraphic communication, Reuter endeavoured to 
start a news agency in Paris, but finding that the French govern- 
ment's restrictions would render the scheme unworkable, 
removed in 1851 to England and became a naturalized British 
subject. The first submarine cable — between Dover and 
Calais — had just been laid, and Reuter opened an office in 
London for the transmission of intelligence between England 
and the continent. At first, however, his business was practi- 
cally confined to the transmission of private commercial telegrams 
to places not connected with the new telegraph system. He 
appointed agents at the various telegraph termini on the con- 
tinent to take these despatches off the wires and forward them 
by rail or pigeon-post to the addresses. Simultaneously he 
endeavoured to induce the English papers to publish the foreign 
news telegrams supplied by his various agents. These efforts 
were for some years unsuccessful, until in 1858 The Times 
published the report of an important speech by Napoleon III. 
forwarded by Reuter's Paris agent. Reuter now extended his 
sphere of operations all over the world, and in 1859 obtained 
leave for the presence of representatives at the headquarters of 
the Austrian and French armies during the war. In 1866 he 
laid down a special cable from Cork to Crookhaven, which 
enabled him to circulate news of the American Civil War several 
hours before the steamer could reach Liverpool. A concession 
for a cable beneath the North Sea to Cuxhaven was granted 
him by the king of Hanover in 1865, and in the same year a 
concession was granted him for a cable between France and 
the United States, the line being worked jointly by Reuter 
(whose business had just been converted into a limited liability 
company) and the Anglo- American Telegraph Company. In 
1872 he obtained from the shah of Persia an exclusive concession 
to develop the internal resources of that country, but the con- 
cession was annulled and its privileges transferred to the Im- 
perial Bank of Persia. Reuter was in 1871 given the title of 
baron by the duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, and by a special 
grant of Queen Victoria he and his heirs were authorized to have 
the privileges of this rank in England. Baron Reuter died at 
Nice on the 25th of February 1899. 



REUTERHOLM, GUSTAF ADOLF, Bakon (1756-1813), 
Swedish statesman. After a brief military career he was ap- 
pointed Kammerherr to Sophia Magdalcna, queen consort of 
Gustavus III., and subsequently became intimately connected 
with the king's brother, Charles, then duke of Sudermania. He 
remained in the background throughout the reign of Gustavus 
III., whom he constantly opposed and by whom he was im- 
prisoned along with the other malcontents in 1789. He was 
abroad at the time of the king's death, but a summons from 
his friend, now duke regent, speedily recalled him, and in 1793 
he was made a member of the council of state and one of the 
" lords of the realm." At first he seemed inclined to adopt a 
liberal system, and reintroduced the freedom of the press. He 
did this solely, however, to reverse the Gustavian system, and 
persecuted the stalwarts of the late king {e.g. G. M. Armfelt, 
J. K. Toll) with a petty vindictiveness which excited general 
disgust. Towards the end of the regency, Reuterholm inclined 
towards an alliance with Russia on the basis of a marriage 
between the young king, Gustavus IV., and the empress 
Catherine's granddaughter, Alexandra Pavlovna, an alliance 
frustrated by the bigotry of the intended groom. At home the 
Swedish government ended as ultra-reactionary, owing to an 
insignificant riot in Stockholm which so alarmed Reuterholm 
that he threatened all printers who printed anything relating 
to the constitutions of the French republic or the United States 
of America with the loss of their privileges. In March 1795 he 
closed the Swedish Academy because A. G. Silfverstolpe in his 
inaugural address had ventured to disapprove of the coup d'ttat 
of 1789. On the accession of Gustavus IV. (November ist, 
1796) Reuterholm was expelled from Stockholm. For the next 
twelve years he lived abroad under the name of Tempelcrentz. 
After the revolution of 1809 he returned to Sweden, but was 
denied all access to Charles XIII., and quitted his country for 
good. He died in Schleswig on the 27th of December 1813. 

See SverigesHistoria (Stockholm, 1877-1881), vol. v. (R. N. B.) 

REUTLINGEN, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of 
Wurttemberg, situated on the Echatz, an affluent of the Ncckar, 
near the base of the Achalm and 36 m. by rail S. of Stuttgart. 
Pop. (1905) 23,850. It is a quaintly built town, with many 
picturesque houses and a fine Gothic church of the 13th and 
14th centuries dedicated to St Mary, which was restored in 
1 893-1 901; it contains in the choir a replica of the Holy 
Sepulchre and a sculptured stone font, and has a tower 240 ft. . 
high. Reutlingen has three other Evangelical churches, a 
Roman Catholic church, a town hall, and several monuments, 
including one to the emperor William I. and another to Friedrich 
List. The industries of the town are numerous, and include the 
spinning and weaving of cotton, dyeing and bleaching; also the 
manufacture of leather, machinery, furniture, shoes, paper, 
clothing, hardware, bricks, beer and woollen goods. Hops, 
vines and fruit are grown in the neighbourhood. Reutlingen 
has several schools and educational establishments, including 
a celebrated pomological institute. It is also famous as the place 
where Pastor Gustav Werner (1809-1887) founded his Christian 
Socialist refuge, which has become widely known in philanthropic 
circles. 

Reutlingen, which is first mentioned in 121 3, became a free im- 
perial town in the 13th century and was fortified by the emperor 
Frederick II., remaining loyal to him and to his son, Conrad IV. 
A member of the league of Swabian towns, its citizens defeated 
Count Ulrich of Wurttemberg on the 14th of May 1377. Later it 
joined the Swabian League and was favoured by the emperor Maxi- 
milian I. It came into the possession of Wurttemberg in 1802. An 
explosion which took place on the 27th of December 1852 destroyed 
many houses in the town. 

See Rupp, Aus der Vorzeit Reutlingens und seiner Umgegend 
(Stuttgart, 1869); Hochstetter, Fuhrer durch Reutlingen und 
Umgebung (Reutlingen, 1901); and Zwiesele, Geognostischer Fuhrer 
in der Umgegend von Reutlingen (Stuttgart, 1897). 

REVAL, or Revel (Russ. Revel, formerly Kolyvafi; 
Esthonian, Tallina and Tannilin), a fortified seaport town of 
Russia, capital of Esthonia, situated on a bay on the S. coast 
of the gulf of Finland, 230 m. W. of St Petersburg by rail. 
Pop. (1000) 66,292, of whom half were Esthonians and 30% 



212 



REVEILLE— REVELATION, BOOK OF 



Germans. The city consists of two parts — the Domberg 
or Dom, which occupies a hill, and the lower town on the beach. 
The Dom contains the castle (first built in the 13th century, 
rebuilt in 1772), where the provincial administration has its 
seat, and a cathedral (1894-1900) with five gilded domes. It 
has its own administration, separate from that of the lower 
town. The church of St Nicholas, built in 131 7, contains many 
antiquities of the former Roman Catholic times and old German 
paintings. The Dom church contains many interesting shields, 
as also the graves of the circumnavigator Baron A. J. von 
Krusenstern (17 70-1846), of the Swedish soldiers Pontus de 
la Gardie (d. 1585) and Carl Horn (d. 1601), and of the 
Bohemian Protestant leader Count Matthias von Thurn (1580- 
1640), The church of St Olai, first erected in 1240, and often 
rebuilt, was completed in 1840 in Gothic style; it has a bell 
tower 456 ft. high. The oldest church is the Esthonian, built 
in 1 2 19. The public institutions " include a good provincial 
museum of antiquities; an imperial palace, Katharinenthal, 
built by Peter the Great in 17 19; and very valuable archives, 
preserved in the town hall (14th century). The pleasant 
situation of the town attracts thousands of people for sea- 
bathing. It is the seat of a branch board of the Russian 
admiralty and of the administration of the Baltic lighthouses. 
Its port has a depth of 4 to 6 fathoms, and a roadstead 35 m. 
wide, which freezes nearly every winter. The exports consist 
chiefly of grain, timber, flax, hides, wool, a species of anchovy, 
and hemp, and the imports of manufactured goods and machinery. 
The value of the aggregate trade amounts to an average of seven 
to nine millions sterling annually. Ther£ is considerable trade 
with Finland. Baltic Port, 30 m. W., is a sort of annex to the 
port of Reval. 

The high Silurian crag now known as Domberg was early 
occupied by an Esthonian fort, Lindanissa. In 1219 the Danish 
king Valdemar II. erected here a strong castle and founded the 
first church. In 1228 the castle was taken by the Livonian 
Knights, but nine years later it returned to the Danes. About 
the same time Liibeck and Bremen merchants settled there, and 
their settlement became an important seaport of the Hanseatic 
League. It was fortified early in the 14th century, and in 1343 
sustained a siege by the revolted Esthonians. Valdemar III. 
sold Reval and Esthonia to the Teutonic Knights in 1346, but 
on the dissolution of the order, in 1561, Esthonia and Reval 
surrendered to the Swedish king Erik XIV. A great conflagra- 
tion in 1433, the pestilence of 1532, the bombardment by the 
Danes in 1569, and the Russo-Livonian War, destroyed its 
trade. The Russians besieged Reval twice, in 1570 and 1577. 
It was still an important fortress, having been enlarged and 
fortified by the Swedes. In 17 10 it was surrendered to Peter 
the Great, who immediately began the erection of a military 
port for his Baltic fleet. His successors continued to fortify 
the access to Reval from the sea, large works being undertaken, 
especially in the early years of the 1 9th century, 

REVEILLES (Fr. r&oeillez, imperative of rfroeiller, to awaken, 
Lat. re- and vigilare, to watch), the signal by call of bugle or 
beat of drum to announce to soldiers the time to awake and 
begin duty. 

REVELATION, BOOK OF, in the Bible, the last book of the 
New Testament. 

Title. — According to the best authorities k CA (in the sub- 
scription) 2, 8, 82, 93, the title of this book is faroKaXwpis Tco&wou. 
Some cursives (1, 14, 17, 25, 28, 31, 38, 51, 90, 91, 94, 97) 
read <br. (+ rov aylov 1, 25, 28, 31, 38, 51, 90, 94) 'I&bvvov rov 
6eo\byov; Q and 12, far. T. rov 0eoX. mi evayyeilarov; P and 
42,^ &w. rov &TTo<rr6\ov 1. koX evayyeklarov. *The word " apoc- 
alypse " gives the current title not only to this book, but to a 
large body of Jewish and Christian writings. This is one of the 
first instances of its .use in this sense in existing literature. An 
earlier use is probably to be found in the title of the Syriac 
Apocalypse of Baruch, which =ypa<$i rij$ 6jroKa\{flpet)$ rov ftapovx 
viov rod Nr;pt<jv. The title is different from what the New Testa- 
ment use of the term would have led us to expect, i.e. 'AttokAXv^is 
'Irjaov, which are indeed the opening words of this book. With 



the latter phrase we might compare Gal. i. 12, where we 
have &iroKa\bl/€<jos 'IrjaovXptarov, " revelation from Jesus Christ." 
For the book is a revelation made by Gcd to Jesus Christ, who 
through His angel made it known to John for transmission to 
the churches. Instead of this the Church substituted the name 
of the disciple through whom the message was delivered for 
that of his Master, and designated our Apocalypse " The 
Apocalypse of John." This title was familiar before the end 
of the 2nd century. 

MSS. and Versions. — There are six uncials, k, A, C, P, Q, j, 
the last of which has not been edited or collated. Of the rest, 
P and Q are imperfect. The known cursives amount to 229, 
according to von Soden (Die Schriften des Neuen Testamentes t 
I. i. 289). There are six ancient versions of various values. 

(a) The best is the Latin, which is found in the Old Latin 
(ghm and the text used by Primasius) and the Vulgate, of which 
there are eight MSS. written between the 6th and 15th centuries. 

(b) The Syriac version appears in two forms, the Philoxenian 
(a.d. 508), recently discovered and edited by Gwynn, and the 
Harclean (a.d. 616). The true Peshitta did not contain the 
Apocalypse, (c) The Armenian version. The Apocalypse was 

admitted to the canon, according to Conybeare, in the 1 2th century 
through the influence of Nerses, who revised an older version 
traceable to the opening of the 5th century, (d) The Egyptian 
version is found in two forms, i.e. the Bohairic and Sahidic. 
The former has been edited by Horner, who is now also engaged 
on an edition of the latter. (e,f) The Ethiopic and Arabic 
versions have not yet been critically edited. 

External Evidence and Canonicity, 2nd Century. — It is possible 
that the Apocalypse was known to Ignatius, Epk. xv. 3 
(Rev. xxi. 3); Pkilad. vi. 1 (Rev. in. 12). Some have thought 
also that Barnabas (vi. 13, xxi. 3) was acquainted with our text, 
but this is highly improbable. Andreas of Caesarea mentions 
Papias as attesting the credibility of Revelation, and cites two 
of his remarks on Rev. xii. 7. The fact that Eusebius does not 
mention Revelation among the New Testament books known to 
Papias (H.E. iii. 39) may be due to the historian's unfriendly 
attitude to the book. Moreover, Papias may be one of the 
presbyters to whom, as having actually seen John, Irenaeus 
(v. 30 = Eusebius, U.E.v. 8) appeals on behalf of the number 666. 
From these possible and highly probable references we pass on 
to the clear testimony of Justin Martyr, who is the first to declare 
that Revelation is by " John, one of the Apostles of Christ " 
(Dial, lxxxi. 15), and a book of canonical standing (i. 28). In 
the latter half of this century it meets with very wide recogni- 
tion. Thus a treatise of some description was written upon it 
by Melito of Sardis in Asia Minor (Eus. H.E. iv. 26), and quoted 
by the anti-Montanist Apollonius (H.E. v. 18) and Theophilus 
of Antioch (H.E. iv. 24). In Carthage its currency is proven 
by the references of Tertullian, and the phraseology of the Acts 
of Perpetua and Felicitas (§§ 4, 12); in Alexandria by the 
citations of Clement (Paed. i. 6. 36; ii. 10. 108, &c); in Rome 
by its inclusion in the Muratorian canon, and in Gaul by its 
use in the Epistle of the churches of Vienne and Lyons (Eus. 
H.E. v. 10. 58), and in Irenaeus, who defends the apostolic 
authorship of the Revelation of John (Haer. iv. 14. i, 17. 6, 18.6, 
20. 11, 21, 3; v. 26. 1, &c). 

But in certain quarters the authority of the book was denied. 
Thus Marcion rejected it on the ground of its Jewish character 
(Tertullian, c. Marcion, iv. 5), and the Alogi assigned both Revela- 
tion and the Gospel to Cerinthus (Epiphanius, Haer. Ii, 3), 
This attitude is more widely represented in the next century. 

Third Century. — The attack on Revelation was resumed by 
abler antagonists in this century. The objections of the Alogi 
were restated and maintained by the Roman presbyter Caius 
in his controversy with the Montanist Proclus (Eus. H.E. ii. 25. 6; 
iii. 28. 2), but met with such overwhelming refutation at the 
hands of Hippolytus (see Gwynn, Hermathena, vi. 397-418) 
that no church writer in the West subsequently except Jerome 
seriously called in question the authorship of our book. 

Dionysius of Alexandria (a.d. 255) wrote a moderate and 
effective criticism, in which he rejects the hypothesis of the 



REVELATION, BOOK OF 



213 



Cerinthian authorship and urges that it was not written by 
the apostle, on the ground of its difference in language, style 
and contents from the other Johannine writings. Its author 
was some inspired man bearing the same name as the son of 
Zebedee. The arguments of Dionysius were repeated by Eusebius, 
who ascribed the work to the presbyter John mentioned by 
Papias (Eus. H.E. iii. 39) and was in doubt whether he should 
place Revelation among the spurious (v6da)woxks (H.E. iii. 25.4) 
or the accepted (d/ioXoyofyia'a). 

Eastern Church. — In the Eastern Church the views of Diony- 
sius and Eusebius were generally accepted. With the exception 
of Methodius and Pamphilus the book was not received by 
Eastern scholars. Thus it was either not mentioned or dis- 
owned by Cyril of Jerusalem, Chrysostom, Theodore of Mop- 
suestia, Theodoret and Amphilochus of Iconium. It is absent 
from the so-called Synopsis of Athanasius, the Stichometry of 
Nicephorus, the List of Sixty Books and other authoritative 
documents. It formed no part of the Peshitta New Testament. 
It was apparently unknown to Ephraem. Even when later 
it found a place in the Philoxenian and Harclean versions it 
never became a familiar book to the Syrian Churches, while it 
was unhesitatingly rejected by the Nestorian and Jacobite 
Churches. 

But though the Syrian Church maintained this unconciliatory 
attitude to the book, opposition to it began gradually to dis- 
appear in the rest of the East. Thus it came to be acknow- 
ledged by Athanasius, Isidore of Pelusium, Gregory of Nyssa, 
and others. Commentaries on the book were written by 
Andreas, archbishop of Caesarea, in the 5th century, and Arethas 
in the 9th. 

Western Church. — In the Western Church, Revelation was 
accepted by all writers from Hippolytus onward with the 
exception of Jerome, who relegated it to the class lying between 
the canonical and apocryphal. The authenticity of the book 
was unquestioned thenceforward till the Reformation, when 
the view of Jerome was revived by Erasmus, Carlstadt, Luther 
and others under various forms. In the Lutheran Church this 
opposition lasted into the next century, but in the Reformed 
it gave way much earlier. That Revelation has retained its 
place in the canon is due not to its extravagant claims to in- 
spiration or its apocalyptical disclosures, but to its splendid 
faith and unconquerable hope, that have never failed to awake 
the corresponding graces in every age of the Church's history. 

The History of Interpretation. — This is a most fruitful subject, 
and the study of it helps to settle other related questions. We 
first of all might divide the methods of interpretation into two 
Classes: I. Methods which presuppose the literal unity of the 
book; II. Methods which presuppose some breach of this unity 
either in the plan of the book as a whole or in some of its details. 

I. Methods presupposing the Literal Unity of the Book. — Where 
the book was accepted the problem of its interpretation was 
differently dealt with according to the age and environment of 
the interpreter. The book was first taken in a severely literal 
sense, and particularly in its chiliastic doctrine. 

i. Chiliastic Interpretation. — Revelation was held to teach 
chiliasm, or the doctrine of the literal reign of 1000 years. 
Amongst the chiliasts were Cerinthus, Papias, Justin, Irenaeus, 
Hippolytus, Tertullian and Victorinus. 1 When the Church 
obtained the mastery of the world this method came naturally 
to be abandoned in favour of a spiritualistic interpretation, to 
which we shall presently refer. But the growing secularism of 
the Church led to a revival of the former method in the beginning 
of the 13th century amongst the Franciscans. Thus Joachim 
of Floris in his Expositio magni abbatis Ioachimi in Apoc. 
teaches that Babylon is Rome, the Beast from the Sea Islam, 
the False Prophet the heretical sects of the day, and that on 
the close of the present age which was at hand the millennium 
would ensue. This method of interpretation was pursued to 
extravagant lengths by other Franciscans and was subsequently 

1 The oldest Latin commentary was written by this scholar (ob. 
303). He was the first in extant literature to interpret certain 
passages in Revelation of Nero. 



adopted by the Protestant reformers, who could justify their 
identification of the papacy with the Antichrist from books 
written within the Roman communion. Joachim was the first 
to apply the " recapitulation " theory to Revelation. 

ii. Spiritualistic Interpretation. — The founder of this school of 
interpretation was Ticonius the Montanist (floruit a.d. 380), 
though he followed therein the precedent set by Origen. His 
interpretation is on the whole mystical. Historical fulfilments, 
if not excluded, are not sought for. The millennium is the 
period between the first and second comings of Christ. The 
method of Ticonius was dominant in the Church down to the 
middle ages, amongst his followers being such notable church- 
men as Augustine, Primasius, Cassiodorus, Bede, Anselm. 

iii. Universal Historical Method of Interpretation. — A counter- 
attempt over against Joachim to interpret Revelation in the 
light of history was made by Nicolas of Lyra (1329, in his 
PostUla), following (?) therein the lead of Petrus Aureolus(i3i7). 
Here for the first time a consistently elaborated world-historical 
interpretation is carried out from the reign of Domitian to 
Lyra's own period. Under this method might be classed the 
expositions of Luther, Osiander, Striegel, Flacius, Gerhard and 
Calovius; and English writers such as Napier, Mede and 
Newton. Throughout these later commentaries a strong 
antipapal interest which identified the pope with the Antichrist 
holds a central place — a doctrine which, as we have seen, goes 
back historically to the immediate disciples of Joachim and 
like-minded Franciscans. 

iv. Contemporary-Historical Method. — Under* the stress of the 
Protestant attack there arose new methods on the papal side, 
and their authors were the Spanish Jesuits, Ribeira (ob. 1591) 
and Alcasar (ob. 1614). With these writers we have the be- 
ginning of a scientific method of interpretation. They approach 
the book from the standpoint of the author and seek the clue 
to his writings in the events of his time. It is from these scholars 
that subsequent writers of Revelation have learnt how to study 
this book scientifically. 2 This method was adopted and 
developed by Grotius, 8 Hammond, Clericus, Semler, Corredi 
and Eichhorn, Lucke, Bleek and Ewald, and the consciousness 
that Rome and not Jerusalem was the object of attack in 
Revelation became increasingly clear in the works of these 
scholars. The work of Ramsay, The Letters to the Seven 
Churches (1904), is a pure representative of this method. 

v.-vii. Continuously Historical, Eschatological 4 and Symbolical 
Methods. — These methods are now generally regarded as un- 
scientific, and call for no further notice here save" to mention 
that the first' was upheld by Hcngstenberg, Ebrard, Maitland, 
Elliott, &c; the second by Kliefoth, Beck, Zahn, and the third 
by Auberlen, Luthardt, Milligan and Benson. 

The learned Cambridge Commentary by Swete (The Apoc- 
alypse of John, 2nd ed., 1907) makes use of several of the 
methods of interpretation enumerated above. Thus Dr Swete 
writes (p. ccxviii) of his work: " With the ' preterists ' (con- 
temporary-historical) it will take its stand on the circumstances 
of the age and locality to which the book belongs, and will 
connect the greater part of the prophecy with the destinies of 
the empire under which the prophet lived; with the ' futurists " 
(eschatological) it will look for fulfilments of St John's pregnant 
words in times yet to come. With the school of Auberlen and 
Benson it will find in the Apocalypse a Christian philosophy of 
history; with the * continuous-historical ' school it can see 

1 The Jesuit Tuan Mariana was the first after Victorinus to explain 
" the wounded head " as referring to Nero. This interpretation 
was introduced into Protestant exegesis by Corrodi. 

* The beginnings of the literary-critical method are to be found in 
Grotius. Starting from the different dates assigned by tradition to 
the exile to Patmos and the different chronological relations implied 
in the book itself, he conjectured that the Apocalypse was composed 
of several works of St John, written in different places and at different 
times, some before, some after a.d. 70. Herein he was followed by 
Hammond and Lakemacher, but the idea was before its time and 
practically died stillborn. 

4 Or futurist. While it is impossible to interpret the Apocalypse 
scientifically as a whole by the eschatological method, there are un- 
doubtedly some sections in it which must be so interpreted. 



214 



REVELATION, BOOK OF 



in the progress of events ever new illustrations of the working 
of the great principles which are revealed. And ... it will 
gladly accept all that research and discovery can yield for the 
better understanding of the conditions under which the book 
was written." The chief value of this very scholarly book is 
to be found in its textual side. 

The greater number of the methods discussed above have 
made no permanent contribution to the exegesis of Revelation; 
the method among them that has done most in this direction 
is the contemporary-historical. But, though tjiis method has 
been applied in its fullness, and that by the keenest exegetes, 
there remains a consciousness that it has failed to solve many 
of the problems of the book. In many important points, 
however, its upholders are agreed, i.e. that the book is directed 
against Rome, that Nero redivivus is to be recognized in the 
wounded head, that the number 666 denotes Nero Caesar, and 
that in chap. xi. the preservation of the temple is foretold. 
Consequently the date of the composition of the book is placed 
before a.d. 70. Against the date assigned to the opening 
verses of this chapter modern scholars can make no objection, 
but, if this be the date of the entire work, then many passages 
in it are hopelessly inexplicable; for the latter just as certainly 
demand a date subsequent to a.d. 70 as xi. 1-2, a date prior to 
it. If, therefore, the possibilities of exegesis were exhausted in 
the list of methods already enumerated, science would have 
,to put the New Testament Apocalypse aside as a hopeless 
enigma. But there is no such impasse. For in the New 
Testament Apocalypse there is not that rigid consistency and 
unity in detail that the past presupposed. The critical studies 
of recent years have shown that most of the Old Testament 
prophetical books are composite. And this holds true in no 
less a degree of most of the Jewish apocalypses. Such works 
are to be explained on what might be called the " fragmentary 
hypothesis." Other books, like the Ethiopic Enoch, exhibit a 
series of independent sources connected more or less loosely 
together. Such are to be explained on the " sources hypo- 
thesis." Others, like the Ascension of Isaiah, betray the handi- 
work of successive editors, and are accordingly to be explained 
on the " redaction hypothesis." Now modern scholars have 
with varying success used in turn these three hypotheses with 
a view to the solution of the problems of the New Testament 
Apocalypse. To these we shall now address ourselves. 

II. Methods — Literary -Critical — presupposing some Degree of 
Compositeness in the Book. 

i. Redaction Hypothesis. — Suggestions, as we have already 
observed, had been made in this direction, but it was not till 
Weizsacker (Theol. Litter oturzeitung, 1882, p. 78 seq.) reopened 
the question that the problem was seriously undertaken. In 
the same year his pupil Volter (Die Entstehung der Apok., 1882, 
1885) put forward the bold theory that the original Apocalypse 
consisted of i. 4-6, iv. i-v. 10, vi. 1-17, vii. 1-8, viii. 1-13, 
ix. 1-21, xi. 14-19, xiv. 1^3, 6, 7, xiv. 14-20, xviii. 1-24, xix.. 1-4, 
xix. 5-ioa, which he assigned to the year a.d. 66 (so the second 
edition). To this the original author added as an appendix x. 
i-xi. 13, xiv. 8, xvii. 1-18, in a.d. 68-70. The work under- 
went three later redactions at the hands of successive editors 
in the reigns of Trajan and Hadrian. Instead o'f the above 
complex theory this writer now offers another (Die Offenbarung 
Johannis, 1004), 1 in which he distinguishes an apocalypse of 
John, a.d. 65, i. 4-6, iv. i-v. 10, vi. i-vii. 8, viii.-ix., xi. 14-19, 
xiv. 1-3, 6-7, xiv. 14-20, xviii. i-xix. 4, xix. 5-10 (pp. 3"5 6 ), 
an apocalypse of Cerinthus a.d. 70, x. 1-11, xvii. 1-18, xi. 1-13, 
xii. 1-16, xv. 5-6, 8, xvi. 1-21, xix. 11-xxi. 8, xxi. o-xxii. 6 
(pp. 56-129), a redaction of the work in a.d. 114-15, i. 7 _8 > 
v. 6b, 11-14, vii. 0-17, xii. 11, iS— xiii. 18, xiv. 4-5, 0-12, xv. 
1-4, 7, xvi. 19b, xvii. 14, 16, 17, xxi. 14, 22-27, xxii. 1-2, 8-9 
(pp. 120-48), and certain additions, i. 1-3, o-iii. 22, xiv. 13, 
xvi. 15, xxii. 7, 10-20, made in the time of Hadrian (pp. 148-171). 
First of all it should be observed that Volter was the first to 

1 Besides the works mentioned here Volter wrote two other works 
on the Apocalypse: Die Offenbarung Johannis, 1886; Das Problem 
der Apokalypse t 1893. 



call attention to the radical difference in outlook between 
vii, 1-8 and vii, 0-17 — a difference now generally recognized. 
Next it is noteworthy that in the second scheme here given 
Volter has abandoned his theory of a redaction hypothesis 
in favour of a sources hypothesis+a redactor. The earlier view 
of Volter was rejected on every side: the later will not prove 
more acceptable, though individual suggestions of this scholar 
will be occasionally helpful. The problem was next dealt 
with by Vischer (Die Offenbarung Johannis, eine Jiidische 
Apokalypse in Christlicher Bearbeitung, 1886, 2nd ed., 1895), 
who took iv. i-xxii. 5 to be a Jewish apocalypse revised and 
edited by a Christian, to whom he assigned i.-iii., v. 9-14, vii. 
0-17, xi. 8b, xii. 11, xiii. 9, 10, xiv. 1-5, 12, 13, xvi. 15, xvii. 
14, xix. 9, 10, 13b, xx. 4b-5a, 6, xxi. 5D-8, 14b, xxii. 6-21, 
together with some isolated expressions and all references to 
the Lamb. This scheme met with a better reception than that 
of Volter, but it also has failed to solve the problem. In 1891 
Erbes (Offenbarung Johannis, 1891) maintained that the book 
was entirely of Christian origin. The groundwork was written 
about a.d. 62. In this an editor incorporated a Caligula 
apocalypse, and a subsequent editor revised the existing work 
in many passages and made considerable additions, especially 
in the later chapters. Another attempt, mainly from this 
standpoint, has recently been made by J. Weiss of Marburg 
(Offenbarung des Johannis, 1904). This writer seeks to estab- 
lish the existence of an original Christian apocalypse written 
before a.d. 60. This included (see p. 111) i. 4-6 (7, 8), 0-19, 
ii.-vii., ix., xii. 7-12, xiii. 11-18, xiv. 1-5, 14-20, xx. i-i5,xxi. 
1-4, xxii. 3-5, 8 sqq. With this a Jewish apocalypse (x -xi. 13, 
xii. 1-6, 14-17, xiii. 1-7, xv.-xix., xxi. 0-27 — see p. 115), written 
a.d. 70, was incorporated by the redactor. This latter apocalypse 
consisted of a series of independent prophecies which appeared 
to have the same crisis in view. This redactor, moreover, was 
the first who gave to the Apocalypse the character of an attack 
on the Roman Empire and the imperial cult by means of a 
series of small additions. In the above work we have a com- 
bination of the redaction and sources hypotheses. 

ii. Sources Hypothesis. — The same year Weyland (Theol. 
Tijdsch., 1886, 454-70; Omwer kings en CompUatie-Hypothesen 
toegepast op de Apoc. van Johannis, 1888) advanced the theory 
of two Jewish sources (tt and a), which were subsequently 
worked over by a Christian redactor. Such a theory as that 
just mentioned hopelessly fails to account for the linguistic 
unity of the book. 

A very elaborate form of this theory was issued in 1884 
(Offenbarung Johannis) by Spitta, who found three main 
sources in the Apocalypse. First, there was the primitive 
Christian apocalypse embracing the letters and the seals written 
by John Mark soon after a.d. 60, — i. 4-6, 9-19, ii. i-iii. 22, 
iv.-vi., viii. 1, vii. 9-17, xix. 9b, 10, xxii. 8, 10-13, 16a, 17, 18a, 
20D-21. Secondly, the trumpet source of the time of Caligula 
(circa 40), — vii. 1-8, viii. 2-ix., x. 1-7, xi. 15, 19, xii.— xiii. 18, 
xiv. 1-11, xvi. 13-20, xix. 1 1-2 1, xx. 1-3, 8-15, xxi. 1, 5a, 6a. 
Thirdly, the vials source from the time of Pompey (circa 63), — 
x. ib, 2a, 8a, 9b, 10-11, xi. 1-13, 15b, 17, 18, xiv. 14-20, 
xv. 2-6, 8, xvi. 1-12, 17a, 21, xvii. i-6a, xviii. 1-23, xix. 1-8, 
xxi. o-xxii. 3a, 15. The rest of the book is from the hands of 
the redactor. 

In 1 891 Schmidt resolved the book into three independent 
sources which were put together by a redactor (Anmerkungen 
fiber d. Komposition der Offenb. Johannis). 

In 1895 Briggs (Messiah of the Apostles, 1895) developed this 
theory to a still more extreme degree. 

iii. Fragment Hypothesis. — The previous theories have brought 
to light and emphasized the fact that within the Apocalypse 
there are passages^ inconsistent with the tone and character of 
the whole. But, notwithstanding this fact, the Apocalypse 
gives a strong impression of its unity. Thus apparently the 
only remaining theory which can account for both these pheno- 
mena is that at which we have now arrived, i.e. the fragment 
hypothesis. To Weizsacker we owe the first statement of this 
theory: In 1882 (Theol. Litter aturz. pp. 78-9) he suggested 



REVELATION, BOOK. OF 



215 



that while the book is a unity the author made free use of older 
materials. Later, in his Apostolic Age (1886, 2nd ed. 1892), he 
specifies these additions as vii. 1-8 (a.d. 64-66), x.-xi. 1-13 
(circa a.d. 67), xii. 1-11, 12-17 (circa 69), xiii. (time of Vespasian), 
xvii. (time of Domitian). 

Sabatier (Les Origines liitiraires . . . de Vapocalypse, 1888) 
regards the book as a unity into which its author had. intro- 
duced older Jewish materials not always consistent with their new 
contexts, such as xi. 1-13, xii.— xiii., xiv. 6-20, xvi. 13, 14, 16, 
xvii. i-xix. 2, xix. 11-xx. 10, xxi. c/-xxii. 5. The author wrote x. 
with a view to adapting xi. 1-13 to its new context. Schoen 
(UOrigine de I 'apocalypse *, 1887) attached himself in the main 
to the scheme of Sabatier. Both these writers assign the 
Apocalypse to the reign of Domitian. 

The labours of these scholars, though to the superficial student 
they seem to prove that everything is possible and nothing 
certain, have certainly thrown great light on the literary 
character of the Apocalypse. Though differing in detail, they 
tend to show that, while the book is the production of one author, 
all its parts are not of the same date, nor are they one and all 
his first-hand creation. For many of the facts, the discovery of 
which we owe to the literary critics, have made the assumption 
of an absolute unity in the details of the Apocalypse a practical 
impossibility. Incongruities manifest themselves not only 
between certain sections and the main scheme of the book, but 
also between these and their immediate contexts. These sections 
are vii. i-8a, xi. 1-13, xii., xiii., xvii., xviii., xx., xxi. o-xxii. 5. 
Some of these sections (xi., xii., xiii., xvii.) contain elements 
that cannot be explained from any of the above methods. The 
symbols and myths in these are not the creation of the writer, 
but borrowed from the past, and in not a few instances the 
materials are too foreign to his subject to lend themselves to 
his purpose without the help of artificial and violent expedients. 
For the elucidation of these foreign elements a new method — 
the traditional-historical — is necessary, and to the brilliant 
scholar Gunkel we owe its origination. 

iv. Traditional-historical Method. — Gunkel (Schopfung und 
Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit; eine religions geschichtliche Unter- 
suchung ilber Gen. 1 und Joh. 12, 1895) opened up new lines of 
investigation. He criticizes sharply (pp. 173 sqq., 233 sqq.) 
former methods of interpretation, and with the ardour of a 
discoverer of a new truth seeks to establish its currency through- 
out the entire field of apocalyptic. To such an extreme does 
he carry his theory that he denies obvious references to his- 
torical personages in the Apocalypse, when these are clothed in 
apocalyptic language. Thus he refuses to recognize Nero in 
the beast and its number. But apart from its extravagances, 
his theory has undoubted elements of truth. It is true that 
tradition largely fixes the form of figures and symbols in apoca- 
lyptic. Yet each new apocalypse is to some extent a reinter- 
pretation of traditional material, which the writer uses not 
wholly freely but with reverence from the conviction that they 
contained the key to the mysteries of the present and the past. 
From this standpoint it may be argued that every apocalypse 
is in a certain sense pseudonymous; for the materials are not 
the writer's own, but have come down to him as a sacred deposit 
— full of meaning for the seeing eye and the understanding heart. 
On the other hand, since much of the material of an apocalypse 
is a reinterpretation, it is necessary to distinguish between its 
original meaning and the new turn given to it in the Apocalypse. 
At times details in the transmitted material are unintelligible 
to our author, and these in some cases he omits referring to 
in his interpretation. The presence of such details is strong 
evidence of the writer's use of foreign material. 

As an illustration of his theory Gunkel seeks at great length to 
establish the Babylonian origin of chap. xii. of the Apocalypse. 
His investigation tends to show that in the course of tradition 
cosmological myths are transformed into eschatological dogmas. 

The above method was adopted by Boussct in his work Der 
Antichrist in der Vberlieferung des Judenthums, des Neuen 
Testaments, und der alten Kirche (1895), in which he sought to 
show that a fixed tradition of the Antichrist originating in 



Judaism can be traced from New Testament times down to the 
middle ages, and that this tradition was in the main unaffected 
by the Apocalypse, though in chap. xi. the Apocalypse shows 
dependence on it. Next in 1896 he published his commentary 
Die Ojfenbarung Johannis (2nd cd. 1906). In this work he 
availed himself of the results of the past and followed the three 
approved methods — the contemporary-historical, the fragment- 
ary and the traditional-historical. 

Julicher (Einleitung in das Neue Testament*, 1901, pp. 204-29) 
adopts the same three methods of interpretation. 

Holtzmann (Einleitung in das N.T* t 1892; Hand-Commentar*, 
1893; Lehrbuch der NTlichen Theol., i. 463-76) holds mainly to 
the contemporary-historical method in his earlier works, though 
recognizing signs of a double historical background; but in his 
last work the importance of tradition as a source of the writer's 
materials is fully acknowledged. 

In 1902 0. Pfleiderer in the second edition of his Urchristentum 
(1902, pp. 281-335) abandoned his former view on the Apocalypse 
and followed essentially the lines adopted by Bousset, though 
the details are differently treated. 

In the same year Porter's able article on " Revelation " 
appeared in Hastings' Bible Dictionary (iv. 239-66), and in 
1905 his still fuller treatment of the same theme in The Mes- 
sages 0} the Apocalyptical Writers, 160-294. To these works the 
present writer is indebted for many a suggestion. 

A small commentary (no date) by Anderson Scott follows in 
some measure the lines laid down in Bousset and Porter. 

Psychological Method. — It might be supposed that all possible 
methods had now been considered, and that a combination 
of the three methods which have established their validity 
in relation to the interpretation of the Apocalypse would be 
adequate to the solution of all the problems of the book, but this 
is not so; for even when each in turn has vindicated the pro- 
vinces in the book that rightly belong to it, and brought intelligi- 
bility into these areas, there still remain outlying regions which 
they fail to illumine. It is not indeed that these methods have 
not claimed to solve the questions at issue, but that their 
solutions have failed to satisfy the larger body of reasonable 
criticism. The main problem, which so far has not been satis- 
factorily solved, may be shortly put as follows: Are the visions 
in the Apocalypse the genuine results of spiritual experiences, or 
are they artificial productions, mere literary vehicles of the 
writer's teaching? Weizsacker unhesitatingly advocates the 
latter view. But the serious students of later times find them- 
selves unable to follow in his footsteps. The writer's belief in 
his prophetic office and his obvious conviction of the inviolable 
sanctity of his message make it impossible to accept Weizsacker's 
opinion. Nor is it possible to accept Gunkel's theory in Schdp- 
Jung und Chaos as an adequate explanation, who explained 
the author's conviction of the truth of his message as spring- 
ing always from the fact that he was dealing with traditional 
material. This theory, which we have already dealt with in 
other connexions, is undoubtedly helpful, but here we require 
something more, and Gunkel has in consequence of Weinel's 
work (Wirkungen des Geistes und der Geister, 1899) subsequently 
acknowledged that actual spiritual experiences lie behind some 
of the visions in apocalyptic (Kautzsch, Pseud, des A.T. y ii. 
341 sqq.). The fact of such visionary experience can hardly 
be questioned: the only difficulty lies in determining to what 
extent it underlies the revelations of apocalyptic. For a short 
discussion of this question we might refer to Bousset's Ojfen- 
barung Johannis*, pp. 8 sqq., and Porter's article on " Revela- 
tion " in Hastings' Bible Dictionary, iv. 248 sqq. 

Methods of Interpretation. — As a result of the preceding in- 
quiry we conclude that the student of the Apocalypse must 
make use of the following methods — the contemporary- 
historical, the literary-critical (fragmentary hypothesis), the 
traditional-historical and the ^psychological. Each of these 
has its legitimate province, and the extent of this province can 
in most cases be defined with reasonable certainty. 

Plan and Detailed Criticism of the Book. — Two theories have 
been advanced to explain the plan and order of the book. The 



2l6 



REVELATION, BOOK OF 



first of these is the recapitulation theory which Tyconius originated 
and Augustine adopted, and which has been revived in later 
times by Hofmann, Hengstenberg and others. This theory holds 
that no progress is designed in the successive visions of the seven 
seals, the seven trumpets and the seven bowls; for that in the 
vision of the seals we have already an account of the last judg- 
ment (vi. 12-17) and the hlessed consummation (vii. 9-17). 
Thus the three groups form parallel accounts and contain the 
same or closely related material. But such a view is in conflict 
with the fact that the Apocalypse exhibits a steady movement 
from a detailed account of the condition of actual individual 
churches on an ever- widening sweep to the catastrophes that 
will befall every nation and country till at last evil is finally 
overthrown and the blessedness of the righteous consummated. 
Accordingly later exegetes x hold that the seventh in each series is 
unfolded in the series of seven that follows. But to this theory 
also it has been objected (Holtzmann, Hand-Commentar. p. 294) 
that the bowls are in the main a repetition — in parts weaker, in 
others stronger — of what has already been put forward in the 
trumpets; that before the seventh member of each hebdomad 
there is a pause occasioned by the insertion of visions of a 
different nature; that the final judgment has already been 
depicted in vi. 17, and yet further descriptions recur in x. 6, 7, 
xi. 15-18, xiv. 7, xix. 11: the temple in heaven is opened in 
xi. 19 and yet again in xv. 5: heaven its*elf has already been 
rent in sunder in vi. 12-17, & n & vet m viiL 7-12 is supposed to 
be in its ancient order: all green grass is burnt up in viii. 7, 
yet in ix. 4 the locusts are not permitted to injure the grass, 
and other like inconsistencies. 

The impossibility of logically carrying out either theory has 
given rise to doubts as to the unity of the book. Holtzmann 
(Hand-Comment. 295) represents its structure as follows: — 

i. 1-8 . . Introduction. 

i. 9-iii. 22 . . Group of seven letters, 
iv.-v. 14 . . Heavenly scene of the Vision. 
vi. 1-17 . . Six seals. 

vii. 1-17 . . The sealed and the blessed, 
viii. 1-5 . . The emergence of the trumpets 

from the seventh seal, 
viii. 6.-ix. 21 . Six trumpets. 

x. i-xi. 14 . Destiny of Jerusalem, 
xi. 15-19 . . The seventh trumpet. 

xii. i-xiv. 5 . The great visions of the three 
chief enemies and of the 
Kingdom of the Messiah. 
xiv. 6-20 . . Return to the earlier connexion. 
xv. i-xvi. 1 . Transition to the bowls, 
xvi. 2-21 . . Seven bowls. 

xvii. i-xix. 10 The great Babylon. 
xix. ii-xx. 15 Final catastrophes. 

xxi.-xxii. 5 . The New Jerusalem, 
xxii. 6-21 . . Conclusion. 

It is noteworthy that the sections on the right hand correspond 
in the main to the elements which have been those to which 

1 Swete divides the Apocalypse first of all into forty-two minor 
sections. Next he groups these sections into fourteen larger masses 
of apocalyptic matter, and by a process of synthesis seeks to arrive 
at the plan on which the author constructed his book. In so doing 
he points out that we become conscious of a great cleavage which 
practically divides the book into two parts, i. 9-xi. 14 and xii. 1- 
xxii. 5, independently of the prologue and greeting, i. 1-8, and 
the epilogue and benediction, xxii. 6-21. A further study of the 
leading thoughts of the above parts enables him to set forth the 
scheme of the book as follows : — 

Prologue and Greeting, i. 1-8. 
Part I. Vision of Christ in the midst of the churches, i. 9-iii. 22. 
Vision of Christ in Heaven, iv. i-v. 14. 
Preparations for the End, vi. i-xi. 19. 
Part II. Vision of the Mother of Christ (i.e. the Church) and her 
enemies, xii. i-xiii. 18. 
Preparations for the End, xiv. i-xx. 15. 
Vision of the Bride of Christ arrayed for her husband, 

xxi. i-xxii. 5. 
Epilogue and benediction, xxii. 6-21. 



the latest critics have assigned either an earlier date or a different 
authorship. 

Chaps, i.-iii. — These chapters open with a prologue, i. 1-3, 
which defines the source, character and contents of the book, 
followed by a greeting, i. 4-8, in which the writer salutes the 
Seven Churches of Asia. Having so introduced his work the 
author, describes a vision of the ascended Christ, i. 0-20, who 
sends His messages to the angels of the Seven Churches, ii.-iii. 
With the conclusion of these epistles the Apocalypse proper really 
begins. But the way has been prepared for it. Its contents 
are " the things which must quickly happen," i. 1. The visions 
are not for John's personal benefit, but for transmission to 
the church at large, i. 11, and the writer is bidden to write down 
what he has seen and " the things which are and the things 
which shall be hereafter," i. 19. 

iv.-vi. — The first three chapters show great artistic skill, and 
the power of the artist is no less conspicuous in what follows. 
First of all John is bidden to come up into heaven and see the 
things that should be hereafter, the vision of iv. 1. Then he 
beholds the Almighty on His throne surrounded by the four and 
twenty elders and the four living creatures. Before Him they 
all bow in worship and acknowledge that by Him were created 
all things and of His own free will were all created. In the 
next chapter (v.) the seer has a vision of a roll in the hand of Him 
that sat on the throne which none could open or look upon, till 
the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the mighty one with seven horns 
and seven eyes, appeared. Before Him all the elders and the 
living creatures fell down and acknowledged that He had power 
to open the seven seals thereof, and their song was re-echoed 
by every thing alike in heaven and earth. The contrast be- 
tween these two chapters and those that follow is striking in the 
extreme. The time of the seer's vision is one of direst need. 
The life and death struggle between the church and the empire 
has now entered on its final stage, and fear and trouble and woe 
are rife in the hearts of the faithful. But when the seer is 
exalted to heaven he sees no trace of the turmoil on earth. The 
vision of the Almighty is full of majesty and peace. All things 
do Him service; for all are the free creation of His will. The 
next vision serves to connect the Source and Sustainer of all 
things with the world and its history. The closing of the inter- 
mediate stage of the history of created things is committed to 
the Christ who will also be Lord of the age to come. The future 
of the saints is assured: what can avail against Him that hath 
" glory and dominion for ever and ever " the wild attacks of 
Rome and even of Satan and his hosts ? The Lamh that was 
slain has taken upon Himself the burden of the world's history. 

In vi. we have the opening of the six seals, and the horrors 
of the future begin. The choice of three series of seven seals, 
seven trumpets and seven bowls, to form the framework in 
which the history of the last woes is to be given 5 shows the same 
hand that addressed the churches as seven. But between the 
sixth and seventh seals and the sixth and seventh trumpets 
the connexion is more or less disturbed by the insertion of certain 
interludes containing material foreign in certain aspects to the 
Apocalypse. These are vii. 1-17 and x. i-xi. 14. 

vii. 1-17. — These verses, which interrupt the plan of the hook, 
fall into two independent fragments, 1-8 and 9-17, which are 
inconsistent in their original meaning with each other. For 
while 1-8 was most probably a Jewish apocalyptical fragment and 
strongly particularistic, 9-17 is clearly universalist in character 
and is probably from the hand of our author. The foreign 
origin of vii. 1-8 may be concluded with Spitta, Bousset and 
others from the fact that the four winds, which in vii. 1 are said 
to be held fast lest they should break in elemental fury on land 
and sea, are not let loose or referred to in the subsequent narrative, 
and also from the mention of the 144,000 Israelites of the twelve 
tribes, to whom no further reference is made; for these can no 
more be identified with the countless multitudes in vii. 0-17 
than with those who are "sealed" in ix. 4 sq. nor with the 
144,000 in xiv. 1 ; for in both these cases the sealed are not Jews 
hut elect Christians. The object of both fragments was to 
encourage the faithful in the face of the coming strife. In the 



REVELATION, BOOK OF 



latter, in which the Apocalyptist looks forward prophetically to 
the issue, the assurance held out is of ultimate victory, but of 
victory through death or martyrdom. In the former (Jewish 
or Christian-Jewish fragment) the sealing seemed to have carried 
with it the assurance of deliverance from physical death, as in 
Ezek. ix. 4 sqq. But in its new context this meaning can hardly 
be retained. Not improbably the scaling means to our author 
the preservation not from death, but through death from 
unfaithfulness, and the number 144,000 would signify mystically 
the entire body of true Christians, which formed the true people 
of God. 

Chapter vii., then, interrupts the development of the author's 
plan, but the interruption is deliberate. He wishes to encourage 
the persecuted church not only to face without fear, but also to 
meet with triumphant assurance the onset of those evils which 
would bring panic and despair on the unbelieving world. 

viii.-ix. — These chapters, though presenting some minor 
difficulties, do not call for discussion here. They recount the 
six partial judgments which followed the opening of the seventh 
seal and the blasts of the six trumpets. 

x.-xi. 1-13. — This section bristles with difficulties. Chapter x. 
forms an introduction to xi. 1-13. In it the prophet receives 
a new commission, x. 11:" Thou must prophesy again over many 
peoples and nations and tongues and kings/' This new com- 
mission explains his departure from the plan pursued in the 
earlier chapters of developing the seventh in each series into a 
new series of seven. The seer has a vision of the seven thunders, 
but these he is bidden to seal and not commit to writing. He 
is instead to write down the new book of prophecies. The end 
is at hand. It is noteworthy that in the earlier visions it was 
Christ who spoke to the seer. Here and in the later visions, 
especially those drawn from foreign sources, it is an angel. 

In xi. 1-13 we have a characteristic illustration of our author's 
dependence on* traditional materials and his free adaptation 
of them to meanings other than originally belonged to them. 
For it is generally agreed among critics that xi. 1-13 is borrowed 
from Jewish sources, and that this fragment really consists of 
two smaller fragments, xi. 1-2 and xi. 3-13. The former oracle 
referred originally to the actual. Temple, and contained a pre- 
diction of the preservation of the Temple. It must have been 
written before a.d. 70 and probably by a Zealot. 1 But our 
author could not have taken it in this literal sense if he wrote 
after a.d. 70 or even anterior to that date, owing to the explicit 
declaration of Christ as to the coming destruction of Jerusalem. 
The passage, then, must have a spiritual meaning, and its purpose 
is the encouragement of the faithful by the assurance of their 
deliverance not necessarily from physical death but from the 
dominion of the evil one. In xi. 3-13 we have another Jewish 
fragment of a very enigmatic character. Bousset has shown 
with much probability that it is part of the Antichrist legend. 
The prophecy of the two witnesses and their martyrdom belongs 
to this tradition. The fragment was apparently written before 
a.d. 70, since it speaks of the fall of only a tenth of the city, 
xi. 13. 2 The significance of this fragment in our author's use of 
it is similar to that of xi. 1-2. The details defy at present 
any clear interpretation, but the incorporation of the fragment 
may be due in general to the emphasis it lays on the faithful 
witness, martyrdom and resurrection of the saints. 

xi. 14-19. — The seventh trumpet, xi. 15, ushers in the third 
woe, xi. 14. Its contents are given in xii.-xx. In xi. 15-19 the 
seer hears great voices in heaven singing a triumphal song in 
anticipation of the victory that is speedily to be achieved. This 
song forms a prelude to the chapters that follow. 

1 The Zealots occupied the inner court of the Temple during its 
siege by the Romans. 

2 The^ linguistic evidence, as Bousset has pointed out, confirms 
the critical conclusion that xi. 1-13 were independent sources. For 
whereas in ix.-x. the verb almost regularly begins the sentence and 
object follows the verb, in xi. 1-13 the object frequently precedes 
the verb and the subject nearly always. The order of the genitive 
in xi. 4 is elsewhere unknown in the Arjocalypse, and in xi. 2, 3 the 
construction of 5i56«u followed by teal instead of infinitive or Xva is 
unique in this book. 



217 

xii. — This is the most difficult chapter in the book. Its main 
intention in its present context is apparently to explain Satan's 
dominion over the world and the bitterness of his rage against 
the church and against Christ. Christ, indeed, escapes him and 
likewise the Jewish Christians (" the woman," xii. 16) but " the 
rest of her seed," xii. 17 (the Gentile Christians?), are exposed to 
his fury. But his time is at hand; together with his hosts he 
has been cast down from heaven, and on the earth he " hath but 
a short time." The attribution of the seven heads and ten horns 
to the dragon, xii. 3, points forward to Rome, which is regarded 
as a temporary incarnation of Satan, xiii. 1, xvii. 3. 

But, though a few of the leading thoughts of this chapter 
may be obvious, we are plunged into problems that all but defy 
solution when we essay to discover its origin or interpret its 
details. Most scholars are agreed that this chapter is not, except 
in the case of a few sentences, the work of our author. In 
other words, it has been taken over from pre-existing material — 
either Christian or Jewish — and the materials of which it is 
composed are ultimately derived from non-Jewish sources — 
either Babylonian, Greek or Egyptian — and bore therein very 
different meanings from those which belong to them in their 
present connexion. Furthermore, the materials are fragmentary 
and the order irregular. 

^ (a) First of all, the chapter is not the free creation of a Chris- 
tian writer. Such an one could never have so represented the 
life of Christ — a child persecuted by a dragon and carried off to 
God's throne. No mention of Christ's earthly life and cruci- 
fixion. Furthermore, the victory over Satan is ascribed to 
Michael. Again, a Christian could not represent Christ as the 
son of the wife of the sun-god; for such is the natural inter- 
pretation of the woman crowned with the twelve stars and 
with her feet upon the moon. Finally, even if " the woman " 
who is the mother of Christ be taken to be the ideal Israel in the 
beginning of the chapter, at its close she is clearly the Christian 
community founded by Him. We conclude, therefore, that the 
present chapter is not the work of our author. There are, 
however, traces of his hand. Thus 7-12, which is really a 
Jewish fragment recounting the victory of Michael over Satan, 
has to a certain degree been adapted to a Christian environment 
by the insertion of the iob-11. 

(b) The order is not original. The flight of the woman is 
mentioned in verse 6 to a place of refuge prepared for her by 
God. Then comes an account of the casting down of Satan 
from heaven. Then again in 13-16 the flight of the woman 
is described. This fact has been variously accounted for by 
different critics. Wellhausen regards 1-6 and 7-14 as doublets, 
and differentiates two actions in the original account which are 
here confused. Spitta takes verse 6 to be an addition of the 
redactor, which describes proleptically what follows, while Gunkel 
sees in 6 and 7-16 parallel accounts. In any case we should 
probably agree with the contention of J. Weiss, supported by 
Bousset in the second edition of his commentary, that 7-12 is a 
fragment of a Jewish apocalypse, of which iob-11 is an addition 
of our author. Next that 6 is a doublet of 13 sqq. What 
then is to be made of 1-5, 13-17? Different explanations have 
been offered. Giuikel 8 traces it to a Babylonian origin. He 
urges that an adequate explanation is impossible on the assump- 
tion of a Jewish or Christian origin. At the base of this account 
lies the Babylonian myth of the birth of the sun-god Marduk, 
his escape from the dragon who knows him to be his destined 
destroyer, and the persecution of Marduk's mother by the 
dragon. But Gunkel's explanation is an attempt to account 
for one ignotutn per tgnotius; for hitherto no trace of the myth 
of the sun-god's birth and persecution and the flight into the 
wilderness has been found in Babylonian mythology. More- 
over, Gunkel no longer lays emphasis on the Babylonian, but 
merely on the mythical origin of the details. A more satis- 
factory explanation has been offered by Dieterich (Abraxas, 
117 sqq.), who finds in this chapter an adaptation of the birth 
of Apollo and the attempt of the dragon Pytho to kill his mother 

1 Schdpfung and Chaos § 3, Religions gesch. Verstdndniss d. N.T., 
54 sqq. 



218 



REVELATION, BOOK OF 



Leto, because it was foretold that Leto's son would kill the 
dragon. Leto escapes to Ortygia, which Poseidon covers with 
the sea in order to protect Leto. Here Apollo is born, who 
four days later slays the dragon. Yet another explanation from 
Egyptian mythology is given by Bousset (Offenbarung Johannis, 
2nd ed., pp. 354, 355) in the birth of the sun-god Horus. 
Here the goddess mother is represented with a sun upon her 
head. Typhon slays Horus. Hathor, his mother, is persecuted 
by Typhon and escapes to a floating island with the bones of 
Horus, who revives and slays the dragon. 1 There are obvious 
points of similarity, possibly of derivation, between the details 
in our text and the above myths, but the subject cannot 
be further pursued here, save that we remark that in the sun 
myth the dragon tries to kill the mother before the child's birth, 
whereas in our text it is after his birth, and that neither in the 
Egyptian nor in the Greek myth is there any mention of the 
flight into the wilderness. 

The insertion of the alien matter 7-12 between 1-5 and 13-17 
may be due to our author's wish to show that the expulsion of 
Satan from heaven after Christ's birth and ascension to heaven 
was owing in some measure to Christ, although he has allowed 
Michael's name to remain in the borrowed passage, 7-1 2 — a fact 
which shows how dependent the writer was on tradition. 

xiii. — In this chapter we have the two beasts 2 which symbolize 
respectively Rome and the Roman provincial priesthood of the 
imperial cult. Thus the world powers of heathen statesmanship 
and heathen religion are leagued in a confederacy against the 
rising Christian Church. Against these the church is not to 
attempt to use physical force; its only weapon is to be passive 
endurance and loyalty to God. 

That this chapter must be interpreted by the contemporary- 
historical method is now generally admitted. Even Gunkel 
is obliged to abandon his favourite theory here, though he 
contests strongly the recognition of any allusion to Nero. 
Various solutions have been offered as to the seven emperors 
designed by the seven heads of the beast, xiii. 1. But the 
details of this passage are not sufficiently definite to determine 
the question here. It will return in chapter xvii. There are, 
however, two facts pointing to a late date. The first is the 
advanced stage of development of this, the Neronic-Antichrist 
legend. One of the heads " is smitten unto death," but is healed 
of the death stroke. This points, we may here assume, to the 
Nero redivivus legend, which could not have arisen for a full 
generation after Nero's death, and the assumption receives 
large confirmation from the most probable interpretation of 
the enigmatical words, xiii. 18, " the number of the beast . . . 
is six hundred and sixty six." Four continental scholars, 
Fritzsche, Benary, Hitzig and Reuss, independently recognized 
that Nero was referred to under the mystical number 666. 
For by transliterating. Kataap Nepcbv into Hebrew I™ ™P 
and adding together the sums denoted by the Hebrew letters 
we obtain the number 666. This solution is confirmed by the 
fact 1 that it is possible to explain by it an ancient (Western?) 
variant for the number 666, i.e. 616. This latter, which is 
attested by Irenaeus (v. 30. 1), the commentary of Ticonius, 
and the uncial C, can be explained from the Latin form of the 
name Nero, which by its omission of the final n makes the sum 
total 616 instead of 666. 

The above solution may be regarded as established, though 
several scholars, as Oscar Holtzmann (Stack's Geschichte des 
Volkes Israel, ii. 661), Spitta and Erbes, have contended that 
616 was the original reading (r&tos Kaurap=6i6) and that 

1 On the possibility of other points of contact between the 
Apocalypse and Egyptian mythology, see Mrs Grenf ell's article, 
" Egyptian Mythology and the Bible," in the Monist (1906), pp. 
169-200. 

2 In xiii. 2 the description of the beast unites the features of the 
four beasts in Daniel's vision (vii.). It is clear that our author 
identified the fourth beast-, (vii. 23) with Rome, as did also the 
author of 4 Ezra xii. 10. But this was not the original significance 
of the fourth beast, for the author of Daniel referred thereby to the 
Greek empire; but, since the prophecy was not realized, it was 
subsequently reinterpreted, and applied, as we have observed, to 
Rome. 



chapter xiii. was part of a Jewish apocalypse written under 
Caligula between the years 39 and 41. But this Caligula 
hypothesis cannot be carried out unless by a vigorous use of 
the critical knife, in the course of which more than a third of 
the chapter is excised. Moreover the number 616 is too weakly 
supported to admit of its being recognized as the original. 

The figure of the first beast presents many difficulties, owing 
to the fact that it is not freely invented but largely derived 
from traditional elements and is by the writer identified with 
the seventh wounded head. The second beast, signifying the 
pagan priesthood of the imperial cult, called " the false 
prophet " in xvi. 13, appears to be an independent development 
of the Antichrist legend. 

xiv.-xvi. — These chapters contain a vision of Christ on Mount 
Zion and the 144,000 of the undefiled that follow Him, xiv. 1-5, 
the last warnings relating to the harvest and vintage of the 
world, xiv. 6-20: the vision of the wrath of God in the out- 
pouring of the seven bowls containing the seven last plagues, 
xv.-xvi. 

In the above section most critics are agreed that xiv. 14-20 
originally represented the final judgment and was removed 
from its rightful place at the close of an apocalypse to its 
present position. In its original setting " the one like unto a 
Son of Man, having on his head a golden crown " (xiv. 14), 
undoubtedly designated the Messiah, but the transformation 
of the final judgment into a preliminary act of judgment by a 
redactor, necessarily brought with it the degradation of the 
Son of Man to the level of a mere angel. Some critics hold 
that this apocalypse was the apocalyptic groundwork, but 
Bousset is of opinion that it stood originally in connexion with 
xi. 1-13. 

As regards xvi. the views of critics take different directions, 
but that of Bousset followed by Porter seems the most reason- 
able. This is that this chapter forms an introduction to xvii., 
which was an independent fragment. The writer throws this 
introduction into his favourite scheme of seven acts, in this 
case symbolized by seven bowls. The earlier verses, 2-1 1, do 
not amount to much beyond a repetition of what is found in 
viii.-ix., save that as a preparation for xvii. references, are 
inserted to the beast and his worshippers (ver. 2) and to Rome 
(ver. 10). In xvi. 12-16 is a revised form of an older tradition. 

xvii. — This chapter presents great difficulties, especially if 
with the older and some of the recent exegetes we regard it as 
written at the same time and by the same author. Even so 
strong an upholder of the unity of the book as Swete is ready 
to admit that portions of xvii., as well as of xiii., show signs of 
an earlier date than the rest of the book. He writes: " The 
unity of the Book . . . cannot be pressed so far as to exclude 
the possibility that the extant book is a second edition of an 
earlier work, or that it incorporates earlier materials, and 
either hypothesis would sufficiently account for the few indica- 
tions of a Neronic or Vespasianic date that have been found 
in it " {Apoc. of St John 2 , p. civ.). This chapter cannot be 
interpreted apart from the Neronic myth. Of this there appear 
to be two stages attested here. Of the earlier we have traces 
in xvii. 16-17 and xvi. 12, where there are allusions to Nero's 
confederacy with the Parthian kings with a view to the destruc- 
tion of Rome. Of the later stage, when the myth of Nero 
redivivus was fused with that of the Antichrist, we have at- 
testation in xvii. 8, 12-14, where Nero is regarded as a demon 
coming up from the abyss to war not with Rome but with 
Christ and the elect. This development of the Neronic myth 
belongs to the last years of the 1st century, and is decidedly 
against a Vespasianic date. To meet this difficulty a recent 
interpreter — Anderson Scott — though he assigns the book to 
the year a.d. 77, is yet willing to admit that the book though 
composed in the reign of Vespasian was " reissued with additions 
by the same hand after the death of Domitian" {Revelation, p. 56). 
Our author represents himself as writing under the sixth 
emperor. Five have already died, the seventh is yet to come, 
to be followed by yet an eighth, who is one of the seven (i.e. 
Nero). In order to arrive at the date here implied, we can 



REVELATION, BOOK OF 



219 



begin the reckoning from Julius Caesar or Augustus, we can 
include or exclude Galba, Otho and Vitellius, and, finally, when 
we have drawn our conclusions from these data, there remains 
the possibility that the book was after all not written under 
the sixth emperor, but was really a vaticinium ex eventu. Ac- 
cording to the different methods pursued, some have concluded 
that Nero was the sixth emperor, and thus dated the Apocalypse 
before a.d. 70; others Vespasian, and yet others Domitian. 
No solution of the difficulties of the chapter is wholly satis- 
factory, but the best yet offered seems to be that of Bousset 
(Ojfenbarungtj 410-18). He holds that 1-7, o-ir, 15-18, 
belong to an original source, which was written in the reign of 
Vespasian and represents the earlier stage of the Neronic myth. 
To a reviser in Domitian 's reign we owe 8,12-14 and 6b, a clause 
in 9, &rrd &prj . . . a.br&v, and another in n, 6 fjv ko.1 oIk Igtw. If 
the clause kqX ck tov afyiaros t&v /taprfyxoj' f Irj<rov in 6 is an addition, 
then he thinks the source was Jewish and the " blood of the 
saints " was that shed at the destruction of Jerusalem, and the 
forecast of the author related to the destruction of Rome. 
When the reviser recast the passage it dealt not with the 
destruction of Jerusalem, but with the persecution of the 
Christians. Nero was now a demonic monster from the abyss, 
and the ten kings no longer Parthians but ghostly helpers of 
Nero. The destruction of Rome has now become a secondary 
event: the reviser's thought is fixed on the final strife between 
the Lamb and the Antichrist. 

xviii.~xix. 10. — This section describes in prophetic language 
borrowed almost wholly from Isaiah and Jeremiah the coming 
judgment of Rome, and gives the ten lamentations of the kings 
and the merchants and the seamen over her, and the thanks- 
givings in heaven for her overthrow. 

xix. 11-21. — The victory of the warrior Messiah over the two 
beasts, the Roman Empire and the imperial cultus and the 
kings of the earth. Many of the ideas set forth in earlier 
chapters here coalesce and find their consummation. The 
Messiah, whose birth and escape from the dragon was recounted 
in xii. 5, and who was to rule the nations with a rod of iron, at 
last appears in discharge of His office. The beast and the false 
prophet who arc described in xiii. are cast alive into the lake 
of fire, and the kings of the earth who had assembled for this 
conflict, xvi, 14, xvii. 14, were slain by the sword of Him that 
sat on the horse. 

The conception of the Messiah may be Jewish: at all events 
it is not distinctively Christian. The title " Word of God " 
can hardly be said to establish any connexion with the prologue 
of the Fourth Gospel; for the conceptions of the Messiah in 
that Gospel and in these chapters belong to different worlds 
of thought. 

It is to be observed that our author follows the apocalyptic 
scheme of two judgments which is first attested about 100 B.C. 
The first judgment precedes the establishment of the temporary 
Messianic kingdom, as here in xix. 19-21; and the final judg- 
ment follows at its close, as here in xx. 7-10. 

xx. 1-6. — The millennium, or the period between the first 
and final judgments, when Christ, with His chosen, reigns and 
Satan is imprisoned. Rome has been overthrown, but, as 
Rome is only the last secular manifestation of Satan, there is yet 
the final struggle with Satan and his adherents. But the time 
for this struggle has not yet arrived. Satan is bound 1 and cast 
into the abyss, and the kingdom of Christ and of the martyrs 
and faithful confessors established for a thousand years. Thus 
it is shown that evil will be finally overcome; for that the true 
and ultimate power even in this world belongs to Christ and 
those that are His. 

The main features of this section have been borrowed from 
Judaism. The Messianic kingdom was originally conceived of 
as of everlasting duration on the present earth, but about 100 B.C. 
this idea was abandoned and the hopes of the faithful were 
directed to a temporary earthly kingdom of 400 or 1000 years 
or of indefinite duration (see R. H. Charles, Critical History of 

x This idea appears as early as the 2nd century B.C. Cf. Test. 
Levi xviii. 12. 



the Doctrine of a Future Life, pp. 201-4, 261, 286, 288). More- 
over, the expectation that the saints would rise to share in the 
blessedness of this kingdom is also found in Judaism, 4 Ezra 
vii. 28 (op. cit. p. 285). 

xx. ?-io. — Release of Satan and final assault on the city 
of God by the hosts of Gog and Magog at the instance of Satan. 
Satan and the beasts condemned to eternal torment. 

xx. 11-14. — The Final Resurrection and Judgment. 

xxi. 1-8. — The new heavens and the new earth. The language 
in this and the following section is highly figurative; but as 
Porter has well remarked: "Figurative language is the only 
language in which we can express our hope of heaven, and no 
figures can have greater power to suggest this hope than those 
taken from the literal longings of exiled Israel for the recovery 
of its land and city." 

xxi. g-xxii. 5. — The vision of the New Jerusalem. There 
are several grounds for regarding this section as an independent 
source possibly of Jewish origin and subsequently submitted to a 
Christian revision. This view is taken by Vischer, Weyland, 
Spitta, Sabatier, J. Weiss, Bousset and others. Our author 
has incorporated it as describing the consummation of the 
prevision contained in xi. 15-18, in which he foresaw the time 
when the kingdom of the world would become the kingdom of 
our Lord and of His Christ, and the saints should enter on their 
reward. Moreover, he has already hinted at its contents in 
xix. 7 and xxi. 2, where he speaks of the church as a bride and the 
marriage supper of the Lamb. But the section betrays incon- 
sistent conceptions. The standpoint of the heavenly Jerusalem 
is abandoned in xxi. 24-27, xxii. 2, and the context implies an 
earthly Jerusalem to which the Gentiles go up as pilgrims. 
Outside the gates of this city are unclean and abominable things. 
These inconsistencies are best explained by the hypothesis that 
our author was drawing upon a literary fixed tradition. The 
doublets in xxi. 23 and xxii. 5b, in xxi. 25 and xxii. 5a, and 
in xxi. 27 and xxii. 3, point in the same direction. Various 
additions were introduced, according to Bousset, by the last 
redactor, such as the frequently recurring reference to the 
Lamb, xxi. 9, 22, 23, 27, xxii. 1,3. In xxii. 3 the fact that the 
words " of the Lamb " are an addition is clear from the context; 
for, after the clause " the throne of God and of the Lamb shall 
be therein " the singular follows, " His servants shall do Him 
service." 

xxii. 6-21. — The conclusion. The promises are sure, the 
end is near and the judgment at hand. The words of the book 
are the message of Christ Himself and are inviolable. 

Unity. — From the preceding sections it follows that we 
cannot ascribe a strict literary unity to the book. The book 
is most probably the work of a single author, but it was not 
written wholly at one date, nor have all the parts come directly 
from one brain. We have several good grounds, for regarding 
vii. 1-8, xi. 1-13, xii., xiii., xvii., as wholly or in part independent 
sources, which our author has laid under contribution and 
adapted more or less adequately to his purpose. He appears to 
have taken over with but slight modification xx. and xxi. 
9-xxii. 5. Furthermore, while certain fragments such as xi. 1-2 
presuppose a date anterior to a.d. 70, others, as xvi. 12 and 
xvii. 12, require a date not later than Vespasian's time; 
other parts of xvii. postulate a Vespasianic date as the earliest 
admissible, and, finally, the composition of the book in its 
present form cannot be placed before the closing years of 
Domitian. But to this question we shall return presently. 

Nevertheless, the book exhibits a relative unity; for, whatever 
digressions occur in the development of its theme, the main 
object of the writer is never lost sight of. This relative unity 
is manifested also in the uniform character of the language, a 
uniformity, however, which is occasionally conspicuous by its 
absence in the case of independent sources, as in xi. 1-13. The 
author or the final redactor has impressed a certain linguistic 
character on the book, which differentiates it not only from all 
secular writings of the time, but also from all the New Testa- 
ment books, including the Johannine. And yet the Apocalypse 
shows in many of its phrases an undoubted affinity to the latter — 



220 



REVELATION, BOOK OF 



a fact which requires foi its explanation the assumption that the 
book emanated from certain literary circles influenced by John. 
Date. — There are many indications of the date, which may be 
summarized as follows: (a) Condition of the Asian churches. 
(b) Persecution of the church, (c) Attitude of the author to 
Rome, (d) The Antichrist legend* (c) Primitive tradition and 
its confirmation through the discovery of references in the 
text to certain edicts of Domitian. As a result of these con- 
siderations we may arrive at the date of the work with almost 
greater certainty than that of any other New Testament book. 

(a) Condition of the Churches. — Christianity appears to have 
already had a long history behind it. The fact that St Paul 
founded the church of Ephesus seems to have been forgotten. 
The earliest zeal has passed away and heathen ways of thought 
and life are tolerated and practised at Pergamum and Ephesus, 
and faith is dying or dead at Laodicea and Sardis. These 
phenomena belong to a period considerably later than the time 
of Nero. 

(b) Persecution of the Church. — Persecution is the order of the 
day. Each of the seven letters concludes with praise of those 
who have been victorious therein. There had been isolated 
instances of persecution at Ephesus, ii. 3, Philadelphia, iii. 8, 10, 
and at Smyrna, ii. 9, and of an actual martyrdom at Pergamum, 
ii. 13. But now a storm of persecution was about to break upon 
the universal church, iii. 10, and in the immediate future. 
Already the seer beholds the destined number of the martyrs 
complete, vi. o-n: the great multitude whom no man could 
number, clothed in white before the throne of God, vii. 9: he 
exhorts his readers to patient endurance unto death, xiv, 12, 
and already sees them as victors in heaven, xv. 2. Over the 
true witnesses and martyrs he pronounces the final beatitude 
of the faithful: "Blessed are those who die in the Lord," 
xiv. 13. 

Such an expectation of persecution is inexplicable from 
Nero's time. There is not a trace of any declaration of war 
on the universal church in his period such as the Apocalyptist 
anticipates and in part experiences. Christian persecution 
under Nero was an imperial caprice. The Christians were 
attacked on slanderous charges of superstition and secret 
abominations, but not as a church. Not till the last years of 
Domitian is it possible to discover conditions which would 
explain the apprehensions and experiences of our writer. So 
far as we can discover, no persecution was directed against 
Christians as Christians till Domitian's time. In the year 
a.d. 92 Flavius Clemens was put to death and his wife banished, 
on the ground that they were adherents of the new faith. Thus 
the temper of the book on this question demands some date 
after a.d. 90. It marks the transition, from the earlier tolerant 
attitude of Rome towards Christianity, to its later hostile 
attitude. 

(c) Attitude of the Author towards Rome. — In earlier times the 
church had strongly impressed the duty of loyalty to Rome, 
as we see from the Epistle to the Romans and 1 Peter. This 
was before the pressure of the imperial cult was felt by the 
Christian church. But in the Apocalypse we have the experi- 
ences of a later date. The writer manifests the most burning 
hatred towards Rome and the worship of its head — the beast 
and the false prophet, who are actual embodiments of Satan. 
Such an attitude on the part of a Christian is not explicable 
before the closing years of Domitian; for, apart from Caligula, 
he was the first Roman emperor who consistently demanded 
divine honours. 

(d) The Antichrist Legend. — We find at least two stages of the 
Neronic and Antichrist myth in the Apocalypse. The earliest 
form is not attested here, that Nero had not really been slain, 
but would speedily return and destroy his enemies. The first 
pretender appeared in a.d. 69, and was put to death in Cythnus. 
The second stage of this legend was that Nero had taken refuge 
in the Far East, and would return with the help of his Eastern 
subjects for the overthrow of Rome. Two pretenders arose in 
conformity with this expectation among the Parthians in 
a.d. 80 and 88. This widespread expectation has left its 



memorial in our book in xvi. 12 and in xvii. 16-17, which point 
to the belief that Rome would be destroyed by Nero and the 
Parthian kings. Finally, in xiii. and xvii. 8, 12-14, we have 
a later phase of the myth, in which there is a fusion of the 
Antichrist myth with that of Nero redivivus. This fusion could 
hardly have taken place before the first half of Domitian's reign, 
when the last Neronic pretender appeared. As soon as the 
hope of the living Nero could no longer be entertained, the way 
was prepared for this transformation of the myth. The living 
Nero was no longer expected to return from the East, but Nero 
was to be restored to life from the abyss by the dragon, i.e. 
Satan. This expectation is recounted in xiii., but it appears 
most clearly in the additions to xvii. Thus in xvii. 8 the 
reference to Nero redivivus as the Antichrist is manifest: " The 
beast that thou sawest was, and is not, and is about to come 
up out of the abyss and to go into perdition." 1 Thus again we 
are obliged to postulate a date not earlier than a.d. 90 for the 
book in its present form. 

(c) Primitive Church Tradition and its Confirmation through the 
Discovery of References in the Text to Certain Edicts of Domitian. 
— The earliest external evidence is practically unanimous in 
ascribing the Apocalypse to the last years of Domitian. The 
oldest testimony is that of Irenaeus v. 30. 3: hC hidvov &v kppedif 
rov Kal rrjv 7 K.iiQKa\v^/iv ioipaK&ros ovdl yap irpd iroWov xpbvw 
kapadrj, aXKa ox^dv hrl ttjs ^juerepas yeveas, irpds re? TtXa -rfjs 
AoptTiavov apxrjs. The rest of the patristic evidence from 
Clement of Alexandria, Origen, Victorinus, Eusebius and 
Jerome will be found in Swete's Apocalypse of St John 1 , 
xcix. seq. Though a few later authorities, such as Epiphanius 
and Theophylact, assign the book to earlier or later periods, 
the main body of early Christian tradition attests the date 
of its composition in the closing years of Domitian. Not- 
withstanding, on various critical grounds, Baur, Hilgenfeld, 
Lightfoot, Westcott, Hort and Beyschlag assigned the book 
to the reign of Nero, or to the years immediately following 
his death, while Weiss, Dusterdieck and Mommsen assign it 
to the time of Vespasian. When, however, we combine the 
preceding arguments with that of the early church tradition, 
the evidence for the Domitian date outweighs that for any 
other. And this conclusion receives remarkable confirmation 
from a recent fact brought forward by S. Reinach in an article 
in the Revue archiologique, ser. III. t. xxxix. (1901), pp. 350-74, 
and reprinted in Cultes, mythes et religions, ii. 356-80 (1906). 
This fact explains a passage which has hitherto been a total 
enigma to every expounder, i.e. vi. 6: "A choenix of wheat for 
a denarius, and three choenikes of barley for a denarius, and 
the oil and the wine hurt thou not." Swete writes here: " The 
voice fixes a maximum price for the main food-stuffs. The 
denarius . . . was the daily wage . . . and a choenix of wheat 

1 Verse ir postulates either a Vespasianic or Domitianic date: 
" And the beast that was, and is not, is himself also an eighth, 
and is of the seven; and he goeth into perdition." In verse 10 
it is stated that five of the seven had fallen, " the one is and another 
is not yet come, and when he cometh he must continue a little 
while." If we reckon from Augustine and omit Galba, Oth o and 
Vitellius, each of whom reigned only a few months, we arrive at 
Vespasian. The vision, therefore, belongs to his reign, a.d. 69-79. 
Verse n, with the exception of the words "which was and is not/' 
leads to' the identification of the eighth with Nero redivivus. But 
what then is to be made of the above reckoning when it was taken 
over by the Apocalyptist who wrote in Domitian's reign? Some 
scholars are of opinion that this writer identified Domitian with 
the eighth emperor, the Nero redivivus, the beast from the abyss. 
But this is unlikely, notwithstanding the fact that even some 
pagan writers, such as Juvenal, Pliny and Martial (?), traced a 
resemblance between Domitian and Nero. On the other hand, 
if we refuse to accept this identification, and hold that the beast 
from the abyss is yet to come, any attempt at a strict exegesis of 
the text plunges us in hopeless difficulties. For Domitian in that 
case would be the sixth, and the preceding five would have to begin 
with Galba — a most improbable supposition* But futhermore, 
since this new reckoning would exclude Nero, how could the 
eighth be said to be one of the seven, i.e. Nero ? Bousset thinks 
thatthe Apocalyptist, knowing not what to make of this reckoning, 
left it standing as it was and attempted a new interpretation of the 
seven heads by taking them to refer to the seven hills of Rome in 
the addition he made to verse 9. 






REVELATION, BOOK OF 



221 



the average daily consumption of the workman. . . . Barley 
was largely the food of the poor." According to the words 
just quoted from the Apocalypse, there was to be a dearth of 
grain and a superfluity of wine; the price of the wheat was to 
be seven times the ordinary, according to Reinach's com- 
putation, and that of the barley four times. This strange 
statement suggested some historical allusion, and the discovery 
of the allusion was made by Reinach, who points out that 
Domitian by an edict in a.d. 92 prohibited the planting of new 
vineyards in Italy, and ordered the reduction of those in the 
provinces by one-half. As Asia Minor suffered specially under 
this edict, an agitation was set on foot which resulted in the 
revocation of the edict. In this revocation the Apocalyptist 
saw the menace of a famine of the necessaries of life, while 
the luxuries would remain unaffected. From his ascetic stand- 
point the revocation of the edict could only pander to drunken- 
ness and immorality. Reinach's explanation of this ancient 
crux interpretum, which has been accepted by Harnack, Bousset, 
Porter, Sanday, Swete and others, fixes the earliest date of the 
composition of the Apocalypse as a.d. 93. Since Domitian 
died in 96, the book was therefore written between a.d. 93 
and 95. 

Author. — Before entering on the chief data which help towards 
the determination of this question, we shall first state the author's 
standpoint. His book exhibits a Christianity that is — as 
Harnack (Ency. Brit. 9 , xx. 498) writes — " free from the law, 
free from national prejudices, universal and yet a Christianity 
which is independent of Paul. . . . The author speaks not at 
all of the law 1 — the word does not occur in his work; he looks 
for salvation from the power and grace of God and Christ alone 
. . . nowhere has he made a distinction between Gentile and 
Jewish Christians. . . . The author of the Apocalypse has cast 
aside all national religious prejudices." The writer -is not 
dependent, consciously or unconsciously, on the Pauline teaching. 
He has won his way to universalism, not through the Pauline 
method, but through one of his own. He has no serious prefer- 
ence for the people of Israel as such, but only for the martyrs 
and confessors, who shall belong to every tribe and tongue and 
people and nation (vii. 9 seq.). The unbelieving Jews are " a 
synagogue of Satan " (ii. 9). 

Yet, on the other hand, our author's attitude to the world 
reflects the temper of Judaism rather than that of Christianity. 
He looks upon the enemies of the Christian Church with uncon- 
cealed hatred. No prayer arises within his work on their 
behalf, and nothing but unalloyed triumph is displayed 
over their doom. The Christian duty of love to those that 
wrong us does not seem to have impressed itself on our 
Apocalyptist. 

Is the Apocalypse pseudonymous? — All the Jewish apocalypses 
are pseudonymous, and all the Christian with the exception of 
the Shepherd of Hermas. Since our book undoubtedly belongs 
to this category, the question of its pseudonymity must arise. 
In the articles on Apocalyptic Literature and Apocryphal 
Literature (qq.v.) we have shown the large lines of differentia- 
tion between apocalyptic and prophecy. The chief ground for 
resorting to pseudonymous authorship in Judaism was that the 
belief in prophecy was lost among the people. Hence any writer 
who would appeal to them was obliged to do so in the name of 
some great figure of the past. Furthermore, this belief that 
prophecy had ceased led the religious personalities of the later 
time to authenticate their message by means of antedated 
prophecy. They procured confidence in their actual predictions 
by appealing to the literal fulfilment of such antedated prophecy. 
In such literature we find the characteristic words or their 
equivalents: " Seal up the prophecy: it is not for this genera- 
tion," which are designed to explain the late appearance of the 
works in which they are found, But this universal character- 
istic of apocalyptic is almost wholly lacking in the New Testa- 
ment Apocalypse. The vaticinium ex eventu plays but a very 

1 His freedom from legal bondage is as undeniable as his univer- 
salism. He lays no further burden on his readers than those re- 
quired by the Apostolic Decree of Acts xv. 28 seq. 



small part in it. Moreover, the chief ground for the develop- 
ment of a pseudonymous literature was absent in the early 
Christian church. For with the advent of Christianity prophecy 
had sprung anew into life, and our author distinctly declares that 
the words of the book are for his own generation (xxii. 10). 
Hence we conclude that the grounds are lacking which would 
entitle our assuming a priori that the Apocalypse is pseudony- 
mous. 

Was the Author the Son of Zebedee, the Apostle? — The evidence 
of the book is against this assumption. The writer demands 
a hearing as a prophet (xxii. 6), and in no single passage makes 
any claim to having been an apostle. Nay more, the evidence 
of the text, so far as it goes, is against such a view. He never 
refers to any previous intercourse with Christ such as we find 
frequently in the Fourth Gospel, and when he speaks of " the 
twelve apostles of the Lamb " (xxi. 14) he does so in a tone that 
would seem to exclude him from that body. Here internal and 
external evidence are at strife; for from the time of Justin 
pnwards the Apocalypse was received by the church as the work 
of the Apostle John (see Swete, op. cit*, p. clxxv). If the writer 
of the Fourth Gospel was the Apostle John, then the difficulties 
for the assumption of an apostolic authorship of the Apoca- 
lypse become well-nigh insuperable. Nay more, the difficulties 
attending on the assumption of a common authorship of the 
Gospel and Apocalypse, independently of the question of the 
apostolic authorship of the Gospel, are practically insuperable. 
Some decades ago these difficulties were not insurmountable, 
when critics assigned a Neronic date to the Apocalypse and a 
Domitianic or later date to the Gospel. It was from such a 
standpoint conceivable that the thoughts and diction of the 
writer had undergone an entire transformation in the long 
interval that intervened between the composition of the two 
books, on the supposition that both were from the same hand. 
But now that both books are assigned to the last decade of the 
1 st century a.d. by a growing body of critics, the hypothesis of 
a common authorship can hardly be sustained. The validity of 
such an hypothesis was attacked as early as the 4th century by 
Dionysius of Alexandria in the fragment of his treatise irepi 
kirayyekt&v, in Eusebius, H.E. vii. 24 seq. His arguments, as 
summed up by Swete (op. cit. y p. cxiv seq.), arc as follows: 
" John the Evangelist abstains from mentioning his own name, 
but John the Apocalyptist names himself more than once at 
the very outset of his book, and again near its end. Doubtless 
there were many who bore the name of John in the early Christian 
communities; we read, for instance, of 'John, whose surname 
was Mark/ and there may have been a second John in Asia, since 
at Ephesus, we are told, there were two tombs said to be John's. 
. . . Again, while the Gospel and the Epistle of John show marks 
of agreement which suggest a common authorship, the Apocalypse 
differs widely from both in its ideas and in its way of expressing 
them; we miss in it the frequent references to 'life,' 'light,' 
' truth/ ' grace ' and ' love ' which arc characteristic of the Apostle 
and find ourselves in a totally different region of thought. . . . 
Lastly, the linguistic eccentricities of the Apocalypse bar the 
way against the acceptance of the book as the work of the 
Evangelist. The Gospel and the First Epistle are written in 
correct and flowing Greek, and there is not a barbarism, a solecism, 
or a provincialism in them; whereas the Greek of the Apocalypse 
is inaccurate, disfigured by unusual or foreign words and even 
at times by solecisms." 

All subsequent criticism has more or less confirmed the con- 
clusions of Dionysius. On the other hand, it is impossible to 
ignore the signs of a relationship between the Apocalypse and 
the Gospel in the minor peculiarities of language. 2 These, 
Swete holds, " create a strong presumption of affinity " between 
the two books, while Bousset infers that they " justify the assump- 
tion that the entire circle of Johanninc writings spring from 
circles which stood under the influence of the John of Asia 
Minor." 

We conclude, therefore, that the Gospel and the Apocalypse 

1 See Bousset, Offenbarung Johannis*, pp. I77- J 79; Swete*, pp. 
exxv-exxix. 



222 



REVELS, MASTER OF THE— REVENTLOW 



are derived from different authors who moved in the same 
circles. 1 

As regards the John mentioned in the Apocalypse, he is now 
identified by a majority of critics with John the Presbyter, 
and further the trend of criticism is in favour of transferring 
all the Johannine writings to him, or rather to his school in 
Asia Minor. 2 

For an independent discussion of the authorship of the Fourth 
Gospel, see John, Gospel of St. (R. H. C.) 

REVELS, MASTER OF THE.*— The history of the Revels 
office has an interesting place in that of the English stage (see 
also Drama, and Theatre). Among the expenses of the royal 
Wardrobe we find provision made for tunicae and viseres in 
1347 for the Christmas ludi of Edward III.; during the reign 
of Henry VII. payments are also recorded for various forms of 
court revels; and it became regular, apparently, to appoint a 
special functionary, called Master of the Revels, to superintend 
the royal festivities, quite distinct from the Lord of Misrule (q.v.) . 
In Henry VII.'s time he seems to have been a minor official of the 
household. In Henry VIII.'s time, however, the post became 
more important, and an officer of the Wardrobe was permanently 
employed to act under the Master of the Revels. With the 
patent given to John Farlyon in 1 534 as Yeoman of the Revels, 
what may be considered as an independent office of the Revels 
(within the general sphere of the lord chamberlain) came into 
being; and in 1544 Sir Thomas Cawarden received a patent 
as Master of the Revels, he being the first to become head of 
an independent office, M agister J ocorum^ Revelorum el Mascorum 
omnium el singularium nostrorum vulgariler nuncupatorum 
Revells and Masks. Cawarden was Master till 1559. Soon after 
his appointment, the office and its stores were transferred to a 
dissolved Dominican monastery at Blackfriars, having previously 
been housed at Warwick Inn in the city, the Charterhouse, and 
then at the priory of St John of Jerusalem in Clerkenwell, to 
which a return was made after Cawarden's death. Sir Thomas 
Benger succeeded Cawarden, and Edmund Tylney followed him 
(1570-16 10); it was the appointment of the latter's nephew, 
Sir George Buck, as deputy-master, with the reversion to the 
mastership, which led to so much repining on the part of the 
dramatist, John Lyly, who was himself a candidate. Under 
Tylney, the functions of Master of the Revels gradually 
became extended to a general censorship of the stage, 
which in 1624 was put directly in the hands of the lord 

1 There are several analogies in Jewish literature. Thus the 
Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs — a universalist work — and the 
Book of Jubilees — a particularistic work — are from different authors, 
though they are written within a few years of each other by Phari- 
sees and use much common material. Similarly with regard to 
the Apocalypse of Baruch and 4 Ezra. 

2 Several converging lines of testimony tend to prove that John 
the son of Zebedee was, like his brother James, put to death by the 
Jews. First, we have the express testimony of Papias to this 
effect, which ispreserved in George Hamartofus and in an epitome 
of Philip of Side. Attempts have been made to explain away 
this testimony by Lightfoot, Harnack, Drummond, and Bernard 
{Irish Church Quarterly, 1908, 52 sqq.). Secondly, Papias's testi- 
mony receives support from Jesus's own words in Mark x. 39; 
for, as Wellhausen remarks on this passage, " the prophecy refers 
not only to James but also to John; and if it had remained only 
half fulfilled, it would hardly have kept its place in the Gospel. 
The third strand of evidence is found in the Martyrologies, Cartha- 
ginian, Armenian and Syrian. Bernard (op. ciL) has tried to 
prove that the Martyrologies do not imply the martyrdom but 
only the faithful ..witness of John. Finally, Clement of Alexandria 
(Bousset, Die Offenbarung, p. 38) furnishes evidence in the same 
direction; for in Clem. Alex. Strom, iv. o, 71, the Gnostic Herac- 
leon gives' a list of the Apostles who had not been martyred, and 
these were: " Matthew, Philip, Thomas and Levi" (corrupt for 
Lebbaeus). If we accept this evidence, the martyrdom cannot 
have been later than a.d. 69, and may have been considerably 
earlier. In either case such a fact, if it is a fact, is against an 
Apostolic origin of the Johannine writings. John the Presbyter 
is in that case " the disciple whom Jesus loved and the founder of 
the Johannine school in Asia Minor. But the question is still at 
issue. 

1 The word " revel " meant properly a noisy or riotous tumult 
or merry-making, and is derived from O. Fr. reveler ', to rebel, to riot, 
make a noise ; Lat. rebellare. 



chamberlain, thus leading to the licensing act of 1737 (see 
Drama). 

See E. K. Chambers, The Mediaeval Stage (1004) ; and his Notes 
on the History of the Revels Office under the Tudors (1906), with 
authorities quoted. 

REVELSTOKE, an incorporated town of British Columbia, 
on the Columbia river and the Canadian Pacific railway, 381 m. 
E. of Vancouver. Pop. (1907) 3526. It is the capital of 
Kootenay county, and the shipping centre for the mining and 
lumbering district. It contains large railway shops, several 
breweries, and saw and shingle mills. 

REVENTLOW, CHRISTIAN DITLEV FREDERICK, Count 
(1 748-1827), Danish statesman and reformer, the son of Privy 
Councillor Christian Ditlev Reventlow, born on March ir, 1748. 
After being educated at the academy of Sor6 and at Leipzig, 
Reventlow, in company with his younger brother Johan Ludwig 
and the distinguished Saxon economist Carl Wendt (1731-1815), 
the best of cicerones on such a tour, travelled through Germany, 
Switzerland, France and England, to examine the social, eco- 
nomical and agricultural conditions of civilized Europe. A 
visit to Sweden and Norway to study mining and metallurgy 
completed the curriculum, and when Reventlow in the course 
of 1770 returned to Denmark he was an authority on all the 
economic questions of the day. In 1774 he held a high 
position in the Kammerkollegiet, or board of trade, two years 
later he entered the Department of Mines, and in 1781 he was a 
member of the Overskattedirectionen, or chief taxing board. He 
had, in 1774, married Frederica Charlotte von Beulwitz, who 
bore him thirteen children, and on his father's death in 1775 
inherited the family estate in Laaland. Reventlow overflowed 
with progressive ideas, especially as regards agriculture, and he 
devoted himself, heart and soul, to the improvement of his 
property and the amelioration of his serfs. Fortunately, the 
ambition to play a useful part in a wider field of activity than he 
could find in the country ultimately prevailed. His time came 
when the ultra-conservative ministry of Hoegh Guldberg was 
dismissed (April 14th, 1784) and Andreas Bernstorff, the states- 
man for whom Reventlow had the highest admiration, returned 
to power. 

Reventlow was an excellently trained specialist in many 
departments, and was always firm and confident in those 
subjects which he had made his own. Moreover, he was a man 
of strong and warm feelings, and deeply religious. 

The condition of the peasantry especially interested him. He 
was convinced that free labour would be far more profitable 
to the land, and that the peasant himself would be better if 
released from his thraldom. 

His favourite field of labour was thrown open to him when, on 
the 6th of August 1784, he was placed at the head of the Rente- 
kammeret, which took cognisance of everything relating to 
agriculture. His first step was to appoint a small agricultural 
commission to better the condition of the crown serfs, and 
amongst other things enable them to turn their leaseholds into 
freeholds. Observing that the Crown Prince Frederick was also 
favourably disposed towards the amelioration of the peasantry, 
Reventlow induced him, in July 1786, to appoint a grand 
commission to take the condition of all the peasantry in the 
kingdom into immediate consideration. This celebrated 
agricultural commission continued its labours for many years, 
and introduced a whole series of reforms of the highest import- 
ance. Thus the ordinance of 8th June 1787 modified 
the existing leaseholds, greatly to the advantage of the 
peasantry; the ordinance of 20th June 1788 abolished 
villenage and completely transformed the much-abused hoveri 
system whereby the feudal tenant was bound to cultivate his 
lord's land as well as his own; and the ordinance of 6th December 
1799, which did away with hoveri altogether. Reventlow 
was also instrumental in starting the public credit banks, for 
enabling small cultivators to borrow money on favourable 
terms. In conjunction with his friend, Heinrich Ernst Schim- 
melmann (1747-1831), he also procured the passing of the 
ordinances permitting free trade between Denmark and Norway, 



REVENUE— REVERIE 



223 



the free importation of corn from abroad, and the abolition of 
the mischievous monopoly of the Iceland trade. 

But the financial distress of Denmark, the jealousy of the 
duchies, the ruinous political complications 'of the Napoleonic 
period, and, above all, the Crown Prince Frederick's growing 
jealousy of his official advisers, which led him to rule, or rather 
misrule, for years without the co-operation of his Council of 
State — all these calamities were at last too much even for 
Reventlow. On 7th December 1813 he received his dismissal 
and retired to his estates, where, after working cheerfully 
among his peasantry to the last, he died on the nth of 
October 1827. 

See Adolph Frederik Bergsoe, Grev. C. D. F. Reventlows 
Virksomhed (Copenhagen, 1837) ; Louis Theodor Alfred Bobe, 
Efterl. Papirer fra den Reventlowske Familiekreds (Copenhagen, 
1895-97). 

REVENUE (0. Fr. revenu t from revenir, to return), income, 
return, or profit; more particularly the receipts from all 
sources of a government or state. The revenue of a state is 
largely made up of taxation, and the general principles of taxes 
are discussed in Taxation and Finance. In some countries 
the public or state domain may contribute substantially to the 
revenue, as do the crown forests in Russia, while in other 
countries important contributions are made from the state 
railways, post and telegraph services, &c. For the historical 
development of the English revenue see English Finance, 
and for other countries see the sections on finance in the articles 
dealing with the various countries. In the United Kingdom 
the term inland revenue is used to denote that part of the 
revenue which is derived from death duties, stamps and other 
taxes, such as income tax, land tax, inhabited house duty, &c. 
The Board of Inland Revenue is a special department of the 
English civil service, with headquarters at Somerset House. 
The Board consists of a chairman, deputy chairman, and 
two commissioners, with joint secretaries, assistant secretaries 
and a staff of officials. The other important department 
engaged in the collection of the English revenue is the Board 
of .Customs and Excise. The excise department was formerly 
a branch of the inland revenue, but was amalgamated with the 
customs department on the 1st of April 1909. The Board of 
Customs and Excise is constituted as is the Board of Inland 
Revenue. 

In the United States the greater proportion of the national 
revenue ($547,086,992 out of $663,217,677 in 1909) is derived 
from customs and internal revenue. The internal revenue 
consists for the most part of receipts from taxes on spirits, 
tobaccos and fermented liquors. In 1909 the amount derived 
from customs revenue was $300,977,438, and internal revenue, 
$246,109,554. 

REVERE, PAUL (1735-1818), American engraver and patriot, 
was born in Boston, Massachusetts, on the 1st of January 1735. 
He had a meagre schooling, and in his father's shop learned 
the trade of a gold- and silversmith. In 1756 he was second 
lieutenant of artillery in the expedition against Crown Point, 
and for several months was stationed at Fort Edward, in New 
York> He became a proficient copper engraver, and. engraved 
several anti-British caricatures in the years before the War of 
Independence. He was one of the Boston grand jurors who 
refused to serve in 1774 because parliament had made the 
justices independent of the people for their salaries; was a 
leader in the Boston Tea Party; was one of the thirty North 
End mechanics who patrolled the streets to watch the move- 
ments of the British troops and Tories; and in December 1774 
was sent to Portsmouth, New Hampshire, to urge the seizure 
of military stores there, and induced the colonists to attack 
and capture Fort William and Mary — one of the first acts of 
military force in the war. His midnight ride from Charlestown 
to Lexington on the i8th-i9th of April 1775, to give warning 
of the approach of British troops from Boston, is Revere 's most 
famous exploit; it is commemorated by Longfellow, who, 
however, has "paid little attention to exactness of fact " 
(Justin Winsor). In 1775 Revere was sent by the Massachusetts 



provincial congress to Philadelphia to study the working of the 
only powder mill in the colonies, and although he was allowed 
only to pass through the building, obtained sufficient informa- 
tion to enable him to set up a powder mill at Canton. He was 
commissioned a major of infantry in the Massachusetts militia 
in April 1776; was promoted to the rank of lieutenant-colonel 
of artillery in November; was stationed at Castle William, 
defending Boston harbour, and finally received command of 
this fort. He served in an expedition to Rhode Island in 1778, 
and in the following year participated in the unsuccessful 
Penobscot expedition. After his return he was accused of 
having disobeyed the orders of the commanding officer, was 
tried by court-martial, and was acquitted. After the war he 
engaged in the manufacture of gold and silver ware, and became 
a pioneer in the production in America of copper plating and 
copper spikes for ships. In 1795, as grandmaster of the Masonic 
fraternity, he laid the cornerstone of the new State House in 
Boston, and in this year also founded the Massachusetts Charit- 
able Mechanic Association, becoming its first president. He 
died in Boston on the 10th of May 1818. " 

See Charles F. Gettemy, The True Story of Paid Revere (Boston, 
1905). 

REVERE, a township and a coast resort of Suffolk county, 
Massachusetts, U.S.A., immediately N.E. of Boston on Massa- 
chusetts Bay. Pop. (1910, U.S. census), 18,219. Area, 
4-56 sq. m. The township is served by the Boston & Maine 
and the Boston, Revere Beach & Lynn railways, and by several 
electric railways connecting iwith Boston, 'Chelsea, Lynn, 
Maiden, and Medford. Revere Beach, a crescent-shaped beach 
of white sand extending from the promontory of Winthrop on 
the S. to the Point of Pines on the N., is a popular bathing 
resort, and has been called the Coney Island of Boston. The 
township has a Carnegie library and a handsome town hall. 
The first settlement here was made about 1626, and, under the 
name of Rumney Marsh, it was a part of Boston until 1739, 
when it became a part of the new township of Chelsea. The 
northern part of Chelsea was organized as the township of 
North Chelsea in 1846; part of it was separated as Winthrop 
in 1852; and in 1871 the name North Chelsea was changed 
to Revere, in honour of Paul Revere. 

REVEREND (Lat. reverendus, gerundive of revereri, to 
revere, pay respect to), a term of respect or courtesy, now 
especially used as the ordinary prefix of address to the names 
of ministers of religion of all denominations. The uses of Med. 
Lat. revet endus do not confine the term to those in orders; 
Du Cange {Gloss, s.v.) defines it as titulus konotarius, etiam 
mulieribus potioris dignitatie concessus, and in the 15th century 
in English it is found as a general term of respectful address. 
The usual prefix of address of a parson was " sir," representing 
Lat. dominus (see Sir), or " master." It has been habitually 
used of the parochial clergy of the Church of England since 
the end of the 17th century. It is not, however, a title of 
honour or dignity, and no denomination has any exclusive 
right to use it. A faculty was ordered to be issued for the 
erection of a tombstone, the inscription on which contained 
the name of a Wesleyan minister prefixed by " reverend "; 
this the incumbent had refused {Keat v. Smith, 1876, 1 P.D. 73). 
In the Church of England deans are addressed as " very 
reverend," bishops as " right reverend," archbishops as " most 
reverend." The Moderator of the Church of Scotland is also 
styled " right reverend." 

REVERIE, a condition of mental abstraction, a fit of musing, 
a "brown study" ("brown" in the sense of "gloomy," and 
not to be referred to Germ. Braune, brow). The word appears 
in the 14th or 15th centuries in its original meaning in Old 
French, of joy, delight, also wildness, anger. The French rever, 
later resver, modern river, to dream, meant originally to wander 
in speech or thought, and is derived from the Lat. rabiare, 
cf. " rabies," " rage " and " rave." The French reverie (resverie) 
was adopted again in the 17th and 18th centuries as meaning 
a state of dreaminess; thus Locke (Essay on the Human Under- 
standing, 1695, ii. xix.) says: " When ideas float in our minds 



224 



REVIEW— REWA 



without any reflection or regard of the understanding, it is that 
which the French call resvery; our language has scarce a word 
for it." 

REVIEW (Fr. revue, from revolt, to see again, Lat. re and 
videre), an inspection or critical examination; it is chiefly used 
as a military or naval term for an inspection on a large or formal 
scale of a fleet or hody of troops by the sovereign or other person 
holding a high official position, or for a critical account of a 
recently published literary work in a magazine or periodical. 
The earliest use of the word for the title of such a periodical 
was in the paper begun by Defoe in 1704, the full title of which 
was A Review of the Affairs of France and of all Europe, as influ- 
enced by that Nation (see Periodicals and Newspapers). In 
France there is a particular application of the term revue or, 
more fully, revue de fin d y annie to a form of dramatic performance, 
acted or sung, in which the chief events of the past year, and 
the personages who have been prominently before the public, 
are satirically and critically passed under review. Attempts 
have been made to trace such performances to an early origin. 
In their modern form, however, they date from the reign of 
Louis Philippe. V An 1841 elVan 1941, by the brothers Cogniard, 
was one of the earliest. 

REVILLAGIGEDO, an isolated, uninhabited group of rocky 
islands in the N. Pacific, lat. t8° N., long. 112 W., belonging 
to Mexico, and forming part of the state of Colima. They are 
about 420 m. from the Mexican coast and comprise the large 
island of Socorro (San Tomas), 24 m. long by an average of 
9 m. wide, and the three widely separated islets of San Benedicto, 
Roca Partida and Clarion, with a total area of 320 sq. m. 
The island of Socorro has an extinct volcano 3660 ft. high. The 
islands have certain remarkable zoological features, comprising 
several birds and reptiles allied to those of the Mexican main- 
land but differing from them in species. The archipelago 
derives its name from the Spanish viceroy who governed Mexico 
from 1746 to 1755. 

RfiVILLE, ALBERT (1826^ ), French Protestant theo- 
logian, was born at Dieppe on the 4th of November 1826. 
After studying at Geneva and Strassburg, he became in 1849 
pastor at Lunerai near Dieppe, and in 1851 of the Walloon 
Church 'at Rotterdam, where he remained until 1872. In 1880 
he was made professor of the history of religions in the College 
de France at Paris. Six years later he was appointed president 
of the section of religious studies in the ficole des hautes etudes 
at the Sorbonne. He is one of the leaders of the French school 
of advanced critical theology. 

Works. — Besides contributing; to the Revue de thSologie (Paris), 
the Revue de Vhistoire des religions (Paris), the Revue des deux 
mondes, the following works are important: Manuel oVhistoire 
comparte de la philosophie el de la religion (1859; Eng. trans., 
1864); Histoire du dogme de la divinite* de J&sus Christ (1869, 3rd 
ed. f 1904; Eng. trans., 1905); Prolegomhtes de Vhistoire des re- 
ligions (1881, 4th ed., 1886; Eng. trans., 1884); TModore Parker, 



1884); J&sus de Nazareth (1897, 12th ed., 1906) 

His son, Jean Reville, was born on the 6th of November 
1854, studied at Geneva, Paris, Berlin and Heidelberg, and 
became professor of patristic literature and secretary of the 
section of religious studies in the ficole des hautes etudes at 
the Sorbonne. In 1884 he became co-editor of the Revue de 
Vhistoire des religions (Paris). 

His books include: La Doctrine du lo%os (1881); La Religion a 
Rome sous les Sevhres (1886); Les Oripnes de Vipiscopat (1895); 
and Le Protestantisme literal, ses origtnes, sa nature, sa mission 
(1903; Eng. trans., 1903). 

REVOLUTIONARY TRIBUNAL, THE (le tribunal revolu- 
tionnaire), a court which was instituted in Paris by the Convention 
during the French Revolution for the trial of political offenders, 
and became one of the most powerful engines of the Terror. The 
news of the failure of the French arms in Belgium gave rise in 
Paris to popular movements on the 9th and 10th of March 1793, 
and on the 10th of March, on the proposal of Danton, the 
Convention decreed that there should be established in Paris 



an extraordinary criminal tribunal, which received the official 
name of the Revolutionary Tribunal by a decree of the 29th of 
October 1793. It was composed of a jury, a public prosecutor, 
and two substitutes, all nominated by the Convention; and 
from its judgments there was no appeal. With M. J. A. Hermann 
as president and Fouquier-Tinville as public prosecutor, the 
tribunal terrorized the royalists, the refractory priests and all 
the actors in the counter-revolution. Soon, too, it came to 
be used for personal ends, particularly by Robespierre, who 
employed it for the condemnation of his adversaries. The 
excesses of the Revolutionary Tribunal increased with the 
growth of Robespierre's ascendancy in the Committee of Public 
Safety; and on the 10th of June 1794 was promulgated, at his 
instigation, the infamous Law of 22 Prairial, which forbade 
prisoners to employ ' counsel for their defence, suppressed the 
hearing of witnesses and made death the sole penalty. Before 
22 Prairial the Revolutionary Tribunal had pronounced 1220 
death-sentences in thirteen months; during the forty-nine days 
between the passing of the law and the fall of Robespierre 
1376 persons were condemned, including many innocent 
victims. The lists of prisoners to be sent before the tribunal 
were prepared by a popular commission sitting at the museum, 
and signed, after revision, by' the Committee of General 
Security and the Committee of Puhlic Safety jointly. Although 
Robespierre was the principal purveyor of the tribunal, we 
possess only one of these lists bearing his signature. The 
Revolutionary Tribunal was suppressed on the 31st of May 
1795. Among its most celebrated victims may be mentioned 
Marie Antoinette, the Hebertists, the Dantonists and several 
of the Girondists. Similar tribunals were also in operation in 
the provinces. 

See H. A. Wallon, Histoire du tribunal revolutionnaire de Paris 
(Paris, 6 vols., 1880-82); E. Campardon, Le Tribunal revolution- 
naire de Paris (Paris, 2nd ed., 2 vols., 1866); C. Berriat Saint- 
Prix, La Justice revolutionnaire a Paris, Bordeaux, Brest, Lyon, 
Nantes, ... (Paris, 1861), and La Justice revolutionnaire (aoUt 
17 Q2-pr atrial^ an II.) d'apres des documents originaux (Paris, 1870); 
also G. Lendtre, Le Tribunal revolutionnaire (1908). For a biblio- 
graphy of its records see M. Tourneux, Bibliog. de la ville de Paris 
. . . (1890, vol. i. Nos. 39 2 5-3974)- 

REWA, or Riwa, a native state of Central India in the Bagel- 
khand agency. It is the only large state in Bagelkhand, and the 
second largest in Central India, having an area of about 13,000 
sq. m. It is bounded N. by the United Provinces, E. by Bengal 
and S. by the Central Provinces. On the W. it meets other 
petty states of Bagelkhand. Rewa is divided into two well- 
defined portions. The northern and smaller division is the 
plateau lying between the Kaimur range of hills and that 
portion of the Vindhyas known as Binjh, which overlook the 
valley of the Ganges. This plateau is for the most part culti- 
vated and well peopled; rich harvests both of kharif and rabi 
crops are generally obtained. Water is plentiful, and the 
country is full of large tanks and reservoirs, which, however, 
are not used for irrigation purposes; the only system of wet 
cultivation which has any favour with the villagers is that of 
bunds, or mounds of earth raised at the lower ends of sloping 
fields to retain the rain water for some time after the monsoon 
rains cease. The country to the S. of the Kaimur hills com- 
prises by far the largest portion of the state; but here cultiva- 
tion is restricted to the valley between the hills and the Sone 
river, and to a few isolated patches in scattered parts of the 
forest wastes. The principal river is the Sone, which flows 
through the state in a N.E. direction into Mirzapur district. 
Another important river is the Tons, but neither is navigable. 
The annual rainfall averages about 41 in. The population in 
1901 was 1,327,385, showing a decrease of 12% in the decade. 
Many of the inhabitants of the hilly tracts are Gonds and Kols. 
Estimated revenue, £200,000. The staple crops are rice, 
millets and wheat; but more than one-third of the area is 
covered with forests, yielding timber and lac. 

The S. of the state is crossed by the branch of the Bengal-Nagpur 
railway from Bilaspur to Katni, which taps the Umaria coal-field. 
The state suffered from famine in 1896-97, and again to a less 



REWA KANTHA— REYER 



225 



extent in 1899-1900; but on both oocasions adequate measures 
of relief were provided. 

The state first came under British influence in 1812. The chief, 
Venkat Raman Singh, was born in 1876, succeeded in 1880 and 
was created G. C.S.I, in 1897. During his minority the administra- 
tion was reformed. He is Rajput of the Baghela branch of the 
Solanki race, and is descended from the founder of the Anhilwara 
Patan dynasty in Gujarat. 

The town of Rewa is 131 m. S. of Allahabad. Pop. (190 1) 24, 668. 
It has a high school, also the Victoria and zenana hospitals and 
a model gaol. The political agent for Bagelkhand resides at 
Satna, on the East Indian railway: pop. (1901) 7471. 

REWA KANTHA, a political agency or collection of native 
states in India, subordinate to the government of Bombay. It 
stretches for about 150 m. between the plain of Gujarat and 
the hills of Malwa, from the river Tapti to the Mahi, crossing 
the Nerbudda or Rewa, from which it takes its name. The 
number of separate states is 61, many of which are under 
British jurisdiction. The only important one is Rajpipla 
(q.v.). It includes also five second-class states entitled Chota 
Udaipur, Bariya, Sunth, Lunawada and Balaimor. Total 
area, 4972 sq. m. In 1901 the population was 479,065, show- 
ing a decrease of 35 % in the decade, due to the results of 
famine. Estimated revenue, £140,000; tribute (mostly to the 
gaekwar of Baroda), £10,000. Many of the inhabitants belong 
to the wild tribes of Bhils and Kolis. The political agent, who 
is also collector of the British district of the Panch Mahals, 
resides at Godhra. 

REWARD, recompense, a gift or payment in return for 
services rendered. " Reward " and " regard " are forms of 
the same word. Old French, from which both words came 
into English, also had rewarder and regarder (the latter form 
only surviving in modern French), from re-, back, in return, 
and warder, garder, to watch, protect — ultimately a Teutonic 
word, from the base war-, to defend; cf. " ward " and " guard," 
which are thus also doublets. In early use in English, " re- 
ward " and " regard " were interchangeable in meaning; 
thus in Piers Plowman, xi. 129, " Reson rod forth and tok 
reward of no man," cf. " The towne doth receave ... an annuall 
regard for the same " (a 16th-century reference quoted by the 
New English Dictionary from R. Willis and J. W. Clark, Archil. 
Hist, of Univ. of Cambridge, 1886). In use the words are now 
distinct, " regard " being restricted to such meanings as atten- 
tion, respect, esteem, consideration. 

In English law the offering of rewards presents two distinct 
aspects: (1) with reference to the nature of the information 
or act for the giving or doing whereof the reward is offered; 
(2) with reference to the nature of the relation created between 
the person offering and the person claiming the reward. 

1. Courts of assize and quarter sessions are empowered to 
order the payment of rewards to persons who have been active 
in or towards the apprehension of persons charged with certain 
specified crimes against person and property (Criminal Law, 
1826, ss. 28, 29; Criminal Justice Administration Act 1851, 
ss. 7, 8). The rewards are payable according to a scale fixed 
by the home secretary. In the case of courts of quarter sessions 
the maximum is £5. Courts of assize may award a larger sum 
where extraordinary courage and diligence have been shown 
towards the apprehension. The sums awarded are paid out 
of the rate or fund chargeable with the costs of assizes and 
sessions. It is illegal to advertise for the recovery of stolen 
property (including dogs) on terms of not asking questions 
(Larceny Act i86r, s. 102; Larceny Advertisements Acts 1870, 
s. 3). The advertiser and the newspaper which publishes it 
incur a penalty of £50. (See Mirams v. Our Dogs Publishing 
Co., 1901, 2 K.B. 564.) It is a criminal offence at common 
law to offer any reward on terms leading to compounding a 
felony or sheltering the offender (R. v. Burgess, 1886, 16 Q.B.D. 
141), and under the Larceny Act 1861 ,(ss. 20, 101) it is criminal 
to accept a reward for recovery of stolen property without 
bringing the thief to justice. 

2. Where a reward is lawfully offered for information the 
person who first supplies the required information, i.e. satisfies 
the conditions on which the reward is payable, is entitled to 



recover by action the reward offered. Performance of the 
conditions is an acceptance of the offer (Carlill v. Carbolic 
Smoke Ball Co., 1893, 1 Q.B. 256, 270). Thus on an advertise- 
ment for information leading to the arrest and conviction of 
shop-breakers, T. gave information which led to the arrest of R., 
who while in prison told the police where to find the thieves. 
T. was held entitled to the reward (Tamer v. Walker, 1866, L.R. 
1 Q.B. 641). This rule applies even where the offer is general 
to all the world (Williams v. Carwardine, 1833, 4 B. & Ad. 621; 
Spencer v. Harding, 1870, L. R. 5 C.P. 561). It would seem that 
on grounds of public policy an offender could not claim the 
reward on surrendering himself to justice (Bent v. Wakefield cVc. 
Bank, 1878, 4 C.P.D. 1, 4). It is not clear whether officers of 
justice are by their office and duty debarred from claiming 
rewards offered for the arrest of offenders (Ibid. p. 5). 

REWARI, a town of British India, in Gurgaon district of the 
Punjab, 32 m. S.W. of Gurgaon, on the Rajputana-Malwa 
railway. Pop. (1901) 27,295. It is an important centre of 
trade, being the junction for the Rewari-Bhatinda branch of 
the Rajputana railway. The chief manufacture is that of brass- 
ware for cooking utensils. 

REWBELL, JEAN FRANCOIS (1747-1807), French 
politician, was born at Colmar (then in the department of 
Haut-Rhin) on the 8th of October 1747. He was president 
(bdtonnier) of the order of avocats in Colmar, and in 1789 was 
elected deputy^ to the States-General by the Third Estate of the 
bailliage of Colmar-Schlestadt. In the Constituent Assembly 
his oratorical gifts, legal knowledge and austerity of life gave 
him much influence. During the session of the Legislative 
Assembly he exercised the functions of procureur syndic and was 
subsequently secretary-general of the department of Haut-Rhin. 
In the Convention he was a zealous promoter of the trial of 
Louis XVI., but was absent on mission at the time of the king's 
condemnation. He took part in the reactionary movement 
which followed the fall of Robespierre, and became a member 
of the reorganized Committees of Public Safety and General 
Security. The moderation he displayed caused his election 
by seventeen departments to the Council of Five Hundred. 
Appointed a member of the Directory on the 1st of October 
1795, he became its president in 1796, and retired by ballot in 
1799. He then entered the Council of Ancients. After the 
coup d'etat of 18 Brumaire he retired from public life, and died 
at Colmar on the 23rd of November 1807. 

See L. Sciout, Le Directoire (Paris, 1895-97). 

REYBAUD, MARIE ROCH LOUIS (1 790-1879), French 
writer, economist and politician, was born at Marseilles on the 
15th of August 1799. After travelling in the Levant and in 
India, he settled in Paris in 1829. Besides writing for the 
Radical press, he edited the Histoire scientifique et militaire de 
l' expedition francaise en Egypte in ten volumes (1830-36) and 
Dumont d'UrvuVs Voyage autour du monde (1833). In 1840 
he published Etudes sur les reformateurs ou socialistes modernes 
(see Socialism) which gained him the Montyon prize (1841) and 
a place in the Academie des sciences morales et politiques (1850). 
In 1843 he published Jerdme Paturot & la recherche oVune position 
sociale, a clever social satire that had a prodigious success. In 
1846 he abandoned his democratic views, and was elected liberal 
deputy for Marseilles. His Jirfime Paturot & la recherche de la 
meilleure des republiques (1848) was a satire on the new Re- 
publican ideas. After the coup d'itat of 1849 he ceased to take 
part in public life, and devoted himself entirely to the study of 
political economy. To this period belong his La Vie de Vemployt 
(1855); U Industrie en Europe (1856); and £tudes sur le 
regime de nos manufactures (1859), He died in Paris on the 
28th of October 1879. 

REYER, ERNEST (1823- ), French composer, was born 
at Marseilles on the 1st of December 1823. At the age of sixteen 
he went to Algeria, and remained there some years. The out- 
come of his residence there was a symphonic ode entitled Le 
Stlam, the musical orientalism of which had, unluckily for him, 
already been anticipated by F61icien David in Le Dtsert. Mattre 
Wolfram* a one-act opera, was produced at the Ope*ra comique 

xxni. § 



226 



REYNARD THE FOX— REYNOLDS, J. F. 



in 1854; and in 1858 Sacttntala, a ballet, at the Opera. It was 
the production of La Stalite at the Theatre lyrique in 1861 that 
brought Reyer's name prominently before the' public. But 
Reyer had to wait several years before obtaining a real and 
permanent success. Erostrate, an opera produced at Baden- 
Baden in 1862, and given at the Paris Opera some ten years 
later, was a failure. The composer had in the meanwhile set to 
work on Sigurd, the subject of which is the same that inspired 
Wagner in Siegfried and G otter dammerung. It was at last 
produced in Brussels in 1884, and subsequently brought out at 
the Paris Opera. Sigurd is a work of great value, displaying its 
composer's .elevated notions as regards the form of the " lyrical 
drama." Salammbd, founded upon Flaubert's romance, was 
successfully produced at Brussels in 1890. Gluck, Weber, 
Berlioz and Wagner exercised' most influence over Reyer. As a 
musical critic (preceding Berlioz in that capacity for the Journal 
des dtbats) Reyer was a well-known writer; and he became 
librarian of the Paris OpSra, and a member of the Institute. 
His Quarante Arts de mitsique (with biographical notice by 
E. Henriot) was published in 1909. 

REYNARD THE FOX, a beast-epic, current in French, 
Dutch and German literature. The cycle of animal stories 
collected round the names of Reynard the Fox and Isengrim 
the Wolf in the 12th century seems to have arisen on the border- 
land of France and Flanders. Much of the material may be 
found in Aesop, in Pkysiologus, and in the 1 2th-century Disciplina 
Clericalis of Petrus Alfonsus. But the difference is very great. 
The intention of the trouveres who recited the exploits of Reynard 
was, in the earlier stages, in no sense didactic. The tales, like 
those of " Uncle Remus," were amusing in themselves; they 
were based on widely diffused folklore, and Reynard and his 
companions were not originally men disguised as animals. 
Jacob Grimm (Reinhart Fucks, 1834) maintained their popular 
origin; his theories, which have been much contested, have 
received additional support from the researches of K. Krohn, 
who discovered many of the stories most characteristic of the 
cycle in existing Finnish folklore, where they can hardly have 
arrived through learned channels. 

There is abundant evidence that Isengrim and Reynard were 
firmly established in the popular imagination in the 13th century, 
and even earlier. Guibert de Nogent (De Vita sua, book 3, chap.viii., 
printed Paris, 1651), in referring to the disturbances at Laon 
in 1 112, says that the bishop Gaudri was accustomed to call 
one of his enemies Isengrim, and it is obvious from the context 
that the taunt was perfectly understood by the popular mind. 
Philip the Fair is said to have annoyed Pope Boniface III., 
who died in 1303,. by the representation of the "Procession 
Renart "; and in 1204-1206 in Flanders two opposing parties 
were designated Isangrini and Blavotini (blue-footed). The 
principal names of the Reynard cycle, and the earliest in use, 
were German. Reynard himself (Raginohardus, strong in 
counsel), Bruin the Bear, Baldwin the Ass, Tibert the Cat, 
Hirsent the She-wolf, had German names^ most of which were 
used as person-names in Lorraine, Whatever the sources of the 
stories, it was in France- that the cycle obtained its greatest 
vogue. The Roman de Renart as printed by Meon (Paris, 
4 vols., 1826) runs to over 40,000 lines, and contains a great 
number of detached episodes or branches, to which the trouveres 
gave a certain unity by attaching them to the traditionary 
feud between Reynard and Isengrim. This rapidly became 
symbolic of the triumph of craft and eloquence over brute 
strength. Renart was a popular epic parodying feudal institu- 
tions as represented in the romances of chivalry, and readily 
adapting itself to satire of the rich, of the forms of justice, and 
of the clergy. 

The early French originals are lost, the most ancient existing 
fragments being in Latin. The fable of the lion's sickness and 
his cure by the wolf's skin occurs in the Ecbasis cujusdam captivi 
per Tropologiam (ed. E. Voigt; Strassburg, 1875), written by a 
monk of St Evre at Toul (Meurthe-et-Moselle) about 940. 
Ysengrimus (ed. E. Voigt; Halle, 1884), a clerical satire 
written by Nivard of Ghent about 1148, includes the story of 



the lion's sickness and the pilgrimage of Bertiliana the Goat. 
Another Latin poem, Reinardus vulpes (ed. F. J. Mone; Stutt- 
gart, 1832), contains in addition the theft of. the bacon, and how 
Isengrim is induced to fish with his tail. A simpler version, 
derived probably from a French original, is Isingrines ndt, 
written in German about 1180 by the Alsatian Heinrich der 
Glichezare. Only fragments of this poem are preserved, but 
about a quarter of a century later it was re-written with little 
change in the subject matter as Reinhart Fucks (ed. J. Grimm, 
Berlin, 1834; and K. Reissenberger, Halle, 1886). Most later 
versions of Reynard have been derived, however, from the 
Flemish Reinaert de vos (ed. J. F. Willems, Ghent, 1836; and 
E. Martin, Paderborn, 1874), written about 1250 in East Flanders 
by Willem. Reinaert is a poem of 3474 lines. The corresponding 
branch of the French Roman de Renart (for which and its satirical 
sequels, Le Couronnement Renart, Renart le nouveau, and Rtnart 
le contrefait, see French Literature) is one of the earliest and 
best of the great French cycle. 

The fable was, like other French works, known in England, 
but did not at once pass into the popular stock. Odo of Cheriton, 
who died in 1247, used the Reynard stories in his sermons, and 
many of them occur in his collection of Parabolae (ed. Hervieux, 
Fabulistes latins, 1884, vol. i.). The English poem of the Vox 
and the Wolf dates from the 13th century; and the " Nonne 
Preestes Tale " of Chaucer, in which, however, the fox is Rossel 
and the ass Brunei, is a genuine Reynard history. 

Willem's Reinaert de Vos was left incomplete, and the con- 
tinuation — about 4000 lines in a more didactic vein — was added 
by an unknown writer of West Flanders about 1370. The first 
copy printed in any language was the Dutch prose version, 
Hystorie van Reynaert de Vos, printed at Gouda by Gheraert 
JLeeuw in 1479. On this Caxton based his Historye of reynarf 
the foxe (reprinted by E. Arber, 1878), which he finished on the 
6th of June 1481. As a satire on the church, especially on 
monks and nuns, Reynard became popular with reformers, and 
numerous versions followed in England and Germany. A Low 
German version, Reineke Fuchs, with a prose commentary by 
Hinrek Alckmer (Henry of Alkmaar), was issued from the 
Antwerp press of Gheraert Leeuw in 1487. From this rifaci- 
mento was derived the Low German Reynke de Vos (ed. Hoffmann 
vori Fallersleben, Breslau, 1834; and Friedrich Prien, Halle, 
1887), which was printed at Liibeck in 1498. Michael Beuther 
is said to have been the translator into High German (Reiniken 
Fuchs, 1 544) ; and the book was made available to the general 
European public in the Latin version of Hartmann Schopper, 
Opus Poeticum de admirabili fallacia et astutia Vulpeculae Reinikes 
Libras quatuor (Frankfort, 1567). The modern German version 
(1794) of Goethe has been often reprinted, notably in 1846 with 
illustrations by Wilhelm von Kaulbach. 

Reynard is dealt with by Carlyle in an essay " On German 
Literature of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries " in the 
Foreign Quarterly Review (1831). An admirable^ account of the 
Reynard cycle is given by W. J. Thorns in his edition of Caxton's 
version for the Percy Society (1844). Prien's edition of Reynke 
de Vos contains bibliographical particulars of the German, Danish, 
Swedish, Icelandic and English editions (cp. Brunet, Manuel du 
libraire, s.v. Renart). The best edition of the Roman de Renart 
is by Ernest Martin (3 vols., Strassburg and Paris, 1881-1887). 
See also Leopold Sudre, Les Sources du roman de Renard (Paris, 
1890); Jacob Grimm, Sendschreiben an C. Lachmann iiber Reinhart 
Fuchs (Leipzig, 1840) ; Gaston Paris, " Le Roman de Renard " in the 
Journal des savants (Dec. 1894 and Feb. 1895); Kaarle Krohn, 
Bar und Fuchs (Helsingfors, 1888), and the editions mentioned 
above. The story is told in modern French by Paulin Paris, Les 
Aventures de Maitre Renart et oVYsengrin son compere (1861), and 
in English by Joseph Jacobs, following a modernized text of Caxton 
made by " Felix Summerley " (Sir H. Cole), in The Most Delectable 
History of Reynard the Fox (1895), with a valuable introduction. 

REYNOLDS, JOHN FULTON (1820-1863), American soldier, 
was born at Lancaster, Pennsylvania, on the 20th of 
September 1820, and graduated at West Point in 184 1. He 
became first lieutenant of artillery in 1846, and was breveted 
captain and major for gallantry in the Mexican War. He took 
part in the Utah expedition under Brigadier-General Albert 
Sidney Johnston. In 1859 he was made commandant of cadets 



REYNOLDS, SIR JOSHUA 



at West Point, where he was stationed at the outbreak of the 
Civil War in 1 86 i. He was made a lieutenant-colonel of infantry 
in May and brigadier-general of volunteers in August of that 
year. In the Peninsular campaign, after taking part in the 
battles of Beaver Dam Creek and Gaines* Mill, he was taken 
prisoner in the hard-fought action of Glendale or Frazicr's Farm. 
Exchanged after six weeks' captivity, he commanded a division 
with conspicuous ability and ccfurage in the second battle of 
Bull Run. Shortly after this he was placed in command of 
the militia of his native state when Lee's invasion threatened 
it. In November 1862 he was commissioned major-general of 
volunteers, and appointed to command the 1. Corps of the Army 
of the Potomac, and took part in the battle of Fredericksburg. 
At the time of General Meade's appointment to command the 
Army of the Potomac many desired to see Reynolds selected for 
that post, but he gave Meade his whole-hearted support in the 
three critical days preceding the battle of Gettysburg (q.v.). 
He was placed by Meade in command of the left wing (I., III. 
and XI. corps and Buford's cavalry division) and thrown forward 
to Gettysburg to cover the concentration of the Army of the 
Potomac. The battle which ensued there, on the 1st of July 
1863, took its shape from Reynolds's resolution to support Buford's 
cavalry with the I. and XL crops. Meade was notified, and 
hurried forward the right wing under Hancock. Reynolds 
himself was killed very early in the day by a rifle bullet. A 
bronze statue was placed on the field of Gettysburg and a 
portrait in the library at West Point by the men of the I. Corps. 
The state of Pennsylvania erected a granite shaft on the spot 
where he fell, and an equestrian bronze statue stands in 
Philadelphia. 

His elder brother William (181 5-1879), a naval officer, served 
afloat in the Civil War, effected many useful reforms while 
acting secretary of the navy in 1873 and 1874, and retired from 
the United States navy in 1877 as a rear-admiral. 

REYNOLDS, SIR JOSHUA (1723-1792), the most prominent 
figure in the English school of painting, was born at Plympton 
Earl, in Devonshire, on the 16th of July 1723. He received a 
fairly good education from his father, who was a clergyman and 
the master of the free grammar school of the place. At the 
age of seventeen, the lad, who had already shown a fondness 
for drawing, was apprenticed in London to Thomas Hudson, 
a native of Devonshire, who, though a mediocre artist, was 
popular as a portrait painter. Reynolds remained with Hudson 
for only two years, and in 1743 he returned to Devonshire, where, 
settling at Plymouth Dock, he employed himself in portrait 
painting. By the end of 1744 he was again in London. He was 
well received by his old master, from whom he appears previously 
to have parted with some coldness on both sides. Hudson 
introduced him to the artists' club that met in Old Slaughter's, 
St Martin's* Lane, and gave him much advice as to his work. 
Reynolds now painted a portrait of Captain the Hon. John 
Hamilton, the first that brought him any notice, with those of 
other people of some repute; but on the death of his father in 
1746 he established himself with two of his sisters at Plymouth 
Dock, where he painted numerous portraits, and it was here 
that he came under the influence of the works of one of the 
painters who materially affected his art. This was William 
Gandy of Exeter, who had died in 1730, and whose painting, 
derived through his father from VanDyck, was pronounced by 
Northcote to come nearer to nature in the texture of flesh than 
that of any artist who ever lived. The influence on him of 
Gandy may be seen in the early self-portrait of the National 
Portrait Gallery, so rich in impasto and strong in light and 
shade, in which he is seen shading his eyes with his hand. 

Meanwhile the pleasant urbanity of manner which distin- 
guished Reynolds throughout life had been winning for him 
friends. He had "made the acquaintance of Lord Edgcumbe, 
and by him was introduced to Captain (afterwards Viscount) 
Keppel. Keppel was made aware of Reynolds's ardent desire 
to visit Italy; and, as he had just been appointed to the com- 
mand of the Mediterranean squadron, he gracefully invited the 
artist to accompany him in his own ship, the " Centurion." 



227 

The offer was gladly accepted. While Keppel was conducting 
his tedious negotiations with the dey of Algiers, relative to the 
piracy with which that potentate was charged, Reynolds resided 
at Port Mahon, the guest of the governor of Minorca, painting 
portraits of the principal inhabitants; and in December 1749 
he sailed for Leghorn, and thence, with all eagerness, made his 
way to Rome. 

He has confessed that his first sight of the works of Raphael 
i was a grievous disappointment, but he recognized afterwards, as 
he said, that the fault was in himself, and he brought his mind 
ultimately into the fitting posture of reverence. The fact is 
significant of Reynold's attitude towards the older masters. 
It has been often noticed that in his " Discourses " and else- 
where he praises just the very masters whose practice his own 
work implicitly condemns. The truth is that Reynolds was 
naturally a good critic, but was not strong enough to believe in 
his own opinions if they ran counter to the prevailing taste of his 
times. Of the early Italians he praises the " simplicity and 
truth " and observes that they " deserve the attention of a 
student much more than many later artists." In Venice he 
adopted a method of study that only a born painter could have 
thought of, making memoranda of the gradations of light and 
shade in the pictures, " and this without any attention to the 
subject, or to the drawing of the figures." On the other hand, 
we find him lavishing both attention and eulogy on the later 
Italian mannerists, such as Guido and the Carracci, and even 
Salviati and Vasari. 

After a residence of more than two years in 'Rome, where 
he caught a severe cold which resulted in the deafness that clung 
to him for the rest of his life, Reynolds, in* the spring of 1752, 
spent five months in visiting Parma, Florence, Venice and other 
important cities of Italy. Returning to England by way of 
Paris, Reynolds, after a brief stay in Devonshire, established 
himself as a portrait painter in St Martin's Lane, London, whence 
he afterwards removed to Great Newport Street, and finally, in 
1 760, to Leicester Square, where he continued to paint till his death. 

In London, Reynolds stepped at once and without a struggle 
into a foremost position as the fashionable portrait painter of 
the day. In this he was greatly helped by bis success in society. 
Throughout his career his social occupations claimed the next 
place to his painting, and here it may be noticed that, though 
we read of some little ostentation in the form of a showy chariot 
and liveried lackeys, his good taste always kept him from any 
undue " push," or adulation of the great. At the outset Lord 
Edgcumbe played the part of the generous patron, and exerted 
himself to obtain commissions for his protege, of whose ability 
the portraits which he now produced — especially the famous 
full-length of his old friend Keppel — were sufficient guarantee. 
The artist's painting room was thronged with the wealth and 
fashion of London. In 1755 his clients for the year numbered 
120, and in 1757 the number of sittings recorded in his pocket- 
books reached a total of 677. He was not always so busy, but 
his popularity never really waned, though various other artists 
competed with him for popular applause. First the Swiss 
Liotard had his momemt of popularity; and at a later period 
there was Opie, and the more formidable and sustained rivalry 
of Gainsborough and of Romney; but in the midst of all 
Reynolds maintained his position unimpaired. During the first 
year of his residence in London he had made the acquaintance of 
Dr Johnson, which, diverse as the two men were, became a 
friendship for life. To him Burke and Goldsmith, Garrick, 
Sterne and Bishop Percy were before long added. At the 
hospitable dinner-table of Reynolds such distinguished men 
enjoyed the freest and most unconstrained companionship, and 
most of them were members of the " Literary Club," established, 
at the painter's suggestion, in 1764. 

In 1760 the London world of art was greatly interested by the 
novel proposal of the Society of Artists to exhibit their works 
to the public. The hall of the society was at their disposal 
for the purpose; and in the month of April an exceedingly 
successful exhibition was opened, the precursor of many that 
followed. To this display Reynolds contributed four portraits. 



228 



REYNOLDS, SIR JOSHUA 



In 1765 the association obtained a royal charter, and became 
known as " The Incorporated Society of Artists "; but much 
rivalry and jealousy were occasioned by the management of 
the various exhibitions, and an influential body of painters 
withdrew from the society. They had access to the young 
king, George III., who promised his patronage and help. In 
December 1768 the Royal Academy was founded, and Reynolds, 
whose adhesion to the movement was for a time doubtful, was 
hailed by acclamation its first president, an honour which more 
than compensated for his failure to obtain the appointment 
of king's painter, which, the previous year, had been bestowed 
on Allan Ramsay. In a few months the king signified his 
approval of the election by knighting the new president, and 
intimating that the queen and himself would honour him with 
sittings for portraits .to be presented to the Academy. 

Reynolds was in every way fitted for his new position, and 
till the late Lord Leighton the Academy never had so good a 
figure-head. He did not take any part in the educational work 
of the new institution, but on the social side he set the Academy 
on the lines it has followed with the greatest worldly success 
ever since. It was at his suggestion that the annual banquet 
was instituted. To the specified duties of his post he added 
the delivery of a presidential address at the distribution of the 
prizes, and his speeches on these occasions form the well-known 
" Discourses •" of Sir Joshua. These discourses alone would 
be sufficient to entitle their author to literary distinction; 
indeed, when they were first delivered, it was thought impossible 
that they could be the production of a painter, and Johnson 
and Burke have been credited with their composition, in spite 
of the specific denials of both, and of Dr Johnson's indignant 
exclamation — " Sir Joshua, sir, would as soon get me to paint 
for him as to write for him! " 

Sir Joshua was too prosperous and successful an artist 
altogether to escape the jealousy of his less fortunate or less 
capable brethren, and it must on the other side be admitted 
that his attitude towards some of his contemporaries was 
wanting in generosity. His relations with Gainsborough, who 
on his part was in fault, would require more space for discussion 
than can here be afforded, but he was not just either to Hogarth 
or to Richard Wilson. It may be added that though Reynolds's 
friends were genuinely fond of him, his was not a nature that 
could inspire or feel any great warmth of personal feeling. 
Cosmo Monkhouse in the Dictionary of National Biography 
speaks of " the beauty of his disposition and the nobility of 
his character," but adds: " he was a born diplomatist." The 
latter phrase gives the real key to his character. Without 
going so far as fully to endorse the sentiment of Mrs Thrale's 
famous line about a " heart too frigid " and a " pencil too 
warm," we must agree with a recent writer that the attitude 
of Reynolds towards his fellow men and women was one 
of detachment. Hence we regard Reynolds as a man with 
tempered admiration, and reserve our enthusiasm for his art. 
In 1784, on the death of Ramsay, Reynolds was appointed 
painter to the king. Two years previously he had suffered 
from a paralytic attack; but, after a month of rest, he was 
able to resume his painting with unabated energy and power. 
In the summer of 1789 his sight began to fail; he was affected 
by the gutta serena, but the progress of the malady was gradual, 
and he continued occasionally to practise his art till about the 
end of 1790, delivering his final discourse at the Academy on 
the 10th of December. He was still able to enjoy the companion- 
ship of his friends, and he exerted himself in an effort to raise 
funds for the erection of a monument in St Paul's to Dr 
Johnson, who had died in 1784. Towards the end of 1791 it 
was evident to the friends of Reynolds that he was gradually 
sinking. For a few months he suffered from extreme depres- 
sion of spirits, the result of a severe form of liver complaint, 
and on the 23rd of February 1792 this great artist and blameless 
gentleman passed peacefully away. 

As a painter Reynolds stands, with Gainsborough, just behind 
the very first rank. There can be no question of placing him by 



the side of the greatest Venetians or of the triumvirate of the 17th 
century, Rubens, Rembrandt, Velasquez; but, if he fail also to 
equal either Hals or Van Dyck, this is due, not to any defect in 
his natural capacity, but to deficiencies in his education combined 
with the absence in his case of that splendid artistic tradition on 
which the others leaned. He could not draw the figure properly; 
nor could he as a rule compose successfully on anything like a 
monumental scale. English painters in his early days possessed a 
sound technique, and most of Hogarth's best pictures are perfectly 
well preserved as well as beautifully painted but Reynolds was not 
content with the tried methods Hudson could have taught him. 
In the desire to compass that creaminess, that juicy opulence in 
colour and texture, of which he conceived the idea before the 
Italian journey, and which he found realized in the works of the 
Venetians and Correggio, he embarked on all sorts of fantastic 
experiments in pigments and media, so that Haydon exclaimed, 
" The wonder is that the picture did not crack beneath the brush! " 
The result was the speedy ruin of many of his own productions, 
and he inaugurated an era of uncertainty in method which seriously 
compromised the efforts of his successors in the English school. 

The motive for this procedure may explain if it do not justify 
it. He was all his life intensely in earnest about his art, devoured 
by what he himself calls " a perpetual desire to advance "; and he 
accounts for his own uncertainty partly from his want of training, 
and partly from his " inordinate desire to possess every kind of 
excellence " he saw in the works of others. Now if this mental 
energy led him into hazardous attempts to find a royal road to the 
painter's ideal, it acted well upon his design in lending to it a certain 
intellectual solidity, which gives it an advantage over the slighter, 
though at times more exquisite, productions of the pencils of 
Gainsborough or Romney. The weight and power of the art of 
Reynolds are best seen in those noble male portraits, " Lord Heath- 
field," " Johnson," " Sterne," " Goldsmith," " Gibbon," " Burke," 
",Fox," " Garrick,"J that are historical monuments as well as 
sympathetic works of art. In this category must be included his 
immortal " Mrs Siddons as the Tragic Muse." 

In portraits of this order Reynolds holds the field, but he is 
probably more generally admired for his studies of women and of 
children,. of which the Althorp^ portraits of the Spencer family are 
classic examples. Nature had singled out Sir Joshua to endow him 
with certain gifts in which he has hardly an equal. No portrait 
painter has been more happy in his poses for single figures, or has 
known better how to control by good taste the piquant, the acci- 
dental, the daring, in mien and gesture.^ "Viscountess Crosbie " 
is a striking instance. When dealing with more than one figure 
he was not always so happy, but the " Duchess of Devonshire 
and her Baby," the " Three Ladies decking a Figure of Hymen," 
and the " Three Ladies Waldegrave " are brilliant successes. He 
was felicitous too in his arrangement of drapery, often following 
his own fashion of investing his graceful dames in robes of ideal cut 
and texture, quite apart from the actual clothes worn at the time. 
Few painters, again, have equalled the president in dainty and at 
the same time firm manipulation of the brush. The richness of 
his deeper colouring is at times quite Venetian. For pure delight 
in the quality of paint and colour we cannot do better than go to 
the " Angels' Heads " of the National Gallery, or the " Nelly 
O'Brien " in the Wallace Collection. 

It corresponds with what has been noted as Reynolds's habit of 
mind in regard to older art to find him throughout his life hankering 
after success in what he was fond of calling the "grand style" 
in " historical painting." His failure here is as notorious as his 
brilliant success in the field of art for which nature had equipped 
him. His " Ugolino," his " Macbeth," his " Cardinal Beaufort," 
have no real impressiveness, while his greatest effort in the " his- 
toric " style, the " Infant Hercules " at St Petersburg, resulted in 
his most conspicuous disaster. 

It is in the " Discourses " that Reynolds unfolds these artistic 
theories that contrast so markedly with his own practice. The 
first discourse deals with the establishment of an academy for the 
fine arts, and of its value as being a repository of the traditions of 
the best of bygone practice, of " the principles which many artists 
have spent their lives in ascertaining." In the second lecture the 
study of the painter is divided into three stages, — in the first of 
which rte is busied with processes and technicalities, with the 
grammar of art, while in the second he examines what has been 
done by other artists, and in the last compares these results with 
Nature herself. In the third discourse Reynolds treats of " the 
great and leading principles of the grand style"; and succeeding 
addresses are devoted to such subjects as " Moderation," " Taste," 
" Genius," and " Sculpture." The fourteenth has an especial 
interest as containing a notice of Gainsborough, who had died 
shortly before its^deliveiy; while the concluding discourse is mainly 
occupied with a panegyric on Michelangelo. 

The other literary works of the president comprise his three essays 
in The Idler for 1 759-1 760 ("On the Grand Style in Painting," 
and " On the True Idea of Beauty "), his notes to Du Fresnoy^s 
Art of Painting, his Remarks on the Art of the Low Countries, his 
brief notes in Johnson's Shakespeare, and two singularly witty and 
brilliant fragments, imaginary conversations with Johnson, which 



REYNOLDS, W.— REZANOV 



were never intended by their author for publication, but, found 
among his papers after his death, were given to the world by his 
niece, the marchioness of Thomond. 

The president left to his niece, Mary Palmer, the bulk of his 
property, about £100,000, with works of art that sold for £30,000 
more. There were, besides, legacies amounting to about £15,000. 
His body rests in St Paul's. 

See Northcote, Memoirs of Sir Joshua Reynolds, Knight, &c. 
(1813), and Supplement thereto (1815); Farrington, Memoirs 
of the Life of Str Joshua Reynolds (1819); Cotton, Sir Joshua 
Reynolds and his Works (edited by Burnet, 1856); Leslie and 
Taylor, Life and Times of Sir Joshua Reynolds (2 vols., 1865); 
Redgrave, A Century of English Painters (1866), vol. i. ; Graves 
and Cronin, A History of the Works of Sir Joshua Reynolds, P.R.A. 
(4 vols., 1809-1901); Sir Walter Armstrong, Sir Joshua Reynolds, 
First President of the Royal Academy (1900; also a shorter work, 
1905); Lord Ronald Gower, Sir Joshua Reynolds (1902). For 
Reynolds's literary works, see Malone, The Works of Sir Joshua 
Reynolds, Knight (3 vols., 1798); Beechy, Literary Works of Sir 
Joshua Reynolds (1835); Leisehing, Sir J. Reynolds zur Aesthetik 
u. Technik der bildenden Kunste (Leipzig, 1893); Discourses delivered 
to the Students of the Royal Academy by Sir Joshua Reynolds, Kt., 
with introductions and notes by Roger Fry (1905). 

REYNOLDS, WALTER (d. 1327), archbishop of Canterbury, 
was the son of a Windsor baker, and became a clerk, or chaplain, 
in the service of Edward I. He held several livings and, owing 
perhaps to his histrionic skill, he became a prime favourite 
with the prince of Wales, afterwards Edward II. Just after 
the prince became king [in 1307 Reynolds was appointed 
treasurer of England; in 1308 he became bishop of Worcester 
and in 1310 chancellor. When Robert Winchelsea, archbishop 
of Canterbury, died in May 13 13 Edward II. prevailed upon 
Pope Clement V. to appoint his favourite to the vacant archbishop- 
ric, and Walter was enthroned at Canterbury in February 1314. 
Although the private life of the new archbishop appears to have 
been the reverse of exemplary he attempted to carry out some 
very necessary reforms in his new official capacity; he also 
continued the struggle for precedence, which had been carried 
on for many years between the archbishops of Canterbury and 
of York. In this connexion in 131 7 he laid London under 
an interdict after William de Melton (d. 1340), archbishop of 
York, had passed through its streets with his cross borne erect 
before him. Reynolds remained in general loyal to Edward II. 
until 1324, when with all his suffragans he opposed the king 
in defence of the bishop of Hereford, Adam of Orlton. In the 
events which concluded Edward's life and reign the archbishop 
played a contemptible part. Having fled for safety into Kent 
he returned to London and declared for Edward III., whom 
he crowned in February 1327. He died at Mortlake on the 
16th of November following. 

REZANOV, NICOLAI PETROVICH DE (1764-1807), 
Russian nobleman and administrator under Catherine II., 
Paul I. and Alexander L, was one of the ten barons of Russia, 
and, for his services to the empire, was rewarded with the court 
title of chamberlain. In 1803 he was made a privy councillor 
and invested with the order of St Ann. He was also the author 
of a lexicon of the Japanese language and of several other 
works, which are preserved in the library of the St Petersburg 
Academy of Sciences, of which he was a member. He was the 
first Russian ambassador to Japan (1804), and instigated the 
first attempt of Russia to circumnavigate the globe (1803), 
commanding the expedition himself as far as Kamchatka. But 
Rezanov's monument for many years after his death was the 
great Russian American Fur Company; and his interest to 
students of history centres round the policy involved in that 
enterprise, which, thwarted by his untimely death, would have 
changed the destinies of Russia and the United States. 

Meeting (in 1788) Shelikov, chief of the Shelikov-Golikov 
Fur Company, Rezanov became interested in the merchant's 
project to obtain a monopoly of the fur trade in those distant 
dependencies. Conscious of latent energies, and already tired 
of the pleasures of a dissolute court, he became a partner in 
the company, and rapidly developed into a keen and tireless 
man of business. At the death of Shelikov in 1795 he became 
the leading spirit of the wealthy and amalgamated but harassed 
companies, and resolved to obtain for himself and his partners 



229 

« 
privileges analogous to those granted by Great Britain to the 
East India Company. He had just succeeded in persuading 
Catherine to sign his charter when she died, and he was obliged 
to begin again with the ill-balanced and intractable Paul. For 
a time the outlook was hopeless; but Rezanov's skill, subtlety 
and address prevailed, and shortly before the assassination of 
the emperor Paul he obtained his signature to the momentous 
instrument which granted to the Russian-American Company, 
for a term of twenty years, dominion over the coast of N.W. 
America, from latitude $$ degrees northward; and over the 
chain of islands extending from Kamchatka northward and 
southward to Japan. This famous " Trust," which crowded out 
all the small companies and independent traders, was a source 
of large revenue to Rezanov and the other shareholders, includ- 
ing members of the Imperial family, until the first years of the 
19th century, when mismanagement and scarcity of nourishing 
food threatened it with serious losses if not ultimate ruin. 
Rezanov, his humiliating embassy to Japan conclude^, reached 
Kamchatka in 1805, and found commands awaiting him to 
remain in the Russian colonies as Imperial inspector and 
plenipotentiary of the company, and to correct the abuses that 
were ruining the great enterprise. He travelled slowly to 
Sitka by way of the Islands, establishing measures to protect 
the fur-bearing animals from reckless slaughter, punishing or 
banishing the worst offenders against the company's laws, and 
introducing the civilizing influence of schools and libraries, 
most of the books being his personal gifts. He even established 
cooking schools, which flourished briefly. 

At the end of a winter in Sitka, the headquarters of the 
company, during which he half-starved with the others, he 
bought a ship from a Yankee skipper and sailed for tbe Spanish 
settlements in California, purposing to trade his tempting cargo 
of American and Russian wares for food-stuffs, and to arrange 
a treaty by whose terms his colonies should be provisioned twice 
a year with the bountiful products of New Spain. He cast 
anchor in the harbour of San Francisco early in April 1806, 
after a stormy voyage which had defeated his intention to take 
possession of the Columbia river in the name of Russia. Although 
he was received with great courtesy and entertained night and 
day by the gay Californians, no time was lost in informing him 
that the laws of Spain forbade her colonies to trade with foreign 
powers, and that the governor of all the Californias was in- 
corruptible. Rezanov, had it not been for a love affair with 
the daughter of the comandante of San Francisco, Don Jose 
Arguello, and for his personal address and diplomatic skill, 
with which he won over the clergy to his cause, would have 
failed again. As it was, when he sailed for Sitka, six weeks 
after his arrival, the " Juno's " hold was full of bread-stuffs and 
dried meats, he had the promise of the perplexed governor to 
forward a copy of the treaty to Spain at once, and he was 
affianced to the most beautiful girl in California. Shortly after 
his arrival in Sitka he proceeded by water to Kamchatka, 
where he despatched bis ships to wrest the island Sakhalen of 
the lower Kurile group from Japan, then started overland for 
St Petersburg to obtain the signature of the tsar to the treaty, 
and also personal letters to the pope and king of Spain that he 
might ask for the dispensation and the royal consent necessary 
to his marriage. He died of fever and exhaustion in Krasnoiarsk , 
Siberia, on the 8th of March 1807. 

The treaty with California, the bare suggestion of which made 
such a commotion in New Spain, was the least of Rez&nov's 
projects. It was sincerely conceived, for he was deeply and 
humanely concerned for his employees and the wretched natives 
who were little more than the slaves of the company; but its 
very obviousness raised the necessary amount of dust. His 
correspondence with the company, and with Zapinsky, betrays 
a clearly defined purpose to annex to Russia the entire western 
coast of North America, and to encourage immediate emigra- 
tion from the parent country on a large scale. Had he lived, 
there is, all things considered, hardly a doubt that he would 
have accomplished his object. The treaty was never signed, 
the reforms of Rezanov died of discouragement, the fortunes of 






230 



RHACIS— RHAETIC 



the colonies gradually collapsed, the Spanish girl who had loved 
Rezanov became a nun; and one of the ablest and most ambitious 
men of his time lies forgotten in the cemetery of a poor Siberian 
town. 

See Bancroft's History of California, and Alaska; Tikmenev's 
Historical Review of the Origin of the Russian American Company; 
Rezdnoy-Zapisky Correspondence ; Travels of Krusenstern and Langs- 
ford, &c. (G. A.*) 

RHACIS, or Rachis (Gr. pdxts, a backbone), in botany 
the axis of an inflorescence or of a branched leaf; in zoology, 
the stem of a feather, as opposed to the vesillum, or web. 

RHADAMANTHUS (Gr. Rhadamanthys), in Greek mytho- 
logy, son of Zeus and Europa and brother of Minos, king of 
Crete. Driven out of Crete by his brother, who was jealous 
of his popularity, he fled to Boeotia, where he wedded Alcmene. 
Homer represents him as dwelling in the Elysian fields (Odyssey, 
iv. 564). According to later legends, on account of his in- 
flexible integrity he was made one of the judges of the dead in 
the lower world, together with Aeacus and Minos. He was 
supposed to judge the souls of Asiatics, Aeacus those of Euro- 
peans, while Minos had the casting vote (Plato, Gorgias, 424A). 

RHAETIC (Fr. Rhetien or Rheztien; Ger. Rhat or Rhatisch; 
It. Retico), in geology, the assemblage of rocks classed by most 
English and German authorities in the Triassic system, and by 
Imost French geologists placed at the base of the Lias, in the 
Jurassic system. It has been called the Infra-Lias. This 
diversity of opinion is due to the fact that the Rhaetic formation 
presents the characters of a group of passage-beds, uniting 
certain features of the Trias with others of the Jurassic system ; 
none the less, it has sufficient individuality to be recognized 
with tolerable certainty over a wide area in Europe and beyond. 
The name Rhaetic was first applied by C. W. Giimbel to the 
strata of this horizon in the Rhaetic Alps, where they are 
thickly developed and in parts fossiliferous. The labours of 
E. V. Mojsisovic and E. Suess have demonstrated that in the 
Alpine Rhaetic several distinct facies may be recognized, viz. 
a Swabian facies: shore and lagoon deposits with a pelecypod 
fauna, poor in species but rich in individuals; a Carpathian 
facies with corals, algae, Terebratula gregaria and Plicatula 
intusstrtata, exemplified in the upper part .of the Dachstein 
limestone; a Kossener facies: black limestones and marls, 
with a brachiopod fauna in which Spirigera oxycolposis very 
noticeable; and a Salzburg facies, characterized by pelagic 
pelecypods and some ammonites (see table in Triassic System). 
The whole of the Rhaetic falls within Mojsisovic's zone of Avicula 
contorta. This epoch is marked off from the earlier Triassic 
period by a very general marine transgression which proceeded 
with minor irregularities and retrogressions over the whole area, 
until at its close it was followed by the more decided trans- 
gression which indicates the commencement of the Lias. 

Among the marine fossils of the Rhaetic, Avicula contorta, 
the principal zone form, is very characteristic and has a wide 
range; Myophoria inflata, Modlola mlnuta, Protocardium 
rhaetlcum and Terebratula gregaria are common species. True 
belemonites make their first appearance. Corals, Thecosmilia, 
&c, are common in some districts. Plant remains are abundant 
in certain areas, and in places give rise to beds of lignite and 
coal. The flora is more nearly akin to that of the Trias than 
to that of the Jurassic rocks. Vertebrate remains are fairly 
abundant in the form of teeth, isolated bones, scales and 
coprolites in what are known as " Bone Beds " (q.v.). These 
beds are a very characteristic feature; they occur on several 
horizons in many tracts of the European Rhaetic, and recur in 
beds of this age in America. In England there is usually a 
bone bed about the base of the formation; in Germany one 
occupies a similar position; a second occurs less constantly 
about the middle, and in the Wurttemberg district a third bed 
separates the Rhaetic and Lias, and constitutes the well-known 
manure bed of Bebenhausen. In these beds are found the 
bones of Ichthyosaurus and Pliosaurus, anticipating their great 
development in the Lias, while the remains of Belodon and 
Mystriosuchus serve to link this epoch with Triassic stego- 



cephalian reptiles. Several coleopterous insects have been 
found in the same beds, but the most interesting feature of 
the bone-bed fauna is the first appearance in the northern 
hemisphere of true mammals: Microlestes in England and 
Wurttemberg, Triglyphus in Wurttemberg, Dromatherium and 
Microconodon in America. 

In England the Rhaetic formation occurs as a thin but constant 
series of beds at the base of the Lias and above the Keuper marls. 
The upper part, often called the " White Lias," is a series of thin- 
bedded shales, limestone and marls, 1 to 2£ ft. thick; the lower 
portion consists mainly of dark shales, sometimes with very perfect 
lamination — "paper shales." Below there are beds of grey and 
M tea-green " marls which are now usually regarded as the topmost 
Keuper beds, but they have often been included in the Rhaetic 
formation (see Keuper). The best exposures in Britain are those 
between Penarth Head and Cavernock Point, Aust Cliff and Garden 
Cliff near Westbury-on-Severn, and Wainlode Cliff between Tewkes- 
bury and Gloucester. From their excellent development near 
Penarth the Rhaetic beds have long been known in England as the 
penarth Beds (H. W. Bristow, 1864). The more prominent beds 
in the White Lias of the west of England and Glamorganshire are 
the Estheria beds and the insect limestone or Pseudomonotis-bed, 
and on both of these horizons the limestone may assume the peculiar 
characters of landscape marble, sometimes called Cotham marble, 
from Cotham House near Bristol. A hard fine-grained limestone, 
known locally as the Sun-bed, occurs at the top of the series near 
Bath and Radstock; at Street, Wedmore and south of the Mendips 
generally it is called Jew stone. Wedmore stone is a tough, shelly 
and sandy limestone in the black shales at Wedmore, near Wells; 
it is employed in the neighbourhood as a building stone. North of 
Somersetshire the White Lias is poorly represented ; in Glamorgan- 
shire it appears between Cardiff and Pyle, west of Bridgend and at 
Sutton and Southerndown. Rhaetic beds have been traced at 
Market Drayton, Salop ; near Audlem, Cheshire ; Rugby and 
Stratford-on- Avon ^ in Warwickshire ; Wigston in Leicestershire ; 
Needham Forest in Staffordshire, and in Nottinghamshire and 
Yorkshire as far as the coast. They have not yet been proved 
beneath the Lias of Cumberland. Rhaetic fossils have been found 
in great numbers in fissures in the Carboniferous limestone of the 
Mendips. On the western side of Scotland Rhaetic rocks occur at 
Appleeross, Ardnamurehan, Morven, Mull, Raasay and Skye. In 
Sutherlandshire sandstone and conglomerate and large transported 
masses occur; one of them, atLinksfield, carries a bone bed. Here 
the black shales of the English type fail; sandstones with coaly 
layers and yellowish-grey crystalline and oolitic limestones take 
their place. In Antrim a small outcrop of black shales with Avicula 
contorta occurs near Port Rush. 

On the European continent the Rhaetic rocks are most thickly 
developed in the Alpine regions; and, as in the case of the older 
Triassic formations, calcareous and dolomitic strata predominate 
here and in the Mediterranean province. In the Alpine district 
the main divisions are the Rhaetic Dachstein limestone and the 
Kossener beds; shales, marls and limestones. In tile northern 
tract the following subdivisions have been recognized in descending 
order: beds with Choristeceros Marschi; Starhem passage beds; 
Rhynchonella fissicostata beds; Lithodendron limestone; beds with 
Terebratula gregaria; beds with Avicuta contorta; " Plat ten Kalk " 
with Rhynchonella alpina. In the southern tract the subdivisions 
are: Conchodus dolomite (Conchodus infraliassicus—Lycodius 
cor.), Lithodendron limestone, Azzarola beds, Contorta marls, 
11 Plattenkalk." Much limestone is of the " reef " type. In 
Germany the rocks are mainly fine, clean yellow sands, suggesting 
littoral or dune conditions, with bituminous clays and maris. The 
formation is often missing in south-west Germany. Similar beds 
occur in Lorraine and Luxembourg (gres de Vic, gres de K6dange, gres 
de Mortinsart). In Cotentin are dolomitic sandstones and marl; 
round the central plateau of France the rocks are coarse sands, ' 
arkoses, and conglomerates; while in the south of France the sandy 
and calcareous facies occur intermixed. In Spain limestones and 
dolomites occur up to 100 metres in thickness; in Portugal sandy 
beds recur. The Rhaetic of Scania, south Sweden, consists mainly of 
sandstone and shales with beds of coal up to one metre thick. Only 
the upper beds contain marine fossils; the bulk of the formation is 
of lacustrine or estuarine origin, with j>lant remains and insects. 
In Italy the formation is well developed in the north and at Rotzo, 
Spezzia and Carrara; and yields the famous statuary marble and 
the black variety known as portor. Rhaetic beds have been re- 
cognized in Sardinia, Corsica, Sicily, in the Balkan Peninsula and 
Greece; in AsiaNMinor, Afghanistan, Turkistan, Persia, Siberia and • 
India (limestones and dolomites of Niti and the Mahaveda beds, 
sandstones and conglomerates, nearly 10,000 feet thick in Satpura); 
in China, Japan and Tongking (with coal beds). In Australasia 
the Wianamatta beds of New South Wales, the Bellarine beds of 
Victoria, the Ipswich and Tivoli beds of Queensland, and the 
Jerusalem beds of Tasmania, and beds on a similar horizon in New 
Zealand, have been regarded as equivalents of the Rhaetic. In 
Africa the Stormberg beds of the Karoo series and the Molteno beds 



RHAMNUS PURSHIANA— RHEA 



231 



of the Cape have been assigned to this epoch. In America Rhaetic 
rocks are recognized in N. Carolina, Connecticut, California, Mexico, 
Bolivia and Chile; the formation is also recorded from Spitzbergen, 
Franz Joseph Land and elsewhere in the Arctic regions. 

For the English Rhaetic see L. Richardson, " The Rhaetic Rocks 
of North-west Gloucestershire," Proc. Cotteswold Club, xiv. p. 127 
(Glos. 1901-1903). (J. A. H.) 

RHAMNUS PURSHIANA, or Californian buckthorn, a plant 
the bark of which is used in medicine under the name of cascara 
sagrada. An active principle anthra-gluco-sagradin has been 
isolated by Tschirch. The preparations of it contained in the 
British pharmacopoeia are: (1) Extractum cascarae sagradae 
(extractum rhamni purshianae, United States pharmacopoeia), 
dose 2 to 8 grs.; (2) Extractum cascarae sagradae liquidum, dose 
i to 1 fl. dr. From the latter is prepared syrupus cascarae 
aromaticus, dose J to 2 fl. dr. In this preparation the bitter 
taste of the cascara sagrada is disguised by the addition of 
tincture of orange, cinnamon water and syrup. In the United 
States pharmacopoeial preparation Fluid extraction rhamni, 
purshianae aromaticum, does 10 to 30 minims, the taste is 
similarly obscured. Cascara sagrada is one of the most useful 
of all laxatives, since not only does it empty the bowel of faecal 
matter, but it acts as a tonic to the intestine and tends to pre- 
vent future constipation. It is largely used in the treatment 
of chronic constipation. A single full dose of the liquid extract 
may be taken at bedtime, or divided doses, 10 to 15 minims, 
three times a day before meals. When a strong purgative is 
required some drug other than cascara sagrada should be 
employed, but its use in gradually decreasing doses is indicated 
after evacuation has been effected by podophyllin or rhubarb. 
Cascara sagrada is the principal constituent of most of the 
proprietary laxatives on the market. 

RHAMPSINlTUS, a Greek corruption of Ra-messu-pa-neter, 
the popular name of Rameses III., king of Egypt of the XXth 
Dynasty. He is well known in connexion wifch t]ie story of 
his treasure house told by Herodotus (ii. 121), which greatly 
resembles that of Agamedes and Trophonius. (See Egypt, 
History.) 

RHANKAVES (commonly also Rhangabe), ALEXANDROS 
RHIZOS(i8io-i8q2), Greek savant, poet and statesman, was born 
at Constantinople of a Phanariot family on the 25th of December 
1810. He was educated at Odessa and the military school at 
Munich. Having served as an officer of artillery in the Bavarian 
army, he returned to Greece, where he held several high educa- 
tional and administrative appointments. He subsequently 
became ambassador at Washington (1867), Paris (1868), and 
Berlin (1874-1886), and was one of the Greek plenipotentiaries 
at the congress of 1878. After his recall he lived at Athens, 
where he died on the 29th of June 1892. He was the chief 
representative of a school of literary men whose object was to 
restore as far as possible the ancient classical language. Of 
his various works, Hellenic Antiquities (1842-1855, of great 
value for epigraphical purposes), Archaeologia (1865-1866), an 
illustrated Archaeological Lexicon (1888-1891),- and & History 
of Modern Greek Literature (1877) are of the most interest to 
scholars. He wrote also the following dramatic pieces: The 
Marriage of Kutrules (comedy), Dttkas (tragedy), the Thirty 
Tyrants, The Eve (of the Greek revolution); the romances, 
The Prince of Morea, Leila, and The Notary of Argostoli) and 
translated portions of Dante, Schiller, Lessing, Goethe and 
Shakespeare. 

A complete edition of his philological works in nineteen volumes was 
published at Athens (1874-1890), and his *A7roM*^7Mo»'^'" - a(Memoirs) 
appeared posthumously in 1894-1895. 

RHAPSODIST (Gk. Rhapsodos), originally an epic poet who 
recited his own poetry; then, one who recited the poems 
of others (see Homer). 

RHATANY or KRAMERIA ROOT, in medicine, the dried 
root either of Para rhatany or of Peruvian rhatany. The 
action of rhatany is due to the rhatania-tannic acid, and re- 
sembles that of tannic acid, being a powerful astringent. An 
infusion is used as a gargle for relaxed throats; and lozenges, 
particularly those containing rhatany and cocaine, are useful 



in similar cases. Like tannic acid, the powdered extract may 
be applied as a local haemostatic. All preparations of rhatany 
taken internally are powerful astringents in diarrhoea and 
intestinal haemorrhage. 

RHAYADER (Rhaiadr-Gwy), a market town of Radnorshire, 
Wales, situated amid wild and beautiful scenery on the left 
bank of the Wye, about i£ m. above its confluence with the 
Elan. Pop. (1901) 1215. Rhayader is a station on the 
Cambrian railway. A stone bridge over the Wye connects 
the town with the village and parish church of Cwmdauddwr. 
Rhayader has for some centuries been an important centre for 
Welsh mutton and wool, and its sheep fairs are largely attended 
by drovers and buyers from all parts. Near Rhayader are the 
large ^ reservoirs constructed (1895) by the corporation of 
Birmingham in the Elan and Claerwen valleys. 

Rhayader, built close to the Falls of the Wye (whence its name), 
owes its early importance to the castle erected here by Prince Rhys 
'ap Griffith ol South Wales, c. 1178, in order to check the English 
advance up the Wye Valley. Seized by the invaders, castle and 
town were later retaken in 1231 by Prince Llewelyn ap Iorwerth, 
who burned the fortress and slew its garrison. Scarcely a trace of 
the castle exists, although its site near St Clement's church is locally 
known as Tower Hill. With the erection of Maesyfed into the shire 
of Radnor in 1536 Rhayader was named as assize-town for the 
newly formed county in conjunction with New Radnor; but in 1542, 
on account of a local riot, the town was deprived of this privilege in 
favour of Presteign. Rhayader constituted one ol the group of 
boroughs comprising the Radnor parliamentary district until the 
Redistribution Act of 1885. 

RHEA, a goddess of the Greeks known in mythology as the 
daughter of Uranus and Gaia, the sister and consort of Kronos, 
and the mother of Zeus. In Homer she is the mother of 
the gods, though not a universal mother like Cybele, the 
Phrygian Great Mother, with whom she was later identified. 
The original seat of her worship was in Crete. There, according 
to legend, she saved the new-born Zeus, her sixth child, from 
being devoured by Kronos by substituting a stone for him and 
entrusting the infant god to the care of her attendants the Curetes 
(g.v.). These attendants afterwards * became the bodyguard 
of Zeus and the priests of Rhea, and performed ceremonies in 
her honour. In historic times the resemblances between Rhea 
and the Asiatic Great Mother, Phrygian Cybele, were so notice- 
able that the Greeks accounted for them by regarding the latter 
as only their own Rhea, who had deserted her original home 
in Crete and fled to the mountain wilds of Asia Minor to escape 
the persecution of Kronos (Strabo 469, 12). The reverse view 
was also held (Virgil, Aen. iii. in), and it is probably true 
that a stock of Asiatic origin formed part of the primitive 
population of Crete and brought with them the worship of 
the Asiatic Great Mother, who became the Cretan Rhea. (See 
Great Mother of the Gods.) (G. Sn.) 

RHEA, the name given in 1752 by P. H. G. Mohring 1 to a 
South American bird which, though long before known and 
described by the earlier writers — Nieremberg, Marcgrav and 
Piso (the last of whom has a recognizable but rude figure of 
it) — had been without any distinctive scientific appellation. 
Adopted a few years later by M. J. Brisson, the name has since 
passed into general use, especially among English authors, for 
what their predecessors had called the American ostrich; but 
on the European continent the bird is commonly called Nandu* 
a word corrupted from a name it is said to have borne among 
the aboriginal inhabitants of Brazil, where the Portuguese 
settlers called it ema (see Emeu). The resemblance of the rhea 
to the ostrich (q.v.) was at once perceived, but the differences 
between them are also very evident. The former, for instance, 
has three instead of two toes on each foot, it has no apparent 
tail, its wings are far better developed, and when folded cover 
the body, and its head and neck are clothed with feathers, while 
internal distinctions of still deeper significance have since been 

1 What prompted his bestowal of this name, so well known in 
classical mythology, is not apparent. 

2 Jhe name Touyou, also of South American origin, was applied 
to it by Brisson and others, but erroneously, as Cuvier shows, 
since by that name, or something like it, the jabiru (q.v.) is properly 
meant. 






232 



RHEINBERGER 



dwelt upon by T. H. Huxley {Proc. Zool. Society, 1867, pp. 420- 
422) and W. A. Forbes {op. cit., 1881, pp. 784-87). There can 
be little doubt that they should be regarded as types of as many 
orders — Struthiones and Rheae — of the subclass Ratitae. Struc- 
tural characters no less important separate the rheas from 
the emeus; the former can be readily recognized by the rounded 
form of their contour-feathers, which want the hyporrhachis 
or after-shaft that in the emeus and cassowaries is so long as 
to equal the main shaft, and contributes to give these latter 
groups the appearance of being covered with shaggy hair. The 
feathers of the rhea have a considerable market value, and for 
the purpose of trade in them it is annually killed by thousands, 
so that 1 its total extinction as a wild animal is probably only 
a question of time. It is polygamous, and the male performs 
the duty of incubation, brooding more than a score of eggs, 
the produce of several females — facts known to Nieremberg 




?J$«V^r ^ J^^ 



Rhea. 

more than two hundred and fifty years since, but hardly accepted 
by naturalists until recently. No examples of this bird seem 
to have been brought to Europe before the beginning of the 
present century, and accordingly the descriptions previously 
given of it by systematic writers were taken at second hand and 
were mostly defective if not misleading. In 1803 J. Latham 
issued a wretched figure of the species from a half-grown speci- 
men in the Leverian Museum, and twenty years later said he 
had seen only one other, and that still younger, in Bullock's 
collection {Gen. Hist. Birds, viii. p. 379). 2 A bird living in con- 
finement at Strassburg in 1806 was, however, described and 
figured by Hammer in 1808 {Ann. du Museum, xii. pp. 427- 

1 J. E. Harting^in his and De Mosenthal's Ostriches and Ostrich 
Farming, from which the woodcut here introduced is by permission 
copied, gives (pp. 67-72) some portentous statistics of the destruc- 
tion of rheas for the sake of their feathers, which, he says, are 
known in the trade as " Vautour " to distinguish them from those 
of the African bird. 

2 The ninth edition of the Companion to this collection (1810, 
p. 121) states that the specimen " was brought alive " [?to England]. 



433 j pl- 39)- I Q England the Report of the Zoological Society 
for 1833 announced the rhea as having been exhibited for the 
first time in its gardens during the preceding twelvemonth. 
Since then many other living examples have been introduced, 
and it has bred both there and in many private parks in Britain. 

Though considerably smaller than the ostrich, and wanting 
its fine plumes, the rhea in general aspect far more resembles 
that bird than the other Ratitae. The feathers of the head and 
neck, except on the crown and nape, where they are dark brown, 
are dingy white, and those of the body ash-coloured tinged with 
brown, while on the breast they are brownish-black, and on the 
belly and thighs white. In the course of the memorable voyage 
of the " Beagle," C. Darwin came to hear of another kind of 
rhea, called by his informants Avestruz petise, and at Port 
Desire on the east coast of Patagonia he obtained an example 
of it, the imperfect skin of which' enabled J. Gould to descrihe 
it {Proc. Zool. Society, 183.7, p. $5) as a second species of the 
genus, naming it after its discoverer. Rhea darwini differs 
in several well-marked characters from the earlier known 
R. americana. Its bill is shorter than its head; its tarsi are 
reticulated instead of scutellated in front, with the upper part 
feathered instead of being bare; and the plumage of its body 
and wings is very different, each feather being tipped with a 
distinct whitish band, while that of the head and neck is greyish- 
brown. A further distinction is also asserted to be shown by 
the eggs— -those of R. americana being of a yellowish-white, 
while those of R. darwini have a bluish tinge. Some years 
afterwards P. L. Sclater described {op. cit., i860, p. 207) a third 
and smaller species, closely resembling the R. americana, but 
having apparently a longer bill, whence he named it R. macro- 
rhyncha, more slender tarsi, and shorter toes, while its general 
colour is very much darker, the body and wings being of a 
brownish-grey mixed with black. The precise geographical 
range of these three species is still undetermined. While R. 
americana is known to extend from Paraguay and southern 
Brazil through the La Plata region to an uncertain distance in 
Patagonia, R. darwini seems to be the proper inhabitant of the 
country last named, though M. Claraz asserts {op. cit., 1885, 
p. 324) that it is occasionally found to the northward of the Rio 
Negro, which had formerly been regarded as its limit, and, 
moreover, that flocks of the two species commingled may be 
very frequently seen in the district between that river and the 
Rio Colorado. On the " pampas " ■ R. americana is said to 
associate with herds of deer {Cariacus campestris), and R. 
darwini to be the constant companion of guanacos {Lama 
huanaco) — just as in Africa the ostrich seeks the society of 
zebras and antelopes. As for R. macrorhyncha, it was found by 
W. A. Forbes {Ibis, 1881, pp. 360, 361) to inhabit the dry and 
open " sertoes " of north-eastern Brazil, a discovery the more 
interesting since it was in that part of the country that Marcgrav 
and Piso became acquainted with a bird of this kind, though the 
existence of any species of rhea in the district had been long 
overlooked by or unknown to succeeding travellers. 

Besides the works above named and those of other recognized 
authorities on the ornithology of South America such as Azara, 
Prince Max of Wied, Professor Burmeister and others, more cr less 
valuable information on the subject is to be found in Darwin's 
Voyage, Dr Booking's " Monographic des Nandu " in (Wieg- 
mann's) Archiv fiir Naturgeschichte (1863, i. pp. 213-41); R. O. 
Cunningham's Natural History of the Strait of Magellan and paper 
in the Zoological Society's Proceedings for 187 1 (pp. 105-110), 
as well as H. F. Gadow's still more important anatomical 
contributions in the same journal for 1885 (pp. 308 seq.). 

(A. N.) 

RHEINBERGER, JOSEPH GABRIEL (1830-1901), German 
composer, was born at Vaduz, Liechtenstein, on the 17th of 
March 1839, His musical abilities were manifested so early 
that he was appointed organist of the parish church when he was 
but seven years old. A three-part Mass composed by him was 
performed in the following year. He was taught at first by 
Philipp Schmutzer, choir director at Feldkirch; he entered the 
Munich Conservatorium in 1851, and remained there till 1854 



RHEINE— RHETORIC 



233 



as a pupil of Professor E. Leonhard for piano, Professor Herzog 
for organ and J. J. Maier for counterpoint. After leaving the 
school he had private lessons from Franz Lachner, and was 
appointed a professor in the conservator! um in succession to 
Leonhard in 1859. In i860 he became professor of composition, 
and was appointed organist of the Michelskirche, a post he held 
till 1866. In 1877 he succeeded Wiillner as Hofkapellmeister, 
and from that time his attention was largely devoted to sacred 
music. His compositions include works of importance in every 
form, from the operas Die sieben Raben (Munich, 1869) and 
Tiirmers Tochterlein (Munich, 1873) an ^ tne oratorio Christo- 
forus, op. i2o ; to the well-known quartet for piano and strings 
in E flat, op. 38, the nonet for wind and strings, op. 139, and 
the seventeen organ sonatas, which form notable additions 
to the literature of the instrument. He died in November 
1901. 

RHEINE, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Westphalia, situated on the Ems, at the point where it becomes 
navigable, 29 m. W. by rail of Osnabriick, and at the junction 
of main lines to Minister, Rotterdam and Emden. Pop. (1905) 
12,801. It is an old-fashioned town with a pronounced Dutch 
aspect, and has pretty gardens and promenades. Rheine is the 
seat of cotton industries, has manufactures of jute, machinery, 
tobacco and flour, and a considerable river trade in agricultural 
produce. It received municipal rights in 1327. About a mile 
north of Rheine is the castle of Bentlage, the family seat of the 
princes of Rheina-Wolbeck. 

RHENANUS, BEATUS (1485-1547), German humanist, was 
born in 1485 at Schlettstadt in Alsace, where his father, named 
Bild, a native of Rheinau (hence the surname Rhenanus), was a 
prosperous butcher. He received his early education at the 
famous Latin school of Schlettstadt, and afterwards (1503) went 
to Paris, where he came under the influence of Jacobus Faber 
Stapulensis, an eminent. Aristotelian. In 151 1 he removed to 
Basel, where he became intimate with Desiderius Erasmus, and 
took an active share in the publishing enterprises of Joannes 
Froben (q.v.). In 1526 he returned to Schlettstadt, and devoted 
himself to a life of learned leisure, enlivened with epistolary 
and personal intercourse with Erasmus (the printing of whose 
more important works he personally superintended) and many 
other scholars of his time. He died at Strassburg on the 20th of 
July 1547. 

His earliest publication was a biography of Geiler of Kaisers- 
berg (15 10). Of his subsequent works the principal arc Rerum 
Germanicarum Libri III. (1531), and editions of Velleius Pater- 
cuius (ed. princeps, from a MS. discovered by himself, 1522); 
Tacitus (1519, exclusive of the Histories); Livius (1535); and 
Erasmus (with a life, 9 vols, fol., 1540-41). 

See A. Horawitz, Bealus Rhenanus (1872), and by the same, 
Des Beatus Rhenanus literarische Tdtigkeit (2 vols., 1872); also the 
notice by R. Hartfelder in Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie. 

RHETICUS, or Rhaeticus (1514-1576), a surname given to 
George Joachim, German astronomer and mathematician, 
from his birth at Feldkirch in that part of Tirol which was 
anciently the territory of the Rhaeti. Born on the 15th of 
February 1514, he studied at Tiguri with Oswald Mycone, and 
afterwards went to Wittenberg where he was appointed pro- 
fessor of mathematics in 1537. Being greatly attracted by the 
new Copernican theory, he resigned the professorship in 1539, 
and went to Frauenberg to associate himself with Copernicus 
(q.v.), and superintended the printing of the De Orbium Revolu- 
tione which he had persuaded Copernicus to complete. Rheticus 
now began his great treatise, Opus Palatinum de Triangulis, 
and continued to work at it while he occupied his old chair at 
Wittenberg, and indeed up to his death at Cassovia in Hungary, 
on the 4th of December 1576. The Opus Palatinum of Rheticus 
was published by Valentine Otho, mathematician to the electoral 
prince palatine, in 1596. It gives tables of sines and cosines, 
tangents, &c, for every 10 seconds, calculated to ten places. 
He had projected a table of the same kind to fifteen places, but 
did not live to complete it. The sine table, however, was 
afterwards published on this scale under the name of Thesaurus 



Mathematicus (Frankfort, 1613) by B. Pitiscus (1561-1613), 
who himself carried the calculation of a few of the earlier sines 
to twenty- two places. He also published Narratio de Libris 
Revolutionum Copemici (Gedenum, 1540), which was subse- 
quently added to editions of Copernicus's works; and Ephemer- 
ides until 1551, which were founded on the Copernican doctrines. 
He projected numerous other works, as is shown by a letter to 
Peter Ramus in 1568, which Adrian Romanus inserted in the 
preface to his Idea of Mathematics. 

RHETORIC (Gr. ^ropi^ rkxn, the art of the orator), the 
art of using language in such a way as to produce a desired 
impression upon the hearer or reader. The object is strictly 
persuasion rather than intellectual approval or conviction; 
hence the term, with its adjective " rhetorical," is commonly 
used for a 'speech or writing in which matter is subservient 
to form or display. So in grammar, a " rhetorical question " is 
one which is asked not for the purpose of obtaining an, answer, 
but simply for dramatic effect. The power of eloquent speech 
is recognized in the earliest extant writings. Homer describes 
Achilles as a " speaker of words, as well as a doer of deeds ": 
Nestor, Menelaus and Odysseus are all orators as well as states- 
men and soldiers. Again the brilliant eloquence of Pericles is 
the theme of Aristophanes and Eupolis. Naturally the influ- 
ence wielded by the great orators led to an investigation of 
the characteristics of successful rhetoric, and especially from the 
time of Aristotle the technique of the art ranked among the 
recognized branches of learning. 

A lost work of Aristotle is quoted by Diogenes Laertius 
(viii. 57) as saying that Empedocles " invented " (evpeiv) 
rhetoric; Zeno, dialectic (i.e. logic, the art of making a logical 
argument, apart from the style). This is certainly not to be 
understood as meaning that Empedocles composed the first 
" art " of rhetoric. It is rather to be explained by Aristotle's 
own remark, cited by Laertius from another lost treatise, that 
Empedocles was " a master of expression and skilled in the use 
of metaphor " — qualities which may have found scope in his 
political oratory, when, after the fall of^Thrasydaeus in 472 B.C., 
he opposed the restoration of a tyranny at Agrigentum. The 
founder of rhetoric as an art was Corax of Syracuse Bariy 
(c. 466 B.C.). In 466 a democracy was established Greek . 
in Syracuse. One of the immediate consequences rhetoric 
was a mass of litigation on claims to property, urged — Corax ' 
by democratic exiles who had been dispossessed by 
Thrasybulus, Hiero or Gelo. Such claims, going many years 
back, would often require that a complicated series of details 
should be stated and arranged. It would also, in many instances, 
lack documentary support, and rely chiefly on inferential 
reasoning. Hence the need of professional advice. The facts 
known as to the " art " of Corax perfectly agree with these 
conditions. He gave rules for arrangement, dividing the 
speech into five parts— proem, narrative, arguments (ay&vei), 
subsidiary remarks (irapeKpaats) and peroration. Next he 
illustrated the topic of general probability (ei*6s), The 
showing its two-edged use: e.g. f if a puny man is topic 
accused of assaulting a stronger, he can say, " Is it •/««*• 
likely that I should have attacked him?" If vice versa, 
the strong man can argue, " Is it likely that I should have * 
committed an assault where the presumption was sure to be 
against me?" This topic of ekfe, in its manifold forms, was in 
fact the great weapon of the earliest Greek rhetoric. It was 
further developed by Tisias, the pupil of Corax, as we 
see from Plato's Phaedrus, in an " art " of rhetoric 
which antiquity possessed, but of which we know little else. 
Aristotle gives the elicds a place among the topics of the fallacious 
enthymeme which he enumerates in Rhet. ii. 24, remarking 
that it was the very essence of the treatise of Corax; he points 
out the fallacy of omitting to distinguish between abstract and 
particular probability, quoting the verses of Agatho, — " Perhaps 
one might call this very thing a probability, that many im- 
probable things will happen to men." Gorgias (q.v.) 
of Leontini captivated the Athenians in 427 B.C. by 
his oratory (Diod. xii. 53), which, so far as we can judge, was 

xxm, 8 a 



234 



RHETORIC 



Anth 
phoa. 



characterized by florid antithesis, expressed in short jerky 
sentences. But he has no definite place in the development of 
rhetoric as a system. It is doubtful whether he left a written 
"art"; and his mode of teaching was based on learning 
prepared passages by heart, — diction (Xe&s), not invention or 
arrangement, being his great object. 

The first extant Greek author who combined the theory with 
the practice of rhetoric is the Athenian Antiphon (q.v.), the 
first of the Attic orators, and the earliest representative 
at Athens of a new profession created by the new 
art of rhetoric — that of the \oyoyp6.<t>os, the writer of 
forensic speeches for other men to speak in court. His speeches 
show tbe art of rhetoric in its transition from the technical to 
the practical stage, from the school to the law court and the 
assembly. The organic lines of the rhetorical pleader's thought 
stand out in bold relief, and we are enabled to form a clear 
notion of the logographer's method. We find a striking illustra- 
tion of the fact that the topic of " probability " is the staple 
of this early forensic rhetoric. Viewed generally, the works of 
Antiphon arc of great interest for the history of Attic prose, as 
marking how far it had then been influenced by a theory of 
style. The movement of Antiphon's prose has a certain grave 
dignity, " impressing by its weight and grandeur," as a Greek 
critic in the Augustan age says, " not charming by its life and 
flow." Verbal antithesis is used, not in a diffuse or florid 
way, but with a certain sledge-hammer force, as sometimes in 
the speeches of Thucydides. The imagery, too, though bold, 
is not florid. The structure of the periods is still crude; and 
the general effect of the whole, though often powerful and 
impressive, is somewhat rigid. 

Antiphon represents what was afterwards named the " austere " 
or u rugged " style (avarrjpa dp/iorfa), Lysias was the model 
of an artistic and versatile simplicity. But while Antiphon 
has a place in the history of rhetoric as an art, Lysias, with his 
more attractive gifts, belongs only to the history of oratory. 
Ancient writers quote an " art " of rhetoric by Isocrates, but 
its authenticity was questioned. It is certain, however, that 
Isocrates taught the art as such. He is said to have 
defined rhetoric " as the science of persuasion " (Sext. 
Empir. Adv. Mathem.ii. § 62, p. 301 seq.). Many of his particular 
precepts, both on arrangement and on diction, are cited, but 
they do not give a complete view of his method. The <j>iXoao<j>ta 
(" theory of culture ") which Isocrates expounds in his discourses 
Against the Sophists and on the Antidosis, was in fact rhetoric 
applied to politics. First came technical expositions : the 
pupil was introduced to all the artificial resources which prose 
composition employs (rhs ISkas airaaas als' 6 X670S riryx&^i 
Xpck/iB'os, Antid. § 183). The same term (i5£<u) is also used by 
Isocrates in a narrower sense, with reference to the " figures " of 
rhetoric, properly called cx^jLtara {Panath. § 2) ; sometimes, again, 
in a sense still more general, to the several branches or styles of 
literary composition (Antid. § 11). When the technical elements 
of the subject had been learned, the pupil was required to apply 
abstract rules in actual composition, and his essay was revised 
by the master. Isocrates was unquestionably successful in 
forming speakers and writers. His school was famous during 
a period of some fifty years (390 to 340 B.C.). Among the 
statesmen whom it trained were Timotheus, Leodamas of 
Acharnae, Lycurgus and Hyperides; among the philosophers or 
rhetoricians were Speusippus, Plato's successor in the Academy, 
and Isaeus; among the historians, Ephorus and Theopompus. 
Cicero and through him all subsequent oratory owed much to 
the ample prose of the Isocratean school. 

In the person of Isocrates the art of rhetoric is thus thoroughly 
established, not merely as a technical method, but also as a 
practical discipline of life. If Plato's mildly ironical reference 
in the Euthydemus to a critic "on the borderland between 
philosophy and statesmanship " was meant, as is probable, for 
Isocrates, at least there was a wide difference between the measure 
of acceptance accorded to the earlier Sophists, such as Protagoras, 
and the influence which the school of Isocrates exerted through 
the men whom it had trained. Rhetoric had won its place in 



education. It kept that place through varying fortunes to the 
fall of the Roman empire, and resumed it, for a while, at the 
revival of learning. 

Plato in the Gorgias and the Phaedrus satirized the ordinary 
textbooks of rhetoric, and himself gave directions for a higher 
standard of work; but the detailed study of the art Afism 
begins with Aristotle. Aristotle's Rhetoric belongs to totie's 
the generation after Isocrates, having been composed "Rhe- 
(but sec Aristotle) between 330 and 322 B.C. As toHc" 
controversial allusions sometimes hint it holds Isocrates for 
one of the foremost exponents of the subject. From a purely 
literary point of view Aristotle's RJietoric (with the partial 
exception of book iii.) is one of the driest works in the world. 
From the historical or scientific point of view it is one of the 
most interesting. If we would seize the true significance of the 
treatise it is better to compare rhetoric with grammar than 
with its obvious analogue, logic. A method of grammar was 
the conception of the Alexandrian age, which had lying before 
it the standard masterpieces of Greek literature, and deduced 
the " rules " of grammar from the actual practice of the best 
writers. Aristotle in the latter years of the 4th century B.C. 
held the same position relatively to the monuments of Greek 
oratory which the Alexandrian methodizers of grammar held 
relatively to Greek literature at large. Abundant material lay 
before him, illustrating how speakers had been 'able to persuade 
the reason or to move the feelings. He therefore sought thence 
to deduce rules and so construct a true art. Aristotle's practical 
purpose was undoubtedly real. If we are to make persuasive 
speakers, he believed, this is the only sound way to set about it. 
But the enduring interest of his Rhetoric is mainly retrospective. 
It attracts us as a feat in analysis by an acute mind — a feat 
highly characteristic of that mind itself, and at the same time 
strikingly illustrative of the field over which the materials have 
been gathered. 

The Rhetoric is divided into three books. It deals in great detail 
with the minutiae of the rhetorical craft. Book i. discusses the 
nature and object of rhetoric. The means of persuasion (t£ot«s) 
are classified into " inartificial " (arexvot), i.e. the facts of the case 
external to the art, documents, laws, depositions, — and " arti- 
ficial " (lvr€xvoL) y the latter subdivided into logical (the popular 
syllogism or "enthymeme," the " example," &c.), ethical, and 
emotional. Aristotle next deals with the " topics " (rixot), i.e. 
the commonplaces of rhetoric, general or particular arguments 
which the rhetorician must have ready for immediate use. Rhetoric 
is then broadly divided into : — (1) deliberative • (av^ovXevrtK-fj), 
concerned with exhortation or dissuasion, and with future time, 
its end (reXos) being the advantage or detriment of the persons 
addressed; (2) forensic (Sikclpikt)), concerned with accusation and 
defence, and with time past, its standard being justice; (3) epi- 
deictic, the ornamental rhetoric of display, concerned with praise 
and blame, usually with the present time, its standard being honour 
and shame. Each of these kinds is discussed, and the book ends 
with a brief analysis of the " inartificial proofs." In book ii. 
Aristotle returns to the " artificial " proofs — those which rhetoric 
itself provides. The " logical " proof having been discussed in 
book 1., he turns to the ethical." He shows how the speaker 
may so indicate his own character and the goodness of his motive 
as to prepossess the audience in his favour, and proceeds to furnish 
materials to this end. The " emotional " proof is then discussed, 
and an analysis is given of the emotions on which the speaker may 
play. A consideration follows of the " universal commonplaces . 
(koivoI tSttol) which are suitable to all subjects. The book ends 
with an appendix dealing with the " example" (irap&5etyna), the 
general moral sentiments \yvS>iiai) and the enthymeme. In book iii. 
Aristotle considers expression (A*£«), including the art of delivery 
(vttSkputls), and arrangement (t&£is). Composition, the use of 
prose rhythm, the periodic style (the " periodic " style, Kar&rr panfiimj, 
being contrasted with the running (elpoftkvji)) are all analysed, 
and the types of style literary (ypa^udi) and oral (&yupumK^) are 
differentiated. Under " arrangement " he concludes with the 
parts of a speech, proem, narrative, proofs and epilogue. 

It is necessary briefly to consider Aristotle s general view* of 
rhetoric as set forth in book i. Rhetoric is properly an art. This 
is the proposition from which Aristotle sets out. It is so because 
when a speaker persuades, it is possible to find out why he succeeds 
in doing so. ^ Rhetoric is, in fact, the popular branch of logic. 
Hitherto, Aristotle says, the essence of rhetoric has been neglected 
for the accidents. Writers on rhetoric have hitherto concerned 
themselves mainly with " the exciting of prejudice, of pity, of 
anger, and such-like emotions of the soul." All this is very well, 
but " it has nothing to do with the matter in hand; it has regard 



RHETORIC 



235 



to the judge/' The true aim should be to prove your point, or 
seem to prove it. 

Here we may interpolate a comment which has a general bearing 
on Aristotle's Rhetoric. It is quite true that, if we start from the 
conception of rhetoric as a branch of logic, the phantom of logic 
in rhetoric claims precedence over appeals to passion. But Aristotle 
does not sufficiently regard the question — What, as a matter of 
experience, is most persuasive? Logic may be more persuasive 
with the more select hearers of rhetoric; but rhetoric is for the 
many, and with the many appeals to passion will sometimes, 
perhaps usually, be more effective than syllogism. No formulation 
of rhetoric can correspond with fact which does not leave it abso- 
lutely to the genius of the speaker whether reasoning (or its phantom) 
is to be what Aristotle calls it, the ** body of proof " (jujuo 
irlarews), or whether the stress of persuading effort should not be 
rather addressed to the emotions of the hearers. 

But we can entirely agree with Aristotle in his next remark, 
which is historical in its nature. The deliberative branch of 
rhetoric had hitherto been postponed, he observes, to the forensic. 
We have, in fact, already seen that the very origin of rhetoric 
in Hellas was forensic. The relative subordination of deliberative 
rhetoric, however unscientific, had thus been human. Aristotle's 
next statement, that the master of logic will be the master of 
rhetoric, is a truism if we concede the essential primacy of the 
logical element in rhetoric. Otherwise it is a paradox; and 
it is not in accord with experience, which teaches that speakers 
incapable of showing even the ghost of an argument have 
sometimes been the most completely successful in carrying 
great audiences along with them. Aristotle never assumes that 
the hearers of his rhetorician are as ol x&pfevT&i the culti- 
vated few; on the other hand, he is apt to assume tacitly — and 
here his individual bent comes out — that these hearers are not 
the great surging crowd, the #xXos, but a body of persons with 
a decided, though imperfectly developed, preference for sound 
logic. 

What is the use of an art of rhetoric? ' It is fourfold, Aristotle 
replies. Rhetoric is useful, first of all, because truth and justice 
are naturally stronger than their opposites. When 
awards are not duly given, truth and justice must have 
been worsted by their own fault. This is worth correct- 
ing. Rhetoric is then (1) corrective. Next, it is (2) instructive, as 
a popular vehicle of persuasion for persons who could not be 
reached by the severer methods of strict logic. Then it is 
(2) suggestive. Logic and rhetoric are the two impartial arts; 
that is to say, it is a matter of indifference to them, as arts, 
whether the conclusion which they draw in any given case is 
affirmative or negative. Suppose that I am going to plead a 
cause, and have a sincere conviction that I am on the right side. 
The art of rhetoric will suggest to me what might be urged on 
the other side; and this will give me a stronger grasp of the 
whole situation. Lastly, rhetoric is (4) defensive. Mental 
effort is more distinctive of man than bodily effort; and "it 
would be absurd that, while incapacity for physical self-defence 
is , a reproach, incapacity for mental defence should be no 
reproach." Rhetoric, then, is corrective, instructive, sug- 
gestive, defensive. But what if it be urged that this art 
may be abused? The objection, Aristotle answers, applies 
to all good things, except virtue, and especially to the 
most useful things. Men "may abuse strength, health, wealth, 
generalship. 

The function of the medical art is not necessarily to cure, 
but to make such progress towards a cure as each case may 
admit. Similarly it would be inaccurate to say that 
the function of rhetoric was to persuade. Rather 
must rhetoric be defined as " the faculty of discerning 
in every case the available means of persuasion." Suppose 
that among these means of persuasion is some process of 
reasoning which the rhetorician himself knows to be un- 
sound. That belongs to the province of rhetoric all the 
same. In relation to logic, a man is called a " sophist " 
with regard to his moral purpose (irpoaipeais), i.e. if he 
knowingly used a fallacious syllogism. But rhetoric takes 
no account of the moral purpose. It takes account simply 
of the faculty (dbvatus) — the faculty of discovering any means 
of persuasion. 



Uses of 
rhetoric. 



Rhetoric 
defined. 



Rhet- 
oric'* to 
Alex* 
ander.'* 



period 
from 
Alex* 
ander to 
Augus- 
tus. ' 



Herma- 
goras. 



Aristotle's Rhetoric is incomparably the most scientific work 
which exists on the subject. It may also be regarded as having 
determined the main lines on which the subject was The 
treated by nearly all subsequent writers. The extant 
treatise on rhetoric (also by Aristotle?) entitled 'IVopuc^ 
irpds f A\k%av6pov, formerly ascribed to Anaximenes of 
Lampsacus, was written at latest by 340 d.C. The 
introductory letter prefixed to it is probably a late forgery. 
Its relation towards Aristotle's Rhetoric is discussed in the article on 
Aristotle. 

During the three centuries from the age of Alexander to 
that of Augustus the fortunes of rhetoric were governed by 
the new conditions of Hellenism. Aristotle's scientific The 
method lived on in the Peripatetic school. Meanwhile 
the fashion of florid declamation or strained conceits 
prevailed in the rhetorical schools of Asia, where, amid 
mixed populations, the pure traditions of the best 
Greek taste had been dissociated from the use of the 
Greek language. The " Asianism " of style which thus came 
to be constrasted with " Atticism " found imitators at Rome, 
among whom must be reckoned the orator Hortensius 
(c. 95 B.C.). Hermagoras of Temnos in Aeolis (c. 110 
B.C.) claims mention as having done much to revive 
a higher conception. Using both the practical rhetoric 
of the time before Aristotle and Aristotle's philosophical rhetoric, 
he worked up the results of both in a new system, — following the 
philosophers so far as to give the chief prominence to " inven- 
tion." He thus became the founder of a rhetoric which may 
be distinguished as the scholastic. Through the influence of 
his school, Hermagoras did for Roman eloquence very much 
what Isocrates had done for Athens. Above all, he counter- 
acted the view of " Asianism," that oratory is a mere knack 
founded on practice, and recalled attention to the study of it 
as an art. 1 

Cicero's rhetorical works are to some extent based on the 
technical system to which he had been introduced by Molon at 
Rhodes. But Cicero further made an independent 
use of the best among the earlier Greek writers, 
Isocrates, Aristotle and Theophrastus. Lastly, he could draw, 
at least in the later of his treatises, on a vast fund of reflection 
and experience. Indeed, the distinctive interest of his con- 
tributions to the theory of rhetoric consists in the fact that his 
theory can be compared with his practice. The result of such 
a comparison is certainly to suggest how much less he owed to 
his art than to his genius. Some consciousness of this is perhaps, 
implied in the idea which pervades much of his writing on 
oratory, that the perfect orator is the perfect man. The same 
thought is present to Quintilian, in whose great work, 
De Institutione Oratoria, the scholastic rhetoric re- 
ceives its most complete expression (c. a.d. 90). 
Quintilian treats oratory as the end to which the entire mental 
and moral development of the student is to be directed. Thus 
he devotes his first book to an early discipline which should 
precede the orator's first studies, and his last book to a discipline 
of the whole man which lies beyond them. Some notion of his 
comprehensive method may be derived from the circumstance 
that he introduces a succinct estimate of the chief Greek and 
Roman authors, of every kind, from Homer to Seneca (bk. x. 
§§ 46-131). After Quintilian, the next important name is that 
of Hermogenes of Tarsus, who under Marcus Aurelius 
made a complete digest of the scholastic rhetoric from 
the time of Hermagoras^ of Temnos (no B.C.). It is 
contained in five extant treatises, which are remarkable for 
clearness and acutenesS, and still more remarkable as having 
been completed before the age of twenty-five. Hermogenes 
continued for nearly a century and a half to be one of the chief 
authorities in the schools. Longinus (c. a.d. 260) published 
an Art of RJtetoric which is still extant; and the more 
celebrated treatise On Sublimity (repl vypovs), if not Jriters* 
his work, is at least of the same period. In the later 
half of the 4th century Aphthonius (q.v.) composed the 
" exercises " (wpoyvixvkGixaTa) w T hich superseded the work of 
1 See J ebb's Attic Orators, ii. 445. , 



Cicero. 



Quia* 
tillaa. 



Hermo- 
genes* 



\y 



236 



RHETORIC 



Hermogenes. At the revival of letters the treatise of Aphthonius 
once more became a standard text-book. Much popularity was 
enjoyed also by the exercises of Aelius Theon (of uncertain date; 
see Tiieon). (See further the editions of the RJietores Graeci 
by L. Spengel and by Ch. Walz.) 

During the first four centuries of the empire the practice of 
the art was in greater vogue than ever before or since. First, 
Practice there was a general dearth of the higher intellectual 
ofRhet* interests: politics gave no scope to energy; philosophy 
oric was stagnant, and literature, as a rule, either arid or 

under the frivolous. Then the Greek schools had poured their 
pce * rhetoricians into Rome, where the same tastes which 
revelled in coarse luxury welcomed tawdry declamation. 
The law-courts of the Roman provinces further created a 
continual demand for forensic speaking. The public teacher 

of rhetoric was called " sophist/' which was now an 
p/ilsts."' academic title, similar to " professor " or " doctor." 

In the 4th century B.C. Isocrates had taken pride in 
the name of vofacrTrjs, which, indeed, had at no time wholly lost 
th* good, or neutral, sense which originally belonged to it. 
The academic meaning which it acquired under the early 
empire lasted into the middle ages (see Du Cange, s.v. t who 
quotes from Baldricus, " Egregius Doctor magnusque Sophista 
Geraldus "). While the word rhetor still denoted the faculty, 
the word sophist es denoted the office or rank to which the 
rhetor might hope to rise. So Lucian (" Teacher of Rhe- 
toricians," § 1) says: " You ask, young man, how you are to 
become a rhetor, and attain in your turn to the repute of that 
most impressive and illustrious title, sophist." Lucian also 
satirizes the discussions of the nature of rhetoric in his parody 
the Parasite (cf. also his Bis Accusatus). 

Vespasian (70-79 a.d.), according to Suetonius, was the 
first emperor who gave a public endowment to the teaching 
of rhetoric. Under Hadrian and the Antonines (a.d. 117-180) 

the public chairs of rhetoric became objects of the 
Rhetoric n ig nes t ambition. The complete constitution of the 

schools at Athens was due to Marcus Aurelius. The 
Philosophical school had four chairs (Opbvoi) — Platonic, Stoic, 
Peripatetic, Epicurean. The Rhetorical school had two chairs, 
one' for " sophistic," the other for " political " rhetoric. By 
" sophistic " was meant the academic teaching of rhetoric as 
an art, in distinction from its " political " application to the 
law-courts. The " sophistical " chair was superior to the 
"political" in dignity as in emolument, and its occupant was 
invested with a jurisdiction over the youth of Athens similar 
to that of the vice-chancellor in a modern university. The 
Antonines 1 further encouraged rhetoric by granting immunities 
to its teachers. Three " sophists " in each of the smaller towns, 
and five in the larger, were exempted from taxation (Dig. 
xxvii.' i, 6, § 2). The wealthier sophists affected much personal 
splendour. Polemon (c. a.d. 130) and Adrian of Tyre (c. a.d. 
170) are famous examples of extravagant display. The aim 
of the sophist was to impress the multitude. His whole stock- 
in-trade was style, and this was directed to astonishing by tours 

de force. The scholastic declamations were chiefly of 

two classes. (1) The suasoriae were usually on 

historical or legendary subjects, in which some course 
of action was commended or censured (cf. Juv. Sat.). These 
suasoriae belonged to deliberative rhetoric (the pavkevrucov 
yevos, deliberativum genus). (2) The controversiae turned 
especially on legal issues, and represented the forensic rhetoric 
(biKaviKov ykvos, judiciale genus). But it was the general 
characteristic of this period that all subjects, though formally 
" deliberative " or " forensic," were treated in the style and 
spirit of that third branch which Aristotle distinguished, the 
rhetoric of eirlfiei £w or " display." The oratory produced by 
the age of the academic sophists can be estimated from a large 
extant literature. It is shown under various aspects, and pre- 
sumably at its best, by such writers as Dio Chrysostom at the 
end of the 1st century, Aelius Aristides (see Aristides, Aelius) 
in the 2nd, the chief rhetorician under the Antonines, Themistius, 
Himerius and Libanius in the 4th. Amid much which is 



Deciama 
tions. 



tawdry or vapid, these writings occasionally present passages 
of true literary beauty, while they constantly offer matter of 
the highest interest to the student. 

In the medieval system of academic studies, grammar, 
logic and rhetoric were the subjects of the trivium, or course 
followed during the four years of undergraduateship. Medieval 
Music, arithmetic, geometry and astronomy con- study of 
stituted the quadrivium, or course for the three years Rhetoric 
from the B.A. to the M.A. degree. These were the seven 
liberal arts. In the middle ages the chief authorities on 
rhetoric were the latest Latin epitomists, such as Martianus 
Capella (5th cent.), Cassiodorus (5th cent.) or Isidorus (7th 
cent.). 

After the revival of learning the better Roman and Greek 
writers gradually returned into use. Some new treatises were 
also produced. Leonard Cox (d. 1549) wrote The Art of Craft of 
Rhetoryke, partly compiled, partly original, which was reprinted 
in Latin at Cracow. The Art of Rhetorique t by Thomas Wilson 
(1553), afterwards secretary of state, embodied rules chiefly 
from Aristotle, with help from Cicero and Quintilian. About 
the same time treatises on rhetoric were published in France 
by Tonquelin (1555) and Courcelles (1557). The general aim 
at this period was to revive and popularize the best teaching 
of the ancients on rhetoric. The subject was regularly Rhetoric 
taught at the universities, and was indeed important. at the 
At Cambridge in 1570 the study of rhetoric was Untver- 
based on Quintilian, Hermogenes and the speeches of 8iiies * 
Cicero viewed as works of art. An Oxford statute of 1588 
shows that the same books were used there. In 1620 George 
Herbert was delivering lectures on rhetoric at Cambridge, 
where he held the office of public orator. The decay of rhetoric 
as a formal study at the universities set in during the 18th 
century. The function of the rhetoric lecturer passed over 
into that of correcting written themes; but his title remained 
long after his office had lost its primary meaning. If the theory 
of rhetoric fell into neglect, the practice, however, was encouraged 
by the public exercises (" acts " and " opponencies ") in the 
schools. The college prizes for " declamations " served the 
same purpose. 

The fortunes of rhetoric in the modern world, as briefly 
sketched above, may suffice to suggest why few modern writers 
of ability have given their attention to the subject. Modern 
Perhaps one of the most notable modern contributions Writers on 
to the art is the collection of commonplaces framed (in Rhetoric 
Latin) by Bacon, " to be so many spools from which the threads 
can be drawn out as occasion serves," a truly curious work of 
that acute and fertile mind. He called them " Antitheta." A 
specimen is subjoined: — 

Uxor et Liberi 

Against. 

" He who marries, and has 
children, has given hostages to 
fortune." 

" The immortality of brutes is 
in their progeny ; of men, in 
their fame, services, and insti- 
tutions.*' 

" Regard for the family too 
often overrides regard for the 
state." 



state 



For. 
11 Attachment to the 
begins from the family." 

" Wife and children are a dis- 
cipline in humanity. Bachelors 
are morose and austere." 

" The only advantage of celi- 
bacy and childlessness is in case 
of exile." 



This is quite in the spirit of Aristotle's treatise. The popu- 
larity enjoyed by Blair's Rhetoric in the latter part of the 18th 
and the earlier part of the 19th century was merited rather by 
the form than by the matter. Campbell's Philosophy of Rhetoric, 
which found less wide acceptance than its predecessor, was 
superior to it inMepth, though often marred by an imperfect 
comprehension of logic. But undoubtedly the best modern 
book on the subject is Whately's Elements of Rhetoric. Wbatelym 
Starting from Aristotle's view, that rhetoric is " an 
offshoot from logic," Whately treats it as the art of " argu- 
mentative composition." He considers it under four heads: 

(1) the address to the understanding ( = Aristotle's \oyiKT) maris); 

(2) the address to the will, or persuasion (= Aristotle's' rjdiKrj and 



RHEUMATISM 



237 



-KoBnrtKri rtcris); (3) style; (4) elocution, or delivery. But 
when it is thus urged that — 

" All a rhetorician's rules 
But teach him how to name his tools," 

the assumption is tacitly made that an accurate nomenclature 
and classification of these tools must be devoid of practical use. 
The conditions of modern life, and especially the invention of 
printing, have to some extent diminished the importance which 
belonged in' antiquity to the art of speaking, though modern 
democratic politics and forensic conditions still make it one 
which may be cultivated. with advantage. 

Among more modern works are J. Bascom, Philosophy of Rhetoric 
(New York, 1885); and numerous books on voice culture, gesture 
and elocution. For ancient rhetoric see Sir R. C. Jebb's translation 
of Aristotle's Rhetoric (ed. J. E. Sandys, 1909), and his Attic Orators 
(1876) ; also Spengel, Artium Scriptores (1828) ; Westermann, 
Gesch. der Beredtsamkeit (1833-35;) Cope, in the Cambridge Journal 
of Classical and Sacred Philology (1855-57) introductions to Cicero's 
De Oratore (A. S. Wilkins) and Orator (J. E. Sandys); Volkmann, 
Die Rhetorik der Griechen und Romer in system. Ubersicht (ed. 2, 
1885). (R.C.J.; X.) 

RHEUMATISM (from Gr. peDjua, flux), a general term for 
various forms of disease, now subdivided more accurately under 
separate names. 

Acute Rheumatism or Rheumatic Fever is the name given 
to a disease having for its chief characteristics inflammatory 
affections of the joints, attended by severe constitutional dis- 
turbances and frequently associated with inflammation of the 
pericardium and valves of the heart. The acute rheumatism 
of childhood differs materially from that of adults in that the 
articular manifestations and constitutional disturbance arc 
usually much less severe, whereas the heart and pericardium are 
especially liable to be attacked. It will be advisable, therefore, 
in discussing the symptoms, to deal separately with the 
rheumatism of adults and that of childhood. There are certain 
points of importance in connexion with its causation which are 
generally agreed upon. It is essentially a disease of childhood 
and early adult life, being most commonly met with between the 
ages of ten and twenty-five and comparatively rarely after 
forty. Heredity is unquestionably an important predisposing 
cause. Climate is also a factor of considerable importance, 
cold and damp with sudden and wide fluctuations of temperature 
being especially conducive to an attack. While perhaps more 
common in Great Britain than elsewhere, it is met with in most 
parts of the globe. Exposure to cold and wet, and especially a 
chill after free perspiration and fatigue, are among the most 
common exciting causes of an attack. 

Of recent years much evidence has accumulated tending to 
show that rheumatism is a specific infective disease due to a 
micro-organism, and this is now generally recognized. There is 
still, however, some difference of opinion as to the nature of the 
micro-organism by which it is produced. In 1900 F. J. Poynton 
and Paine isolated from eight cases of acute rheumatism in 
children a minute diplococcus similar to that previously de- 
scribed by Triboulet and hy A. Wasserman, which inoculated 
into rabbits produced lesions of the joints and of the heart 
indistinguishable from those met with in acute rheumatism. 
They have since obtained the same micro-organism from a 
further large number of cases of acute rheumatism, and their 
results have been confirmed by Walker, Beattie and others. 
They therefore claim that this micro-organism, to which they 
have given the name Diplococcus rheumaticus, is the specific 
cause of acute rheumatism. The objections which have been 
raised by other competent observers against this view are: 
(1) That this diplococcus is not found in all cases of acute 
rheumatism. (2) That certain other micro-organisms when 
inoculated into animals will produce joint and heart affections 
similar to those produced by the aforesaid Diplococcus rheumaticus. 
It would be out of place here to enter into the merits of this 
controversy; suffice it to say that the objections raised do not 
appear to be cogent enough to invalidate the conclusions arrived 
at^by the authors of the germ theory. The matter is, however, 
still to a certain- extent sub judice. 



In adults the affection of the joints is the most striking feature. 
The attack is usually ushered in by a feeling of chilliness or 
malaise, with pain or stiffness in one or more joints, 
generally those of large or medium size, such as the fomJ!~ 
knees, ankles, wrists or shoulders. At first the pain is 
confined to one or two joints, but others soon become affected, 
and there is a tendency to symmetry in the order in which they 
are attacked, the inflammation in one joint being followed by 
that of the same joint on the opposite side. The affected joints 
are swollen, hot and excessively tender, and the skin over them 
is somewhat flushed. The temperature is raised, ranging from 
about 101 to 103 F., the pulse rapid, full and soft; the face is 
flushed, the tongue coated with a thick white fur, and there is 
thirst, loss of appetite, and constipation.^ The hody is bathed 
in a profuse perspiration, which has a characteristic sour, 
disagreeable odour. The urine is diminished, acid and loaded 
with urates. The attack is of variable duration, and may pass 
off in a few days or last for some weeks. Relapses are not 
uncommon when convalescence appears to have been estab- 
lished. Among the complications which may arise are hyper- 
pyrexia, or rapid and extreme rise of temperature, which may 
run up as high as no° F., when death will speedily ensue unless 
prompt and energetic treatment by cold baths or icepacks is 
resorted to. Affections of the heart, pericarditis (inflammation 
of the fibro-serous sac investing the heart) and endocarditis 
(inflammation of the lining membrane and the valves of the 
heart), which arc so frequently associated with rheumatism, 
should he regarded as part of the disease, rather than as com- 
plications of rheumatism. They are far more common in 
children than in adults, and it is the damage to the valves of the 
heart in children by rheumatism which lays the foundation of 
much chronic heart disease in later 'life. 

In childhood the affection of the joints is usually slight, and 
may be confined to a little pain or stiffness in one or two joints, 
and is sometimes attributed by parents to " growing pains." 
The constitutional symptoms are also ill-marked and tliere are 
no acid sweats, the temperature is not as a rule very high, the 
tongue not heavily coated, and the child does not appear to 
be very ill. The heart and pericardium are, however, especially 
liable to attack, and this may he so insidious in its onset that 
attention is not called to it till considerable damage has been 
done to the heart. It is of importance, therefore, that in 
children the heart should be frequently examined by a physician, 
when there is the slightest suspicion of an attack of rheumatism. 
Chorea or St Vitus's dance is a common manifestation of rheu- 
matism in children. Subcutaneous fibrous nodules, attached 
to tendons or fibrous structures beneath the skin, are a special 
feature of the rheumatism of childhood. They are painless, 
and vary in size from one-eighth to half an inch in diameter. 
They are not very common, but when present indicate that the 
rheumatism has a firm hold and that cardiac complications 
are to be apprehended. 

The patient should be placed in bed between blankets, and 
should wear a light flannel or woollen shirt. The affected joints 
should be kept at rest as far as possible, and enveloped 
in cotton-wool. Salicylate of soda or salicin, first tneat" 
suggested by Dr Maclagan in 1876, appear to exercise 
a specific influence in acute rheumatism. They have a power- 
ful effect not only in reducing the temperature, but in relieving 
the pain and cutting short the attack. Frequent and fairly 
large doses of salicylate of soda should be administered for the 
first twenty-four hours: the dose and interval at which it is 
given should then be gradually reduced till the symptoms 
subside. In conjunction with this, alkalies such as bicarbonate 
or citrate of potash should also be administered. The effect 
of the salicylate should be carefully w T atched, and the dose 
reduced if toxic symptoms such as delirium, deafness, and 
noises in the ears occur. These drugs are of less service in the 
rheumatism of children than in that of adults, as they do not 
appear to exercise any specific influence in arresting the cardiac 
inflammation to which children are specially " liable, though' 
they have a marked effect on the joint affections. 'Aspirin has 



2 3 8 



RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 



recently come into use as a substitute for salicylates, and may 
succeed when salicylates fail. 

Subacute rheumatism. — This term is sometimes applied to 
attacks of the disease of a less severe type in which the symp- 
toms, though milder in character, are usually of longer duration 
and more intractable than in the acute form. It is difficult, 
however, to draw a hard-and-fast line between the two, but 
the term may perhaps be most appropriately applied to the 
repeated and protracted attacks of cardiac rheumatism in 
children. 

Chronic Rheumatism. — This term has been somewhat 
loosely applied to various chronic joint affections, sometimes 
of gouty origin or the result of rheumatoid arthritis. Strictly 
speaking, it may be applied to cases in which the joint lesions 
persist after an attack of rheumatism, and chronic inflammatory 
thickening of the tissues takes place, so that they become stiff 
and deformed. It is also appropriate to certain joint affections 
occurring in later life in rheumatic subjects, who are liable to 
repeated attacks of pain and stiffness in the joints, usually 
induced by exposure to cold and wet. This form of rheumatism 
is less migratory than the acute, and is commonly limited to one 
or two of the larger joints. After repeated attacks the affected 
joints may become permanently stiff and painful, and crackling 
or creaking may occur on movement. There is seldom any 
constitutional disturbance, and the heart is not liable to be 
affected. 

Muscular Rheumatism. — By this is understood a painful 
affection of certain groups of muscles attributable to inflamma- 
tion of their fibrous and tendinous attachments. It is commonly 
brought on by exposure to cold and wet, and especially by a chill 
after violent exercise and free perspiration when the clothes are 
not changed. Any movement of the affected muscles gives 
rise to severe and sharp pain which may induce a certain degree 
of spasm and rigidity at the time. The pain usually subsides 
and passes off completely while the patient is at rest, but occurs 
on the slightest movement of the affected muscles. 
The chief varieties of muscular rheumatism are: — 

i. Lumbago, in which the muscles of the lower part of the 
back are affected so that stooping, particularly the 
attempt to rise again to the erect position, induces 
severe pain. 

2. Intercostal rheumatism, affecting the muscles between 

the ribs, so that taking a deep breath and certain 
movements of the arms give rise to pain. 

3. Torticollis or stiff neck, affecting the muscles of one side 

of the neck. 

Treatment. — Salicylates, which are of service in acute rheu- 
matism, are not so reliable in the chronic varieties, but are some- 
times of service. Aspirin, salicin, quinine and iodide of potas- 
sium may be more successful, but other active treatment is 
usually required. The application of heat in the form of poul- 
tices or fomentations, counter irritation by mustard leaves 
or blisters, are indicated in some cases. In others massage, 
hot douches, or electricity may be required. Mineral waters 
and baths of various health resorts are often of great benefit 
in obstinate cases, such as those of Buxton, Bath, Harrogate, 
Woodhall Spa, &c, in England, or of Aix-les-Bains, Wiesbaden, 
Wildbad, &c, and many others on the continent of Europe. 
Wintering abroad in warm, dry and sunny climates may be 
advisable in some cases when this is practicable. 

Q. F. H. B.) 

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS (osteo-arthritis, arthritis de- 
formans), terms employed to designate a disease or group of 
diseases characterized by destructive changes in the joints. 
Though it is only in comparatively recent times that the disease 
was definitely recognized as separate clinically from either 
rheumatism or gout, it is certain that it prevailed in ancient 
times. Characteristic changes in the bones have been found 
in remains in tombs in Egypt attributed by Petrie to 1300 B.C., 
and ancient Roman as well as British graves have held bones 
showing distinct traces of the diseases. Of early medical 
writers, Paulus Aeginata observed the lesions and seemed to 



consider them distinctive. Landre Beauvais in 1800 published 
a description of the disease under the title of Goutte asthenique 
primitif. The first endeavour, however, to separate rheumatoid 
arthritis as a distinct disease was made by William Heberden 
in 1803; while in 1805 John Haygarth recognized the difference 
between it and rheumatism, and suggested the term " nodosity 
of the joints." A wide divergence of opinion during the 19th 
century as to its relation to rheumatism and to gout gave rise 
to the unfortunate term " rheumatic gout." The name arthritis 
deformans was suggested by Virchow in 1859. Various causes, such 
as nervous origin, inherited arthritic diathesis, a relationship 
to rheumatism or gout, and reflex irritation, have been put 
foward as giving rise to the disease, but in the present state of 
medical knowledge two are most favoured. The first ascribes 
the disease to an infective process arising from micro-organisms. 
Several observers have found bacteria in the synovial fluid and 
membranes of affected joints, — Max Schiiller finding both bacilli 
and cocci, while in 1896 Gilbert Bannatyne, Wohlmann and 
Blaxall isolated a micro-organism, a bacillus with a bipolar 
staining, which they stated to be almost constantly present in 
the joints of patients with true rheumatoid arthritis. The 
second view is that the disease is the result of a chronic toxaemia 
produced by absorption of toxines from the intestine, with 
perhaps some error in metabolism. In many cases there seems 
to be a distinct evidence of a local infection, injury being a 
determining factor, and some families seem to have joints 
which are specially liable to degeneration. The disease may 
begin at any age, for there is no doubt that persistent cases have 
been met with in quite young children; but it usually begins 
in early middle-age, and statistics seem to confirm the impression 
of the greater liability of females. Conditions which tend to 
lower the general health seem to act as a predisposing cause to 
rheumatoid arthritis, e.g. mental worry, uterine disorders and 
various lowering diseases/ prominent among which are influenza 
and tonsillitis. In a number of cases in women the onset occurs 
about the time of the menopause. 

The method of onset varies according to the form. There 
are four well-marked types — (1) the peri-articular form, in which 
the most marked changes are in the synovial membrane and 
peri-articular tissues, and the cartilage may be involved to a 
lesser degree. In this variety is found every grade of severity. 
The onset may be acute, resembling an attack of rheumatic 
fever, for which it may be mistaken; the joints, one or more, 
are swollen, tender and painful to the touch; the temperature 
elevated to ioo°; 101 ; but unlike rheumatic fever, sweating 
and hyperpyrexia are uncommon. The acute stage may then 
subside, a slight thickening remaining in the capsule of the 
joint, and the contours of the limb scarcely regaining the normal; 
or the attack may gradually develop into the chronic form. 
The pain varies greatly, and is not necessarily in ratio to the 
amount of arthritis present. Various joints may be involved, 
the spinal vertebrae not infrequently sharing in an arthritis; 
the most usual joints to be attacked, however, are r the knee and 
shoulder. When the knee is attacked there is commonly 
effusion into the joint. Muscular atrophy is usually present, 
but varies greatly in its extent. In most cases it is present to 
a much greater degree than can be accounted for by disuse of 
the muscles. The skin has in these cases a curious glossy 
appearance, and pigmentations may be noticed. In, chronic 
forms the onset is gradual, one joint becoming painful and 
swelling, and then the others successively; in these slow forms 
the outlook for the recovery of the joint is not so good as in 
the acute, and some cases may proceed to extreme deformity 
with little or no pain. Gradually the shape of the joint is altered ;. 
this is in a great measure due to synovial thickening, and partly 
to the presence of osteophytes in the joint. When the affected 
joint is moved a distinct crepitation can be felt. The muscles 
about the joint atrophy often to an extreme degree, and con- 
tractures supervene, flexing the leg upon the thigh if the knees 
should be affected, and the thigh upon the abdomen should the 
hip be affected. In extreme degrees the patient may become a 
complete cripple. Later, in many cases a quiescent stage of the 






RHEYDT— RHIGAS 



239 



disease is reached, the patients cease to suffer pain, and are 
inconvenienced only by the deformities in the- limbs, in which a 
considerable degree of motion may be retained. Remarkable 
deformities are seen in hands in which a considerable amount 
of usefulness still remains. Dyspepsia and anaemia are fre- 
quently associated with arthritis. Monarticular arthritis more 
particularly affects the aged; and when it affects the hip is 
known as morbus coxae senilis. 

(2) The atrophic form of arthritis is not very common. The 
chief anatomical change is due to atrophy in the bone and cartilage. 
The disease occurs at an earlier period in life than the peri-articular 
form, from which the initial symptoms do not markedly differ; 
but the disorganization in the joint is greater, dislocations 
frequently occur, and ankylosis of the joints follows. This is the 
most serious form of arthritis. 

(3) In the hypertrophic form the anatomical changes include 
the formation of new bone as well as changes in the cartilage. 
This new-bone formation may lead to progressive ankylosis in 
the joints. Should the, vertebral column be affected a rigid 
condition of the spine known as spondylitis deformans (" poker 
back ") may ensue. What are termed " Heherden's nodes " 
are small hard knobs about the size of a pea frequently found 
upon the fingers near the terminal phalangeal joints; they 
rarely give rise to symptoms. Popularly ascribed to gout, these 
nodes are in reality a manifestation of arthritis. 

(4) A variety of arthritis occurring in children is known as 
Still's disease; in which the swelling of the joints is associated with 
swelling of the lymph glands and of the spleen. The onset is often 
acute, with fever and rigors; sweating is profuse and the joints 
are enlarged and painful. There may he much muscular 
wasting and limitation of movement in the joints, and anaemia 
is associated with the disease. 

The treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is rarely curative, 
once the disease has been permanently established; and it 
is therefore important to begin treatment before destructive 
changes have taken place in the joints. In the acute febrile 
form, which is frequently taken for rheumatism, the essential 
treatment is rest to the affected joints, with the application of 
oil of wintergreen; the joint should not be fixed hut supported. 
In the more chronic forms medicinal treatments are usually 
of little value. Potassium iodide is useful in some cases by 
promoting absorption of the hypcrtrophied fibrous tissue, and 
guaiacol if administered for a sufficiently long time is said to 
be capable of arresting the disease, diminishing the size of the 
joint and helping movement. Where anaemia accompanies the 
disease iron and arsenic are of value. The general health of a 
patient suffering from rheumatoid arthritis must be maintained, 
and he should live upon a dry soil. Visits to Aix-les-Bains, 
Buxton, Bath or Droit wich, with their baths and shampooings, 
often prove useful, particularly when combined with gentle 
massage. It is a mistake to keep the joints entirely at rest 
in the chronic forms, as this tends to the formation of contractures 
and ankylosis. Moderate exercise without undue fatigue is 
desirable. Patients should go early to hed and have plenty of 
rest, sunshine and fresh air. It is important that the diet should 
be nourishing and plentiful, and should there be intestinal 
putrefaction fermented milk is useful. As regards the local 
treatment, it will be well in the majority of cases to determine 
by the X-rays the exact state of the affected joints. Radiant 
heat, vibration and hot-air baths are among the best treatments. 
The active hyperaemia induced by hot air favours restoration 
of movement and alleviates pain, but where there is pronounced 
destruction of bone and cartilage full restoration of a joint 
cannot take place. Systematic exercises of the joints tend to 
prevent the atrophy of the adjacent muscles, atnd Bier's passive 
hyperaemia induced by the temporary use of an elastic bandage 
has the same results. Should an X-ray photograph reveal the 
presence of spurs or loose bodies in the joints interfering with 
free movement their removal is called for. Sometimes the 
breaking down of adhesions under an anaesthetic is necessary, 
and gentle passive and later active movements of the joints 
should follow if freedom of use is to be gained. Recently 



treatment by radium has taken a definite place in the therapeutics 
of chronic arthritis, its analgesic properties seeming of great 
benefit. ' (H. L. H.) 

RHEYDT, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine pro- 
vince, situated on the Nicrs, 19 m. W. of Diisseldorf, on the main 
line of railway to Aix-la-Chapelle, and at the junction of lines 
to* Crefeld and Stolbcrg. Pop. (1905) 40,149. It has two 
Roman Catholic and two Evangelical churches,' a handsome 
new town hall (1895), a gymnasium, and several technical 
schools. The principal products of its numerous factories are 
silk, cotton, woollen and mixed fabrics, velvet, iron goods, 
machinery, shoes, cables, soap and cigars. Dyeing and finishing, 
brewing and distilling, are also carried on. RJieydt is an ancient 
place, but its industrial importance is of very recent growth, 
and it only received municipal rights in 1856. 

See Rheyter Chronik. Geschichte der Ilerrscltaft und Stadt Kheydt 
(2 vols., Rheydt, 1897); and Strauss, Geschichte der Stadt Kheydt 
(Rheydt, 1897). 

RHlANUS, Greek poet and grammarian, a native of Crete, 
friend and contemporary of Eratosthenes (275-195 B.C.). 
Suidas says he was at first a slave and overseer of a palaestra, 
but obtained a good education later in life, and devoted himself 
to grammatical studies, probably in Alexandria. He prepared a 
new recension ot the Iliad and Odyssey } characterized by sound 
judgment and poetical taste. His bold atheteses are frequently 
mentioned in the scholia. He also wrote epigrams, eleven of 
which, preserved in the Greek anthology and Athcnaeus, show 
elegance and vivacity. But he was chiefly known as a writer 
of epics (mythological and ethnographical), the most celebrated 
of which was the Messeniaca in six books, dealing with the 
second Messenian war and the exploits of its central figure 
Aristomenes, and used by Pausanias in his fourth book as a 
trustworthy authority. Other similar poems were the Achaica, 
Eliaca, and Thessalica. The Heracleia was a long mythological 
epic, probably an imitation of the poem, of the same name by 
Panyasis, and containing the same number of books (fourteen). 

Fragments in A. Meineke, Analecta Alexandrina (1843); for 
Rhianus's work in connexion with Homer, see C. Mayhoff, De 
Rhiani Studiis Homericis (Dresden, 1870); also W. Christ, Ges- 
chichte der griechischen Litteratur (1898). 

RHIGAS, CONSTANTINE, known as Rhigas of Velestinos 
(Pherae), or Rhigas Pheraios (1 760-1 798), Greek patriot and 
poet, was born at Velestinos, and was educated at Zagora and 
at Constantinople, where he became secretary to Alexander 
Ypsilanti. In 1786 he entered the service of Nicholas Mavro- 
genes, hospodar of Wallachia, at Bucharest, and when war broke 
out between Turkey and Russia in 1787 he was charged with the 
inspection of the troops at Craiova. Here he entered into close 
and friendly relations with a Turkish officer named Osman 
Passvan-Oglou (17 58-1807), afterwards the famous governor 
of Widin, whose life he saved from the vengeance of Mavrogenes. 
After the death of his patron Rhigas returned to Bucharest to 
serve for some time as interpreter at the French Consulate. At 
this time he wrote the famous Greek version of the Marseillaise, 
well known in Byron's paraphrase as "sons of the Greeks, 
arise." He was the founder of the Hetaireia, a society formed 
to organize Greek patriotic sentiment and to provide the Greeks 
with arms and money. Believing that the influence of the 
French Revolution would spread to the Near East, he betook 
himself to Vienna to organize the movement among the exiled 
Greeks and their foreign supporters in 1793, or possibly earlier. 
He published in Vienna many Greek translations of foreign 
works, and presently foundci a Greekpress there, but his chief 
glory was the collection of national songs which, passed from 
hand to hand in MS., roused patriotic enthusiasm throughout 
Greece. They were only printed posthumously at Jassy in 
1 8 14. While at Vienna Rhigas entered into communication 
with Bonaparte, to whom he sent a snuff-box made of the root 
of a laurel tree taken from the temple of Apollo, and eventually 
he set out with a view to meeting the general of the army of 
Italy in Venice. But before leaving Vienna he forwarded 
papers, amongst which is said to have been his correspondence 



240 



RHINE 



with Bonaparte, to a compatriot at Istria. The papers were 
betrayed by Demetrios Oikonomos Kozanites into the hands 
of the Austrian government, and Rhigas was arrested at Trieste 
and handed over with his accomplices to the Turkish authorities 
at Belgrade. Immediately on arrest he attempted suicide. 
His Turkish friend, Passvan-Oglou, sought to secure his escape, 
and the government apparently consented to release him on 
the payment of a ransom of about £6000; but meanwhile the 
Turkish pasha commanding at Belgrade had taken the law into 
his own hands. Rhigas's five companions were secretly drowned, 
but he himself offered so violent a resistance that he was shot 
by two Turkish soldiers. His last words are reported as being: 
" I have sown a rich seed; the hour is coming when my country 
will reap its glorious fruits." Rhigas, writing in the popular 
dialect instead of in classical Greek, aroused the patriotic 
fervour of his contemporaries and his poems were a serious 
factor in the awakening of modern Greece. 

See Rizos Neronlos, Histoire de la revolution grecgue (Paris, 1829); 
I. C. Bolanachi, Hommes illustres de la Grece moderne (Paris, 1875) ; 
and Mrs E. M. Edmonds, Rhigas Pheraios (London, 1890). 

RHINE (Lat. Rhenus, Ger. Rhein, Fr. Rhin, Dutch Rkyn, 
o'r Rijn), the chief river of Germany and one of the most im- 
portant in Europe. It is about 850 m. in length and drains an 
area of 75,000 sq. m. The distance in a direct line between 
its source in the Alps and its mouth in the German Ocean is 
460 m. Its general course is north-north-west, but it makes 
numerous deflexions and at one point is found running in a 
diametrically opposite direction. The name Rhine, which is 
apparently of Celtic origin, is of uncertain etymology, the most 
favoured derivations being either from der Rinnende (the 
flowing), or from Rein (the clear), the latter being now the more 
generally accepted. 

1. The Swiss Portion. — The Rhine rises in the mountains 
of the Swiss canton of the Grisons, and flows for 233 m. in Swiss 
territory, within which its drainage basin includes about 14,059 
sq. m., and every canton save Geneva. The two main branches 
of the Rhine, the Hinter Rhine and the Vorder Rhine, unite 
at Reichenau, 6 m. S.W. of Coire. (1) The principal stream 
is considered to be that of the Hinter Rhine, which issues 
(7271 ft.) from the glaciers of the Rheinwaldhorn group, and 
then flows first N.E. through the Rhein wald valley, and next 
N. through the Schams valley, which communicates by the 
well-known gorge of the Via Mala with the Tomleschg valley 
at Thusis, whence the stream continues its N. course to Reich- 
enau; total length 35J m., total fall 3711 ft. It receives a 
number of mountain torrents during its course, the most im- 
portant being that from the Avers- glen, and the Albula, both 
on the right, which is itself formed by many mountain streams. 
(2) The Vorder Rhine rises in the small Toma lake (7691 ft.), 
S. of the Oberalp Pass, not far from the St. Gotthard Pass, and 
then flows N.E. past Disentis and Ilanz, which claims the 
honour of being the "first town on the Rhine," to Reichenau; 
total length 42 m., total fall 349 2 J ft. Its chief affluents are 
the stream dignified by the name of the Medels Rhine, that 
rises in the Cadlimo glen, W. of the Lukmanier Pass, and, after 
flowing through the Medels glen, joins the Vorder Rhine at 
Disentis, and the Glenner, flowing from the Lugnetz glen, both 
on the right. From Reichenau the united streams flow N.E. 
to Coire, the capital of the canton of the Grisons, and then turn 
towards the N., past Ragatz, the valley broadening out, and 
the river being joined on the right by the Landquart and the 111, 
before it expands into the Lake of Constance. Extensive 
" corrections " of the river bed, especially the canal of Diepold- 
sau, have been carried out in the lower bit of this part of the 
valley, while from a little north of Ragatz the right bank belongs 
first to Liechtenstein and then to the Austrian province of the 
Vorarlberg. On issuing from the Lake of Constance at Con- 
stance, the Rhine flows nearly due west to Basel, where it leaves 
Swiss territory, the south bank during this portion of the river 
being entirely Swiss, save the town of Constance, but the north 
shore belongs to Baden, save in the case of the Swiss town 
of Stein-am-Rhein and the Swiss canton of Schaffhausen. The 



chief towns on its banks are Constance (S.), Schafihauscn (N.), 
Waldshut (N.), Laufenburg (S.), Sackingen (N.), Rheinfelden 
(S.), and Basel (both banks). About i£ m. below Schaffhausen 
the river forms the famous Falls of the Rhine, or Falls of Schaff- 
hausen (60 ft. high), while at Coblenz, opposite Waldshut, it 
receives its chief affluent, the Aar, recently swollen by the 
Reuss and the Limmat, and of greater volume than the river 
in which it loses its identity. (W. A. B. C.) 

2. The German and Dutch Porlion, — After Basel, when the 
Rhine turns to the north and enters Germany, its breadth is 
between 550 and 600 ft., while its surface now lies not more than 
800 ft. above the sea, showing that the river has made a descent 
of 6900 ft. by the time it has traversed a third of its course. 
From Basel to Mainz the Rhine flows through a wide and 
shallow valley, bordered on the east and west by the parallel 
ranges of the Black Forest and the Vosges. Its banks are low 
and flat, and numerous islands occur. The tendency to divide 
into parallel branches has been curbed in the interests of naviga- 
tion, and many windings have been cut off by leading the water 
into straight and regular channels. At Mannheim the river 
is nearly 1500 ft. in width, and at Mainz, where it is diverted 
to the west by the barrier of the Taurius, it is still wider. It 
follows the new direction for about 20 m., but at Bingen 
it again turns to the north and begins a completely new stage 
of its career, entering a narrow valley in which the enclosing 
rocky hills abut so closely on the river as often barely to leave 
room for the road and railway on either bank; during this 
portion of its course the speed of the current at a normal state 
of the water exceeds 6 m. an hour. This is the most beautiful 
part of the whole course of the river, abounding in ruined 
castles, romantic crags and sunny vineyards. At Coblenz the 
valley widens and the river is 1200 ft. broad, but the hills close 
in again at Andernach, and this ravine-like part of its course 
cannot be considered as ending till below the Siebengebirge 
(Seven Mountains), where the river once more expands to a 
width of 1300-1600 ft. Beyond Bonn and Cologne the banks 
are again flat and the valley wide, though the hills on the right 
bank do not completely disappear till the neighbourhood of 
Diisseldorf. Farther on the country traversed by the Rhine is 
perfectly level, and the current becomes more and more sluggish. 
On entering Holland, which it does below Emmerich, its course 
is again deflected to the west. Within Holland the banks 
are so low as to require at places to be protected by embank- 
ments against inundations. Almost immediately after entering 
Holland the stream divides into two arms, the larger of which, 
carrying off about two-thirds of the water, diverges to the west, 
is called the Waal, and soon unites with the Maas. The smaller 
branch to the right retains the name of Rhine and sends off 
another arm, called the Yssel, to the Zuider Zee. The Rhine 
now pursues a westerly course almost parallel with that of the 
Waal. At Wijk another bifurcation takes place, the broad Lek 
diverging on the left to join the Maas, while the " Kromme 
Rijn " to the right is comparatively insignificant. Beyond 
Utrecht, where it is again diminished by the divergence of the 
Vecht to the Zuider Zee, the river under the name of the " Oude 
Rijn," or Old Rhine, degenerates into a sluggish and almost 
stagnant stream, which requires the artificial aid of a canal 
and of sluices in finding its way to the sea. In Roman times 
the Rhine at this part of its course seems to have been a full and 
flowing river, but by the 9th century it had lost itself in the 
sands of Katwijk, and it was not until the beginning of the 
19th century that its way to the sea was re-opened. Though 
the name Rhine thus at last attaches to a very insignificant 
stream, the entire district between the Waal on one side and 
the Yssel on the other, the Insula Batavorum of Caesar, in 
reality belongs to tfie delta of the famous river. 

Tributaries. — The Rhine is said to receive, directly or indirectly, 
the waters of upwards of 12,000 tributaries of all sizes. Leaving 
out of account the innumerable glacier streams that swell its volume , 
above the Lake of Constance, the most important affluents to its 
upper course are the Wutach, the Alb and the Wiese, descending 
on the right from the Black Forest, and the Aar, draining several 
Swiss cantons on the left. In the upper Rhenish basin, between 



RHINE 



241 



Basel and Mainz, the tributaries, though numerous, are mostly 
short and unimportant. The 111 and the Nahe on the left and the 
Neckar and the Main on the right arc, however, notable exceptions. 
Before joining the Rhine the HI runs almost parallel with it and 
at no great distance for upwards of 50 m. In the narrow part of 
the valley, between Bingen and Cologne, the Rhine receives the 
waters of the Lahn and the Sicg on the right, and those of the 
Mosel, bringing with it the Saar, and the Ahr on the left. Still 
lower down, but before the Dutch frontier is reached, come the 
Ruhr and the Lippe on the right, and the Erft on the left. The 
numerous arms into which the Rhine branches in Holland have 
already been noticed. 

Physical Geography. — The Rhine connects the highest Alps with 
the mud banks of Holland, and touches in its course the most 
varied geological periods; but the river valley itself is, geologically 
speaking, of comparatively recent formation. Rising amid the 
ancient gneiss rocks of the St Gotthard, the Rhine finds its way 
down to the Lake of Constance between layers of Triassic and 
Jurassic formation; and between that lake and Basel it penetrates 
the chalk barrier of the Jura. The upper Rhenish valley is evidently 
the bed of an ancient lake, the shores of which were formed by 
the gneiss and granite of the Black Forest on the one side and the 
granite and sandstone of the Vosges on the other. Within the 
valley all the alluvial deposits are recent. Between Bingen and 
Bonn the Rhine forces its way through a hilly and rocky district 
belonging to the Devonian formation. The contorted strata of 
slate and greywacke rock must have been formed at a period vastly 
anterior to that in which the lake of the upper valley managed 
to force an outlet through the enclosing barriers. Probably this 
section may be looked upon as the oldest portion of the river course 
proper, connecting the upper Rhenish lake with the primeval 
ocean at Bonn. Tn this district, too, as has already been remarked, 
is the finest scenery of the Rhine, a fact due in great part to the 
grotesque shapes of the quartzose rocks, left denuded of the less 
durable slate and sandstone. All the strata intersected by the 
Rhine between Bingen and Bonn contain fossils of the same classes. 
The deposits of the actual valley here, belonging to the Miocene 
group of the Tertiary system, are older than the deposits either 
farther up or farther down the river; but they are contempo- 
raneous with the basalts of the Rhine, which at Coblcnz and in the 
peaks of the Seven Mountains also contribute to the scenic charm 
of the river. The very extensive pumice deposits at Neuwied 
and the lava and other volcanic rocks belong to a more recent epoch. 
Below Bingen the formations belong almost entirely to the Post- 
Tertiary period. Numerous extinct volcanoes rise near Neuwied. 
In the natter parts of the valley occur large beds of loam and rubble, 
sometimes in terraces parallel with, but several hundred feet above, 
the river, proving by their disposition and appearance that the 
valley has been formed by the action of water. 

Navigation. — The Rhine has been one of the chief waterways of 
Europe from the earliest times; and, as its channel is not exposed 
to the danger of silting up like those of the Elbe and the Oder, 
it has always been comparatively easy to keep it open** The 
Romans exerted themselves to improve the lower navigation of 
the river, and appointed prefects of the Rhine to superintend the 
shipping and to exact the moderate dues imposed to keep the 
channel in repair. The Franks continued the same policy and 
retained a system of river-dues. Afterwards, as the banks became 
parcelled out among a host of petty princelings, each of whom 
arrogated the right of laying a tax on passing vessels, the imposts 
became so prejudicial as seriously to hamper the development of 
the shipping. ^Many of the riparian potentates derived the bulk 
of their revenue from this source, and it is calculated that in the 
1 8th century the Rhine yielded a total revenue of £200,000, in spite 
of the comparatively insignificant amount of the shipping. The 
first proposal for a free Rhine was mooted by the French at the 
congress of Rastatt (1 797-1 799), but Holland, commanding the 
mouth of the river, placed every obstacle in the way of the sugges- 
tion. In 1831, on the separation of Holland and Belgium, the former 
had become more amenable to reason; and a system was agreed 
upon which practically gave free navigation to the vessels of the 
riverine states, while imposing a moderate tariff upon foreign ships. 
After the war of 1866, Prussia negotiated with Baden, Bavaria 
and Hesse-Darmstadt with a view to the removal of all tolls. 
It was not, however, till 1868 (see Die Rhein-Schijfahrts Akte vom 
17 ten Okl., 1868) that the last vestige of a toll disappeared and the 
river was thrown open without any restriction. -The management 
of the channel and navigation is now vested in a central commis- 
sion, meeting at Mannheim on the 1st of July in each year. Jhe 
channel has been greatly improved and in many places made more 
direct since the beginning of the 19th century, large sums being 
annually spent in keeping it in order. Capacious river harbours 
have been formed at various points, twenty-nine of these being in 
Germany and eight in Holland. The position of the river is highly 
favourable for the development of its trade. It flows through the 
mOw'; populous regions of the continent of Europe, to discharge 
into one ot the most frequented seas opposite Great Britain, and, 
besides serving as a natural outlet for Germany, Belgium and 
Holland, is connected with a great part of central and southern 



France by the Rhine- Rhone and the Rhinc-Marne canals, and with 
the basin of the Danube by the Ludwigs-Canal. 

The introduction of steam has greatly increased the shipping 
on the Rhine; and small steamers nly also on the Main, the Neckar, 
the Maas and the Mosel. The first Rhine steamer was launched 
in 1817; and now the river is regularly traversed by upwards of a 
hundred, from the small tug up to the passenger saloon-steamer^ 
The steamboat traffic has especially encouraged the influx of 
tourists, and the number of passing travellers may now be reckoned 
as between one and two millions annually. The river is navigable 
without interruption from Basel to its mouth, a distance of 550 
miles, of which 450 lie within Germany. Above Spires, however, 
the river craft are comparatively small, but lower down vessels of 
500 and 600 tons burden find no difficulty in plying. Between 
Basel and Strassburg the depth of water is sometimes not more 
than 3 ft.; between Strassburg and Mainz it varies from 5 to 25 ft.; 
while below Mainz it is never less than q or 10 ft. The deepest 
point is opposite the Lorelei (Lurlci) Rock near St Goar, where it 
is 75 ft. in depth; at Diisseldorf the depth is about 50 ft. 

London, Hamburg, Bremen and the chief Baltic ports as far as 
Riga and St Petersburg participate in the traffic on the Rhine. 
The boats which ply up and down the river itself, without venturing 
upon the open sea, are mostly craft of 100 to 200 tons, owned in 
the great majority of cases by their captains, men principally of 
German or Dutch nationality. This fleet is computed to number 
some 8500 craft, with an aggregate capacity of over 2 million tons, 
of which about one-tenth are steamships. The traffic at the chief 
German ports of the river aggregated 4,489,000 tons in 1870, but by 
1900 this had grown to a total of 17,000,000 tons, thus distributed : 
Ruhrort, 6,512,000 tons; Duisburg, 3,000,000 tons; Cologne, 
1,422,000 tons; and Mannheim, 6,021,000 tons. These are not 
the only ports on the river; a large trade is also done at Kchl, 
Maxau (for Karlsruhe), Ludwigshafcn, Mainz, Bonn, Rotterdam 
and a host of smaller places. The amount of traffic which passed 
the town of Emmerich near the Dutch frontier,. both ways, increased 
from an annual average of about 6 million tons in 1881-85 to over 
9Tf million t^JLJT T **ffi Notwithstanding the inherent diffi- 
culties of constructToTt-tSused by the great variations in the level 
of the stream, amounting sometimes to 20 ft. or more, the chief 
ports of the Rhine are admirably constructed, and well equipped 
with modern contrivances for loading and unloading vessels. 
Boats carrying as much as 600 tons are often able to proceed as far 
up stream as Strassburg, and smaller craft get as far as Huningen, 
a little above Basel. Large passenger boats ply regularly between 
Mainz and Diisseldorf, and sometimes extend their journeys as high 
up as Mannheim, and as far in the other direction as Rotterdam. 
The efforts of the river authorities are being directed to the deepen- 
ing and improvement of the navigable channel from the sea to 
Strassburg, the low-water depths aimed at being 10 ft. from 
Rotterdam to the German frontier, and 10 ft. thence to Cologne; 
8 ft. 3 in. from Cologne to St Goar, and 6 ft. 6 in. from St Goar 
to Mannheim. At present the Rhine in Holland has a depth of 
about 9 ft. and a width of 1200 to 1300 ft., though the Merwede 
branch exceeds this depth by 8 in. Altogether a sum approaching 
£2,500,000 was spent in Holland within the latter part of the 19th 
century on the improvement of the Rhine and its principal arteries. 
Above Mannheim the depth of the stream is always less than 5 ft., 
and generally varies between that figure and 4 ft. 6 in. The 
difficulty of ascending the rapids near Bingen is usually surmounted 
by the help of steam hauling machinery placed on the bank, 
though powerful tugs have also come into use for this purpose. 
The work of blasting out the rocks which at that spot projected 
in the bed of the river, begun in 1830, was continued down to the 
year 1887, so that now there arc two navigable channels of sufficient 
depth for all vessels which ply up and down that part of the stream. 
One of the most interesting features of the Rhine navigation is 
afforded by the huge rafts of timber that are floated down the river. 
Single tree trunks sent down to the Rhine by the various tributaries 
are united into small rafts as they reach the main stream; and 
these again are fastened together to form one large raft about 
Andernach. Though not so large as formerly, these timber rafts 
are still sometimes 400 or 500 ft. in length, and are navigated by 
200 to 400 men, who live in little huts on the raft, forming actual 
floating villages. On reaching Dort the rafts are broken up and 
sold, a single raft sometimes producing as much as £30,000. The 
voyage from Bingen to Dort takes from one to six weeks, and the 
huge unwieldy structures require to be navieated with great care. 
The commerce carried on by the river itself is supplemented by 
the numerous railways, which skirt its banks and converge to its 
principal towns. Before the introduction of railways there were 
no permanent bridges across the Rhine below Basel; but now 
trains cross it at about a dozen different points in Germany and 
Holland. 

History. — Politically the Rhine has always played a great 
part. The wholt valley seems to have been originally occupied 
by Celtic tribes, who have left traces of their presence on the 
contents of tombs and in the forms of names (Moguntiaeum 



242 



RHINE PROVINCE 



or Mainz, Borbetomagus or Worms); but at the beginning of 
the historical period we find the Celts everywhere in retreat 
before the advancing Teutons. Probably the Teutonic pressure 
began as early as the 4th century before Christ, and the history 
of the next few hundred years may be summed up as the gradual 
substitution of a Germanic for a Celtic population along the 
banks of the Rhine. Its second historical period begins with the 
advent of the Romans, who stemmed the advancing Teutonic 
tide. Augustus and his successors took good care to fortify 
the Rhine carefully, and a large proportion of the Roman legions 
were constantly in garrison here. For two hundred years the 
Rhine formed the boundary between the Roman empire and the 
Teutonic hordes; and during that period the left or Roman 
bank made prodigious strides in civilization and culture. The 
wonderful Roman remains at Trier and elsewhere, the Roman 
roads, bridges and aqueducts, are convincing proofs of what 
the Rhine gained from Roman domination. This Roman 
civilization was, however, destined to be swamped by the 
current of Teutonic immigration, which finally broke down the 
barriers of the Roman empire and overwhelmed the whole 
of the Rhenish district. Under Charlemagne, whose principal 
residence was in Aix-la-Chapelle, the culture of the Rhine 
valley again began to flourish, its results being still to be traced 
in the important architectural remains of this period. At the 
partition of the domains of Charlemagne in a.d. S43 the Rhine 
formed the boundary between Germany and the middle kingdom 
of Lotharingia; but by S70 it lay wholly within the former 
realm. For nearly eight hundred years it continued in this 
position, the frontier of the German empire coinciding more or 
less with the line of the Rhone. During the early middle ages 
the bank of the Rhine formed the most cultured part of Ger- 
many, basing its civilization on its "Roman past. The Thirty 
Years' War exercised a most prejudicial effect upon the district 
of the Rhine; and the peace of Westphalia gave France a 
footing on the left bank of the hitherto exclusively German 
river by the acquisition of Alsace. The violent seizure of 
Strassburg by France in 1681 was ratified by the peace of Ryswick 
in 1697, which recognized the Rhine as the boundary between 
Germany and France from Basel to about Germersheim. It 
was an easy inference for the French mind that the Rhine should 
be the boundary throughout and the Gaul of Caesar restored. 
This ideal was realized in 1801, when the whole of the left bank 
of the Rhine was formally ceded to France. The congress of 
Vienna (181 5) restored the lower part of the Rhenish valley to 
Germany, but it was not till the war of 1S70-71 that the recovery 
of Alsace and Lorraine made the Rhine once more " Germany's 
river, not Germany's frontier." In the military history of all 
these centuries constant allusion is made to the Rhine, its 
passages and its fortresses. Every general who has fought in 
its neighbourhood has at one time or another had to provide 
for a crossing of the Rhine, from Julius Caesar, who crossed it 
twice, down to our own time. The wars carried on here by 
Louis XIV. are still remembered in the Rhine district, where the 
devastations of his generals were of the most appalling descrip- 
tion; and scarcely a village or town but has a tale to tell of the 
murder and rapine of this period. 

The Rhine in Literature. — The Rhine has always exercised a 
peculiar sort of fascination over the German mind, in a measure 
and in a manner not easily paralleled by the case of any other 
river. " Father Rhine " is the centre of the German's patriotism 
and the symbol of his country. In his literature it has played 
a prominent part from the Nibelungailied to the present day; 
and its weird and romantic legends have been alternately the 
awe and the delight of his childhood. The Rhine was the 
classic river of the middle ages; and probably the Tiber alone 
is of equal historical interest among European rivers. But 
of late years the beauties of the Rhine have become sadly 
marred; the banks in places, especially between Coblenz and 
Bonn, disfigured by quarrying, the air made dense with the 
smoke of cement factories and steam-tugs, commanding spots 
falling a prey to the speculative builder and villages growing 
into towns. 



See Daniel, Deutschiand: Beyerhaus, Der Rkein von Strassburg 
bis zur holtandischen Grenze (Coblenz, 1902); Mohr, Die Ftossetei 
auf dem Rhein (Mannheim, 1897); C. Eckert, Rheinsckiffakrt im 
iQten Jahrkundert; Horn, Der Rhein, Geschichte und Sagen seiner 
Burgen (Stuttgart, 1893); Treutlein, Die neueren DeutscJten Rhein- 
stromstudien und ihre Ergebnisse (in Ausland, 1893); A. Chambalu, 
Die Stromverdnderungen des Niederrheins seit der vorromischen Zeit 
(Cologne, 1892), and nandbooks of Baedeker, Meyer and Woerl. 

0. F. M.; P. A. A.) 

RHINE PROVINCE, or Rhixelakd, the most westerly 
province of the kingdom of Prussia, bounded on the N. by 
Holland, on the E. by the Prussian provinces of Westphalia and 
Hesse-Nassau, and the grand duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt, on 
the S.E. by the Bavarian Palatinate, on the S. and S.W. by 
Lorraine, and on the W. by Luxemburg, Belgium and Holland. 
The small district of Wetzlar in the midst of the province of 
Hesse also belongs to the Rhine Province, which, on the other 
hand, surrounds the Oldenburg principality of Birkenfeld. 
The extent of the province is 10,423 sq. m.; its extreme length, 
from north to south, is nearly 200 m., and its greatest breadth 
is just under 90 m. It includes about 200 m. of the course of 
the Rhine, which forms the eastern frontier of the province 
from Bingen to Coblenz, and then flows through it in a north- 
westerly direction. 

The southern and larger part of the Rhine province, belong- 
ing geologically to the Devonian formations of the lower Rhine, 
is hilly. On the left bank are the elevated plateaus of the 
Hunsriick and the Eifel, separated from each other by the 
deep valley of the Mosel, while on the right bank are the spurs 
of the Westerwald and the Sauerland, the former reaching the 
river in the picturesque group known as the Seven Mountains 
(Siebengebirge), The highest hill in the province is the Walder- 
beskopf (2670 ft.) in the Hochwald, and there are several other 
summits above 2000 ft. on the left bank, while on the right 
there are few which attain a height of 1600 ft. Most of the 
hills are covered with trees, but the Eifel (g.r.) is a barren and 
bleak plateau. To the north of a line drawn from Aix- 
la-Chapelle to Bonn the province is flat, and marshy districts 
occur near the Dutch frontier. The climate varies considerably 
with the configuration of the surface. That of the northern 
lowlands and of the sheltered valleys is the mildest and most 
equable in Prussia, with a mean annual temperature of 50 
Fahr., while on the hills of the Eifel the mean does not exceed 
44°. The annual rainfall varies in the different districts from 
18 to 32 inches. Almost the whole province belongs- to the 
basin of the Rhine, but a small district in the north-west is 
drained by affluents of the Meuse. Of the numerous tributaries 
which join the Rhine within the province, the most important 
are the N T ahe, the Mosel and the Ahr on the left bank, and 
the Sieg, the Wupper, the Ruhr and the.Lippe on the right. 
The only lake of any size is the Laacher See, the largest of the 
" maare " or extinct crater lakes of the Eifel. 

Of the total area of the Rhine province about 45% is 
occupied by arable land, 16% by meadows and pastures, 
and 31% by forests. Little except oats and potatoes 
can be raised on the high-lying plateaus in the south of the 
province, but the river-valleys and the northern lowlands are 
extremely fertile. The great bulk of the soil is in the hands of 
small proprietors, and this is alleged to have had the effect of 
somewhat retarding the progress of scientific agriculture. The 
usual cereal crops are, however, all grown with success, and 
tobacco, hops, flax, rape, hemp and beetroot (for sugar) are 
cultivated for commercial purposes. Large quantities of fruit 
are also produced. The vine-culture occupies a space of about 
30,000 acres, about half of which are in the valley of the Mosel, 
a third in that of the Rhine itself, and the rest mainly on the 
Nahe and the Ahr. v The choicest varieties of Rhine wine, 
however, such as Johannisberger and Steinberger, are produced 
higher up the river, beyond the limits of the Rhine province. 
In the hilly districts more than half the surface is sometimes 
occupied by forests, and large plantations of oak are formed 
for the use of the bark in tanning. Considerable herds of cattle 
are reared on the rich pastures of the lower Rhine, but the 



RHINOCEROS 



243 



number of sheep in the province is comparatively small, and 
is, indeed, not greatly in excess of that of the goats. The 
wooded hills are well stocked with deer, and a stray wolf 
occasionally finds its way from the forests of the Ardennes into 
those of the Hunsriick. The salmon fishery of the Rhine is 
very productive, and trout abound in the mountain streams. 

The great mineral wealth of the Rhine province probably 
furnishes its most substantial claim to the title of the " richest 
jewel in the crown of Prussia." Besides parts of the carboni- 
ferous measures of the Saar and the Ruhr, it also contains 
important deposits of coal near Aix-la-Chapelle. Iron ore is 
found in abundance near Coblenz, the Bleiberg in the Eifcl 
possesses an apparently inexhaustible supply of lead, and zinc 
is found near Cologne and Aix-la-Chapelle. The mineral pro- 
ducts of the district also include lignite, copper, manganese, 
vitriol, lime, gypsum, volcanic stones (used for millstones) 
and slates. By far the most important item is coal. Of the 
numerous mineral springs the best known are those of Aix-la- 
Chapelle and Kreuznach. 

The mineral resources of the Prussian Rhine province, 
coupled with its favourable situation and the facilities of transit 
afforded by its great waterway, have made it the most important 
manufacturing district in Germany. The industry is mainly 
concentrated round two chief centres, Aix-la-Chapelle and 
Dusseldorf (with the valley of the Wuppcr), while there are 
naturally few manufactures in the hilly districts of the south 
or the marshy flats of the north. The largest iron and steel 
works are at Essen, Oberhausen, Duisburg, Dusseldorf and 
Cologne, while cutlery and other small metallic wares are 
extensively made at Solingen, Remscheid and Aix-la-Chapelle. 
The cloth of Aix-la-Chapelle and the silk of Crefeld form 
important articles of export. The chief industries of Elberfeld- 
Barmen and the valley of the Wupper are cotton-weaving, 
calico-printing and the manufacture of turkey red and other 
dyes. Linen is largely made at Gladbach, leather at Malmedy, 
glass in the Saar district and beetroot sugar near Cologne. 
Though the Rhineland is par excellence the country of the vine, 
beer is largely produced; distilleries arc also numerous, and 
large quantities of sparkling Moselle are made at Coblenz, 
chiefly for exportation to England. Commerce is greatly 
aided by the navigable rivers, a very extensive network of rail- 
ways, and the excellent roads constructed during the French 
regime. The imports consist mainly of raw material for working 
up in the factories of the district, while the principal exports 
are coal, fruit, wine, dyes, cloth, silk and other manufactured 
articles of various descriptions. 

The population of the Rhine province in 1905 was 6,435,778, 
including 4,472,058 Roman Catholics, 1,877,582 Protestants 
and 55,408 Jews. The Roman Catholics muster strongest on 
the left bank, while on the right bank about half the population 
is Protestant. The great bulk of the population is of Teutonic 
stock, and about a quarter of a million are of Flemish blood. 
On the north-west frontier reside about 10,000 Walloons, who 
speak French or Walloon as their native tongue. The Rhine 
province is the most thickly populated part of Prussia, the 
general average being 617 persons per sq. m. The province 
contains a greater number of large towns than any other 
province in Prussia. Upwards of half the population are sup- 
ported by industrial and commercial pursuits, and barely a 
• quarter by agriculture. There is a university at Bonn, and 
elementary education is especially successful. For purposes 
of administration the province is divided into the five districts 
of Coblenz, Dusseldorf, Cologne, Aix-la-Chapelle and Trier. 
Coblenz is the official capital, though Cologne is the largest and 
most important town. Being a frontier province the Rhine- 
land is strongly garrisoned, and the Rhine is guarded by the 
three strong fortresses of Cologne with Deutz, Coblenz with 
Ehrenbreitstein, and Wesel. The province sends 35 members 
to the German Reichstag and 62 to the Prussian house of 
representatives. 

History. — The present Prussian Rhine province was formed in 
1815 out of the duchies of Cleves, Berg, Gelderland and Julich, 



the ecclesiastical principalities of Trier and Cologne, the free cities 
of Aix-la-Chapelle and Cologne, and nearly a hundred small lord- 
ships and abbeys. At the earliest historical period we find the 
territories between the Ardennes and the Rhine occupied by the 
Treviri, the Ebu rones and other Celtic tribes, who, however, were 
all more or less modified and influenced by their Teutonic neigh- 
bours. On the right bank of the Rhine, between the Main and 
the Lahn, were the settlements of the Mattiaci, a branch of the 
Germanic Chatti, while farther to the north were the Usipetes 
and Tencteri. Julius Caesar conquered the tribes on the left bank, 
and Augustus established numerous fortified posts on the Rhine, 
but the Romans never succeeded in gaining a firm footing on the 
right bank. As the power of the Roman empire declined the Franks 
pushed forward along both banks of the Rhine, and by the end of 
the 5th century had regained all the lands that had formerly been 
under Teutonic influence. The German congucrors of the Rhenish 
districts were singularly little affected by the culture of the pro- 
vincials they subdued, and all traces of Roman civilization were 
submerged in a new flood of paganism. By the 8th century the 
Frankish dominion was firmly established in central Germany and 
northern Gaul. On the division of the Carolingian realm the part 
of the province to the east of the river fell to the share of Ger- 
many, while that to the west remained with the evanescent kingdom 
of Lotharingia. By the time of Otto 1. (d. 073) both banks of the 
Rhine had become German, and the Rhenish territory was divided 
between the duchies of Upper and Lower Lorraine, the one on the 
Mosel and the other on the Meuse. Subsequently, as the central 
power of the German sovereign became weakened, the Rhineland 
followed the general tendency and split up into numerous small 
independent principalities, each with its separate vicissitudes and 
special chronicles. The old Lotharingian divisions passed wholly 
out of use, and the name of Lorraine became restricted to the 
district that still bears it. In spite of its dismembered condition, 
and the sufferings it underwent at the hands of its French neigh- 
bours in various periods of warfare, the Rhenish territory prospered 
greatly and stood in the foremost rank of German culture and 
progress. Aix-la-Chapelle was fixed upon as the place of corona- 
tion of the German emperors, and the ecclesiastical principalities 
of the Rhine bulk largely in German history. Prussia first set fool 
on the Rhine in 1609 by the joint occupation of Cleves; and about 
a century, later Upper Gelderland and Mors also became Prussian. 
At the peace of Basel in 1795 the whole of the left bank of the Rhine 
was resigned to France, and in 1806 the Rhenish princes all joined 
the Confederation of the Rhine. The congress of Vienna assigned 
the whole of the lower Rhenish districts to Prussia, which had the 
tact to leave them in undisturbed possession of the liberal institu- 
tions they had become accustomed to under the republican rule of 
the French. 

RHINOCEROS, the designation for such perissodactyle 
(odd-toed) ungulate mammals as carry one or more horns on 
the head, and their extinct relatives (see Peeissodactyla). 
Rhinoceroses are of large size and massive build, but have little 
intelligence, and are generally timid in disposition, though 
ferocious when wounded or brought to bay. The African 
species use the nasal horns as weapons, with which they strike 
and toss their assailant, but the Asiatic rhinoceroses employ 
their sharp lower tusks much as does a boar. Rhinoceroses are 
dull of sight, but their hearing and scent are remarkably acute. 
They feed on herbage, shrubs and leaves of trees, and, like so 
many other large animals which inhabit hot countries, sleep 
the greater part of the day, and are most active in the cool of 
the evening or even during the night. Some are found in more 
or less open plains, while others inhabit swampy districts. 
Members of the group have existed in both east and west 
hemispheres since the beginning of the Miocene period; but in 
America they all became extinct before the end of the Pliocene 
period, and in the Old World their distribution has become 
greatly restricted. They are, for instance, no longer found in 
Europe and North Asia, but only in Africa and in portions of the 
Indian and Indo-Malayan regions. Living rhinoceroses may 
be arranged in three groups: (1) With a single nasal horn, and 
very thick skin, which is raised into strong, definitely arranged 
ridges or folds. In this group there are two well-marked species. 
The Indian rhinoceros {Rhinoceros unicornis), the largest of the 
Asiatic forms, is the most widely known, from its being exhibited 
in zoological gardens. A famous rhinoceros presented to the 
Zoological Society of London in July 1864 lived till December 
1904. This species stands from 5 ft. to 5 ft. 9 in. at the 
shoulder and is blackish grey in colour; the horn rarely 
exceeds a foot in length, but one in the British Museum 
measures 19 in. This species is now only met with in a wild 



244 



RHINOCEROS 



had 



wider 



state in the Assam plain, though it formerly 
range. 

The first rhinoceros seen alive in Europe since the time when 
these animals, in common with nearly all the large remarkable 
beasts of both Africa and Asia, were exhibited in the Roman 
shows, was of this species. It was sent from India to Emmanuel, 
king of Portugal, in 15 13; and from a sketch taken in Lisbon, 
Albert Diirer composed his celebrated but fanciful engraving, 
which was reproduced in so many old books on natural history. 
This species chiefly frequents swampy grass jungle and is fond 
of a mud-bath. According to General A. H. Kinloch ? it is 
hunted by " tracking the animal on a single elephant until he 
is at last found in his lair, or perhaps standing quite unconscious 




tic 1. — Indian Rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis). This and the 
following illustrations are reduced from drawings by J. Wolf, from 
animals in the London Zoological Society's Gardens. 




Fig. 2. — Javan Rhinoceros (Rhinoceros sondaicus). 

of danger; or by beating him out of the jungle with a line 
of elephants, the guns being stationed at the points where 
he is most likely to break cover. In the latter case it 
is necessary to have reliable men with the beaters, who can 
exercise authority and keep them in order, for both mahouts 
and elephants have the greatest dread of the huge brute, who 
appears to be much more formidable than he really is." The 
Javan rhinoceros (Rhinoceros sondaicus) is distinguished by its 
smaller size, and a different arrangement of the skin-folds (as 
may be seen by comparing figs. 1 and 2). The horn in the 
female is little developed, if not altogether absent. This species 
has a more extensive geographical range than the last, being 
found in the Bengal Sundarbans near Calcutta, Burma, the 
Malay Peninsula, Java, Sumatra and Borneo. The colour is 
uniform dusky grey. A female obtained in the Sundarbans 



stood 5 ft. 6 in. high. This species is more an inhabitant of 
tree-forest than of grass jungle, and its usual habitat appears 
to be in hilly countries. 

In the second section there is a well-developed nasal, and 
a small frontal horn separated by an interval. The skin is 
thrown into folds, but these are not strongly marked, and lower 
tusks are present. This group or genus is represented at the 
present day only by the Sumatran rhinoceros, Rhinoceros 
(Dicerorhinus) sumatrensis, with its sub-species. It is the smallest 
of all the species, and its geographical range is nearly the same 
as that of the Javan species, though not extending into Java; 
it has been found in Assam, Chittagong, Burma, the Malay 
Peninsula, Sumatra and Borneo. The colour varies from earthy 
brown to blackish, and the greater part of the body is thinly 
covered with hair, and the ears and tail are fringed. The average 
height of adults is from 4 ft. to 4 ft. 6 in. This species inhabits 
forests, and ascends hills to considerable elevations; it is shy 
and timid, but easily tamed even when adult. A specimen 
from Chittagong acquired in 1872 by the Zoological Society of 
London was named R. lasiotis, as it differed from the typical 
form by its larger size, paler and browner colour, smoother 
skin, longer, finer and redder hair, and the long fringe of hair 
on the ears. It is now recognized as a local race. 




Fig. 3. — Black or common African Rhinoceros (Rhinoceros 
(Diceros) bicornis). 

To the third group or genus (Diceros) belong the two African 
rhinoceroses, which have two horns, the skin without definite 
folds, and no lower tusks. The black rhinoceros (Rhinoceros 
(Diceros) bicornis) is the smaller of the two, and has a pointed 
prehensile upper lip. It ranges through the wooded and 
watered districts of Africa, from Abyssinia in the north to the 
Cape Colony, but its numbers are yearly diminishing, owing to 
the opening up of the country. It feeds exclusively on leaves 
and branches of bushes and small trees, and chiefly frequents 
the sides of wood-clad rugged hills. Specimens in which the 
posterior horn has attained a length as great as or greater than 
the anterior have been separated under the name of R. keitloa, 
but the characters of these appendages are too variable for 
specific distinctions. The black rhinoceros is more rarely seen 
in menageries in Europe than either of the Asiatic species, but 
one lived in the gardens of the London Zoological Society from 
1868-1891. 

Lastly we have the white — BurchelTs, or square-mouthed — 
rhinoceros (Rhinoceros (Diceros) simus), the largest of the five, 
and differing from the other species in having a square truncated 
upper lip. In conformity with the structure of the mouth, 
this species h'ves entirely by browsing on grass, and is therefore 
more partial to open countries or districts where there are broad 
grassy valleys between the tracts of bush. In its old haunts in 



RHINTHON— RHIZOPODA 



245 



the south it is practically extinct; but ten were reported from 
a reserve in Zululand in 1902. A detached colony exists, 
however, near Lado, on the Upper Nile. No specimen of this 
species has ever been brought alive to Europe. Mr F. C. Selous 
gives the following description of its habits: — 

"The square-mouthed rhinoceros is a huge, ungainly looking 
beast, with a disproportionately large head, a large male stand- 
ing 6 ft. 6 in. at the shoulder. Like elephants and buffaloes 
they lie asleep 'during the heat of the day, and feed during 
the night and in the cool hours of early morning and evening. 
Their sight is very bad; but they are quick of hearing, and their 
scent is very keen ; they are, too, often accompanied by rhinoceros 
birds, which, by running about their heads, flapping their wings, 
and screeching at the same time, frequently give them notice of the 
approach of danger. When disturbed they go off at a swift trot, 
which soon leaves all pursuit from a man on foot far behind; but if 
chased by a horseman they break into a gallop, which they can keep 
up for some distance. However, although they run very swiftly, 
when their size and heavy build is considered, they are no match for 
an average good horse. They are, as a rule, very easy to shoot on 
horseback, as, if one gallops a little in front of and on one side of 
them, they will hold their course, and come sailing past, offering 
a magnificent broadside shot, while under similar circumstances 
a prehensile-lipped rhinoceros will usually swerve away in such a 
manner as only to present his hind-quarters for a shot. When 
either walking or running, the square-mouthed rhinoceros holds 
its head very low, its nose nearly touching the ground. When a 
small calf accompanies its mother, it always runs in front and she 
appears to guide it by holding the point of her horn upon the little 
animal's rump; and it is perfectly wonderful to note how m all 
sudden changes of pace, from a trot to a gallop, or vice versa, the 
same position is always exactly maintained. During the autumn 
and winter months (ue. from March to August) the square-mouthed 
rhinoceros is usually very fat ; and its meat is then most excellent, 
being something like beef, but yet having a peculiar flavour of its 
own. The part in greatest favour among hunters is the hump, 
which, if cut off whole and roasted just as it is in the skin, in a hole 
<lug in the ground, would, I think, be difficult to match either for 
juiciness or flavour." (W. H. F.; R. L.*) 

RHINTHON (c. 323-285" B.C.), Greek dramatist, son of a 
potter. He was probably a native of Syracuse and after- 
wards settled at Tarentum. He invented the hilarotragoedia, a 
burlesque of tragic subjects. Such travesties were also called 
phlyaces (" fooleries ") and their writers phlyacographi. He was 
the author of thirty-eight plays, of which only a few titles 
(Amphitryon y Heracles, Orestes) and lines have been preserved, 
chiefly by the grammarians, as illustrating dialectic Tarentine 
forms. The metre is iambic, in which the greatest licence 
is allowed. The Amphitruo of Plautus, although probably 
imitated from a different writer (Archippus of the Middle 
Comedy), may be taken as a specimen of the manner in which 
such subjects were treated. There is no doubt that the hilaro- 
tragoedia exercised considerable influence on Latin comedy, the 
Rhinthonica (i.e. fabula) being mentioned by various authorities 
amongst other kinds of drama known to the Romans. Scenes 
from these travesties are probably represented in certain vase 
paintings from Lower Italy, for which see H. Heydemann, " Die 
Phlyakendarstellungen auf bemalten Vasen," in Jahrbuch des 
archaologischen Insiiiuts, i. (1886). 

Fragments in monograph by E. Volker (Leipzig, 1887); see also 
E. Sommerbrodt, De Phlyacographia Craecorum (Breslau, 1875); 
W. Christ, Geschichte der griechischen Litter atur (1898). 

RHIZOPODA, the name given by Dujardin (pro parte, 1838) 
to a group of Sarcodine Protozoa. They are distinguished by 
their pseudopods, simple or branched, passing by wide bases 
into the general surface, never fine radial nor fusing into complex 
networks; skeleton absent or a simple shell (" test," " theca "), 
never (?) a calcareous shell, nor represented by a siliceous net- 
work,' nor spicules. Reproduction by binary fission ; by division 
or abstriction of buds after the body has become multi-nucleate; 
or by the resolution of the body into numerous uninucleate 
zoospores (amcebulse or flagellulse) which may conjugate as 
gametes; plasmodium formation unknown; encystment (in 
" resting cysts " or " hypnocysts ") common. Without a 
knowledge of the history it is impossible to distinguish a naked 
Lobose from the Amoebula (pseudopodiospore) of a Myxomycete 
■or Proteomyxan. As to the name, Dujardin included the 
thecate Lobosa, the Filosa, and the Reticularia or Foraminifera 



(q.v). The latter had already received the name Foraminifera 
(for their shells) from d'Orbigny; and as it is impossible to 
separate naked from thecate Lobosa we have merged his 
Amoebina (Amibiens) in the larger group. The Filosa were 
removed by Lang from the Reticularia; in habit and test they 
are inseparable from the Lobosa; and though their cytoplasm 
approximates to that of Reticularia, their ectosarc is much less 
granular, though not free from granules as stated by Lang. 

The majority of Rhizopoda are fresh-water forms, some 
occurring in the film of water on mosses, among Sphagnum, or 
about the bases of grass-haulms; many, however, are exclusively 
marine. The aquatic forms generally may lurk among Confervae 
or higher weeds, or lie in the bottom of decomposing or excre- 
mentitious matter in still or slow-flowing waters. Of these some 
may become temporarily pelagic, floating up by the formation 
of gas vacuoles (containing probably C0 2 ) in the cytoplasm. It 
is easy to verify this by placing Arcella (fig. 1, 7) in a drop of 
water on a glass cover and inverting this over a glass ring; the 
Arcella sink to the free convex surface of the drop and escape 
from this most unnatural position by secreting gas-vacuoles; 
when they float up to contact with the glass cover, so as to touch 
it by the convex back of the shell, they put forth long pseudo- 
podia which attach themselves to the glass and by their con- 
traction turn the animal over, so that it can crawl over (i.e. 
under) the glass. Amoeba (Entamoeba) histolytica, Schaudinn, is 
the cause of tropical dysentery and hepatic abscess in man. 
Pelomyxa (fig. 1, 5-6) is remarkable for containing symbiotic 
bacteria. Zooxanthellae (symbiotic green cells — Algae or 
Flagellates) occur in several species; and PauUnella contains 
two sausage-shaped blue-green bodies, " chromatophores," 
which are probably symbiotic Cyanophyceae. The shell, even 
when not a .simple membrane, has always a continuous inner 
membrane of a complex nitrogenous substance containing 
sulphur, allied to keratin and termed pseudochitin. The outer 
layer when present is composed of little hollow prisms (Arcella, 
fig* J > l)y sand, or inorganic matter first swallowed by the 
animal (Difflugia, Pseudodifflugta) , sometimes partially digested 
(Lecquereuxia), or else of plates secreted as " reserve plates " 
within the cytoplasm of the animal Cyphoderia (fig. 6, B), 
Quadrula, Nebelia, Euglypha (figs. 4, 6, A), &c. In Quadrula 
irregularis alone are the plates said to be calcareous; elsewhere 
they are always siliceous and simply refractive, so that the 
silica is probably hydrated (opal). The cement is possibly of 
silicified pseudochitin. This material is often permeated by a 
ferric oxide or hydrate, even when it is not coloured rusty brown. 
Shell formation of the membranous test is by simple surface- 
excretion; under budding we describe its accomplishment in the 
aggregated shells. 

The " pylome," or aperture for the protrusion of the proto- 
plasm, is usually single. There are two pylomes at opposite 
poles in several Filosa (Ditrema), hence united by some authors 
into a distinct family (fig. 7, 1, 5, 11), and in the gelatinous 
theca of Trichosphaerium (fig. 5) are numerous permanent 
pylomic pores. The nucleus is variable in form and character. 
In Amoeba binucleata two nuclei are always present; and some 
genera are permanently plurinucleate (Pelomyxa, Arcella, 
fig. 1, 7). It often gives forth fragments into the cytoplasm, the 
" chromidia" of R. Hertwig, which, as in Foraminifera (q.v.), 
may play an important part in reproductive processes. The 
contractile vacuole (there are two in Arcella, fig. 1, 7) in actively 
progressing Rhizopods always discharges at the hinder end. 
Absent or sluggish in marine forms, it is of constant occurrence 
in all fresh-water Rhizopods except Pelomyxa. 

The pseudopods vary greatly in type. In Amoeba prince ps 
(fig. 1, 4) they are mere promontory-like extensions of the body; 
in A. radiosa (fig. 1, 1-3) and Trichosphaerium (fig. 5) they are 
distinct slender processes, tapering, and either blunt or finely 
pointed at the apex; in Pelomyxa (fig. 1, 5, 6) as in A. (Lit ha- 
moeba) discus (fig. 2) they are " eruptive, " hemispherical, 
formed apparently by the rupture of the ectoplasm, and the 
outpouring of the endoplasm which at once differentiates a 
clear outer layer as a new ectoplasm; in Amoeba Umax during 



246 



RHIZOPODA 



progression the 
posteriorly and 



body is roughly oval with the apex truncated 
the wide anterior end forming a single anterior 




Fig. i. — 1-3, Amoeba radiosa (Dactylosphaerium polypodium) , 
M. Schultze, in three stages of equal binary fission during fifteen 
minutes; a, nucleus; 6, contractile vacuole (after M. Schultze). 

4, Amoeba princeps, Ehr.; a, nucleus; b, c, vacuoles; food 
vacuoles shaded (after Auerbach). 5, 6, Pelomyxa palustris: 

5, a small example J$ in. in diameter, moderately extended; 6, a 
portion more highly magnified ; a, ectosarc ; 6, vacuoles ; c, 

d, pseudopods formed by eruption and containing endosarc; 

e, vesicles containing a solution of glycogen; /, nuclei; the 
numerous little pods are symbiotic bacteria. 7, Arcella vulgaris: 
a, shell; b, cytoplasm; c, lobose pseudopods; d, d> d, 3 
nuclei ; e, one of the contractile vacuoles ; the dark shaded 
circles represent bubbles or gas vacuoles. 8, Cochliopodium pellu- 
cidum: a, "vesicular" nucleus, with dense central mass or 
" karyosome " (a frequent type of Protistic nucleus). (From 
Lankester.) 

pseudopod. Progression chiefly takes place by a rolling over 
of the anterior end (fig. 3 — see also Amoeba); but it may take 
place by the extension of a pseudopod, its attachment at the tip, 



followed by its contraction to pull up the rest of the animal;, 
this is well shown in the thecate species. Another mode is that 
of A. radiosa (fig. 1, 1-3), which can roll over on the tips of its. 
stiff pseudopods. The pseudopods of the Filosa (figs. 6, 7) 
are branched, but less rich in granules, and less viscid than those 
of Foraminifera; they rarely anastomose, and never coalesce 
to form perforated plates. 

A process whose relations to reproduction are not fully made 
out is that of " plastogamy," where two or more individuals 
unite completely by their cytoplasm, the nuclei remaining 
distinct; it may be temporary or permanent: in the latter case- 




Fig. r 2. — Amoeba (Lithamoeba) discus (after Lankester). A, 
quiescent; B, putting forth eruptive pseudopods. c.v. t contractile 
vacuole through which the richly vacuolated cytoplasm is seen; 
/, food particles; cone, concretions, insoluble in dilute HC1 
and KHO, soluble in strong HC1; n, nucleus. 

determining, of course, a much more rapid increase of size than 
that due to growth. Thanks to the labours of F. Schaudinn, 
we now know the full life cycles of at least half a dozen species; 
previously we only knew with certainty of two modes of 
fission — equal constriction {Amoeba — fig. 1, 1-3) and bud-fission 
(Difflugia). As in other Sarcodina, chromidia, or fragments 
of nuclear substance budded off from the nucleus into the endo- 
plasm, play an important part in many reproductive processes. 
Equal binary fission is common. In the thecate forms, e.g. 
Difflugia y Euglypha (fig. 4), this is replaced by bud-fission; 
half the cytoplasm passes out through the pylome, and becomes. 




From Jenning's Contributions to the Study of the Behavior of Lower Organisms, by- 
permission of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, D.C. 

Fig. 3. — 1, ideal perspective view of left half of a crawling 
Amoeba; 2, diagram showing successive position of marked points 
on anterior end; 3, diagrammatic section, the arrows showing 
directions of absolute motion — the rate being indicated by the length 
of the shaft. 

invested with its covering there; the enclosed "reserve'*' 
skeletal elements pass to the surface in order, so that the pylome 
of the new shell faces that of the old; the original nucleus divides. 
in situ and one daughter nucleus passes into what we may call 
the bud-cytoplasm; the two daughters of the original cell, 
which we may call the " bud-sister " and the " stock-sister " 
respectively, now separate. In the plurinucleate forms a true 
bud-formation takes place, nucleate masses of cytoplasm being 
constricted off at the surface. A simultaneous resolution into 
uninucleate cells may affect the multinucleate species (or the 
multinucleate state of habitually uninucleate species); this is. 
termed schizogony. 
In Trichosphaerium (fig. 5) it occurs at the close of two* 






RHIZOPODA 



247 



distinct periods in the life cycle which we may call A and B; I brood-cells are amoebulae (pseudopodiospores) (fig. 5, 4) 
the individuals of the A period being distinguished by the | which grow into the multinucleate B type, with a nonspiculate 

theca (fig. s, 5). The resolution of the B type 
is preceded by rapid multiplication of the 
nuclei by mitosis (fig. 5, 7), and the uninucleate 
cells are 2-flagellate zoospores (fig. 5, 9). These 
pair with zoospores of a different brood to their 
own (fig. s, 10) (i.e. they are exogamous 
gametes); and the fusion cell (fig. 5, n) so 
formed is the starting-point of the A type (fig. 
5, 12). Brood formation by resolution of a 
multinucleate individual has been observed or 
conjectured in Amoeba, &c. 

A formation of numerous pseudopodiospores 
within Pelomyxa has been repeatedly described, 
and these have been seen to conjugate equally, 
the zygote becoming multinuclear. But the 
possibility of the alleged reproductive cells 
being parasites has not yet been fully ex- 
cluded. 

Chlamydophrys stercorea is a small Filose, 
occurring in the faeces of several mammals, 
but only forming its characteristic shell out- 
q /> side the body; plastogamic monstrosities are 

A ° frequent. The nucleus degenerates, and is 

Frotxx Odkin's Protozoa, by permission of the Macraillan Co., New York. expelled with some plasm. The chromidia 

Fig. 4. — Bud-fission of Euglypha alveolata. A % passing out of secreted plates to remain inside the shell, and differentiate or 
surface of bud. B, bud completely invested ; nucleus preparing to divide by mitosis. aggregate into about eight . nuclei; the cell 
C, D t later stages. . g then resoived int0 as many 2 -fl a gellate 

presence of radiating spicules of MgC03 in the gelatinous theca; swarmers, which escape as isogamous exogametes. The 
the resolution of period A is simple (fig. 5, 3) and the uninucleate zygote becomes surrounded by a brown cyst. When 







From The Cambridge Natural History, after Schaudinn, vol. i., 
permission of Macmillan & Co. Ltd. 



Protozoa, by 



Fig. 5. — Trichosphaerium sieboldii. 1, Adult of "A" form; 2, 
its multiplication by fission and gemmation; 3, resolution into 
uninucleate amoeboid zoospores; 4., development (from zoospores 
of " A ") into " B " form (5); 6, its multiplication by fission and 
gemmation; 7, its resolution after nuclear bipartition into minute 
2-flagellate zoospores (or exogametes); 8, liberation of gametes; 
9, 10, more highly magnified pairing of gametes of different origin ; 
ii, 12, zygote developing into " A " form. 




:W • A 



p- 




From Eugene Penard, Faune rhizopodijue du bassin du Lhnan. 

Fig. 6. — A, Euglypha alveolata. i t Living animal; a, guitar- 
shaped outline of body, retracted from shell for emission of pseudo- 
pods; b, b, reserve plates in body for offspring in next bud- fission; 
2, empty shell; 3, round plates; 4, 5, adoral plates with more or 
less marked denticulations; 6, oval plates';^, transverse section of 
shell, showing circle of reserve plates within. 

B, Sphenoderia lenia. 1, Animal, lateral view; 2 t same from 
above; 3, shell, lateral view; 4, shell, oral view of the pylome; 
5, optical section through empty shell and pylome; 6, nucleus; 
7, surface view of pylome (dotted lines represent its opposite side 
as seen at a lower focus). 



248 



RHODE ISLAND 



swallowed by a mammal it develops, and the ordinary form 
is found in the excreta. 

Centropyxis aculeata is closely allied to Difflugia. It divides 
by fission and also at the end of a cycle by schizogony, the 




! 



Z 



Fig. 7, — Filosa and Foramimfera of similar habit. 1. Diplo- 
phrys archeri (moor pools); a, nucleus; &, contractile vacuoles; 
c, oil drop. 2. Allogromia fluviatilis (freshwater Foraminifer) ; 
a, numerous nuclei; the elongated bodies are ingested diatoms. 
3. Shepheardella taeniformis (marine Foraminifer), X 30 with 
retracted protoplasm; a, nucleus. 4. The same X 15 with 
expanded pseudopods. 5-9. Nucleus of same in various aspects as 
carried along in streaming protoplasm. 10. Amphitrema wrighti- 
awMw(moorpools) ; shell membranous,enerusted with foreign bodies. 
11. Diaphorodon mobile (moor pools); a, nucleus. 

offspring being amoebulae. In some these acquire a shell 
directly; in others a second brood division into four takes place, 
and it is only then that shells are formed. The latter conjugate 
as males with the former as females; and the fusion cell encysts 
within the approximated shells; it emerges as a naked amoeba 
after a period of rest, forms a shell and assumes the type of the 



species. Other types of reproduction are known, Amoeba colt,. 
an inhabitant of the gut of man, showing an endogamous pairing 
of closely related nuclei similar to that of Actinosphaerium 
(see Heliozoa). 

Classification 

Lobosa. — W. B. Carpenter. Cytoplasm with a clear eetosarc, 
not wetted by the medium; pseudopods never finely branching, 
usually rounded at the apex; nucleus single or multiple; shell 
(" test," " theca ") absent, gelatinous, membranous or of cemented 
granules of ingested sand, &c, or plates secreted in the endosarc. 

^Selected genera: § 1. Naked Amoeba (g.v.) (" Amibe" Bory), with 
the subgenera Dactylosphaerium, Hertwig and Lesser (fig. 1, 1-3), 
with slender, pointed pseudopods; Lithamoeba, Lankester, always 
containing inorganic granules (fig. 2). Pelomyxa, Greeff(fig. 1, 
5, 6), with blunt, eruptive pseudopods and numerous nuclei, -fa in. 
or more in diameter when contracted. A rcuothr ix, C\apar&de and 
Lachmann, with one or more slender, very mobile, flagelliform 
pseudopods as well as the lobose ones. 

§ 2. Test gelatinous, perforated by pseudopods: Amphizonella, 
Greeff; Trichosphaerium, Schneider (fig. 5). 

§ 3. Test membranous: Cochliopodium, Hertwig and Lesser 
(fig. 1, 8). 

§ 4. Test " ehitinous," shag;reened: Arcella, Stein (fig. 1, 7). 

§ 5. Test of ingested particles: Difflugia, Leelerc; Centropyxis, 
Stein ; Lecqueureuxia, Sehlumberger (shell material of diatomaeeous 
tests fusecf into sausage-shaped masses). 

§ 6, Test of secreted siliceous or ehitinous plates: Quadrula, 
F. E. Schultze. (In Q. irregularis the plates are said to be cal- 
careous.) 

Filosa. — A. Lang, Cytoplasm without definite ectosare; pseu- 
dopods branching, tapering to fine tips, somewhat granular; test 
present in all known species and varying as in the Lobosa. 

Selected genera: § 1. Test membranous: Gromia, Dujardin 
{pro parte); Mikrogromia, Hertwig; Diplophrys, Barker (fig. 7, 
1); Ditrema, Archer; Amphitrema, Archer (fig, 7, 11); the last 
three have a mouth-like aperture (pylome) at either end of the 
test. 

§ 2. Test of ingested or incrusted particles: Pseudodifflugia r 
Sehlumberger; Diaphorodon, Archer (fig. 7, 12). 

§ 3. Test of secreted plates: Euglypha, Dujardin (figs. 4, 6, A); 
sphenoderia lenta (fig. 6, B) ; Faulinetta t Lauterborn, 

Bibliography. — E. Penard, FaunerhizopodiguedubassinduLiman 
(1902), and Les Rhizopodes des grands lacs (1905); James Cash, 
The British Freshwater Rhizopoda and Heliozoa (Ray Society), 
vol. 1. (1905) — these works contain full bibliographies of older 
literature. L. Rhumbler, " Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Rhizopo- 
den " {Zeitsch. Wiss. Zoologie, lii. (1891), and numerous papers in 
Arch. Entwickelungsgeschichte and Arch. Protistenkunde ; F. Schau- 
dinn, " Untersuch. lib. die Fortpflanzung einiger Rhizopoden " in 
Arb. Raised. Gesundheitsamt, xix. (1903); S. Awerinzew, "Die 
ehemisehe 'Zusammensetzung der Gehause der susswasserrhizo-; 
poden," Arch. Prot. viii. (1906); K. Boll, " t)ber die Fortpflan- 
zung von Pelomyxa palustris," Arch. Prot. viii. (1906). For bibli- 
ographies and a clear exposition we may also cite Y. Delage and 
E. He"rouard, Traite de zoologie concrete, i. (La cellule et les pro* 
iozoaires) (1896); A. Lang, Lehrb. d. vergleich. Anatomie d. wir» 
bellosen Thiere (ed. 2), i. ( " Protozoa " (1901); and Marcus Hartog, 
" Protozoa," in Cambridge Natural History, i. (1906). Of the older 
literature we need only cite F. Dujardin, " Sur les organ ismes 
infe'rieurs," Ann. Sc. Nat. Zool. iv. (1835), and " Zoophytes, 
Jnfusoires " (i84i)>" (M. Ha.) 

RHODE ISLAND, a North Atlantic state of the American 
Union, belonging to the New England group, and lying between 
41 18' and 42 3' N. lat. and 71 8' and 71 10 53' W. long. 1 It 
is bounded, N. and E., by the state of Massachusetts; S., by 
the Atlantic Ocean; and W., by the state of Connecticut, from 
which it is separated in part by the Pawcatuck river. Rhode 
Island is the smallest state in the Union, having an extreme 
length, N. and S., of 48 m., an extreme width, E. and W., of 
37 m., and a total area of 1248 sq. m., of which 181 sq. m. are 
water-surface. 

Topography. — The region of which Rhode Island is a part 
was at one time worn down to a gently rolling plain near sea- 
level, but has since been uplifted and somewhat dissected by 
stream action. As a result the topography is characterized by 
low, rounded hills, bur> is nowhere mountainous. Since the 
uplift and stream dissection a slight depression has allowed 
the sea to invade the lower portions of the river valleys, forming 
the bays known as Narragansett Bay, Providence "river," 
Sakonnet "river," &c. Glaciation has disturbed the river 

# l Block Island, over which the jurisdiction of the state extends, 
lies 10 m. off the coast, and is not included within these limits. 



RHODE ISLAND 



249 



•systems, causing the formation of numerous lakes and of the 
waterfalls which determined the situation of many of the 
manufacturing cities of the state. 

In the N.W. is Durfee Hill, which attains an elevation of 805 ft., 
.and is the highest point within Rhode Island. The mean elevation 
for the entire state is 200 ft. The coast-line, including the shores 
of the bays and islands, is extensive; its western portion is only 
slightly indented, but its eastern portion is deeply indented by 
Narragansett Bay, a body of water varying in width from 3 to 12 m., 
-and extending inland for about 28 m. The land surface E. of this 
bay is very gently rolling, but to the W. it consists of a somewhat 




more rugged upland which slopes gradually southward. Over the 
whole state there is a layer of drift deposited by the glaciers which 
once covered this region. This glacial material is in the form of 
a till or boulder clay, but in the lowlands, and especially along 
Narragansett Bay, it is generally overlaid by stratified drift de- 
posited by glacial streams. Within Narragansett Bay are the 
numerous islands characteristic of an area which has suffered com- 
paratively recent depression, the largest being Rhode Island (or 
Aquidneck), Conanicut Island and Prudence Island. Of these the 
most important is Rhode Island, 15 m. long and 3 m. wide, which has 
given the state its name. Lying about 10 m. off the coast and S. 
of the central part of the state is Block Island, a sandy tract 6 m. 
long and from 1 to 4 m. wide, with a rolling surface. 

The rivers of the state are short and of no great volume, but 
they flow swiftly and are useful in supplying power for manu- * 



factories. The Providence river is really an arm of Narragansett 
Bay, into which flow the waters of the Pawtuxet and the Black- 
stone rivers. The latter stream at Pawtucket has a fall of about 
50 ft., and the Pawtuxet river also has a number of falls along 
its course. Mount Hope Bay is a north-eastern arm of Narragan- 
sett Bay, and is also the estuary of the Taunton river. The Sakon- 
net river is a long bay separating Aquidneck or Rhode Island from 
the mainland on the E. The Pawcatuck river is the largest stream 
in the western half of the state, and along the lower part of its 
course it forms the boundary between Rhode Island and Con- 
necticut. 

Fauna and Flora. — The fauna of the state does not differ 
from that of southern Connecticut and eastern 
Massachusetts. The marine fauna is of economic 
importance. The woodland area of the state 
has been estimated (census of 1900) at 400 
sq. m., or about 37% of the land area, but the 
trees are generally too small for timber. The 
most common varieties of trees are the oak, 
walnut and chestnut. There are a few stretches 
of pine forest, and in the S. the swamps are 
sometimes overgrown with cedar. 

'Climate. — Rhode Island has a more moderate 
climate than that of the northern sections of 
New England. There are no great extremes 
of either heat or cold, and a number of the 
towns and cities, especially Newport and Nar- 
ragansett Pier, have become noted summer 
resorts. Narragansett Pier has a mean annual 
temperature of 49 , a mean summer tempera- 
ture (for June, July and August) of 68°, and a 
mean winter temperature (for December, 
January and February) of 29 . The mean 
annual temperature at Providence is 50 ; the 
mean for the summer, 72 °; and for the winter, 
30 ; while the highest and lowest tempera- 
tures ever recorded are respectively 102 and 
-9 . The mean annual rainfall is about 50 in., 
ranging from 47*4 in. at Narragansett Pier to 
53-2 in. at Kingston. 

Soils. — The boulder clay or " hard pan " of 
which most of the surface lands are composed, 
forms a very indifferent support for vege- 
tation, and consequently the state is not well 
adapted for the growing of crops. 

Agriculture. — The acreage of improved farm 
land in Rhode Island decreased from 356,487 
in 1850 to 137,354 in I 9 00 » but the value of 
farm property (including land with improve- 
ments, implements, machinery and live stock) 
increased in the same period from $19,100,640 
to $26,989,189. The number of farms remained 
about the same — 5385 in 1850 and 5498 in 
1900; but the average area decreased from 
102-9 acres to 82-9 acres. The value of farm 
products increased from $3,670,135 in 1879 to 
$6,333,864 in 1899. The average value of farms 
increased from #3547 in 1850 to $4909 in 1900. 
The number of persons engaged in agricultural 
pursuits in 1880 was 10,986, and in 1900, 
10,957. 

The total acreage of cereals (barley, buck- 
wheat, Indian corn, oats, rye and wheat) de- 
creased from 19,575 acres in 1870 to 10,552 
acres in 1899, and the total product of these 
crops decreased from 801,111 bu. in 1849 to 
350,110 bu. in 1899. 

The total number of neat cattle on farms 
decreased from 36,262 in 1850 to 30,696 in 
1900, but the number of dairy cows increased 
from 18,698 to 23,660. 

Fisheries. — Whaling was an established in- 
dustry in Rhode Island as [early as 1723, 
and in 1731 the colonial assembly provided 
a bounty of five shillings a barrel for whale oil, and a penny a pound 
for whalebone. About 1750 sperm candles were first manufactured. 
In 1846 about 50 whaling vessels sailed from Rhode Island ports; 
but by the close of the century the industry had become practically 
extinct. In 1905 the number of persons employed in the general 
fisheries industry was 2212; and the value of the catch was 
$1,546,658, the largest items being: lobsters, $64,358; squeteague 
(weakfish), $86,478; scup, $138,030; and oysters (for market), 
$874,232. 

Minerals. — Rhode Island's mineral wealth is relatively slight. 
The total value ' of all the mineral products of the state in 1907 
was $937,384, and in 1908, $708,694, and of these totals granite 



Erwry Vtlkcrs* 



1 United States Geological Survey, Mineral Resources of the 
United Slates. 



250 



RHODE ISLAND 



was valued in 1908 at $556,774. The value of the clay products, 
lime and talc, decreased from $245,378 in 1907 to $112,815 in 
1908. The mining of iron ore was begun about 1767 in the vicinity 
of the present Cranston, and much of the metal was used in the 
making of cannon during the War of Independence, but thesupply 
was soon exhausted. Near Tiverton and Cranston graphite has 
been quarried. 

Manufactures. — Rhode Island is essentially a manufacturing 
state; of the 191,923 persons in the state engaged in gainful 
occupations in 1900, 101,162 (or 52.7%) were employed in 
manufacturing and mechanical pursuits. By the middle of 
the 17th century boat-building had become an established 
industry, and large vessels were built at Newport. In 1777 
the state offered a large premium for every pound of steel, 
similar to German steel, made within its boundaries; and in 
1789 a rolling and slitting mill was built near Providence. 
Cotton was first imported to Providence from Spain in 1785; 
a company to carry on cotton-spinning, formed at Providence 
in 1786, established there in the following year a factory con- 
taining a spinning jenny of 28 spindles (the first machine of 
the kind to be used in the United States), and also a carding 
machine and a spinning frame with which was manufactured 
a kind of jean having a linen warp and a cotton filling. The 
fly shuttle was also apparently first introduced at Providence 
in 1788. The first calico printed in the United States was 
made at East Greenwich about 1794. The Providence Associa- 
tion of Mechanics and Manufacturers, incorporated in 1789, 
organized industrial development. The prohibition of the 
exportation from England of machinery, models or drawings 
retarded mechanical improvement, but in 1790 an industrial 
company was formed at Providence to carry on cotton spinning, 
and in December of that year there was established at Paw- 
tucket a factory equipped with Arkwright machines constructed 
by Samuel Slater. This machinery was operated by water- 
power, then first used in the United States for the spinning of 
cotton thread; and from this may he dated the beginning of 
the factory system in Rhode Island. These machines were soon 
adapted to the spinning of wool, and in 1804 a woollen factory 
was built at Peacedale, South Kingston. The first power- 
loom used in the United States was invented about 181 2, and 
was set up at Peacedale, in 18 14, for the manufacture of woollen 
saddlegirths and other webbing. The first power-loom for 
cotton manufacture was set up in North Providence in 181 7. 
Textile manufacturing by improved methods was hardly well 
established in Rhode Island before 1825. The manufacture 
of jewelry, which was established in Providence in 1784, was 
greatly promoted ten years later by Nehemiah Dodge's in- 
vention of the process of " gold-filling," still further improved 
in 1846 by Thomas H. Lowe. The manufacture of silverware 
was begun in Providence soon after the close of the War of 
Independence. 

Rhode Island's water powers have been its only natural 
resources which have aided in the development of its manu- 
factures, and its transportation facilities have always been 
inadequate, because of shallow water at Providence and scanty 
railway communication; but the state's manufacturing enter- 
prises are of great importance. 

In 1900 Rhode Island ranked 17th among the states in the value 
of its manufactured products, but led all of the states in the value 
per capita ($430). The total number of establishments in 1850 
was 864; in 1890, 3377, and in 1900, 4189. In 1900 there were 
1678 factories, and in 1905, 1617 factories. 1 The total capital in- 
vested in manufacturing in 1850 was $12,935,676; in 1890, 
$126,483,401, and in 1900, 8183,784,587, of which $176,301,606 
was in factories; in 1905 the capital invested in factories was 
$215,901,375. The value of all manufactured products in 1850 
was $22,117,688; in 1890, $142,500,625, and in 1900, $184,074,378, 
of which $165,550,382 was the value of factory products; in 1905 
the value of factory^ products was $202,109,583. The average 
number of employes in 1850 was 20,967; in 1890, 8i,ni;andin 



x The 1905 census of manufactures gives statistics only for estab- 
lishments under the factory system, excluding the hand trades, 
and gives factory statistics for 1905 and for 1900. The statistics 
given above for 1900 in comparison with 1905 are for factory pro- 
ducts. 



1900, 98,813, of whom 88,197 were factory employes; in 1905 
there were 97,318 factory employes. 

Rhode Island ranked first in 1900 ($13,229,313) and in 1905 
(814,431,756) among the states of the United States in the Value 
of jewelry, which was fourth in the value of the state's manu- 
factures; second in worsted goods (1900, $33r34 1 »3 2 9; I9°5» 
$44477,596), which were first in value in the state's manufac- 
tures; and third in dyeing and finishing textiles (1900, $8,484,878; 
1905, 89,081,457), which ranked fifth among the state's manu- 
factures; in the value of cotton goods (second in rank in the state) 
it fell from the fourth rank in 1900 ($24,056,175) to fifth rank in 
I9°5 ($30,628,843), when the value of Rhode Island's product 
was less than that of Georgia. Other important manufactures 
were: combined textiles (not including flax, hemp and jute products) 
in 1900, $77,998,396; in 1905, $103,0^6.311; foundry and machine 
shop products in 1900, $13,269,086; in 1905, $16,338,512; woollen 
goods in 1900, $5,330,550; in 1905, $8,163,167; rubber boots and 
shoes in 1900, $8,034,417; electrical machinery, apparatus and 
supplies in 1900, $5,113,292; in 1905, $54354741 silversmithing * 
and silverware in 1900, $4,249,190; in 1905, $5,323,264; gold and 
silver, reducing and refining (not from ore) in 1900, $3,484,454; 
in 1905, $4,260,698; cotton small wares in 1900, $2,379,500; in 
1 9°5f $3»944»6o7; hosiery and knit goods in 1900, $2,713,850; 
in 1905, $3,344,655; silk and si l k goods in 1900, $1,311,333;* 
in 1905, $2,555,986. In 1905, .1146 establishments reported 
power, as against 1360 in 1900 — a decrease of 15-7 %, but the total 
horsepower increased from I5J,545 to 190,777, or 22*7%. 

Transportation. — Steam railway mileage in Rhode Island in- 
creased from 68 m. in 1850 to 209 m. in 1900, and to 211 m. on 
the 1st of January 1909 (the New York, New Haven & Hartford 
being the only railway system of any importance in the state). 
In 1910 a charter was granted to the Grand Trunk system. In 
1902 the mileage of street and electric railways (most of them 
interurban) operated in the state was 336-33 m. The state has a 
natural water outlet in the Providence river and Narragansett 
Bay, but there is lack of adequate dockage in Providence harbour, 
and insufficient depth of water for ocean traffic. ^ The ports of entry 
are Providence (by far the largest, with imports valued at 
$1,893,551, and exports valued at $12,517 in 1909), Newport and 
Bristol. 

Population. — The total population of Rhode Island in 1880 
was 276,531; in 1890, 345>5°6; in 1900, 428,556; and in 1910, 
542,674.* The increase from 1880 to 1890 was 24-9%, from 
1890 to 1900 24%, and from 1900 to 1910, 26-6%. Of 
the total population in 1900, 285,278 were native whites, 
134,519 were foreign-born, 9092 were negroes, 366 were Chinese, 
35 were Indians and 13 were Japanese. Of the foreign-born, 
35,501 were Irish, 31,533 were French-Canadians and 22,832 
were English. Of the total population, 275,143 were of foreign 
parentage, i.e. either one or both parents were foreign-born — 
and 81,232 were of Irish parentage, both on the father's and 
mother's side, and, in the same sense, 49,427 were of French- 
Canadian and 3 2,007 of English parentage. Rhode Island 
in 1900 had the highest percentage of urban population of any 
state in the Union, 91*6% of the total population living in 
cities of 4000 or more inhabitants. From 1890 to 1900 the 
urban population increased from 310,335 to 392,509 or 26-5%; 
while the rural population (i.e. population outside of incor- 
porated places), increased from 35,171 to 36,047 — i-i% of 
the total increase in population. The cities of the state, with 
population in 1900, 3 are Providence, 175,597; Pawtucket, 
39,231; Woonsocket, 28,204; Newport, 22,034; aD <l Central 
Falls, 18,167. In 1906 there were in the state 264,712 com- 
municants of various religious denominations, and of these 
199,951 were Roman Catholics. Second in strength were the 
Baptists, who founded the colony; in 1906 they numbered 
19,878, of whom 14,304 were of the Northern Convention. 
There were 15443 Protestant Episcopalians, 9858 Congrega- 
tionalists, 7892 Methodists. The Friends, whose influence 
was so strong in the early history of Providence, numbered in 
1906 only 648 in the whole state. 

Administration. — The state is governed under the con- 
stitution of 1842, with amendments adopted in 1854, 1864, 
1886, 1888, 1889, 1892, ^893, 1900, 1903, 1909. All native or 
naturalized citizens of the United States residing in Rhode 

2 The populations in other census years were: (1790) 68,825; 
(1800) 69,122; (1810) 76,931; (1820) 83,059; (1830) 97>199; 
(1840) 108,830; (1850) 147,545; (i860) 174.620; (1870) 217,353. 

3 In 1910 the populations of the cities were: Providence, 224,326; 
Pawtucket, 51,622; Woonsocket, 38,125; Newport, 27,149; and 
Central Falls, 22,754. • 



RHODE ISLAND 



251 



Island are citizens of the state. Under an act of 1724 the 
-suffrage was restricted to adult males who possessed a freehold 
of the value of $134 (see History). So far as state and national 
elections are concerned, the privilege was extended to native 
non-freeholders by the constitution of 1842, to naturalized 
foreigners who had served in the Civil War by an amendment 
-of the 7th of April 1886, and to all adult male citizens by the 
amendment of the 4th of April 1888. A curious survival of 
the old system exists in the provision that only those who pay 
taxes on $134 worth of property may vote for members of city 
councils or on propositions to levy taxes or to expend public 
money. The working men are thus almost entirely excluded 
from participating in the government of the large factory 
towns. 

Amendments to the constitution must be passed by both 
houses of the General Assembly at two consecutive sessions, 
and must then be ratified by -three-fifths of the electors of the 
state present and voting thereon in town and ward meetings. 
Fifteen amendments have thus been added to the constitution 
of 1842. An amendment of the 7th of April 1886 forbade 
the manufacture and sale of intoxicating beverages, but it was 
badly enforced and was repealed by a subsequent amendment 
of the 20th of June 1889. 

The powers of the governor are unusually small. Until 1909, 
when a constitutional amendment was adopted, he had no power 
of veto, and his very limited nominal powers of appointment and 
removal are controlled by a rotten-borough Senate. The other 
^administrative officers are a secretary of state, an attorney-general, 
an auditor, a treasurer, a commissioner of public schools, a railroad 
commissioner, and a factory inspector, and various boards and 
commissions, such as the board of education, the board of agri- 
culture, the board of health, and the commissioners of inland 
fisheries, commissioners of harbours and commissioners of pilots. 

The legislative power is vested in the General Assembly, 1 which 
•consists of a Senate made up of the lieutenant-governor and of one 
senator from each of the thirty-eight cities and townships in the 
state, and a House of Representatives of one hundred members, 
apportioned according to population, but with the proviso that each 
town or city shall have at least one member and none shall have 
more than one-fourth of the total (see History). Members of the 
legislature and all state officials are elected annually in November. 
A majority vote was formerly required, but since the adoption 
of the tenth amendment (November 28, 1893) a plurality vote 
has elected. 

At the head of the judicial system is the supreme court (i747)» 
divided since 1893 into an appellate division and a common pleas 
division, with final revisory and appellate jurisdiction upon all 
questions of law and equity. Below this are the twelve district 
courts, the town councils, probate courts in the larger towns, and 
justices of the peace. The seven judges of the supreme court and 
the district judges are elected by the General Assembly, the former 
during good behaviour, the latter for terms of three years. 

The town (or township) is the unit of local government, the 
county being recognized only for judicial purposes and to a certain 
extent in the appointment by central administrative boards. There 
are five counties and thirty-eight towns. The municipal govern- 
ments of Newport and Providence present interesting features, for 
which see the separate articles on these cities. 

Education. — The public school system of Rhode Island was 
established in 1800, abolished in 1803, and re-established in 1828. 
At the head of it is a commissioner of education, appointed by the 
governor and the Senate, and a board of education, composed of 
the governor and the lieutenant-governor ex officio and six other 
members elected by the General Assembly. Under an act of the 
12th of April 1883, as amended on the 4th of April 1902, education 
is compulsory for children between the ages of seven and fifteen, 
but the maximum limit is reduced to thirteen for children who are 
employed at lawful labour. The total enrolment in the public 
schools in 1905 was 71,425 and the total expenditure for public 
school purposes was $1,987,751. A considerable proportion of the 
Irish and the French Canadians send their children to the Roman 
Catholic parochial schools. The chief institutions for higher educa- 

1 Under the constitution of 1842 it was provided that there should 
be two sessions of the General Assembly annually: one at Newport 
in May, and the other in October to be held at South Kingstown 
once in two years, and the intermediate years alternately at Bristol 
and East Greenwich, an adjournment from the October session 
being held annually at Providence. In 1854 this was amended: 
one session was provided for to be held in Newport in May, an 
adjournment being held annually at Providence. And in 1900 
by another amendment Providence became the only meeting-place 
of the General Assembly. 



tion are Brown University (1764), the State School of Design 
(1877), the State Normal School (reorganized 1898), and the Moses 
Brown School (18 19), all at Providence (g.tf.), and the State College 
of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts (1888) at Kingston, a land grant 
college under the Morrill Acts of 1862 and 189/), the Hatch Act of 
1887 and the Adams Act of 1906. This institution was founded 
as an agricultural school in 1888 and became a college in 1892. 
It has departments of agriculture, engineering and science, a 
library of 15,000 volumes and an experiment station. There are 
state training-schools for teachers at Providence, Cranston, Bristol, 
Barrington, Central Falls, Warwick and Pawtucket. 

Charitable and Penal Institutions. — A board of state charities 
and corrections, established in 1869, supervises and controls all of 
the penal, charitable and correctional institutions of the state at 
large and also the local almshouses. There were in 191 o nine 
members of the board, three from Providence county, one from 
each of the other counties, and one from the state at large; five 
were appointed by the governor with the consent of the Senate, 
and four were elected by the Senate. A group of institutions 
(under the control of the board) at Howard, in Cranston town- 
ship, about 7 m. from Providence, including the Workhouse and 
House of Correction, the Hospital for the Insane (1865), the Alms- 
house, the State Prison and Providence County Jail, the Sock- 
anosset School for Boys, and the Oaklawn School for^ Girls, are 
supported entirely or in part by the state. In addition to the 
institutions under the board of charities and corrections there are 
two under the board of education, and supported wholly or in part 
by the state, the School for the Deaf (1877) and the Home and 
School for Dependent and Neglected Children (1885) at Providence. 
The Soldiers' Home (1891) at Bristol, the Butler Hospital for the 
Insane (1847) at Providence, and a Sanitarium (1905) at Wallum 
Lake, in the township of Burrillville, also receive state aid. 

Finance. — The chief sources of revenue in the order named are 
the general property tax, the tax on savings banks, the tax on 
insurance companies, and liquor licences. There is no corporation 
tax. The total receipts from all sources for the year 1909 were 
$2,317,512, the expenditures $2,345,359. The public debt, which 
originated in 1752, amounted to £70,000 sterling in 1764, to £4000 
in 1775 and to $698,000 in 1783. Part of the Revolutionary debt 
was paid in depreciated paper, part was assumed by the United 
States government, part was paid at various rates of depreciation 
between 1803 and 1820, and the remainder, $43*971. was repudiated 
in 1847. Other obligations had accumulated in the meantime, 
however, so that the debt in 1848 amounted to $187,000. This 
was gradually reduced until the Civil War, when it was increased 
to $3,889,000 by 1865. A sinking fund commission was established 
in 1875, and the entire sum was extinguished by the 1st of August 
1894. The issue of .bonds for the construction of the new capitol 
building and other purposes has led, however, to a new debt, which 
at the beginning of 1910 amounted to $4,800,000. There was at 
the same time a sinking fund of $654,999. Before the adoption 
of the Federal constitution Rhode Island was badly afflicted with 
the paper money heresy. £5000 were printed in 1710, and from 
that time until 1751 there were nine separate issues. These were 
gradually retired, however, through the efforts of the mercantile 
classes, aided by the parliamentary statutes of 1751 and 1763, and 
by about 1763 the finances were again placed on a sound money 
basis. The influx of Continental currency gave some trouble during 
the War of Independence, but there were no further local issues 
until 17^6, when £100,000 were issued. 

The first banks organized in the state were the Providence Bank 
in 1 79 1, the Bank of Rhode Island at Newport in 1795, and the 
Washington Bank at Westerly in 1800. Forty-four charters had 
been issued in 1826 and sixty in 1837. Partly through restrictive 
local legislation and partly as a result of the operation of the Suffolk 
system of redemption in Boston, these institutions were always 
conservative. During practically the entire period before the 
Civil War their note issues constituted a smaller proportion of the 
capital stock than those of any other state. By an act of 1858 
which is still In force, annual reports must be presented to the state 
auditor. On the establishment of the national banking system, 
1863-65, nearly all of the banks took out national charters. 
Since 1865 the most notable features have been the rise and de- 
cadence of the national banks and the rise of the trust companies. 
During the decade from 1800 to 1900 the deposits in the national 
banks increased only 5%, from $16,700,000 to $17,500,000; those 
of the trust companies increased 330%, from $12,000,000 to more 
than $40,000,000. During the period from 1890 to 1901 twenty 
national banks retired from business, and the total capital stock was re- 
duced from about twenty millions to about thirteen millions of dollars. 

History.— Rhode Island was founded by refugees from 
Massachusetts, who went there in search of religious and 
political freedom. The first settlements were made at Pro- 
vidence by Roger Williams (q.v.) in June 1636, and at 
Portsmouth on the island of Aquidneck by the Antinomians, 
William Coddington (1601-1678), John Clarke (1609-1676), 
and Anne Hutchinson (1 591-1643), in March-April 1638. 



252 



RHODE ISLAND 



Becoming dissatisfied with conditions at Portsmouth, Codd- 
ington and Clarke removed a few miles farther south on 
the 29th of April 1639, and established a settlement. at New- 
port. In a similar manner Warwick was founded in January 

1643 by seceders from Providence under the lead of Samuel 
Gorton. The union of Portsmouth and Newport, March 12, 
1640, was followed by the consolidation of all four settlements, 
May 19, 1647, under a patent of March 14, 1644, issued by 
the parliamentary board of commissioners for plantations. 
The particularistic sentiment was still very strong, however, 
and in 1651 the union split into two confederations, one in- 
cluding the mainland towns, Providence and Warwick; the 
other, the island towns, Portsmouth and Newport. A re- 
union was effected in 1654 through the influence of Roger 
Williams, and a charter was secured from Charles II. on the 
8th of July 1663. In the patent of 1644 the entire colony 
was called Providence Plantations. On the 13th of March 

1644 the Portsmouth-Newport General Court changed the 
name of the island from Aquidneck to the Isle of Rhodes or 
Rhode Island. The official designation for the province as 
a whole in the charter of 1663, therefore, was Rhode Island 
and Providence Plantations. The charter was suspended 
at the beginning of the Andros regime in 1686, but was re- 
stored again after the Revolution of 1689. The closing years 
of the 17th century were characterized by a gradual transition 
from the agricultural to the commercial stage of civilization. 
Newport became the centre of an extensive business in piracy, 
privateering, smuggling, and legitimate trade. Cargoes of 
rum, manufactured from West Indian sugar and molasses, 
were exported to Africa and exchanged for slaves to be sold 
in the southern colonies and the West Indies. The passage 
of the Sugar Act of April 5, 1764, and the steps taken by the 
British government to enforce the Navigation Acts seriously 
affected this trade. The people of Rhode Island played a 
prominent part in the struggle for independence. On the 
9th of June 1772 the " Gaspee," a British vessel which had 
been sent over to enforce the acts of trade and navigation, 
ran aground in Narragansett Bay and was burned to the 
water's edge by a party of men from Providence. Nathanael 
Greene, a native of Rhode Island, was made commander of 
the Rhode Island militia in May 1775, and a major-general 
in the Continental army in August 1776, and in the latter 
capacity he served with ability until the close of the war. 
In the year 1776, General Howe sent a detachment of his 
army under General Henry Clinton to seize Newport as a 
base of operations for reducing New England, and the city 
was occupied by the British on the 8th of December 1776. 
To capture this British garrison, later increased to 6000 men, 
the co-operation of about 10,000 men (mostly New England 
militia) under Major-General John Sullivan, and a French 
fleet carrying 4000 French Tegulars under Count D'Estaing, 
was planned in the summer of 1778. On the 9th of August 
Sullivan crossed to the north end of the island of Rhode Island, 
but as the Frenchmen were disembarking on Conanicut Island, 
Lord Howe arrived with the British fleet. Count D'Estaing 
hastily re-embarked his troops and sailed out to meet Howe. 
For two days the hostile fleets manoeuvred for positions, 
and then they were dispersed by a severe storm. On the 
20th, D'Estaing returned to the port with his fleet badly 
crippled, and only to announce that he should sail to Boston 
to refit. The American officers protested but in vain, and 
on the 28th they decided to retreat to the north end of the 
island. The British pursued, and the next day there was 
a severe engagement in which the Americans were driven 
from Turkey and Quaker Hills. On the 30th the Americans, 
learning of the approach of Lord Howe's fleet with 5000 
troops under Clinton, decided to abandon the island. The 
British evacuated Newport the 25th cf October 1779, and the 
French fleet was stationed here from Ju v 1780 to 1781. 

The influence of Roger Williams's iceas and the peculiar 
conditions under which the first settlements w r;s established 
have tended to differentiate the history of Rhoc T ; Island from 



that of the other New England states. In 1640 the General 
Court of Massachusetts declared that the representatives of 
Aquidneck were " not to be capitulated withal either for them- 
selves or the people of the isle where they inhabit," and in 
1644 and again in 1648 the application of the Narragansett 
settlers for admission to the New England Confederacy was 
refused except on condition that they should pass under the 
jurisdiction of either Massachusetts or Plymouth. Rhode 
Island was one of the first communities in the world to advo- 
cate religious freedom and political individualism. 

The individualistic principle was shown in the jealousy of 
the towns toward the central government, and in the establish- 
ment of legislative supremacy over the executive and the 
judiciary. The legislature migrated from county to county up 
to 1854, and there continued to be two centres of govern- 
ment until 1900. The dependence of the judiciary upon the 
legislature was maintained until *i86o, and the governor is still 
shorn of certain powers which are customary in other states 
(see Administration). In the main the rural towns have 
adhered most strongly to the old individualistic sentiment, 
whereas the cities have kept more in touch with the modern 
nationalistic trend of thought. This was shown, for example, 
in the struggle for the ratification of the Federal constitution. 
Under the Articles of Confederation it was principally Rhode 
Island that defeated the proposal to authorize Congress to 
levy an impost duty of 5% mainly as a means of meeting 
the debts of the Central government. When the constitu- 
tional convention met in Philadelphia in 1787 to frame a con- 
stitution for a stronger Federal government, the agriculturists 
of Rhode Island were afraid that the movement would result 
in an interference with their local privileges, and especially 
with their favourite device of issuing paper money, and the 
state refused to send delegates, and not until the Senate had 
passed a bill for severing commercial relations between the 
United States and Rhode Island, did the latter, in May 1790, 
ratify the Federal constitution, and then only by a majority 
of two votes. Rhode Island, like the rest of New England, 
was opposed to the War of 181 2 and the Mexican War. 
During the Civil War it sent 23,457 men into the service 
of the Union. 

The economic transition of the later 17th century from the 
agricultural to the commercial regime was followed by a further 
transition to the manufacturing regime during the closing years 
of the 1 8th and the early years of the 19th centuries. Com- 
mercial interests have been almost entirely destroyed, partly 
because of the abolition of the slave trade and partly because 
of the embargo and the war of 1812, but mainly because the 
cities of the state are unfavourably situated to be the termini of 
interstate railway systems. Providence, owing to its superior 
water-power facilities, has therefore become one of the leading 
manufacturing centres of New England, whereas Newport is 
now known only as a fashionable summer resort. . The move- 
ment as a whole was of exactly the same character as the 
industrial revolution in England, and it led to the same result, 
a struggle for electoral reform. The system of apportionment 
and the franchise qualifications were worked out to meet the 
needs of a group of agricultural communities. The charter of 
1663 and the franchise law of 1724 established substantial 
equality of representation among the towns, and restricted the 
suffrage to freeholders. In the^ course of time, therefore, the 
small towns came to be better represented, proportionally than 
the large cities, and the growing class of artisans was entirely 
disfranchised. The city of Providence issued a call for a 
constitutional convention in 1796, and similar efforts were made 
in 1799, 181 7, 1821, 1822 and 1824, but nothing was accom- 
plished. About 1840 Thomas W. Dorr (1805-1854), a young 
lawyer ol Providence, ^began a systematic campaign for an 
extension of the suffrage, a reapportionment of representation 
and the establishment of an independent judiciary. The 
struggle, which lasted for several years, and in fact is not yet 
entirely over, was one between the cities and the country, 
between the manufacturers and the agriculturists. It was 



RHODE ISLAND 



253 



also complicated by racial and religious prejudices, a large 
proportion of the factory operatives being foreigners and Roman 
Catholics, and most of the country people native Protestants. 
The former were in general associated with the Democratic 
party, the latter with the Whigs. A convention summoned 
without any authority from the legislature, and elected on the 
principle of universal manhood suffrage, met at Providence, 
October 4-November 18, 1841, and drafted a frame of govern- 
ment which came to be known as the People's Constitution. A 
second convention met on the call of the legislature in February 
1842 and adopted the so-called Freeman's Constitution. On 
being submitted to popular vote the former was ratified by a 
large majority (December 27, 28, 29, 1841), while the latter 
was rejected by a majority of 676 (March 21, 22, 23, 1842). 
At an election held on the 18th of April 1842 Dorr was chosen 
governor. The supreme court of the state and the president 
of the United States (Tyler) both refused to recognize the 
validity of the People's Constitution, whereupon Dorr and a few 
of his more zealous adherents decided to organize a rebellion. 
They were easily repulsed in an attack upon the Providence 
town arsenal, and Dorr, after a brief period of exile in Connecti- 
cut, was convicted of high treason on the 26th of April 1844, 
and was sentenced to imprisonment for life. He was released by 
act of the Assembly in June 1845, an d was restored to the full 
rights of citizenship in May 1851. The Freeman's Constitution, 
modified by another convention, which held its session at New- 
port and East Greenwich, September 12-November 5, 1842, 
was finally adopted by popular vote on November 21-23, 1842. 
Only a partial concession was. made to the demand for reform. 
The suffrage was extended to non-freeholders, but only to those 
of American birth. Representation in the lower house of the 
legislature was apportioned according to population, but only 
on condition that no city or town should ever elect more than 
one-sixth of the total number of members. Each city and town 
without regard to population was to elect one senator. In 
order to perpetuate this system the method of amending the 
constitution was made extremely difficult (see Administration). 
Since the adoption of the constitution the conditions have become 
worse owing to the extensive immigration of foreigners into the 
large cities and the gradual decay of the rural towns. From 
about 1 845 to 1 880 most of the immigrants were Irish, but 
since 1880 the French-Canadians have constituted the chief 
element. In 1000 over 30% of the population of the state 
was foreign-born. A constitutional amendment of 1888 extended 
to them the right of suffrage in state and national elections, and 
an amendment of 1009 partially remedied the evils in the system 
of apportionment. When the last Federal census was taken in 
1910, Providence, Pawtucket, Woonsocket and Newport, with 
a combined population of 341,222, had four senators, whereas 
the remainder of the state, with a population of 201,452, had 
thirty-four. Providence, with a population of 224,326 out of a 
total of 542,674, had one member in a Senate of thirty-eight and 
twenty-five members in a House of Representatives of one 
hundred. The Republican machine finds it easy with the 
support of the millionaire summer colony at Newport and the 
street railway corporations to corrupt the French-Canadians and 
a portion of the native element in the rural towns and maintain 
absolute control of the state government. The majority has 
occasionally protested by electing a Democratic governor, but 
he has not been able to accomplish a great deal, because until 
1909 he did not have veto power nor effectual means to induce 
the Senate to ratify his appointments. Bonds were issued on 
the 8th of November 1892 for the construction of a new state 
house at Providence, the corner stone was laid in October 1896, 
and the building was thrown open to use on the 1st of January 
1901. A constitutional amendment of 1900 dispensed with 
the session of the legislature at Newport. 

In presidential campaigns the state has been Federalist, 
1792-1800; Democratic Repubh'can, 1804; Federalist, 1808- 
181 2; Democratic Republican, 1816-1820; Adams (Republican), 
1824-1828; National Republican, 1832; Democratic, 1836; 
Whig, 1 840- 1 848; Democratic, 1852; and Republican since 1856. 



GOVERNORS OF RHODE ISLAND 

Portsmouth 
William Coddington . . . Judge, 

William Hutchinson . 

Newport 
William Coddington . . . Judge, 1 639-1 640 

Portsmouth and Newport 
William Coddington . . Governor, 

Presidents under the Patent 
John Coggeshall 

Jeremy Clarke .... 
John Smith .... 

Nicholas Easton 

Providence and Warwick ! 
Samuel Gorton . President, 

John Smith 
Gregory Dexter . 

Portsmouth and Newport 
John Sanford . . . President, 1653-1654 

Presidents under the Patent of 1644 
Nicholas Easton 1654 



1638-1639 
1639-1640 



1 640-1647 

T OF 1644 

I 647-I 648 
I 648-I 649 
I 649- I 65O 
165O-165I 

1651-1652 
I 652-I 653 
I653-I654 



Roger Williams 

Benedict Arnold 

William Brenton 

Benedict Arnold 

Governors under the C 

Benedict Arnold 

William Brenton 

Benedict Arnold 

Nicholas Easton 

William Coddington . 

Walter Clarke . 

Benedict Arnold 

William Coddington . 

John Cranston . 

Peleg Sanford 

William Coddington, 2nd 

Henry Bull 

Walter Clarke . 

John Coggeshall (acting) 

Henry Bull 

John Easton 

Caleb Can- 
Walter Clarke . 

Samuel Cranston 

Joseph Jencks . 

William Wanton 

John Wanton 

Richard Ward . 
. William Greene . 

Gideon Wanton . 

William Greene . 

Gideon Wanton . 

William Greene * 

Stephen Hopkins 

William Greene . 

Stephen Hopkins 

Samuel Ward 

Stephen Hopkins 

Samuel Ward 

Stephen Hopkins 

Josias Lyndon 

Joseph Wanton . 

Nicholas Cooke . 

William Greene, 2nd . 

John Collins 

Arthur Fenner, 3 Federalist and Democratic Re- 
publican 

Paul Mumford (acting), Democratic Republican 

Henry Smith, „ „ „ 

Isaac Wilbour, „ ,, ,, 

James Fenner, Democratic Republican . 

William Tones, Federalist .... 

Nehemiah R. Knight, Democratic Republican 

William C. Gibbs, „ „ 

James Fenner 4 (Democratic Republican and 
National Republican) . 



1 654-1 657 
1657-1660 
1660-1662 
1 662- 1 663 
iiarter of 1663 

1 663-1 666 
1666-1669 
1669-1672 
1 672- 1 674 
1674-1676 
1676-1677 
1 677- 1 678 
.1678 
1 678- 1 680 
1 680-1 683 
1683-1685 
1685-1686 
1686 1 
1 689-1 690 
1690 
1 690-1695 

1695 

1 696-1698 

1698-1727 

1 727-1 732 

I732-I/33 

1 734-1 740 

1740-1743 

1 743-1 745 
1 745-1 746 

1 746-1 747 
I747-I74& 
174^1755 
1755-1757 
1 757-1 758 
1758-1762 
1 762-1 763 
1763-1765 

1765-1767 
1 767-1 768 
1 768-1 769 
1 769-1 775 
1775-1778 
1778-1786 
1 786-1 790 



1 790-1 805 
1805 

1 805- 1 806 
1 806-1 807 
1 807-181 1 
1811-1817 
1817-1821 
1 821-1824 



1 824- 1 83 1 



1 A separation occurred in 1651 between the towns of Providence 
and Warwick on one side and Portsmouth and Newport on the 
other. They were reunited in 1654. 

J The charter was suspended from 1686 to 1689, during which 
time the province was under the supervision of Sir Edmund Andros. 

1 Arthur Fenner became a Democratic Republican about 1800. 

4 James Fenner was a Democratic Republican to 1826, a National 
Republican (Adams) to 1829 and a Democrat (Jackson) to 1831. 



254 



RHODES, C. J. 



Lemuel H. Arnold, National Republican * . 1831-1833 

John B. Francis, Democrat arid Anti-Masonic 1833-1838 

William Sprague, Whig .... 1 838-1 839 

Samuel W. King, Whig .... 1839-1843 

Under the Constitution of 1842 
James Fenner, Whig .... 
Charles Jackson, 1 Democrat 
Byron Diman, Whig .... 
Elisha Harris, Whig .... 
Henry B. Anthony, Whig . 
Philip Allen, Democrat 
Francis M. Dimond (acting), Democrat 
William W. Hoppin, Whig and American 
Elisha Dyer, Republican 
Thomas G. Turner, Republican 
William Sprague, 2 Unionist . 
William C. Cozzens (acting), Unionist 
James Y. Smith, Republican 
Ambrose E. Burnside, „ 
Seth Padelford, 
Henry Howard, „ 

Henry Lippitt, „ 

Charles C. Van Zandt, „ 
Alfred H. Littlefield, „ . 
Augustus O. Brown, ,; 
George P. Wetmore, ,, 
John W. Davis, Democrat, . 
Royal C. Taft, Republican, . 
Herbert W. Ladd, „ . 

John W. Davis, Democrat . 
Herbert W. Ladd, Republican 
D. Russell Brown, „ 

Charles W. Lippitt, „ 
Elisha Dyer, 



William Gregory, „ 

Charles Dean Kimball, Republican 
L. F. C. Garvin, Democrat . 
George H. Utter, Republican 
James H. Higgins, Democrat 
Aram J. Pothier, Republican 



1 843-1 845 
1 845-1 846 
1 846-1 847 
1 847-1 849 
I 840-1 85 1 
" 1851-1853 

1 853-1 854 
1 854-1 857 
1 857-1 859 
I 850-1 860 
1 860-1 863 
1863 

1 863-1 866 
1866-1869 
1869-1873 
1 873-1 875 
1875-1877 
1877-1880 
1 880-1883 
1 883-1 885 
1885-1887 
1 887-1 888 
1 888-1 889 
1 889-1 890 
1890-1 891 
1891-1892 
1892-1895 

1 895-1 897 
1 897-1900 
1 900-1 901 
1901-1903 

1903-1905 
1 905-1 907 
1907-.1909 
1909- 



Bibliography. — For general physical description see C. T. 
Jackson, Report on the Geological and Agricultural Survey of Rhode 
Island (Providence, 1840); N. S. Shaler, J. B. Woodworth, and A. F. 
Foerste, Geology of the Narragansett Basin (Washington, 1899); 
and T. Nelson Dale, The Chief Commercial Granites of Massachusetts, 
New Hampshire and Rhode Island (Ibid., 1908), being Bulletin 354 
of the U.S. Geological Survey. Administration: — The charters 
of 1644 and 1663 and the constitution of 1842 are all given in F. N. 
Thorpe, Constitutions, Charters, and Organic Laws (Washington, 
1909), vol. vi. See also the annual reports of the treasurer, the 
auditor, the commissioner of public schools, the board of education, 
and the board of state charities and corrections; W. H. Tolman, 
History of Higlier Education in Rhode Island (Washington, 1894); 
Henry Phillips, Jr., Historical Sketches of the Paper Currency of the 
American Colonies (2 vols., Roxbury, Mass., 1865-1866); Thomas 
Durfec, Gleanings from the Judicial History of Rhode Island (Provi- 
dence, 1883); and the works of Field, Richman and Mowry (see 
History, Bibliography). 

History. — For many years the standard authority on the period 
before the ratification of the constitution was S. G. Arnold, History 
of Rhode Island, 1636-iygo (2 vols., New York, 1859^60, 4th cd., 
Providence, 1894). His work has, however, been partially super- 
seded by T. B. Richman, Rhode Island: Its Making and Meaning, 
1 636-1 683 (2 vols., 1902), and Rhode Island: A Study in Separatism 
(Boston and New York, 1905). Edward Field (Editor), State of 
Rhode Island and Providence Plantation at the end of the Century: 
A History (3 vols., Boston, 1902), is valuable for the more recent 
history of the state. See also Adelos Gorton, The Life and Times 
of Samuel Gorton (Philadelphia, 1908); W. B. Weeden, Early 
Rhode Island: A Social History of the People (New York, 1910); 
F. G. Bates, Rhode Island and the Formation of the Union (New 
York, 1898); A. M. Mowry, The Dorr War; or the Constitutional 
Struggle in Rhode Island (Providence, 1901); Records of the Colony 
of Rhode Island and Providence Plantation, 1636-17 Q2 (10 vols., 
Providence, 1856-65); Rhode Island Historical Society, Collec- 
tions (10 vols., to be continued, Providence, 1827-1902); Proceed- 
ings and Publications, 23 numbers (Providence, 1872-1902, to be 
continued). The Quarterly (8 vols., 1892-1901, discontinued); 
Rhode Island Historical Tracts, Series T., 20 vols. (Providence, 
1877-1884), Series II., 5 vols. (Providence, 1889-96). For 
general bibliographies see J. R. Bartlett, Bibliography of Rhode 
Island (Providence, 1864); C. R. Brigham, in Field, III., pp. 651- 
81 ; and Richman, in A Study in Separatism, pp. 353-85. 

1 Jackson was a Liberation Whig— favouring the liberation of 
Dorr from prison — but he was elected on the Democratic ticket. 

2 Sprague was elected over the radical Republican candidate 
through a coalition of Democrats and conservative Republicans. 



RHODES, CECIL JOHN (1853-1902), British colonial and 
Imperial statesman, was born on the 5th of July 1853, at 
Bishop Stortford, in Hertfordshire. His father was a clergyman, 
but he claimed descent from yeoman stock. Cecil John Rhodes 
was the fifth son in a large family of sons and daughters. At 
the time of his birth his father held the living of Bishop Stort- 
ford. The boy was educated at Bishop Stortford grammar 
school with the intention of preparing for the Church; but at 
the age of sixteen his health broke down, and in the latter part 
of 1870 he was sent to join an elder brother, then engaged in 
farming in Natal.. In that year diamonds were discovered in 
the Kimbcrley fields. By the end of 1871 Mr Rhodes and 
his brother were among the successful diggers. The dry air 
of the interior restored Mr Rhodes's health, and before he was 
nineteen he found himself financially independent, physically 
strong and free to devote his life to any object which commended 
itself to his choice. 

Rhodes has left behind him an interesting record of the 
manner in which he was affected by the situation. He deter- 
mined to return to England, and to complete his education by 
reading for a degree at Oxford; but before doing so, he spent 
eight months in a solitary journey through the then little 
known parts of the country lying to the north of the Orange 
and Vaal rivers. He went through Bechuanaland to Mafeking, 
thence to Pretoria, Murchison, Middelburg and back through 
the Transvaal to Kimberley. The journey, made in an ox- 
wagon at a rate of progression of some 15 to 20 miles a day, 
represented a walking tour of eight months through the vast 
spaces of rolling veld which at that time filled those regions of 
Southern Africa. He saw one of the healthiest countries in the 
world barely occupied. He knew the agricultural possibilities 
of Natal. He knew its mineral wealth. The effect of the 
combined influences on his mind, in the circumstances in which 
he found himself, was profound. The idea took passionate 
possession of him that the fine country through which he moved 
ought to be secured for occupation by the British race, and that 
no power but Great Britain should be allowed to dominate in 
the administration of South Africa. When he brought his 
self-imposed pilgrimage to an end, he had found an object to 
which he proposed to devote his life. It was nothing less than 
the governance of the world by the British race. A will exists 
written in Mr Rhodes's own handwriting a couple of years 
later, when he was still only twenty-two, in which he states his 
reasons for accepting the aggrandizement and service of the 
British empire as his highest ideal of practical achievement. 
It ends with a single bequest of everything of which he might 
die possessed, for the furtherance of this great purpose. Five- 
and-twenty years later his final will carried out, with some 
difference of detail, the same intention. 

The share which he allotted to himself in the general scheme 
was the extension of the area of British settlement in Africa, 
but he did not attempt to address himself immediately to public 
work. He returned, in accordance with his first resolve, to 
Oxford, where he matriculated at Oriel. In 1873 his health 
again failed, and he was sent back to South Africa under what 
was practically a death sentence. Years afterwards he saw the 
entry of his own case in the diary of the eminent physician 
whom he consulted, with a note, " Not six months to live." 
South Africa again restored him to health. Three years later 
he was back at Oxford, and from 1876 to 1878 he kept his terms. 
During this period he spent the Long Vacation each year in 
South Africa, where his large financial interests were daily 
increasing in importance. He was a member of the Cape 
ministry when, after a further lapse of years, he kept his last 
term and took his degree. He did not read hard at Oxford, 
and was more than once remonstrated with in the earlier terms 
for non-attendance at lectures. But he passed his examina- 
tions; and though- he was never a student in the university 
sense of the term, he was to the end of his life a keen devourer 
of books. He kept always a special liking for certain classic 
authors. Aristotle was the guide whom as a lad he followed 
in seeking the " highest object "■ on which to exercise the 



RHODES, C. J. 



" highest activity of the soul." Marcus Aurelius was his 
constant companion. There exists at Grote Schuur a copy of 
the Meditations deeply scored with Mr Rhodes's marks. 

During this Oxford time, and on to 1881, Mr Rhodes was 
occupied with the amalgamation of the larger number of the 
diamond mines of Kimberley with the Dc Beers Company, an 
operation which established his position as a practical financier 
and gave him an important connexion and following in the 
business world. To many admirers who shared his ideas on 
public questions his connexion with the financial world and his 
practical success were a stumbling-block. It was often wished 
for him that he had " kept himself clear of all that." But this 
was not his own view. His ideals were political and practical. 
To him the making of money was a necessary preliminary to 
their realization, and he was proud of his practical ability in 
this direction. He was personally a man of most simple tastes. 
His immense fortune was spent in the execution of his ideals, 
and it has been justly said of him that he taught the world a 
new chapter of the romance of wealth. 

In 1881 Mr Rhodes entered public life as a member of the 
Cape assembly. It was the year of the Majuba settlement. 
South Africa was convulsed with questions which had arisen 
between the British and the Dutch, and leaders of Dutch 
opinion at the Cape ventured to speak openly of the formation 
of a United States of South Africa under its own flag. The 
British party needed a rallying-ground, and Mr Rhodes took 
his stand on a policy of local union combined with the consolida- 
tion and expansion of Imperial interests. He offered to Dutch 
and British alike the ideal of a South African Federation 
governing itself within the empire, and extending, by its gradual 
absorption of native territories, the range of Imperial administra- 
tion. Local self-government was, in his opinion, the only endur- 
ing basis on which the unity of the empire could be built, and 
throughout his life he was as keen a defender of local rights as 
he was of Imperial unity. There was a period somewhat later 
in his career when this attitude on his part gave rise to a good 
deal of misapprehension, and his advocacy of the elimination of 
direct Imperial interference in local affairs caused him to be 
viewed in certain quarters with suspicion as a Separatist and 
Independent. Those who were inclined to take this view were 
greatly strengthened in their suspicions by the fact that at 
a critical moment in the struggle for Home Rule in Ireland 
Mr Rhodes contributed £10,000 to the funds of the Separatist 
party. The subsequent publication of his correspondence on 
the subject with Mr Parnell, who was at that time leading the 
Home Rule party, demonstrated, however, the essential fact 
that, whatever might have been the secret intentions of the 
extreme Irish Home Rulers, Mr Rhodes's contribution was made 
strictly subject to the retention of the Irish members at West- 
minster. He remained of the opinion that the Home Rule 
movement, wisely treated, would have had a consolidating and 
not a disruptive effect upon the organization of the empire. 

In South Africa the influence which he acquired over the 
local independents and over the Dutch vote was subsequently 
an important factor in enabling him to carry out the scheme 
of northern expansion which he had at heart, and which he had 
fully developed in his own mind at Oxford in 1878. In 1881 
the Bechuana territory was a sort of no man's land through 
which ran the trade routes to the north. It was evident that 
any power which commanded the trade routes would command 
the unknown northern territory beyond. The Pretoria Con- 
vention of 1 88 1 limited the westward extension of the Transvaal 
to a line east of the trade routes. Nevertheless, the reconstituted 
republic showed itself anxious to encroach by irregular overflow 
into native territories, and Mr Rhodes feared to sec the extension 
of the British colonies permanently blocked by Dutch occupation. 
.One of his first acts as a member of the Cape assembly was to 
urge the appointment of a delimitation commission. He served 
in person on the commission, and obtained from the chief 
Mankoroane, who claimed about half of Bechuanaland, a formal 
cession of his territories to the British government of the Cape. 
The Cape government refused to accept the offer. In February 



255 

1884 a second convention signed in London again defined the 
western frontier of the Transvaal, Bechuanaland being left 
outside the republic. With the consent of Great Britain, 
Germany had occupied, almost at the same time, the territory 
on the Atlantic coast now known as German South-West Africa. 
In August 1884 Mr Rhodes was appointed resident deputy 
commissioner in Bechuanaland, where, notwithstanding the 
conventions to the contrary, Boers had ousted the natives from 
considerable areas and set up the so-called republics of Goshen 
and Stellaland. An old Dutchman who knew the value of the 
position said privately to Mr Rhodes, " This is the key of South 
Africa." The question at issue was whether Great Britain or 
the Transvaal was to hold the key. It was a question about 
which at that time the British public knew nothing and cared 
nothing. Mr Rhodes made it his business to enlighten tbem. 
President Krugcr, speaking for the government of the Transvaal, 
professed to regard the Dutch commandoes as freebooters, and 
to be unable to control them. It devolved upon Great Britain 
to oblige them to evacuate the territory. ^Largely as the result 
of Mr Rhodes's exertions the necessary step was taken. The 
Warren expedition of 1884-85 was sent out. In tbe presence of 
British* troops upon the frontier President Krugcr recovered 
his controlling power over the Transvaal burghers, and without 
any fighting the commandoes were withdrawn. Thereupon 
southern Bechuanaland was declared to be British territory, 
while a British protectorate was declared over the northern 
regions up to the 22nd parallel (September 1885). 

It was the first round in the long duel fought on the field 
of South Africa between Mr Rhodes, as the representative of 
British interests, and President Kruger, as the head of the 
militant Dutch party. The score on this occasion was to Mr 
Rhodes, and the entrance to the interior was secured. But the 
22nd parallel was far short of the limits to which Mr Rhodes 
hoped to see British influence extend, and he feared lest Germany 
and the Transvaal might yet join hands in the native territory 
beyond, and bar his farther progress towards the north. The 
discovery of gold on Xhr Witwatersrand in 1886, by adding to 
the wealth and importance of the Transvaal, gave substance 
to this fear. 

The territory to the north of the 22nd parallel was at that 
time under the domination of Lobengula, chief of the Matabele, 
a native potentate celebrated alike for his ability and for 
the despotic character of his rule. There were rumours of 
Dutch and German emissaries at the kraal of Lobengula, 
engaged in persuading that chief to cede certain portions of 
his territory. Portugal also was putting forward shadowy 
claims to the country. It was in these circumstances that 
Mr Rhodes conceived the idea of forming a British Chartered 
Company, which should occupy the territory for trading and 
mining purposes as far as the Zambezi, and bring the whole 
under the protection of Great Britain. The idea took shape- 
in 1887, in which year Mr Rhodes's first emissaries were sent 
to Lobengula. The charter of the British South Africa Company 
was granted in October 1889. Between the two dates his 
conception of the possibilities to be achieved by the Company 
had expanded. Mr Rhodes no longer limited the sphere of his 
operations to the Zambezi, but, crossing the river at the back 
of the Portuguese settlements at its mouth, he obtained per- 
mission to extend the territories of the Chartered Company to 
the southern end of Lake Tanganyika, including within the 
sphere of its operations the British settlements already made 
in Nyasaland. He hoped to go farther still, and to create a 
connected chain of British possessions through the continent 
which nrght eventually justify the description," Africa British 
from the Cape to Cairo." The treaty negotiated between 
Great Britain and Germany in 1890 extended the German sphere 
of influence from the East Coast to the frontier of the Congo 
Free State, and defeated this hope. But Mr Rhodes did not 
wholly renounce the idea. In 1892, when the question of the 
retention or abandonment of Uganda hung in the balance at 
home, he threw all the weight of his influence into the scale of 
retention, and undertook at his own personal expense to connect 



'2 5 6 



RHODES, C. J. 



that territory by telegraph with British possessions in the south. 
In the following year, 1893, it was found inevitable to fight the 
Matabele, and a war, prosecuted with a success that is perhaps 
unique of its kind, placed the country entirely in British hands. 
The territory thus added to the British empire covered an 
extent of 450,000 square miles, of which large portions consist 
of healthy uplands suitable for white colonization. The pioneer 
party who constructed the first road and founded the first 
British stations in the country received their orders to cross 
the frontier in the end of 1889. By the end of 1899, before the 
outbreak of the South African War, though the country had 
passed through the trial of a war, two native rebellions, and the 
scourge of rinderpest, it had become, under the name of Rhodesia, 
a well-settled province of the British empire, with a white popula- 
tion of some 12,000 to 13,000 persons. 

The six years which followed the granting of the charter may 
be regarded as the most successful of a singularly successful 
life. In 1890, not many months after the granting of the charter, 
Mr Rhodes accepted the position of prime minister of the Cape. 
He was maintained in power very largely by the Dutch vote, 
which he spared no pains to conciliate; and having the confidence 
of both political sections of the colony, he found himself practically 
in a position to play the part of benevolent despot in South 
Africa. He used the position well so far as the public was 
concerned. While his scheme of northern expansion was making 
the rapid progress which has been indicated, he did much to 
elevate and to enlarge the field of local politics. He frankly 
declared and worked for the policy of uniting British and Dutch 
interests in South Africa; he took a keen interest in local educa- 
tion. He also during this period carried through some important 
reforms in native policy. He had the courage to restrict the 
franchise, introducing an educational test and limiting the exercise 
of voting power to men enjoying an income equal to a labourer's 
wage — thus abolishing, without making any distinction of colour, 
the abuses of what was known as the " blanket " vote. 

But his native policy was far from being one of simple re- 
striction. He liked the natives; he employed them by thousands 
in the mining industry, he kept native servants habitually about 
his person, he seemed to understand their peculiarities and was 
singularly successful in dealing with them. The first canon of 
his native policy was that liquor should be kept from them; 
the second, that they should be encouraged to labour, and 
guaranteed the full possession of their earnings; the third, that 
they should be educated in the practical arts of peace. He 
appreciated the full importance of raising their territorial con- 
dition from one of tribal to individual tenure; and while he 
protested against the absurdity of permitting the uncivilized 
Kaffir to vote on questions of highly civilized white policy, 
he believed in applying to the native for his own native affairs 
the principle of self-government. Of these views some received 
practical embodiment in the much-disputed act known as the 
Glen Grey Act of 1894. In this connexion it may also be noted 
that he was one of the warmest and most convinced supporters 
of Lovedale, the very successful missionary institution for the 
education of natives in South Africa. 

The position of benevolent despot has obvious drawbacks. 
In Mr Rhodes's case the dependence which the populations of 
Cape Colony were led to place on him had its reaction on the 
public in a demoralizing loss of self-reliance, and for himself it 
must be admitted that the effect on the character of a man 
already much disposed to habits of absolutism in thought and 
action was the reverse of beneficial. Mr Rhodes felt himself 
to be far stronger than any man in his own surroundings; he 
knew himself to be actuated by disinterested motives in the 
aims which he most earnestly desired to reach. He was pro- 
foundly impressed by a sense of the shortness of life, and he 
so far abused his power as to become intolerant of any sort of 
control or opposition. The inevitable result followed, that 
though Mr Rhodes did much of great and good work during 
the six years of his supreme power, he entirely failed during 
that period to surround himself, as he might have done, by a 
circle of able men fit to comprehend and to carry on the work 



to which his own best efforts were directed. To work with him 
was practically impossible for those who were not willing to 
accept without demur the yoke of dogmatic authority He 
had a few devoted personal friends, who appreciated his aims 
and were inspired by his example; but he was lacking in regard 
for individuals, and a great part of his daily life was spent in 
the company of satellites and instruments, whom he used with 
cynical unconcern for the furtherance of his ends. 

In 1896 the brilliant period of his premiership was brought 
to an end by the incident which became famous under the 
name of the Jameson Raid. The circumstances which led to 
the Raid belong properly to the history of the Transvaal. It 
is enough to say briefly here that the large alien population 
which had been attracted to the Transvaal by the phenomenal 
wealth of the Johannesburg goldfields, conceiving themselves 
to have reason to revolt against the authority of the Transvaal 
government, resolved towards the end of 1895 to have recourse 
to arms in order to obtain certain reforms. Mr Rhodes, as 
a large mine-owner, was theoretically a member of the mining 
population. In this capacity he was asked to give his counten- 
ance to the movement. But as prime minister of a British 
colony he was evidently placed in a false position from the 
moment in which he became cognizant of a secret attempt 
to overturn a neighbouring government by force of arms. 
He did more than become cognizant. The subsequent finding 
of a Cape committee, which he accepted as accurate, was to 
the effect that " in his capacity as controller of the three great 
joint-stock companies, the British South Africa Company, the 
De Beers Consolidated Mines, and the Gold Fields of South 
Africa, he directed and controlled the combination which 
rendered such a proceeding as the Jameson Raid possible." 
He gave money, arms and influence to the movement; and 
as the time fixed for the outbreak of the revolution approached, 
he allowed Dr Jameson, who was then administrator of the 
British South Africa Company in Rhodesia, to move an armed 
force of some 500 men upon the frontier. Here Mr Rhodes's 
participation in the movement came to an end. It became 
abundantly clear from subsequent inquiry that he was not 
personally responsible for what followed. A cipher corre- 
spondence, seized and published by the Boers, left the civilized 
world in no doubt as to Mr Rhodes's share in the previous 
preparation, and he was for a time believed to be responsible 
for the Raid itself. Subsequent inquiries held by committees 
of the Cape parliament and of the British House of Commons 
acquitted him entirely of responsibility for Dr Jameson's final 
movement, but both committees found that he had acted in 
a manner which was inconsistent with his duty as prime 
minister of the Cape and managing director of the British South 
Africa Company. 

He displayed, in the circumstances, characteristic qualities 
of pluck and candour. He made no concealment of his own 
share in the catastrophe; he took full responsibility for what 
had been done in his name by subordinates, and he accepted 
all the consequences which ensued. He resigned his premier- 
ship of the Cape (January 1896); and, recognizing that his 
presence was no longer useful in the colony, he turned his 
attention to Rhodesia. His design was to live in that country, 
and to give all the stimulus of his own presence and encourage- 
ment to the development of its resources. The Matabele 
rebellion of March 1896 intervened to prevent the immediate 
realization of his plans. In June Imperial troops were sent up, 
and by the end of July the result of the military operations 
had driven the natives to the Matoppo Hills, where they held 
a practically impregnable position. The prospect was of con- 
tinued war, with a renewal of a costly campaign in the following 
year. Mr Rhodes conceived the idea that he might effect 
single-handed the pacification which military skill had failed 
to compel. To succeed, it was essential that he should trust 
and be trusted. He accordingly moved his tent away from 
the troops to the base of the Matoppo Hills. He lay there 
quietly for six weeks, in the power of the enemy if they had 
chosen to attack. Word was circulated among the natives 



RHODES, J. F. 



that he had come alone and undefended to hear their side of 
the case. A council was held by them in the very depths of 
the hills, where no armed force could touch them. He was 
invited to attend it. It was a case of staking his life on trust. 
He displayed no hesitation, but mounted and rode unarmed 
with the messenger. Three friends rode with him. The 
confidence was justified. They met the assembled chiefs at 
the place appointed. The native grievances were laid before 
Mr Rhodes. At the end of a long discussion Mr Rhodes, 
having made and exacted such concessions as he thought fit, 
asked the question, " Now, for the future is it peace or is it 
war?" And the chiefs, laying down their sticks as a symbol 
of surrendered arms, declared, "We give you one word: it is 
peace." The scene, as described by one of the eye-witnesses, 
was very, striking. Mr Rhodes, riding away, characterized it 
simply as " one of the scenes which make life worth living." 

His life was drawing towards its end. He had still a few 
years, which he devoted with success to the development of 
the country which bore his name. The railway was brought 
to Bulawayo, and arrangements were made for carrying the 
line on in sections as far as the south end of Lake Tanganyika, 
a construction which was part of his pet scheme for connecting 
the Cape by a British line of communication with Cairo. He 
also concluded arrangements for carrying a telegraphic land 
line, through to Egypt, and had the satisfaction of seeing the 
mineral development of the country fairly started. But the 
federal union of South Africa, to which he had always worked 
as the secure basis of the extension of British rule in the southern 
half of the continent, was not for him to see. The South African 
War broke out in 1899. Mr Rhodes took his part at Kimberley 
in sustaining the hardships of a siege; but his health was 
broken, and though he lived to see victory practically assured 
to British arms, peace had not been concluded when, on the 
26th of March 1902, he died at Muizenberg, near Cape Town. 
. His life's work did not end actually with his death. He 
left behind him a will in which he dedicated his fortunes, as he 
had dedicated himself, exclusively to the public service. He 
left the bulk of his vast wealth for the purpose of founding 
scholarships at Oxford of the value each of £300 a year, to be 
held by students from every important British colony, and 
from every state and Territory of the United States of America. 
The sum so bequeathed was "very large; but it was not for the 
munificence of the legacy that the will was received with 
acclamation throughout the civilized world: it was for the 
striking manifestation of faith which it embodied in the principles 
that make for the enlightenment and peace and union of man- 
kind, and for the fine constancy of Mr Rhodes's conviction that 
the unity of the British Empire,' which he had been proud to 
serve, was among the greatest of organized forces uniting for 
universal good. The will was drawn up some years before his 
death. A codicil, signed during the last days of his life, gave 
evidence of some enlargement of his views as to the association 
of races necessary in order to secure the peace of the world, 
and added to the original scheme a certain number of scholar- 
ships to be held at the disposal of German students. 

The publication of the will silenced Mr Rhodes's detractors 
and converted many of his critics. It set a seal which could 
not be mistaken upon his completed life. The revulsion of 
sentiment towards him was complete, and his name passed at 
once in the public estimation to the place which it is probably 
destined to take in history, as one which his countrymen are 
proud to count among the great makers of the British Empire. 

See the Life by Sir Lewis Michell (2 vols., London, 1910); 
consult also Sir T. E Fuller, Cecil John Rhodes: A Monograph and 
a Reminiscence (London, 1910), and " Vindex," Cecil Rhodes: 
His Political Life and Speeches (London, 1900). 

(F L. L.) 

The Rhodes Scholarships. — The scholarship system founded 
by the will of Cecil Rhodes provides in perpetuity for the 
support at Oxford, for a term of three years each, of about 
175 selected scholars. Each scholar from the colonies and 
the United States has an allowance of £300 per annum during 



•257 

the continuance of his scholarship; those from Germany, as 
being nearer to Oxford, an allowance of £250 each. In each 
province of Canada, in each state of Australia, in the four 
collegiate schools of Cape Colony (Rondebosch, Stellenbosch, 
South African College, and St Andrew's College, Grahamstown), 
in the dominion of New Zealand, and in the colonics of Natal, 
Jamaica, Bermuda and Newfoundland, a scholar is elected each 
year. Three scholarships annually are assigned to Rhodesia. 
Each state and Territory of the American Union is entitled 
to have two scholars in residence, so that an election takes 
place in two years out of three. Five scholarships are provided 
annually for scholars from Germany. 

In his will Rhodes mentions the objects he had in view in founding 
the different scholarships: — 

1. Colonial. — " I consider that the education of young colonists 
at one of the universities in the United Kingdom is of great advantage 
to them for giving breadth to their views, for their instruction in 
life and manners, and for instilling into their minds the advantage 
to the colonies as well as to the United Kingdom of the retention 
of the unity of the empire." 

t 2. American. — " I also desire to encourage and foster an apprecia- 
tion of the advantages which I implicitly believe will result from 
the union of the English-speaking people throughout the world, 
and to encourage in the students from the United States of North 
America who will benefit from the American scholarships to be 
established for the reason above given at the university of Oxford 
under this my will an attachment to the country from which they 
have sprung, but without, I hope, withdrawing them or their sym- 
pathies from the land of their adoption or birth." 

3. German. — " I note the German emperor has made instruction 
in English compulsory in German schools. I leave five- yearly 
scholarships at Oxford of £250 per annum to students of German 
birth, the scholars to be nominated by the German emperor for 
the time being. Each scholarship to continue for three years, so 
that each year after the first three there will be fifteen scholars. 
The object is that an understanding between the three Great Powers 
will render war impossible and educational relations make the 
strongest tie." 

' He defines as follows the principles on which he wished his 
scholars to be selected : — 

" My desire being that the students who shall be elected to the 
scholarships shall not be merely bookworms, I direct that in the 
election 01 a student to a scholarship regard shall be had to (1) his 
literary and scholastic attainments; (2) his fondness for and success 
in manly outdoor sports such as cricket, football and the like; 
(3) his qualities of manhood, truth, courage, devotion to duty, 
sympathy for and protection of the weak, kindliness, unselfishness 
and fellowship; and (4) his exhibition during school days of moral 
force of character and of instincts to lead and to take an interest 
in his schoolmates, for those latter attributes will be likely in after 
life to guide him to esteem the performance of public duties as 
his highest aim." 

The trustees named in the will for the management of the trust 
were Lord Rosebery, Lord Grey, Lord Milncr, Sir Lewis Michell, 
Dr L. S. Jameson, Mr Alfred Beit and Mr Bourchier F. Hawksley. 

After consultation with the educational authorities of all the 
communities to which scholarships are assigned, the trustees arranged 
a system for the selection of scholars. This system, which is 
subject to such changes as experience suggests, may be summarized 
as follows. Every candidate, in order to become eligible, is required 
to pass the Responsions examination of the university of Oxford, 
or some examination accepted by the university as an equivalent. 
In the case of communities possessing universities or colleges in 
' affiliation with Oxford, a certain standing at those universities is 
accepted in lieu of Responsions. Examinations are held in two 
years out of three in each state of the American Union, and annually 
in colonies which do not have the affiliated universities or colleges 
referred to. German scholars are nominated by his majesty the 
emperor of Germany. Candidates must be unmarried — must be 



between the ages of 19-and 25 (in Jamaica and Queensland, 18-25; 
in Newfoundland, 18-21; in Western Australia, 17-25), and they 
must be, in the colonies, British subjects — in the United States and 



Germany, subjects of those countries. In each British colony 
electing scholars and in each state of the Union there is a committee 
of selection, composed commonly of leading educational authorities 
or high public officials. To these committees all candidates who 
have passed the qualifying tests submit their claims. The com- 
mittees are entrusted with the power of selection, but are expected 
to exercise this power, as closely as circumstances permit, in accord- 
ance with the suggestions made by Rhodes. The trust arranges 
for the distribution of elected scholars among the colleges of Oxford, 
each of which has agreed to receive a limited number of approved 
candidates. . : (G. R. P.) 

RHODES, JAMES FORD (1848- ), American historian, 
was born in Cleveland, Ohio, on the 1st of May 1848. He 

xxra. 9 



2 5 8 



RHODES 



entered the university of New York as a special student in 
1865, studied at the university of Chicago in 1866-67, and 
at the College de France in 1867-68, and in 1868 served 
as occasional Paris correspondent to the Chicago Times. He 
then took a course in metallurgy in the School of Mines, at 
Berlin; subsequently inspected iron and steel works in western 
Germany and in Great Britain; and in 1870 joined his father 
in the iron, steel and coal business in Cleveland, becoming a 
member of the firm in 1874. He retired from business with 
an ample fortune in 1885, and after two years devoted to 
general reading and travel he began his History of the United 
States from the Compromise of 1850, which, closing the narrative 
with the year 1877, was published in seven volumes in 1893- 
1906. In recognition of the merit of his work he received 
honorary degrees from various American universities, was 
elected president of the American Historical Association in 
1899, and received the Loubet prize of the Berlin Academy 
of Sciences in 1 901 . In 1 909 he published a volume of 
Historical Essays. 

RHODES, the most easterly of the islands of the Aegean 
Sea, about 10 m. S. of Cape Alypo in Asia Minor. It forms, 
with the islands of Syme, Casos, Carpathos, Castelorizo, Telos 
and Charki, one of the four sanjaks into which the Archipelago 
vilayet of Turkey is divided. The governor-general of the 
vilayet 'resides at the town of Rhodes. The length of the 
island is about 45 m. from N.E. to S.W., its greatest breadth 
22 m., and its area nearly 424 sq. m.' The population of the 
island comprises 7000 Moslems, 21,000 Christians, and 2000 
Jews. 

The island is diversified in its surface, and is traversed from 
north to south by an elevated mountain range, the highest 
point of which is called Atairo (anc. Atabyris or Atabyrium) 
(4560 ft.). It commands a view of the elevated coast of Asia 
Minor towards the north, and of the Archipelago, studded 
with its numerous islands, on the north-west; while on the 
south-west is seen Mount Ida in Crete, often veiled in clouds, 
and on the south and south-east the vast expanse of waters 
which wash the African shore. The rest of the island is 
occupied in great part by ranges of moderately elevated hills, 
on which are found extensive woods of ancient pines, planted 
by the hand of nature. These forests were formerly very 
thick, but they are now greatly thinned by the Turks, who 
cut them down and take no care to plant others in their place. 
Beneath these hills the surface of the island falls lower, and 
several hills in the form of amphitheatres extend their bases 
as far as the sea. 

Rhodes was famed in ancient times for its delightful climate, 
and it still maintains its former reputation. The winds are 
liable to little variation; they blow from the west, often with 
great violence, for nine months in the year, and at other times 
from the nojth; and they moderate the summer heats, which 
are chiefly felt during the months of July and August, when 
the hot winds blow from the coast of Anatolia. 

Rhodes, in addition to its fine climate, is blessed with a 
fertile soil, and produces a variety of the finest fruits and 
vegetables. Around the villages are extensive cultivated 
fields and orchards, containing fig, pomegranate and orange 
trees. On the sloping hills carob trees, and others both useful 
and agreeable, still grow abundantly; the vine also holds its 
place, and| produces a species of wine which was highly valued 
by the ancients, though it seems to have degenerated greatly 
in modern times. The valleys afford rich pastures, and the 
plains produce every species of grain. 

The commerce of the island has been of late years increasing 
at a rapid rate. Many British manufactures are imported 
by indirect routes, through Smyrna, Constantinople, Beyrout 
and other places. Cotton stuffs, calicoes and grey linen are 
among the goods most in demand; they are exported to the 
neighbouring coast of Anatolia, between Budrum and Adalia, 
and thence conveyed into the interior. The expansion of 
the trade has been very much owing to the establishment of 
steam navigation direct to the island, which is now visited 



regularly by French and Austrian steamers, as well as by some 
from England to Symrna. 

The only town of any importance in the island is the capital, 
Rhodes, which stands at the north-east extremity. It rises in 
an imposing manner from the sea, on a gentle slope in the form 
of an amphitheatre. It is surrounded with walls and towers, 
and defended by a large moated castle of great strength. These 
fortifications are all the work of the Knights of St John. The 
interior of the, city does not correspond to its outward appear- 
ance. No trace exists of the splendour of the ancient city, 
with its regular streets, well-ordered plan and numerous 
public buildings. The modern city of Rhodes is in general 
the work of the Knights of St John, and has altogether a 
medieval aspect. The picturesque fortifications also by 
which the city is surrounded remain almost unaltered as they 
were in the 15th century. The principal buildings which 
remain are the church of St John, which is become the principal 
mosque; the hospital, which has been transformed into public 
granaries; the palace of the grand master, now the residence 
of the pasha; and the senate-house, which still contains some 
marbles and ancient columns. Of the streets, the best and 
widest is a long street which is still called the Street of the 
Knights. It is perfectly straight, and formed of old houses, 
on which remain the armorial bearings of the members of the 
order. On some of these buildings are still seen the arms of 
the popes and of some of the royal and noble houses of Europe. 

The only relics of classical antiquity are the numerous 
inscribed altars and bases of statues, as well as architectural 
fragments, which are found scattered in the courtyards and 
gardens of the houses in the extensive suburbs which now 
surround the town, the whole of which were comprised within 
the limits of the ancient city. The foundations also of the 
moles that separate the harbours are of Hellenic work, though 
the existing moles were erected by the Knights of St John. 

Rhodes has two harbours. The lesser of these lies towards 
the east, and its entrance is obstructed by a barrier of rocks, 
so as to admit the entrance of but one ship at a time. It is 
sufficiently sheltered, but by the negligence ofithe Turks the 
sand has been suffered to accumulate until it has been gradually 
almost choked up. The other harbour is larger, and also in a 
bad condition; here small ships may anchor, and are sheltered 
from the west winds, though they are exposed to the north 
and north-east winds. The two harbours are separated by a 
mole which runs obliquely into the sea. At the eastern 
entrance is the fort of St Elmo, with a lighthouse. 

History. — It is as yet difficult to determine the part which 
Rhodes played in prehistoric days during the naval predominance 
of the neighbouring island of Crete; but archaeological remains 
dating from the later Minoan age prove that the early Aegean 
culture maintained itself there comparatively unimpaired until 
the historic period. A similar conclusion may be drawn from 
the -legend which peopled primitive Rhodes with a population 
of skilful workers in metal, the " Telchines." Whatever the 
t racial affinities of the early inhabitants may have been, it is 
certain that in historic times Rhodes was occupied by a Dorian 
population, reputed to have emigrated mainly from Argos 
subsequently to the " Dorian invasion " of Greece. The three 
cities founded by these settlers — Lindus, Ialysus and Camirus — 
belonged to the " League of Six Cities," by which the Dorian 
colonists in Asia Minor sought to protect themselves against 
the barbarians of the neighbouring mainland. The early history 
of these towns is a record of brisk commercial expansion and 
active colonization. The position of Rhodes as a distributing 
centre of Levantine and especially of Phoenician goods is well 
attested by archaeological finds. Its colonies extended not only 
eastward along the southern coast of Asia Minor, but also linked 
up the island with^the westernmost parts of the Greek world. 
Among such settlements may be mentioned Phaselis in Lycia, 
perhaps also Soli in Cilicia, Salapia on the east Italian coast, 
Gela in Sicily, the Lipari islands, and Rhoda in north-east 
Spain. In home waters the Rhodians exercised political 
control over Carpathos and other islands. 



RHODESIA 



259 



The history of Rhodes during the Persian wars is quite 
obscure. In the 5th century the three cities were enrolled in 
the Delian League, and democracies became prevalent. In 
412 the island revolted from Athens and became the head- 
quarters of the Peloponnesian fleet. Four years later the in- 
habitants for the most part abandoned their former residences 
and concentrated in the newly founded city of Rhodes. This 
town, which was laid out on an exceptionally fine site according 
to a scientific plan by the architect Hippodamus of Miletus, 
soon rose to considerable importance, and attracted much of 
the Aegean and Levantine commerce which had hitherto been 
in Athenian hands. In the 4th century its political develop- 
ment was arrested by constant struggles between oligarchs and 
democrats, who in turn brought the city under the control of 
Sparta (412-395, 391-378), of Athens (395*391, 378-357), and 
of the Carian dynasty of Maussollus (357-340). It seems that 
about 340 the island was conquered for the Persian king by his 
Rhodian admiral Mentor; in 332 it submitted to Alexander 
the Great. Upon Alexander's death the people expelled their 
Macedonian garrison, and henceforth not only maintained their 
independence but acquired great political influence. The 
expansion of Levantine trade which ensued in the Hellenistic 
age brought especial profit to Rhodes, whose standard of coinage 
and maritime law became widely accepted in the Mediterranean. 
Under a modified type of democracy, in which the chief power 
would seem to have rested normally with the six wpvraveis, or 
heads of the executive, the city enjoyed a long period of remark- 
ably good administration. The chief success of the government 
lay in the field of foreign politics, where it prudently avoided 
entanglement in the ambitious schemes of Hellenistic monarchs, 
but gained great prestige by energetic interference against 
aggressors who threatened the existing balance of power or the 
security of the seas. The chief incidents of Rhodian history 
during this period are a memorable siege by Demetrius Polior- 
cetes in 304, who sought in vain to force the city into active 
alliance with King Antigonus by means of his formidable fleet 
and artillery; a severe earthquake in 227, the damages of which 
all the other Hellenistic states contributed to repair, because they 
could not afford to see the island ruined; some vigorous cam- 
paigns against Byzantium, the Pergamene and the Pontic 
kings, who had threatened the Black Sea trade-route (220 sqq.), 
and against the pirates of Crete. In accordance with their 
settled policy the Rhodians eagerly supported the Romans when 
these made war upon Philip V. of Macedon and Antiochus III. 
of Syria on behalf of the minor Greek states. In return for 
their more equivocal attitude during the Third Macedonian 
.War they were deprived by Rome of some possessions in Lycia, 
and damaged by the partial diversion of their trade to Delos 
(167). Nevertheless during the two Mithradatic wars they 
remained loyal to the republic, and in 88 successfully stood a 
siege by the Pontic king. The Rhodian navy, which had dis- 
tinguished itself in most of these wars, did further good service 
on behalf of Pompey in his campaigns against the pirates and 
against Julius Caesar. A severe blow was struck against the 
city in 43 by C. Cassius, who besieged and ruthlessly plundered 
the people for refusing to submit to his exactions. Though 
Rhodes continued a free town for another century, its commercial 
prosperity was crippled and a series of extensive earthquakes 
after a.d. 155 completed the ruin of the city. 

In the days of its greatest power Rhodes became famous as a 
centre of pictorial and plastic art ; it gave rise to a school of eclectic 
oratory whose chief representative was Apollonius Molon, the 
teacher of Cicero; it was the birthplace of the Stoic philosopher 
Panaetius; the home of the poet Apollonius Rhodius and the 
historian Posidonius. Protogenes embellished the city with his 
paintings, and Chares of Lindus with the celebrated colossal statue 
of the sun-god, which was 105 ft. high. The colossus stood for 
fifty-six years, till an earthquake prostrated it in 224 B.C. Its 
enormous fragments continued to excite wonder in the time of 
Pliny, and were not removed till a.d. 656, when Rhodes was con- 
quered by the Saracens, who sold the remains for old metal to a 
dealer, who employed nine hundred camels to carry them away. 
The notion that the colossus once stood astride over the entrance 
to the harbour is a medieval fiction. During the later Roman 
empire Rhodes was the capital of the province of the islands. Its 



history under the Byzantine rule is uneventf ul,but for some temporary 
occupations by the Saracens (653-658, 717-718), and the gradual 
encroachment of Venetian traders since 1082. In the 13th century 
the island stood as a rule under the control of Italian adventurers, 
who were, however, at times compelled to acknowledge the over- 
lordship of the emperors of Nicaea, and failed to protect it against 
the depredations of Turkish corsairs. In 1309 it was conquered 
by the Knights Hospitallers of St John of Jerusalem at the instiga- 
tion of the pope and the Genoese, and converted into a great fortress 
for the protection of the southern seas against the Turks. Under 
their mild and just rule both the native Greeks and the Italian 
residents were able to carry on a brisk trade. But the piratical 
acts of these traders, in which the knights themselves sometimes 
joined, and the strategic position of the island between Constanti- 
nople and the Levant, necessitated its reduction by the Ottoman 
sultans. A siege in 1480 by Mahomet II. led to the repulse 
of the Turks with^ severe losses; after a second investment, during 
which Sultan Suleiman I. is said to have lost 90,000 men out of a 
force of 200,000, the knights evacuated Rhodes under an honourable 
capitulation (1522). The population henceforth dwindled in con- 
sequence of pestilence and emigration, and although the island 
recovered somewhat in the 18th century under a comparatively 
lenient rule it was brought to a very low ebb owing to the severity 
of its governor during the Greek revolution. The sites of Lindus, 
Ialysus, and Camirus, which in the most ancient times were the 
principal towns of the island, are clearly marked, and the first 
of the three is still occupied by a small town with a medieval castle, 
both of them dating from the time of the knights, though the 
castle occupies the site of the ancient acropolis, of the walls of 
which considerable remains are still visible. There are no ruins 
of any importance on the site of cither Ialysus or Camirus, but 
excavations at the latter place have produced valuable and interest- 
ing results in the way of ancient vases and other antiquities, which 
are now in the British Museum. Rhodes was again famous for 
its^ pottery in medieval times; this was a lustre ware at first 
imitated from Persian, though it afterwards developed into an 
independent style of fine colouring and rich variety of design. 

Sec Pindar, 7th Olympian Ode; Diodorus v. 55-59, xiii.-xx. 
passim; Polybius iv. 46-52, v. 88-90, xvi. 2-9, xxvii.-xxix. 
passim; C. Torr, Rhodes in Ancient Times (Cambridge, 1885), 
Rhodes tn Modern Times (Cambridge, 1887); C. Schumacher De 
republica Rkodiorum commentatio (Heidelberg, '1886); H.'van 
Gelder, GeschichU der alien Rkodier (Hague, 1900); B. V. Head, 
Historia Numorum (Oxford, 1887), pp. 539~542; and Baron de 
Balabre, Rhodes of the Knights (1909). 

(E.H.B.;'E.Gr.;*M.O.B.C.) 

RHODESIA (so named after Cecil Rhodes), an inland country 
and British possession in South Central Africa, bounded S. and 
S.W. by the Transvaal, the Bechuanaland Protectorate and 
German South-West Africa; W. by Portuguese West Africa. 
N.W. by Belgian Congo; N.E. by German East Africa; E. by 
the British Nyatealand Protectorate and Portuguese East Africa, 
It covers an area of about 450,000 sq. m., being larger than 
France, Germany and the Low Countries combined. It is 
divided into two parts of unequal size by the mid81e course of 
the Zambezi. 

Southern Rhodesia, with an area of 148,575 sq. m., consists 
of Matabeleland and Mashonaland, the western and eastern 
provinces, while the trans-Zambezi regions are divided into 
North-Western Rhodesia (or Barotseland) and North-Eastem 
Rhodesia. 

Physical Features, — Rhodesia forms part of the high tableland 
which constitutes the interior of Africa south of the Congo 
basin. Hydrographically the greater part of the country 
belongs to the basin of the Zambezi (q.v.), but in the N.E. it 
includes the eastern headstreams of the Congo, and in the S. 
and S.E. it is drained by the tributaries of the Limpopo, the 
Sabi and the Pungwe. The Limpopo forms the boundary 
between Southern Rhodesia and the Transvaal. The north- 
western regions, drained by the upper Zambezi and its affluents, 
are described under Barotseland, and North-Eastem Rhodesia, 
together with the adjacent Nyasaland Protectorate, under 
British Central Africa. The highest portion of the tableland 
of Southern Rhodesia runs from the S.W. to the N.E. and forms 
a broad watershed between the tributaries of <he Zambezi- 
flowing north and the rivers flowing south and east. It is along 
this high plateau that the railway runs from Bulawayo to 
Salisbury and onwards to Portuguese East Africa. The eleva- 
tion of the railway varies from 4500 ft. to 5500 ft. There is a 
gradual sloping away of the plateau to the N.W. and S.E., so 



26o 



RHODESIA 



that only a small portion of Southern Rhodesia is under 
3000 ft. The eastern boundary, along Portuguese East Africa, 
forms the edge of the tableland; the height of the edge is 
accentuated by a series of ridges, so that the country here 
assumes a mountainous appearance, the grass-clad heights 
being reminiscent of the Cheviot Hills of Scotland or the lower 
Alps of Switzerland. 

Geology. — The geology of this region is very imperfectly known. 
Metamorphic rocks extend over immense areas, but these and the 
other formations are to a great extent hidden beneath superficial 
deposits. Conglomerates and banded ironstone rocks are found 
in the metamorphic areas around Bulawayo and the borders of 
Katanga; but to what extent these represent the different forma- 
tions older than the Karroo and newer than the Swaziland schists 
(see Transvaal) has not been satisfactorily determined. Certain 
gold-bearing conglomerates are regarded as the equivalents of 
the Witwatersrand series, but the main sources of gold are the 
veins of quartz and igneous rocks developed in the metamorphic 
series. The Karroo formation is well represented, and covers 
extensive areas in the Zambezi basin. The Dwyka conglomerate 



RHODESIA 

Scale. 1 : 1 5,000.000 
English Miles 
© 
• * • 




^XROTe:torate. 



appears to be developed in the Tuli district. The coal-bearing 
strata of Tuli and Wankies are certainly of Karroo age. They have 
yielded the fossil remains of fishes Acrolepis molyneuxi, the fresh- 
water mollusc Palaeomutela, a few reptilian bones, and species of 
Glossopteris amongplants.^ 

The' age of a widely distributed series 'of red-white sandstones, 
named by Molyneux the Forest Sandstone, remains uncertain. 
Molyneux considers them Tertiary, but it is not improbable that 
sandstones of various ages from Karroo to those of Recent date are 
represented. They contain numerous interbedded sheets of basalt, 
but it is doubtful if any of these are of so recent a date as Tertiary. 
Rocks of Karroo age occur round Lake Bangweulu, and contain 
numerous fossil plants and a few small shells. The age of the 
wide, thick sheet of basalt, through which the Zambezi has cut the 
Batoka^ gorge between the Victoria Falls and Wankies, . remains 
uncertain. 1 



1 For geology see F. H. Hatch, " Notes on the Geology of M 
naland and Matabeleland," Geol. Mag.,, 1895; A. J. C. Moly 



Masho- 
jlyneux, 
" The Sedimentary Deposits of Rhodesia,*' Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc, 
vol. lix. (1903); F. P. Mennel, "Geology of Rhodesia," British 
Association Handbook (Cape Town, 1905); G. W. Lamplugh, British 
Assoc. Rep.i South African Meeting, 1905. 



Climate. — As Southern Rhodesia extends between 16 S. and 22 ° S., 
and is thus within the tropics, it might be expected that the 
climate would be trying for Europeans, but owing to the elevation 
of the country the temperature is rarely too high for comfort. 
Another factor that renders the climate equable is that the rainy 
season coincides with the summer months, and the winter months 
are dry. The nights are always cool, so that the climate approxi- 
mates to the ideal. On the high tableland which forms the great 
proportion of the country the temperature in the shade rarely 
reaches ioo° and there is just sufficient frost in the winter to be 
useful to farmers. The winter months are June, July and August, 
and the hottest months are the spring months of September, 
October and November, just before the rains begin. A temperature 
of no is sometimes reached in the low-lying district of Tuli 
(elevation 1890 ft.) and in the Zambezi valley. There is a striking 
difference between the minimum temperatures on the ground and 
those registered 4 ft. from the ground. The latter rarely reach 
freezing-point, but the ground temperature is sometimes as low 
as 2 4 . Hoar frost is most noticeable in the vleis and low-lying 
areas. The period known as the rainy season extends from Sep- 
tember to March, but the greatest amount falls in the Last three 
months of that period. The mean annual rainfall for various 
stations in the eastern half of Rhodesia ranees 
from 24 to 44 in., the greatest rainfall being 
along the eastern border. For the western half 
the mean ranges from 19 to 27 in., but in the 
south-west corner it is much drier, the rainfall so 
far recorded never reaching 18 in. There is a 
sufficiency of rain for all summer crops, but winter 
crops, such as wheat, must be^ assisted by irrigation. 
Malaria is prevalent in certain districts during the 
wet season, but this is now preventable and the 
country is very healrhy, children, especially in towns 
and on the high veld, growing sturdily. The 
death-rate amongst Europeans is only about 15 
per 1000. 

Fauna. — Rhodesia is rich in the larger grami- 
nivorous animals, especially in antelope, which 
number about twenty-five varieties, including 
kudu, eland, hartebeeste, roan, sable, wilde- 
beeste and impala. The most common are the 
duiker, the stembok and the rietbok. Other 
herbivorous animals found in the -country are 
the buffalo, giraffe, zebra, elephant, hippopotamus, 
rhinoceros (black and white), warthog, and various 
baboons and monkeys. The buffalo is now rare, 
having been almost exterminate^ by the rinder- 
pest in 1896. The carnivora include the lion, 
leopard, cheetah, and various wild cats, foxes, 
wolves, jackals and dogs. There are at least 
five varieties ■ of the mongoose. Amongst the 
rodents are squirrels, dormice, rats (eleven kinds), 
the porcupine, the Cape hare and the rock hare* 
Of insectivora the ant-eater, the ant-bear, the 
hedgehog and various shrews may be mentioned. 
Bats number eleven varieties. Snakes are numer- 
ous, the most important being the python, the 
puff-adder and the cobra. Crocodiles and iguanas 
are found in most of the rivers, and chameleons 
and lizards are very common. Rhodesia abounds 
in beetles, butterflies and moths, and new varieties 
are frequently discovered in the wet season. Men- 
tion ought to be made of white ants (termites) 
and locusts. The ants are a serious pest, attack- 
_ ing all cut timber resting in or on the ground. 
E axryw»u«*. Th gradually envelop the dead wood in a' 
mound of earth and consume it wholly, so that all poles and 
house-timber have to be carefully protected either by chemical 
preparations or by raising them clear from contact with the 
earth. The mounds which the white ants erect often reach a 
height of many feet. There are several kinds, the black-headed 
nipper ant, chiefly found in the west, being the most destructive. 
Locusts are particularly dreaded in their wingless state, when 
they clean off every green leaf, every bit of vegetation, as they 
■ march on in their hundreds of thousands. The rivers are not very 
plentiful in fish, but occasional sport is afforded by barbel, bream 
and tiger-fish. • * * 

Birds to the number of about 400 varieties have been found in 
Rhodesia. The largest of these are the ostrich, the secretary-bird/ 
the paauw, the koorhaan, cranes (three varieties), storks (four), 
vultures (six) and eagles (eight). The chief birds that attract, 
sportsmen, besides x the paauw and the koorhaan already men- 
tioned, are the guinea-fowl (three kinds), partridge and francolin 
(seven kinds), wild goose, duck and teal. Some of the most in- 
teresting birds are the weaver-birds (eighteen), the ox-peckers, 
which find their food on the backs of cattle, the kingfishers (eight), 
the hornbills (five), the parrots, lovebirds, the polygamous widow 
birds — whose females are of insignificant appearance, but whose 
males develop a brilliant plumage and lengthy tails during the 



RHODESIA 



261 



breeding season, when they are on guard over their harems of from 
ten to hfte*en wives — the sunbirds, with their long curved beaks 
that search out the nectar of flowers, and the honey-guides, which, 
with their agitated " chuck, chuck," lead the wayfarer to bees' 
nests with expectation of joining in the plunder. The small birds 
of Rhodesia are usually very brilliantly coloured, the most dis- 
tinguished being what is known as the blue jay, with its bright, 
iridescent, light blue plumage. 

Flora : — The vegetation of the territory is luxurious and mainly 
subtropical, but in the lower valleys the flora assumes a tropical 
aspect. The country is well wooded and in this respect differs 
from the high tablelands farther south. The trees as a rule attain 
no greater height than about 20 ft., but in some districts, such as 
South Melsctter and Wankies, there are remains of forests of large 
timber. The small growth of the trees is said_ to be due to the 
annual veld fires, and it is noticeable that native trees that are 
protected attain a much greater height. As a rule the wood is 
either yery hard or very soft, so that timber for building has still 
to be imported, although the existing timber is useful for mining 
purposes. One of the hardest woods is the so-called Rhodesian 
teak (native Ikusi), which is about 50% harder than real teak 
(Tectona grandis). The trees most commonly met with are mapane, 
used for poles; umkamba, resembling mahogany; m'lanji cedar, 
chiefly found along theeastern border; umsasa, used for firewood; 
impachla, the native wisteria. Among other trees are the baobab 
with enormous very soft trunk, the fruit being a large nut containing 
citrate of magnesia, which natives use to make a cooling drink; 
the umvagaz — or blood-wood — which issues a blood-coloured juice 
when cut, and the umkuna, or hissing tree, which hisses when an 
incision is made. The barks of the umsasa, the umhondo, and the 
umgosa are much used by natives for binding fibres in making huts 
and are also used for tanning. The bark of the baobab yields a 
fine fibre which natives use in making excellent game nets and 
fishing nets. The native fruit-bearing trees are the fig (many 
varieties), the mahobohobo or umjanje, resembling the loquat, 
the Kaffir plum, very sour and totally different from the Kaffir 
plum of Cape Colony, and the Kaffir orange. Among the shrubs 
the proteas, or sugar bushes^ with their nectar-stored flowers, are 
the most frequent. The mimosa thorn, although more of the 
nature of a tree, grows in dense masses, chiefly in the western 
province. 

The period of the year when flowers begin to bloom is rather 
remarkable. After the long spell of dry weather, lasting from five 
to seven months, and before any rain has fallen, blooms appear all 
over the vejd. Most of such flowers are those of bulbous plants 
or plants with large roots that have been stored with nourishment 
during the previous growing wet season. The flowers are sustained 
by this stock of food until the rains appear again to replenish the 
roots. Even grass sprouts green over the earth before the rains 
appear, and -the hard-baked veld is pierced by the shoots of the 
gladiolus, the orchid, the asparagus, the solanum, the convolvulus 
and many other flowers. When the rains are far advanced, the 
annuals shoot rapidly and make a second tshow of bloom. A 
peculiarity of the early spring shoots on trees and shrubs is that 
they have not the green tints of the colder regions, but are all shades 
of brown and orange and red and yellow. 

One of the chief features of Rhodesia is the vast stretches of 
grass-covered veld, the grasses varying from a few inches to 15 ft. 
in height and numbering about 100 different varieties. * Along the 
rivers are to be found palms, tree ferns, bananas, dracaenas and 
other hot climate plants. Rubber, indigo and cotton are indigenous 
and there are groves of lemon trees, but these were most probably 
introduced by early settlers. Tobacco, which grows luxuriantly, 
may also have been introduced. 

Inhabitants. — In Southern Rhodesia about half the European 
population, which in 1909 was approximately 16,500, is British 
born or born of British parents, and about one-third is South 
African born. There are about 11,500 males and 5000 females, 
and the population is equally divided between the urban and 
rural areas. In rural areas the chief occupations are mining 
and agriculture. Industrial pursuits, including mining, engage 
about 25% of the population, 8% are employed in agriculture, 
and 15% in commerce. Mashonaland has 7500 white inhabi- 
tants, and Matabeleland 9000. There are about 2000 Asiatics 
in Southern Rhodesia. 

The Natives of Rhodesia belong to the Bantu-Negro stock 
and are roughly divisible into two groups; those long settled 
in the country, and the Amazulu, who during the 19th century 
left Zululand and, passing through the more southern regions, 
overran Rhodesia and settled in Matabeleland. The Barotse 
(q.v.) are mainly settled in North-West Rhodesia. In Southern 
Rhodesia, in spite of incursions from Portuguese territory and 
from the north, the natives can be still clearly divided into 
Mashona and Matabele, living in the eastern and western pro- 



vinces respectively. The name Mashona is not used by the 
natives but is useful as distinguishing the allied tribes of the 
eastern division from the Matabele in the west. The languages 
of the Mashona tribes arc allied and are distinct from that of 
the Matabele (or Zulu), but it is uncertain whether these 
Mashona tongues should be regarded merely as different 
dialects, or (languages as different as those of the various 
nations of Europe (but see Bantu Languages). The tribes 
round Salisbury and extending as far as Marondella in the 
east and about 100 m. north are clearly branches of the 
Vasezuru people, that is, the people from " higher up," the 
" higher up " being a region in the south-east. Their history, 
can be traced from about the beginning of the 18th century; 
but there is a great lack of tradition amongst this class of 
native, which is distinctly inferior in type to the Matabele in 
the west. 

Farther north there are the Makorikori and the Mabudja or 
Mabushla. It would appear that the country in which these 
people now dwell was formerly in the possession of the Barotse, 
and some of the present chiefs obtained their positions by per- 
mission of the Barotse. Previously, . according to Portuguese 
documents of the 16th and 17th centuries, the Makaranga or 
Makalanga now located in the south round about Victoria had 
possession of the country as far north as the Zambezi. Their 
language is allied to that of the present inhabitants, but in 
many respects is widely different and of late has become 
more so owing to intercourse with the Matabele. Along 
the eastern border two more tribes can * be differentiated, 
namely, Umtasa's people in the north and those speaking the 
Chindawo language in the south. Their languages are merely 
variants of the language spoken in the Salisbury and Mazoe 
districts. 

All the tribes in the eastern province have very, similar habits 
and customs. Their huts are circular with a wall a foot or two 
high, made of poles and daga (mud) surmounted by a conical 
thatched roof. They thus differ from the beehive huts of the 
Zulus. They are built indiscriminately together and are not 
surrounded by stockades. The whole family dwells in the same 
hut along with dogs, goats and fowls, and sometimes even with 
cattle, though there are usually separate kraals for their cattle. 
The kraals are as a rule filthy, but the inside of the hut is kept 
clean. There is a special place for a fire, and a raised portion 
of the mud floor on which to sleep, but no furniture. Their 
mealie fields are usually some distance from the place of abode, 
but their tobacco gardens are near their huts. Their main 
object in life seems to be to grow sufficient grain for food and 
beer. The grain . they store in granaries, resembling small 
huts, placed on rocks or on stakes, out of the reach of white ants 
and secure from the depredations of animals. They amuse 
themselves occasionally by making earthenware pots which 
are very soft and easily broken, or by engaging in iron-work or 
brass-wire work for ornamentation. In the south they are 
quite clever in making water-tight baskets from rushes grown 
by the Sabi river. In their religious beliefs spirits play a great 
part. Above all there is a vague idea of a Supreme Being whom 
they call Mwari. They have a fixed belief in the spirits of 
their ancestors, the spirits of the witch-doctors, the spirits of the 
Matabele, the spirits of old women, the spirits of the foolish, 
the spirits of baboons, &c. Every occurrence is attributed to 
the influence of a spirit, and if the occurrence is an evil one a 
feast and dance of propitiation are held. Feasts of thanks- 
giving are also held on such occasions as the gathering of the 
first-fruits, the harvest festival, or on the return from a long and 
dangerous journey. Of the tribes already mentioned the most 
advanced are Umtasa's people and the Makaranga. The pro- 
bable connexion of the tribes now inhabiting Mashonaland with 
the architects of the ancient stone buildings which are scattered 
over the country is discussed in the section Archaeology, Of 
these ruins the most extensive are situated near Victoria and are 
known as Zimbabwe (q.v.). 

In the western province the Matabele, or rather Amandabele, 
are the descendants of the Zulus who trekked under the 



262 



RHODESIA 



leadership of the famous Mosilikatze up through the Trans- 
vaal, whence they were driven by the Boers. Mosilikatze 
died in 1868, and his son Lobengula, after a fight with a 
brother, assumed sway in 1870. His people were divided 
into three main sections: the Abezansi (who were the aristo- 
crats), the Abenhla and the Amaholi. The Amaholi or Holi 
were the inhabitants of the land at the time of the 
invasion and thereafter were practically in the position of 
bondsmen and rarely allowed to possess cattle. The great 
spirit of the Holis was the Mlimo, who was practically the 
spirit of the nation. Among the Holi tribes are the Aba- 
shangwe, the Abanyai, the Batonke (near the Zambezi), the 
Abananzwa of the Wankie district, the Ababiro of the Tuli 
district, and the Abasili, a nomadic tribe chiefly subsisting on 
game. There is a small tribe in the Belingwe district called the 
Abalemba, which would appear to have been in touch with the 
Arabs in early times. Their customs include circumcision and 
the rejection of pork as food. 

The natives in Southern Rhodesia number about 700,000, and 
of these 10,000 work on the mines and 20,000 are engaged in 
farm, railway and household work under Europeans. 

Chief Towns. — Salisbury, which lies 4880 ft. above the sea, is 
the capital of Southern Rhodesia, being the seat of government, 
'and is situated in the eastern province (Mashonaland). There 
are about 1700 white inhabitants and 3000 natives. It is the 
commercial centre for an extensive mining and farming district. 
The principal buildings include churches, public library, hospital, 
schools, banks, post office and numerous hotels. There are a con- 
siderable number of government offices, and the administrator and 
resident commissioner live here. The only industries are a brewery 
and a tobacco factory for grading and packing the tobaccos of the 
local growers. 

Bulawayo {q.v.), situated 4469 ft. above the sea, is the largest town 
and is in the western province, Matabeleland. It is 301 m. by rail 
S.W.of Salisbury, and 1362 m. N.E. of Cape Town. The popula- 
tion is some 4000 Europeans and about the same number of natives. 
The town has the advantage of a good pipe water supply and a 
service of electric light. It was the ancient capital of the Matabele 
king, Lobengula. There is a Government house which is occa- 
sionally occupied, and was the residence of Cecil Rhodes. It is 
from Bulawayo that the World's View, the burial-plaoe of Rhodes in 
the Matoppo Hills, is usually visited. 

The other towns are Umtali, on the eastern border, pop. 800 
whites, railway works, centre for numerous large and small gold 
mines; Gwelo, the central town, about midwav between Salisbury 
and Bulawayo, 370 whites; Victoria and Mefsetter in the south, 
centres of farming districts. Victoria, near which are the famous 
Zimbabwe ruins, is reached by mail cart (80 m.) from Selukwe, 
and Melsetter by mail cart (95 m.) from Umtali. There are also 
small townships at Hartley, Selukwe, Enkeldoorn and Gwanda. 
Bulawayo and Salisbury are managed by town councils, the other 
towns have sanitary boards. 

Communications.— The Rhodesian railway system connects the 
chief towns and mining centres with one another and all the other 
South African countries. The main line is a continuation of the 
railway from Cape Town through Kimberley and Mafeking. It 
runs from Mafeking in a general N.E. direction to Bulawayo, whence 
it goes N.W. to the Zambezi, which is crossed a little below the 
Victoria Falls. The bridging of the river was completed in April 
1905. Thence the railway is continued N.E. (92 m.) to Kalomo, 
Barotseland, and onward to the Katanga district of Belgian Congo. 
The section from Kalomo to Broken Hill (261 m.) was completed in 
1907, and the extension to the frontier of Belgian Congo (126 m.) 
in 1909. ^ This main line forms the southern link in the Cape to 
Cairo railway and steamboat service. From Bulawayo a line goes 
N.E. by Gwelo to Salisbury and thence S.E. to the Portuguese port 
of Beira. From Bulawayo another line (120 m. long) runs S.E. 
to the West Nicholson Mine. From Gwelo a railway (40 m.) goes 
S.E. to Yankee Doodle, and from this there branches a line (50 m. 
long) in an easterly direction to Blinkwater. From Salisbury a line 
runs N.W. to Lomagundi (84 m.). The last-named has a 2 ft. gauge. 
The other railways are of the standard gauge of South Africa — 
3 ft. 6 in. The distances from Bulawayo to the following places 
are:— Gwelo, 113 m.; Salisbury, 301 m.; Umtali, 471 m.; Beira, 
675 m. ; .Mafeking, 490 m. ; Kimberley, 713 m:; Cape Town, 1362 m. ; 
Port Elizabeth, 1190 m.; East London, 1260 m.; Bloemtontein, 
800 m.; Johannesburg, 931 m.; Pretoria, 977 m.; Lourenco 
Marques, 1307 m.; Durban, 1238 m. (the last four places all via 
Fourteen Streams, a junction 48 m. N. of Kimberley), and Victoria 
Falls, 282 m. 

About 4000 m. of roads have been built and are maintained by 
government. The telegraph and telephone system is very com- 
plete, there being for the whole of Rhodesia about 8000 m. of wires. 
This total includes the police telephone wires and part of the African 



Transcontinental system, and is served by about ninety telegraph 
offices. In Southern Rhodesia there are about eighty post offices. 
A post office savings bank wa* brought into operation on the 1st of 
January 1005. Over 2,500,000 letters, post-cards and parcels are 
despatched annually. 

Agriculture. — The country is well adapted for agriculture. Chief 
attention has been paid by farmers to the growing of maize, the 
annual produce being about half a million bushels. It is a very 
easily grown cereal, especially in such a fertile country as Rhodesia, 
and is extensively grown by natives, but the improved methods of 
the whites easily secure a yield of from twice to eight times that of 
the native. The average yield by European farmers is about eight 
bags of 200 lb per acre, but ten to fifteen bags is quite a common 
crop. ^ Wheat, barley and oats are grown with success under 
irrigation in the winter time, but the moisture with attendant rust 
is too excessive for these crops in summer. Tobacco promises to 
be a great source of wealth to the territory. Both the Turkish and 
Virginian tobaccos have been raised and cured and put on the 
market, where they were easily disposed of. They are of better 
quality than those grown elsewhere in South Africa. In 1908 only 
about 500 acres were under cultivation, but there are large tracts 
of land suitable for this industry. 

Fruits of very extensive variety thrive in Rhodesia ; they include 
plums, bananas, grapes, guavas, paupaus, figs, loquats, pine-apples, 
Cape gooseberries, mulberries, tree tomatoes, rosellas, granadillas, 
all kinds of citrus fruits. The most flourishing are the citrus fruits 
and the Japanese plums, but in the higher altitudes pears and 
apples are also very successful. Vegetables of nearly all kinds 
can be grown, especially potatoes, tomatoes, asparagus, sweet 
potatoes, yams, &c. Coffee produces as much as 4 lb of beans to 
the shrub in certain Darts. 

Cattle thrive well in Rhodesia, and stock-raising promises to be 
the^ chief agricultural industry of the future. During the early 
period of European occupation rinderpest and at a later date East 
Coast fever decimated the country, but the prevention of these 
diseases is now thoroughly understood and, since the rinderpest 
of 1896 swept away large herds, cattle have been increasing rapidly 
in number. There is hardly any portion of the territory which 
is not suitable for cattle, and the rapid natural increase indicates 
a speedy prosperity in cattle ranching. Goats and woolless sheep 
number about 800,000 in the territory. Donkeys and mules thrive, 
but horses are very liable to horse-sickness towards the end of 
the rainy season. 

Mining. — When Rhodesia was first opened up to European 
occupation, attention was immediately called to the large number 
of gold workings made by unknown former inhabitants of the 
country. These workings were only carried on to a limited extent, 
being stopped probably by the presence of water and the lack of 
suitable machinery. European enterprise has resulted in the 
discovery of a large number of mines situated in widely scattered 
areas. The chief mines are the Globe and Phoenix, the Selukwe 
and the Wanderer in the Gwelo district; the Giant in the 
Hartley district; the Jumbo in the Mazoe district; the Ayrshire 
in the Lomagundi district; the Penhalonga and the Rezende in 
the Umtali district, while there are numerous smaller mines in the 
Gwanda, Insiza, Gwelo, Hartley and Umtali districts. The output 
of gold increased in value from £308,000 in 1900 to £2,623,000 in 
1909, about one- third of this being produced by small workers 
whose individual output is not over 1500 oz. a month. As efforts 
have been restricted mainly to extracting the ore indicated by 
ancient workings, it is probable that many gold reefs still await 
discovery ^ The mineral wealth of Rhodesia is very varied and 
includes silver, of which 262,000 oz. were produced in 1909; coal, 
170,000 tons (1909), and lead, 965 tons. Extensive discoveries 
of chrome iron have been made in the Selukwe district. There is a 
steady export of this metal, of which the output in 1909 was over 
25,000 tons. Besides these, small quantities of copper, wolframite 
and diamonds have been exported, while scheelite and asbestos 
have been discovered in payable quantities. 

Commerce. — Taking the average for a series of years ending 
1908, the total imports amounted to about £1,500,000 per annum, 
55% of which were manufactured articles, including £250,000 
textile goods and wearing apparel, and £120,000 machinery. Im- 
ports of food and drink amounted to £330,000. In 1909 the 
imports amounted to £2,214,000, the chief items being food and 
drink (£422,000), machinery, animals and cotton goods. Exports 
consist almost entirely of minerals. In 1909 they were valued at 
£3,178,000. Included in the total is £342,000 goods imported and 
re-exported. 

Administration, — The administration of Rhodesia is carried 
on by the British South Africa Company under an order in 
council of 1898, amended by orders in council of 1903 and 1905. 
The company is called upon to appoint for Southern Rhodesia 
an administrator or administrators. The company also ap- 
points an executive council of not fewer than four members to 
advise^ the administrator upon all matters of importance in 
administration. An order in council of 1903 provided for a 



RHODESIA 



263 



legislative council consisting of the administrator, who presides, 
seven nominees of the company approved by the secretary of 
state, and -seven members elected by registered voters (the 
number of registered voters in 1908 was 5291). In 1007 it was 
agreed to reduce the company's nominees by one, so that the 
elected members should form the majority of the council. The 
secretary of state appoints a resident commissioner, who sits on 
both executive and legislative councils without vote. The duty 
of the resident commissioner is to report to the high commissioner 
upon all matters of importance. Ordinances passed by the 
legislative council are submitted to the high commissioner for 
consent or otherwise, but may be disallowed by the secretary 
of state. 

For the administration of justice there is a High Court 
with two judges having civil and criminal jurisdiction. There 
are seven magistrates' courts throughout the territory. For 
the administration of native affairs there are appointed a 
secretary for native affairs, two chief native commissioners, 
twenty-eight native commissioners and six assistant native 
commissioners. Natives suffer no disabilities or restrictions 
which do not equally apply to Europeans except in respect of 
the supply of arms, ammunition and liquor. Native com- 
missioners may exercise jurisdiction in native affairs not ex- 
ceeding that exercisable by magistrates. The company has 
to provide land, usually termed Native Reserves, sufficient 
and suitable for occupation by natives and for their agricul- 
tural and industrial requirements. 

Revenue. — The administrative revenue of Southern Rhodesia was 
at first much less than the cost of administcation. The figures 
for 1899-1900 were: revenue, £325,000; expenditure, -£702,000. 
Since that date revenue has increased and expenditure decreased, 
and from 1905-6 (in which year the revenue exceeded £500,000) 
the cost of administration has been met out of revenue. For 
1909-10 the revenue was approximately £600,000, the two main 
items being customs duty, £190,000, and native tax, £200,000. 
The native tax is £1 per head for every adult male and 10s. Tor every 
wife after the first. 

Education. — Besides a few private schools, there -were in 1909 
34 schools for Europeans, 26 of which were wholly financed by 
government, the remainder being aided. The aided schools are 
as a rule connected with some religious body, and aid is given to 
the extent of half the salaries of the teachers and half the cost of 
school requisites. Loans are also given to assist in school building. 
A system of boarding grants has been instituted to enable children 
in the outlying districts to attend school. Education is not free 
except for poor children, but the fees in government schools do 
not exceed £6 a year. In 1910 several schools had reached the stage 
of preparing pupils for matriculation at the Cape University and 
similar examinations. The number of pupils in 1^09 in European 
schools was 12 12, being more than double what it had been four 
years previously. The education of natives is in the hands of 
various religious bodies, but financial aid is given by government 
to native schools which comply with certain easy conditions. In 
1909, 80 native schools with an enrolment of 7622 pupils earned 
grants. 

Military Forces. — The military force in Southern Rhodesia is styled 
the British South African Police, and numbers about ^o officers, 
400 non-commissioned officers and men, and 550 native police. 
The force is under a commandant-general, who, with the sub- 
ordinate officers, is appointed by the secretary of state, and is 
under the direct control and authority of the nigh commissioner. 
The commandant-general is paid by the British parliament. The 
offices of commandant-general and resident commissioner were com- 
bined in 1905. 

The Southern Rhodesia Volunteers, in two divisions, eastern and 
western, under command of colonels, number altogether 86 officers 
and 1700 non-commissioned officers and men. 

Medical. — There are, including cottage hospitals, ten hospitals 
in towns and townships, and thirteen district surgeries have been 
established. (G. Du.) 

Archaeology. — Between the Zambezi and the Limpopo, and 
extending from the coast to at least 27 E., may be found the 
traces of a large population which inhabited Southern Rhodesia 
and Portuguese East Africa in bygone times. Apart from 
numerous mines, some of which are being successfully re- 
worked at the present day, ruins of stone buildings have been 
found in several hundred distinct places. Few of these have 
been explored systematically, but investigations in 1905, 
though confined to a small number of sites, determined at 



least the main questions of date and origin. The fanciful 
theories of popular writers, who had ascribed these buildings 
to a remote antiquity, and had even been so audacious as to 
identify their founders with the subjects of King Solomon or 
of his contemporary the queen of Shcba, are now seen to be 
untenable. J. T. Bent's Ruined Cities of Mashonaland (1892) 
is now interesting only for its illustrations, and his theories 
are obsolete. Positive archaeological evidence demonstrates 
that the " Great Zimbabwe " itself, the most famous and 
the most imposing of the misnamed " Ruined Cities," was 
not built before medieval times, and that the earliest date 
which can be assigned to any of the sites explored is subse- 
quent to the nth century a.d. Moreover, the complete 
identity of custom, revealed no less by the details of the dwell- 
ings than by the type of the articles found within them, proves 
that the tribe that built these structures was one closely akin 
to if not actually identical with the present Bantu inhabitants 
of the country. 

These ruins, even when stripped of their false romance, are 
of extreme interest; but their nature and appearance have 
been much' misunderstood, and the skill and intelligence re- 
quired for their erection have been grossly overestimated. 
It should be clearly stated, therefore, that the methods of the 
old Rhodesians evince their complete ignorance of all the 
devices employed in the architecture of civilized peoples. 
They have not attempted to solve the problems of supporting 
weight and pressure by the use of pillar, arch or beam; the 
ingenuity of the builders goes no further than the dexterous 
heaping up of stones. Indeed, their most finished and ela- 
borate work must be compared with nothing more ambitious 
than the dry-built walls which serve to enclose the fields in 
certain parts of England. The material is the local granite or 
diorite obtainable in the immediate neighbourhood. Stone- 
hewing has not been practised; and was unnecessary, since 
the natural flaking of the boulders provides an abundance 
of ready-made slabs which need only be detached from the 
parent rock and broken to the required size. At most the 
blocks thus obtained have been very roughly trimmed with 
one or two blows, and any apparent regularity in the fitting 
has been obtained merely by judicious selection. Mortar 
has seldom been used; the courses are never laid with any 
approach to exactness; walls merely abut on one another 
without being bonded, and the same line often varies greatly 
in thickness at different parts. 

The main principle of the ground plan is invariably circular 
or elliptical, though it is carried out with a conspicuous lack 
of symmetry or exactness. Straight lines are unknown, and 
even accidental approximations to an angle are rare. This 
is eminently characteristic of the Bantu, whose huts are 
.commonly built in circular form. Indeed, it is the round Bantu 
hut which has been the original model for even the finest 
of these stone constructions. The connexion between the 
two, however, goes beyond mere resemblance. The stone 
walls are always accompanied by huts; they are mere parti- 
tions or ring-fences enclosing and structurally inseparable from 
platforms of clay or cement on which stand the remains of 
precisely the same dwellings that the Makalanga make at the 
present day. Buildings such as those at Dhlo Dhlo, Nana- 
tali and Khami in Matabeleland, or at Zimbabwe in southern 
Mashonaland, are merely fortified kraals; remarkable indeed 
as the work of an African people, but essentially native African 
in every detail, not excepting the ornamentation. 

The best-known and the most attractive of the Rhodesian 
ruins are those situated in the more central and southern 
region. In the north-east, however, the remains are even 
more numerous, though the single units are less remarkable. 
Over the whole of Inyanga and the Mazoe region are distri- 
buted hill-forts, pit-dwellings and intrenchments which are 
more primitive in character though of the same generic type as 
those found farther south. The inhabitants of these northern 
districts were occupied more in agriculture than in gold-mining, 
and one of the most striking features of their settlements is the 



264 



RHODESIA 



irrigation system. There are no aqueducts such as Europeans or 
Arabs might have built, but water furrows have been carried on 
admirably calculated gradients for miles along the • hill-sides. 
The amount of labour which has been expended on the great 
villages between Inyanga and the Zambezi is astounding. 
On one site, the Niekerk Ruins, an area of fully 50 sq. m. is 
covered with uninterrupted lines of walls. It is an interesting 
question which may be solved by future explorations whether 
these settlements do not extend north of the Zambezi. In- 
trenchments like those of the Niekerk Ruins have been reported 
from the south-east of Victoria Nyanza, and Major Powell 
Cotton has published a photograph from the Nandi country 
which exhibits a structure precisely similar to the hill forts 
of Inyanga. (See also Zimbabwe; Monomotapa.) 

See D. Randall-Mad ver, Mediaeval Rhodesia (London, 1906); 
R. N. Hall and W. G. Neal, The Ancient Ruins of Rhodesia (London, 
1902); Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, 1875 and 1876; Journal of the 
R.G.S., 1890, 1893, 1899, 1906; Journal of Anthropl. InsU, vols. 
xxxi., xxxv. (E>. R.-M.) 

History. — There is evidence that from the 10th or nth 
centuries onward the lands now forming ^ Rhodesia were in- 
habited by Bantu^negroes who had made some progress in 
civilization .and who traded with the Arab settlements at 
Sofala and elsewhere on the east coast (see Archaeology above). 
From the 1 5th century, if not earlier, until about the close of the 
1 8th century, a considerable part of this area was ruled by a 
hereditary monarch, known as the Monomotapa, whose Zim- 
babwe (capital) was, in the earlier part of the period indicated, 
in what is now Mashonaland. Some of the Monomotapas 
during the 16th and 17th centuries entered into political and 
commercial relations with the Portuguese (see Monomotapa 
and Zimbabwe). The Monomotapa " empire " included many 
vassal states, and probably fell to pieces through intertribal 
fighting, which greatly reduced the number of inhabitants. In 
the early years of the 19th century the tribes appear to have lost 
all cohesion. The people were mainly agriculturists, but the 
working of the gold-mines, whence the Monomotapas had ob- 
tained much of their wealth, was not wholly abandoned. 

The modern history of the country begins with its invasion 
by the Matabele, an offshoot of the Zulus. Mosilikatze, their 
first chief, was a warrior and leader who served under the 
Zulu despot Chaka. Being condemned to death by Chaka, 
Mosilikatze fled, with a large division of the Zulu army. About 
1 81 7 he settled in territories north of the Vaal, not far from 
the site of Pretoria; and in 1836 a treaty of friendship was 
entered into with him by the governor of Cape Colony. In the 
same year. a number of the " trek Boers " had crossed the Vaal 
river, and came in contact with the Matabele, who attacked 
and defeated them, capturing a large number of Boer cattle 
and sheep; In November 1837 the Boers felt themselves strong 
enough to assail Mosilikatze, and they drove him and his 
tribe north of the Limpopo, where they settled and occupied 
the country subsequently known as Matabeleland. In 1868 
Mosilikatze died. Kuruman, son and recognized heir of the old 
chieftain, had disappeared years before, and though a Matabele 
who claimed to be the missing heir was brought from Natal he 
was not acknowledged by the leading indunas, who in January 
1870 invested Lobengula, the next heir, with the chieftainship. 
Those Matabele who favoured the supposed Kuruman were 
defeated in one decisive battle, and thereafter Lobengula, whose 
kraal was at Bulawayo, reigned unchallenged. At this time the 
Matabele power extended north to the Zambezi, and eastward 
over the land occupied by the Mashona and other Makalanga 
tribes. North of the Zambezi the western districts were ruled 
by the Barotse (tf.v.), while the eastern portion had been overrun 
by other tribes of Zulu-Xosa origin, among whom the Agoni 
were the most powerful. The explorations of David Living- 
stone, Thomas Baines (1822-1875), Karl Mauch, and other 
travellers, had made known to Europe the general character of 
the country and the existence of great mineral wealth. Loben- 
gula was approached by several " prospectors " for the grant 
of j concessions; among them two Englishmen, Baines in 1871 



and Sir John Swinburne in 1872, obtained cessions of mineral 
rights, but little effort was made to put them in force. In 1882 
President Kruger, who was then bent on extending the bound- 
aries of the Transvaal in every* direction, endeavoured to make 
a treaty with Lobengula, but without success. The Warren 
expedition of 1884 to Bechuanaland (q.v.)j while it checked for a 
time the encroachments of the Transvaal Boers, and preserved 
to Great Britain the highway to the north through Bechuana- 
land, also served to encourage colonists to speculate as to the 
future of the interior. At this time, top, the struggle between the 
nations of western Europe for the unappropriated portions of 
Africa had begun, and while the Boers, foiled in Matabeleland, 
endeavoured to get a footing in Mashonaland, both Portuguese 
and Germans were anxious to secure for their countries as much 
of this region as they could. In 1887 a map was laid before the 
Portuguese cortes showing the territories in Africa claimed by 
Portugal.. They stretched across the continent from sea to sea, 
and included almost the whole of what is now Rhodesia, as well 
as the British settlements on Lake Nyasa. To the claim of a 
transcontinental domain Portugal had succeeded in gaining the 
assent of Germany and France, though Germany, which had 
secured a footing in south-west Africa, still dreamed of extending 
her sway over Matabeleland. By the instructions of Lord 
Salisbury, then foreign secretary, the British representative at 
Lisbon informed the Portuguese government that except on the 
seacoast and on portions of the Zambezi river there was not 
a sign of Portuguese authority or jurisdiction in the districts 
claimed by them, and that the British government could not 
recognize Portuguese sovereignty in territory not effectively 
occupied by her. 

This protest, so far as southern Rhodesia is concerned, might 
have been ineffective save for the foresight, energy and deter- 
mination of Cecil Rhodes, who had been instrumental in saving 
Bechuanaland from the Boers, and who as early as 1878 had 
conceived the idea of extending British influence over central 
Africa. 1 At this time gold prospecting was being feverishly 
undertaken all over South Africa as a result of the discoveries 
at Barberton and on the Rand, and Lobengula was besieged for 
all sorts of concessions by both Portuguese and Boers, as well 
as by other adventurers from all parts of the world. The ' 
If the country was to be secured for Britain immediate country 
action was necessary. Sir Sidney Shippard, who had secured 
succeeded Rhodes as commissioner in Bechuanaland for Great 
and who shared his views, kept up a friendly corre- Biit *in. 
spondence with Lobengula, while at Bulawayo Mr J. S. 
Moffat was British resident. At the end of 1887 Sir Sidney 
urged the high commissioner, Lord Rosmead (then Sir Hercules 
Robinson), to allow him to conclude a treaty with Lobengula, 
but unavailingly, until Rhodes, by taking upon himself all 
pecuniary responsibility, succeeded in obtaining the require^ 
sanction. On the nth of February 1888, Moffat and Lobengula 
signed an agreement, whereby the Matabele ruler agreed that he 
would refrain from entering into any correspondence or treaty 
with any foreign state or power without the previous knowledge 
and sanction of the British high commissioner for South Africa. 
Shortly after the conclusion of this treaty, representatives of 
influential syndicates directed by Rhodes, in which Alfred Beit 
and C. D. Rudd were large holders, were sent, with the know- 
ledge of the British government and the high commissioner, to 
negotiate with Lobengula, and on the 30th of October of the same 
year he concluded an arrangement with Messrs Rudd, Rochfort 
Maguire and F.R. Thomson, by which, in return for the payment 
of £100 a month, together with 1000 Martini-Henry rifles and 
100,000 rounds of ammunition, he gave the syndicate complete 
control over all the metals and minerals in his kingdom, with 
power to exclude from his dominions " all persons seeking land, 
metals, minerals or mining rights therein," in which action, if 
necessary, he promised to render them assistance. The position 
of the envoys was one of considerable danger, as Lobengula 
had around him many white advisers strongly antagonistic to 

1 See article " Bechuanaland " by Sir Henry Shippard in British 
Africa (London, 1899). 



RHODESIA 



265 



Rhodes's scheme. The arrival at Bulawayo of Dr L. S. Jameson, 
who had previously attended Lobengula professionally, and who 
strongly supported Rudd and his companions, appears to have 
been the factor which decided Lobengula to sign the concession. 
This concession once obtained, Rhodes proceeded with rapidity 
to prosecute his great enterprise. He extinguished the claims 
of earlier concessionaires by purchase (giving, for instance, 
£10,046 for the Baines and Swinburne grants), and united all 
interests in the British South Africa Company, with a share 
capital of £1,000,000. 

Following the example of Sir George Goldie in West Africa 
and of Sir William Mackinnon in East Africa, Rhodes determined 
to apply to the British government for a charter for the newly 
formed company, whose original directors were, in addition to 
Rhodes and Beit, the duke of Abercorn, the duke of Fife, Lord 
Gifford, Albert (afterwards 4th earl) Grey and George Cawston. 
In applying for a charter (in April 1889) the founders of the 
company stated their objects to, be the following: (1) To 
extend northwards the railway and telegraph systems in the 
direction of the Zambezi; (2) to encourage emigration and 
colonization; (3) to promote trade and commerce; (4) to 
develop and work minerals and other concessions under the 
management of one powerful organization, thereby obviating 
conflicts and complications between the various interests that 
had been acquired within these regions, and securing to the 
native chiefs and their subjects the rights reserved to them 
under the several concessions. In making this application the 
boundaries in which they proposed to work were purposely 
left somewhat vague. They were described to be the region 
The of South Africa lying immediately north of British 

B.S.A. Bechuanaland, north and west of the South African 
Co,*s Republic, and west of the Portuguese dominions on 

charter. ^ e east coast. The government, having ascertained 
the substantial nature of the company's resources and the 
composition of the proposed directorate, and also that they 
were prepared to begin immediately the development of the 
country, granted the charter, dated the 29th of October 1889. 
From this date onward the company was commonly known as 
" the Chartered Company." 

A few points in the charter itself deserve to be noted. In 
the first place, it gave considerable extension to the terms of 
the original concessions by Lobengula. In short, it transformed 
the rights of working minerals and metals, and preventing 
others from doing so, into rights practically sovereign over 
the regions in which the company's activity was to be employed. 
These rights the crown granted directly itself, not merely con- 
firming a previous grant from another source. By Article X. 
the company was empowered to make ordinances (to be approved 
by the secretary of state), and to establish and maintain a force 
of police. A strict supervision was provided for, to be exercised 
by the secretary of state over the relations between the company 
and the natives. The British government reserved to itself 
entire power to repeal the charter at any time that it did not 
consider the company was f ulfilling its obligations or endeavouring 
duly to carry out the objects for which the charter was granted. 
The sphere of operations of the company was not stated with 
any greater precision than had been indicated in the applica- 
tion for the charter; but by agreements concluded with Germany 
in 1900, with Portugal in 1891 and with the Congo State in 
1894, the international boundaries were at length defined (see 
Africa, § 5). The agreements, while they took the British 
sphere north to Lake Tanganyika, disappointed Rhodes in that 
they prevented the realization of the scheme he had formed 
by the time the charter was granted, namely, for securing a 
continuous strip of British territory from the Cape to Egypt — a 
scheme which was but an enlargement of his original conception 
as formulated in 1878. 

Much, however, had happened before the boundaries of the 
British sphere were fixed. While the railway from Cape Town 
was being continued northward as rapidly as possible, the 
determination was taken to occupy immediately part of the 
sphere assigned to the company, and Mashonaland was selected 



as not being in actual occupation by the Matabelc but the home 
of more peaceful tribes. A pioneer force was sent up in June 
■1890 under Colonel Pcnnefather, consisting of five hundred 
mounted police and a few hundred pioneers. Accompanying 
this force as guide was the well-known traveller, F. C. Selous. 
The work of transport was attended with considerable difficulty, 
and roads had to be cut as the expedition advanced. Never- 
theless, in a few months the expedition, without firing a shot, 
had reached the site of what is now the town of Salisbury, and 
had also established on the line of march small forts at Tuli, 
Victoria and Charter. Archibald Ross Colquhoun was chosen 
as the first administrator. He had not long been in office 
when, in May 1891, difficulties arose with thePortuguese Mashon*' 
on their north-west frontier, both parties claiming a Und 
tract of territory in which a Portuguese trading station occupied 
had been established. The result was a skirmish, in ~"A B<w?r 
which a small company of British South Africa police ^ated?' 
were victorious. In 1891 Dr Jameson, who had joined 
the pioneer force, was appointed administrator in succession to 
Colquhoun. The Boers for several years had been planning a 
settlement north of the Limpopo, and they now determined, 
in spite of the Moffat treaty and the British occupation, to carry 
out their object. An expedition known as the Banyailand Trek 
was organized under the leadership of Colonel Ferreira, and two 
large parties of Boers proceeded to the banks of the Limpopo. 
Information of the intended trek had been conveyed to Cape 
Town, and Sir Henry (afterwards Lord) Loch (the high com- 
missioner) at once sent a strong protest to* President Kmger, 
Informing him that any attempt to invade the Chartered 
Company's territories would be an act of hostility against the 
British Crown; and Kruger issued a proclamation forbidding 
the trekkers to proceed. Meanwhile, however, a party had 
already reached the Limpopo, where they were met by Jameson 
in command of the British South Africa Company's forces. 
He told them that they would not be allowed to proceed except 
as private individuals, who might obtain farms on applica- 
tion to the Chartered Company. Colonel Ferreira was arrested 
and detained for a few days, and the expedition then broke 
up and dispersed. 

The pioneers, who were granted farms and mining claims, 
having been settled in Mashonaland, Rhodes recognized the 
extreme importance of giving the country a port nearer than 
that provided by Cape Town. On his initiative proposals were 
made to Portugal, and the treaty concluded in 1891 between 
Great Britain and Portugal provided that a railway might be 
built from Beira in Portuguese territory to Salisbury, on con- 
dition that Portugal received a duty not exceeding 3 % on the 
value of the goods imported. The treaty further stipulated 
for the free navigation of the Zambezi and the construction of 
telegraphs. Prospecting operations were at once started, and 
various gold mines were discovered containing traces of old 
workings. Fresh gold reefs were also opened up. The prospects 
of the country seemed promising, and although a good deal of 
fever occurred in the low-lying valleys under the conditions 
of camp life, the health of the community soon improved as 
more suitable habitations were erected. In two years a white 
population of 3000 people had settled in the newly opened 
country. 

Though the company was now free from international 
rivalry it was soon faced by serious native trouble. The first 
pioneers had deliberately chosen Mashonaland as their place 
of settlement. Ever since the advent of Mosilikatze north of 
the Limpopo the unfortunate Mashonas had been the prey of 
the Matabele; they therefore readily accepted the British 
occupation. The Matabele, however, were loth to abandon their 
predatory excursions among the Mashonas, and in July 1893 
a large itnpi (native force) was sent into Mashonaland, and 
entered not only native kraals, but also the streets of the new 
township of Victoria. An attempt was made to preserve the 
peace, but it was evident from the attitude taken by the Matabele 
that nothing short of the authority which only superior force 
could command would settle the question. The Matabele were 

XXIII, 



266 



RHODESIA 



a proud and fearless race of warriors; the men of that genera- 
tion had never come in conflict with Europeans, and. had never 
been defeated in their conflicts with native foes. Jameson's forces 
were slender, and Rhodes, on being consulted, urged him by 
telegram to " Read Luke fourteen, thirty-one." On obtaining 
a Bible, Jameson read the words: " Or what king, going to 
make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and 
consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him 
that cometh against him with twenty thousand?" He tele- 
graphed in reply: " All right. I have read Luke fourteen, 
thirty-one." The position, though dangerous, admitted of no 
delay, and Jameson determined to risk an expedition with the 
forces at his command. His success on this occasion doubtless 
weighed with him on another and less fortunate one. The 
force available consisted of about 700 volunteers and 225 British 
Bechuanaland police, with some 700 natives. Jameson deter- 
mined to march to Bulawayo, the headquarters of Lobengula 
and the capital of Matabeleland. The force was divided into 
two columns, and was to be met by a further column of Bechuanas 
marching from the south under Khama, the most influential 
of the Bechuan chiefs and a loyal friend of the British. The 
first engagement took place on the Shangani river, where the 
two columns which had started from Fort Charter and Fort 
Victoria were both engaged. Majors Forbes and Allan Wilson 
commanded in these engagements; and after a hot contest 
with between 4000 and 5000 Matabele, the latter were repulsed, 
machine guns being used with terrible effect upon the enemy. 
On the 1st of November a second fight occurred on the high 
ground, in which it was estimated that 7000 of the Matabele 
attacked the laager of the two columns. The oldest and most 
tried regiments of Lobengula dashed right up to the muzzles 
of the guns, but were swept down before the modern rifles and 
machine guns with which the invaders were armed. Meanwhile 
the column of Khama's men from the south had reached the 
Tati, and won a victory on the Singuesi river on the 2nd of 
November. On the 3rd of November Bulawayo was reached, 
and the columns from Mashonaland, accompanied by Jameson 
and Sir John Willoughby, entered the town, Lobengula, and 
Matabele his followers being in full flight towards the Zambezi. 
land con* An endeavour was made to induce Lobengula to 
quered. surrender; but as no replies were received to the 
messages, Major Forbes, on the 13th of November, organized 
a column and started in pursuit. 1 The pursuing party were 
delayed by difficult roads and heavy rains, and did not come 
up with Lobengula until the 3rd of December. Major Allan 
Wilson, in command of thirty-four troopers, crossed the 
Shangani river in advance, and bivouacked close to Loben- 
gula's quarters. In the night the river rose, and reinforce- 
ments were unable to join him. During the early morning the 
Matabele surrounded the little band, and after fighting most 
gallantly to the last, Major Allan Wilson and all his followers, 
with the exception of three messengers, who had been sent 
back, were killed. 

In January 1894 Lobengula died — from fever, or as the result 
of a wound, accounts differ — at a spot about forty miles south 
of the Zambezi. After his death his indunas submitted to the 
Chartered Company's forces, and the war, which cost the 
company over one hundred lives and £110,000, was thus ended. 
An order in council of the 18th of July following defined the 
administrative power of the company over Matabeleland. 
Charges were made against the company of having provoked 
the Matabele in order to bring on the war and thus secure 
their territory, but after inquiry the company was expressly 
exonerated from the charge by Lord Ripon, then colonial 
secretary. With the close of the war the Matabele appeared 
to be crushed, and for over two years there was no serious 
trouble with the natives. The country was at once thrown 

1 Lobengula had in fact sent to the Forbes patrol gold dust worth 
about £1000, and intimated his desire to surrender; but two 
troopers to whom the gold and message were entrusted kept the 
gold and suppressed the message. Their crime was afterwards 
discovered and the troopers sentenced to fourteen years' penal 
servitude. 



open to white settlers. Close to the site of Lobengula's kraal 
the new town of Bulawayo was founded, and rapidly grew 
in importance. Among the new settlers were many Dutch 
farmers. The Roman-Dutch law was chosen as that of the 
new colony, a land commission was established and com- 
missioners appointed to look after the interests of the 
natives. 

Considerable development in the part of the company's 
territory north of the Zambezi had meantime taken place. 
Between 1889 and 1891 a large number of tribes in the region 
between lakes Nyasa and Tanganyika and the Zambezi had 
entered into treaty relations with the company, and a settle- 
ment named Abercorn had been founded at the south end of 
Tanganyika. This work was undertaken in part to forestall 
German action, as before the signature of the agreement of 
July 1890 German agents entertained the design of penetrating 
west of Lake Nyasa to the Congo State frontier. The company 
further acquired the property of the African Lakes Company — 
which had done much to secure British predominance in the 
Nyasa region — and on the organization of Nyasaland as an 
imperial protectorate the South Africa Company contributed 
£1 0,000 a year for three years (1891-92-93) towards the cost 
of the administration, the imperial commissioner during this 
period acting as administrator for the adjacent territories 
belonging to the company (see British Central Africa). 
Farther west, Lewanika, the king of the Barotse, signed, on 
the 27th of June 1890, a treaty placing his country under the 
protection of the Chartered Company, which, while obtaining 
all mineral rights, undertook not to interfere in the internal 
administration of Barotseland. In securing a position thus 
early in Barotseland, Rhodes's aim was to prevent the farther 
extension eastward of the Portuguese province of Angola, 
The subsequent development of Barotseland had little direct 
connexion with the events in other parts of Rhodesia (see 
Barotse and Lewanika). The growth of territory and the 
outlay on Matabeleland led to a great increase of expenditure, 
and the capital of the company was raised to £2,000,000 in 
November 1893, and to £2,500,000 in July 1895. 

In every step taken by the company the guiding hand was 
that of Cecil Rhodes, a fact which received recognition when, 
by a proclamation of the 3rd of May 1895, the company's 
territory received officially the name of " Rhodesia." During 
this year there was great activity in exploiting Matabeleland. 
" Stands " or plots were sold at extraordinary prices in Bula- 
wayo; 539 fetched a total of £153,312, about £285 a stand. 
In within nine months Bulawayo had a population of 1900 
whites, and in the various goldfields there were over 2000 
prospectors. The construction of telegraphs proceeded with 
rapidity and by the end of 1895, 5°° m * oi new lines had been 
constructed, making about 1500 in all. A new company, the 
African Transcontinental Company, had been founded under 
the auspices of Rhodes, with the ultimate purpose of connecting 
the Cape with Cairo. By the end of 1895, 133 m. of these 
lines had been laid. At this time too, the railway from Cape 
Town had passed Maf eking and was approaching the Rhodesian 
frontier, while on the east coast the line to connect Salisbury 
with Beira was under construction. 

In November 1895 the crown colony of British Bechuanaland 
was annexed to Cape Colony, and the Chartered Company 
desired to take over the administration of the Bechuanaland 
protectorate, which stretched between the newly annexed 
portion of Cape Colony and Matabeleland, and through which 
the railway to Bulawayo had to pass. The British government 
consented, and arrangements were made for the transfer. The 
company's police were moved down to a camp in the protector- 
ate at Pitsani Potlogo: It was from this place that on the 29th 
of December Jameson crossed the Transvaal border and marched 
on Johannesburg, in his disastrous attempt to upset President 
Kruger's administration. The " Jameson Raid " put an end 
to the proposed transfer of the protectorate to the Chartered 
Company, and caused a serious crisis in its affairs. Rhodes 
resigned his position as managing director, and Alfred Beit 



RHODESIA 



267 



retired from the directorate in London. Jameson was, on the 
9th of January 1896, officially removed from his office of 
administrator of the company's territories, and was succeeded 
by Earl Grey. Just at this time rinderpest made its appearance 
in southern Rhodesia, carrying off large herds of cattle, and 
this was followed in March 1896 by a revolt of the Matabele, 
while in June the Mashona also rebelled. The occasion, but 
not the cause, of the Matabele rising was the withdrawal of 
the greater part of the company's force to take part in the 
Jameson Raid. The Matabele had various grievances, chiefly 
that after the war of 1893 they were treated as a conquered 
people. All able-bodied young men were required to work 
for the white farmers and miners a certain number of months 
per annum at a fixed rate of pay — a most irksome regulation, 
enforced, on occasions, by the native police in a tyrannical 
fashion. Another grievance was the seizure by the company, 
after the death of Lobengula, of the cattle of the Matabele — 
their chief source of wealth. Not only was there a first con- 
fiscation after the war, but subsequently there was a periodical 
taking away of cattle in small numbers — the company acting 
under the belief that nearly all the cattle in Matabeleland 
belonged to the king and were therefore lawfully theirs. How- 
ever, before the end of 1895 the company had settled the ques- 
tion in agreement with the indunas, two-fifths of the cattle 
to go to the company and the remainder to become the absolute 
property of the natives. But it was neither the action of the 
company in the confiscation of cattle, nor the labour regulations, 
that induced the mass of the people to rebel; they were induced 
to act by chiefs who chafed under their loss of power and 
The position and imagined themselves strong enough to 

rebellions throw off the yoke of the conquerors. In the manner 
oti896. customary among savages the Matabele began hostil- 
ities by the murder of defenceless white settlers — men, 
women and children. Bulawayo was threatened, and soon all 
the country south of the Zambezi was in a state of rebellion. 
Imperial troops under Sir Frederick Carrington were hurried 
up to the assistance of such police as the British South Africa 
Company still had at its command. Volunteers were enrolled, 
' and much fierce fighting followed. Rhodes hastened to Bula- 
wayo, and after conferences with the military and other author- 
ities he determined to go, with Dr Hans Sauer and Mr J. Colen- 
brander, a well-known hunter and pioneer intimately acquainted 
with the natives, and interview the chiefs. They went (September 
1896) unarmed into the heart of the Matoppo Hills, and there 
arranged terms of peace with the indunas. The interview 
involved grave danger to the emissaries, and depended for 
its success entirely upon Rhodes's personality and influence 
over the native races, but it terminated what promised to be 
a long and disastrous native war. The Matabele, whose 
legitimate grievances were acknowledged and met, ceased the 
war after the indaba with Rhodes; the Mashona revolt con- 
tinued, and was not finally crushed until October 1897, though 
all danger to settlers was over six months previously. At 
this time the rinderpest had carried off nearly all the cattle in 
the country — a disaster which, together with the destruction of 
grain during the war, had brought the natives almost to starva- 
tion — and steps had to be taken to supply their needs. Many 
of the white settlers too were reduced to sore straits and re- 
quired assistance. The rebellions had cost the company fully 
£2,500,000, and to meet the debt incurred an additional capital 
of £1,500,000 was raised in 1898. At the meeting of the com- 
pany in April 1898, at which this step was taken, Rhodes was 
re-elected a director. 

The events of 1896 — the Jameson Raid and the rebellions — 
caused the imperial government to remodel the constitution of 
Rhodesia. The armed forces of the company had already 
been placed under the direct control of the crown, and on the 
20th of October 1898 an order in council was passed providing 
for the future regulation of the country. An imperial resident 
commissioner was appointed, who was also to be ex officio 
a member of the executive and legislative councils; and there 
was to be a legislative council, consisting of five nominated 



and four elected members. The first meeting of the newly 
appointed council took place at Salisbury on the 15th of May 
1899/ Other changes, in the direction of giving more power 
to the non-official element, were made subsequently (see above, 
Administration). 

While these political changes were being made the company 
and the settlers set to work to repair the losses by war and 
plague. In particular the policy of railway development was 
pushed forward, and in November 1897 the line from Cape 
Town reached Bulawayo. The Mashonaland railway connecting 
Salisbury with Beira was completed in May 1899. In the 
same year gold-mining on a considerable scale began, the 
output for the year being over 65,000 oz. In the early part 
of 1899 Rhodes visited London and Berlin in furtherance of 
his schemes for the transcontinental telegraph extension 
from Cape Town to Cairo, and the transcontinental railway. 
He endeavoured to obtain from the British Government the 
guarantee of a loan for extending the railway, to be raised 
at 3% but was unsuccessful. He received, however, the 
support of various companies in Rhodesia, who amongst them 
subscribed £252,800 at 3% for the immediate extension of 
the railway for 150 miles; and in May he stated, at a meeting 
of the Chartered Company, that the Rhodesia Railways 
Limited would raise another £3,000,000 at 4%, to be guaranteed 
by the Chartered Company. In this way he hoped that the 
remaining 1050 miles of railway from Bulawayo to the frontier 
of German East Africa might be constructed. In Berlin, 
Rhodes had an interview with the German Emperor, when 
arrangements were arrived at for the passage of telegraph 
lines over German territory, and also in certain contingencies 
for the continuation of the transcontinental railway through 
German East Africa. 

In many respects the country recovered rapidly from the 
disasters of 1896, one of the most important measures taken 
being the compulsory inoculation for rinderpest, which finally 
stamped out the disease in 1898-99. By the last balance- 
sheet issued by the company previous to the outbreak of the 
Boer War it would appear that the revenue of Rhodesia for 
the year ending the 31st of March 1898 amounted to £260,516 
net, of which amount the sale of land plots accounts for 
£63,628; stamps and licences, £69,658; and posts and 
telegraphs, £46,745; so that the machinery of civilized life 
was already in full activity where eight years previously the 
only white inhabitants had been a few missionaries, hunters 
and traders. The government buildings were estimated in 
March 1898 to be worth £165,672, and the assessed value of 
the town property at Bulawayo was £2,045,000 and that at 
Salisbury £750,000. (Both those towns had been granted 
municipal government in 1897.) Education was arranged under 
the supervision of government inspectors, and various religious 
communities were also engaged in educational work. The 
country appeared indeed in 1899 to be starting on the road to 
industrial and agricultural prosperity, but an almost complete 
stop to progress resulted from the outbreak of the Boer War 
in October of that year. The company could point w*ith 
satisfaction to the fact that Rhodesia contributed nearly 
1500 men to the forces serving in the war, 12^% of the 
European population. Rhodesia itself was not subjected to 
invasion, but the withdrawal of so large a number of able- 
bodied men seriously interfered with the development of the 
country, the war not ending until June 1902. Throughout 
this period the natives, with few exceptions, remained peaceful 
and gave the administration no serious trouble. 

Before the war ended, Cecil Rhodes, whose chief work during 
the period since the Raid had been the building up of the 
country which bore his name, was dead (26th of Agitation 
March 1902). Alfred Beit, who had in 1898 refused for self- 
to rejoin the directorate, now consented (June 1902) govern- 
to return to the board of the Chartered Company, meat * 
on which he remained until his death in July 1906. The 
loss of Rhodes's guiding mind and inspiring personality was, 
however, manifest, and among the Rhodesians there arose 



268 



RHODIUM 



a feeling of discontent at the company's conduct of affairs. 
The company was willing on proper terms to hand over 
the administration to the colonists, and they secured the 
services of Sir George Goldie to examine the situation 
and report on what terms the transfer could be made. Sir 
George visited Rhodesia in 1903-4, and drew up a scheme 
which included the taking over by Rhodesia of the adminis- 
trative liabilities incurred by the company, which would thus 
become a public debt. After consultation between leading 
Rhodesians and the directors of the company the scheme was 
abandoned, the Rhodesians considering the financial burden 
proposed too great for an infant colony. The company therefore 
continued the administration, devoting attention to the develop- 
ment of agriculture and mining. The two railway systems 
were linked together by a line from Bulawayo to Salisbury, 
and several short lines to mining properties were built. From 
Bulawayo the main line was continued to the Wankie coal- 
fields, thence to the Zambezi, bridged in 1905 just below the 
Victoria Falls. From the Zambezi the line went north-east, 
so as to render accessible the mineral wealth of Barotse- 
land and that of Katanga on the Rhodesian-Congo frontier. 
Although Rhodesia was affected by the commercial depression 
which prevailed in South Africa for some years after the close 
of the war, its industries showed considerable vitality. In 
1906 the gold output exceeded 500,000 oz., and in the financial 
year 1905-6 the revenue of Southern Rhodesia slightly ex- 
ceeded the expenditure. 

Only once (1895-96) in the first fifteen years following 
the settlement of the country had the company's annual revenue 
exceeded the amount expended in the same period. As a 
commercial undertaking, the company therefore was during 
this period of no pecuniary advantage to the shareholders. 
This was due in part to unforeseen and unavoidable causes, 
but it is also true that the founders of the company had other 
than commercial aims. Rhodes's chief ambition was to secure 
the country for Britain and to open it up to the energies of 
her peoples, and he succeeded in this aim. He acted more 
quickly, and in : many ways more effectively, than the imperial 
government would have been able to act had it at the outset 
taken over the country. To the sturdy colonists Rhodes 
made available a land rich not only in gold, but in coal and 
other minerals, and with very great agricultural and pastoral 
resources, and all this was done without the cost of a penny 
to the imperial exchequer, Despite all drawbacks, an area 
(reckoning Southern Rhodesia only) considerably larger than 
that of the United Kingdom had in less than twenty years 
been endowed with all the adjuncts of civilization and made 
the home of thousands of settlers. 

The progress made by the country in the five years 1906-10 
demonstrated that the faith Rhodes and his colleagues had 
placed in it was not ill-founded. Although the white popu- 
lation increased but slowly, in all other respects healthy 
development took place, the element of speculation which 
had characterized many of the first attempts to exploit the 
land being largely eliminated. In 1906 Lord Selbome (the 
high commissioner) visited Rhodesia. He inquired into the 
various grievances of the settlers against the Chartered Com- 
pany; held an indaba with Matabele indunas in the Matoppo 
Hills, and at Bulawayo had a conference with Lewanika, the 
paramount chief of the Barotse. In 1907 Dr Jameson and 
other directors of the Chartered Company travelled through 
Rhodesia, and the result was to clear up some of the matters 
in dispute between the settlers and the company. Southern 
Rhodesia had become self-supporting, and the essentially 
temporary nature of the existing system of government was 
recognized. But the company held that the time was not yet 
ripe for Southern Rhodesia to become a self-governing colony. 
The directors, however, adopted a more liberal land policy, 
the increased attention given to agriculture being a marked 
and satisfactory feature of the situation. Mining and railway 
development were also pushed on vigorously. 

The movement for the closer union of the British 'South 



African colonies excited lively interest in Southern Rhodesia. 
The territory, not possessing self-government, could not take 
part in the national convention which met at Durban in 
October 1908 on equal terms with the delegates of the Cape, 
&c. It was, however, represented by three delegates on the 
understanding that Rhodesia would not, for the time being at 
least, be included in. any agreement which might be reached. 
The convention resulted in the union (on the 31st of May 1910) 
under one government of the Cape, Transvaal, Natal and 
Orange River colonies. The position of Rhodesia with respect 
to the Union was set forth in the South Africa Act 1909. It 
provides that " the king, with the advice of the Privy Council, 
may on addresses from the Houses of Parliament of the Union 
admit into the Union the territories administered by the 
British South Africa Company on such terms and conditions 
as to representation and otherwise in each case as are ex- 
pressed in the addresses and approved by the king." 

In Rhodesia itself at this time there was a widespread feeling 
that there was no urgency as to the territory joining the Union, 
and the opinion was held by many that a separate existence 
as a self-governing community would be preferable. A section 
of the settlers were content for the present to remain under 
the government of the Chartered Company. 

Bibliography. — 1. Works dealing with the country before 
the establishment of British authority: David Livingstone, 
Missionary Travels (1857) 1 ; T. Baines, The Gold Regions of S.E. 
Africa (1877); R. Gordon Cumming, Five Years of a Hunter's 
Life in . . . S.A. (1850); K. Mauch, Reisen im Inneren von Sud- 
Afrika, 1865-72 (Gotha, 1874); E. Holub, Seven Years in South 
Africa (1881); E. Mohr, To the Victoria Falls of the Zambesi (1876); 
F. C. Selous, A Hunter's Wanderings in Africa (1881), and- Travel 
and Adventure in S.E. Africa (1893); T. M. Thomas, Eleven Years 
in Central South Africa (n.d. [1872]); L. P. Bowler, Facts about 
the Matabele, Mashona, &c. (Pretoria, 1889); Rev. D. Carnegie, 
A mong the Matabele ( 1 804) . 

2. Since the British occupation: Bishop Knight-Bruce, 
Memories of Mashonaland (1895); J. C. Chadwick, Three Years with 
Lobengula (1894); D. C. de Waal, With Rhodes in Mashonaland 
(trans, from Dutch, 1896); W, A. Wells and L. T. Collingridge, 
The Downfall of Lobengula (1894); A. R. Colquhoun, Matabeleland 
(n.d. 11894]); C. H. Donovan, With Wilson in Matabeleland (1894); 
A. G. Lenard, How we made Rhodesia (1896); Lord R. Churchill, 
Men, Mines and Minerals in S.A. (1895); E. Foa, La Traversie 
de VAfrique (Paris, 1900); F. C. Selous, Sunshine and Storm in 
Rhodesia (the Matabele rising) (1896); R. S. S. Baden-Powell, 
The Matabele Campaign, 1896 (1897); E. A. H. Alderson, With 
the Mounted Infantry (in Mashonaland) (1898); S. J. du Toit, 
Rhodesia Past and Present (1897); **• Hensman, History of Rhodesia 
(1900) ; H. P. N. Muller, De Zutd-Afrikaansche Republiek en Rhodesia 
(The Hague, 1896) ;W. H. Brown, On the South African Frontier (1899): 

3. Economics, &c: P. F. Hone, Southern Rhodesia (1909); the 
Annual Reports of the British S.A. Co.; C. T. Roberts, The Future 
of Gold Mining in Mashonaland (Salisbury, Rhodesia, 1898) ; 
Southern Rhodesia*, Information for Settlers (1907); D. E. Hutchins, 
Report . . . on Trees in Rhodesia (Cape Town, 1903) ; Handbook 
for Tourists and Sportsmen (1907); A. H. Keane, The Gold of Ophir 

(1901); C. Peters, The Eldorado of the Ancients (1902); E. de 
Renty, La Rhodesia (Paris, 1907); Proceedings of the Rhodesian 
Scientific Association (1899- ) (1st vol., Bulawayo, 1903); 
The Rhodesian Agricultural Journal (1st vol., Salisbury, Rhodesia, 
1903). All treaties, &c, respecting Rhodesia will be found in Herts- 
lett's Map of Africa by Treaty (1909 ed.). For Blue Books concern- 
ing Rhodesia consult the Colonial Office List (annually). m The best 
general map of S. Rhodesia is that published by the administration 
in 1909-10 (7 sheets on the 1*500000 scale). 

For general works including Rhodesia see South Africa, § 
Bibliography. See also authorities cited under British Central 
Africa, Barotse, &c. (A. P. H.; F. R. C.) 

. RHODIUM [symbol Rh; atomic weight 102-9 (0 = i6)], in 
chemistry, a metallic chemical element found, associated with 
the other elements of the platinum group, in crude platinum 
ore, wherein it was discovered in 1803 by W. H. Wollaston 
(Phil. Trans., 1804, p. 419). It may be obtained from the 
residues of platinum vore after treatment with aqua regia and 
removal of the platinum as chlorplatinate. The mother 
liquors are decomposed by treatment with metallic iron, the 
precipitate obtained being warmed with concentrated nitric 
acid and heated in an iron crucible with concentrated caustic 
potash. The residue thus obtained is mixed with salt and 
1 Unless otherwise stated, the place of publication is London. 



RHODOCHROSITE— RHODODENDRON 



269 



, heated in a current of chlorine, any iridium present being 
^converted into its chloride by treatment .with nitric acid and 
precipitated by ammonium chloride, whilst rhodium ammonium 
chloride goes into solution with its characteristic rose-red 
colour (C. E. Claus, Jour, prakt. Chem., 1843-1845). For other 
methods of extraction see Gibbs, ib., 1861, 84, p. 65; 1865, 
94, p. 10; T. Wilm, Bull. soc. chim., 1880 (2), 34, p. 679; 
E. Fremy, Comptes rendus, 1854, 38, p. 1008, &c). The metal 
itself is best obtained by the reduction of chlorpurpureo 
rhodium chloride, (Cl a Rh 2 -10NH»)-Cl4, in a current of hydrogen, 
the metal after reduction being . cooled in a stream of carbon 
dioxide (S. M. Jorgensen, Zeit. anorg. Chem., iq°3> 34) P* 82). 
It somewhat resembles aluminium in colour; its specific 
gravity varies from 11 to 12-1; and its specific heat is 0*05527 
(V. H. Regnault, Ann. chim. phys., 1861, 6$ } p. 15). It is 
less fusible than platinum. It oxidizes superficially when 
heated, and may be distilled in the electric furnace. It is 
insoluble in acids, but forms a soluble sulphate when fused 
with potassium bisulphate (a reaction which distinguishes it 
from the other metals of the platinum group). It oxidizes 
when fused with potassium hydroxide and potassium nitrate, 
to the dioxide, Rh0 2 , It absorbs hydrogen readily, Rhodium 
black is obtained by reducing rhodium salts with formic acid; 
by alcohol in the presence of alkali; or by precipitation with 
zinc and iron. A colloidal rhodium may be prepared by 
.reducing the sesquichloride with hydrazine hydrate. Rhodium 
salts may be recognized by their characteristic reaction with 
.freshly prepared sodium 'hypochlorite solution. A yellow 
precipitate is obtained, which on shaking for some time with 
acetic acid gradually dissolves to an orange-coloured solution. 
This solution after a short time deposits a grey precipitate, 
and the supernatant liquid becomes azure blue in colour (E. 
.Demarcay, Comptes rendus, 1885, 101, p. 951). 

Several oxides of rhodium are known. The monoxide, RhO, 
-formed when the hydrated sesquioxide is heated (Claus) or when 
finely divided rhodium is heated in a current of air (Wilm), is a grey 
powder which is insoluble in acids. The sesquioxide, Rh 2 0«, is a 
black insoluble powder, formed when the corresponding hydrate is 
'heated. This hydrate, Rh 2 (OH)«, is obtained as a yellow powder, 
by decomposing rhodium salts(not the sulphate)with dilute solutions 
of the caustic alkalis. It is soluble in acids, and in the moist 
condition is also soluble in concentrated alkalis. A hydrated 
rhodium dioxide, Rh0 2 -2H 2 0, is formed when chlorine is passed 
into a solution of the sesquioxide in concentrated caustic potash, 
?or by adding an alkaline hypochlorite to a concentrated^ alkaline 
solution of rhodium and sodium chlorides. # It is a greenish-black 
powder which is soluble in hydrochloric acid. Rhodium chloride, 
Rh 2 CU, is obtained impure by heating the metal to dull redness in a 
current of chlorine, or, purer, by heating an alloy of rhodium and tin 
in chlorine or by heating the double ammonium rhodium chloride 
in chlorine at 440 C. (E. Leidie, Ann. chim. phys., 1889, (6), 17, 
p. 265; Comptes rendus, 1899, 129, p. 1249). It is a red powder, 
* which decomposes at a red heat, leaving a residue of the metal. It 
is insoluble in water and acids, but dissolves in concentrated solu- 
tions of potassium cyanide. The hydrated form i Rh 2 Cl«'8H 2 is 
obtained impure by dissolving the hydrated sesquioxide in hydro- 
. chloric acid, by the action of hydrofluosilicic acid on potassium 
rhodium chloride, and by the action of chlorine on rhodium in the 
presence of sodium chloride. In the last method the product is 
dissolved in a dilute hydrochloric acid (1:1), and the solution 
saturated with hydrochloric acid gas at o° C, allowed^ to stand for 
some time, decanted, and finally evaporated in vacuo (Leidie\ toe. cit.). 
It forms a very deliquescent, red, amorphous mass, which decom- 
poses on exposure. It is very soluble in water, forming a yellow 
solution. It forms double salts with the alkaline chlorides. 

Rhodium monosulphide, RhS, is formed when rhodium or rhodium 
ammonium chloride are heated with sulphur, and also by precipi- 
tating rhodium salts with sulphuretted hydrogen, the precipitate being 
dissolved in ammonium sulphide and thrown down again by dilute 
sulphuric acid (Lecoq de Boisbaudran, Ber., 1883, 16, p. 579). It is a 
dark-coloured powder which is insoluble in acids and other solvents. 
It loses all its sulphur when heated in air. The sesquisulphide, 
Rh 2 Sj, is prepared by heating anhydrous rhodium chloride, Rh 2 Cl«, 
in a current of sulphuretted hydrogen at 360 ° C, or by passing the 
gas into a boiling solution of the chloride. It is a black powder 
which is insoluble in acids and in alkaline sulphides. It decomposes 
when strongly heated. Rhodium sulphate, Rh 2 (SO02, is prepared 
by oxidizing the sulphide, by fusing the metal with acid potassium 
sulphate, or by the action of concentrated sulphuric acid on an alloy 
of rhodium and lead, or on the hydrated sesquioxide. It is a red 
powder which decomposes when heated or when boiled with much 



water. It forms alums (Leidie\ Comptes rendus, 1888, 107, p. 234)^ 
Rhodium potassium alum, Rh J (S0 4 )a*K J S04-24H J 0, is obtained by 
dissolving the sesquioxide in sulphuric acid and adding two-thirds 
of the calculated amount of potassium sulphate to the solution 
(A. Piccini and L. Marino, Zeit. anorg. Chem., iqoi, 27, p. 62). It 
crystallizes in cubes. Rhodium cyanide, Rh 2 (CN)«, is a carmine-red 
powder formed when rhodium potassium cyanide is boiled with 
acetic acid. Rhodium potassium cyanide, K«Rh 2 (CN)i J , is formed 
when the sesquioxide is dissolved in caustic potash and an excess of 
hydrocyanic acid added gradually, the solution being then evaporated 
in vacuo. It is a colourless crystalline solid soluble in watcr L and 
isomorphous with the corresponding iron, cobalt, chromium and 
manganese compounds. 

The rhodium ammonia salts correspond almost with the similar 
cobalt compounds and may be divided into three series — namely, 
hexammine salts (Iuteo-salts), [Rh(NHi)«]Xa; aquopentammine salts 
(roseo-salts), [Rh(NHa)«-H 2 0]Xi; and pentammine salts (purpureo- 
salts), [Rh(NH,)*X]X a . (See S. F. Jorgensen, C. W. Blomstrand, 
Jour. prak. Chem., 1882, et seq.) 

The atomic weight of rhodium has been determined by S. F, 
Jorgensen {Jour, prakt. Chem., 1883, 27, p. 486), by the analysis of 
chlorpurpureo rhodium chloride, the mean value obtained, being 
103; whilst K. Seubcrt and K. Kobbe {Ann., 1890, 260, p. 314). by 
analysis of the double chloride and sulphate, obtained as a mean 
value 102-86. 

RHODOCHROSITE, a mineral species consisting of man- 
ganese carbonate, MnCC>3, crystallizing in the rhombohedral 
system and isomorphous with calcite. It usually occurs 
as cleavable, compact or botryoidal masses, distinct crystals 
being somewhat rare ; these often have the form ,of the 
primitive rhombohedron, parallel to the faces of which there 
are perfect cleavages. When pure, the mineral contains 
47*7% of manganese, but this is usually partly replaced by 
varying amounts of iron, and sometimes «by calcium, mag- 
nesium, zinc, or rarely cobalt (cobalt-manganese-spar). With 
these variations in chemical composition the specific 'gravity 
varies from 3*45 to 3-60; the hardness is 4. The colour is 
usually rose-red, but may sometimes be grey to brown. The 
name rhodochrosite, from the Greek /665o-xpws ; (rose- 
coloured), has reference to the characteristic ..colour of the 
mineral: manganese-spar and dialogite are synonyms.* It 
is found in mineral veins with ores of silver, lead, copper,- &c, 
or in deposits of manganese ore. (Crystals have been met 
with in the mines at Kapnik-Binya and Nagyag near jDeva 
in Transylvania and at Diez in Nassau, but by far the best 
specimens are from Colorado. The mineral is used to a limited 
extent in the manufacture of spiegeleisen and ferromanga"nese. 

RHODODENDRON, Classical writers, such as Dioscorides 
and Pliny,' seem, from what can.be ascertained, to have called 
the oleander {Nerium Oleander) by this name, but in modern 
usage it is applied to a large genus of shrubs and trees be T 
longing to the order of heaths (Ericaceae). No adequate 
distinction can be drawn between this genus and Azalea (q.v.)—r 
the proposed marks of distinction, however applicable in 
particular cases, breaking down when tested more generally. 
The rhododendrons are trees or shrubs, never herbs, with 
simple, evergreen or deciduous leaves, and flowers in terminal 
clusters surrounded in the bud by bud-scales but not as a rule 
by true leaves. The flowers are remarkable for the frequent 
absence or reduced condition of the calyx. The funnel- or 
bell-shaped corolla, on the other hand, with its five or more 
lobes, is usually conspicuous, and in some species so much so 
as to render these plants greatly prized in gardens. The 
free stamens are usually ten, with slender filaments and anthers 
opening by pores at the top. The ovary is five- or many- 
celled, ripening into a long woody pod .which splits from top 
.to bottom by a number of valves, which break away from 
the central placenta and liberate a large number of small bran- 
like seeds provided with a membranous wing-like appendage 
at each end. The species are for the most part native5 of 
the mountainous regions of the northern hemisphere, extend- 
ing as far south as the Malay Archipelago and New Guinea, 
but not hitherto found in South America or Australia. None 
are natives of Britain. They vary greatly in stature, some 
of the alpine species being mere pygmies with minute leaves 
and tiny blossoms, while some of the Himalayan species 
are moderate-sized trees with superb , flowers. Some are 



270 



RHODONITE— RHONDDA 



epiphytal, growing on the branches of other trees, but not 
deriving their sustenance from them. The varieties grown 
in gardens are mostly grafted on the Pontic species (R. ponti- 
cum) and the Virginian R. catawbiense. The common Pontic 
variety is excellent for game-covert, from its hardiness, the 
shelter it affords, and the fact that hares and rabbits rarely 
eat it. Variety of colour has been infused by crossing or 
hybridizing the species first named, or their derivatives, with 
some of the "more gorgeously coloured Himalayan-American 
varieties. In many instances this has been done without 
sacrifice of hardihood. 

Some of the finest hybrids for the open air, especially in favoured 
spots, are altaclerense (scarlet); Harrisi (rosy crimson); Kewense 
(rose) ; Luscombei (rose-pink) ; Mangiest (white) ; noblcanum 
(crimson), one of the first to flower after Christmas; praecox (rose- 
purple); and Shilsoni (crimson). There arealmost countless colour 
variations of these, but one of the most exquisite of late years is that 
known as Pink Pearl, with large clear rosy-pink blossoms of great 
purity. What are termed greenhouse rhododendrons are derivatives 
from certain Malayan and Javanese species, and are consequently 
much more 4^nder. They are characterized by the possession of a 
cylindrical (not funnel-shaped) flower-tube and other marks of 
distinction. The foliageof rhododendrons contains much tannin, 
and has been used medicinally. Whether the honey mentioned by 
Xenophon as poisonous was really derived from plants of this genus 
as alleged is still an open question. 

Cultivation. — The hardy evergreen kinds are readily propagated 
by seed, by layers, and by grafting. Grafting is resorted to only for 
the propagation of the rarer and more tender kinds. Loamy soil 
containing a large quantity of peat or vegetable humus is essential, 
the roots of all the species investigated being associated with a 
fungus partner (mycorhiza). An excess of lime or chalk in the soil 
proves fatal to rhododendrons and their allies sooner or later — a fact 
overlooked by many amateurs. The hardy deciduous kinds are 
valuable for forcing, and withstand cold-storage treatment well. 
The tender Malayan and Javanese species thrive in warm green- 
house temperature, but are difficult to cultivate where the water is 
very alkaline. 

RHODONITE, a member of the pyroxene group of minerals, 
consisting of manganese metasilicate, MnSi03, and crystallizing 
in the anorthic system. It commonly occurs as cleavable to 
compact masses with a rose-red colour; hence the name, from 
the Greek f>68ov (a rose). Crystals often have a thick tabular 
habit; there are perfect cleavages parallel to the prism' faces 
with an arigle of 87 31 £ r . The hardfless is 5|-6|, and the 
specific 'gravity 3-4-3*68. The manganese is often partly 
replaced by iron and calcium, which may sometimes be present 
in considerable amounts; a greyish-brown variety containing 
as much as 20% of calcium oxide is called "bustamite" ; 
" fowlerite " is a zinciferous variety containing 7 % of zinc 
oxide. Rhodonite is a mineral liable to alteration, with the 
formation of manganese carbonate, hydrous silicate or oxides. 
The compact material, which is cut and polished for ornamental 
purposes, is often marked in a striking manner by veins and 
patches of these black alteration products. At Syedelnikova, 
near Ekaterinburg in the Urals, compact material of a good 
colour occurs in a clay-slate and is extensively quarried: boulders 
of similar material found at Cummington in Massachusetts 
(" cummingtdnite' ") have also been worked as an ornamental 
stone. In the iron and manganese mines at Pajsberg near 
Filipstadt andLangban in Vermland, Sweden, small brilliant and 
translucent crystals (" pajsbergite ") and cleavage masses 
occur. Fowlerite occurs as large, rough crystals, somewhat 
resembling pink felspar, with franklinite and zinc ores in granular 
limestone at Franklin Furnace in New Jersey. 

RHOECUS, a Samian sculptor of the 6th century B.C. He and 
his son Theodorus were especially noted for their work in bronze. 
Herodotus says that Rhoecus built the temple of Hera at Samos. 
In the temple of Artemis at Ephesus was a marble figure of 
night by Rhoecus. His name has been found on a fragment of a 
vase which he dedicated to Aphrodite atiNaucratis. His sons 
Theodorus and Telecles made a statue of the Pythian Apollo 
for the Samians. 

RHONDDA (formerly Ystradyfodwg), an urban district and 
parliamentary division of Glamorganshire, South Wales. It 
is 12 m. long by about 4 J m. across at* its widest part, and 
comprises two main valleys, named after their respective rivers, 



Rhondda Fawr (9 J m.) and Rhondda Fach, or the lesser (6§ m.), 
running S.E. and S.W. respectively till their junction at Porth, 
and thence the single valley for upwards of a mile farther down 
the boundary of the Pontypridd urban district at Trehafod. 
The valleys are narrow and tortuous, and their lateral boundaries 
are formed by steep hills varying in. height from about 560 ft. 
on either side of Trehafod to 1340 ft. on the N.E. of Maerdy in 
the lesser Rhondda and 1742 ft. on the S.W. of Treherbert in the 
main valley, while the mountains at the upper end of the latter 
valley culminate in Cam Moesen (1950 ft.). Thetwovalleys are 
separated by the steep ridge of Cefn-rhondda, which ranges from 
600 ft. high above Porth to 1690 ft. near the upper end of the 
district. There are a few tributary valleys of which Cwmparc, 
Clydach Vale and Cymmer are the chief. Though the urban 
district measures 23,884 acres, the area built upon is generally 
a narrow strip on either side of each river except at Treorky 
and Ton, where the valley of the Rhondda Fawr opens out a 
little. In 1877 the ancient parish of Ystradyfodwg (with the 
omission of the township of Rhigos, which lies beyond the 
mountains to the north) was formed into an urban district 
bearing the parish name, the area having previously been part 
of a rural district under the Pontypridd rural sanitary authority. 
In October 1879, portions of the parishes of Llanwonno and 
Llantrisant, comprising over 5000 acres, were added to the urban 
area, the whole being consolidated in 1894 into one civil parish. 
In 1897, the name of the urban district was changed into 
Rhondda. The Taff Vale railway runs up each of the two 
valleys from a junction at Porth (16 m. N.W. of Cardiff), and has 
five stations in the main valley and four in the lesser one. From 
Porth it runs to Pontypridd, whence there is communication 
with Cardiff, Barry and Newport. The Rhondda and Swansea 
Bay railway (authorized in 1882, opened in 1890, and now 
worked by the Great Western) connects the upper end of the 
main valley, where it has a station, Blaen-rhondda, with Port 
Talbot, Neath and Swansea (31 m. distant) by meansof a line 
which has a tunnel 3443 yds. long. 

The district occupies almost the centre of the eastern division 
of the South Wales coal-field, and its coal, upon which the 
inhabitants are almost entirely dependent, is unsurpassed for 
its steam-raising properties. In common with other East 
Glamorgan coal it became commercially known as Cardiff coal 
from the fact that Cardiff was at first its only port of shipment. 
The development of the Rhondda coal-field was later in date than 
those of Aberdare and Merthyr, and it received its chief impetus 
from the American Civil War. Thus the population of the parish 
(excluding Rhigos), which was 576 in 1811, 951 in 1851 and 
3035 in 1 861, increased to 16,914 in 1871. When the bound- 
aries of the district were extended in 1879 the population of 
the enlarged area was calculated by the registrar-general to be 
23,950 in 1871, but it reached 55,632 in 1881, and 113,735 in 
1 901, showing an increase of 104% in the previous twenty years. 
In 1 90 1, 35*4% of the population of three years of age and 
upwards spoke English only, 11-4% spoke Welsh only, the 
remainder being bilingual. 

Ecclesiastically the parish of Ystradyfodwg was an ancient 
chapelry depencfenton Llantrisant. The old parish church at Ton 
Pentre (in substitution for which a new church was built in 1893-94) 
served the whole parish till past the middle of the 19th century. 
Between 1879 and 1900 the ancient parish (excluding Rhigos) was 
divided into seven ecclesiastical parishes, the six new ones being 
Llwyn-y-pia (1879), Tylorstown (1887), Ynyshir (1887), Treherbert 
(1893), Cwmparc (1898) and Ferndale (1900). The additional area 
brought into the urban district in 1879 comprises two other 
ecclesiastical parishes, Cymmer and Porth (1894), and Dinas and 
Penygraie (1901). These nine parishes, comprised in the urban 
district, have twenty churches and eighteen mission-rooms, with 
accommodation for about 12,000 persons. This area, together with 
Pontypridd, Glyntaff and Llanwonno, form the rural deanery of 
Rhondda in the archdeaconry and diocese of Llandaff. There were 
at the end of 1905 over one hundred and fifty nonconformist 
chapels and mission rooms, with accommodation for over 85,000 
persons, of which provision nearly two-thirds was in chapels with 
Welsh services. There is a Roman Catholic church at Tonypandy. 
The public buildings include the council house and offices of the 
district council, erected in 1883-84 for the local board at Pentre, 
libraries and workmen's institutes at Ystrad (1895). and Cymmer 



(i893)» Maerdy (1905), Dinas (1803), and Ferndale public halls, the 
property of a private company at Treherbert (1872), and Tonypandy 
(1891) and a county intermediate school at Porth. By means of a 
tunnel about 2100 yds. long water is obtained for the greater part of 
the main valley from the lake of Llyn Fawr on the Neath side of the 
mountain range which shuts in the valley on the north. This lake has 
been converted into a storage reservoir of about 1 67 million gallons 
capacity. The rest of the district is supplied from the Pontypridd 
Water Company's works above Maerdy in the lesser valley. 

The ancient parish (excluding Rhigos) was formed into a 
parliamentary constituency with one member in 1885. The 
present urban district substantially corresponds to the ancient 
territorial division of Glyn-rhondda, one of the four commotes of 
the cantred of Penychen, and subsequently, in Norman times, one 
of the twelve " members " of the lordship of Glamorgan. Its 
Welsh lords enjoyed a large measure of independence and had 
their own courts, in which Welsh law was administered down to 
1535, when the lordship was fully incorporated in the county of 
Glamorgan. On the ridge of Cefn-rhondda between the two 
valleys was the Franciscan monastery of Penrhys, famous for 
its image of the Virgin and for its holy well which attracted 
large pilgrimages. It was dissolved about 141 5, probably owing 
to its having supported Glyndwr in his rebellion. Edward II. 
came here from Neath Abbey and was captured on the 16th 
of November 1326, either at Penrhys, or between it and 
Llantrisant. (D. Ll. T.) 

RHONE (Fr. Rhdne, Lat. RJiodanus) , one of the most important 
rivers in Europe, and the chief of those which flow directly into 
the Mediterranean. It rises at the upper or eastern extremity 
of the Swiss canton of the Valais, flows between the Bernese 
Alps (N.) and the Lepontine and Pennine Alps (S.) till it expands 
into the Lake of Geneva, winds round the southernmost spurs 
of the Jura range, receives at Lyons its principal tributary, the 
Sa6ne, and then turns southward through France till, by many 
mouths, it enters that part of the Mediterranean which is rightly 
called the Golfe du Lion (sometimes wrongly the Gulf of Lyons). 
Its total length from source to sea is 5045 m. (of which the Lake 
of Geneva claims 45 m.), while its total drainage area in 37,798 
sq. m., of which 2772 sq. m. are in Switzerland (405 sq. m. of 
the Swiss portion being composed of glaciers), and its total fall 
5898 ft. Its course (excluding the Lake of Geneva, q.v.) naturally 
fails into three divisions: (1) from its source to the Lake of 
Geneva, (2) from Geneva to Lyons, and (3) from Lyons to 
the Mediterranean. 

1. From its source to the lake the Rhone is a purely Alpine 
river, flowing through the great trench which it has cut for 
itself between two of the loftiest Alpine ranges, and which (save 
, a bit at its north-west end) forms the Canton of the Valais. 
Its length is 105^ m., while its fall is 4679 ft. It issues as a 
torrent, at the height of 5909 ft., from the great Rhone glacier 
at the head of the Valais, the recent retreat of this glacier having 
proved that the river really flows from beneath it, and does not 
take its rise from the warm springs that are now at some distance 
from its shrunken snout. It is almost immediately joined on 
the left by the Mutt torrent, coming from a small glacier to 
the S.E., and then flows S.W. for a short distance past the 
well-known Gletsch Hotel (where the roads from the Grimsel 
and the Furka Passes unite). But about half a mile from the 
glacier the river turns S.E. and descends through a wild gorge 
to the more level valley, bending again S.W. before reaching 
the first village, Oberwald. It preserves this south-westerly 
direction till Martigny.' The uppermost valley of the Rhone 
is named Goms (Fr. Conches), its chief village being Miinster, 
while Fiesch, lower down, is well known to most Swiss travellers. 
As the river rolls on, it is swollen by mountain torrents, descend- 
ing from the glaciers on either side of its bed — so by the Geren 
(left), near Oberwald, by the Eginen (left), near Ulrichen, by 
the Fiesch (right), at Fiesch, by the Binna (left), near Grengiols, 
by the Massa (right), flowing from the great Aletsch glaciers, 
above Brieg. At Brieg the Rhone has descended 3678 ft. from 
its source, has flowed 28 m. in the open, and is already a consider- 
able stream when joined (left)by the Saltine, descending from 
the Simplon Pass. Its course below Brieg is less rapid than 



RHONE 271 

before and lies through the alluvial deposits which it has brought 
down in the course of ages. The valley is wide and marshy, 
the river frequently overflowing its banks. Further mountain 
torrents (of greater volume than those higher up) fall into the 
Rhone as it rolls along in a south-westerly direction towards 
Martigny: the Visp (left), coming from the Zermatt valley, 
falls in at Visp, at Gampel trie Lonza (right), from the Lfitschen 
valley, at Leuk the Dala (right), from the Gemmi Pass, at 
Sierrc the Navizen (left), from the Einfisch or Anniviers 
valley, at Sion, the capital of the Valais, the Borgne (left) 
from the Val d'H6rens; soon* the Rhone is joined by the Morge 
(right), flowing from the Sanetsch Pass, and the boundary in 
the middle ages between Episcopal Valais to the east and Savo- 
yard Valais to the west, and at Martigny by the Dranse (left), 
its chief Alpine tributary, from the Great St Bernard and the 
Val de Bagnes. At Martigny, about' 50 m. from Brieg, the 
river bends sharply to the N.W., and runs in that direction to 
the Lake of Geneva. It receives the Salanfe (left), which forms ' 
the celebrated waterfall of Pissevache, before reaching the 
ancient town and abbey of St Maurice fojm.). Henceforward 
the right bank is in the canton of Vaud (conquered from Savoy 
in 1475) and the left bank in that of the Valais (conquered 
similarly in 1536), for St Maurice marks the end of the historical 
Valais. Immediately below that town the Rhone rushes through 
a great natural gateway, a narrow and striking defile (now 
strongly fortified), which commands the entrance of the Valais. 
Beyond, the river enters the wide alluvial plain, formerly 
occupied by the south-eastern arm of the Lake of Geneva, 
but now marshy and requiring frequent V correction." * It 
receives at Bex the Avancon (right), flowing from the glaciers 
of the Diablerets range, at Monthey the Vieze (left), from 
ChampSry and the Val d'llliez, and at Aigle the Grande Eau 
(right), from the valley of Ormonts-dessus. It passes by the 
hamlet of Port Valais, once on the shore of the lake, before 
expanding into the Lake of Geneva, between Villeneuve (right) 
and St Gingolph (left). During all this portion of its course 
the Rhone is not navigable, but a railway line runs along it 
from Brieg in about 72 m. to either Villeneuve or Le Bouveret. 

2. On issuing at Geneva from the lake the waters of the 
Rhone are very limpid and blue, as it has left all its impurities 
in the great settling vat of the lake, so that Byron might well 
speak of the " blue rushing of the arrowy Rhone " (Childe Harold, 
canto iii. stanza 71). But about half a mile below Geneva this 
limpidity is disturbed by the pouring in of theUurbid torrent 
of the Arve (left), descending from the glaciers of the Mont Blanc 
range, the two currents for some distance refusing to mix. The 
distance from Geneva to Lyons by the tortuous course of the 
Rhone is about 124 m., the fall being only about 689 ft. The 
characteristic feature of this portion of the course of the Rhone 
is the number of narrow gorges or cluses through which it rushes, 
while it is forced by the southern spur of the Jura to run in a 
southerly direction, till, after rounding the base of that spur, 
it can flow freely westwards to Lyons. About 12 m. S. of 
Geneva the Rhone enters French territory, and henceforth till 
near Lyons forms first the eastern, then the southern boundary 
of the French department of the Ain, dividing it from those of 
Haute Savoie and Savoie (E.) and that of the Isere (S.). Soon 
after it becomes French the river rushes furiously through a 
deep gorge, being imprisoned on the north by the Cr£do and on 
the south by the Vuache, while the great fortress of l'ficluse 
guards this entrance into France. The railway pierces the 
Credo by a tunnel. In the narrowest portion of this gorge, 
not far from Bellegarde at its lower end, there formerly existed 
the famous Perte du Rhdne (described by Saussure in his 
Voyages dans les Alpes, chapter xvii.), where for a certain 
distance the river disappeared in a subterranean channel; 
but this natural phenomenon has been destroyed, partly by 
blasting, and partly by the diversion of the water for thi use 
of the factories of Bellegarde. At Bellegarde the' Valserinc 
flows in (right), and then the river resumes its southerly direction, 
from which the great gorge had deflected it for a while. Some 
way below Bellegarde, between Le Pare and Pyrimont, the 



272 



RHONE— RHONGEBIRGE 



Rhone becomes officially " navigable/' though as far as Lyons 
the navigation now consists all but wholly of the floating of 
flat-bottomed boats, named rigues, laden chiefly with stone 
quarried from the banks of the river. Above Seyssel (n m. 
from Bellegarde) the Usses (left) joins the Rhone, while just 
below that village the Fier (left) flows in from the Lake of 
Annecy. Below the junction of the Fier the hills sink on either 
side, the channel of the river widens, and one may say that it 
leaves the mountains for the plains. At Culoz (41^ m. by rail 
from Geneva) the railway from Geneva to Lyons (105 m.) quits 
the Rhone in order to run west by a direct route past Amberieu. 
The Rhone continues to roll on southwards, but no longer (as 
no doubt it did in ancient days) enters the Lac du Bourget, of 
which it receives the waters through a canal, and then leaves 
it on the east in order to run along the foot of the last spur of 
the Jura. It flows past Yenne (left) and beneath the picturesque 
fortress (formerly a Carthusian monastery) of Pierre Chatcl 
(right) before it attains the foot of the extreme southern spur of 
the Jura, at a height of 696 ft., not far from the village of Cordon, 
and just where the Guiers flows in (left) from the mountains 
of the Grande Chartreuse. This is nearly the last of the cluses 
through which the river has to make its way. The very last 
is at the Pont du Saut or Sault, a little S. of Lagnieu. The river 
now widens, but the neighbouring country is much exposed to 
inundations. It receives (right) its most important tributary 
in this part of its course, the Ain, which descends from the 
French slope of the Jura and is navigable for about 60 m. above 
its junction with the Rhone. Farther down the Rhone meanders 
for a time with shifting channels in a bed about 2 m. broad, 
but it gathers into a single stream before its junction with the 
Sa6ne, just below Lyons. The Sa6ne (q.v.), which has received 
(left) the Doubs, is the real continuation of the Rhone, both 
from a geographical and a commercial point of view, and it is 
by means of canals branching off from the course of the Sa6ne 
that the Rhone communicates with the basins of the Loire, 
the Seine, the Rhine and the Moselle. In fact, up to Lyons, 
the Tihone (save when it expands into the Lake of Geneva) is 
a huge and very unruly mountain torrent rather than a great 
European river. 

' 3. Below Lyons, however, the Rhone becomes one of the 
great historical rivers of France. It was up its valley that 
first Greek, then Latin civilization penetrated from the Medi- 
terranean to Lyons, as well as in the 10th century the Saracen 
bandits from their settlement at La Garde Freinet, near the 
coast of Provence. Then, too, from Lyons downwards, the 
Rhone serves as a great medium of commerce by which central 
France sends its products to the sea. Its length from Lyons 
to the sea is some 230 rri., though its fall is but 530 ft. But 
during this half of its course it can boast of having on its left 
bank (the right bank is very poor in this respect) such historical 
cities as Vienne, Valence, Avignon, Tarascon and Aries, while 
it receives (left) the Isere, the Dr6me and the Durance rivers, 
all formed by the union of many streams, and bringing down 
the waters that flow from the lofty snowy Dauphine Alps. 
The Ardeche is the only considerable affluent from the right. 
Near Aries, about 25 m. from the sea, and by rail 175J m. from 
Lyons, the river breaks up into its two main branches, the 
Grand Rhone running S.E. and the Petit Rhone S.W.; they 
enclose between them the huge delta of the Camargue, which 
is cultivated on the banks of the river only, but elsewhere is 
simply a great alluvial plain, deposited in the course of ages 
by the river, and now composed of scanty pasturages and of 
great salt marshes. Between Lyons and the sea, the Rhone 
divides four departments on its right bank (Rh6ne, Loire, 
Ardeche and Gard) from as many on its left bank (Is8re, 
Dr6me, Vaucluse and Bouches du Rh6ne). 

Consult in general Ch. LenthSric, Le Rhdne—kistoire d*un fleuve, 
2 vols. (Paris, 1892). (W. A. B. C.) 

RHfiNE, a department of south-eastern France, formed in 
1793 from the eastern portion of the department of Rhdne-et- 
Loire, and comprising the old districts of Beaujolais, Lyonnais, 
Franc-Lyonnais, Forez and a small portion of Dauphin6. Pop. 



(1906) 858,907. Area, n 04 sq m. Rh6ne is bounded N. by 
the department of Sadne-et-Loire, E. by Ain and Isere and S. and 
W. by Loire. The Sa6ne and the Rhone form its natural 
boundary on the east. The department belongs almost entirely 
to the basin of the Rhone, to which it sends its waters by the 
Sa6ne and its tributary the Azergues, and by the Gier. The 
mountains which cover the surface of the department con- 
stitute the watershed between the Rhone and the Loire, and 
from north to south form four successive groups — the Beaujolais 
Mountains, the highest peak of which is 3320 ft.; the Tarare 
group; the Lyonnais Mountains (nearly 3000 ft.); and Mont 
Pilat, the highest peak of which belongs to the department of 
Loire. The lowest point of the department (460 ft. above sea- 
level) is at the egress of the Rhone. The meteorological con- 
ditions vary greatly with the elevation and exposure. Snow 
sometimes lies in the mountains from November to April, 
while at Lyons and in the valleys the- mean temperature in winter 
is 36 F. and in summer 70 , the annual mean being 53 . The 
average rainfall is somewhat higher than is general over France 
owing to the amount of the precipitation on the hilly region. 

Good agricultural land is found in the valleys of the Sa6ne 
and Rhone, but for the most part the soil is stony and only 
moderately fertile. Wheat, oats, rye and potatoes are ex- 
tensively cultivated, but their importance is less than that of 
the vine, the hills of the Beaujolais on the right bank of the 
Sa6ne producing excellent wines. Fruit trees, such as peaches, 
apricots, walnuts and chestnuts, grow well, but the wood in 
general is little more than copse and brushwood. Good 
pasture is found in the valleys of the Azergues and its affluents. 
Mines of iron-pyrites and coal and quarries of freestone are 
worked. The production of silk fabrics, the chief branch of 
manufacture, that of chemicals and machinery, together with 
most of the other industries of the department, are concentrated 
in Lyons (q.v.) and its vicinity. Tarare is a centre for the 
manufacture of muslin and embroidery. - Oullins has large 
railway workshops belonging to the Paris-Lyon-Mediterranee 
railway, and there are important glass works at Givors. Cotton- 
spinning and weaving are carried on in several localities. The 
products of its manufactures, together with wine and brandy, 
form the bulk of the exports of the department; its imports 
comprise chiefly the raw material for its industries. It is 
served by the Paris-Lyon railway. The Rhone and the Sa6ne 
and in the extreme south the canal of Givors are its navigable 
waterways. Lyons the capital is the seat of an archbishop 
and of a court of appeal and centre of an educational division 
(acadSmie). The department is divided amongst the districts 
of the VII., VTIL, XII., XIII. and XIV. army corps. There 
are two arrondissements (Lyons and Villefranche) subdivided 
into 29 cantons and 269 communes. The principal places 
besides Lyons are Givors, Tarare and Villefranche, which 
receive separate treatment. 

RHONGEBIRGE, or Die Rhon, a mountain-chain of central 
Germany, running in a north-westerly direction from the 
Bavarian province of Lower Franconia to the Prussian province 
of Hesse-Nassau and the grand duchy of Saxe-Weimar, and 
divided by the Werra from the Thuringian Forest on the N. 
The other sides are bounded by the Fulda on the W. and the 
Sinn and Frankish Saab on the E. and S. Its length is 50 m., 
breadth 5-7 m., and its mean elevation 1900 ft. This, district 
is divided into three groups — the southern, the high (Hohe) 
and the nearer (Vordere) Rhon. Of these the southern, a con- 
tinuation of the Spessart, largely consists of flat conical masses 
and reaches its highest point in the Heiliger Kreuzberg (2900 ft.). 
The Hohe Rhon, beginning immediately to the north-west of 
the latter mountain, is a high plateau of red sandstone, covered 
with fens and basalt peaks. It is a wild, dreary, inclement 
tract of country, covered with snow for six months in the year 
and visited by frequent fogs and storms. It is said of it that 
whoever desires to experience a northern winter can spare 
himself a journey to the North Cape or Siberia, and find it in 
his native Rhon. There is little vegetation, and the inhabitants 
eke out a scanty sustenance from the cultivation of potatoes 



RHOXOLANI— RHUBARB 



273 



and flax. The highest inhabited place is Frankenhausen, 
lying at a height of 2350 ft. with 6383 inhabitants (1900). The 
nearer (Vordere) Rhon, forming the northern side of the range, 
is more attractive, with forests and deep and fertile valleys. 

See Lenk, Zur geologischen Kenntnis der sudlichen Rhdn (Wurzburg, 
1887); Scheidtweiler, Die Rhdn und ihre wirthschaftlichen Verhdlt- 
nisse (Frankfort, 1887); and Daniel, Deutschland (5th ed., Leipzig, 
1878). 

RHOXOLANI, a Sarmatian tribe defeated in the Crimea by 
Diophantus, general of Mithradates, c. 100 B.C., and by the 
Romans on the lower Danube c. a.d. 60, and also under M. 
Aurelius. They seem to have finally succumbed to the Goths. 

RHUBARB. This name is applied both to a drug and to 
a vegetable. 

1. The drug has been used in medicine from very early 
times, being described in the Chinese herbal Pen-king, which 
is believed to date from 2700 B.C. The name seems to be 
a corruption of Rheum barbarum or Reu'barbarum, a designa- 
tion appliedito the drug as early as the middle of the 6th century, 
and apparently identical with the prjov or pa of Dioscorides, 
described by him as a root brought from beyond the Bosporus. 
In the 14th century rhubarb appears to have found its way 
to Europe by way of the Indus and Persian Gulf to the Red 
Sea and Alexandria, and was therefore described as " East 
Indian " rhubarb. Some also came by way of Persia and 
the Caspian to Syria and Asia Minor, and reached Europe 
from the ports of Aleppo and Smyrna, and became known 
as " Turkey " rhubarb. Subsequently to the year 1653, 
when China first permitted Russia to trade on her frontiers, 
Chinese rhubarb reached Europe chiefly by way of Moscow; 
and in 1704 the rhubarb trade became a monopoly of the 
Russian government, in consequence of which the term 
" Russian " or " crown " rhubarb came to be applied to it. 
Urga was the great depot for the rhubarb trade in 17 19, but 
in 1728 the depot was transferred to Kiachta. All rhubarb 
brought to the depot passed through the hands of the govern- 
ment inspector; hence Russian rhubarb was invariably good 
and obtained a remarkably high price. This severe super- 
vision naturally led, as soon as the northern Chinese ports 
were thrown open to European trade, to a new outlet being 
sought; and the increased demand for the drug at these ports 
resulted in less care being exercised by the Chinese in the 
collection and curing of the root, so that the rhubarb of good 
quality offered at Kiachta rapidly dwindled in quantity, and 
after i860 Russian rhubarb ceased to appear in European 
commerce. Owing to the expense of carrying the drug across 
the whole breadth of Asia, and the difficulty of preserving it 
from the attacks of insects, rhubarb was formerly one of the 
most costly of drugs. In 1542 it was sold in France for ten 
times the price of cinnamon and four times that of saffron, and 
in an English price list bearing date of 1657 it is quoted at 16s. 
per lb, opium being at that time only 6s. and scammony 12s. 

per lb. 

The dose of rhubarb is anything from £ up to 30 grains, 
according to the action which is desired. The British Pharmacopeia 
contains seven preparations, only one of which is of any special 
value. This is the Pulvis Rhei Compositus, or Gregory's powder, 
which is composed of 2 parts of rhubarb, 6 of heavy or light 
magnesia and 1 of ginger. The dose is 20 to 60 gr. 

Rhubarb is used in small doses — i to 2 gr. — as an astringent tonic, 
since it stimulates all the functions of the upper part of the alimentary 
canal. In many cases of torpid dyspepsia it is very efficient when 
combined with the subnitrate of bismuth and the bicarbonate of 
sodium. The more characteristic action of rhubarb, however, is 
purgation, which it causes in doses of 15 gr. and upwards. _ The 
action occurs within seven or eight hours, a soft, pulpy motion of 
a yellow colour being produced. The colour is due to the chrysa- 
robin, which is also the purgative constituent of the drug. _ Rhubarb 
is also a secretory cholagogue, increasing the amount of bile formed 
by the liver. The drug is apt to cause colic, and should therefore 
never be given alone. The* -ginger in Gregory's powder averts this 
unpleasant consequence of the aperient properties of rhubarb. The 
drug is peculiar in that the purgation is succeeded by definite 
constipation, said to be due to the rheotannic acid. This explana- 
tion is hardly satisfactory, however, since it is difficult to see how 
the rheotannic acid can be retained in the bowel during the process 
of purgation. Rhubarb has, therefore, definite indications and 



contra-indications. It is obviously worse than useless in the 
treatment of chronic constipation, which it only aggravates. On 
the other hand, it is very valuable in children and others, when 
diarrhoea has been caused by an unsuitable dietary. The drug 
removes the indigestible residue of the food and then gives the bowel 
rest. Rhubarb is also useful in the weaning of infants, since it is 
partly excreted in the maternal milk, and gives it a bitter taste 
which the baby dislikes. 

Some chrysarobin is absorbed and is excreted in the urine, which 
it slightly increases and colours a reddish brown. The colour is 
discharged by the addition of a little dilute hydrochloric acid to 
the urine. 

The botanical source of Chinese rhubarb cannot be said to have 
been as yet definitely cleared up by actual identification of plants 
observed to be used for the purpose. Rheum palmatum, R. officinale, 
R. palmatum, var. tqnguticum, R. colinianum and R. Franzenbachii 
have been variously stated to be the source of it, but the roots 
produced by these species under cultivation^ in Europe do not 

E resent the characteristic network of white veins exhibited by the 
est specimens of the Chinese drug. 
Chemistry. — The most important constituent of this drug, giving 
it its purgative properties and its yellow colour, is chrysarobin, 
CsoHieOr, formerly known as rhein or chrysophan. The rhubaib of 
commerce also contains chrysophanic acid, a dioxymethyl anthra- 
quinone, ChH«(CHj)02(OH)2, of which chrysarobin is a reduction 
product. Nearly 40% of the dru£ consists of calcium 'oxalate, 
which gives it the characteristic grittiness.^ There is also present 
rheotannic acid, which is of some practical importance. There are 
numerous other constituents, such as emodin, CuHioOa, mucilage, 
resins, rheumic acid, CsdHuOsi aporrhetin, &c. 

Production and Commerce, — Rhubarb is produced in the four 
northern provinces of China proper (Chih-li, Shan-se f Shen-se and 
Ho-nan), in the north-west provinces of Kan-suh, formerly included 
in Shen-se, but now extending across the desert of Gobi to the 
frontier of Tibet, in the Mongolian province of Tsing-hai, including 
the salt lake Koko-nor, and the districts of 'Tangut, Sifan and 
Turfan, and in the mountains of the western provinces of Sze-chuen. 1 
Two of the most important centres of the trade are Sining-fu in the 
province of Kan-suh, and Kwanhien in Sze-chuen. From Shen-se, 
Kan-suh and Sze-chuen the rhubarb is forwarded to Hankow, 
and thence carried to Shanghai, whence it is shipped to Europe. 
Lesser quantities are shipped from Tien-tsin, and occasionally the 
drug is exported from Canton, Amoy, Fuh-chow and Ning-po. 

Very little is known concerning the mode of preparing the drug 
for the market. According to Mr Bell, who on a journey from St 
Petersburg to Peking had the opportunity of observing the plant in a 
growing state, the root is not considered to be mature until it is six 
years old. It is then dug up, usually in the autumn, and deprived 
of its cortical portion and smaller branches, and the larger pieces 
are divided in half longitudinally; these pieces are bored with 
holes and strung up on cords to dry, in some cases being previously 
subjected to a preliminary drying on stone slabs heated by fire 
underneath. In Bhutan the root is said to be hung up in a kind 
of drying room, in which a moderate heat is regularly maintained. 
The effect produced by the two drying processes is very different : 
when dried by artificial heat, the exterior of the pieces becomes 
hardened before the interior has entirely lost its moisture, and 
consequently the pieces decay in the centre, although the surface 
may show no change. These two varieties are technically known 
as kiln-dried and sun-dried; and it was on account of this differ- 
ence in quality that the Russian officer at Kiachta had every piece 
examined by boring a hole to its centre. 

European Rhubarb. — As early as 1608 Prosper Alpinus of Padua 
cultivated as the true rhubarb a plant which is now known as 
Rheum rhaponticum, a native of southern Siberia and the basin 
of the Volga. This plant was introduced into England through 
Sir Matthew Lister, physician to Charles I., who gave seed obtained 
by him in Italy to the botanist Parkinson. The culture of this 
rhubarb for the sake of the root was commenced in 1777 at Banbury, 
in Oxfordshire, by an apothecary named Hayward, the plants 
being raised from seed sent from Russia in 1762, and with such 
success that the Society of Arts awarded him a silver medal in 
1 789 and a gold one in 1 794. The cultivation subsequently extended 
to Somersetshire, Yorkshire, and Middlesex, but is now chiefly 
carried on at Banbury. English rhubarb root is sold at a cheaper 
rate than the Chinese rhubarb, and forms a considerable article of 
export to America, and is said to be used in Britain in the form of 
powder, which is of a finenyellow colour than that of Chinese rhubarb. 
The Banbury rhubarb appears to be a hybrid between R. rhaponticum 
and R. undulatum — the root, according to E. Colin, not presenting 
the typical microscopic structure of the former. More recently very 



1 According to Mr F. Newcombe, Med* Press and Circ, August 
2,' 1882, the Chinese esteem the Shen-se rhubarb as the best, that 
coming from Kanchow being the most prized of all; Sze-chuen 
rhubarb has a rougher surface and little flavour, and brings only 
about half the price; Chung-chi rhubarb also is greatly valued, 
while the Chi-chuang, Tai-huang and Shan-huang varieties are 
considered worthless. . 



274 



RHYL— RHYME 



good rhubarb has been grown at Banbury from Rheum officinale, 
but these two varieties are not equal in medicinal strength to 
the Chinese article, yielding less extract— -Chinese rhubarb afford- 
ing, according to H. Seier, 58% English rhubarb 21 % and 
R7 officinale 17%. In France the cultivation of rhubarb 
was commenced in the latter half of the 18th century— R. cop- 
pactum, R. palmatum, R. rha£onticum and R. undulatum being 
the species grown. The cultivation has, however, now nearly ceased, 
small quantities only being prepared at Avignon and a few other 
localities* 

The culture of Rheum compactum was begun in Moravia in the 
beginning of the present century by Prikyl, an apothecary in 
Austerlitz, and until about fifty years ago the root was large y 
exported to Lyons and Milan, where it was used for dyeing silk. 
As a medicine 5 parts are stated to be equal to 4 of Chinese rhubarb. 
Rhubarb root is also grown at Auspitz in Moravia and at llmitz, 
Kremnitz and Frauenkirchen in Hungary; R. emodi is said to be 
cultivated for the same purpose in Silesia. > 

Rhubarb is also prepared for use in medicine from wild species 
in the Himalayas and Java. 

2. The rhubarb used as a vegetable consists of the leafstalks 
of R. rhaponticum and its varieties, and R. undulatum. It 
is known in America as pie-plant. Plants are readily raised 
from seed, but strong plants can be obtained in a much shorter 
time by dividing the roots. Divisions or seedlings are planted 
about 3 ft. apart in ground which has been deeply trenched 
and manured, the crowns being kept slightly above the sur- 
face. Rhubarb grows freely under fruit-trees, but succeeds 
best in an open situation in rich, rather light soil. The stalks 
should not be pulled during the first season. If a top-dress- 
ing of manure be given each winter a plantation will last good 
for several years. Forced rhubarb is much esteemed in winter 
and early spring, and forms a remunerative crop. Forcing 
under glass or in a mushroom house is most satisfactory, but 
open-ground forcing may be effected by placing pots or boxes 
over the roots and burying in a good' depth of stable litter 
and leaves. Several other species, such as R. palmatum, 
R. officinale, R. nobile and others, are cultivated for their 
fine foliage and handsome inflorescence, especially in wild 
gardens, margins of shrubberies and similar places. They 
succeed in most soils, but prefer a rich soil of good depth. They 
are propagated by seeds or by division. 

RHYL, a watering-place and urban district of Flint, N. 
Wales, practically equidistant by rail from Bangor (295 m.) 
and Chester (30 m.), and 209 m. from London on the London 
& North-Western railway. Pop. (1901) 8473. It is situated 
near the mouth of the Clwyd. Formerly, like Llandudno, a 
small fishing village, the town has now all the appointments 
of a popular resort. In winter the gales often fill the streets 
to the depth of several feet, with drifts of sand from the sur- 
rounding dunes, which, however, are noted in summer for 
the dry and bracing air. The neighbouring country is inter- 
esting from its scenery and antiquities. Among the institu- 
tions of the town may be mentioned the Queen Alexandra 
Hospital (1902), and several hydropathic establishments and 
convalescent homes. The estuary harbours coasting vessels, 
and some shipbuilding is carried on. On the beach towards 
Prestatyn can be seen the remains of a submerged forest. 

RHYME, more correctly spelt Rime, from a Provencal word 
rim (its customary English spelling is due to a confusion with 
rhythm), a literary ornament or device consisting of an identity 
of sound in the terminal syllables of two or more words. In 
the art of versification it signifies the repetition of a sound at 
the end of two or more lines in a single composition. This 
artifice was practically unknown to the ancients, and, when 
it occurs, or seems to occur, in the works of classic Greek and 
Latin' poets, it must be considered to be accidental. The 
natural tendency of the writer of verse unconsciously to repeat 
a sound, however, is shown by the fact that there have been 
discovered nearly one thousand lines in the writings of Virgil 
where the final syllable rhymes with a central one, tbus — 
Bella per Emathios plus quam civilia campos. 

It is more than doubtful, however, whether the difference of 
stress would not prevent this from sounding as a rhyme in 
an antique ear, and the phenomenon results more from the 



contingencies of grammar than from intention on the part of 
the poet. Conscious rhyme belongs to the early medieval 
periods of monkish literature, and the name given^ to lines 
with an intentional rhyme in tbe middle is Leonine verse, 
the invention being attributed to a probably apocryphal monk 
Leoninus or Leonius, who is supposed to be the author of a 
history of the Old Testament preserved in the Bibliotheque 
Nationale of Paris. This " history " is composed in Latin 
verses, all of which rhyme in the centre. Another very famous 
poem in Leonine rhyme is the " De Contemptu Mundi " of 
Bernard of Cluny, which was printed at Bremen in 1595. 
Rhyme exists to satisfy the ear by the richness of repeated 
sound. In the beginnings of modern verse, alliteration, a 
repetition of a consonant, satisfied the listener. A further 
ornament was discovered when assonance, a repetition of the 
vowel-sounds, was invented. Finally, both of these were com- 
bined to procure a full identity of sound in the entire syllable, 
and rhyme took its place in prosody. When this identity of 
sound occurs in the last syllable of a verse it is the typical end- 
rhyme of modern European poetry. Recent criticism has been 
inclined to look upon the African church-Latin of the age of 
Tertullian as the starting-point of modern rhyme, and it is 
probable that the ingenuities of priests, invented to aid wor- 
shippers in hearing and singing long pieces of Latin verse in 
the ritual of the Catholic church produced the earliest conscious 
poems in rhyme. Moreover, not to give too great importance 
to the Leonine hexameters which have been mentioned above, 
it is certain that by the 4th century a school of rhymed sacred 
poetry had come into existence, classical examples of which 
we still possess in the " Stabat Mater " and the " Dies Irae." 
In the course of the middle ages, alliteration, assonance and 
end-rhyme held the field without a rival in vernacular poetry. 
There is no such thing, it may broadly be said, as medieval 
verse in which one or other of these distinguishing ornaments 
is not employed. After the 14th century, in the north of 
Europe, and indeed everywhere except in Spain, where asson- 
ance held a powerful position, end-rhyme became universal 
and formed a distinctive indication of metrical construction. 
It was not until the invention of Blank Verse (q.v.) that rhyme 
found a modern rival, and in spite of the successes of this 
instrument rhyme has held its own, at all events for non- 
dramatic verse, in the principal literature of Europe. Certain 
forms of poetry are almost inconceivable without rhyme. 
For instance, efforts have been made to compose rhymeless 
sonnets, but the result has been, either that the piece of blank 
verse produced is not in any sense a sonnet, or else that by 
some artifice the appearance of rhyme has been retained. In 
the heyday of Elizabethan literature a serious attempt was 
made in England to reject rhyme altogether, and to return to 
the quantitative measures of the ancients. The prime mover 
in this heresy was not a poet at all, but a pedantic grammarian 
of Cambridge, Gabriel Harvey (1545 ?-i63o). He considered 
himself a great innovator, and for a short time he actually 
seduced no less melodious a poet than Edmund Spenser to 
abandon rhyme and adopt a system of accented hexameters 
and trimeters. Spenser even wrote largely in those measures, 
but the greater portion of his experiments in this kind, of 
which The Dying Pelican is supposed to have been one, have 
disappeared. From 1576 to 1579 the genius of Spenser seems 
to have been obscured by this error of taste, but he shook 
it off completely when he composed The Shepherd's Calendar. 
Harvey considered Richard Stonyhurst (1547-16 18) the most 
loyal of his disciples, and this author published in 1582 four 
books of the Aeneid translated into rhymeless hexameters on 
Harvey's plan. The result remains, a portent of ugliness 
and cacophony. A far greater poet, Thomas Campion (1575- 
1620), returned to the attack, and in a tract published in 1602 
advocated the remission of rhyme from lyrical poetry. He, 
by dint of a prodigious effort, produced some unrhymed odes 
which were not without charm, but the best critics of the rime, 
such as Daniel, repudiated the innovation, and rhyme continued 
to have no serious rival except blank verse. 



RHYMNEY— RHYOLITE 



275 



There have, from time to time, been made experiments of a similar 
nature, notably by Tennyson, but rhyme has retained its sway as 
an essential ornament of all English poetry which is not in blank 
verse. There have been not a few poems composed, principally 
in the nineteenth century, in rhymeless hexameters, and even the 
elegiac couplet has been attempted. The experiments of Long- 
fellow, Clough, Kingsley and others demand respectful notice, but 
it is more than doubtful whether any one of these, even the melli- 
fluous Andromeda of the last-named writer, is really in harmony 
with the national prosody. 

In Germany a very determined attack on rhyme was made 
early in the seventeenth century, particularly by a group of 
aesthetic critics in the Swiss universities. They attacked 
rhyme as an artless species of sing-song, which deadened and 
destroyed the true movement of melody in the rhythm. The 
argument of this group of critics had a deep influence in German 
practice, and led to the composition of a vast number of works 
in unrhymed measures, in few of which, however, is now found 
a music which justifies the experiment. Lessing recalled the 
German poets to a sense of the beauty and value of rhyme, but 
the popularity of Klopstock and his imitators continued to 
exercise a great influence. Goethe and Schiller, without 
abandoning rhyme altogether, permitted themselves a great 
liberty in the employment of unrhymed measures and in imita- 
tion of classic metres. This was carried to still greater lengths 
by Platen and Heine, the rhymeless rhythm of the last of whom 
was imitated in English verse by Matthew Arnold and others, 
not without an occasional measure of success. In France, on 
the other hand, the empire of rhyme has always been triumphant, 
and in French literature the idea of rhymeless verse can scarcely 
be said to exist. There the rime pleine or riche, in which not 
merely the sound but the emphasis is perfectly identical, is 
insisted upon, and a poet who rhymed as Mrs Browning did, 
or made " flying " an equivalent in sound to " ZionJ" would be 
deemed illiterate. 

In French, two species of rhyme are accepted, the feminine 
and the masculine. Feminine rhymes are those which end in a 
mute e, masculine those which do not so end. The Alexandrine, 
which is the classical metre in French, is built up on what are known 
as rimes croisees, that is to say a couplet of masculine rhymes followed 
by a couplet of feminine, and that again by masculine. This rule 
is unknown to the medieval poetry of France. 

In Italian literature the excessive abundance and facility of 
rhyme has led to a rebellion against its use, which is much more 
reasonable than that of the Germans, whose strenuous language 
seems to call for an emphatic uniformity of sound. But it was 
the'influence of German aesthetics which forced upon the notice 
of Leopardi the possibility of introducing rhymeless lyrical 
measures into Italian verse, an innovation which he carried out 
■ with remarkable hardihood and success. The rhymeless odes 
of Carducci are also worthy of admiration, and may be com- 
pared by the student with those of Heine and of Matthew Arnold 
respectively. Nevertheless, in Italian also, the ear demands the 
pleasure of the full reiterated sound, and the experiments of the 
eminent poets who have rejected it have claimed respect rather 
than sympathy or imitation. At the close of the 19th century, 
particularly in France, where the rules of rhyme had been most 
rigid, an effort to modify and minimise these restraints was 
widely made. There is no doubt that the laws of rhyme, like 
other artificial regulations, may be too severe, but there is no 
evidence that the natural beauty which pure rhyme introduces 
into poetry is losing its bold on the human ear or is in any real 
danger of being superseded by accent or rhythm. 

See Joseph B. Mayer, A Handbook of Modern English Metre 
(Cambridge, 1903); J. Minor, Neukockdeutsche Metrik (Strassburg, 
1893); J* B. Schutze, Versuck einer Theorie des Reimes nach Inhalt 
und Form (Magdeburg, 1802). (E. G.) 

RHYMNEY, an urban district in the western parliamentary 
division of Monmouthshire, England, on the borders of Glamor- 
ganshire, 22 m. N. by W. of Cardiff, on the Rhymney, the London 
& North-Western, and the Brecon & Mertliyr railways. Pop. 
(1901), 7915. The Rhymney river, in the upper valley of which 
this town lies, forms almost throughout its course, to the 
estuary of the Severn near Cardiff, the boundary between 
England and Wales (Monmouthshire and Glamorganshire). 



In its upper part the valley, like others adjacent and parallel to 
it, is populous with mining townships, and the town of Rhymney 
owes its importance to the neighbouring coal-mines and to its 
iron and steel works, which employ nearly the whole population. 
The works of the Rhymney Iron Company, including blast 
furnaces and rolling mills, are among the largest of the kind in 
England. 

RHYOLITE (Gr. few, to flow, because of the frequency 
with which they exhibit fluxion structures), the group name of 
a type of volcanic rock, occurring mostly as lava flow?, and 
characterized by a highly acid composition. They arc the most 
siliceous of all lavas, and, with the exception of the dacitcs, are 
the only lavas which contain free primary quartz. In chemical 
composition they very closely resemble the granites which are 
the corresponding rocks of plutonic or deep-seated origin; their 
minerals also present many points of similarity to those of 
granite though they are by no means entirely the same. Quartz, 
orthoclase and plagioclase felspars, and biotite are the com- 
monest ingredients of both rocks, but the quartz of rhyolitcs 
is full of glass enclosures and the potash felspar is pellucid 
sanidine, while the quartz of granite contains dust-like fluid 
cavities of very minute size and its potash felspar is of the 
turbid variety which is properly called orthoclase. The granites 
also are holocrystalline, while in the rhyolites there are usually 
porphyritic crystals floating in a fine ground-mass. Rhyolites 
have also been called liparites because many of the lavas of the 
Lipari Islands are excellent examples of this group. Above all 
rocks they have a disposition to assume vitreous forms, as when 
fused they crystallize with great difficulty. "Hence it has long 
baffled experimenters to produce rhyolite synthetically by 
fusion; it is stated that these difficulties have now been over- 
come, but geologists believe that the presence of steam and'other 
gases in the natural state expedites crystallization. In crucibles 
these cannot be retained at the temperatures employed; when 
the rocks are melted the gases escape and on cooling a pure 
glass is formed. The vitreous forms of rhyolite are known as 
obsidian, perlite and pumice (qq.v.). 

The minerals of the first generation, or phenocrysts, of rhyolite 
are generally orthoclase, oligoclase, quartz, biotite, augite or horn- 
blende. The felspars are usually glassy clear, small but of well- 
developed crystalline form: the potasTi felspar is sanidine, usually 
Carlsbad twinned ; the soda-lime felspar is almost always oligoclase, 
with characteristic polysynthetic structure. Both of these may 
be corroded and irregular in their outlines; their cleavage and 
twinning then distinguish them readily from quartz. Glass en- 
closures, sometimes rectangular with small immobile bubbles, are 
frequent. The quartz occurs as blebs or sub-rounded grains, which 
are corroded double hexagonal pyramids. Its glass enclosures are 
many and nearly always rounded or elliptical in section. No proper 
cleavage is seen in the quartz, though arcuate (conchoidal) fractures 
may often be noticed ; they may have^ been produced by strain on 
cooling. Phenocrysts of micropegmatite are known in some rhyo- 
lites; they may have the shape of felspar or of quartz crystals; 
in the former case Carlsbad twinning is by no means uncommon, 
but in other cases hour-glass structure is very conspicuous. Biotite 
is always deep brown or greenish brown, in small hexagonal tabjets, 
generally blackened at their edges by magmatic corrosion. Slus- 
covite is not known in rhyolites. t Hornblende may be green or 
brown ; in the quartz-pantellaritcs it sometimes^ takes the form of 
strongly pleochroic brown cossyrite. Like biotite it is eumorphic 
but often corroded in a marked degree. Augite, which, is equally 
common or more common than the other ferro-magnesian minerals, 
is always green; its crystals are small and perfectly shaped, and 
corrosion phenomena are very rarely seen in it. zircon, apatite 
and magnetite are always present in rhyolites, their crystals being 
often beautifully perfect though never large. Olivine is never a 
normal ingredient, but occurs in the hollow spherulites or litho- 
physae of some rhyolites with garnet^ tridymite, topaz and other 
minerals which indicate pneumatolytic action. Amonjj the less 
^common accessory minerals of the rhyolites are cordierite in crystals 
which resemble hexagonal prisms but break up under polarized 
light into six radiating sectors owing to complicated twinning: 
they weather to green aggregates of chlorite and muscovite (pinite); 
garnet, sphene and orthite may also be met with in rhyolitcs. 

The ground-mass of rhyolitic rocks is of three distinct types 
which are stages in crystalline development, viz. the vitreous, 
the felsitic or cryptocrystalline, and the microcrystalline. 
Hence some authorities have proposed to subdivide the group 



276 



RHYOLITE 



into the vitrophyres, the felsophyres and the granophyres, but this 
is not now in use, and the last of these terms has obtained a 
signification quite different from that originally assigned to it. 
Mixtures of the different kinds occur; thus a vitreous rhyolite 
has often felsitic areas in its ground-mass, and in the same 
lava flow some parts may be vitreous while others are felsitic. 
The vitreous rhyolites are identical in most respects with the 
obsidians, from which they can only be separated in an artificial 
classification; and in their glassy base the banded or eutaxitic, 
spherulitic and perlitic structures of pure obsidians are very 
frequently present (see Obsidian; Perlite). The felso- 
liparites or liparites with stony ground-mass are especially 
common among the pre-Tertiary igneous rocks (see Quartz- 
porphyry), as liparite glass is unstable and experiences 
devitrification in course of time. Many of these felsites have 
fluxion banding, spherulites and even perlitic cracks, which are 
strong evidence that they were originally glassy. In other 
cases a hyaloliparite, obsidian, or pitchstone becomes felsitic 
along its borders and joint planes, or even along perlitic cracks, 
and we may assume that the once fibrous rock has changed into 
felsite under the action of percolating moisture or even by 
atmospheric decomposition. In many rhyolites the felsite 
is original and represents an incipient crystallization of the 
vitreous material which took place before the rock was yet cold. 
The felsite in turn is liable to change; it becomes a fine mosaic of 
quartz and alkali felspar; and in this way a matrix of the third 
type, the microcrystalline, may develop. This is proved by 
the occurrence of the remains of spherulitic and perlitic structures 
in rocks which are no longer felsitic or glassy. Many micro- 
crystalline rhyolites have a ground-mass in which much felsitic 
matter occurs; but as this tends to recrystallize in course of 
time, the older rocks of this group show least of it. Whilst no 
quartz-bearing rhyolites are known to have been erupted in 
recent years, Lacroix proved that portions of the " dome " 
which rose as a great tower or column out of the crater of Mont 
Pelee after the eruption in 1906 contained small crystals of quartz 
in the ground-mass. The rock was an acid andesite, and it 
was ascribed by Lacroix to the action of steam retained in the 
rock under considerable pressure. The microcrystalline ground- 
mass of rhyolites is never micrographic as in the porphyries 
(granophyres) ; on the other hand it is often micropoikilitic, 
consisting of small felspars, often sub-rectangular, embedded in 
little rounded or irregular plates of quartz. 

The ground-mass of rhyolites is liable to other changes, of 
which the most important are silicification, kaolinization 
and sericitization. Among the older rocks of this group it is 
the exception to find that secondary quartz has not been de- 
posited in some parts of them. Often indeed the matrix is 
completely replaced by silica in the form of finely crystalline 
quartz or chalcedony; and these rocks on analysis prove to 
contain over 90% of silica. In the recent rhyolites of Hungary, 
New Zealand, &c, the deposit of coarse opal in portions of the 
rock is a very common phenomenon. 

Kaolinization may be due to weathering, and the stony dull 
appearance of the matrix of many microcrystalline rhyolites 
is a consequence of the decomposed state of the felspar grains 
in them; it is even more typically developed by fumarole 
action, which replaces the felspars with soft, cloudy white 
products which belong to a mineral of the kaolin group. Seri- 
citization, or the development of fine white mica after felspar, 
is usually associated with shearing, and is commonest in the 
older rhyolites. 

Vesicular structure is very common in rhyolites; in fact 
the pumiceous obsidians have this character in greater perfec- 
tion than any other rocks (see Pumice); but even the felso- 
rhyolites are very often vesicular. The cavities are usually 
lined with opal and tridymite; in the older rocks they may 
be filled with agate and chalcedony. The "mill-stone 
porphyries," extensively used in Germany for grinding corn, 
are porous rhyolites; the abundance of quartz makes them 
hard, and their rough surfaces render them peculiarly suitable 
for this purpose. In some of them the cavities arc partly 



secondary. These rocks are obtained in the Odenwald, Thur- 
ingerwald and Fichtelgebirge. 

In Britain a pale grey Tertiary^ rhyolite occurs at Tardreej 
Antrim (the only British rock containing tridymite), and in Skye. 
Felsitic' rhyolites occur among the Old Red rocks of Scotland (Pent- 
land Hills, Lome, &c), in Devonshire, and in large numbers in North 
Wales* The Carnarvonshire rhyolites are often much altered and 
silicified; many of them have a nodular structure which is very 
conspicuous on weathered surfaces. The spheroids may be two 
or three inches in diameter; some of them are built up of con- 
centric shells. Rhyolites are also known from Fishguard, Malvern, 
Westmorland and Co. Waterford. One of the oldest volcanic 
rocks of Britain (pre-Cambrian, ^ Uriconian) is the spherulitic 
rhyolite of the Lea Rock near Wellington in Shropshire. It shows 
bright red spherulites in great^ numbers and is probably an obsidian 
completely devitrified. Perlitic structure is also visible in it. 

In other parts of Europe rhyolites have a fairly wide distribution 
though they are not very numerous. In Hungary (Hlinik, &c.) 
there are many well-known examples of this class. They extend 
along the margin of the Carpathians and are found also in Sieben- 
burgen. In Italy they occur in the Eugancan Hills and in the 
Lipari Islands; the latter being the principal source of pumice at 
the present day. Rhyolites of Recent age occur in Iceland 
(Myvatn, &c), where they are characterized by the frequent absence 
of quartz, and the presence of much plagioclase and pyroxene. 
Some of these rocks have been called trachyte-obsidians, but they 
seem to be rhyolites which contain an exceptionally large amount 
of soda.^ The older rhyolites, which are generally called quartz- 
porphyries in Germany, are mostly of Permian or Carboniferous 
age and are numerous in the Vosges, Odenwald, Thuringerwald, &c. 
Theyare often accompanied by basic rocks (melaphyres). Permian 
rhyolites occur also at Lugano in Italy. Rhyolites are known also 
in Asia Minor and the Caucasus, in New Zealand, Colorado, Nevada 
and other parts of western North America. In the Yellowstone 
National Park there is a well-known cliff of obsidian which shows 
remarkably perfect columnar jointing. Some of the rhyolites of 
Nevada are exceedingly rich in porphyritic minerals, so that they 
appear at first sight to be holocrystalline rocks, since the ground- 
mass is scanty and inconspicuous. To this type the name nevadite 
has been pven, but it is rare and local in its distribution. 

In the island of Pantellaria, which lies to the south-west of Sicily, 
there are rocks of rhyolitic affinities which present so many unusual 
features that they have been designated pantellarites. They 
contain less silica and alumina and more alkalis and iron than do 
ordinary rhyolites. Their felspars are of the anorthoclase group, 
being rich in soda together with potash, and are very variable 
in crystalline development. Aeginne-augite and forms of soda- 
amphibole are also characteristic of these rocks: dark brown 
aenigmatite or cossyrite often occur in them. Quartz is not very 
plentiful ; other ingredients are olivine, arfvedsonite and tridymite. 
The ground-mass varies much, being sometimes quite vitreous, 
at other times a glass filled with swarms of microliths, while in 
certain pantellarites it is a microcrystalline aggregate of quartz 
and alkali felspar. The absence of plagioclase and biotite are 
marked distinctions between these rocks and the rhyolites, together 
with the scarcity of quartz and the prevalence of soda-bearing 
pyroxenes and amphiboles. 

Among the Palaeozoic volcanic rocks of Germany there is a group 
of lavas, the quartz-keratophyres, which are of acid composition 
and rich in alkali felspar. Their dominant alkali is soda: hence 
their felspars are albite and cryptoperthite, not sanidine as in 
rhyolites. Quartz occurs sometimes as corroded phenocrysts, 
but is often scarce even in the ground-mass. Porphyritic biotite 
or augite are very rare, but occur in the matrix along with felspars 
and quartz. Micropegmatite is not infrequent in these rocks, and 
they may be^ silicified like the rhyolites. As quartz-keratophyres 
mostly occur in districts where there has been a good deal of folding, 
they are often crushed and more or less sericitized. They are best 
known from the Devonian rocks of Westphalia and the Harz, 
but are also found in Queensland, and similar rocks have been 
described (as soda-f el sites) from Ireland. The rocks which they 
accompany are usually diabases and spilites. 

The other group of rhyolitic rocks rich in alkali felspars and soda 
pyroxenes and^ amphiboles are the comendites. They are often 
porphyritic, with crystals of quartz, sanidine, microperthite or 
albite: the ground-mass is microcrystalline or rarely micrographic, 
and often filled with spongy growths of aegirine and riebeckite. 
They are known from the recent eruptive districts of East Africa, 
from Sardinia and Texas, and very similar rocks occur as intrusive 
masses which may be grouped with the porphyries. 

The following analyses show the composition of some of the 
principal types of rhyolites : — 

Si0 2 A1,0, Fe,0, FeO CaO MgO K*0 Na*0 H,0 
I. 76*34 13*22 1-93 1-85 o-2i 3-67 2-84 o-6i 

IL 72-15 1350 3-12 0-93 0-16 4-54 4-20 0-85 

HI. 77*59 1275 0-67 n.f. 0-04 0-16 3-99 2-56 1-54 

IV. 67*48 9-70 7-42 2-21 1-45 0-77 2-94 7-21 0*96 
V. 70-97 13-84 3-2i 0-78 1-26 0-20 1-57. 6-27 0-74 

VI. 74-76 u-6o 3-50 0-19 0-07 0-18 4-92 4-35 0-64 



RHYTHM 



.277 



1. Rhyolite, Telki Banya, Hungary. 
II. do. Mafahlid, Iceland. 

III. do. Omahu, New Zealand. 

IV. Pantellarite, Pantellaria. 

V. Quartz-keratophyre, Muhlenthal, Harz. 
VI. Comendite, Sardinia. 

We note in the rhyolites I.— III. the very high silica, with alkalis 
and alumina also in considerable amount, while lime, magnesia and 
iron are very low. In the pantellarite, keratophyre and comendite 
the silica tends to be less abundant, while the alkalis, especially 
soda, increase; they have less alumina but are richer in iron and 
magnesia. It is easy to see why the latter types contain less quartz, 
felspars often very rich in soda, and femic minerals which contain 
iron and alkalis in notable amounts such as aeginne, nebeckite and 
arfvedsonite. (J. b. r.) 

RHYTHM (Greek f>v$fifc, from fetv, to flow), the measured 
flow of movement, or beat, in verse, music or by analogy in 
other connexions, e.g. " rhythm of life." The early critic of 
prosody, Aristoxenus, distinguished as the three elements out of 
which rhythm is composed, the spoken word, Xefis, the tune of 
music and song, fik\os f and the bodily motion, Ktvrj<ns (rco/mrua?. 
The art of the early Greek poets was devoted to & har- 
monious combination of these three elements, language, 
instrument and gesture uniting to form perfect rhythm. Aris- 
toxenus proceeds to define the rhythm so produced as an arrange- 
ment of time-periods, rb\iv xP&'wv, but other early theorists 
make not the time but the syllable the measurement of poetic 
speech. Both music and poetry depend, and have depended 
from the earliest times, on rhythm. But in music melody and 
harmony have to be taken into consideration, whereas in poetry 
the rhythmical value of the tone is modified by the imaginative 
value and importance of the words themselves. In earliest 
times the fundamental unity of the two arts was constantly 
manifest, but as the world has progressed, and they have 
ramified into countless forms, the difference between them has 
been emphasized more and more. 

Rhythm in Verse.— Professor Jakob Minor has adduced a 
figure, valuable in helping us to realize what poetic rhythm 
is, when he remarks that to strike a bell twelve times, 
at exactly equal intervals, is to produce what may be called, 
indeed, a rhythmic effect, but not to awaken anything 
resembling the sensation of poetical rhythm. Into the idea 
of poetic rhythm enters an element of life, of pulse, of a 
certain inequality of time based upon an equality of^ tone. 
Rhythm ceases to be poetic rhythm if it is mechanical or 
* lifeless. Aristotle, from whom a definition might be ex- 
pected, is very vague in dealing with the subject, and most 
of the old rhetorical writers darken counsel with statements 
'that are obscure or irrational. The fact is that rhythm 
is an expression of the instinct for order in sound which 
naturally governs the human ear, and little practical know- 
ledge is gained by following Suidas when he says that rhythm 
is the father of metre, or Quintilian in his epigram that 
rhythm is male and metre is female. These, definitions arise 
from a rhetorical desire to measure a delicate instinct by 
rule of three, and, as a matter of fact, Greek criticism on 
this subject often lost itself in arithmetical absurdities. 
It is sufficient to say that rhythm is the law which governs 
the even and periodical progress of sounds, in harmony 
with the exigencies of human emotion. For the passions, 
as expressed in verse, various movements are appropriate. 
Joy demands that the voice should leap and sing; sorrow 
that it should move solemnly and slowly; and poetry, which 
is founded on rhythm, requires that the movement of words 
should respond to this instinctive gradation of sounds. The 
finer the genius of the metrist the more exquisitely does his 
rhythm convey, as upon an instrument, the nature of the 
passion which burdens his verses. Ecstasy takes a quick, 
eager, rising movement: — 

" Give him the nectar! 
Pour out for the poet, 
Hebe, pour free! 
Quicken his eyes with celestial dew, 
That Styx the detested no more he may view. 



Mystery and suspense demand a faint, languid and throbbing 
movement: — 

11 There is not wind enough in the air 
To move away the ringlet curl 
From the lovely lady's cheek — 
There is not wind enough to twirl 
The one red leaf, the last of its clan, 
That dances as often as dance it can." 
An overpowering sadness interprets itself in rhythm that is 
full and slow and emphatic: — 

11 My genial spirits fail, 
And what can these avail 
To lift the smothering weight from off my breast? 
It were a vain endeavour, 
Though I should gaze for ever 
On that green light that lingers in the west : 
I may not hope from outward forms to win 
The passion and the life, whose fountains are within." 

The rhythm so produced, intimately linked, almost beyond 
the disintegrating power of analysis, with human feeling, may 
depend either on accentuation or quantity. The latter forms the 
principle upon which all classic metre was composed, while the 
former is dominant in nearly every description of modern verse. 
Greek and Latin verse depends entirely upon the relation of 
syllables, long or short- It was a question of time with the 
ancients, of stress or weight with us. It is an error to say, as is 
often done, that ancient verse did not recognize accent, and that 
in modern verse there is no place for quantity. These state- 
ments are generally true, but there are various exceptions to 
both rules. Schiffer, in his Englische Metrik, specially points 
out that " long and short syllables have no constant length, no 
constant relation, but they depend on their place in the verse, 
and on the context; though they do not determine the rhythm 
of verse, they still act as regulators of our metre in a very im- 
portant degree." Pauses take an essential importance in the 
construction of modern rhythm, of the variety and vitality of 
which they are the basis. They are introduced for the purpose 
of relieving the monotony of successive equal groups of syllables. 
The pause often takes the place of a light syllable, and there are 
instances in the verse of Shakespeare and Milton where it is even 
allowed to fill up the space of a heavy syllable. But still more 
often the pause does not imply the dropping of a syllable at 
all, but simply dictates a break in the sound, equivalent to a 
break in the sense. The following extract from a " Psalm " in 
Crashaw's Steps to the Temple (1646), in which the pauses 
are numerous and energetic, will exemplify the variety of this 

artifice: — 

" On the proud banks of great Euphrates' flood, | 

There we sate | and there we wept : | 
Our harps | that | now | no music understood, | 

Nodding | on the willows slept | 

While I unhappy captiv'd I we 

Lovely Sion | thought on thee." 
In the blank verse of Milton the free use of pauses constitutes 
the principal element in the amazing metrical art of the poet, 
and is the source of the sublime originabty of his music. In 
speaking of rhythm, it is customary to think of the formal rules 
which govern the fixed cadence of feet in poetry, but there is also 
a rhythm in prose, which imitates the measured movements of the 
body in stately speech. According to Renan, the rhythm of 
the ancient poetry of the Hebrews is solely founded on this prose 
movement, which differs, in fact, from that of modern European 
poetry merely in its undefined and indeterminate character. 

See J. Minor, Neuhochdeutsche Metrik (Strassburg, i8qj); 
W. Christ, Die Metrik der Greichen (Leipzig, 1874); Roderick 
Benadix, Das Wesen des deutschen Rhythmus (Leipzig, 1862); Jakob 
Schiffer, Englische Metrik (Leipzig, 1895); Edwin Guest, History 
of English Rhythms (London, 1838; 2nd cd., 1882); Theodore 
de Banville, Petit Traiti de la poisie francaise (Pans, 188 0; 
F. B. Gummere, Handbook of Poetics (Boston, 1902). (E. G.) 

Rhythm in Music— The rhythm of modern music began to 
develop through the attempts of learned medieval musicians to 
adapt the rhythms of spoken language to the necessities of 
choral singing; but before the process bad gone far, certain 
much more ancient and powerful principles, always manifest 
in folk-song and dance, gained ascendancy, so that even the 



278 



RHYTHM 



simplest classical music has a rhythm for which no criteria of 
poetic metre can be made adequate. From the musical point 
of view, the rhythm of speech, whether in prose or verse, is very 
subtle and almost uniformly fluent. The metrical feet which 
constitute the details of poetic rhythm are musically very 
minute; and the exaggerated forms in which music represents 
them are many and* varied. On the other hand, the groups of 
metrical feet which constitute any one kind of verse are of a 
uniformity which for music on a large scale would be intolerable. 
Artistic music is soon compelled to draw upon infinite resources 
of its own, which preserve an appropriate accentuation of the 
sense and feeling, while obliterating or hugely exaggerating the 
poet's rhythmic effects. Musical rhythm cannot be studied 
on a sound basis unless its radical divergences from speech- 
rhythm are recognized from the outset. 

In the earliest extant musical settings of poetry the treatment 
of accent and quantity was strictly arithmetical ; and purely 
aesthetic requirements were satisfied by ex post facto inference 
from the arithmetical laws, rather than treated as the basis of 
the laws. Accent, when translated into music, is a rhythmic 
sensation resembling the stress we put on the left foot in march- 
ing; while quantity rarely suggests any bodily movement at 
all, since it can correspond only to variations in the length of 
steps. Now in modern music a sense akin to that of bodily 
movement is of overwhelming importance. Changes of tempo, 
and of the grouping of musical beats, are incidents as obvious 
in their effect as changes in the pace of a running horse. One 
consequence is that the laws of musical accent are simple and 
cogent, while the laws of musical quantity, if such exist, are far 
beyond analysis. Fluent speech and energetic physical exercise 
cannot be carried on simultaneously by the same person; and 
hence the laws of quantity belong to speech rather than to dance. 
Before we could form adequate notions of the musical rhythms 
of classical Greece, we should need to settle, firstly, how far the 
dancing in Greek drama included movements other than ideal- 
ized dramatic gesticulation; secondly, how much bodily energy 
was involved in all dancing that may have gone beyond this; 
and lastly, how much dancing of any kind was executed by the 
singers while singing. What is certain is that ancient Greek 
musical rhythms were exact translations of verse rhythms, 
with the quantities interpreted arithmetically. 

The extant fragments of Greek music are, whether we have 
read them correctly or not, undoubtedly very different in rhythm 
from the system of discant on which European music of the 
1 2th and 13th centuries first developed; but they resemble 
discant in so far as the modern sense of rhythm is absent and 
its place is supplied by a sense of the rhythmic expression of 
unusually slow and emphatic speech. In ordinary speech there 
is an important difference between long syllables and short; 
but it is not naturally regulated by an exact rhythm, and the 
art by which it is organized in verse admits (or indeed demands) 
considerable freedom on the part of the reciter in varying his 
pace within such limits as do not destroy the structure of the 
lines. But when a chorus is made to sing words, it must, if the 
words are to reach the hearer, sing them slowly; and moreover, 
it must sing them exactly together, unless, as in much classical 
music, it can repeat them until they are either understood or 
dismissed from the mind as a mere pretext for the employment 
of voices in a merely musical design. In any case^ if a chorus 
is to sing well together, the contrast between short and long 
syllables must be placed on an arithmetical basis, the simpler 
the better. Now the sole function of ancient Greek music was 
to enhance the emotional effect of poetic words by regulating 
their rise and fall in a musical scale and their length in a metrical 
scheme; and it was natural and right that its rhythms should, 
though accurate, have no stronger ictus than those of the words. 
To make them as rigid and forcible as the rhythms of a non-vocal 
music would produce an effect as intolerable to a Greek ear as 
a schoolboy's worst jog-trotting scansion of poetry. We need 
not, then, imagine that the human sense of rhythm has suffered 
any mysterious change, when our best attempts at deciphering 
the extant fragments of ancient Greek music yield us a rhythm 



which scholars can explain by the structure of Greek verse, but 
which gives us no musical sense. Neither here nor in such 
strange harmonic phenomena as our complete inversion of 
medieval harmonic ideas as to the treatment of " perfect con- 
cords " (see Harmony) do we find any principle involved which 
is not as true at the present day as it ever was. Ancient musical 
rhythm shared in the general qualities of that " Flatland " 
which we know ancient music to have been; modern musical 
rhythm, like harmony, belongs, as it were, to a three-dimensioned 
musical space with the vast artistic resources of a consistent' 
perspective. 

Indeed, we need much the same kind of mental gymnastic 
in studying the origins of musical rhythm as we need for the 
much more abstruse subject of harmonic origins. The two 
subjects soon begin to show interaction. During the period of 
discant we find metrical conceptions already strongly modified 
by two purely musical factors. Firstly, the attempt to make 
voices produce a harmony from different simultaneous melodies 
(instead of from combinations conceived as disguised unison) 
brought with it the necessity for differences of length enormously 
larger than any possible metrical differences. The metrical 
influence, however, still so predominated, even in the 14th 
century, as to produce a rhythm based almost exclusively on 
what would now be called triple time. Secondly, that sense of 
bodily movement, for which the less clumsy term " dance- 
rhythm " is far too narrow, gained ground as the only means 
powerful enough to hold the various rhythms of the new and 
growing polyphony together. In the later stages of discant the 
old metrical conceptions struggled against the grain of the 
polyphony for awhile, only to succumb in a tangle of inextricable 
technicality: and the new art, which became coherent in the" 
15th century, disregarded poetic metre, with little or no loss in 
capacity to interpret words if the composer had leisure or desire 
to do so; since, after all, poetic rhythm in its highest forms has a 
subtle freedom which renders mechanical musical translation 
worse than useless, while the rhythmic swing of the lighter forms 
of poetry was soon discovered by the composers of the " Golden 
Age " to be practically identical with the refined dance-rhythm 
which they in their lighter moments idealized from folk-music. 1 

By the middle of the 15th century polyphony attained 
such independence that the only rhythms which would hold 
the flow of independent melodious voices together were those 
in which a steadily duple or steadily triple rhythm (either of 
which might be subdivided by the other or by itself) could be 
felt as an absolutely regular musical tread. Such a rhythm 
is capable of expressing every poetic foot, either by the differ- 
ence of stress between notes or by a difference in their length. 
Moreover, emphasis may be obtained by the pitch of the note, 
or, again, by its harmonic significance. All these forms of 
emphasis combine and counteract each other in an infinite 
variety, till the sense of musical movement becomes as remote 
from crude dance-rhythm as it is from poetic metre. But 
though the part thus played by accent was already of para- 
mount importance in the " Golden Age " of music, it was not 
allowed to become evident to the ear except in the lighter 
and more coarse-grained art-forms. Its highest purpose was 
served as soon as the listener was able to lose all crude rhythmic 
impulses in a secure feeling that the mass of polyphonic harmony 
was held together by a general grouping of the rhythmic beats 
in fours or threes; and individual parts were at least as free 
to indulge in other rhythms across the main rhythm as they 
are in the most complex modern music, so long as the harmony 
was held together by the average grouping, or " time," as we 
now call it. Hence the rhythmic variety of 16th-century 

1 It would be interesting and fruitful to consider how far the 
growing preference, In modern European languages^ of accent^ to 
quantity, may not only have modified the conception of musical 
rhythm, but may itself have been enhanced by the rhythmic tend- 
encies of popular song, which had so great an influence on the learned 
music of the middle ages. • And it can hardly be said that the 
subject of musical rhythm has yet been so clearly treated on these 
lines as to shed the light it seems capable of shedding upon many 
vexed questions in poetic rhythm. , 



RHYTHM 



279 



music is exactly like the harmonic variety, and the limitations 
and waywardness of the one are no more archaic than those of 
the other. 

When the resources of later music and the treatment of 
instruments necessitated the publishing of music in score as 
well as in separate parts, it became necessary to guide the eye 
by drawing vertical lines (" bars ") at convenient distances. 
Hence the term " score " (Ger. Partitur, Fr. partition). These 
divisions naturally coincided with the main rhythmic groups, 
and eventually became equidistant. This purely practical 
custom has co-operated with the great increase of rhythmic 
firmness necessary for the coherence of those large modern 
forms which decree the shape rather than the texture of the 
music, until our notions of rhythm may fairly be described 
as bar-ridden. And, since the vast majority of our musical 
rhythms absorb the utmost complexity of detail into the most 
square and symmetrical framework possible, we are taught to 
regard the " 4-bar period " as a normal (or even ultimate) 
rhythmic principle, instead of contenting ourselves with broader 
conceptions which treat symmetry and proportion in time as 
freely as they are treated in space. It cannot be too strongly 
emphasized that the bar indicates no universal musical principle. 
The havoc wrought by mechanical teaching on this point is 
incalculable, especially in the childish crudeness of current 
ideas as to the declamation of words in classical and modern 
music: ideas which mislead even some composers who might 
have been expected to know better. 

As rhythm is contemplated in larger measures, it becomes 
increasingly difficult to say where the "sense of rhythm ends 
and the sense of proportion begins. The same melody that 
may be felt as a square and symmetrical piece of proportion 
in four-bar rhythm if it is taken slowly, wiU be equally rational 
as a single bar of " common time " (see below) if it is taken 
very quickly; and between these two extremes there may be 
insensible gradations. All that can be laid down is that com- 
posers are apt to use short bars where they demand constant 
strong accent, while long bars will imply smoother rhythms. For 
example, if the scherzo of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony were 
written in V instead of J bars, then the passages now marked 
Ritmo di tre battute would have to appear in J time, and so 
the changes of rhythm would be much more visible on paper. 
But the tendency to put a strong accent on the first beat of 
every bar would make this notation an undesirable substitute 
for Beethoven's, since it would lead to a neglect of the sub- 
ordinate accents (all of them bar-accents, as Beethoven writes 
them). The trio of this scherzo shows the opposite case in the 
fact that Beethoven first intended to write it in J time, but, 
in order to indicate a more tranquil flow at the same pace, 
doubled the quantity contained in a bar, substituting alia 
breve bars, each equal to two of the preceding J bars. The 
alteration produced a discrepancy in the metronome marks, 
which has always caused controversy among conductors, but 
the facts admit of only one interpretation. It is clear, then, 
that the only sound theory of musical rhythm will be that in 
which accent, beat, bar, and even form and proportion are 
relative terms. 

The kinds of time (i.e. rhythmic groups forming, as it were, 
invariable molecules in the structure of any continuous piece of 
music) that are used in all music from the 15th century onwards 
are nowadays classified as duple and triple, and each of these may 
be simple or compound. Simple time is that in which the normal 
subdivision of its beats is by two, whether the number of the beats 
themselves is duple or triple. Compound time is that in which 
the beats are regularly divided by three, which three subdivisions 
are reckoned as subordinate beats. The beats are in all kinds of 
time reckoned as halves, quarters, 8ths, i6ths or even 32nds of the 
standard note in modern music, the semibreve: and the time- 
signature placed at the beginning of a piece of music is really a 
fraction, of which the numerator expresses the number of beats in 
a bar, while the denominator expresses the size of a beat. Thus 
J signifies three crotchets in a bar. Compound time is expressed, 
not by using normal fractions of a semibreve as main beats and 
dividing them into triplets? but by using dotted beats. A dot after 

1 Triplets are groups of three equal notes crowded into the time 
normally taken by two. Binary and ternary subdivision answer 



a note adds another half to its value, and so not only do we obtain 
the means of expressing a great variety of rhythmic effects (especi- 
ally quantitative effects of iambic and trochaic character) in all 
kinds of time, but we are able to use normal fractions of a semi- 
breve as the subordinate beats of compound time. Thus % is the 
compound time obtained by dotting the two crotchets of I time, 
and is thus totally different in accent and meaning from J 4 timc 
though that also contains six quavers in a bar. The most highly 
compound times in classical music are to be found in the last move- 
ment of Beethoven's Sonata, Op. in. He begins by dividing bars 
of 8 into their usual compound time ,*. He then divides the 
six half-beats of J time by three, producing 13 (which he in- 
correctly calls ,«), and lastly he divides the 12 quarter-beats by 3, 
producing JJ (which he calls }{). The special signatures C for 
4 time, and C for % time are the last survivals of the time system 
of the middle ages (see Musical Notation). That complicated 
system of mood, time and prolation was capable of expressing 
even more highly compound rhythms than our usual time-signatures, 
though the complexity was in most cases unreal, since the small 
rhythmic ictus of ecclesiastical polyphony renders little but the 
general distinction between duple and triple rhythm audible: 
especially as the more compound rhythms were not subdivisions 
but multiples, involving lengths better measurable by an eight-day 
clock than by human ears. The second Kyrie of Palestrina's 
Missa V Homme Armi is one of the rare cases which remain both 
rhythmic and complex when transcribed in modern score. 1 For 
genuine articulate complexity the ballroom scene in Mozart's 
Don Giovanni has never been surpassed. So real are its three 
simultaneous rhythms of minuet, contredanse and waltz that the 
persons on the stage actually dance to whichever suits their char- 
acter. Anomalous measures such as J and J time, whether 
divisible into alternations of J and J or not, are aesthetically best 
regarded not as rhythmic units, but as extreme cases of unsym- 
metrical phrase-rhythm erected into a system for special effect. 
They tend, however, to group themselves into musical sentences 
of reactionary squareness; and the { movement of Tschaikovsky's 
Pathetic Symphony consists of twenty 8-bar periods (twenty-four, 
counting the repeats) before an unpaired A-bar phrase is heard in 
the short coda. Even the last bar is not odd, though it is the 179th, 
for the rhythm ends with an unwritten 180th bar of silence. 

There is, no doubt, a germ of truth in current doctrine as to 
the fundamental character of 4-bar phrase-rhythms, inasmuch 
as the human anatomy has a bilateral symmetry with either 
limb on one side slightly stronger than that on the other. This 
is probably the basis of our natural tendency to group rhythmic 
units in pairs, with a stress on the first of each pair; and hence, 
if our attention is drawn to larger groups, we put more stress 
on the first of the first pair than on the first of the second; 
and so with still greater groups, until our immediate and un- 
analysed sense of rhythm merges into a sense of proportion 
distributed through time with a clear consciousness of past, 
present and future. The point at which this merging takes 

every ordinary purpose of musical rhythm, "being capable of expres- 
sing clear distinctions^ far more minute than have ever been regu- 
lated in speech. It is impossible to pronounce a syllable in less than 
a tenth of a second; but it is easy to play 16 notes in a second on 
the pianoforte. (That is to say, musical rhythm continues to be 
measurable up to the point at which atmospheric vibrations coalesce 
in the ear as low musical notes!) In a series of such rapid notes 
a single break twice in a second would have a very obvious rhythmic 
effect directly measured by the ear. If the broken series were 
levelled into an even series of fourteen notes a second, the rhythmic 
effect would be entirely different, though the actual difference of 
pace would be only ^ of a second. The special sign for triplets 
is readily adapted to other subdivisions where necessary; but such 
adaptation generally indicates rather a freedom of declamatory 
rhythm than any abstruse arithmetical accuracy. Among the 
worst barbarisms in musical editing is the persistent reduction of 
Chopin's septoles, groups of 13 and other indeterminables, into 
mutton-cutlet frills.^ A natural freedom in performance is as 
necessary for the minutiae of musical rhythm as it is in speech; 
but where all but the finest players fail is in basing this freedom on 
the superlative accuracy of the rhythmic notation of the great 
composers. 

1 In the critical edition of Palestrina's complete works, vol. xii. 
p. 177 (Breitkopf and Hartcl), the editor has violently simplified it. 
He is justified in using the ordinary <£ bars to hold the piece together, 
and he is not called upon to reproduce the riddles of the original 
notation; but some secondary time signatures oughtto have been 
added to indicate the strong swing of the tunc in its conflicting 
shapes; and there is no justification, in a full score intended for 
scholars, in supplanting the true rhythm of the quintus by a rough 
practical compromise. 



28o 



RHYTINA 



place depends on the extent to which these larger groups can 
dominate the details of the rhythm, and this again depends 
on the listener's capacity for grasping large and slow rhythms. 
In any case, the only " ultimate " rhythmic element is the 
tendency to mark off rhythmic beats into pairs, with a stress 
on the first of each pair. Where this tendency is resisted, the 
mind will follow the line of least resistance, which will vary 
according to the pace and detail of the music. Thus in rapid 
triple time it is easier to seek duple rhythm in the grouping of 
bars than in the details within the bars; but if the groups of 
bars are also triple, or irregular, the mind will fix on the first 
recurring salient feature for a secondary beat, regardless of 
inequality in length; rather than, so to speak, hop on one leg 
indefinitely. On this principle there is a distinct tendency 
in moderate and slow triple times to throw a secondary accent 
on the third beat; or sometimes on the second, as in the spring- 
ing step of the mazurka, where the spring gives energy to the 
first beat and the descent from it gives poise to the second. 
• The tendency of small rhythmic groups to build themselves 
into large and square ones, such as 8-bar, 16-bar and even 
3 2-bar periods, is doubtless important ; but the converse 
tendency of large phrase-rhythms to break up in a tapering 
series is far more significant, since even in its most regular 
forms it not only produces more variety the further it goes, 
but always increases in obvious effect, until the subdivisions 
attain the minuteness (and therewith the expression) of speech 
rhythms. (A crude example of the device is Diabelli's waltz, 
on which Beethoven wrote his gigantic 33 variations. See 
Variations, where the point is illustrated by a diagram.) 
Regularly expanding rhythm, on the other hand, not only 
becomes imperceptible as it is carried further, but tends merely 
to make musical proportions resemble those of a chess-board. 
In great music the expanding principle is therefore always 
contrasted with or modified by the tapering principle, which 
can indeed exist simultaneously with it and with any other. 
For, to take only three categories, the harmonic changes of a 
passage may be designed in tapering rhythm while the melodic 
phrases expand, and the entries of instruments or parts occur 
on some third principle, regular or irregular. Such interplay 
need produce no feeling of complexity; indeed, it is an art 
most neglected by those composers who most rely on the effect 
of complex rhythm. It is the main discoverable source of 
that almost dramatic sense of movement that distinguishes 
the great musical styles from the academic methods which play 
for safety, and from the anti-academic novelties which end in 
monotony. 

Square rhythms become desirable at climaxes where physical 
energy dominates thought. Strong final cadences accordingly 
require that the last chord should fall on an accent; and if the 
pace is rapid the final chord will probably be not only on an 
accented beat but on an accented bar. Thus it is quite obvious 
that there is by a mere oversight one bar too many in the four 
bars of tremolo quavers at the end of the first movement of 
Beethoven's Fourth Symphony; for they are followed by an 
important bar leading to "the last three chords, which chords 
can only mean (counting bars as beats) — " One, two, Three " 
(" four" being silent and therefore unwritten). A fifth bar of 
tremolo would correct the rhythm in a more vigorous but more 
vulgar way by bringing the last chord onto " One " of the next 
imaginary group of four. The former correction is so obviously 
right that the imagination makes it in spite of the presence of 
the superfluous bar, which is instinctively ignored as an accidental 
prolongation of the tremolo. Where the composer writes in 
bars so short as to be permanently less than the phrases of the 
piece (as in Beethoven's scherzos), or in bars that are frequently 
longer than the phrases (as in most of Mozart's movements in 
slow or moderate common time) , it sometimes becomes impossible 
to construe the music without carefully calculating where the 
accents come; and this calculation is most easily made on the 
assumption that the strongest cadences bring the tonic chord 
on an accent. Thus, in Beethoven's Sonata in E flat, Op. 27, 
No. 1, the first bar of the second movement must be preliminary 



and the first accent must come on the second bar, since the piece* 
refuses to make sense in any other way. Indeed, Beethoven 
has written some notes twice over in order to bring his double- 
bars and repeat-marks where they will indicate the true rhythmic 
joints to the eye. (A double-bar is a mere graphic indication 
of some important sectional division, not necessarily rhythmic 
or even coincident with a normal bar-stroke.) 

Theorists, however, have developed a tendency to assume 
that all cadences must be strong. More than one critic has 
told us that the scherzo of Beethoven's Sonata, Op. 28, is in the 
same predicament as that of Op. 27, No. 1; though it not only 
makes excellent sense with its cadences in the light and weak 
form in which they appear, but, when reconstrued on the " strong 
cadence " theory, entirely fails in its middle portion to uphold 
that theory or to make any other rhythmic sense. And when 
Professor Prout tells us that the overture to Figaro begins with a 
silent bar, and that Schubert's Impromptu in B flat is positively 
ungrammatical in its cadences unless it is entirely rebarred, 
and when Dr Riemann turns half the ritornello of a Bach con- 
certo from -J into f time, simply in order to make the sequences 
coincide with the hardest possible accents; then we can only 
protest that this is regulating musical aesthetics by criteria too 
crude for the aesthetics of bricklaying. An edition of Paradise 
Lost, in which the lines were so rearranged as to bring all punctua- 
tion marks (except perhaps commas) at the end of the line, 
would be on precisely the same level of ingenious barbarity. 

Few technical terms are entirely peculiar to the subject of 
musical rhythm; but some obvious terms of syntax, such as 
phrase, period and section are used with varying degrees of system 
by all writers on music; and the whole terminology of prosody 
has been annexed — with such success that we are told in Grove's 
Dictionary (article , " Metre ") that " the theme of Weber's 
Rondo brillante in E flat (Op. 62) is in Anapaestic Tetrameter 
Brachycatalectic, very rigidly maintained." 

One important term has acquired a special significance in 
music: viz. Syncopation. It means a cross-accent of such 
strength as to equal or even suppress the main accent; but the 
use of the term is generally restricted to cases in which the cross- 
accent is produced by shifting the notes of a melody or a formula 
so that they fall between the beats instead of upon them. From 
what we have said as to the almost physical energy of musical 
rhythm it is obvious that such a phenomenon is of far greater 
effect and importance in music than it could possibly be in 
verse; and, to whichever subject the term may belong by 
priority, extreme caution is needed in extending any musical 
notion of it to the structure of poetry. (D. F. T.) 

RHYTINA, a name applied to the northern sea-cow (Rhylina 
gigas f or stelleri) } a gigantic relative of the manati and dugong, 
which formerly inhabited Bering and Copper Islands, in the 
North Pacific, where it was discovered during Bering's voyage 
in 1 741, and subsequently described by Steller, who accompanied 
that expedition as a naturalist. Bering's half-starved sailors 
soon reduced the numbers of these comparatively helpless 
creatures; and it was not long after — probably about the year 
1768 — that the species, which was the sole representative of 
its genus, became completely exterminated. The Rhytina was 
the largest member of the order Sirenia, attaining a length of 
nearly twenty feet; and had a very thick, rugged, bark-like 
skin. The jaws, which are bent downwards to a moderate 
extent, are unprovided with teeth, but in life carried ridged 
horny plates. The tail was very deeply forked; and the 
flippers were short and truncated, lacking apparently the 
terminal joints of the digits. 

When first discovered, this Sirenian was extremely numerous 
in the bays of Bering Island, where it browsed upon the abundant 
sea-tangle. Its extirpation is due to the Russian sailors and 
traders who visited the island in pursuit of seals and sea-otters, 
and who subsisted on its flesh. Numbers of bones have been 
discovered in the soil of Bering and Copper Islands, from which 
more or less nearly perfect skeletons have been reconstructed, 
so that the osteology of this interesting animal is well represented 
in most of the larger museums. (R. L.*) 



RIANSARES— RIBADENEIRA 



281 



RIANSARES, AUGUSTIN FERNANDEZ MUflOZ, Duke of 
(1808 or 1810-1873), morganatic husband of Maria Christina, 
queen and regent of Spain, was born at Taranc6n, in the 
province of Cuenca, in New Castile. His father was the keeper of 
an " estanco " or office for the sale of the tobacco of the govern- 
ment monopoly. He enlisted in the bodyguard, and attracted 
the attention of the queeri. According to one account, he 
distinguished himself by stopping the runaway horses of her 
carriage; according to another, he only picked up her hand- 
kerchief; a third, and scandalous explanation of his fortune 
has been given. It is certain that the queen married him 
privately, very soon after the death of her husband on the 
29th of September 1833. By publishing her marriage, Maria 
Christina would have forfeited the regency; but her relations 
with Mufioz were perfectly well known. When on the 13th of 
August 1836 the soldiers on duty at the summer palace, La 
Granja, mutinied and forced the regent to grant a constitution, 
it was generally, though wrongly, believed that they over- 
came her reluctance by seizing Mufioz, whom they called her 
" guapo" or fancy man, and threatening to shoot him. When 
in 1840 the queen found her position intolerable and fled the 
country, Mufioz went with her and the marriage was published, 
and on the overthrow of Espartero in 1843 the couple returned. 
In 1844 Queen Isabella II., who was now declared to be of 
^ge, gave her consent to her mother's marriage, which was 
publicly performed. Munoz was created duke of Riansares 
and made a knight of the Golden Fleece. By Louis Philippe, 
king of the French, he was created duke of Mont-Morot and 
Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour. Until his wife was 
finally driven from Spain by the revolutionary movement of 
1854, the duke is credibly reported to' have applied himself 
to making a large fortune out of railway concessions and 
by' judicious stock exchange speculations. Political ambi- 
tions he had none, and it is said that he declined the offer 
of the crown of Ecuador. All authorities agree that he was 
not only good-looking, but kindly 'and well-bred. He died 
five years before his wife at L'Adresse, near Havre, on the 
nth of September 1873. Several children were born of the 
marriage. 

- RIAZ PASHA (c. 1835- ), Egyptian statesman, born 
about 1835, was of a Circassian family, but said to be of Hebrew ! 
extraction. Little is known of his early life save that until 
the accession of Ismail Pasha to the vice-royalty of Egypt in 
1863 he occupied a humble position. Ismail, recognizing in 
this obscure individual a capacity for hard work and a strong 
will, made him one of his ministers, to find, to his chagrin, 
'that Riaz was also an honest man possessed of a remarkable 
independence of character. When Ismail's financial straits 
compelled him to agree to a commission of inquiry Riaz was 
the only Egyptian of known honesty sufficiently intelligent 
and patriotic to be named as a vice-president of the com- 
mission. He filled this office with distinction, but not to the 
liking of Ismail. The khedive, however, felt compelled, when 
as a sop to his European creditors he assumed the position 
of a constitutional monarch, to nominate Riaz as a member 
of the first Egyptian cabinet. For the few months this 
government lasted (September 1878 to April 1879) Riaz was 
minister of the interior. When Ismail dismissed the cabinet 
and attempted to resume autocratic rule, Riaz had to flee 
the country. Upon the deposition of Ismail, June 1879, Ri az 
was sent for by the British and French controllers, and he 
formed the first ministry under the khedive Tewfik. His 
administration, marked by much ability, lasted only two 
years, and was overthrown by the agitation which had for 
figure-head Arabi Pasha (q.v.). The beginnings of this move- 
ment Riaz treated as of no consequence. In reply to a warning 
of what might happen he said, " But this is Egypt; such things 
do not happen; you say they have happened elsewhere, 
perhaps, but this is Egypt." On the evening of the 9th of 
September 188 1, after the military demonstration in Abdin 
Square, Riaz was dismissed; broken in health he went to 
Europe, remaining at Geneva until the fall of Arabi. After 



that event Riaz, subordinating his vanity to his patriotism, 
accepted office as minister of the interior under Sherif Pasha 
(q.v.). Had Riaz had his way Arabi and his associates would 
have been executed forthwith, and when the British insisted 
that clemency should be extended to the leaders of the revolt 
Riaz refused to remain in office, resigning in December 1882. 
He took no further part in public affairs until 1888, when, on 
the dismissal of Nubar Pasha (q.v.) t he was summoned to 
form a government. He now understood that the only policy 
possible for an Egyptian statesman was to work in harmony 
with the British agent (Sir Evelyn Baring — afterwards Lord 
Cromer). This he succeeded in doing to a large extent, wit- 
nessing if not initiating the practical abolition of the corvSe 
and many other reforms. The appointment of an Anglo-Indian 
official as judicial adviser to the khedive was, however, opposed 
by Riaz, who resigned in May 1891. In the February follow- 
ing he again became prime minister under Abbas II., being 
selected as comparatively acceptable both to the khedivial 
and British parties. In April 1894 Riaz finally resigned office 
on account of Ill-health. Superior, probably, both intellectually 
and morally to his great rival Nubar, he lacked the latter's 
broad statesmanship as well as his pliability. Riaz's stand- 
point was that of the benevolent autocrat; he believed that 
the Egyptians were not fitted for self-government and must 
be treated like children, protected from ill-treatment by 
others and prevented from injuring themselves. In 1889 
he was made an honorary G.C.M.G. A worthy tribute to 
Riaz was paid by Lord Cromer in his farewell speech at Cairo 
on the 4th of May 1907. " Little or no courage is now re- 
quired," said Lord Cromer, " on the part of a young Egyptian 
who poses as a reformer, but it was not always so. Ismail 
Pasha had some very drastic methods of dealing with those 
who did not bow before him. Nevertheless, some thirty years 
ago Riaz Pasha stood forth boldly to protest against the mal- 
administration that then prevailed 'in Egypt. He was not 
.afraid to belLthe cat." 

RI B (from O. Eng. ribb ; the word appears in many 
Teutonic languages, cf. Gcr. Rippe, Swed. reb), in anatomy, 
the primary meaning, one of the series of elastic arched bones 
(costae) which form the casing or framework of the thorax 
(see Skeleton: Axial). The word is in meaning transferred 
,to many objects resembling a rib in shape or function. In 
architecture, it is thus used of the arches of stone which in 
medieval work constitute the skeleton of the vault, and carry 
the shell or web. Although in the Roman vault the rib played 
an important element in its construction, it was generally 
hidden in the thickness of the vault and was made subservient 
to its geometrical surfaces. The Gothic masons, on the other 
hand, reversed the process, and not only made the vaulting 
• surface subservient to the rib, but by mouldings . rendered 
,the latter a highly decorative feature. The principal ribs 
are the transverse (arc doubleau), the diagonal (arc ogive) 
and the wall rib (former et). Those of less importance are 
the intermediate, the ridge and Heme ribs. The ridge-rib 
is one first introduced into the vault to resist the thrust of 
the intermediate ribs between the wall and diagonal ribs; 
it also served to mark the junction of the filling-in or web 
of vaults in those cases where the courses dipped toward the 
diagonal rib. (See Vault.) A Heme rib (the term is borrowed 
from the French) is a short rib, introduced into the vaulting 
in the Early Perpendicular period, which coupled together 
the transverse and intermediate ribs; in the later period the 
" Heme " rib becomes one of the chief features of the " steUa " 
vault (see further Vault). 

RIBADENEIRA, PEDRO A. (1527-1611), hagiologist, was 
bom at Toledo on the 1st of November 1527. As a lad he 
repaired to Rome for study, and there on the 18th of September 
1540 was admitted by Ignatius Loyola, in his thirteenth 
year, as one of the Society of Jesus, which had not yet t re- 
ceived papal sanction. He pursued his studies at Paris (1542) 
in philosophy and theology. Loyola, in 1555, sent him on a 
mission to Belgium; in pursuance of it he visited England in 



282 



RIBALD— RIBBON-FISHES 



1558. A later result of his visit was his Historia Ecclesiastica 
del scistna del Reyno de Inglaterra (1588-1594), often reprinted, 
and used in later editions of N. Sander's De Origine et Pro- 
gressu Schismatis Anglicanu In 1560 he was made Provincial 
of the Society of Jesus in Tuscany, thence transferred as Pro- 
vincial to Sicily in 1563, again employed in Flanders, and 
from 1571 in Spain. In 1574 he settled in Madrid, where 
he died on the 10th of September 1611. His most important 
work is the Life of Loyola (1572), which he was the first to 
write. In his first edition of the Life, as also in the second 
enlarged issue (1587), Ribadeneira affirmed that Loyola had 
wrought no miracle, except the foundation of his Society 
(thus making his claim parallel with that of Mahomet, whose 
only miracle, originally, was the Koran). In the process for 
the canonization of Loyola, a narrative published by Riba- 
deneira in 1600 exhibited miracles; and these are recorded 
in an abridgment of the Life by Ribadeneira (published post- 
humously in 161 2) with a statement by Ribadeneira that he 
had known of them in 1572 but was not then satisfied of their 
proof. For this change of opinion he is taken to task by Bayle. 
That Ribadeneira was, though an able, a very credulous writer, 
is shown by his lives of the successors of Loyola in the general- 
ship of the Society, Lainez and Borgia; and especially by 
his Flos Sanctorum (1599-1610), a collection of saints' lives, 
entirely superseded by the labours of the Bollandists. His 
other works are numerous but of little moment, including 
his Tratado de la religion (1595), intended as a refutation of 
MachiavehTs Prince. 

See his autobiography in his Bibliotheca Scriptorum Societatis Jesu 
(1602 and 1608, supplemented by P. Alegambe and N.Sotwell in 1676) ; 
N. Antonio, Biotheca Hispana Nova (1788); Biographie Universale 
(Michaud) (1 842-1 865). (A. Go.*) 

' RIBALD, a word now only used in the sense of jeering, 
irreverent, abusive, particularly applied to the uses of low, 
offensive or mocking jests. It has an interesting early history, 
of which Du Cange (Gloss, s.v. Ribaldi) gives a full account. 
It is one of those words, like the Greek rvpavvos, an uncon- 
stitutional ruler, and the Latin latro, a hired soldier, mercenary, 
later robber, which have acquired a degraded and evil sig- 
nificance. The ribaldi were light-armed soldiers, on whom 
fell the duty of being first in attack, the enfans perdus or " for- 
lorn hope " of the armies of the French kings; thus Rigordus, 
in his contemporary history of the reign of Philip Augustus, 
for the year 1189, speaks of the Ribaldi . . . qui primos im- 
petus in expuguandis munilionibus facere consueverunt. Later 
we find the ribaldi among the rabble of camp-followers of 
an army, and Giovanni Villani, in his 16th-century Chronicle 
(11, 139), speaks of ribaldi et i raguazzi del koste, and Froissart 
of the ribaux as the lowest ranks in an army. Ribaldus (ribaut) 
was thus a common name for everything ruffianly and aban- 
doned, and Matthew Paris (Ann. 1251) says: Fures, exules, 
fugitivi, excommunicati, quos omnes Ribaldos Francia vulgariter 
consuevit appellare. The name (ribaldae or ribaldi) was particu- 
larly applied to prostitutes, brothel-keepers and all who fre- 
quent haunts of vice, and there was at the French court from 
the 12th century an official, known as Rex Ribaldorum, king 
of the ribalds, changed in the reign of Charles VI. to Prae- 
positus Hospitii Regis, whose duty was to investigate and hold 
judicial inquiry into all crimes committed within the precincts 
of the court, and control vagrants, prostitutes, brothels and 
gambling-houses. The etymology of the word has been much 
discussed, and no certainty can be arrived at. The termination 
— aid — points to a Teutonic origin, and connexion has been 
suggested with O.H.Ger. Hripd, M.H.Ger. Ribe, prostitute, with 
Ger. reiben, rub, or with rauben, rob. Neither Skeat nor the 
New English Dictionary find any relation to the English " bawd," 
procuress, pander. 

RIBAULT (or Ribaut), JEAN (c. 1520-1565), French 

navigator, famous for his connexion with the early settlement 

• of Florida, was born at Dieppe, probably about 1 520. Appointed 

by Admiral Coligny to the command of an expedition to prepare 

an asylum for French Protestants in America, Ribault sailed 



on the 1 8th of February 1562, with two vessels, and on the 
1st of May landed in Florida at St John's river, or, as he called 
it, Riviere de Mai. Having settled his colonists at Port Royal 
Harbour (now Paris Island, South Carolina), and built Fort 
Charles for their protection, he returned to France to find the 
country in the throes of the Civil War. In 1563 he appears to 
have been in England and to have issued True and Last Discoverie 
of Florida (Hakluyt Soc, vol. vii.). In April 1564 Coligny was 
in a position to despatch another expedition under Rene de 
Laudonniere, but meanwhile Ribault's colony had come to an 
untimely end — the unfortunate adventurers, destitute of sup- 
plies from home, having revolted against their governor and 
attempted to make their way back to Europe in a boat which 
was happily picked up, when they were in the last extremities, 
by an English vessel. In 1565 Ribault was again sent out to 
satisfy Cob'gny as to Laudonniere's management of his new 
settlement, Fort Caroline, on the Riviere de Mai. While he 
was still there the Spaniards, under Menendez de Aviles, though 
their country was at peace with France, attacked the French 
ships at the mouth of the river. Ribault set out to retaliate 
on the Spanish fleet, but his vessels were wrecked by a storm 
near Matanzas Inlet and he had to attempt to return to Fort 
Caroline by land. The fort had by this time fallen into the 
hands of the Spaniards, who had slaughtered all the colonists 
except a few who got off with two ships under Ribault's son. 
Induced to surrender by false assurances of safeguard, Ribault 
and his men were also put to the sword in October 1565. The 
massacre was avenged in kind by Dominique de Gourgues 
(d. 1583) two years later. 

See E. and E. Haag, La France protestante (1 846-1 859); and F. 
Parkman, Pioneers of France in the New World (new ed., 1899). 

RIBBECK, JOHANN CARL OTTO (1827-1898), German 
classical scholar, was born at Erfurt in Saxony on the 23 rd of 
July 1827. Having held professorial appointments at Kiel 
and Heidelberg, he succeeded his tutor Ritschl in the chair of 
classical philology at Leipzig, where he died on the 18th of July 
1898. Ribbeck was the author of several standard works on 
the poets and poetry of Rome, the most important of which are 
the following: Geschichte der rbmischen Dichtung (2nd ed., 
1894-1900); Dieromische Tragodie im Zeitalter der Republik 
(1875); Scaenicae Romanorum Poesis Fragmenta y including the 
tragic and comic fragments (3rd ed., 1897). As a textual critic 
he was distinguished by considerable rashness, and never hesitated 
to alter, rearrange or reject as spurious what failed to reach 
his standard of excellence. These tendencies are strikingly 
shown in his editions of the Epistles and Ars Poetica of Horace 
(1869), theSatires of Juvenal (1859) and in the supplementary 
essay Der echte und unechte Juvenal (1865). In later years, 
however, he became much more conservative. His edition of 
Virgil (2nd ed., 1 894-1 895), although only critical, is a work 
of great erudition, especially the Prolegomena. His biography 
of Ritschl ( 1 879-1 881) is one of the best works of its kind. The 
influence of his tutor may be seen in Ribbeck's critical edition 
of the Miles Gloriosus of Plautus, and Beitrage zur Lehre von den 
lateinischen Partikeln, a work of much promise, which causes 
regret that he did not publish further results of his studies in 
that direction. His miscellaneous Reden und Vortrage were 
published after his death (Leipzig, 1899). He took great interest 
in the monumental Thesaurus Linguae Latinae, and it was 
chiefly owing to his efforts that the government of Saxony was 
induced to assist its production by a considerable subsidy. 

Jhe chief authority for his life is Otto Ribbeck; ein Bild seines 
Lebens aus seinen Brief en (1901), ed. by Emma Ribbeck. 

RIBBON-FISHES .(Trachypteridae), a family of marine 
fishes t readily recognized by their long, compressed, tape-like 
body, short head, narrow mouth and feeble dentition. A high 
dorsal fin occupies the whole length of the back; an anal is 
absent, and the caudal, if present, consists of two fascicles of 
rays of which the upper is prolonged and directed upwards. 
The pectoral fins are small, the ventrals composed of several 
rays, or of one long ray only. Ribbon-fishes possess all the 
characteristics of fishes living at very great depths. They are 



RIBBONISM— RIBBONS 



283 



extremely fragile when found floating on the surface or thrown 
ashore, and rarely in an uninjured condition; the rays of their 




Fig. 1. — Trachypterus taenia* 

fins especially, and the membrane connecting them, are of a 
very delicate and brittle structure. In young ribbon-fishes 
some of the fin-rays are prolonged in an extraordinary degree, 
and sometimes provided with appendages (see fig. 2). There 




Fig. 2. — Young Trachypterus* 

are only two genera in the family, Regalecus, the oar-fish, and 
Trachypterus. In the former the length of the body is about 
fifteen times its depth. The head likewise is compressed, short, 
resembling in its form that of a herring; the eye is large; the 
mouth is small, and provided with very feeble teeth. A long 
many-rayed dorsal fin, of which the very long anterior rays 
form a kind of high crest, extends from the top of the head 
to the end of the tail; the anal and perhaps the caudal 
fins are absent; but the ventrals (and by this the oar-fish is 
distinguished from the other ribbon-fishes) are developed into 
a pair of long filaments, which terminate in a paddle-shaped 
extremity, but are too flexible to assist in locomotion. The 
whole body is covered with a layer of silvery epidermoid sub- 
stance, which easily comes off and adheres to other objects. 




Fig 3. — Oar-fish. 

Oar-fishes are the largest deep-sea fishes^ known, the majority of 
the specimens observed measuring 12 ft. in length; but some are 
recorded to have exceeded 20 ft. Their range in the great depths 
of the ocean seems to extend over all seas, but, however numerous 
they may be in the depths which are their home, it is only by rare 
accident that specimens reach the su'rface. Thus from the coasts of 
Great Britain only about twenty captures are known in the long 
space of a century and a half, and not more than thirteen from those 
of Norway. Oar-fishes have been considered by naturalists to have 



given rise to some of the tales of " sea-serpents," but their size as well 
as the facility with which they are secured when observed render this 
solution of the question of the existence of such a creature im- 
probable. When they rise to the surface of the water they are either 
dead or in a helpless and dying condition. The ligaments and tissues 
by which the bones and muscles were held together whilst the fish 
lived under the immense pressure of great depths have then become 
loosened and torn by the expansion of the internal gases; and it is 
only with difficulty that the specimens can be taken entire out of the 
water, and preserved afterwards. Every specimen found has been 
more or less mutilated; and especially the terminal portion of the 
tail, which seems to end in a delicate tapering filament, has never 
been perfect; — it is perhaps usually lost as a useless appendage at 
a much earlier period of the life of the fish. Of Trachypterus, 
specimens have been taken in the Atlantic, the Mediterranean, at 
Mauritius and in the Pacific. The species from the Atlantic has 
occurred chiefly on the northern coasts, Iceland, Scandinavia, 
Orkneys and Scotland. It is known as T. arcticus, in English the 
deal-fish; its Icelandic name is Vagmaer. Its length is 5 to 8 ft. 
Specimens seem usually to be driven to the shore by gales in 
winter, and are sometimes left by the tide. S. Nilsson, however, 
in Scandinavia observed a living specimen in two or three fathoms 
of water moving something like a flat-fish with one side turned 
obliquely upwards. 

RIBBONISM, the name given to an Irish secret-society 
movement, which began at the end of the 18th century in 
opposition to the Orangemen (q.v.) f and which was represented 
by various associations under different names, organized in 
lodges, and recruited all over Ireland from the lowest classes 
of the people. The actual name of Ribbonism (from a green 
badge worn by its members) became attached to the movement 
later, about r826; and, after it had grown to its height about 
1855, it declined in force, and was practically 'at an end in its 
old form when in 187 1 the Westmeath Act declared Ribbonism 
illegal. See also under Ireland: History. 

RIBBONS. By this name are designated narrow webs, 
properly of silk, not exceeding nine inches in width, used 
primarily for binding and tying in connexion with dress, but also 
now applied for innumerable useful, ornamental and symbolical 
purposes. Along with that of tapes, fringes and other small- 
wares, the manufacture of ribbons forms a special department 
of the textile industries. The essential feature of a ribbon 
loom is the simultaneous weaving in one loom frame of two or 
more webs, going up to as many as forty narrow fabrics in 
modern looms. To effect the conjoined throwing of all the 
shuttles and the various other movements of the loom, the 
automatic action of the power-loom is necessary; and it is 
a remarkable fact that the self-acting ribbon loom was known 
and extensively used more than a century before the famous 
invention of Cartwright. A loom in which several narrow webs 
could be woven at one time is mentioned as having been working 
in Dantzig towards the end of the 16th century. Similar looms 
were at work in Leiden in 1620, where their use gave rise to so 
much discontent and rioting on the part of the weavers that the 
states-general had to prohibit their use. The prohibition was 
renewed at various intervals throughout the century, and in the 
same interval the use of the ribbon loom was interdicted in 
most of the principal industrial centres of Europe. About 
1676, under the name of the Dutch loom or engine loom, it was 
brought to London; and, although its introduction there caused 
some disturbance, it does not appear to have been pro- 
hibited. In 1745, John Kay, the inventor of the fly-shuttle, 
obtained, conjointly with Joseph Stell, a patent for im- 
provements in the ribbon loom; and since that period it has 
benefited by the inventions applied to weaving machinery 
generally. 

• Ribbon-weaving is known to have been established near St 
fitienne (dep. Loire) so early as the nth century, and that town 
has remained the headquarters of the industry. During the 
Huguenot troubles, ribbon-weavers from St fitiennc settled at 
Basel and there established an industry which in modern times 
has rivalled that of the original seat of the trade. Crefcld is the 
centre of the German ribbon industry, the manufacture of black 
velvet ribbon being there a specialty. In England Coventry 
is the most important seat of ribbon-making, which is also prose- 
cuted at Norwich and Leicester. 



284 



RIBEIRA— RIBERA 



RIBEIRA, a town of north-western Spain, in the province 
of Coninna, on the extreme south-west of the peninsula formed 
between the river of Muros y Noya and Arosa Bay. Pop. 
(1000) 12,218. Ribeira is in a hilly country, abounding in 
wheat, wine, fruit, fish and game. Its port is Santa Eugenia 
de Ribeira, on Arosa Bay. The population is chiefly occupied 
in agriculture, cattle-breeding and fisheries. 

RIBEIRO, BERNARDIM (1482-1552), the father of bucolic 
prose and verse in Portugal, was a native of Torrao in the 
Alemtejo. His father, Damiao Ribeiro, was implicated in the 
conspiracy against King John II. in 1484, and had to flee to 
Castile, whereupon young Bernardim and his mother took refuge 
with their relations Antonio Zagalo and D. Ignez Zagalo at 
the Quinta dos Lobos, near Cintra. When King Manoel came 
•to the throne in 1495, he rehabilitated the families persecuted 
by his predecessor, and Ribeiro was able to leave his retreat and 
return to Torrao. Meanwhile D. Ignez had married a rich 
landowner of Estremoz, and in 1503 she was summoned to ' 
court and appointed one of the attendants to the Infanta D. 
Beatriz. Ribeiro accompanied her, and through her influence 
the king took him under his protection and sent him to the 
university of Lisbon, where he studied from 1506 to 1512. When 
he obtained his degree in law, the king showed him further favour 
by appointing him to the post of Escrivao da Catnara, or secretary, 
and later by bestowing on him the habit of the military order 
by Sao Thiago. Ribeiro's poetic career commenced with his 
coming to court, and his early verses are to be found in the 
Cancioneiro Geral of Garcia de Resende (q.v.). He took part in 
the historic Seroes do Pa$o, or palace evening 'entertainments, 
which largely consisted of poetical improvisations; there he met 
and earned the friendship of the poets Sa de Miranda (q.v.) 
and Christovao Falcao (q.v.), who became his literary comrades 
and the confidants of his romance, in which hope deferred and 
bitter disappointment ended in tragedy. Ribeiro had early 
conceived a violent passion for his cousin, D. Joanna Zagalo, 
the daughter of his protectress, D. Ignez; but, though she seems 
to have returned it, her family opposed her marriage to a singer 
and dreamer with small means and prospects, and finally 
compelled her to wed a rich man, one Pero Gato. When the 
latter met a violent death shortly afterwards, D. Joanna retired 
to a house in the country, and it is alleged that Ribeiro visited 
her, and that their amour resulted in the birth of a child. All we 
know positively, however, is that in 1521 the lady went into 
seclusion in the convent of St Clare at Estremoz, where she fell 
a victim to a violent form of insanity, and that she died there 
some years later. It is further alleged that Ribeiro's conduct 
had caused a scandal which led the king to deprive him of his 
office and exile him. But the loss of position and income can 
have added very little to the poignant grief of such a true lover 
and profound idealist as Bernardim Ribeiro. He had poured 
out his heart in five beautiful eclogues, the earliest in Portuguese, 
written in the popular octosyllabic verse; and now, hopeless of 
the future and broken in spirit, he decided to go to Italy, for a 
poet the land of promise. He started early in 1522, and travelled 
widely in the peninsula, and during his stay he wrote his moving 
knightly and pastoral romance Menina e Moqa, ■ in which he 
related the story of his unfortunate passion, personifying himself 
under the anagram of " Bimnarder," and D. Ignez under that 
of " Aonia." When he returned home in 1524, the new king, 
John III., restored him to his former post, and it is said that he 
paid a last visit to his love at St Clare's convent and found her 
in a fit of raving madness. This no doubt preyed on a mind 
already unhinged by trouble, and hastened the decline of his 
mental powers, which had already commenced. About 1534 a 
long illness supervened, and the years that elapsed between that 
year and his death may be described as the night of his soul. 
He was quite unable to fulfil the duties of his orifice, and in 1 549 
the king bestowed upon him a pension for his support; but he 
did not live long to enjoy it, for in 1552 he died insane in All 
Saints Hospital in Lisbon. 

The Menina e Moqa was not printed until after Ribeiro 's 
death, and then first in Ferrara in 1554. On its appearance 



the book made such a sensation that its reading was forbidden, 
because, though it contained nothing heterodox, it disclosed 
a family tragedy which the allegory could not hide. It is 
divided into two parts, the first of which is certainly the work 
of Ribeiro, while as to the second opinion is divided, though 
Dr Theophilo Braga considers it genuine and explains its 
progressive lack of lucidity and order by the mental illness 
of the author. The first part has been ably edited by Dr Jose 
Pessanha (Oporto, 1891). Ribeiro's verses, including his five 
eclogues, which for their sincerity of feeling, simple diction 
and chaste form are unsurpassed in Portuguese literature, 
were reprinted in a limited 6dition de luxe by Dr Xavier da 
Cunha (Lisbon, 1886). 

Authorities. — Visconde Sanches de Baena, Bernardim Ribeiro 
(Lisbon, 1895) ; Dr Theophilo Braga, Bernarditn Ribeiro e Bucolismo 
(Oporto, 1 897), containing a full analysis of Ribeiro's novel (sometimes 
called the Saudades, though it is more commonly described, as here, 
by the initial words of the story, Menina e Mo$a). (E. Pr.) 

RIBERA, GIUSEPPE (1588-1656), commonly called Lo 
Spagnoletto, or the Little Spaniard, a leading painter of the 
Neapolitan or partly of the Spanish school, was born near 
Valencia in Spain, at Xativa, now named S. Felipe, on 12th 
January 1588. His parents intended him for a literary or 
learned career; but he neglected the regular studies, and 
entered the school of the Spanish painter Francisco Ribalta. 
Fired with a longing to study art in Italy, he somehow made 
his way to Rome. Early in the 17th century a cardinal noticed 
him in the streets of Rome drawing from the frescoes on a 
palace facade; he took up the ragged stripling and housed 
him in his mansion. 'Artists had then already bestowed upon 
the alien student, who was perpetually copying all sorts of 
objects in art and in nature, the nickname of Lo Spagnoletto. 
In the cardinal's household Ribera was comfortable but dis- 
satisfied, and one day he decamped. He then betook himself 
to the famous painter Michelangelo da Caravaggio, the head of 
the naturalist school, called also* the school of the Tenebrosi, 
or shadow-painters, owing to the excessive contrasts of light 
and shade which marked their style. The Italian master gave 
every encouragement to the Spaniard, but not for long, as he 
died in 1609. Ribera, who had in the first instance studied 
chiefly from Raphael and the Caracci, had by this time acquired 
so much mastery over the tenebroso style that his performances 
were barely distinguishable from Caravaggio's own. He now 
went to Parma, and worked after the frescoes of Correggio 
with great zeal and efficiency: in the museum of Madrid is his 
" Jacob's Ladder," which is regarded as his chef-d y ceuvre in 
this manner. From Parma Spagnoletto returned to Rome, 
where he resumed the style of Caravaggio, and shortly after* 
wards he migrated to Naples, which became his permanent [home. 

Ribera was as yet still poor and inconspicuous, but a rich 
picture-dealer in Naples soon discerned in him all the stuff of 
a successful painter, and gave him his daughter in marriage. 
This was the turning-point in the Spaniard's fortunes. He 
painted a " Martyrdom of St Bartholomew," which the father- 
in-law exhibited from his balcony to a rapidly increasing and 
admiring crowd. The popular excitement grew to so noisy a 
height as to attract the attention of the Spanish viceroy, the 
Count de Monterey. From this nobleman and from the king 
of Spain, Philip IV., commissions now flowed in upon Ribera. 
With prosperity came grasping and jealous selfishness. Spagno- 
letto, chief in a triumvirate of greed, the " Cabal of Naples," 
his abettors' being a Greek painter, Belisario Corenzio, and a 
Neapolitan, Giambattista Caracciolo, determined that Naples 
should be an artistic monopoly; by intrigue, terrorizing and 
personal violence on occasion they kept aloof all competitors. 
Annibale Caracci, t{ie Cavalier d'Arpino, Guido, Domenichino, 
all of them successively invited to work in Naples, found the 
place too hot to hold them. The cabal ended at the time of 
Caracciolo's death in 1641. 

The close of Ribera's triumphant career has been variously 
related. If we are to believe Dominici, the historian of Nea- 
politan art, he totally disappeared from Naples in 1648 and 



RIBOT, A. F. J.— RIBOT, T. 



285 



was no more heard of — this being the sequel of the abduction 
by Don John of Austria, son of Philip IV., of the painter's 
beautiful only daughter Maria Rosa. But these assertions 
have not availed to displace the earlier and well-authenticated 
statement that Ribera died peaceably and wealthy in Naples 
in 1656. His own signature on his pictures is constantly 
" Jusepc de Ribera, Espafiol." His daughter, so far from 
being disgraced by an abduction, married a Spanish nobleman 
who became a minister of the viceroy. 

The pictorial- style of Spagnolctto is extremely powerful. 
In bis earlier style, founded (as we have seen) sometimes on 
Caravaggio and sometimes on the wholly diverse method of 
Correggio, the study of Spanish and Venetian masters can 
likewise be traced. Along with his massive and predominating 
shadows, he retained from first to last great strength of local 
colouring. His forms, though ordinary and partly gross, are 
correct; the impression of his works gloomy and startling. He 
delighted in subjects of horror. Salvator Rosa and Luca 
Giordano were his most distinguished pupils; also Giovanni Do, 
Enrico Fiammingo, Michelangelo Fracanzani, and Aniello 
Falcone, who was the first considerable painter of battle-pieces. 
Among Ribera 's principal works should be named " St Januarius 
Emerging from the Furnace," in the cathedral of Naples; the 
" Descent from the Cross," in the Neapolitan Certosa, generally 
regarded as his masterpiece; the " Adoration of the Shepherds " 
(a late work, 1650), now in the Louvre; the " Martyrdom of 
St Bartholomew," in the museum of Madrid; the " Pieta," in 
the sacristy of S. Martino, Naples. His mythologic subjects 
are generally unpleasant — such as the " Silenus," in the Studj 
Gallery of Naples, and " Venus Lamenting over Adonis," in 
the Corsini Gallery of Rome. The Louvre contains altogether 
twenty-five of his paintings; the National Gallery, London, 
two — one of them, a " Peita," being an excellent though not 
exactly a leading specimen. He executed several fine male 
portraits; among others his own likeness, now in the collection 
at Alton Towers. He also produced twenty-six etchings, ably 
treated. For the use of his pupils, he drew a number of ele- 
mentary designs, which in 1650 were etched by Francisco 
Fernandez, and which continued much in vogue for a long 
while among Spanish and French painters and students. 

Besides the work of Dominici already referred to (1840-46), the 
Diccionario Historico of Cean Bermudez is a principal authority 
regarding Ribera and his works; also E. de Lalaing, ' Ribera " (in 
Histoire de quatre grands peintres), 1888. (W. M. R.) 

RIBOT, ALEXANDRE F^LIX JOSEPH (1842- ), French 
statesman, was born at St Omer on 7th February 1842. After 
a brilliant career at the university of Paris, where he was 
lauriat of the faculty of law, he rapidly made his mark at the 
bar. He was secretary of the conference of advocates and one 
of the founders of the SociiU de legislation compar&e. During 
1875 and 1876 he was successively director of criminal affairs 
and secretary-general at the ministry of justice. In 1877 he 
made his entry into political life by the conspicuous part he 
played on the committee of legal resistance during the Broglie 
ministry, and in the following year he was returned to the 
chamber as a moderate republican member for Boulogne, in 
his native department of Pas-de-Calais. His impassioned yet 
reasoned eloquence gave him an influence which was increased 
by his articles in the Parlement in which he opposed violent 
measures against the unauthorized congregations. He devoted 
himself especially to financial questions, and in 1882 was 
reporter of the budget. He became one of the most prominent 
republican opponents of the Radical party, distinguishing 
himself by his attacks on the short-lived Gambetta ministry. 
He refused to vote the credits demanded by the Ferry cabinet 
for the Tongking expedition, and shared with M. Clemen ceau 
in the overthrow of the ministry in 1885. At the general 
election of that year he was one of the victims of the Republican 
rout in the Pas-de- Calais, and did not re-enter the chamber 
till 1887. After 1889 he sat for St Omer. His fear of the 
Boulangist movement converted him to the policy of " Re- 
publican Concentration," and he entered office in 1890 as 



foreign minister in the Freycinet cabinet. He had an intimate 
acquaintance and sympathy with English institutions, and two 
of his published works — an address, Biographic de Lord Erskinc 
(1866), and £lude sur Vacte du 5 avril 1873 pour Vttablissement 
.d'une cour supreme de justice en Angleterre (1874) — deal with 
English questions; he also gave a fresh and highly important 
direction to French policy by the understanding with Russia, 
which was declared to. the world by the visit of the French 
fleet to Cronstadt in 1891, and which subsequently ripened 
into a formal treaty of alliance. He retained bis post in the 
Loubet ministry (February-November 1892), and on its defeat 
became himself president of the council, retaining the direction 
of foreign affairs. The government resigned in March 1893 on 
the refusal of the chamber to accept the Senate's amendments* 
to the budget. On the election of Felix Faure as president of 
the Republic in January 1895, M. Ribot again became premier- 
and minister of finance. On the 10th of June he was able to 
make the first official announcement of a definite alliance with 
Russia. On the 30th of October the government was defeated 
on the question of the Chemin de fer du Sud, and resigned 
office. The real reason of its fall was the mismanagement of 
the Madagascar expedition, the .cost of which in men and 
money exceeded all expectations, and the alarming social 
conditions at home, as indicated by -the strike at Carmaux. 
After the fall of the Men'ne ministry in 1898 M. Ribot tried in 
vain to form a cabinet of " conciliation." He was elected, at 
the end of 1898, president of the important commission on 
education, in which he advocated the adoption of a modern 
system of education. The poh'cy of the Waldeck-Rousscau 
ministry on the religious teaching congregations broke .up the 
Republican party, and M. Ribot was among the scceders; 
but at the general election of 1902, though he himself secured 
I re-election, his policy suffered a severe check. He actively 
opposed the policy of the Combes ministry and denounced the 
alliance with M. Jaures, and on the 13th of January 1905 he 
was one of the leaders of the opposition which brought about 
the fall of the cabinet. Although he had been most violent 
in denouncing the anti-clerical policy of the Combes cabinet, 
he now announced his willingness to- recognize a new regime to 
replace the Concordat, and gave the government his support 
in the establishment of the Associations culluedes, while he 
secured some mitigation of the severities attending the separa- 
tion. He was re-elected deputy for St Omer in 1906. In the 
same year he became a member of the French Academy in 
succession to the due d'Audiffret-Pasquier; he was already a 
member of the Academy of Moral and Political Science. In 
justification of his policy in opposition he published in 1905 
two volumes of his Discours politiques. 

RIBOT, THfiODULE (1823-1891), French painter, was born 
at Breteuil, in Eure, in 1823, and died at Bois Colomoes, near 
Paris, in September 1891. A pupil nominally of Glaize, but 
more really of Ribera, of the great Flemings .and of Chardin, 
Theodule Ribot had yet conspicuously his own noble and 
personal vision, his own intensity of feeling and rich sobriety 
of performance. Beginning to work seriously at art when 
he was no longer extremely young, and dying before he was 
extremely old, Ribot crowded into some thirty or thirty-five 
years of active practice very varied achievements; and he 
worked in at least three mediums, oil paint, pencil or crayon 
draughtsmanship and the needle of the etcher. His drawings 
were sometimes " complete in themselves," and sometimes 
fragmentary but powerful preparations for painted canvases. 
The etchings, of which there are only about a couple of dozen, 
are of the middle period of his practice; they show a diversity 
of method as well as of theme; the work in the well-nigh 
Velazquez-like " Priere " — a group of girl children — contrast- 
ing strongly with that process almost of outline alone, which 
he employed in the brilliant little group of prints which record 
his vision of the character and humours of cooks and kitchen- 
boys. In etching, the method varied with .the theme — not 
with the period. It is quite otherwise with the paintings. 
Here the earlier work, irrespective of its subject, is the drier 



286 



RIBOT, T. A.— RICARDO 



and the more austere; the later work, irrespective of its subject, 
the freer and broader. But even in that which is quite early 
there is a curious and impressive intensity of conception and 
presentation. His visions of elderly women and young girls 
remain upon the memory. His women, wrinkled and worn, 
have had the experience of a hard and grinding world; his 
children, his young girls, are the quintessence of innocence 
and happy hopefulness, and life is a jest to his boys. His 
religious pieces, in which Ribera affected him, have conviction 
and force. Into portraits and into character studies, but more 
especially into genre subjects, Ribot was apt to introduce 
Still-life, and to make much of it. Herein, as in his sense of 
homeliness, he resembled Chardin. But again, Chardin-like, 
he painted Still-life for its own sake, by itself, and always with 
an extraordinary sense of the solidity and form, the texture 
and the hue, and, it must be added also, the very charm of 
matter. (F. We.) 

RIBOT, THfiODULE ARMAND (1830-1903), French psycho- 
logist, was born at Guingamp on the 18th of December 1839, 
and was educated at the Lycee de St Brieuc. In 1856 he began 
to teach, and was admitted to the ficole Normale Sup&ieure 
in 1862. In 1885 he gave a course of lectures on " Experi- 
mental Psychology " at the Sorbonne, and in 1888 was ap- 
pointed professor of that subject at the College of France. 
His thesis for his doctor's degree, republished in 1882, Hiriditi: 
itude psychologique (5th ed., 1889), is his most important anc^ 
best known book. Following the experimental and synthetic 
methods, he has brought together a large number of instances 
of inherited peculiarities; he pays particular attention to the 
physical element of mental life, ignoring all spiritual or non- 
material factors in man. In his work on La Psychologie 
anglaise contemporaine (1870), he shows his sympathy with the 
sensationalist school, and again in his translation of Herbert 
Spencer's Principles of Psychology. Besides numerous articles, 
he has written on Schopenhauer, Philosophic de Schopenhauer 
(1874; 7th ed., 1896), and on the contemporary psychology 
of Germany (La Psychologie allemande contemporaine, 1879; 
13th ed., 1898), also four little monographs on Les Maladies 
de la mimoire (1881; 13th ed., 1898); De la volonti (1883; 
14th ed., 1899); De la personnalite* (1885; 8th ed., 1899); 
and La Psychologie de V attention (1888), which supply useful 
data to the student of mental disease. 

Other works by him are: — La Psychologie des sentiments (1896); 
L' Evolution des id6es g6n6rales (1897); Essai sur Vimagination 
crSatrice (1900); La Logique des sentiments (1904); Essai sur les 
passions (1906). Of the above the following have been translated 
into English: — English Psychology (1873); Heredity: a Psycho- 
logical Study of its Phenomena, Laws, Causes, and Consequences 
(1875); Diseases of Memory: An Essay in the Positive Psychology 
(1882); Diseases of the Will (New York, 1884); German Psychology 
of to-day, tr. J. M. Baldwin (New York, 1886) ; The Psychology of Atten- 
tion (Open Court Publishing .Company, Chicago, 1890); Diseases 
of Personality (Chicago, 1895); The Psychology of the Emotions 
(1897); The Evolution of General Ideas, tr. F. A. Welby (Chicago, 
1899); Essay on the Creative Imagination, tr. A. H. N. Baron (1906). 

RICARD, LOUIS GUSTAVE (1823-1873), French painter, 
was born in Marseilles in 1823, and studied first under Auber 
in his native town, and subsequently under Coignet in Paris. 
The formation of his masterly, distinguished style in portraiture 
was, however, due rather to ten years' intelligent copying of 
the old masters at the Louvre and at the Italian galleries, 
than to any school training. He was a master of technique, 
and his portraits — about two hundred — reveal an extra- 
ordinary insight into the character of his sitters. Never- 
theless, for some time after his death his name was almost 
forgotten by the public, and it is only of quite recent years 
that he has been conceded the position among the leading 
masters of the modern French school which is his due. A 
portrait of himself, and one of Alfred de Musset, are at the 
Luxembourg Gallery. Among his best known works are the 
portrait of his mother, and those of the painters Fromentin, 
Heilbuth and Chaplin. 

See Gustave Ricard, by Camille Mauclair (Paris, Librairie de Vart). 



RICARDO, DAVID (1772-1823), English economist, was 
born in London on the 19th of April 1772, of Jewish origin. His 
father, who was of Dutch birth, bore an honourable character 
and was a successful member of the Stock Exchange. At the 
age of fourteen Ricardo entered his father's office, where he 
showed much aptitude for business/ About the time when 
he attained his majority he abandoned the Hebrew faith 
and conformed to the Anglican Church, a change which seems 
to have been connected with his marriage to Miss Wilkinson, 
which took place in 1793. In consequence of the step thus 
taken he was separated from his family and thrown on his 
own resources. His ability and uprightness were known, and 
he at once entered on such a successful career in the pro- 
fession to which he had been brought up that at the age of 
twenty-five, we are told, he was already rich. He now began to 
occupy himself with scientific pursuits, and gave some atten- 
tion to mathematics as well as to chemistry and mineralogy; 
but, having met with Adam Smith's great work, he ■ threw 
himself with ardour into the study of political economy. 

His first publication (1809) was The High Price of Bullion 
a Proof of the Depreciation of Bank Notes. This tract was an 
expansion of a series of articles which the author had con- 
tributed to the Morning Chronicle, It gave a fresh stimulus 
to the controversy, which had for some time been discontinued, 
respecting the resumption of cash payments, and indirectly 
led to the appointment of a committee of the House of 
Commons, commonly known as the Bullion Committee, to 
consider the whole question. The report of the committee 
asserted the same views which Ricardo had put forward, and 
recommended the repeal of the Bank Restriction Act. Not- 
withstanding this, the House of Commons declared in the 
teeth of the facts that paper had undergone no depreciation. 
Ricardo's first tract, as well as another on the same subject, 
attracted much attention. 

In 181 1 he made the acquaintance of James Mill, whose 
introduction to him arose out of the publication of Mill's tract 
entitled Commerce Defended. Whilst Mill doubtless largely 
affected his political ideas, he was, on his side, under obligations 
to Ricardo in the purely economic field; Mill said in 1823 
that he himself and J. R. M'Culloch were Ricardo's disciples, 
and, he added, his only genuine ones. 

In 181 5, when the Corn Laws were under discussion, he 
published his Essay on the Influence of a Low Price of Corn on 
the Profits of Stock. This was directed against a recent tract 
by Malthus entitled Grounds of an Opinion on the Policy 
of Restraining the Free Importation of Foreign Corn. The 
reasonings .of the essay are based on the theory of rent which 
has often been called by the name of Ricardo; but the author 
distinctly states that it was not due to him. " In all that 
I have said concerning the origin and progress of rent I have 
briefly repeated, and endeavoured to elucidate, the principles 
which Malthus has so ably laid down on the same subject in 
his Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent" We now 
know that the theory had been fully stated, before the time 
of Malthus, by Anderson; it is in any case clear that it was 
no discovery of Ricardo. ^Ricardo states in this essay a set of 
propositions, most of them deductions from the theory of rent, 
which are in substance the same as those afterwards embodied 
in the Principles , and regarded as characteristic of his system, 
such as that increase of wages does not raise prices; that 
profits can be raised only by a fall in wages and diminished 
only by a rise in wages; and that profits, in the whole progress 
of society, are determined by the cost of the production of 
the food which is raised at the greatest expense. It does not 
appear that, excepting the theory of foreign trade, anything 
of the nature of fundamental doctrine, as distinct from the 
special subjects of banking and taxation, is laid down in the 
Principles which does not already appear in this tract. We 
find in it, too, the same exclusive regard to the interest of the 
capitalist class, and the same identification of their interest 
with that of the whole nation, which are generally characteristic 
of his writings. 



RICASOLI 



287 



In the Proposals for an Economical and Secure Currency 
(1816) he first disposes of the chimera of a currency without 
a specific standard, and pronounces in favour of a single metal, 
with a preference for silver, as the standard. 

Ricardo 's chief work, Principles of Political Economy and 
Taxation, appeared in 1817. The fundamental doctrine of this 
work is that, on the hypothesis of free competition, exchange 
value is determined by the labour expended in production, — 
a proposition not new, nor, except with considerable limitation 
and explanation, true, and of little practical use, as " amount 
of labour " is a vague expression, and the thing intended 
is incapable of exact estimation. Ricardo 's theory of dis- 
tribution has been briefly enunciated as follows: " (1) The 
demand for food determines the margin of cultivation; 
(2) this margin determines rent; (3) the amount necessary to 
maintain the labourer determines wages; (4) the difference 
between the amount produced by a given quantity of labour 
at the margin and the wages of that labour determines profit." 
These theorems are too absolutely stated, and require much 
modification to adapt them to real life. His theory of foreign 
trade has been embodied in the two propositions: " (1) Inter- 
national values are not determined in the same way as domestic 
values; (2) the medium of exchange is distributed so as to 
bring trade to the condition it would be in if it were conducted 
by barter." 
A considerable portion of the work is devoted to a study 
of taxation, which requires to be considered as a part of the 
problem of distribution. A tax is not always paid by those 
on whom it is imposed; it is therefore necessary to determine 
the ultimate, as distinguished from the immediate, incidence 
of every [form of [taxation. Smith had already dealt with 
this question; Ricardo develops and criticizes his results. 
The conclusions at which he arrives are in the main as follows: 
a tax on raw produce falls on the consumer, but will also 
diminish profits; a tax on rents on the landlord; taxes on 
houses will be divided between the occupier and the ground 
landlord; taxes on profits will be paid by the consumer, and 
taxes on wages by the capitalist. 

In 1819 Ricardo, having retired from business and become 
a landed proprietor, entered parliament^ as member for 
Portarlington. He was at first diffident and embarrassed in 
speaking, but gradually overcame these difficulties, and was 
heard with much attention and deference, especially when 
he addressed the House on economic questions. He probably 
contributed in a considerable degree to bringing about the 
change of opinion on the question of free trade which ulti- 
mately led to the legislation of Sir Robert Peel on that 
subject. 

In 1820 he contributed to the supplement of the Encyclopaedia 
Britannica (6th ed.) an " Essay on the Funding System." In this 
besides giving an historical account (founded on Dr Robert 
Hamilton's valuable work On the National Debt, 1813, 3rd ed., 
1 818) of the several successive forms of the sinking fund, he 
urges that nations should defray their expenses, whether 
ordinary or extraordinary, at the time when they are incurred, 
instead of providing for them by loans. 

In 1822 he published a tract On Protection to Agriculture, 
which is an able application to controversy of the general 
principles laid down in his systematic work. Its arguments 
and conclusions are therefore subject to the same limitations 
which those fundamental principles require. 

In his Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank, published 
posthumously in 1824, he proposes that the issue of the paper 
currency should be taken out of the hands of the Bank of 
England and vested in commissioners appointed by the 
government. The tract describes in detail the measures to 
be adopted for the introduction and working of the system. 
A certain step towards realizing the objects of his scheme, 
though on different lines from Ricardo's, was taken in Sir 
Robert Peel's act of 1844, by which the discount business 
of the bank was separated from the issue department. 

Ricardo died on the nth of September 1823, at bis seat 



(Gatcomb Park) in Gloucestershire, from a cerebral affection 
resulting from disease of the ear. James Mill, who was inti- 
mately acquainted with him, says (in a letter to Napier of 
November 181 8) that he knew not a better man, and on the 
occasion of his death published a highly eulogistic notice of 
him in the Morning Chronicle. A lectureship on political 
economy, to exist for ten years, was founded in commemoration 
of him, M'CulIoch being chosen to fill it. 

In forming a general judgment respecting Ricardo, we must 
have in view not so much the minor writings as the Principles, 
in which his economic system is expounded as a whole. By a 
study of this work we arc led" to the conclusion that he was 
an economist only, not at all a social philosopher in the wider 
sense, like Adam Smith or John Mill. He had great acuteness, 
but little breadth. For any large treatment of moral and 
political questions he seems to have been alike by nature and 
preparation unfitted; and there is no evidence of his having 
had any but the most ordinary and narrow views of the great 
social problems. He shows no trace of that hearty sympathy 
with the working classes which breaks out in several passages 
of the Wealth of Nations; we ought, perhaps, with Held, to 
regard it as a merit in Ricardo that he does not cover with 
fine phrases his deficiency in warmth of social sentiment. 
The idea of the active capitalist having any duties towards 
his employes never seems to occur to him; the labourer is, 
in fact, merely an instrument in the hands of the capitalist, 
a pawn in the game he plays. 

He first introduced into economics on a great scale the 
method of deduction from a priori assumptions. The con- 
clusions so arrived at have often been treated as if they were 
directly applicable to real life, and indeed to the economic 
phenomena of all times and places. But the truth of Ricardo's 
theorems is now by his warmest admirers admitted to be 
hypothetical only. Bagehot seems right in believing that 
Ricardo himself had no consciousness of the limitations to which 
his doctrines are subject. Be this as it may, we now see that 
the only basis on which these doctrines could be allowed to 
stand as a permanent part of economic science is that on which 
they are placed by Roscher, namely, as a stage in the preparatory 
work of the economist, who, beginning with such abstractions, 
afterwards turns from them, not in practice merely, but in the 
completed theory, to real life and men as they actually are or 
have been. 

The criticisms to which Ricardo's general economic scheme 
is open do not hold with respect to his treatment of the subjects 
of currency and banking. These form precisely that branch 
of economics into which moral ideas (beyond the plain pre- 
scriptions of honesty) can scarcely be said to enter, and where 
the operation of purely mercantile principles is most immediate 
and invariable. They were, besides, the departments of the 
study to which Ricardo's early training and practical habits 
led him to give special attention; and they have a lasting 
value independent of his systematic construction. 

Ricardo's collected works were published, with a notice of his 
life and writings, by J. R. M'Culloch in 1846. 

The Principles have been edited (with an introduction, biblio- 
graphy and notes) by E. C. K. Gonner, 1891. See also Letters to 
H. Trower and Others, ed. J. Bonar and J. H. Hollander, 1899; 
Letters to 7. R. M'Culloch, ed. J. H. Hollander, 1895; Letters to 
T. R. Malthus, ed. J. Bonar, 1887. A French translation of the 
Principles by Constancio, with notes by Say, appeared in 1818; 
the whole works, translated by Constancio and Fonteyraud, form 
vol. xiii. (1847) of the Collection des principaux iconomistes, where 
they are accompanied by the notes of Say, Malthus, Sismondi, 
Rossi, &c. The Principles was first " naturalized " in Germany, 
says Roscher (though another version by Von Schmid had pre- 
viously appeared), by Edward Baumstark in his David Ricardo's 
Grundgesetze der Vofksvnrthschaft und der Besteuerung ubersetzt 
und erldutert (1837), which Roscher highly commends, not only 
for the excellence of the rendering, but for the value of the explana- 
tions and criticisms which are added. 

RICASOLI, BETTINO, Baron (1800-1880), Italian statesman, 
was born at Broglio on the 19th of March 1809. Left an orphan 
at eighteen, with an estate heavily encumbered, he was by 
special decree of the grand duke of Tuscany declared of age, and 



288 



RICCATI— RICCI 



entrusted with the guardianship of his younger brothers. In- 
terrupting his studies, he withdrew to Broglio, and by careful 
management disencumbered the family possessions. In 1847 
he founded the journal La PatrtCj and addressed to the grand 
duke a memorial suggesting remedies for the difficulties of the 
state. In 1848 he was elected Gonfaloniere of Florence, but 
resigned on account of the anti-Liberal tendencies of the grand 
duke. As Tuscan minister of the interior in 1859 he promoted 
the union of Tuscany with Piedmont, which took place on"the 
1 2th of March i860. Elected Italian deputy in 186 1 , he succeeded 
Cavour in the premiership. As premier he admitted the Garibal- 
dian volunteers to the regular army, revoked the decree of exile 
against Mazzini, and attempted reconciliation with the Vatican; 
but his efforts were rendered ineffectual by the non possumus 
of the pope. Disdainful of the intrigues of his rival Rattazzi, 
he found himself obliged in 1862 to resign office, but returned 
to power in 1866. On this occasion he refused Napoleon lll.'s 
offer to cede Venetia to Italy, on condition that Italy should 
abandon the Prussian alliance, and also refused the Prussian 
decoration of the Black Eagle because Lamarmora, author of the 
alliance, was not to receive it. Upon the departure of the French 
troops from Rome at the end of 1866 he again attempted to 
conciliate the Vatican with a convention, in virtue of which 
Italy would have restored to the Church the property of the 
suppressed religious orders in return for the gradual payment 
of £24,coo,ooo, " In order to mollify the Vatican he conceded 
the exequatur to forty-five bishops inimical to the Italian r6gime. 
The Vatican accepted his proposal, but the Italian Chamber 
proved refractory, and, though dissolved by Ricasoli, returned 
more hostile than before. Without waiting for a vote, Ricasoli 
resigned office and thenceforward practically disappeared from 
political life > speaking in the Chamber only upon rare occasions. 
He died at Broglio on the 23rd of October 1880. His private life 
and public career were marked by the utmost integrity, and 
by a rigid austerity which earned him the name of the " iron 
baron." In spite of the failure of his ecclesiastical scheme, he 
remains one of the most noteworthy figures of the Italian 
Risorgimento. 

See Tabarrini and Gotti, Lettere e documenti del barone Bettino 
Ricasoli, 10 vols. (Florence, 1886-1894); Passerini, Genealogia 
e storia della r famiglia Ricasoli {ibid. 1861); Gotti, Vita del barone 
Bettino Ricasoli {ibid. 1894). (H. W. S.) 

RICCATI, JACOPO FRANCESCO, Count (1676-1754), Italian 
mathematician, was born at Venice on the 8th of May 1676, 
and died at Treviso on the 15th of April 1754. 
* He studied at the university of Padua, where he graduated in 
1696. His favourite pursuits were scientific, and his authority 
on all questions of practical science was referred to by the 
senate of Venice. He corresponded with many of the European 
savants of his day, and contributed largely to the Ada Erudi- 
toturn of Leipzig. He was offered the presidency of the academy 
of science of St Petersburg; but he declined, preferring the 
leisure and independence of life in Italy. Riccati's name is best 
known in connexion with his problem called Riccati's equation, 
published in the Ada Erudilorum % September 1724. A very 
complete account of this equation and its various transforma- 
tions was given by J. W. L. Glaisher in the Phil. Trans. (1881). 

After Riccati's death his works were collected by his sons and 
published (1758) in four volumes. His sons, Vincenzo (1707- 
1775) and Giordano (1709-1790), inherited his talents. The 
former was professor of mathematics at Bologna, and published, 
among other works, a treatise on the infinitesimal calculus. 
Giordano was distinguished both as* a mathematician and an 
architect. 

RICCI, MATTEO (1552-1610), Italian missionary to China, was 
born of a noble family at Macerata in the March of Ancona on 
the 7th of October 1552. After some education at a Jesuit 
college in his native town he went to study law at Rome, where 
in 1571, in opposition to his father's wishes, he joined the Society 
of Jesus. 

In 1577 Ricci and other students offered themselves for the 
East Indian missions. Ricci, without visiting his family to take 



leave, proceeded to Portugal. His comrades were Rudolfo 
Acquaviva, Nicolas Spinola, Francesco Pasio and Michcle 
Ruggieri, all afterwards, like Ricci himself, famous in the Jesuit 
annals. They arrived at Goa in September 1578. After four 
years spent in India, Ricci was summoned to the task of opening 
China to evangelization. 

f Several fruitless attempts had been made by Xavier, and 
since his death, to introduce the Church into China, — as by 
Melchior Nunes of the Jesuit Society operating from Sanchian 1 
in 1555; by Gaspar da Cruz, a Dominican, in that or the follow- 
ing year; by the Augustinians under Martin Herrada, 1575; 
and in 1579 by the Franciscans led by Pedro d'Alfaro. In 1571 
a house of the Jesuits had been set up at Macao (where the 
Portuguese were established in 1557), but their attention was 
then occupied with Japan, and it was not till the arrival at 
Macao of Alessandro Valignani on a visitation in 1582 that work 
in China was really taken up. For this object he had obtained 
the services first of M. Ruggieri and then of Ricci. After various 
disappointments they found access to Chow-king-fu on the Si- 
Kiang or West River of Canton, where the viceroy of the two 
provinces of Kwang-tung and Kwang-si then had his residence, 
and by his favour were able to establish themselves there for 
some years. Their proceedings were very cautious and tentative; 
they excited the curiosity and interest of even the more intelli- 
gent Chinese by their clocks, their globes and maps, their books 
of European e