Skip to main content
 
 
 
 
 
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "Encyclopædia Britannica 11 ed. Vol. 20 (Ode to Payment of members)"
See other formats



imn 



WM 



1 < i 



■J B? " - J 








=u ' K 1 ' ft ■ '> ■ r 1 1 1 '■ fa alt r 



; : ' ;^ :J " ,vl ■'."'. 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2009 with funding from 

Boston Library Consortium Member Libraries 



http://www.archive.org/details/encyclopdiabri20chis 



THE 



ENCYC 



OP^EDIA BRITANNICA 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



FIRST 


edjU, 


published in 


three volumes, 


1768 — 1771 


SECOND 


>> 




ten ,, 


1777— 1784 


THIRD 


>> 




eighteen ,, 


I738—I797 


FOURTH 


>> 




twenty ,, 


1801 — 1S10 


FIFTH 


>> 




twenty ,, 


1815—1817 


SIXTH 


5) 




twenty ,, 


1823 — 1824 


SEVENTH 


T> 




twenty-one ,, 


1830 — 1842 


EIGHTH 


»? 




twenty-two ,, 


1853 — 1S60 


NINTH 


>» 




twenty-five ,, 


1S7S-1S89 


TENTH 


,, 


ninth edition and eleven 








supplementary volumes, 


1902 — 1903 


ELEVENTH 


„ 


>ublished in 


twenty-nine volumes, 


1910 — 1911 



COPYRIGHT 
in all countries subscribing to the 



Bern Convention * 

by 
THE CHANCELLOR, MASTERS AND SCHOLARS 

of the 
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE 



, 



\ 



A 11 rights reserved 



THE 



ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA 



DICTIONARY 

OF 

ARTS, SCIENCES, LITERATURE AND GENERAL 

INFORMATION 



ELEVENTH EDITION 

VOLUME^XX^ 

/ODE to PAYMENT OF MEMBERS 




Cambridge, England: 

at the University Press 

New York, 35 West 32nd Street 
191 1 



;. 



Copyright, in the United States of America, 1911, 

by 

The Encyclopaedia Britannica Company. 



/ 

vii 



/.;o 



■>es; 



INITIALS USEI 



IN VOLUME XX. TO IDENTIFY INDIVIDUAL 



CONTRBUTORS, 1 WITH THE HEADINGS OF THE 



:LES IN THIS VOLUME SO SIGNED. 



ART 



Albert Charles eward, M.A., F.R.S. 

Professor of B :my in the University of Cambridge. Hon. Fellow of Emmanuel' 
College, Camblge. President of the Yorkshire Naturalists' Union, 1910. 

Albert Frederic Pollard, M.A., F.R.Hist.S. 

Professor of Edish History in the University of London. Fellow of All Souls' 



College, Oxfor 
1901. Lothia 



Author of The 
Constitutional ■ 



Albert George 

Late R.A. M)iager, 
Lieut.-Col. co 



Assistant Editor of the Dictionary of National Biography, 1893- 
Prizeman, Oxford, 1892; Arnold Prizeman, 1898. Author of 



Palaeobotany: Mcsozoic. 



Parker, Matthew. 



England undeme Protector Somerset; Henry VIII. ; Life of Thomas Cranmer; &c. 

Arthur George (ougiity, M.A., Litt.D., C.M.G. 

Dominion Arcjvist of Canada. Member of the Geographical Board of Canada. 



'radle of New France ; &c. 
■istory of Canada. 



Joint-editor of Documents relating to the 



Papineau. 



ADCOCK. 

Gun Department, Elswick Works, Ncwcastle-on-Tyne. 
manding 1st Northumbrian Brigade, R.F.A. (Territorial Forces). 
Joint-author Artillery: its Progress and Present Position; &c. 

Adolf Harnack. 

See the biograiical article: Harnack, Adolf. 

Andrew Jacksoi-Lamoureux. 

Librarian, Cotge of Agriculture, Cornell University. 
News, Rio de aneiro. 

Achille Luchaii:. 

See the biognjhical article: Luchai^e, Denis J. Aciiille. 

Alexander Mac 
Professor of 



j Ordnance: 'History and Con- 
1 slniction. 



\ Origen. 



Formerly Editor of the 



Rial 



Para. 



Agnes Muriel 



jster, M.A., M.D., LL.D., D.Sc, F.R.S., F.S.A. 

latomy in the University of Cambridge, and Fellow of St John's 



j Papacy: 1087-1305. 



College. AutDr of Text-Book of Human Anatomy; &c. 



lay (Mrs Wilde) 



Formerly Ret lent Tutor of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. Joint-author of Sources i 
of Roman Hi:>ry, 133-70 B.C. L 



Palmistry. 



Patron and Client (in part). 



Alfred Newtoj) F.R.S. 

See the biogrphiual article: Newton, Alfred. 



Alfred Peter 



Author of S'tth African Studies; The Commonweal; &c. Served in Kaffir War, Orange Free State: History 
'artner with Dr L. S. Jameson in medical practicein South Africa^ /• >, a; .A 



Anthyme St P;jl, 



Author of H 
Arthur Smith 



Oriole; Ornithology (in part); 
Orthonyx; Ortolan; 
Osprey; Ostrich; Ousel; 
Owl; Oyster-catcher; 
Parrot; Partridge. 



illier, M.D., M.P. 



i 878-1 879. 

till 1896. Mmber of Reform Committee, Johannesburg, and Political Prisoner at 

Pretoria, li 



■1896. M.P. for Hitchin division of Herts, 1910 



Paris: History (in part). 



toire Monumentale de la France. 

ard, LL.D., F.R.S. [ ° Si ™°i e ™ S \„ A . 

Keeper of Gtology, Natural History Museum, South Kensington. Secretary of < Uwen, Sir Kicnara, 

the Geologic 1 Society, London. I Palaeospondylus. 



A. W. H.* •-' 

'f : i ;i 



Arthur Waugi M.A. f 

' New College Oxford. Newdigate Prize; 1888. Author of Gordon in Africa; Alfred, J Pater, Walter; 
Lord Temiy.m. Editor of Johnson's Lines of the Poets; and of editions of Dickens, j Patmore, Coventry. 
Tennyson, Arnold, Lamb; &c. I 

Arthur Willi* Holland. . J °«° of Fusing; Palatine; 

" Formerly Sciolar of St John's College, Oxford. Bacon Scholar of Gray's Inn, 1900. I Paston Letters. 

' l A complete list, showing all individual contributors, appears in the final volume. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF A1TICLES 



R. 



V fJ. w. 

*►• t. R. 




C. R. B. 



c. 


We. 


DeB. 


D. 


C. 


D. 


F. T. 


D. 


G. H 



D. 


H 




D. 


H 


S. 


D. 


J. 


H. 


E. 


A. 


F. 


E. 


B. 


T. 


E. 


C. 


B. 



E. C. Q. 

E.G. 
E. Gr. 



Editor of Encyclopaedia of e Laws 1 Patents {in $&rt). 

{' 



Pantomime. 



F.I.C., Assoc.In:.C.E., 



Alexander Wood Renton, M.A., LL.B. 

Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of Ceylon. 
of England. 

Adolphus William Ward, Litt.D., LL.D. 
See the biographical article : Ward, A. W. 

Sir Boverton Redwood, D.Sc, F.R.S. (Edin.), 
M.Inst.M.E. 
Adviser on Petroleum to the Admiralty, Home Office, India Office, Corportion of 
London, and Port of London Authority. President of the Society of Cemical " 
Industry. Member of the Council of the Chemical Society. Member of Ccncil of 
Institute of Chemistry. Author of "Cantor" Lectures on Petroleum; Proleum 
and its Products; Chemical Technology; &c. 

Charles Everitt, M.A., F.C.S., F.G.S., F.R.A.S. / Omm: Chemistry oflhe Opium 

Formerly Scholar of Magdalen College, Oxford. L Alkaloids. 

Charles Francis Atkinson. f . 

Formerly Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford. Captain, 1st City of London Royal -j Orleans: Campaign of ibyo. 
Fusiliers). Author of The Wilderness and Cold Harbour. I 



Ozokerite; Paraffin. 



Carlton Huntley Hayes, A.M., Ph.D. 

Assistant Professor of History in Columbia University, New York City, 
the American Historical Association. 



A Ozanam; Paschal II.; 
Meoerof j paulL; „ ^ m)> 



Charles Lethbridge Kingsford, M.A., F.F..Hist.S., F.S.A. 

Assistant Secretary to the Board of Education. Author of Life of Henry V. ditor 
of Chronicles of London ; and Stow's Survey of London. 

Clement Reid, F.R.S. , F.L.S., F.G.S. f 

District Geologist on H.M. Geological Survey of England and Wales. Autor of J Palaeobotanv* 
Origin of the British Flora ; &c. Joint-author of Pre-Glacial Flora of Btain ; 1 



J Oldeastle, Sir John; 
[Oxford, 13th Earl of. 



Tertiary. 



Fossil Flora of Tegelen. 

Charles Raymond Beazley, M.A., D.Litt., F.R.G.S., F.R.Hist.S. r 

Professor of Modern History in the University of Birmingham. Formerly Feliw of Odoric {in part); 
Merton College, Oxford, and University Lecturer in the History of Geogiphy. -j Oelschlaeer* Ortelius 

1908. Author of 'enry ° ' 



Lothian Prizeman, Oxford, 1889. Lowell Lecturer, Boston, 
the Navigator; The Dawn of Modem Geography; &c. 



Cecil Weatherly. 

Formerly Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford. 



Barrister-at-Law. 



Pageant. 



Paris: History {in part). 



Ltd. Inventor of the Clerk CyckGas-^ Oil Engine. 



' *[ Palestrina {in part). 



Henri de Blowitz. 

See the biographical article: Blowitz, H. G. S. A. de. 

Dugald Clerk, M.Inst.C.E., F.R.S. 

Director of the National Gas Engine Co., 
Engine. 

Donald Francis Tovey ..—-,.,„ „ f Opera; Oratorio; Overture; 

Author of Essays in Musical Analysis: comprising The Classical Concerto, The J 
Goldberg Variations, and analyses of many other classical works. 

David George Hogarth, M.A. 

Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxjrd. 

Fellow of the British Academy. Excavated at Paphos, 1888; Naucratis, 899 «j Orontes; Pamphylia. 

and 1903; Ephesus, 1904-1905; Assiut, 1906-1907; Director, British Schoc at 

Athens, 1897-1900. Director, Cretan Exploration Fund, 1899. 

David Hannay. f Orford, Earl of (Edward 

Formerly British Vice-Consul at Barcelona. Author of Short History of the Ryal-\ Russell); 
Navy; Life of Emilio Castelar; &c. [ Orleanists. 

Dukinfield Henry Scott, M.A., Ph.D., LL.D., F.R.S. [ 

President of the Linnean Society. Author of Structural Botany; Studies in Fcsil-{ Paleobotany: Palaeozoic. 
Botany; &c. I 

David James Hamilton, M.D., F.R.S. (Edin.) (1849-1909). f 

Professor of Pathology, Aberdeen University, 1882-1907. Authcr of Text-Boo, of-i Pathology {in pari). 
Pathology; &c. (_ 

Edward Augustus Freeman, LL.D., D.C.L. 

See the biographical article : Freeman, E. A. 

Edward Burnett Tylor, D.C.L. , LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Tylor, Edward Burnett. 

Right Rev. Edward Cuthbert Butler, M.A., O.S.B., D.Litt. 

Abbot of Downside Abbey, Bath. Author of " The Lausiac History of Palladiu," 
in Cambridge Texts and Studies. 

Edmund Crosby Quiggin, M.A. 

Fellow, Lecturer in Modern Languages, and Monro Lecturer in Celtic, Gonville aid 
Caius College, Cambridge. 

Edmund Gosse, LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Gosse, Edmund. 

Ernest Arthur Gardner, M.A. 

See the biographical article: Gardner, Percy. 



A Palermo {in part). 
j Ordeal. 



Olive tans; Pachomius, St. 



Patrick, St. 



r Ode; Ohlensehlager; 
■< Ottava Rima; Overbury; 
I Paludan-Muller; Pastoral. 
JOlympia {in part); 
\ Parthenon. 



E. H. M. 

Ed. M. 

E. M. H. 
E. M. T. 



E. M. W. 
E. 0.* 

E. Pr. 

F. C. C. 
F. G. P. 

F. K.* 
F. R. C. 

F. Wa. 
F. W. Mo. 

F. W. R.* 

F. X. K. 

G. A. Gr. 

G. A. C* 
G. B. B. 

G. B. G. 
G. Ch. 
G. C. W. 



INITILS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



( 



/ 



Vll 



Elus Hovell Miis, M.A. 

(University Lcct k in Palaeography, Cambridge. Lecturer and Assistant Librarian "j OlDia .(huxinc). 
at Pembroke C< Ige, Cambridge. Formerly Fellow of Pembroke College. 
Eduard Meyer, PD., D.Litt. (Oxon.), LL.D. f °™«>«; Osroene; Osroes; 

Professor of Antnt History in the University of Berlin. Author of Geschichte des < racorus; rartnia; 
Alterthums: Gef elite des alien Aegyptens; Die Israeliten und Hire Nachbarstamme. [ Parysatis; Pasargadae. 

Edward Morell 
Curator of the 



)LMES. 

useum of the Pharmaceutical Society, London. 



{op 



lum. 



Sir Edward Matje Thompson, G.C.B., I.S.O., D.C.L , Litt.D., LL.D. 

Director and Iicipal Librarian, British Museum, 1898-1909. Sandars Reader in 
Bibliography, mbridge, 1 895-1 896. Hon. Fellow of University College, Oxford. 
Correspondent' the Institute of France and of the Royal Prussian Academy of - 
Sciences. Au >r of Handbook of Greek and Latin Palaeography. Editor of 
Chronicon Ame. Joint-editor of publications of the Palaeographical Society, 
the New Palac raphical Society, and of the Facsimile of the Laurentian Sophocles. L 

Rev. Edward M 'burn Walker, M.A. 



Fellow, Senioi 



Great Ormoni 
in Surgery a 



Palaeography; 
Palimpsest; 
Paper: History; 
Papyrus; 
Parchment. 



utor and Librarian of Queen's College, Oxford. 



-j Olynthus. 



Edmund Owen, ]B., F.R.C.S., LL.D., D.Sc. 

Consulting St^on to St Mary's Hospital, London, and to the Children's Hospital, 

ijtreet, London. Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Late Examiner 

he Universities of Cambridge, London and Durham. Author of 



A Manual ofnatomyfor Senior Students. 



Ovariotomy. 



Edgar Prestag 
Special Lect 
Examiner in 
mendador, 
Royal Acadi 
of a Portugu 



Oliveira Martins; 
Osorio. 



r in Portuguese Literature in the University of Manchester, 
rtuguese in the Universities of London, Manchester, &c. Com- . 
uguese Order of S. Thiago. Corresponding Member of Lisbon 
of Sciences, Lisbon Geographical Society; &c. Editor of Letters 
Nun; Azurara's Chronicle of [Guinea; &c. 

Frederick CorJ/allis Conybeare, M.A., D.Th. (Giessen). f 

Fellow of th British Academy. Formerly Fellow of University College, Oxford. J Paul of Samosata; 
Editor of T\Ancient Armenian Texts of Aristotle. Author of Myth, Magic and | Paulicians. 



Frederick Wi 
Curator an. 



Parsons, F.R.C.S., F.Z.S., F.R.Anthrop.Inst. f 

Anatomical Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Lecturer on J Olfactory System; 
Thomas's Hospital and the London School of Medicine for Women, | Pancreas. 



Morals; &c. 

Frederick G\ik 
Vice-Preside 
Anatomy at 
London. Fcierly Hunterian Professor at the Royal College of Surgeons 

Fernand Khnct. 

Sec the biogphical article: Khnopff, F. E. J. M. 

Frank R. Can 

Author of .S th Africa from the Great Trek to the Union. 

Francis Watt, LA. 

Barrister-at iw, Middle Temple. Author of Law's Lumber Room. 

Frederick Wa:er Mott, F.R.S., M.D. f 

Physician t( sharing Cross Hospital. Pathologist to the London County Asylums, -j Paralysis. 
Fullerian PiKssor of Physiology at the Royal Institution. L 

iam Rudler, I.S.O., F.G.S. C onyx- 



Painting: Modem Belgian. 
Orange Free State (in part). 



Paterson, William. 



librarian of the Museum of Practical Geology, London, 1879-1902. 



"1 



1 Opal. 

r 



1878-1901.-J Papacy: 1870-iQOO. 



Pahari. 



President oile Geologists' Association, 1887-18 

Franz Xaver pAus (1 840-1 901). 

Professor ofZhurch History, University of Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 
Author of Gehichte der christlichen Kunst ; &c. 

George Abrah^ Grierson, CLE., Ph.D., D.Litt. , 

Member of t2 Indian Civil Service, 1873-1903. In charge of Linguistic Survey 
of India, 189^1902. Gold Medallist, Royal Asiatic Society, 1909. Vice-President 
of the RoyaUsiatic Society. Formerly Fellow of Calcutta University. Author of 
The Languad of India; &c. 

Rev. George 4bert Cooke, D.D. f 

Oriel Profess^ of the Interpretation of Holy Scripture, and Fellow of Oriel College, -j Palmyra. 
Oxford. Catn of Rochester. Hon. Canon of St Mary's Cathedral, Edinburgh. I 

Gerard BAix>wf Brown, M.A. f 

Professor of^ine Art, University of Edinburgh. Formerly Fellow of Brasenose -j Painting. 
College, Oxffd. Author of The Fine Arts; The Arts in Early England; &c. [ 



George BroWuGoode (1851-1896). 



Assistant Se 
of American 



etary of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 1887-1 896. 
'ishes. 



George ChrVsKl 
Professor|of 
Hon. Fel 



Author j Oyster (in part). 



M.A.,LL.D. r 

lathematics and Dean of the Faculty of Arts, Edinburgh University, -i Pascal (in part). 
nd formerly Fellow and Lecturer of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. (_ 



George ChJrl|s Williamson, Litt.D. 

Chevaliej of the Legion of Honour. Author ol Portrait Miniatures; Life of Richard \ Oliver, Isaac; 
Cosway, \R-Ai, George Engleheart; Portrait Drawings; &c. Editor of the New | Oliver, Peter. 
Edition if Bran's Dictionary of Painters and Engravers. 



A 



G. 


/ 
E. 


G. 


E. C. 


G. 


H. C. 


G. 


Sa. 


G. 


S. W. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



H. A. B. 

H.Br. 
H. Ch. 

H. CI. 

H. E. 

H. E. R. 
H. F. B. 

H. F. G. 
H. F. 0. 

H. F. P. 
H. Ja. 

H. L. H. 

H. M. C. 

H. N. D. 

H. R. T. 
H. W. C. D. 

H. Y. 
J. A. C. 



Rev. George Edmundson, M.A., F.R.Hist.S. 

Formerly Fellow and Tutor of Brasenose College, Oxford. Ford's Lecturer, 1909. 
Hon. Member, Dutch Historical Society, and Foreign Member, Netherlands Aisocia- 
tion of Literature. 

George Earl Church. 

See the biographical article: Church, G. E. 

George Herbert Carpenter, B.Sc. 

Professor of Zoology in the Royal College of Science, Dublin. 
their Structure and Life. 



f Oldenbarneveldt; 
j Orange (House of); 
[ Ostend Company. 

f 



i Orinoco. 
Author of hsects: -! Orthoptera. 



George Saintsbury, LL.D., D.C.L. 

See the biographical article: Saintsbury, George E. B. 

German Sims Woodhead, M.A., M.D., F.R.S. (Edin.f. 

Professor of Pathology, Cambridge University. Fellow of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. 
Member of Royal Commission on Tuberculosis, 1902. 

Henry Arthur Bethell. 

Lieut. -Col. Commanding 49th Brigade R.F.A. Associate Member of R.A. Com- 
mittee. Awarded Lefroy Medal for Contributions to Artillery Science. Authir of 
Modern Guns and Gunnery; The Employment of Artillery; &c. 

Henry Bradley, M.A., Ph.D. 

Joint-editor of the New English Dictionary (Oxford). Fellow of the Bitish 
Academy. Author of The Story of the Goths; The Making of English; &c. 

Hugh Chisholm, M.A. 

Formerly Scholar cf Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Editor of the nth editicn of' 
the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Co-editor of the 10th edition. 

Sir Hugh Charles Clifford, K.C.M.G. 

Colonial Secretary, Ceylon. Fellow of the Royal Colonial Institute. Forrrerly 
Resident, Pahang. Colonial Secretary, Trinidad and Tobago, 1903-1907. Authtro'f 
Studies in Brown Humanity; Further India, &c. Joint-author of A Dictionan of 
the Malay Language. 

Karl Hermann Ethe, M.A., Ph.D. 

Professor of Oriental Languages, University College, Aberystwyth (University of 
Wales). Author of Catalogue of Persian Manuscripts in the India Office Librry, 
London (Clarendon Press) ; &c. 

Sir Henry Enfield Roscoe, LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Roscoe, Sir Henry Enfield. 

Horatio Robert Forbes Brown, LL.D. 

Editor of the Calendar of Venetian State Papers, for the Public Record Offce, 
London. Author of Life on the Lagoons; Venetian Studies; John Addingon' 
Symonds, a Biography; &c. 

Hans Friedrich Gadow, F.R.S., Ph.D. 

Strickland Curator and Lecturer on Zoology in the University of Cambric^e. - 
Author of " Amphibia and Reptiles," in the Cambridge Natural History. 

Henry Fairfield Osborn, LL.D., D.Sc, F.R.S. (Edin.). 

Da Costa Professor of Geology, Columbia University, New York. Presid'Ht, 
American Museum of Natural History, New York. Curator of Departmen -\a( - 
Vertebrate Palaeontology. Palaeontologist U.S. Geological Survey. Autho' of 
From the Greeks to Darwin ; &c. 

Henry Francis Pelham, LL.D., D.C.L. j 

See the biographical article: Pelham, Henry Francis. 1 

Henry Jackson, Litt.D., LL.D., O.M. 1 

Regius Professor of Greek in the University of Cambridge. Fellow of TriiityJ 
College. Fellow of the British Academy. Author of Texts to illustrate the Histoyof] 
Greek Philosophy from Thales to Aristotle. 

i 

Harriet L. Hennessy, M.D. (Brux.), L.R. C.P.I. , L.R. C.S.I. 

Hector Munro Chadwick, M.A. 

Librarian and Fellow of Clare College, Cambridge. Reader in Scandinavm, - 
Cambridge University. Author of Studies on A nglo-Saxon Institutions. 

Henry Newton Dickson* M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S. (Edin.), F.R.G.S. 

Professor of Geography at University College, Reading. Formerly Vice-Presidcit, 
Royal Meteorological Society. Lecturer in Physical Geography, Oxford. Autho of " 
Meteorology; Elements of Weather and Climate; &c. 

Henry Richard Tedder, F.S.A. 

Secretary and Librarian of the Athenaeum Club, London. 



/Orleans, Charles, Duke of; 
\ Pascal (in part). 

Parasitic Diseases. 



J Ordnance: 

Field Artillery Equipments. 

-. Orm. 

•j Parliament (in part). 



Pantun. 



Omar Khayyam (in part) 



Pasteur. 



Padua. 



Odontornitb.es. 



Palaeontology. 



Otho, Marcus S. 



Parmenides of Elea. 



■i Olfactory System: 
Odin. 



Diseases. 



Pacific Ocean (in part). 



< Pamphlets. 



Henry William Carless Davis, M.A. f q^ j B aveux - 

Fellow and Tutor of Balliol College, Oxford. Fellow of All Souls' College, Oxfcd,^ _. j pr -„ vital - ? ' 
1895-1902. Author of England under the Normans and Angevins; Charlemagne. [ uraenc viiaiis. 



Sir Henry Yule, K. C.S.I. 

See the biographical article, Yule, Sir Henry. 

Sir Joseph Archer Crowe, K.C.M.G. 

See the biographical article: Crowe, Sir Joseph Archer. 



Odoric (in part). 



-• Ostade (in part). 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



IX 



J. A. F. 

J. A. H. 

J. Bra. 
J. Bt. 

J. B. A. 
J. C. van D. 

J. E. S * 

J. Fi. 
J. F.-K. 

J. H. A. H. 
J. H. F. 
J. H. M. 

J. HI. R. 
J. Ja. 

J. Lh. 

J. L. M. 

J. M.* 

J. Mn. 

J. M. M. 

J. P.-B. 
J. P. E. 



wd M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S 



Tohn Ambrose Fleuno, j». 

Pender Professor ,f Electrical ^fe%»*^^?f,a 



of Electric Wave 



Fellow 



ce 'London. Formerly Fellow of St John's College Cambridge. 



^SK htlSon of Epical Fleers. Author oiYhe Principles 



■legraphy, Magnets and Electric Currents; &c. 



Ohmmeter; 
Oscillograph. 



Tohn Allen HoweB.Sc. . , 

Curator and LiUrian of the Museum of Practical Geology, London. 
Geology of Build, g Stones. 

Joseph Bratjn, S.J 

Author of Die Lurgische Gewandung &c. 

jAME Lec I tur R e T r L on T 'Ccstrt,ction, Architecture, Sanitation, Quantities, &c, at King's 
College, London Member of Society of Architects. Member of Institute of Jumor 
Engineers. 

JOSE Formedy VI a«-cr i^Saturday Review Author of An Art Tour in the Northern 
Capitals of Eune; Schools of Modem Art in Germany. 

^ProfeS M<S of Art, Rutgers College, New Brunswick, N J. Formerly 
EditorTf Theiidio and the Art Review. Author of Art for Art's Sake; History of 
Painting; Old hglish Masters; &c. 

J ° HN P uMteOnS™ T^Sfoict^. Fellow of St John's College, Cam- 
bridge. FeUow i the British Academy. Author of History of Classical Scholarship ; 
&c. 

John Fiske, LL.L 

See the biograpical article: Fiske, John. 



{Oligocene System; 
Oolite; Ordoviclan System; 
Oxfordian; Palaeozoic Era. 



Pastoral Staff. 



Painter-work. 






James Fitzmauriu 
Gilmour Proft 
Norman McGl 
Member of tr 
Alphonso XI 1 



J Overbeck. 
Painting: United Slates. 



-j Pausanias: Traveller. 
-[ Parkman, Francis. 



;-Kelly, Litt.D., F.R.Hist.S. 

:or of Spanish Language and Literature, Liverpool University. 

Lecturer, Cambridge University. Fellow of the British Academy. 

Royal Spanish Academy. Knight Commander of the Order ot 
Author of A History of Spanish Literature; &c. 



Palacio Valdes, Armando; 
Pardo Bazan. 



Tohn Henry Arsur Hart, M.A. -,,.,/-« r u -a™ 

Fellow, Theol.;icaI Lecturer and Librarian, St John s College, Cambridge. 



John Henry 

Formerly Fell 



FRESE 



„, M.A. 
w of St John's College, Cambridge. 



I Palestine: History (in part). 
J Orpheus (in pari). 



Tohn Henry Midleton, M.A., Litt.D., F.S.A., D.C.L. (1846-1896). 

J Slfde Profess of Fine Arts in the University of Cambridge 1886-1 89S. Director 
o the Fitzwiiam Museum, Cambridge, 1889-1892. Art Director of the South 
Kensfngton IWseum, 1 892-1 896. Author of The Engraved Gems of Classical Times; 
Illuminated fynuscripts in Classical and Medieval Times. 

John Holland Iose, M.A., Litt.D. 



Orcagna. 



Christ's Collte, Cambridge. Lecturer on Modern History of the Cambridge J p aS quier. 
University Lfai Lectures Syndicate. Author of Life of .Napoleon I.; Napoleonic^ 



Studies; the 



evelopment of the European Nations; I he Life of fill, <xc. 






J Professor of English Literature in the Jewish Theological Seminary, New York. 
Formerly pVident of the Jewish Historical Society of England. Corresponding 
Member of te Royal Academy of History, Madrid. Author of Jews of Angevin 
England; Stt< ies in Biblical Archaeology; &c 

Julius Lewkowtscii, M.A., Pn.D 



Passover. 



Examiner to he City and Guilds of London Institute. Vice-President of Chemical I Q ^ 
tociSy. M flber.o y f Council of. Chemical Society j JnsUtuterf Chemistry ;^and \ 



:il 01 v_nemicai oucitiy , n»i"»u- «■ T , ■ t n : i 

Society of PJblic Analysts. Author of Chemical Technology and Analysis of Oils, y 

Fats, and Wices; &c. 
John Linton Ayres, M.A., F.S.A., F.R.G.S. r ,, w 

J Wykeham Fofessor of Ancient History in the University of Oxford and FeUow 

of Maedalei College. Formerly Gladstone Professor of Greek and Lecturer in. 

Ancient Geiraphy, University of Liverpool. Lecturer of Classical Archaeology 

in the Univ< sity of Oxford. 

James Muirhed, LL.D. (1831-1889). . „ 

Scotch Advcate; Professor of Civil Law in the University of Edinburgh, 1862- 
1889. Authnr of Historical Introduction to the Private Law of Rome, and of an edition 
of the Instiites of Gains and Rules of Ulpian. \_ 

John MacpheW M.A., M.D., M.R.C.S. (1817-1S90) f Paranoia 

I spectbr-General of Hospitals, Bengal. Author of The Baths and Wells J Paranoia. 

; EC. I 



Paphos. 



Patron and Client (in part). 



Formerly I 

of Europe ; 



John Malcolj Mitchell 
Sometime 
College (U 

James Georg 



Professor 
Member o 
francais; <S;. 



(" Ostracism; 



"thokrTfQueen's College, Oxford. Lecturer in Classics, East London J p atricians 

J iversity of London). Joint-editor of Grote s History of Greece. 

Joseph Penderel-Brodhurst. J Pawnbroking 

Editor of tie Guardian (London). I 

Tean Paul Hppolyte Emmanuel Adhemar Esmein. f 

1 Law in the University of Paris. Officer of the Legion of Honour J p ar lement 



Law in tne university ui i an=. wm.*.*.. v~ — -_ — S, ■ . ■ j j ;■ 
the Institute of France. Author of Cours elementaire d histoire du droit 



XII 
R. S. C. 

R. Tr. 

S. A. C. 

S. Fr. 
S. G. 0. 
S.N. 
S. P. 

T. As. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



T. 


A. 


I. 


T. 


Ba 




T. 


E. 


M. 


T. 


F. 


C. 


T. 


H. 




T. 


H. 


H.* 


T. 


K. 


C. 


TI 


i.N 




T. 


L. 


H. 


T. 


0. 




T. 


W 


R. D 



V. M. 
W. Ar. 
W. A. B. C. 

W. A. H. 



Robert Seymour Conway, M.A., D.Litt. (Cantab.)- f 

Professor of Latin and Indo-European Philology in the University of Marhester. J 
Formerly Professor of Latin in University College, Cardiff; and Fellowjof (onville 1 
and Caius College, Cambridge. Author of The Italic Dialects. I 

Roland Truslove, M.A. 

Formerly Scholar of Christ Church, Oxford 
at Worcester College, Oxford. 

Stanley Arthur Cook, M.A. 

Lecturer in Hebrew and Syriac, and formerly Fellow, Gonville and Caius (allege, 
Cambridge.^ Editor for the Palestine Exploration Fund. Examiner in Iebrew 
and Aramaic, London University, 1904-1908. Author of Glossary of Aamaic 
Inscriptions; The Law of Moses and the Code of Hammurabi; Critical Nies on 
Old Testament History; Religion of Ancient Palestine; &c. 



Fellow, Dean and Lecturer in lassies 
i 



Paellgni; 
Osca Lingua. 

Paris: Geography and 
Statistics. 



Sydney R. Fremantle. 

Captain, R.N. Naval Mobilization Department, Admiralty, London. 

Sidney George Owen, M.A. 

Student and Tutor of Christ Church, Oxford. 

Simon Newcomb, D.Sc, LL.D. 

See the biographical article: Newcomb, Simon. 

Stephen Paget, F.R.C.S. 

Surgeon to Throat and Ear Department, Middlesex Hospital. Hon. Secrtary, 
Research Defence Society. Author of Memoirs and Letters of Sir James Page; &c. 

■ 

Thomas Ashby, M.A., D.Litt. 

Director of British School of Archaeology at Rome. Formerly Scholar of Christ 
Church, Oxford. Craven Fellow, 1897. Conington Prizeman, 1906. Memfcr of 
the Imperial German Archaeological Institute. Author of The Classical Topog\phy 
of the Roman Campagna. 



Thomas Allan Ingram, M.A., LL.D. 
Trinity College, Dublin. 



Omri; 

Palestine: Old Testament 
History 

Ordnance: Naval Guns and 
Gunnery. 

Ovid. 

Orbit; 
Parallax. 

Paget, Sir James. 

Olbia: Sardinia; 

Orbetello; Oristano; 

Ortona a Mare; Orvieto; 

Ostia; Otranto; Paestum; 

Palermo (in part); 

Pantelleria; Patavium; 

Pa via. 

Patents (in part); 

Payment; 

Payment of Members. 



Sir Thomas Barclay. 

Member of the Institute of International Law. Member of the Supreme Counll of 
the Congo Free State. Officer of the Legion of Honour. Author of Problem of 
International Practice and Diplomacy; &c. M.P. for Blackburn, 1910. 

Rt. Hon. Lord Farnborough. J. ., .. .. 

See the biographical article : Farnborough, Thomas Erskine May, Baron. \ ParIiament \ ln P art > 

Theodore Freylinghuysen Collier, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professor of History, Williams College, Williamstown, Mass. 

Thomas Hodgkin, Litt. D., LL.D., D.C.L. 
See the biographical article: Hodgkin, T. 

Sir Thomas Hungerford Holdich, K.C.M.G., K.C.I. E., D.Sc. 

Superintendent, Frontier Surveys, India, 1892-1898. ■ Gold Medallist, R.CS., 
London, 1887. Author of The Indian Borderland; The Countries of the Kig's 
Award; India; Tibet. 

Rev. Thomas Kelly Cheyne, M.A., D.D., LL.D. 
See the biographical article: Cheyne, T. K. 



Pacific Blockade. 



Orange: France; 

Paul III., IV., V. (Popes). 



Odoacer. 

Oman; Oxus; 
Pamirs. 



.1 . 



Theodor Noldeke. J 

See the biographical article: Noldeke, Theodor. \ 

Sir Thomas Little Heath, K.C.B., D.Sc. J 

Assistant Secretary to the Treasury. Formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambriqe. 1 

Thomas Okey. ■ f 

Examiner in Basket Work for the City and Guilds of London Institute. 1 

Thomas William Rhys Davtds, LL.D., Ph.D. 

Professor of Comparative Religion, Manchester University. President of tie 
Pali Text Society. Fellow of the British Academy. Secretary and Librarian :>f 
Royal Asiatic Society, 1885-1902. Author of Buddhism; Sacred Books of tie 
Buddhists; Early Buddhism; Buddhist India; Dialogues of the Buddha; &c. 

Victor Charles Mahillon. 

Principal of the Conservatoire Royal de Musique at Brussels. Chevalier of tla 
Legion of Honour. 

Sir Walter Armstrong. 

Director of National Gallery of Ireland. Author of Art in the British Isles; &c 
Joint-editor of Bryan's Dictionary of Painters; &c. 

Rev. William Augustus Brevoort Coolidge, M.A., F.R.G.S., Ph.D. 

Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. Professor of English History, St David' 
College, Lampeter, 1880-1881. Author of Guide du Haut Dauphinf; The Rang 
of the Tbdi; Guide to Grindelwald; Guide to Switzerland; The Alps in Nature am 

! in History; &c. Editor to The Alpine Journal, 1880-18S1 ; &c. 

William Alfred Hinds. r 

President of the Oneida Community, Ltd.; Author of American Communities; &c.\ 



Paradise. 

Pahlavi. 

Pappus of Alexandria. 

Osier. 

Pali. 

Ophicleide (in pari). 



Orchardson. 



Olivier, J. D.; 
Orta, Lake of; 
Ortler. 

Oneida Community. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



Xlll 



W. A. P. Walter Alison Phillips, M.A. 

Formerly Exhibitioner of Merton College and Senior Scholar of St John's College 
Oxford. Author of Modern Europe; &c. 

W. A. S. William Augustus Simpson. 

Colonel and Acting Adjutant-General, U.S. Army. 

W. B.* William Burton, M.A., F.C.S. 

Chairman, Joint Committee of Pottery Manufacturers of Great Britain. Author of 
English Stoneware and Earthenware; &c. 

W. E. A.* Rev. William E. Addis, M.A. 

Professor of Old Testament Criticism, Manchester College, Oxford. Author of 
Christianity and the Roman Empire; &c. 

W. E. G. F. William Edward Garrett Fisher, M.A. 
Author of The Transvaal and the Boers. 

VI. H. F. Sir William Henry Flower, F.R.S. 

See the biographical article: Flower, Sir W. H. 

W. L. G. William Lawson Grant, M.A. 

Professor at Queen's University, Kingston, Canada. Formerly Beit Lecturer in 
Colonial History at Oxford University. Editor of Acts of the Privy Council (Colonial 
Series) ; Canadian Constitutional Development (in collaboration). 

W. M. R. William Michael Rossetti. 

See the biographical article: Rossetti, Dante Gabriel. 

W. P. A. Lieut. -Colonel William Patrick Anderson, M.Inst.CE., F.R.G.S. 

Chief Engineer, Department of Marine and Fisheries of Canada. Member of the 
Geographic Board of Canada. Past President of Canadian Society of Civil Engineers. 

W. P. C. William Prideaux Courtney. 

See the biographical article: Courtney, L. H., Baron. 

W. S. R. William Smyth Rockstro. 

Author of A General History of Music from the Infancy of the Greek Drama to the 
Present Period; and other works on the history of music. 

W. W. R.* William Walker Rockwell, D.Ph. 

Assistant Professor of Church History, Union Theological Seminary, New York. 



J Papacy: igoo-igio. 
[Paris: History (in part). 

A Officers: United States. 



Palissy. 



Order, Holy. 

-I Paper: India Pape 
■\ Otter (in part). 



-J Ontario. 

f Palma, Jacopo; Parmigiano; 
1 Paul Veronese. 



Ontario, Lake. 



J Orford, 1st Earl of (Sir Robert 
\ Walpole); Oxford, 1st Earl of. 

1 Palestrina (in part). 

J Papacy: i^go-iSyo; 
X Paschal III. 



PRINCIPAL UNSIGNED ARTICLES 



Ohio. 

Oklahoma. 

Old Age Pensions. 

Old Catholics. 

Oldenburg. 

Olive. 

Oporto. 

Oran. 

Orange. 

Orchids. 

Oregon. 

Original Package. 

Orkney Islands. 



Orleans. 

Orthodox Eastern Church. 

Oxfordshire. 

Oxygen. 

Pacific Ocean: Islands. 

Paisley. 

Palatinate. 

Pallium. 

Palm. 

Palmerston, Viscount. 

Palm Sunday. 

Pampas. 

Panama (Republic). 



Panama Canal. 

Pan-American Conferences. 

Panathenaea. 

Pannonia. 

Pansy. 

Pantheism. 

Para (State). 

Parabola. 

Paracelsus. 

Parachute. 

Paraffin. 

Paraguay. 



Pardon. 

Paris, Treaties of. 

Parish. 

Park, Mungo. 

Parma. 

Parsees. 

Partnership. 

Passionflower. 

Patagonia. 

Patmos. 

Patna. 

Pau. 



ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



VOLUME XX 



ODE (Gr. &55i7, from d«5«i>, to sing), a form of stately and 
elahorate lyrical verse. As its name shows, the original significa- 
tion of an ode was a chant, a poem arranged to be sung to an 
instrumental accompaniment. There were two great divisions 
of the Greek mclos or song; the one the personal utterance of 
the poet, the other, as Professor G. G. Murray says, " the choric 
song of his hand of trained dancers." Each of these culminated 
in what have been called odes, but the former, in the hands 
of Alcaeus, Anacreon and Sappho, came closer to what modern 
criticism knows as lyric, pure and simple. On the other hand, 
the choir-song, in which the poet spoke for himself, hut always 
supported, or interpreted, by a chorus, led up to what is now 
known as ode proper. It was Alcman, as is supposed, who 
first gave to his poems a strophic arrangement, and the strophe 
has come to be essential to an ode. Stesichorus, Ibycus and 
Simonidcs of Ceos led the way to the two great masters of ode 
among the ancients, Pindar and Bacchylidcs. The form and 
verse-arrangement of Pindar's great lyrics have regulated the 
type of the heroic ode. It is now perceived that they are con- 
sciously composed in very elaborate measures, and that each is 
the result of a separate act of creative ingenuity, hut each 
preserving an absolute consistency of form. So far from heing, 
as critics down to Cowley and Boileau, and indeed to the time 
of August Bockh, supposed, utterly licentious in their irregu- 
larity, they are more like the canzas and sirventes of the medieval 
trouhadours than any modern verse. The Latins themselves 
seem to have lost the secret of these complicated harmonies, 
and they made no serious attempt to imitate the odes of Pindar 
and Bacchylides. It is probable that the Greek odes gradually 
lost their musical character; they were accompanied on the 
flute, and then declaimed without any music at all. The ode, 
as it was practised by the Romans, returned to the personally 
lyrical form of the Lesbian lyrists. This was exemplified, in 
the most exquisite way, by Horace and Catullus; the former 
imitated, and even translated, Alcaeus and Anacreon, the latter 
was directly inspired by Sappho. 

The earliest modern writer to perceive the value of the antique 
ode was Ronsard, who attempted with as much energy as he 
could exercise to recover the fire and volume of Pindar; his 
principal experiments date from 1550 to 1552. The poets of 
the Pleiad recognized in the ode one of the forms of verse with 
which French prosody should be enriched, hut they went too 
far, and in their use of Greek words crudely introduced, and in 
their quantitative experiments, they offended the genius of 



the French language. The ode, however, died in France almost 
as rapidly as it had come to life; it hardly survived the 16th 
century, and neither the examples of J. B. Rousseau nor of 
Saint-Amant nor of Malherbe possessed much poetic life. Early 
in the 19th century the form was resumed, and we have the 
Odes composed hetween 1817 and 1824 by Victor Hugo, the 
philosophical and religious odes of Lamartine, those of Victor 
de Laprade (collected in 1844), and the brilliant Odes ftinam- 
bidcsqucs of Theodore de Banvillc (1857). 

The earliest odes in the English language, using the word 
in its strict form, were the magnificent Epithalamiitm and 
Prothalamium of Spenser. Ben Jonson introduced a kind of 
elaborate lyric, in stanzas of rhymed irregular verse, to which 
he gave the name of ode; and some of his disciples, in particular 
Randolph, Cartwright and Herrick, followed him. The great 
" Hymn on the Morning of Christ's Nativity," begun by Milton 
in 1629, may he considered an ode, and his lyrics " On Time " 
and " At a Solemn Music " may claim to belong to the same 
category. But it was Cowley who introduced into English 
poetry the ode consciously huilt up, on a solemn theme and as 
definitely as possihle on the ancient Greek pattern. Being in 
exile in France about 1645, and at a place where the only book 
was the text of Pindar, Cowley set himself to study and to 
imitate the Epinikia. He conceived, he says, that this was 
" the nohlest and the highest kind of writing in verse," but 
he was no more perspicacious than others in observing what 
the rules were which Pindar had followed. He supposed the 
Greek poet to be carried away on a storm of heroic emotion, 
in which all the discipline of prosody was disregarded. In 1656 
Cowley published his Pindaric odes, in which he had not even 
regarded the elements of the Greek structure, with strophe, 
antistrophe and epodc. His idea of an ode, which he impressed 
with such success upon the British nation that it has never 
been entirely removed, was of a lofty and tempestuous piece 
of indefinite poetry, conducted " without sail or oar " in whatever 
direction the enthusiasm of the poet chose to take it. These 
shapeless pieces became very popular after the Restoration, 
and enjoyed the sanction of Dryden in three or four irregular 
odes which are the hest of their kind in the English language. 
Prior, in a humorous ode on the taking of Namur (169s), imitated 
the French type of this poem, as cultivated by Boileau. In 
1 703 Congreve published a Discourse an the Pindarique Ode, 
in which many of the critical errors of Cowley were corrected; 
and Congreve wrote odes, in strophe, antistrophe and epode, 

xx. 1 



ODENKIRCHEN— ODER 



which were the earliest of their kind in English; unhappily 
they were not very poetical. He was imitated by Ambrose 
Philips, but then the tide of Cowley-Pindarism rose again and 
swept the reform away. The attempts of Gilbert West (1703- 
1756) to explain the prosody of Pindar (1749) inspired Gray 
to write his "Progress of Poesy" (1754) and "The Bard" 
(1756). Collins, meanwhile, had in 1747 published a collection 
of odes devised in the Aeolian or Lesbian manner. The odes 
of Mason and Akenside were more correctly Pindaric, but 
frigid and formal. The odes of Wordsworth, Coleridge and 
Tennyson are entirely irregular. Shelley desired to revive the 
pure manner of the Greeks, but he understood the principle of 
the form so little that he began his noble " Ode to Naples " 
with two epodes, passed on to two strophes, and then indulged 
in four successive antistrophes. Coventry Patmore, in 1868, 
printed a volume of Odes, which he afterwards enlarged; these 
were irregularly built up on a musical system, the exact con- 
sistency of which is not always apparent. Finally Swinburne, 
although some of his odes, like those of Keats, are really elaborate 
lyrics, written in a succession of stanzas identical in form, has 
cultivated the Greek form also, and some of his political odes 
follow very closely the type of Bacchylides and Pindar. 

See Philipp August Bockh, De metris Pindari (181 1); Wilhelm 
Christ, Metrik der Griechen und Romer (1874); Edmund Gosse, 
English Odes (1881). (E. G.) 

ODENKIRCHEN, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine 
province, 21 m. by rail S.W. of Diisseldorf, and at the junction 
of lines to Munich, Gladbach and Stolberg. Pop. (1905) 16,808. 
It has a Roman Catholic church, an Evangelical one, a synagogue 
and several schools. Its principal industries are spinning, weav- 
ing, tanning and dyeing. Odenkirchen became a town in 1856. 

See Wiedemann, Geschichte der ehemaligen Herrschaft und des 
Hauses Odenkirchen (Odenkirchen, 1879). 

ODENSE, a city of Denmark, the chief town of the ami (county) 
of its name, which forms the northern part of the island of 
Fiinen (Fyen). Pop. (1901) 40,138. The city lies 4 m. from 
Odense Fjord on the Odense Aa, the main portion on the north 
side of the stream, and the industrial Albani quarter on the 
south side. It has a station on the railway route between 
Copenhagen and Jutland and Schleswig-Holstein via Korsor. 
A canal, 15! to 21 ft. deep, gives access to the town from the 
fjord. St Canute's cathedral, formerly connected with the 
great Benedictine monastery of the same name, is one of the 
largest and finest buildings of its kind in Denmark. It is con- 
structed of brick in a pure Gothic style. Originally dating 
from 1081-1093, it was rebuilt in the 13th century. Under 
the altar lies Canute (Knud), the patron saint of Denmark, 
who intended to dispute with William of Normandy the posses- 
sion of England, but was slain in an insurrection at Odense in 
1086; Kings John and Christian II. are also buried within the 
walls. Our Lady's church, built in the 13th century and re- 
stored in 1851-1852 and again in 1864, contains a carved altar- 
piece (16th century) by Claus Berg of Liibeck. Odense Castle 
was erected by Frederick IV., who died there in 1730. In 
Albani are tanneries, iron-foundries and machine-shops. Ex- 
ports, mostly agricultural produce (butter, bacon, eggs); im- 
ports, iron, petroleum, coal, yarn and timber. 

Odense, or Odinsey, originally Odinsoe, i.e. Odin's island, 
is one of the oldest cities of Denmark. St Canute's shrine was 
a great resort of pilgrims throughout the middle ages. In the 
16th century the town was the meeting-place of several parlia- 
ments, and down to 1805 it was the seat of the provincial 
assembly of Fiinen. 

ODENWALD, a wooded mountainous region of Germany, 
almost entirely in the grand duchy of Hesse, with small portions 
in Bavaria and Baden. It stretches between the Neckar and the 
Main, and is some 50 m. long by 20 to 30 broad. Its highest 
points are the Katzenbuckel (2057 ft.), the Neunkircher HShe 
(1985 ft.) and the Krahberg (1965 ft.). The wooded heights 
overlooking the Bergstrasse are studded with castles and medieval 
ruins, some of which are associated with some of the most 
memorable adventures of German tradition. Among them are 



Rodenstein, the reputed home of the wild huntsman, and near 
Grasellenbach, the spot where Siegfried of the Nibclungenlied 
is said to have been slain. 

See F. Montanus, Der Odenwald (Mainz, 1884) ; T. Lorentzen, Der 
Odenwald in Wort und Bild (Stuttgart, 1904) ; G. Volk, Der Odenwald 
und seine Nachbargebiete (Stuttgart, 1900), and Windhaus, Fuhrer 
durch den Odenwald (Darmstadt, 1903). 

ODER (Lat. Viadua; Slavonic, Vjodr), a river of Germany, 
rises in Austria on the Odergebirge in the Moravian tableland 
at a height of 1950 ft. above the sea, and 14 m. to the east of 
Olmutz. From its source to its mouth in the Baltic it has 
a total length of 560 m., of which 480 m. are navigable for barges, 
and it drains an area of 43,300 sq. m. The first 45 m. of its 
course lie within Moravia; for the next 15 m. it forms the 
frontier between Prussian and Austrian Silesia,' while the re- 
maining 500 m. belong to Prussia, where it traverses the provinces 
of Silesia, Brandenburg and Pomerania. It flows at first 
towards the south-east, but on quitting Austria turns towards 
the north-west, maintaining this direction as far as Frankfort-on- 
Oder, beyond which its general course is nearly due north. As far 
as the frontier the Oder flows through a well-defined valley, 
but, after passing through the gap between the Moravian 
mountains, and the Carpathians and entering the Silesian plain, 
its valley is wide and shallow and its banks generally low. In 
its lower course it is divided into numerous branches, forming 
many islands. The main channel follows the left side of the 
valley and finally expands into the Pommersches, or Stettiner 
Haff, which is connected with the sea by three arms, the Peene, 
the Swine and the Dievenow, forming the islands of Usedom 
and Wollin. The Swine, in the middle, is the main channel 
for navigation. The chief tributaries of the Oder on the left 
bank are the Oppa, Glatzer Neisse, Katzbach, Bober and 
Lausitzer Neisse; on the right bank the Malapane, Bartsch 
and Warthe. Of these the only one of importance for 
navigation is the Warthe, which through the Netze is brought 
into communication with the Vistula. The Oder is also connected 
by canals with the Havel and the Spree. The most important 
towns on its banks are Ratibor, Oppeln, Brieg, Breslau, Glogau, 
Frankfort, Ciistrin and Stettin, with the seaport of Swinemiinde 
at its mouth. Glogau, Ciistrin and Swinemiinde are strongly 
fortified. 

The earliest important undertaking with a view of improving 
the waterway was due to the initiative of Frederick the Great, 
who recommended the diversion of the river into a new and 
straight channel in the swampy tract of land known as the 
Oderbruch, near Ciistrin. The work was carried out in the years 
1746-1753, a large tract of marshland being brought under 
cultivation, a considerable detour cut off, and the main stream 
successfully confined to the canal, 12 m. in length, which is 
known as the New Oder. The river at present begins to be 
navigable for barges at Ratibor, where it is about 100 ft. wide, 
and for larger vessels at Breslau, and great exertions are made 
by the government to deepen and keep open the channel, which 
still shows a strong tendency to choke itself with sand in certain 
places. The alterations made of late years consist of three 
systems of works: — (1) The canalization of the main stream 
(4 m.) at Breslau, and from the confluence of the Glatzer Neisse to 
the mouth of the Klodnitz canal, a distance of over 50 m. These 
engineering works were completed in 1896. (2) In 1887-1891 
the Oder-Spree canal was made to connect the two rivers named. 
The canal leaves the Oder at Fiirstenberg (132 m. above its 
mouth) at an altitude of 93 ft., and after 15 m. enters the 
Friedrich-Wilhelm canal (r34 ft.). After coinciding with this 
for 7 m., it makes another cut of 5 m. to the Spree at Fiirstenwalde 
(126 ft.). Then it follows the Spree for 12 m., and at Gross 
Triinke (121 ft.) passes out and goes to Lake Seddin (106 ft.), 15 
m. (3) The deepening and regulation of the mouth and lower 
course of the stream, consisting of the Kaiserfahrt, 3 m. long, 
affording a waterway between the Stettiner Haff and the river 
Swine for the largest ocean-going vessels; a new cut, 4! m. 
long, from Vietzig on the Stettiner Haff to Wollin Island; the 
Parnitz-Dunzig and Dunzig-Oder canals, together 1 m. long, 



ODERBERG— ODESSA 



constituting the immediate approach to Stettin. Vessels drawing 
24 ft. are now able to go right up to Stettin. In 1905 a project 
was sanctioned for improving the communication between 
Berlin and Stettin by widening and deepening the lower course 
of the river and then connecting this by a canal with Berlin. 
Another project, born at the same time, is one for the canalization 
of the upper course of the Oder. About 4,00x3,000 tons of 
merchandize pass through Breslau (up and down) on the Oder 
in the year. 

See Der Oderstrom, sein Stromgebiet und seine wichtigsten Neben- 
fliisse; hydrographische, wasserwirtschajtliche und wasserrechlliche 
Darslellung (Berlin, 1896). 

ODERBERG, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province 
of Brandenburg, on the Alte Oder, 2 m. from Bralitz, a station 
44 m. N.W. from Frankfort-on-Oder, by the railway to Anger- 
miinde. Pop. (1905) 4,015. It has a fine Gothic church, dedicated 
to St Nicholas, and the ruins of an ancient castle, called Baren- 
kasten. Oderberg is an important emporium for the Russian 
timber trade. 

ODESCALCHI-ERBA, the name of a Roman princely family 
of great antiquity. They are supposed to be descended from 
Enrico Erba, imperial vicar in Milan in 1165. Alessandro 
Erba married Lucrezia Odescalchi, sister of Pope Innocent 
IX., in 1709, who is believed to have been descended from 
Giorgio Odescalchi {floruit at Comoin 1290). The title of prince 
of the Holy Roman Empire was conferred on Alessandro in 
1714, and that of duke of Syrmium in Hungary in 1714, with the 
qualification of " serene highness." The head of the family 
now bears the titles of Fiirst Odescalchi, duke of Syrmium, 
prince of Bassano, &c, and he is an hereditary magnate of 
Hungary and a grandee of Spain; the family, which is one 
of the most important in Italy, owns the Palazzo Odescalchi 
in Rome, the magnificent castle of Bracciano, besides large 
estates in Italy and Hungary. 

See A. von Reumont, Geschichte der Stadt Rom (Berlin, 1868), 
and the Almanack de Gotha. 

ODESSA, one of the most important seaports of Russia, 
ranking by its population and foreign trade after St Petersburg, 
Moscow and Warsaw. It is situated in 46 28' N. and 30 44' 
E., on the southern shore of a semi-circular bay, at the north-west 
angle of the Black Sea, and is by rail 1017 m. S.S.W. from Moscow 
and 610 S. from Kiev. Odessa is the seaport for the basins 
of two great rivers of Russia, the Dnieper, with its tributary 
the Bug, and the Dniester (20 m. to S.). The entrances to the 
mouths of both these offering many difficulties for navigation, 
trade has from the remotest antiquity selected this spot, which 
is situated half-way between the two estuaries, while the level 
surface of the neighbouring steppe allows easy communication 
with the lower parts of both rivers. The bay of Odessa, which 
has an area of 14 sq. m. and a depth of 30 ft. with a soft bottom, 
is a dangerous anchorage on account of its exposure to easterly 
winds. But inside it are six harbours — the quarantine harbour, 
new harbour, coal harbour and " practical " harbour, the 
first and last, on the S. and N. respectively, protected by moles, 
and the two middle harbours by a breakwater. Besides these, 
there are the harbour of the principal shipping company — the 
Russian Company for Navigation and Commerce, and the 
petroleum harbour. The harbours freeze for a few days in winter, 
as also does the bay occasionally, navigation being interrupted 
every year for an average of sixteen days; though this is 
materially shortened by the use of an ice-breaker. Odessa 
experiences the influence of the continental climate of the 
neighbouring steppes; its winters are cold (the average tempera- 
ture for January being 23-2° F., and the isotherm for the entire 
season that of Konigsberg), its summers are hot (72-8° in July), 
and the yearly average temperature is 48-5°. The rainfall is 
scanty (14 in. per annum). The city is built on a terrace 100 to 
155 ft. in height, which descends by steep crags to the sea, and 
on the other side is continuous with the level of the " black 
earth " steppe. Catacombs, whence sandstone for building 
has been taken, extend underneath the town and suburbs, not 
without some danger to the buildings. 



The general aspect of Odessa is that of a wealthy west- 
European city. Its chief embankment, the Nikolai boulevard, 
bordered with tall and handsome houses, forms a fine promenade. 
The central square is adorned with a statue of Armand, due de 
Richelieu (1826), who was governor of Odessa in 1803-1 814. 
A little back from the sea stands a fine bronze statue of Catherine 
II. (1900). A magnificent flight of nearly 200 granite steps leads 
from the Richelieu monument down to the harbours. The 
central parts of the city have broad streets and squares, bordered 
with fine buildings and mansions in the Italian style, and with 
good shops. The cathedral, founded in 1794 and finished in 
1809, and thoroughly restored in 1903, can accommodate 5000 
persons; it contains the tomb of Count Michael Vorontsov, 
governor-general from 1823 to 1854, who contributed much 
towards the development and embellishment of the city. The 
" Palais Royal," with its parterre and fountains, and the spacious 
public park are fine pleasure-grounds, whilst in the ravines that 
lead down to the sea cluster the houses of the poorer classes. 
The shore is occupied by immense granaries, some of which look 
like palaces, and large storehouses take up a broad space in the 
west of the city. Odessa consists (i.) of the city proper, contain- 
ing the old fort (now a quarantine establishment) and surrounded 
by a boulevard, where was formerly a wall marking the limits of 
the free port; (ii.) of the suburbs Novaya and Peresyp, extending 
northward along the lower shore of the bay; and (iii.) of Molda- 
vanka to the south-west. The city, being in a treeless region, * 
is proud of the avenues of trees that line several of its streets 
and of its parks, especially of the Alexander Park, with a statue 
of Alexander II. (1S91), and of the summer resorts of Fontaine, 
Arcadia and Langeron along the bay. Odessa is rising in repute 
as a summer sea-bathing resort, and its mud-baths (from the 
mud of the limans or lagoons) are considered to be efficacious 
in cases of rheumatism, gout, nervous affections and skin 
diseases. The German colonies Liebenthal and Lustdorf are 
bathing-places. 

Odessa is the real capital, intellectual and commercial, of 
so-called Novorossia, or New Russia, which includes the govern- 
ments of Bessarabia and Kherson. It is the see of an archbishop 
of the Orthodox Greek Church, and the headquarters of the 
VIII. army corps, and constitutes an independent " municipal 
district " or captaincy, which covers 195 sq. m. and includes a 
dozen villages, some of which have 2000 to 3000 inhabitants 
each. It is also the chief town of the Novorossian (New Russian) 
educational district, and has a university, which replaced the 
Richelieu Lyceum in 1865, and now has over 1700 students. 

In 1795 the town had only 2250 inhabitants; in 1S14, twenty 
years after its foundation, it had 25,000. The population has 
steadily increased from 100,000 in 1850, 185,000 in 1873, 225,000 
in 1884, to 449,673 in 1900. The great majority of inhabitants 
are Great Russians and Little Russians; but there are also 
large numbers of Jews (133,000, exclusive of Karaites), as well 
as of Italians, Greeks, Germans and French (to which nation- 
alities the chief merchants belong), as also of Rumanians, 
Servians, Bulgarians, Tatars, Armenians, Lazes, Georgians. A 
numerous floating population of labourers, attracted at certain 
periods by pressing work in the port, and afterwards left un- 
employed owing to the enormous fluctuations in the corn trade, 
is one of the features of Odessa. It is estimated that there are 
no less than 3 5,000 people living from hand to mouth in the utmost 
misery, partly in the extensive catacombs beneath the city. 

The leading occupations are connected with exporting, 
shipping and manufactures. The industrial development has 
been rather slow: sugar-refineries, tea-packing, oil-mills, 
tanneries, steam flour-mills, iron and mechanical works, factories 
of jute sacks, chemical works, tin-plate works, paper-factories 
are the chief. Commercially the city is the chief seaport of 
Russia for exports, which in favourable years are twice as high 
as those of St Petersburg, while as regards the value of the 
imports Odessa is second only to the northern capital. The 
total returns amount to 16 to 20 millions sterling a year, repre- 
senting about one-ninth of the entire Russian foreign trade, 
and 14% if the* coast trade be included as well. The total 



ODEUM— ODO 



exports are valued at 10 to n millions sterling annually, and 
the imports at 6 to 9 millions sterling, about 85% of all the 
imports into Russia. Grain, and especially wheat, is the chief 
article of export. The chief imports are raw cotton, iron, 
agricultural machinery, coal, chemicals, jute, copra and lead. 
A new and spacious harbour, especially for the petroleum trade, 
was constructed in 1894-1900. 

History. — The bay of Odessa was colonized by Greeks at a very 
early period, and their ports — Istrianorum Portus and Isiacorum 
Portus on the shores of the bay, and Odessus at the mouth of the 
Tiligul liman — carried on a lively trade with the neighbouring 
steppes. These towns disappeared in the 3rd and 4th centuries, 
and for ten centuries no settlements in these tracts are mentioned. 
In the 14th century this region belonged to the Lithuanians, and 
in 1396 Olgerd, prince of Lithuania, defeated in battle three 
Tatar chiefs, one of whom, Khaji Beg or Bey, had recently 
founded, at the place now occupied by Odessa, a fort which 
received his name. The Lithuanians, and subsequently the 
Poles, kept the country under their dominion until the 16th 
century, when it was seized by the Tatars, who still permitted, 
however, the Lithuanians to gather salt in the neighbouring 
lakes. Later on the Turks left a garrison here, and founded in 
1764 the fortress Yani-dunya. In 17S9 the Russians, under the 
French captain de Ribas, took the fortress by assault. In 1791 
Khaji-bey and the Ochakov region were ceded to Russia. De 
Ribas and the French engineer Voland were entrusted in 1794 
with the erection of a town and the construction of a port at 
Khaji-bey. In 1S03 Odessa became the chief town of a separate 
municipal district or captaincy, the first captain being Armand, 
due de Richelieu, who did very much for the development of the 
young city and its improvement as a seaport. In 1824 Odessa 
became the seat of the governors-general of Novorossia and 
Bessarabia. In 1866 it was brought into railway connexion with 
Kiev and Kharkov via Balta, and with Jassy in Rumania. In 
1854 it was unsuccessfully attacked by the Anglo-Russian fleet, 
and in 1876-1877 by the Turkish, also unsuccessfully. In 1905- 
1906 the city was the scene of violent revolutionary disorders, 
marked by a naval insurrection. (P- A. K. ; J. T. Be.) 

ODEUM (Gr. Odeion), the name given to a concert hall in 
ancient Greece. In a general way its construction was similar to 
that of a theatre, but it was only a quarter of the size and was 
provided with a roof for acoustic purposes, a characteristic 
difference. The oldest known Odeum in Greece was the Skias 
at Sparta, so called from its resemblance to the top of a parasol, 
said to have been erected by Theodorus of Samos (600 B.C.); 
in Athens an Odeum near the spring Enneacrunus on the Ilissus 
was referred to the age of Peisistratus, and appears to have been 
rebuilt or restored by Lycurgus (c. 330 B.C.). This is probably 
the building which, according to Aristophanes {Wasps, 1109), 
was used for judicial purposes, for the distribution of corn, 
and even for the billeting of soldiers. The building which served 
as a model for later similar constructions was the Odeum of 
Pericles (completed c. 445) on the south-eastern slope of the rock 
of the Acropolis, whose conical roof, a supposed imitation of the 
tent of Xerxes, was made of the masts of captured Persian ships. 
It was destroyed by Aristion, the so-called tyrant of Athens, 
at the time of the rising against Sulla (87), and rebuilt by Ario- 
barzanes II., king of Cappadocia (Appian, Milhrid. 38). The 
most magnificent example of its kind, however, was the Odeum 
built on the south-west cliff of the Acropolis at Athens about 
a.d. 160 by the wealthy sophist and rhetorician Herodes Atticus 
in memory of his wife, considerable remains of which are still 
to be seen. It had accommodation for 8000 persons, and the 
ceiling was constructed of beautifully carved beams of cedar 
wood, probably with an open space in the centre to admit 
the light. It was also profusely decorated with pictures 
and other works of art. Similar buildings also existed in 
other parts of Greece; at Corinth, also the gift of Herodes 
Atticus; at Patrae, where there was a famous statue of 
Apollo; at Smyrna, Tralles, and other towns in Asia Minor. 
The first Odeum in Rome was built by Domitian, a second by 
Trajan. 



ODILIENBERG, or Ottilienberg (called Allilona in the 8th 
century), a peak of the Vosges Mountains in Germany, in the 
imperial province of Alsace-Lorraine, immediately W. of the town 
of Barr. Its crest (2500 ft.) is surmounted by the ruins of the 
ancient Roman wall, the Heidenmauer, and by the convent and 
church of St Odilia, or Ottilia, the patron saint of Alsace, whose 
remains rest within. It is thus the object of frequent pilgrimages. 
The convent is said to have been founded by Duke Eticho I., 
in honour of his daughter St Odilia, about the end of the' 7th 
century, and it is certain that it existed at the time of Charle- 
magne. Destroyed during the wars of the middle ages, it was 
rebuilt by the Premonstrants at the beginning of the 17th century, 
and was acquired later by the bishop of Strassburg, who restored 
the building and the adjoining church, in 1853. Since 1899 
the convent has contained a museum of antiquities. 

See Reinhard, Le Mont Ste'Odile (Strassburg, 1888) ; Pfister, Le 
Duche merovingien d 'Alsace et la legende de Sainte Odile (Nancy, 
1892); and R. Forrer, Der Odilienberg (Strassburg, 1899). 

ODIN, or Othin (0. Norse Osinn), the chief god of the Northern 
pantheon. He is represented as an old man with one eye. 
Frigg is his wife, and several of the gods, including Thor and 
Balder, are his sons. He is also said to have been the father of 
several legendary kings, and more than one princely family 
claimed descent from him. His exploits and adventures form 
the theme of a number of the Eddaic poems, and also of several 
stories in the prose Edda. In all these stories his character is 
distinguished rather by wisdom and cunning than by martial 
prowess, and reference is very frequently made to his skill in 
poetry and magic. In Ynglinga Saga he is represented as reigning 
in Sweden, where he established laws for his people. In notices 
relating to religious observances Odin appears chiefly as the 
giver of victory or as the god of the dead. He is frequently 
introduced in legendary sagas, generally in disguise, imparting 
secret instructions to his favourites or presenting them with 
weapons by which victory is assured. In return he receives 
the souls of the slain who in his palace, Valhalla (q.v.), live a 
life of fighting and feasting, similar to that which has been their 
desire on earth. Human sacrifices were very frequently offered 
to Odin, especially prisoners taken in battle. The commonest 
method of sacrifice was by hanging the victim on a tree; and 
in the poem Hdvamdl the god himself is represented as sacrificed 
in this way. The worship of Odin seems to have prevailed 
chiefly, if not solely, in military circles, i.e. among princely 
families and the retinues of warriors attached to them. It is 
probable, however, that the worship of Odin was once common to 
most of the Teutonic peoples. To the Anglo-Saxons he was 
known as Woden (q.v.) and to the Germans as Wodan (Wuotan), 
which are the regular forms of the same name in those languages. 
It is largely owing to the peculiar character of this god and the 
prominent position which he occupies that the mythology of 
the north presents so striking a contrast to that of Greece. 
See Teutonic Peoples, ad fin. ; and Woden. (H. M. C.) 

ODO, or Etjdes (d. c. 736), king, or duke, of Aquitaine, obtained 
this dignity about 715, and his territory included the south- 
western part of Gaul from the Loire to the Pyrenees. In 718 
he appears as the ally of Chilperic II., king of Neustria, who was 
fighting against the Austrasian mayor of the palace, Charles 
Martel; but after the defeat of Chilperic at Soissons in 7r9 he 
probably made peace with Charles by surrendering to him the 
Neustrian king and his treasures. Odo was also obliged to fight 
the Saracens who invaded the southern part of his kingdom, 
and inflicted a severe defeat upon them at Toulouse in 721. 
When, however, he was again attacked by Charles Martel, the 
Saracens renewed their ravages, and Odo was defeated near 
Bordeaux; he was compelled to crave protection from Charles, 
who took up this struggle and gained his momentous victory 
at Poitiers in 732. In 735 the king abdicated, and was succeeded 
by his son Hunold. 

ODO, or Eudes (d. 898), king of the Franks, was a son of 
Robert the Strong, count of Anjou (d. 866), and is sometimes 
referred to as duke of France and also as count of Paris. For 
his skill and bravery in resisting the attacks of the Normans 



ODO OF BAYEUX— ODOACER 



Odo was chosen king by the western Franks when the emperor 
Charles the Fat was deposed in 887, and was crowned at Compiegne 
in February 888. He continued to battle against the Normans, 
whom he defeated at Montfaucon and elsewhere, but was soon 
involved in a struggle with some powerful nobles, who supported 
the claim of Charles, afterwards King Charles III., to the Frankish 
kingdom. To gain prestige and support Odo owned himself 
a vassal of the German king, Arnulf, but in 894 Arnulf declared 
for Charles. Eventually, after a struggle which lasted for three 
years, Odo was compelled to come to terms with his rival, and to 
surrender to him a district north of the Seine. He died at La 
Fere on the 1st of January 89S. 

See E. Lavisse, Histaire de France, tome ii. (Paris, 1903); and 
E. Favre, Eudes, comte de Paris et roi de France (Paris, 1893). 

ODO 1 OF BAYEUX (c. 1036-1097), Norman bishop and 
English earl, was a uterine brother of William the Conqueror, 
from whom he received, while still a youth, the see of Bayeux 
(1049). But his active career was that of a warrior and states- 
man. He found ships for the invasion of England and fought 
in person at Senlac; in 1067 he became earl of Kent, and for 
some years he was a trusted royal minister. At times he acted 
as viceroy in William's absence; at times he led the royal 
forces to chastise rebellions. But in 1083 he was suddenly 
disgraced and imprisoned for having planned a military expedi- 
tion to Italy. He was accused of desiring to make himself pope; 
more probably he thought of serving as a papal condottiere 
against the emperor Henry IV. The Conqueror, when on his 
death-bed, reluctantly permitted Odo's release (1087). The 
bishop returned to his earldom and soon organized a rebellion 
with the object of handing over England to his eldest nephew, 
Duke Robert. William Rufus, to the disgust of his supporters, 
permitted Odo to leave the kingdom after the collapse of this 
design (1088), and thenceforward Odo was the right-hand man 
of Robert in Normandy. He took part in the agitation for the 
First Crusade, and started in the duke's company for Palestine, 
but died on the way, at Palermo (February 1097). Little 
good is recorded of Odo. His vast wealth was gained by 
extortion and robbery. His ambitions were boundless and his 
morals lax. But he was a patron of learning and, like most 
prelates of his age, a great architect. He rebuilt the cathedral 
of his see, and may perhaps have commissioned the unknown 
artist of the celebrated Bayeux tapestry. 

See the authorities cited for William I. and William II., the 
biographical sketch in Gallia Christiana, xi. 353-360; H. Wharton 
Anglia Sacra, i. 334-339 (1691); and F. R. Fowke, The Bayeux 
Tapestry (London, 1 898). (H. W. C. D.) 

ODOACER, or Odovacar (c. 434-493), the first barbarian 
ruler of Italy on the downfall of the Western empire, was born 
in the district bordering on the middle Danube about the year 
434. In this district the once rich and fertile provinces of 
Noricum and Pannonia were being torn piecemeal from the 
Roman empire by a crowd of German tribes, among whom we 
discern four, who seem to have hovered over the Danube from 
Passau to Pest, namely, the Rugii, Scyrri, Turcilingi and Heruli. 
With all of these Odoacer was connected by his subsequent 
career, and all seem, more or less, to have claimed him as be- 
longing to them by birth; the evidence slightly preponderates 
in favour of his descent from the Scyrri. 

His father was Aedico or Idico, a name which suggests Edeco 
the Hun, who was suborned by the Byzantine court to plot 
the assassination of bis master Attila. There are, however, 

1 Odo must be distinguished from two English prelates of the 
same name and also from an English earl. Odo or Oda (d. 959), 
arehbishop of Canterbury, was bishop of Ramsbury from 927 to 
942, and went with King /Ethelstan to the battle of Brunanburh in 
937. In 942 he succeeded Wulfhelm as archbishop of Canterbury, 
and he appears to have been an able and conscientious ruler of the 
see. He had great influence with King Edwy, whom he had crowned 
in 956. Odo (d. 1200), abbot of Battle, was a monk of Christ Church, 
Canterbury, and was prior of this house at the time when Thomas 
Becket was murdered. In 1 175 he was chosen abbot of Battle, and 
on two occasions the efforts of Henry II. alone prevented him from 
being elected archbishop of Canterbury. Odo or Odda (d. 1056), a 
relative of Edward the Confessor, during whose reign he was an earl in 
the west of England, built the minster at Deerhursl in Gloucestershire. 



some strong arguments against this identification. A certain 
Edica, chief of the Scyrri, of whom Jordanes speaks as defeated 
by the Ostrogoths, may more probably have been the father of 
Odoacer, though even in this theory there are some difficulties, 
chiefly connected with the low estate in which he appears before 
us in the next scene of his life, when as a tall young recruit for the 
Roman armies, dressed in a sordid vesture of skins, on his way 
to Italy, he enters the cell of Severinus, a noted hermit-saint of 
Noricum, to ask his blessing. The saint had an inward premoni- 
tion of his future greatness, and in blessing him said, " Fare 
onward into Italy. Thou who art now clothed in vile raiment 
wilt soon give precious gifts unto many." 

Odoacer was probably about thirty years of age when he thus 
left his country and entered the imperial service. By the year 
472 he had risen to some eminence, since it is expressly recorded 
that he sided with the patrician Ricimer in his quarrel with the 
emperor Anthemius. In the year 475, by one of the endless re- 
volutions which marked the close of the Western empire, the 
emperor Nepos was driven into exile, and the successful rebel 
Orestes was enabled to array in the purple his son, a handsome 
boy of fourteen or fifteen, who was named Romulus after his 
grandfather, and nicknamed Augustulus, from his inability to 
play the part of the great Augustus. Before this puppet emperor 
had been a year on the throne the barbarian mercenaries, who 
were chiefly drawn from the Danubian tribes before mentioned, 
rose in mutiny, demanding to be made proprietors of one-third of 
the soil of Italy. To this request Orestes returned a peremptory 
negative. Odoacer now offered his fellow-soldiers to obtain for 
them all that they desired if they would seat him on the throne. 
On the 23rd of August 476 he was proclaimed king; five days 
later Orestes was made prisoner at Placentia and beheaded; and 
on the 4th of September his brother Paulus was defeated and slain 
near Ravenna. Rome at once accepted the new ruler. Augustulus 
was compelled to descend from the throne, but his life was spared. 

Odoacer was forty-two years of age when he thus became 
chief ruler of Italy, and he reigned thirteen years with undisputed 
sway. Our information as to this period is very slender, but 
we can perceive that the administration was conducted as much 
as possible on the lines of the old imperial government. The 
settlement of the barbarian soldiers on the lands of Italy prob- 
ably affected the great landowners rather than the labouring 
class. To the herd of coloni and servi, by whom in their various 
degrees the land was actually cultivated, it probably made little 
difference, except as a matter of sentiment, whether the master 
whom they served called himself Roman or Rugian. We have 
one most interesting example, though in a small way, of such a 
transfer of land with itsappurtenant slaves and cattle, in the dona- 
tion made by Odoacer himself to his faithful follower Pierius. 2 
Few things bring more vividly before the reader the continuity 
of legal and social life in the midst of the tremendous ethnical 
changes of the 5th century than the perusal of such a record. 

The same fact, from a slightly different point of view, is illus- 
trated by the curious history (recorded by Malchus) of the 
embassies to Constantinople. The dethroned emperor Nepos 
sent ambassadors (in 477 or 478) to Zeno, emperor of the East, 
begging his aid in the recon quest of Italy. These ambassadors 
met a deputation from the Roman senate, sent nominally by the 
command of Augustulus, really no doubt by that of Odoacer, 
the purport of whose commission was that they did not need 
a separate emperor. One was sufficient to defend the borders of 
either realm. The senate had chosen Odoacer, whose knowledge 
of military affairs and whose statesmanship admirably fitted 
him for preserving order in that part of the world, and they there- 
fore prayed Zeno to confer upon him the dignity of patrician, 
and entrust the " diocese " of Italy to his care. Zeno returned a 
harsh answer to the senate, requiring them to return to their 
allegiance to Nepos. In fact, however, he did nothing for the 
fallen emperor, but accepted the new order of things, and even 
addressed Odoacer as patrician. On the other hand, the latter 

2 Published in Marini's Papiri diplomatics (Rome, 1815, _Nos. 82 
and 83) and in Spangenberg's Juris Romani Tabulae (Leipzig, 1822, 
pp. 164-173), and well worthy of careful study. 



ODOFREDUS— O'DONNELL (FAMILY) 



sent the ornaments of empire, the diadem and purple robe, to 
Constantinople as an acknowledgment of the fact that he did 
not claim supreme power. Our information as to the actual 
title assumed by the new ruler is somewhat confused. He 
does not appear to have called himself king of Italy. His king- 
ship seems to have marked only his relation to his Teutonic 
followers, among whom he was " king of the Turcilingi," " king 
of the Heruli," and so forth, according to the nationality with 
which he was dealing. By the Roman inhabitants of Italy he 
was addressed as " dominus noster," but his right to exercise 
power would in their eyes rest, in theory, on his recognition as 
patricius by the Byzantine Augustus. At the same time he 
marked his own high pretensions by assuming the prefix Flavius, 
a reminiscence of the early emperors, to which the barbarian 
rulers of realms formed out of the Roman state seem to have been 
peculiarly partial. His internal administration was prohably, 
upon the whole, wise and moderate, though we bear some 
complaints of financial oppression, and he may be looked upon 
as a not altogether unworthy predecessor of Theodoric. 

In the history of the papacy Odoacer figures as the author of 
a decree promulgated at the election of Felix II. in 483, forbidding 
the pope to alienate any of the lands or ornaments of the Roman 
Church, and threatening any pope who should infringe this 
edict with anathema. This decree was loudly condemned in 
a synod held by Pope Symmachus (302) as an unwarrantable 
interference of the civil power with the concerns of the church. 

The chief events in the foreign policy of Odoacer were his 
Dalmatian and Rugian wars. In the year 4S0 the ex-emperor 
Nepos, who ruled Dalmatia, was traitorously assassinated in 
Diocletian's palace at Spalato by the counts Viator and Ovida. 
In the following year Odoacer invaded Dalmatia, slew the 
murderer Ovida, and reannexed Dalmatia to the Western state. 
In 487 he appeared as an invader in his own native Danubian 
lands. War broke out between him and Feletheus, king of the 
Rugians. Odoacer entered the Rugian territory, defeated 
Feletheus, and carried him and" his noxious wife" Gisa prisoners 
to Ravenna. In the following year Frederick, son of the captive 
king, endeavoured to raise again the fallen fortunes of his house, 
but was defeated by Onulf, brother of Odoacer, and, being forced 
to flee, took refuge at the court of Theodoric the Ostrogoth, at 
Sistova on the lower Danube. . ' 

This Rugian war was probably an indirect cause of the fall 
of Odoacer. His increasing power rendered him too formidable 
to the Byzantine court, with whom his relations had for some 
time been growing less friendly. At the same time, Zeno was 
embarrassed by the formidable neighbourhood of Theodoric 
and his Ostrogothic warriors, who were almost equally burden- 
some as enemies or as allies. In these circumstances arose the 
plan of Theodoric's invasion of Italy, a plan by whom originated 
it would be difficult to say. Whether the land when conquered 
was to be held by the Ostrogoth in full sovereignty, or ad- 
ministered by him as lieutenant of Zeno, is a point upon which 
our information is ambiguous, and which was perhaps intention- 
ally left vague by the two contracting parties, whose chief 
anxiety was not to see one another's faces again. The details 
of the Ostrogothic invasion of Italy belong properly to the life 
of Theodoric. It is sufficient to state here that he entered Italy 
in August 480, defeated Odoacer at the Isontius (Isonzo) on the 
28th of August, and at Verona on the 30th of September. Odoacer 
then shut himself up in Ravenna, and there maintained himself 
for four years, with one brief gleam of success, during which he 
emerged from his hiding-place and fought the battle of the 
Addua (nth August 490), in which he was again defeated. A 
sally from Ravenna (10th July 491) was again the occasion of a 
murderous defeat. At length, the famine in Ravenna having 
hecome almost intolerable, and the Goths despairing of ever 
taking the city by assault, negotiations were opened for a 
compromise (25th February 493). John, archbishop of Ravenna, 
acted as mediator. It was stipulated that Ravenna should be 
surrendered, that Odoacer's life should be spared, and that he 
and Theodoric should be recognized as joint rulers of the Roman 
state. The arrangement was evidently a precarious one, and 



was soon terminated by the treachery of Theodoric. He invited 
his rival to a banquet in the palace of the Lauretum on the 15th 
of March, and there slew him with his own hand. " Where is 
God? " cried Odoacer when he perceived the ambush into which 
he had fallen. " Thus didst thou deal with my kinsmen," 
shouted Theodoric, and clove his rival with the broadsword from 
shoulder to flank. Onulf, the brother of the murdered king, was 
shot down while attempting to escape through the palace garden, 
and Thelan, his son, was not long after put to death by order 
of the conqueror. Thus perished the whole race of Odoacer. 
Literature. — The chief authorities for the life of Odoacer are the 
so-called " Anonymus Valesii," generally printed at the end of 
Ammianus Marcellinus; the Life of Severinus, by Eugippius; the 
chroniclers, Cassiodorus and " Cuspiniani Anonymus " (both in 
Roncalli's collection) ; and the Byzantine historians, Malchus and 
John of Antioch. A fragment of the latter historian, unknown 
when Gibbon wrote, is to be found in the fifth volume of Miiller's 
Fragmenla Histaricorum Graecorum. There is a thorough investi- 
gation of the history of Odoacer in R. Pallmann's Geschichte der 
Vblkerivanderiing, vol. ii. (Weimar, 1864). See also T. Hodgkin, 
Italy and her Invaders, vol. iii. (Oxford, 1885). (T. H.) 

ODOFREDUS, an Italian jurist of the 13th century. He was 
born at Bologna and studied law under Balduinus and Accursius. 
After having practised as an advocate both in Italy and France, 
he became professor at Bologna in 1228. The commentaries 
on Roman law attributed to him are valuable as showing the 
growth of the study of law in Italy, and for their biographical 
details of the jurists of the 12th and 13th centuries. Odofredus 
died at Bologna on the 3rd of December 1265. 

Over his name appeared Lecturae in codicem (Lyons, 1480) 
Lecturae in digest uni vetus (Paris, 1504), Summa de libellis farmandis 
(Strassburg, 1510), Lecturae in tres libros (Venice, 1514), and Lecturae 
in digestum novum (Lyons, 1552). 

O'DONNELL, the name of an ancient and powerful Irish 
family, lords of Tyrconnel in early times, and the chief rivals 
of the O'Neills in Ulster. Like the family of O'Neill (q.v.), that 
of O'Donnell was descended from Niall of the Nine Hostages, 
king of Ireland at the beginning of the 5th century; the O'Neills, 
or Cinel 1 Owen, tracing their pedigree to Owen (Eoghan),and 
the O'Donnells, or Cinel Connell, to Conall Gulban, both sons 
of Niall. Tyrconnel, the district named after the Cinel Connell, 
where the O'Donnells held sway, comprised the greater part of 
the modern county of Donegal except the peninsula of Inishowen ; 
and since it lay conterminous with the territory ruled by the 
O'Neills of Tyrone, who were continually attempting to assert 
their supremacy over it, the history of the O'Donnells is for the 
most part a record of tribal warfare with their powerful 
neighbours, and of their own efforts to make good their claims 
to the overlordship of northern Connaught. 

The first chieftain of mark in the family was Goffraidh 
(Godfrey), son of Donnell Mor O'Donnell (d. 1241). Goffraidh, 
who was " inaugurated " as " The O'Donnell," i.e. chief of the 
clan, in 1248, made a successful inroad into Tyrone against 
Brian O'Neill in 1252. In 1257 he drove the English out of 
northern Connaught, after a single combat with Maurice Fitz- 
gerald in which both warriors were wounded. O'Donnell while 
still incapacitated by his wound was summoned by Brian 
O'Neill to give hostages in token of submission. Carried on a 
litter at the head of his clan he gave battle to O'Neill, whom 
he defeated with severe loss in prisoners and cattle; but he died 
of his wound immediately afterwards near Letterkenny, and was 
succeeded in the chieftainship by his brother Donnell Oge, who 
returned from Scotland in time to withstand successfully the 
demands of O'Neill. 

In the 16th century, when the English began to make deter- 
mined efforts to bring the whole of Ireland under subjection to 
the crown, the O'Donnells of Tyrconnel played a leading part; 
co-operating at times with the English, especially when such 
co-operation appeared to promise triumph over their ancient 
enemies the O'Neills, at other times joining with the latter 
against the English authorities. 

1 The Cinel, or Kinel, was a group of related clans occupying an 
extensive district. See P. \V. Joyce, A Social History of Ireland 
(London, 1903), i. 166. 



O'DONNELL (FAMILY) 



Manus O'Donnell (d. 1564), son of Hugh Dubb O'Donnell, 
was left by his father to rule Tyrconnel, though still a mere 
youth, when Hugh Dubh went on a pilgrimage to Rome about 
151 1. Hugh Dubh had been chief of the O'Donnells during 
one of the bitterest and most protracted of the feuds between 
his clan and the O'Neills, which in 1491 led to a war lasting 
more than ten years. On his return from Rome in broken 
health after two years' absence, his son Manus, who had proved 
himself a capable leader in defending bis country against the 
O'Neills, retained the chief authority. A family quarrel ensued, 
and when Hugh Dubb appealed for aid against his son to the 
Maguires, Manus made an alliance with the O'Neills, by whose 
assistance be established his hold over Tyrconnel. But in 1522 
the two great northern clans were again at war. Conn Bacach 
O'Neill, 1st earl of Tyrone, determined to bring the O'Donnells 
under thorough subjection. Supported by several septs of 
Munster and Connaught, ind assisted also by English contingents 
and by the MacDonnells of Antrim, O'Neill took the castle of 
Ballyshannon, and after devastating a large part of Tyrconnel 
he encamped at Knockavoe, near Strabane. Here he was 
surprised at night by Hugh Dubh and Manus O'Donnell, and 
routed with the loss of 900 men and an immense quantity of 
booty. Although this was one of the bloodiest fights that ever 
took place between the O'Neills and the O'Donnells, it did not 
bring the war to an end; and in 1531 O'Donnell applied to the 
English government for protection, giving assurances of allegiance 
to Henry VIII. In 1537 Lord Thomas Fitzgerald and his five 
uncles were executed for rebellion in Munster, and the English 
government made every effort to lay hands also on Gerald, the 
youthful heir to the earldom of Kildare, a boy of twelve years 
of age who was in the secret custody of his aunt Lady Eleanor 
McCarthy. This lady, in order to secure a powerful protector 
for the boy, accepted an offer of marriage by Manus O'Donnell, 
who on the death of Hugh Dubh in July 1537 was inaugurated 
TheO'Donnell. ConnO'Neill was arelative of Gerald Fitzgerald, 
and this event accordingly led to the formation of the Geraldine 
League, a federation which combined the O'Neills, the O'Donnells, 
the O'Briens of Thomond, and other powerful clans; the primary 
object of which was to restore Gerald to the earldom of Kildare, 
but which afterwards aimed at the complete overthrow of English 
rule in Ireland. In August 1539 Manus O'Donnell and Conn 
O'Neill were defeated with heavy loss by the lord deputy at 
Lake Bellahoe, in Monaghan, which crippled their power for 
many years. In the west Manus made unceasing efforts to 
assert the supremacy of the O'Donnells in north Connaught, 
where he compelled O'Conor Sligo to acknowledge his over- 
lordship in 1539. In 1542 he went to England and presented 
himself, together with Conn O'Neill and other Irish chiefs, 
before Henry VIII., who promised to make him earl of Tyrconnel, 
though he refused O'Donnell's request to be made earl of Sligo. 
In his later years Manus was troubled by quarrels between his 
sons Calvagh and Hugh MacManus; in 1555 he was made 
prisoner by Calvagh, who deposed him from all authority in 
Tyrconnel, and he died in 1564. Manus O'Donnell, though a 
fierce warrior, was hospitable and generous to the poor and the 
Church. He is described by tbe Four Masters as " a learned 
man, skilled in many arts, gifted with a profound intellect, and 
the knowledge of every science." At his castle of Portnatrynod 
near Strabane he supervised if he did not actually dictate the 
writing of the Life of Saint Columbkille in Irish, which is preserved 
in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. Manus was several times 
married. Hisfirstwife, Joan O'Reilly, was themotherof Calvagh, 
and two daughters, both of whom married O'Neills; the younger, 
Margaret, was wife of the famous rebel Shane O'Neill. His 
second wife, Hugh's mother, by whom he was ancestor of the 
earls of Tyrconnel (see below), was Judith, sister of Conn Bacach 
O'Neill, 1st earl of Tyrone, and aunt of Shane O'Neill. 

Calvagh O'Donnell (d. 1 566), eldest son of Manus O'Donnell, 
in the course of his above-mentioned quarrel with his father 
and his half-brother Hugh, sought aid in Scotland from the 
MacDonnells, who assisted him in deposing Manus and securing 
the lordship of Tyrconnel for himself. Hugh then appealed 



to Shane O'Neill, who invaded Tyrconnel at the head of a large 
army in 1557, desiring to make himself supreme throughout 
Ulster, and encamped on the shore of Lough Swilly. Calvagh, 
acting apparently on the advice of his father, who was his 
prisoner and who remembered the successful night attack on 
Conn O'Neill at Knockavoe in 1522, surprised the O'Neills in 
their camp at night and routed them with the loss of all their 
spoils. Calvagh was then recognized by the English govern- 
ment as lord of Tyrconnel; but in 1561 he and his wife were 
captured by Shane O'Neill in the monastery of Kildonnell. 
His wife, Catherine Maclean, who bad previously been the wife 
of the earl of Argyll, was kept by Shane O'Neill as his mistress 
and bore him several children, though grossly ill-treated by her 
savage captor; Calvagh himself was subjected to atrocious 
torturejduringthc three years that he remained O'Neill's prisoner. 
He was released in 1564 on conditions which he had no intention 
of fulfilling; and crossing to England he threw himself on the 
mercy of Queen Elizabeth. In 1566 Sir Henry Sidney by the 
queen's orders marched to Tyrconnel and restored Calvagh 
to his rights. Calvagh, however, died in the same year, and 
as his son Conn was a prisoner in tbe hands of Shane O'Neill, 
his half-brother Hugh MacManus was inaugurated The O'Donnell 
in his place. Hugh, who in the family feud with Calvagh had 
allied himself with O'Neill, now turned round and combined 
with the English to crush the hereditary enemy of his family; 
and in 1567 he utterly routed Shane at Letterkenny with the 
loss of 1300 men, compelling him to seek refuge with the Mac- 
Donnells of Antrim, by whom he was treacherously put to death. 
In 1 592 Hugh abdicated in favour of his son Hugh Roe O'Donnell 
(see below); but there was a member of the elder branch of 
the family who resented the passing of the chieftainship to 
the descendants of Manus O'Donnell's second marriage. This 
was Niall Garve, second son of Calvagh's son Conn. His elder 
brother was Hugh of Ramelton, whose son John, an officer in 
the Spanish army, was father of Hugh Baldearg O'Donnell 
(d. 1704), known in Spain as Count O'Donnell, who commanded 
an Irish regiment as brigadier in the Spanish service. This 
officer came to Ireland in 1690 and raised an army in Ulster 
for the service of James II., afterwards deserting to the side 
of William III., from whom he accepted a pension. 

Niall Garve O'Donnell (1569-1626), who was incensed 
at the elevation of his cousin Hugh Roe to the chieftainship 
in 1592, was further alienated when the latter deprived him 
of his castle of Lifford, and a bitter feud between the two O'Don- 
nells was the result. Niall Garve made terms with the English 
government, to whom he rendered valuable service both against 
the O'Neills and against his cousin. But in 1601 he quarrelled 
with the lord deputy, who, though willing to establish Niall 
Garve in the lordship of Tyrconnel, would not permit him to 
enforce his supremacy over Cahir O'Dogherty in Inishowen. 
After the departure of Hugh Roe from Ireland in 1602, Niall 
Garve and Hugh Roe's brother Rory went to London, where 
the privy council endeavoured to arrange the family quarrel, 
but failed to satisfy Niall. Charged with complicity in Cahir 
O'Dogherty's rebellion in 1608, Niall Garve was sent to tbe 
Tower of London, where he remained till his death in 1626. 
He married his cousin Nuala, sister of Hugh Roe and Rory 
O'Donnell. When Rory fled with the earl of Tyrone to Rome 
in 1607, Nuala, who had deserted her husband when he joined 
the English against her brother, accompanied him, taking 
with her her daughter Grania. She was the subject of an Irish 
poem, of which an English version was written by James Mangan 
from a prose translation by Eugene O'Curry. 

Hugh Roe O'Donnell (1 572-1602), eldest son of Hugh 
MacManus O'Donnell, and grandson of Manus O'Donnell by 
his second marriage with Judith O'Neill, was the most celebrated 
member of his clan. His mother was Ineen Dubh, daughter 
of James MacDonnell of Kintyre; his sister was the second 
wife of Hugh O'Neill, 2nd earl of Tyrone. These family con- 
nexions with tbe Hebridean Scots and with the O'Neills made 
the lord deputy, Sir John Perrot, afraid of a powerful com- 
bination against tbe English government, and induced him to 



8 



O'DONNELL, H. J. 



establish garrisons in Tyrconnel and to demand hostages from 
Hugh MacManus O'Donnell, which the latter refused to hand 
over. In 15S7 Perrot conceived a plan for kidnapping Hugh 
Roe (Hugh the Red), now a youth of fifteen, who had already 
given proof of exceptional manliness and sagacity. A merchant 
vessel laden with Spanish wines was sent to Lough Swilly, and 
anchoring off Rathmullan, where the boy was residing in the 
castle of MacSweeny his foster parent, Hugh Roe with some 
youthful companions was enticed on hoard, when the ship 
immediately set sail and conveyed the party to Duhlin. The 
boys were kept in prison for more than three years.. In 1591 
young O'Donnell made two attempts to escape, the second of 
which proved successful; and after enduring terrihle privations 
from exposure in the mountains he made his way to Tyrconnel, 
where in the following year his father handed the chieftainship 
over to him. Red Hugh lost no time in leading an expedition 
against Turlough Luineach O'Neill, then at war with his kinsman 
Hugh, earl of Tyrone, with whom O'Donnell was in alliance. 
At the same time he sent assurances of loyalty to the lord 
deputy, whom he met in person at Dundalk in the summer of 
1592. But being determined to vindicate the traditional 
claims of his family in north Connaught, he aided Hugh Maguire 
against the English, though on the advice of Tyrone he ab- 
stained for a time from committing himself too far. When, 
however, in 1594 Enniskillen castle was taken and the women 
and children flung into the river from its walls by order of Sir 
Richard Bingham, the English governor of Connaught, O'Donnell 
sent urgent messages to Tyrone for help; and while he himself 
hurried to Derry to withstand an invasion of Scots from the 
isles, Maguire defeated the English with heavy loss at Bellana- 
briska (The Ford of the Biscuits). In 1595 Red Hugh again 
invaded Connaught, putting to the sword every soul ahove 
fifteen years of age unable to speak Irish; he captured Longford 
and soon afterwards gained possession of Sligo, which placed 
north Connaught at his mercy. In 1596 he agreed in conjunction 
with Tyrone to a cessation of hostilities with the English, and 
consented to meet commissioners from the government near 
Dundalk. The terms he demanded were, however, refused; 
and his determination to continue the struggle was strengthened 
by the prospect of help from Philip II. of Spain, with whom 
he and Tyrone had been in correspondence. In the beginning 
of 1597 he made another inroad into Connaught, where O'Conor 
Sligo had been set up hy the English as a counterpoise to O'Don- 
nell. He devastated the country and returned to Tyrconnel 
with rich spoils; in the following year he shared in Tyrone's 
victory over the English at the Yellow Ford on the Blackwater; 
and in 1599 he defeated an attempt by the English under Sir 
Conyers Clifford, governor of Connaught, to succour O'Conor 
Sligo in Collooney castle, which O'Donnell captured, forcing 
Sligo to submission. The government now sent Sir Henry 
Docwra to Derry, and O'Donnell entrusted to his cousin Niall 
Garve the task of opposing him. Niall Carve, however, went 
over to the English, making himself master of O'Donnell's 
fortresses of Lifford and Donegal. While Hugh Roe was at- 
tempting to retake the latter place in 1601, he heard that a 
Spanish force had landed in Munster. He marched rapidly to 
the south, and was joined by Tyrone at Bandon; but a night- 
attack on the English hesieging the Spaniards in Kinsale having 
utterly failed, O'Donnell, who attributed the disaster to the 
incapacity of the Spanish commander, took ship to Spain 
on the 6th of January 1602 to lay his complaint before 
Philip III. He was favourably received by the Spanish king, 
hut he died at Simancas on the 10th of September in the 
same year. 

Rory O'Donnell, 1st earl of Tyrconnel (1575-160S), second 
son of Hugh MacManus O'Donnell, and younger brother of 
Hugh Roe, accompanied the latter in the above-mentioned 
expedition to Kinsale; and when his brother sailed for Spain 
he transferred his authority as chief to Rory, who led the 
O'Donnell contingent hack to the north. In r6o2 Rory gave 
in his allegiance to Lord Mountjoy, the lord deputy; and in 
the following summer he went to London with the earl of Tyrone, 



where he was received with favour by James L, who created 
him earl of Tyrconnel. In 1605 he was invested with authority 
as lieutenant of the king in Donegal. But the arrangement 
hetween Rory and Niall Garve insisted upon hy the government 
was displeasing to both O'Donnells, and Rory, like Hugh Roe 
before him, entered into negotiations with Spain. His country 
had been reduced to a desert by famine and war, and his own 
reckless extravagance had plunged him deeply in debt. These 
circumstances as much as the fear that his designs were known 
to the government may have persuaded him to leave Ireland. 
In Septemher 1607 " the flight of the earls " (see O'Neill) took 
place, Tyrconnel and Tyrone reaching Rome in April 1608, 
where Tyrconnel died on the 2Sth of July. His wife, the heautiful 
daughter of the earl of Kildare, was left behind in the haste 
of Tyrconnel's flight, and lived to marry Nicholas Barnewell, 
Lord Kingsland. By Tyrconnel she had a son Hugh; and 
among other children a daughter Mary Stuart O'Donnell, who, 
born after her father's flight from Ireland, was so named by 
James I. after his mother. This lady, after many romantic 
adventures disguised in male attire, married a man called 
O'Gallagher and died in poverty on the continent. 

Rory O'Donnell was attainted hy the Irish parliament in 
1614, hut his son Hugh, who lived at the Spanish Court, assumed 
the title of earl; and the last titular earl of Tyrconnel was this 
Hugh's son Hugh Albert, who died without heirs in 1642, and 
who by his will appointed Hugh Balldearg O'Donnell (see ahove) 
his heir, thus restoring the chieftainship to the elder branch of 
the family. To a still elder branch helonged Daniel O'Donnell 
(1666-1735), a general of the famous Irish hrigade in the French 
service, whose father, Turlough, was a son of Hugh Dubh 
O'Donnell, elder brother of Manus, son of an earlier Hugh 
Dubh mentioned ahove. Daniel served in the French army 
in the wars of the period, fighting against Marlborough at 
Oudenarde and Malplaquet at the head of an O'Donnell regiment. 
He died in 1735. 

The famous Cathach, or Battle-Book of the O'Donnells, was in 
the possession of General Daniel O'Donnell, from whom it passed 
to more modern representatives of the family, who presented itto 
the Royal Irish Academy, where it is preserved. This relic, of which 
a curious legend is told (see P. W. Joyce, A Social History of Ancient 
Ireland, vol. i. p. 501), is a Psalter said to have belonged to Saint 
Columba, a kinsman of the O'Donnells, which was carried by them 
in battle as a charm or talisman to secure victory. Two other 
circumstances connecting the O'Donnells with ancient Irish literature 
may be mentioned. The family of O'Clery, to which three of the 
celebrated " Four Masters " belonged, were hereditary Ollaves 
(doctors of history, music, law, &c.) attached to the family of 
O'Donnell; while the " Book of the Dun Cow " (Lebor-na-h Uidhre), 
one of the most ancient Irish MSS., was in the possession of the 
O'Donnells in the 14th century; and the estimation in which it 
was held at that time is proved by the fact that it was given to the 
O'Conors of Connaught as ransom for an important prisoner, and 
was forcibly recovered some years later. 

See O'Neill, and the authorities there cited. (R. J. M.) 

O'DONNELL, HENRY JOSEPH (1 769-1 834), count of La 
Bishal, Spanish soldier, was descended from the O'Donnells 
who left Ireland after the hattle of the Boyne. 1 Born in Spain, 
he early entered the Spanish army, and in 1810 became general, 
receiving a command in Catalonia, where in that year he earned 
his title and the rank of field-marshal. He afterwards held 
posts of great responsibility under Ferdinand VII., whom he 
served on the whole with constancy; the events of 1823 compelled 
his flight into France, where he was interned at Limoges, and 
where he died in 1834. His second son Leopold O'Donnell 
(1809-1867), duke of Tetuan, Spanish general and statesman, 
was horn at Santa Cruz, Teneriffe, on the 12th of January 1S09. 
He fought in the army of Queen Christina, where he attained 
the rank of general of division; and in 1840 he accompanied 
the queen into exile. He failed in an attempt to effect a rising 
in her favour at Pamplona in iS4r, hut took a more successful 
part in the movement which led to the overthrow and exile of 

1 A branch of the family settled in Austria, and General Karl 
O'Donnell, count of Tyrconnel(i7l5-i77l), held important commands 
during the Seven Years' War. The name of a descendant figures in 
the history of the Italian and Hungarian campaigns of 1848 and 1849. 



O'DONOVAN, E.— ODONTORNITHES 



Espartero in 1843. From 1844 to 1S48 he served the new 
government in Cuba; after his return he entered the senate. 
In 1854 he became war minister under Espartero, and in 1856 he 
plotted successfully against his chief, becoming head of the 
cabinet from the July revolution until October. This rank 
be again reached in July 1858; and in December 1859 he took 
command of the expedition to Morocco, and received the title 
of duke after the surrender of Tetuan. Quitting office in 1863, 
he again resumed it in June 1865, but was compelled to resign 
in favour of Narvaez in 1866. He died at Bayonne on the 5th 
of November 1867. 

There is a Life of Leopold O'DonnclI in La Corona de laurel, by 
Manuel Ibo Alfaro (Madrid, i860). 

O'DONOVAN, EDMUND (1S44-1883), British war-corre- 
spondent, was born at Dublin on the 13th of September 1844, 
the son of John O'Donovan (1809-1861), a well-known Irish 
archaeologist and topographer. In 1866 he began to contribute 
to the Irish Times and other Dublin papers. After the battle 
of Sedan he joined the Foreign Legion of the French army, 
and was wounded and taken prisoner by the Germans. In 1873 
the Carlist rising attracted him to Spain, and he wrote many 
newspaper letters on the campaign. In 1876 he represented 
the London Daily News during the rising of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina against the Turks, and in 1879, for the same paper, 
made his adventurous and famous journey to Merv. On his 
arrival at Merv, the Turcomans, suspecting him to be a Russian 
spy, detained him. It was only after several months' captivity 
that O'Donovan managed to get a message to his principals 
through to Persia, whence it was telegraphed to England. These 
adventures he described in The Men Oasis (1SS2). In 1S83 
O'Donovan accompanied the ill-fated expedition of Hicks 
Pasha to the Egyptian Sudan, and perished with it. 

O'DONOVAN, WILLIAM RUDOLF (1S44- ), American 
sculptor, was born in Preston county, Virginia, on the 28th 
of March 1S44. He had no technical art training, but after 
the Civil War, in which he served in the Confederate army, 
he opened a studio in New York City. and became a well-known 
sculptor, especially of memorial pieces. Among these are 
statues of George Washington (in Caracas), Lincoln and Grant 
(Prospect Park, Brooklyn), the captors of Major Andre (Tarry- 
town, N.Y.), and Archbishop Hughes (Fordham University, 
Fordham, N.Y.), and a memorial tablet to Bayard Taylor 
(Cornell University). In 187S he become an associate of the 
National Academy of Design. 

ODONTORNITHES, the term proposed by O. C. Marsh {Am, 
Joiim. Sci. ser 3, v. (1873) pp. 161-162) for birds possessed of 
teeth (Gr. 680m, tooth, opvis, opvidos, bird), notably the 
genera Hcsperornis and Ichlhyornis from the Cretaceous deposits 
of Kansas. In 1875 {op. cit. x. pp. 403-40S) he divided the 
"subclass" into Odontolcae, with the teeth standing in grooves, 
and Odontotormac, with the teeth in separate alveoles or sockets. 
In his magnificent work, Odoniorniihcs: A monograph on the 
extinct toothed birds of North America, New Haven, Connecticut, 
1S80, he logically added the Saururae, represented by 
Archaeoptcryx, as a third order. As it usually happens with 
the selection of a single anatomical character, the resulting 
classification was unnatural. In the present case the Odont- 
ornithes are a heterogeneous assembly, and the fact of their 
possessing teeth proves nothing but that birds, possibly all of 
.them, still had these organs during the Cretaceous epoch. This, 
by itself, is a very interesting point, showing that birds, as a 
class, are the descendants of well-toothed reptiles, to the complete 
exclusion of the Chelonia with which various authors persistently 
try to connect them. No fossil birds of later than Cretaceous 
age are known to have teeth, and concerning recent birds they 
possess not even embryonic vestiges. 

E. Geoffroy St Hilaire stated in 1821 {Ann. Gen. Sci. Phys. 
viii. pp. 373-3S0) that he had found a considerable number 
of tooth-germs in the upper and lower jaws of the parrot 
Palacomis torquatus. E. Blanchard (" Observations sur le sys- 
teme dentaire chez les oiseaux," Comptcs rendus 50, i860, pp. 
540-542) felt justified in recognizing flakes of dentine. However, 



M. Braun {Arbeit Zool. Inst., Wiirzhurg, v. 1879) and especially 
P. Fraisse {Phys. Med. Gcs., Wilrzburg, 1880) have shown that 
the structures in question are of the same kind as the well-known 
serrated " teeth " of the bill of anserine birds. In fact the 
papillae observed in the embryonic birds are the soft cutaneous 
extensions into the surrounding horny sheath of the bill, compar- 
able to the well-known nutritive papillae in a horse's hoof. 
They arc easily exposed in the well-macerated under jaw of a 
parrot, after removal of the horny sheath. Occasionally calcifica- 
tion occurs in or around these papillae, as it does regularly in 
the " egg-tooth " of the embryos of all birds. 

The best known of the Odontornithes are Hcsperornis rcgalis, 
standing about 3 ft. high, and the somewhat taller H. crassipes. 
Both show the general configuration of a diver, hut it is only hy 
analogy that Hcsperornis can be looked upon as ancestral to 
the Colymbiformes. There arc about fourteen teeth in a groove 
of the maxilla and about twenty-one in the mandible; the 
vertebrae arc typically hctcrocoelous; of the wing-bones only 
the very slender and long humerus is known; clavicles slightly 
reduced; coracoids short and broad, movably connected with 
the scapula; sternum very long, broad and quite Hat, without 
the trace of a keel. Hind limbs very strong and of the Colymbinc 
type, but the outer or fourth capitulum of the metatarsus is the 
strongest and longest, an unique arrangement in an otherwise 
typically steganopodous foot. The pelvis shows much resem- 
blance to that of the divers, but there is still an incisura ischiadica 
instead of a foramen. The tail is composed of about twelve 
vertebrae, without a pygostyle. Enaliornis of the Cambridge 
Greensand of England, and Baptornis of the mid-Cretaceous of 
North America, are probably allied, but imperfectly known. 
The vertebrae are biconcave, with heterocoelous indications in 
the cervicals; the metatarsal bones appear still somewhat 
imperfectly anchylosed. The absence of a keel misled Marsh who 
suspected relationship of Hcsperornis with the Ratitae, and 
L. Dollo went so far as to call it a carnivorous, aquatic ostrich 
{Bull. Sci. Depart, du Nord, ser. 2, iv. 1SS1, p. 300), and this 
mistaken notion of the " swimming ostrich " was popularized by 
various authors. B. Vctter {Fcstschr. Gcs. Isis., Dresden, 1S85) 
rightly pointed out that Hcsperornis was a descendant of 
Carinatae, but adapted to aquatic life, implying reduction of 
the keel. Lastly, M. Furbringer {Untcrsnchungcn, Amsterdam, 
1SS8, pp. 1543, 1505, 1 5S0) relegated it, together with Enaliornis 
and the Colymbo-Podicipcdcs, to his suborder Podicipitiformcs. 
The present writer docs not feel justified in going so far. On 
account of their various, decidedly primitive characters, he 
prefers to look upon the Odontolcae as a separate group, one of 
the three divisions of the Neornithes, as birds which form an 
early offshoot from the later Colymbo-Pelargomorphous stock; 
in adaptation to a marine, swimming life they have lost the 
power of flight, as is shown by the absence of the keel and 
by the great reduction of the wing-skeleton, just as in 
another direction, away from the later Alcctoromorphous 
stock the Ratitae have specialized as runners. It is only in 
so far as the loss of flight is correlated with the absence of 
the keel that the Odontolcae and the Ratitae bear analogy to 
each other. 

There remain the Odontotormac, notably Ichthyornis victor, 
I. dispar, Apalomis and Graculavus of the middle and upper 
Cretaceous of Kansas. The teeth stand in separate alveoles; 
the two halves of the mandible are, as in Hcsperornis, without 
a symphysis. The vertebrae are amphicoelous, but at least the 
third cervical has somewhat saddle-shaped articular facets. 
Tail composed of five free vertebrae, followed by a rather small 
pygostyle. Shoulder girdle and sternum well developed and 
of the typical carinate type. Pelvis still with incisura ischiadica. 
Marsh based the restoration of Ichthyornis, which was obviously a 
well-flying aquatic bird, upon the skeleton of a tern, a relation- 
ship which cannot be supported. The teeth, vertebrae, pelvis 
and the small brain are all so many low characters that the 
Odontotormae may well form a separate, and very low, order 
of the typic-il Carinatae, of course near the Colymbomorphous 
Legion. (H. F. G.1 

xx. 1 a 



IO 



ODORIC— ODYLIC FORCE 



ODORIC (c. 1286-1331), styled "of Pordenone," one of the 
chief travellers of the later middle ages, and a Bcatus of the 
Roman Church, was horn at Villa Nuova, a hamlet near the town 
of Pordenone in Friuli, in or ahout 1286. According to the 
ecclesiastical biographers, in early years he took the vows of 
the Franciscan order and joined their convent at Udine, the 
capital of Friuli. 

Friar Odoric was despatched to the East, where a remarkahle 
extension of missionary action was then taking place, about 
1316-1318, and did not return till the end of 1329 or beginning 
of 1330; but, as regards intermediate dates, all that we can 
deduce from his narrative or other evidence is that he was in 
western India soon after 1321 (pretty certainly in 1322) and that 
he spent three years in China hetween the opening of 1323 and 
the close of 1328. His route to the East lay by Trebizond and 
Erzerum to Tabriz and Sultanieh, in all of which places the order 
had houses. From Sultanieh he proceeded by Kashan and 
Yazd, and turning thence followed a somewhat devious route hy 
Persepolis and the Shiraz and Bagdad regions, to the Persian 
Gulf. At Hormuz he embarked for India, landing at Thana, 
near Bombay. At this city four brethren of his order, three of 
them Italians and the fourth a Georgian, had shortly before 
met death at the hands of the Mahommedan governor. The 
bones of the martyred friars had been collected by Friar Jordanus 
of Severac, a Dominican, who carried them to Supera— the 
Suppara of the ancient geographers, near the modern Bassein, 
about 26 m. north of Bombay — and buried them there Odoric 
tells that he disinterred these relics and carried them with 
him on his further travels. In the course of these he visited 
Malabar, touching at Pandarani (20 m. north of Calicut), at 
Cranganore, and at Kulam or Quilon, proceeding thence 5 appar- 
ently, to Ceylon and to the shrine of St Thomas at Maylapur 
near Madras. From India he sailed in a junk to Sumatra, 
visiting various ports on the northern coast of that island, and 
thence to Java, to the coast (it would seem) of Borneo, to 
Champa (South Cochin-China), and to Canton, at that time 
known to western Asiatics as Chin-Kalan or Great China (Maha- 
chin). From Canton he travelled overland to the great ports 
of Fukien, at one of which, Zayton or Amoy harhour, he found 
two houses of his order; in one of these he deposited the hones 
of the brethren who had suffered in India. From Fuchow he 
struck across the mountains into Cheh-kiang and visited Hang- 
chow, then renowned, under the name of Cansay, Khanzai, 
or Quinsai (i.e. Kingsze or royal residence), as the greatest city 
in the world, of whose splendours Odoric, like Marco Polo, 
Marignolli, or Ihn Batuta, gives notable details. Passing 
northward by Nanking and crossing the Yangtsze-kiang, Odoric 
embarked on the Great Canal and travelled to Cambalec (other- 
wise Cambaleth, Cambaluc, &c.) or Peking, where he remained for 
three years, attached, no doubt, to one of the churches founded by 
Archbishop John of Monte Corvino, at this time in extreme old 
age. Returning overland across Asia, through the Land of Prester 
John and through Casan, the adventurous traveller seems to 
have entered Tibet, and even perhaps to have visited Lhasa. 
After this we trace the friar in northern Persia, in Millestorte, 
once famous as the Land of the Assassins in the Elhurz highlands. 
No further indications of his homeward route (to Venice) are given, 
though it is almost certain that he passed through Tabriz. 
The vague and fragmentary character of the narrative, in this 
section, forcihly contrasts with the clear and careful tracing of 
the outward way. During a part at least of these long journeys 
the companion of Odoric was Friar James, an Irishman, as 
appears from a record in the public books of Udine, showing that 
shortly after Odoric's death a present of two marks was made 
to this Irish friar, Socio bcati Fratris Odorki, amore Dei ct Odorici. 
Shortly after his return Odoric betook himself to the Minorite 
house attached to St Anthony's at Padua, and it was there that 
in May 1330 he related the story of his travels, which was taken 
down in homely Latin by Friar William of Solagna. Travelling 
towards the papal court at Avignon, Odoric fell ill at Pisa, and 
turning back to Udine, the capital of his native province, died 
in the convent there on the 14th of January 1331. The fame of 



his vast journeys appears to have made a much greater impression 
on the laity of his native territory than on his Franciscan hrethren. 
The latter were ahout to bury him without delay or ceremony, 
but the gastald or chief magistrate of the city interfered and 
appointed a public funeral; rumours of his wondrous travels and 
of posthumous miracles were diffused, and excitement spread 
like wildfire over Friuli and Carniola; the ceremony had to be 
deferred more than once, and at last took place in presence of the 
patriarch of Aquileia and all the local dignitaries. Popular 
acclamation made him an object of devotion ; the municipality 
erected a noble shrine for his body, and his fame as saint and 
traveller had spread far and wide before the middle of the 
century, but it was not till four centuries later (1755) that the 
papal authority formally sanctioned his beatification. A bust 
of Odoric was set up at Pordenone in 1881. 

The numerous copies of Odoric's narrative (hoth of the original 
text and of the versions in French, Italian, &c.) that have come 
down to our time, chiefly from the 14th century, show how 
speedily and widely it acquired popularity. It does not deserve 
the charge of mendacity brought against it by some, though 
the adulation of others is nearly as injudicious. Odoric's credit 
was not benefited by the. liberties which Sir John Mandeville 
took with it. The suhstance of that knight's alleged travels 
in India and Cathay is stolen from Odoric, though amplified 
with fahles from other sources and from his own invention, and 
garnished with his own unusually clear astronomical notions. 
We may indicate a few passages which stamp Odoric as a genuine 
and original traveller. He is the first European, after Marco 
Polo, who distinctly mentions the name of Sumatra. The 
cannibalism and community of wives which he attributes to 
certain races of that island do certainly helong to it, or to islands 
closely adjoining. His description of sago in the archipelago 
is not free from errors, but they are the errors of an eye-witness. 
In China his mention of Canton by the name of Censcolam or 
Censcalam (Chin-Kalan), and his descriptions of the custom 
of fishing with tame cormorants, of the habit of letting the 
finger-nails grow extravagantly, and of the compression of 
women's feet, are peculiar to him among the travellers of that 
age; Marco Polo omits them all. 

Seventy-three MSS. of Odoric's narrative are known to exist in 
Latin, French and Italian: of these the chief is in Paris, National 
Library, MSS. Lat. 2584, fols. 118 r.-!27 v._, of about 1350. The 
narrative was first printed at Pesaro in 1513, in what ApostoloZeno 
calls lingua incidta e rozza. Ramusio's collection first contains it 
in the 2nd vol. of the 2nd edition (1574) (Italian version), in which 
are given two versions, differing curiously from one another, but 
without any prefatory matter or explanation. (See also edition of 
1583, vol. ii. fols. 245 r.-256 r.) Another (Latin) version is given in 
the Acta Sanctorum (Bollandist) under the 14th of January. The 
curious discussion before the papal court respecting the beatification 
of Odoric forms a kind of blue-book issued ex typographia rev. 
camerae apostolicae (Rome, 1755). Professor Friedrich Kunstmann 
of Munich devoted one of his valuable papers to Odoric's narrative 
(Histor.-polit. Blatter von Phillips und Gbrres, vol. xxxviii. pp. 507- 
537). The best editions of Odoric are by G. Venni, Elogio storico 
alle gesta del Bealo Odorico (Venice, 1761); H. Yule in Cathay and 
the Way Thither, vol. i. pp. 1-162, vol. ii. appendix, pp. 1-42 (London, 
1866), Hakluyt Society; and H. Cordier, Les Voyages . . . du . . . 
fr'cre Odoric . . . (Paris, 1891) (edition of Old French version of 
c. 1350). The edition by T. Domenichelli (Prato, 1881) may also be 
mentioned; likewise those texts of Odoric embedded in the Storia 
universale delle Missione Francescane, iii. 739-781, and in Hakluyt 's 
Principal Navigations (1599), ii. 39-67. See also John of Viktring 
(Joannes Victoriensis) in Pontes rerum Germanicarum, ed. J. F. 
Boehmer; vol. i. ed. by J . G. Cotta (Stuttgart, 1843), p. 391 ; 
Wadding, Annales Minorum, a.d. 1331, vol. vii. pp. 123-126; 
Bartholomew Albizzi, Opus conformitatum . . . B. Francisci . . ., 
bk. i. par. ii. eonf. 8 (fol. 124 of Milan, edition of 1513); John of 
Winterthur in Eccard, Corpus historicum medii aevi, vol. i. cols. 
1894-1897, especially 1894; C. R. Beazley, Dawn of Modern Geo- 
graphy, iii. 250-287, 548-549, 554, 565-566, 612-613, &c. 

(H. 1 . ; C. R. B.) 

ODYLIC FORCE, a term once in vogue to explain the pheno- 
menon of hypnotism (q.v.). In 1845 considerable attention 
was drawn to the announcement by Baron von Reichenbach 
of a so-called new " imponderable " or " influence " developed 
by certain crystals, magnets, the human body, associated with 
heat, chemical action, or electricity, and existing throughout 



ODYSSEUS— OECOLAMPADI US 



i r 



the universe, to which he gave the name of odyl. Persons 
sensitive to odyl saw luminous phenomena near the poles of 
magnets, or even around the hands or heads of certain persons 
in whose bodies the force was supposed to be concentrated. 
In Britain an impetus was given to this view of the subject by 
the translation in 1850 of Reichenbach's Researches or Magnetism, 
&c, in /elation lo Vital Force, by Dr Gregory, professor of 
chemistry in the university of Edinburgh. These Researches 
show many of the phenomena to be of the same nature as those 
described previously by F. A. Mesmer, and even long before 
Mesmer's time by Swedenborg. 

ODYSSEUS (in Latin Ulixes, incorrectly written Ulysses), 
in Greek legend, son of Laertes and Anticleia, king of Ithaca, a 
famous hero and typical representative of the Greek race. In 
Homer he is one of the best and bravest of the heroes, and the 
favourite of Athena, whereas in later legend he is cowardly and 
deceitful. Soon after his marriage to Penelope he was summoned 
to the Trojan war. Unwilling to go, he feigned madness, 
ploughing a field sown with salt with an ox and an ass yoked 
together; but Palamedes discovered his deceit by placing his 
infant child Telemachus in front of the plough; Odysseus 
afterwards revenged himself by compassing the death of Pala- 
medes. During the war, he distinguished himself as the wisest 
adviser of the Greeks, and finally, the capture of Troy, which 
the bravery of Achilles could not accomplish, was attained by 
Odysseus' stratagem of the wooden horse. After the death of 
Achilles the Greeks adjudged his armour to Odysseus as the man 
who had done most to end the war successfully. When Troy 
was captured he set sail for Ithaca, but was carried by unfavour- 
able winds to the coast of Africa. After encountering many 
adventures in all parts of the unknown seas, among the lotus- 
eaters and the Cyclopes, in the isles of Aeolus and Circe and the 
perils of Scylla and Charybdis, among the Laestrygones, and even 
in the world of the dead, having lost all his ships and companions, 
he barely escaped with his life to the island of Calypso, where he 
was detained eight years, an unwilling lover of the beautiful 
nymph. Then at the command of Zeus he was sent homewards, 
but was again wrecked on the island of Phaeacia, whence he 
was conveyed to Ithaca in one of the wondrous Phaeacian ships. 
Here he found that a host of suitors, taking advantage of the 
youth of his son Telemachus, were wasting his property and 
trying to force Penelope to marry one of them. The stratagems 
and disguises by which with the help of a few faithful friends 
he slew the suitors are described at length in the Odyssey. The 
only allusion to his death is contained in the prophecy of Teiresias, 
who promised him a happy old age and a peaceful death from 
the sea. According to a later legend, Telegonus, the son of 
Odysseus by Circe, was sent by her in search of his father. Cast 
ashore on Ithaca by a storm, he plundered the island to get pro- 
visions, and was attacked by Odysseus, whom he slew. The 
prophecy was thus fulfilled. Telegonus, accompanied by 
Penelope and Telemachus, returned to his home with the body 
of his father, whose identity he had discovered. 

According to E. Meyer {Hermes, xxx. p. 267), Odysseus is an 
old Arcadian nature god identical with Poseidon, who dies at 
the approach of winter (retires to the western sea or is carried 
away to the underworld) to revive in spring (but see E. Rohde, 
Rhein. if us. 1. p. 631). A more suitable identification would 
be Hermes. Mannhardt and others regard Odysseus as a solar 
or summer divinity, who withdraws to the underworld during 
the winter, and returns in spring to free his wife from the suitors 
(the powers of winter). A. Gercke {Neuc Jahrbiicher fur das 
klassische Altertum, xv. p. 331) takes him to be an agricultural 
divinity akin to the sun god, whose wife is the moon-goddess 
Penelope, from whom he is separated and reunited to her on 
the day of the new moon. His cult early disappeared; in 
Arcadia his place was taken by Poseidon. But although the 
personality of Odysseus may have had its origin in some primitive 
religious myth, chief interest attaches to him as the typical 
representative of the old sailor-race whose adventurous voyages 
educated and moulded the Hellenic race. The period when the 
character of Odysseus took shape among the Ionian bards 



was when the Ionian ships were beginning to penetrate to the 
farthest shores of the Black Sea and to the western side of Italy, 
but when Egypt had not yet been freely opened to foreign 
intercourse. The adventures of Odysseus were a favourite subject 
in ancient art, in which he may usually be recognized by his 
conical sailor's cap. 

See article by J. Schmidt in Roscher's Lexikon der Mythologie 
(where the different forms of the name and its etymology are fully 
discussed); O. Gruppe, Griecliische Mythologie, ii. pp. 624, 705-718; 
J. E. Harrison, Myths of the Odyssey in Art and Literature (1881), 
with appendix on authorities. W. Alannhardt, Wald- und Feldkulle 
(1905), ii. p. 106; O. Seeck, Gcsch. des Unlergangs der anliken Welt, . 
ii. p. 576; G. Fougeres, Manlinee el VArcadie orientate (1898), 
according to whom Odysseus is an Arcadian chtlionian divinity and 
Penelope a goddess of flocks and herds, akin to the Arcadian Arlemis; 
S. Eitrem, Die gotllichen Zwillingc bei den Griechen (1902), who 
identifies Odysseus with one of the Dioscuri ('OXuK7es = rioXu5t6M)s); 
V. Berard, Les Phcniciens et I'Odyssce (1902-1903), who regards the 
Odyssey as " the integration in a Greek vdaros (home-coming) of a 
Semitic periplus," in the form of a poem written 900-850 B.C. by an 
Ionic poet at the court of one of the Neleid kings of Miletus. For an 
estimate of this work, the interest of which is mainly geographical, 
see Classical Review (April 1904) and Quarterly Review (April 1905). 
It consists of two large volumes, with 240 illustrations and maps. 

OEBEN, JEAN FRANCOIS, French 18th-century cabinet- 
maker, is believed to have been of German or Flemish origin; 
the date of his birth is unknown, but he was dead before 1767. 
In 1752, twenty years after Boulle's death, we find him occupying 
an apartment in the Louvre sublet to him by Charles Joseph 
Boulle, whose pupil he may have been. He has sometimes been 
confused with Simon Oeben, presumably a relative, who signed 
a fine bureau in the Jones collection at the Victoria and Albert 
Museum. J. F. Oeben is also represented in that collection by 
a pair of inlaid corner-cupboards. These with a bureau and a 
chiffonier in the Garde Meuble in which bouquets of flowers are 
delicately inlaid in choice woods are his best-known and most 
admirable achievements. He appears to have worked extensively 
for the marquise de Pompadour by whose influence he was 
granted lodgings at the Gobelins and the title of " Ebeniste 
du Roi" in 1754. There he remained until 1760, when he obtained 
an apartment and workshops at the Arsenal. His work in 
marquetry is of very great distinction, but he would probably 
never have enjoyed so great a reputation had it not been for his 
connexion with the famous Bureau du Roi, made for Louis XV., 
which appears to have owed its inception to him, notwithstand- 
ing that it was not completed until some considerable time after 
his death and is signed by J. H. Riesener (q.v.) only. Docu- 
mentary evidence under the hand of the king shows that it was 
ordered from Oeben in 1760, the year in which he moved to the 
Arsenal. The known work of Oeben possesses genuine grace and 
beauty; as craftsmanship it is of the first rank, and it is remark- 
able that, despite his Teutonic or Flemish origin, it is typically 
French in character. 

OECOLAMPADIUS, JOHN (1482-1531), German Reformer, 
whose real name was Hussgen or Heussgen, 1 was born at Weins- 
berg, a small town in the north of the modern kingdom of 
Wiirttemberg, but then belonging to the Palatinate. He went 
to school at Weinsberg and Heilbronn, and then, intending to 
study law, he went to Bologna, but soon returned to Heidelberg 
and betook himself to theology. He became a zealous student 
of the new learning and passed from the study of Greek to that 
of Hebrew, taking his bachelor's degree in 1503. He became 
cathedral preacher at Basel in 151 5, serving under Christopher 
von Uttenheim, the evangelical bishop of Basel. From the 
beginning the sermons of Oecolampadius centred in the Atone- 
ment, and his first reformatory zeal showed itself in a protest 
(Dc risu paschali, 1518) against the introduction of humorous 
stories into Easter sermons. In 1520 he published his Greek 
Grammar. The same year he was asked to become preacher 
in the high church in Augsburg. Germany was then ablaze 
with the questions raised by Luther's theses, and his introduction 
into this new world, when at first he championed Luther's 
position especially in his anonymous Canonici indocti (15 19), 
seems to have compelled Oecolampadius to severe self-examina- 

1 Changed to Hausschein and then into the Greek equivalent. 



12 



OECOLOGY— OEDIPUS 



tion, which ended in his entering a convent and becoming a 
monk. A short experience convinced him that this was not for 
him the ideal Christian life (" amisi monachum, inveni Christia- 
num "), and in February 1522 he made his way to Ebernburg, 
near Creuznach, where he acted as chaplain to the little group 
of men holding the new opinions who had settled there under 
the leadership of Franz von Sickingen. 

The second period of Oecolampadius's life opens with his 
return to Basel in November 1522, as vicar of St Martin's and 
(in 1523) reader of the Holy Scripture at the university. Lectur- 
ing on Isaiah he condemned current ecclesiastical abuses, and 
in a public disputation (20th of August 1523) was so successful 
that Erasmus writing to Zurich said " Oecolampadius has 
the upper hand amongst us." He became Zwingli's best helper, 
and after more than a year of earnest preaching and four public 
disputations in which the popular verdict had been given in 
favour of Oecolampadius and his friends, the authorities of 
Basel began to see the necessity of some reformation. They 
began with the convents, and Oecolampadius was able to refrain 
in public worship on certain festival days from some practices 
he believed to be superstitious. Basel was slow to accept 
the Reformation; the news of the Peasants' War and the 
inroads of Anabaptists prevented progress; but at last, in 
1525, it seemed as if the authorities were resolved to listen to 
schemes for restoring the purity of worship and teaching. In 
the midst of these hopes and difficulties Oecolampadius married, 
in the beginning of 1528, Wilibrandis Rosenblatt, the widow 
of Ludwig Keller, who proved to be non rixosa vcl garrula vel 
vaga, he says, and made him a good wife. After his death she 
married Capito, and, when Capito died, Bucer. She died in 1564. 
In January 1528 Oecolampadius and Zwingli took part in the 
disputation at Berne which led to the adoption of the new faith 
in that canton, and in the following year to the discontinuance 
of the mass at Basel. The Anabaptists claimed Oecolampadius 
for their views, but in a disputation with them he dissociated 
himself from most of their positions. He died on the 24th of 
November 1531. 

Oecolampadius was not a great theologian, like Luther, 
Zwingli or Calvin, and yet he was a trusted theological leader. 
With Zwingli he represented the Swiss views at the unfortunate 
conference at Marburg. His views on the Eucharist upheld 
the metaphorical against the literal interpretation of the word 
" body," but he asserted that believers partook of the sacrament 
more for the sake of others than for their own, though later he 
emphasized it as a means of grace for the Christian life. To 
Luther's doctrine of the ubiquity of Christ's body he opposed 
that of the presence and activity of the Holy Spirit in the church. 
He did not minutely analyse the doctrine of predestination as 
Luther, Calvin and Zwingli did, contenting himself with the 
summary " Our Salvation is of God, our perdition of ourselves." 

See J. J. Herzog, Leben Joh. Oecolampads u. die Reformation der 
Kirche m Basel (1843); K. R. Hagenbach, Johann Oecolampad u. 
Oswald Myconitis, die Reformatoren Basels (1859). For other 
literature see \V. Hadorn's art. in Herzog-Hauck's Realencyklopadie 
fur prot. Rel. u. Kirche. 

OECOLOGY, or Ecology (from Gr. oikos, house, and X670S, 
department of science), that part of the science of biology which 
treats of the adaptation of plants or animals to their environ- 
ment (see Plants: Ecology). 

OECUMENICAL (through the Lat. from Gr. oiKou^ewos, 
universal, belonging to the whole inhabited world, 17 oiKov/iivn 
sc. yij, oUuv, to dwell), a word chiefly used in the sense of 
belonging to the universal Christian Church. It is thus specifi- 
cally applied to tbe general councils of the early church (see 
Council). In the Roman Church a council is regarded as 
oecumenical when it has been summoned from the whole church 
under the presidency of the pope or his legates; the decrees 
confirmed by the pope are binding. The word has also been 
applied to assemblies of other religious bodies, such as the 
Oecumenical Methodist Conferences, which met for the first 
time in 1881. " Oecumenical " has also been the title of the 
patriarch of Constantinople since the 6th century (see Orthodox 
Eastern Church). 



OECUS, the Latinized form of Gr. oTkos, house, used by 
Vitruvius for the principal hall or saloon in a Roman house, 
which was used occasionally as a triclinium for banquets. When 
of great size it became necessary to support its ceiling with 
columns; thus, according to Vitruvius, the tetrastyle oecus 
had four columns; in the Corinthian oecus there was a row 
of columns on each side, virtually therefore dividing the room 
into nave and aisles, the former being covered over with a semi- 
circular ceiling. The Egyptian oecus had a similar plan, but 
the aisles were of less height, so that clerestory windows were 
introduced to light the room, which, as Vitruvius states, presents 
more the appearance of a basilica than of a triclinium. 

OEDIPUS (Oi5t7rous, OtSnroSijs, Oi5t7ros, from Gr. olStiv swell, 
and 7rous foot, i.e. " the swollen-footed ") l in Greek legend, son 
of Laius, king of Thebes, and Jocasta (Iocaste). La'ius, having 
been warned by an oracle that he would be killed by his son, 
ordered him to be exposed, with his feet pierced, immediately 
after his birth. Thus Oedipus grew up ignorant of his parentage, 
and, meeting Laius in a narrow way, quarrelled with him and 
slew him. The country was ravaged by a monster, the Sphinx; 
Oedipus solved the riddle which it proposed to its victims, 
freed the country, and married his own mother. In the Odyssey 
it is said that the gods disclosed the impiety. Epicaste (as 
Jocasta is called in Homer) hanged herself, and Oedipus lived 
as king in Thebes tormented by the Erinyes of his mother. In 
the tragic poets the tale takes a different form. Oedipus fulfils 
an ancient prophecy in killing his father; he is the blind instru- 
ment in the hands of fate. The further treatment of the tale 
by Aeschylus is unknown. Sophocles describes in his Oedipus 
Tyrannus how Oedipus was resolved to pursue to the end the 
mystery of the death of La'ius, and thus unravelled the dark 
tale, and in horror put out his own eyes. The sequel of the tale is 
told in the Oedipus Coloneus. Banished by his sons, he is tended 
by the loving care of his daughters. He comes to Attica and 
dies in the grove of the Eumenides at Colonus, in his death 
welcomed and pardoned by the fate which had pursued him 
throughout his life. In addition to the two tragedies of Sophocles, 
the legend formed the subject of a trilogy by Aeschylus, of which 
only the Seven against Thebes is extant; of the Phoenissae of 
Euripides; and of the Oedipus and Phoenissae of Seneca. 

See A. Hofer's exhaustive article in Roscher's Lexikon der Mytho- 
logie; F. W. Schneidewin, Die Sage von Oedipus (1852); D. Com- 
paretti, Edipo e la mitologia comparata (1867); M. Br6al, " Le 
Mythe d'CEdipe," in Melanges de mythologie (1878), who explains 
Oedipus as a personification of light, and his blinding as the dis- 
appearance of the sun at the end of the day; J. Paulson in Eranos. 
Acta philologica Suecana, i. (Upsala, 1896) places the original home 
of the legend in Egyptian Thebes, and identifies Oedipus with the 
Egyptian god Seth, represented as the hippopotamus " with swollen 
foot," which was said to kill its father in order to take its place 
with the mother. O. Crusius (Beitrage zur griechisclien Mythologie, 
1886, p. 21) sees in the marriage of Oedipus with his mother an 
agrarian myth (with special reference to Oed. Tyr. 1497), while 
Hdfer (in Roscher's Lexikon) suggests that the episodes of the murder 
of his father and of his marriage are reminiscences of the overthrow 
of Cronus by Zeus and of the union of Zeus with his own sister. 

Medieval Legends. — In the Golden Legend of Jacobus de Voragine 
(13th century) and the Mystere de la Passion of Jean Michel (15th 
century) and Arnoul Greban (15th century), the story of Oedipus is 
associated with the name of Judas. The main idea is the same 
as in the classical account. The Judas legend, however, never really 
became popular, whereas that of Oedipus was handed down both 
orally and in written national tales (Albanian, Finnish, Cypriote). 
One incident (the incest unwittingly committed) frequently recurs 
in connexion with the life of Gregory the Great. The Theban legend, 
which reached its fullest development in the Thebais of Statius and 
in Seneca, reappeared in the Roman de Thebes (the work of an un- 
known imitator of Benoit de Sainte-More). Oedipus is also the 
subject of an anonymous medieval romance (15th century), Le Roman 
d'QZdipus, fils de Layus, in which the sphinx is depicted as a cunning 
and ferocious giant. The Oedipus legend was handed down to the 
period of the Renaissance by the Roman and its imitations, which 
then fell into oblivion. Even to the present day the legend has 

1 It is probable that the story of the piercing of his feet is a subse- 
quent invention to explain the name, or is due to a false etymology 
(from oiSew), oiSiirovs in reality meaning jthe " wise " (from 0180), 
chiefly in reference to his having solved the riddle, the syllable 
-ttous having no significance. 



OEHLER— OELSNITZ 



J 3 



survived amongst the modern Greeks, without any traces of the 
influence of Christianity (B. Schmidt, Griechische Mdrchen, 1877). 
The works of the ancient tragedians (especially Seneca, in preference 
to the Greek) came into vogue, and were slavishly followed by 
French and Italian imitators down to the 17th century. 

See L. Constans, La Legende d'CEdipe dans Vantiquite, au moyen dge, 
et dans les temps modernes (1881) ; D. Comparetti's Edipo and Jebb's 
introduction for the Oedipus of Dryden, Corneille and Voltaire; 
A. Heintze, Gregorius auf dem Steine, der mittelalterliche Oedipus 
(progr., Stolp, 1877); V. Diederichs, " Russische Verwandte der 
Legende von Gregor auf dem Stein und der Sage von Judas Ischariot," 
in Russische Revue (1880); S. Novakovitch, "Die Oedipussage in 
der siidslavischen Volksdichtung," in Archiv fiir slavische Philologie 
xi._(l888). 

OEHLER, GUSTAV FRIEDRICH (1812-1872), German theo- 
logian, was born on the 10th of June 181 2 at Ebingen, Wiirttem- 
berg, and was educated privately and at Tubingen where he 
was much influenced by J. C. F. Steudel, professor of Old Testa- 
ment Theology. In 1837, after a term of Oriental study at 
Berlin, he went to Tubingen as Repeknl, becoming in 1840 
professor at the seminary and pastor in Schonthal. In 1845 
he published his Prolegomena zur Theologie des Allen Testaments, 
accepted an invitation to Breslau and received the degree of 
doctor from Bonn. In 1852 he returned to Tubingen as director 
of the seminary and professor of Old Testament Theology at 
the university. He declined a call to Erlangen as successor to 
Franz Delitzsch (1867), and died at Tubingen on the 19th of 
February 1872. Oehler admitted the composite authorship of 
the Pentateuch and the Book of Isaiah, and did much to counter- 
act the antipathy against the Old Testament that had been 
fostered by Schleiermacher. In church polity he was Lutheran 
rather than Reformed. Besides his Old Testament Theology 
(Eng. trans., 2 vols., Edinburgh, 1874-1875), his works were 
Gesammclle Seminarreden (1872) and Lehrbuch Symbolik 
(1876), both published posthumously, and about forty articles 
for the first edition of Herzog's Realencyklopadie which were 
largely retained by Delitzsch and von Orelli in the second. 

0EHR1NGEN, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Wiirt- 
temberg, agreeably situated in a fertile country, on the Ohm, 
12 m. E. from Heilbronn by the railways to Hall and Crailsheim. 
Pop. (1905) 3,450. It- is a quaint medieval place, and, among 
its ancient buildings, boasts a fine Evangelical church, con- 
taining carvings in cedar-wood of the 15th century and numerous 
interesting tombs and monuments; a Renaissance town hall; 
the building, now used as a library, which formerly belonged 
to a monastery, erected in 1034; and a palace, the residence 
of the princes of Hohenlohe-Oehringen. 

Oehringen is the Vicus Aurelii of the Romans. Eastwards 
of it ran the old Roman frontier wall, and numerous remains 
and inscriptions dating from the days of the Roman settle- 
ment have been recently discovered, including traces of three 
camps. 

See Keller, Vicus Aurelii, oder Ohringen zur Zeit der Romer (Bonn, 
1872). 

OELS, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of Silesia, 
formerly the capital of a mediatized principality of its own 
name. It lies in a sandy plain on the Oelsbach, 20 m. N.E. 
of Breslau by rail. Pop. (1905) 10,940. The princely chateau, 
now the property of the crown prince of Prussia, dating from 
1558 and beautifully restored in 1891-1S94, contains a good 
library and a collection of pictures. Of its three Evangelical 
churches, the Schlosskirche dates from the 13th century and 
the Propstkirche from the 14th. The inhabitants are chiefly 
engaged in making shoes and growing vegetables for the Breslau 
market. 

Oels was founded about 940, and became a town in 1255. 
It appears as the capital of an independent principality at the 
beginning of the 14th century. The principality, with an area 
of 700 sq. m. and about 130,000 inhabitants, passed through 
various hands and was inherited by the ducal family of Bruns- 
wick in 1792. Then on the extinction of this family in 1884 
it lapsed to the crown of Prussia. 

See W. Hiiusler, Geschichte des Fiirstentums Ols bis zum Aus- 
sterben der piastischen Herzogslinie (Breslau, 1883); and Schulze, 
Die Succession im Fiirstentum Ols (Breslau, 1884). 



OELSCHLAGER [Olearius], ADAM (1600-1671), German 
traveller and Orientalist, was born at Aschcrsleben, near Magde- 
burg, in 1599 or 1600. After studying at Leipzig he became 
librarian and court mathematician to Duke Frederick III. of 
Holstcin-Gottorp, and in 1633 he was appointed secretary to 
the ambassadors Philip Crusius, jurisconsult, and Otto Briiggc- 
mann or Brugman, merchant, sent by the duke to Muscovy 
and Persia in the hope of making arrangements by which his 
newly-founded city of Fricdrichstadt should become the terminus 
of an overland silk-trade. This embassy started from Gottorp 
on the 22nd of October 1633, and travelled by Hamburg, Liibcck, 
Riga, Dorpat (five months' stay), Revel, Narva, Ladoga and 
Novgorod to Moscow (August 14, 1634). Here they con- 
cluded an advantageous treaty with Michael Romanov, 
and returned forthwith to Gottorp (December 14, 1634- 
April 7, 1635) to procure the ratification of this arrange- 
ment from the duke, before proceeding to Persia. This accom- 
plished, they started afresh from Hamburg on the 22nd of 
October 1635, arrived at Moscow on the 29th of March 1636; 
and left Moscow on the 30th of June for Nizhniy Novgorod, 
whither they had already sent agents (in 1634-1635) to prepare 
a vessel for their descent of the Volga. Their voyage down 
the great river and over the Caspian was slow and hindered 
by accidents, especially by grounding, as near Derbent on the 
14th of November 1636; but at last, by way of Shemakha 
(three months' delay here), Ardebil, 'Sultanieh and Kasvin, 
they reached the Persian court at Isfahan (August 3, 1637), 
and were received by the shah (August 16). Negotiations 
here were not as successful as at Moscow, and the embassy left 
Isfahan on the 21st of December 1637, and returned home by 
Resht, Lenkoran, Astrakhan, Kazan, Moscow, &c. At Revel 
Oelschlager parted from his colleagues (April 15, 1639) and 
embarked direct for Liibeck. On his way he had made a chart 
of the Volga, and partly for this reason the tsar Michael wished 
to persuade, or compel, him to enter his service. Once back 
at Gottorp, Oelschlager became librarian to the duke, who also 
made him keeper of his Cabinet of Curiosities, and induced the 
tsar to excuse his (promised) return to Moscow. Under his care 
the Gottorp library and cabinet were greatly enriched in MSS., 
books, and oriental and other works of art: in 1651 he pur- 
chased, for this purpose, the collection of the Dutch scholar and 
physician, Bernard ten Broecke (" Paludanus" ). He died 
at Gottorp on the 22nd of February 1671. 

It is by his admirable narrative of the Russian and the Persian 
legation (Beschreibung der muscowitischen und persischen Reise, 
Schleswig, 1647, and afterwards in several enlarged editions, 1656, 
&c.) that Oelschlager is best known, though he also published a 
history of Holstein (Kurtzer Begriff einer holsteinischen Chronic, 
Schleswig, 1663), a famous catalogue of the Holstein-Gottorp 
cabinet (1666), and a translation of the Gulistan (Persianisches 
Rosenthal, Schleswig, 1654), to which was appended a translation 
of the fables of Lokman. A French version of the Beschreibung 
was published by Abraham de Wicquefort (Voyages en Moscovie, 
Tartarie et Perse, par Adam Olearius, Paris, 1656), an English 
version was made by John Davies of Kidwelly (Travels of the Am- 
bassadors sent by Frederic, Duke of Holstein, to the Great Duke of 
Muscovy and the King of Persia, London, 1662; 2nd ed., 1669), 
and a Dutch translation by Dieterius van Wageningen (Beschrijvingh 
van de nieawe Parciaensche ofte Orientaelsche Reyse, Utrecht, 1651); 
an Italian translation of the Russian sections also appeared (Viaggi 
di Moscovia, Viterbo and Rome, 1658). Paul Flemming the poet 
and J. A. de Mandelslo, whose travels to the East Indies are usually 
published with those of Oelschlager, accompanied the embassy. 
Under Oelschlager's direction the celebrated globe of Gottorp 
(11 ft. in diameter) and armillary sphere were executed in 1654- 
1664; the globe was given to Peter the Great of Russia in 1 71 3 by 
Duke Frederick's grandson, Christian Augustus. Oelschlager's 
unpublished works include a Lexicon Persicum and several other 
Persian studies. (C. R. B.) 

OELSNITZ, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Saxony, 
on the Weisse Elster, 26 m. by rail S.W. of Zwickau. Pop. 
(1905) 13,966. It has two Evangelical churches, one of them 
being the old Gothic Jakobskirche, and several schools. There 
are various manufactories. Oelsnitz belonged in the 14th and 
15th centuries to the margraves of Meissen, and later to the 
electors of Saxony. Near it is the village of Voigtsberg, with 



14 



OELWEIN— OETINGER 



the remains of a castle, once a residence of the governor (Vogt) 
of the Yogtland. 

See Jahn, Chronik der Stadt Olsnitz (1875). 

OELWEIN, a city of Fayette county, Iowa, U.S.A., in the 
N.E. part of the state, about 132 m. N.E. of Des Moines. Pop. 
(1890) 830; (1900) 5142, of whom 789 were foreign-born; 
(1910 U.S. census) 6028. It is served by the Chicago, Rock 
Island & Pacific and the Chicago Great Western railways, the 
latter having large repair shops here, where four lines of its 
road converge. Oelwein was named in honour of its founder, 
August Oelwein, who settled here in 1873; it was incorporated 
in 18S8, and chartered as a city in 1897. 

OENOMAUS, in Greek legend, son of Ares and Harpinna, 
king of Pisa in Elis and father of Hippodameia. It was pre- 
dicted that he should be slain by his daughter's husband. His 
father, the god Ares-Hippius, gave him winged horses swift 
as the wind, and Oenomaus promised his daughter to the man 
who could outstrip him in the chariot race, hoping thus to 
prevent her marriage altogether. Pelops, by the treachery of 
Myrtilus, the charioteer of Oenomaus, won the race and married 
Hippodameia. The defeat of Oenomaus by Pelops, a stranger 
from Asia Minor, points to the conquest of native Ares- 
worshippers by immigrants who introduced the new religion of 
Zeus. 

See Diod. Sic. iv. 73; Pausanias vi. 21, and elsewhere; Sophocles, 
Electra, 504; Hyginus, Fab. 84. 253. Fig. 33 in article Greek Art 
represents the preparations for the chariot race. 

OENONE, in Greek legend, daughter of the river-god Kebren 
and wife of Paris. Possessing the gift of divination, she warned 
her husband of the evils that would result from his journey 
to Greece. The sequel was the rape of Helen and the Trojan 
War. Just before the capture of the city, Paris, wounded by 
Philoctetes with one of the arrows of Heracles, sought the aid of 
the deserted Oenone, who had told him that she alone could 
heal him if wounded. Indignant at his faithlessness, she refused 
to help him, and Paris returned to Troy and died of his wound. 
Oenone soon repented and hastened after him, but finding that 
she was too late to save him slew herself from grief at the sight 
of his dead body. Ovid (Heroides, 5) gives a pathetic description 
of Oenone's grief when she found herself deserted. 

OERLAMS, the name (said to be a corruption of the Dutch 
Obcrlanders) for a Hottentot tribal group living in Great Nam- 
aqualand. They came originally from Little Namaqualand 
in Cape Colony. They are of very mixed Hottentot-Bantu 
blood. 

OESEL (in Esthonian Kure-saarc or Saare-ma), a Russian 
island in the Baltic, forming with Worms, Mohn and Runo, 
a district of the government of Livonia, and lying across the 
mouth of the Gulf of Riga, 106 m. N.N.W. of the city of Riga. 
It has a length of 45 m., and an area of 1010 sq. m. The coasts 
are bold and steep, and, especially towards the north and west, 
form precipitous limestone cliffs. Like those of Shetland, the 
Oesel ponies are small, but prized for their spirit and endurance. 
The population, numbering 50,566 in 1870 and 60,000 in 1900, 
is mainly Protestant in creed, and, with the exception of the 
" German nobility, clergy and some of the townsfolk, Esthonian 
by race. The chief town, Arensburg, on the south coast, is a 
place of 4600 inhabitants, with summer sea-bathing, mud baths 
and a trade in grain, potatoes, whisky and fish. In 1227 Oesel 
was conquered by the Knights of the Sword, and was governed 
by its own bishops till 1561, when it passed into the hands of the 
Danes. By them it was surrendered to the Swedes by the peace 
of Bromsebro (1645), and, along with Livonia, it was united 
to Russia in 1721. 

OESOPHAGUS (Gr. o'iaw = I will carry, and 4>ayai>, to eat), 
in anatomy, the gullet ; see Alimentary Canal for comparative 
anatomy. The human oesophagus is peculiarly liable to certain 
accidents and diseases, due both to its function as a tube to 
carry food to the stomach and to its anatomical situation (see 
generally Digestive Organs). One of the commonest accidents 
is the lodgment of foreign bodies in some part of the tube. The 
situations in which they are arrested vary with the nature of the 



body, whether it be a coin, fishbone, toothplate or a portion of 
food. An impacted substance may be removed by the oesophageal 
forceps, or by a coin-catcher; if it should be impossible to draw 
it up it may be pushed down into the stomach. When it is in 
the stomach a purgative should never be given, but soft food 
such as porridge. Should gastric symptoms develop it may 
have to be removed by the operation of gastrotomy. Charring 
and ulceration of the oesophagus may occur from the swallowing 
of corrosive liquids, strong acids or alkalis, or even of boiling 
water. Stricture of the oesophagus is a closing of the tube so 
that neither solids nor liquids are able to pass down into the 
stomach. There are three varieties of stricture; spasmodic, 
fibrous and malignant. Spasmodic stricture usually occurs in 
young hysterical women; difficulty in swallowing is complained 
of, and a bougie may not be able to be passed, but under an 
anaesthetic will slip down quite easily. Fibrous stricture is 
usually situated near the commencement of the oesophagus; 
generally just behind the cricoid cartilage, and usually results 
from swallowing corrosive fluids, but may also result from the 
healing of a syphilitic ulcer. Occasionally it is congenital. 
The ordinary treatment is repeated dilatation by bougies. 
Occasionally division of a fibrous stricture has been practised, 
or a Symond's tube inserted. Mikulicz recommends dilatation 
of the stricture by the fingers from inside after an incision into 
the stomach or a permanent gastric fistula may have to be made. 
Malignant strictures are usually epitheliomatous in structure, 
and may be situated in any part of the oesophagus. They 
nearly always occur in males between the ages of 40 and 70 years. 
An X-ray photograph taken after the patient has swallowed 
a preparation of bismuth will show the situation of the growth, 
and Kilhan and Briinig have introduced an instrument called 
the oesophagoscope, which makes direct examination possible. 
The remedy of constant dilatation by bougies must not be 
attempted here, the walls of the oesophagus being so softened 
by disease and ulceration that severe haemorrhage or perforation 
of the walls of the tube might take place. The patient should 
be fed with purely liquid and concentrated nourishment in order 
to give the oesophagus as much rest as possible, or if the stricture 
be too tight rectal feeding may be necessary. Symond's method 
of tubage is well borne by some patients, the tube having attached 
to it a long string which is secured to the cheek or ear. The 
most satisfactory treatment, however, is the operation of gastro- 
tomy, a permanent artificial opening being made into the 
stomach through which the patient can be fed. 

OETA (mod. Kotavothra) , a mountain to the south of Thessaly, 
in Greece, forming a boundary between the valleys of the 
Spercheius and the Boeotian Cephissus. It is an offshoot of the 
Pindus range, 7080 ft. high. In its eastern portion, called 
Callidromus, it conies close to the sea, leaving only a narrow 
passage known as the famous pass of Thermopylae (q.v.). There 
was also a high pass to the west of Callidromus leading over into 
the upper Cephissus valley. In mythology Oeta is chiefly 
celebrated as the scene of the funeral pyre on which Heracles 
burnt himself before his admission to Olympus. 

OETINGER, FRIEDRICH CHRISTOPH (1702-17S2), German 
divine and theosophist, was born at Goppingen on the 6th of 
May 1702. He studied theology at Tubingen (1 722-1 728), 
and was much impressed by the works of Jakob Bohme. On 
the completion of his university course, Oetinger spent some 
years in travel. In 1730 he visited Count Zinzendorf at Herrnhut, 
remaining there some months as teacher of Hebrew and Greek. 
During his travels, in his eager search for knowledge, he made 
the acquaintance of mystics and separatists, Christians and 
learned Jews, theologians and physicians alike. At Halle he 
studied medicine. After some delay he was ordained to the 
ministry, and held several pastorates. While pastor (from 1746) 
at Waldorf near Berlin, be studied alchemy and made many 
experiments, his idea being to use his knowledge for symbolic 
purposes. These practices exposed him to the attacks of persons 
who misunderstood him. " My religion," he once said, " is 
the parallelism of Nature and Grace." Oetinger translated 
Swedenborg's philosophy of heaven and earth, and added notes 



OEYNHAUSEN— OFFENBACH, J. 



of his own. Eventually (1:766) he became prelate at Murrhardt, 
where he died on the 10th of February 1782. 

Oetinger's autobiography was published by J. Hambcrger in 1845. 
He published about seventy works, in which he expounded his 
theosophic views. A collected edition, Samtliche Schriften (1st 
section, Homilelische Schriften, 5 vols., 1858-1866; 2nd section, 
Theosophische Werke, 6 vols., 1858-1863), was prepared by K. F. C. 
Ehmann, who also wrote Oetinger's Leben und Briefe (1859). See 
also C. A. Auberlen, Die Theosophie Friedr. Chr_. Oetinger's (1847; 
2nd ed., 1859), and Hcrzog, Fricdrich Chrisloph Qtinger (1902). 

OEYNHAUSEN, a town and watering-place of Germany, in 
the Prussian province of Westphalia, on the Werrc, situated 
just above its confluence with the Weser, 9 m. W. from Minden 
by the main line of railway from Hanover to Cologne, with a 
station on the Lohne-Hameln line. Pop. (1905) 3894. The 
place, which was formerly called Rehme, owes its development 
to the discovery in 1830 of its five famous salt springs, which 
are heavily charged with carbonic acid gas. The waters are used 
both for bathing and drinking, and are particularly efficacious 
for nervous disorders, rheumatism, gout and feminine complaints. 

OFFA, the most famous hero of the early Angli. He is said 
by the Anglo-Saxon poem Widsith to have ruled over Angel, 
and the poem refers briefly to his victorious single combat, 
a story which is related at length by the Danish historians Saxo 
and Svend Aagesen. Offa (Uffo) is said to have been dumb or 
silent during his early years, and to have only recovered his 
speech when his aged father Wermund was threatened by the 
Saxons, who insolently demanded the cession of his kingdom. 
Offa undertook to fight against both the Saxon king 's son and 
a chosen champion at once. The combat took place at Rendsburg 
on an island in the Eider, and Offa succeeded in killing both his 
opponents. According to Widsith Offa's opponents belonged 
to a tribe or dynasty called Myrgingas, but both accounts state 
that he won a great kingdom as the result of his victory. A 
somewhat corrupt version of the same story is preserved in the 
Vitae duorum Of arum, where, however, the scene is transferred 
to England. It is very probable that the Offa whose marriage 
with a lady of murderous disposition is mentioned in Beowulf 
is the same person; and this story also appears in the Vitae 
duorum Of arum, though it is erroneously told of a later Offa, 
the famous king of Mercia. Offa of Mercia, however, was a 
descendant in the 12th generation of Offa, king of Angel. It is 
probable from this and other considerations that the early Offa 
lived in the latter part of the 4th century. 

See H. M. Chadwick, Origin of the English Nation (Cambridge, 
1907), where references to the original authorities will be found. 

OFFA (d. 796), king of Mercia, obtained that kingdom in a.d. 
757, after driving out Beornred, who had succeeded a few 
months earlier on the murder of iEthelbald. He traced his 
descent from Pybba, the father of Penda, through Eowa, brother 
of that king, his own father's name being Thingferth. In 779 
he was at war with Cynewulf of Wessex from whom he wrested 
Bensington. It is not unlikely that the Thames became the 
boundary of the two kingdoms about this time. In 787 the 
power of Offa was displayed in a synod held at a place called 
Cealchyth. He deprived Taenberht, archbishop of Canterbury, 
of several of his suffragan sees, and assigned them to Lichfield, 
which, with the leave of the pope, he constituted as a separate 
archbishopric under Hygeberht. He also took advantage 
of this meeting to have his son Ecgferth consecrated as his 
colleague, and that prince subsequently signed charters as 
Rex Merciorum. In 789 Offa secured the alliance of Berhtric 
of Wessex by giving him his daughter Eadburg in marriage. 
In 794 he appears to have caused the death of ^Ethelberht of 
East Anglia, though some accounts ascribe the murder to 
Cynethryth, the wife of Offa. In 796 Offa died after a reign of 
thirty-nine years and was succeeded by his son Ecgferth. It 
is customary to ascribe to Offa a policy of limited scope, namely 
the establishment of Mercia in a position equal to that of Wessex 
and of Northumbria. This is supposed to be illustrated by his 
measures with regard to the see of Lichfield. It cannot be 
doubted, however, that at this time Mercia was a much more 
formidable power than Wessex. Offa, like most of his predecessors, 



J 5 

probably held a kind of supremacy over all kingdoms south of 
the Humber. He seems, however, not to have been contented 
with this position, and to have entertained the design of putting 
an end to the dependent kingdoms. At all events we hear of 
no kings of the Hwicce after about 780, and the kings of Sussex 
seem to have given up the royal title about the same time. 
Further, there is no evidence for any kings in Kent from 784 
until after Offa's death. To Offa is ascribed by Asser, in his 
life of Alfred, the great fortifications against the Welsh which 
is still known as " Offa's dike." It stretched from sea to sea 
and consisted of a wall and a rampart. An account of his Welsh 
campaigns is given in the Vitae duorum Of arum, but it is difficult 
to determine how far the stories there given have an historical 
basis. 

See Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, ed. J. Earlc and C. Plummer (Oxford, 
1899), s.a. 755, 777, 785, 787, 792, 794, 796, 836; W. dc G. Birch, 
Cartularium Saxonicum (London, 1885-1893), vol. i.; Asser, Life of 
Alfred, ed. W. H. Stevenson (Oxford, 1904); Vitae duorum Ojjarum 
(in works of Matthew Paris, ed. W. Wats, London, 1640). 

OFFAL, refuse or waste stuff, the " off fall," that which falls 
off (cf. Dutch afval, Ger. Abjo.lt). The term is applied especially 
to the waste parts of an animal that has been slaughtered for 
food, to putrid flesh or carrion, and to waste fish, especially 
to the little ones that get caught in the nets with the larger 
and better fish, and are thrown away or used as manure. As 
applied to grain " offal " is used of grains too small or light for 
use for flour, and also in flour milling of the husk or bran of 
wheat with a certain amount of flour attaching, sold for feeding 
beasts (see Flour). 

OFFENBACH, JACQUES (1819-1880), French composer of 
opera boitfe, was born at Cologne, of German Jewish parents, 
on the 21st of June 1819. His talent for music was developed 
at a very early age; and in 1833 he was sent to Paris to study 
the violoncello at the conservatoire, where, under the care of 
Professor Vaslin, he became a fairly good performer. In 1834 
he became a member of the orchestra of the Opera Comique; 
and he turned his opportunities to good account, so that 
eventually he was made conductor at the Theatre Francais. 
There, in 1848, he made his first success as a composer in the 
Chanson de Fortunio in Alfred de Musset's play Le Chandelier. 
From this time forward his life became a ceaseless struggle 
for the attainment of popularity. His power of production was 
apparently inexhaustible. His first complete work, Pepito, 
was produced at the Opera Comique in 1853. This was followed 
by a crowd of dramatic pieces of a light character, which daily 
gained in favour with Parisian audiences, and eventually effected 
a complete revolution in the popular taste of the period. En- 
couraged by these early successes, Offenbach boldly undertook 
the delicate task of entirely remodelling both the form and the 
style of the light musical pieces which had so long been welcomed 
with acclamation by the frequenters of the smaller theatres in 
Paris. With this purpose in view he obtained a lease of the 
Theatre Comte in the Passage Choiseul, reopened it in 1855 under 
the title of the Bouffes Parisiens, and night after night attracted 
crowded audiences by a succession of brilliant, humorous trifles. 
Ludovic Halevy, the librettist, was associated with him from 
the first, but still more after i860, when Halevy obtained Henri 
Meilhac's collaboration (see Halevy). Beginning with Les Deux 
Aveugles and Le Violoneux, the series of Offenbach's operettas 
was rapidly continued, until in 1867 its triumph culminated 
in La Grande Duchesse de Cerolstein, perhaps the most popular 
opera boufe that ever was written, not excepting even his Orphee 
aux enfers, produced in 1858. From this time forward the success 
of Offenbach's pieces became an absolute certainty, and the 
new form of opera boufe, which he had gradually endowed 
with as much consistency as it was capable of assuming, was 
accepted as the only one worth cultivating. It found imitators 
in Lecocq and other aspirants of a younger generation, and 
Offenbach's works found their way to every town in Europe 
in which a theatre existed. Tuneful, gay and exhilarating, 
their want of refinement formed no obstacle to .their popularity, 
and perhaps even contributed to it. In 1866 his own connexion 
with the Bouffes Parisiens ceased, and he wrote for various 



i6 



OFFENBACH— OFFICERS 



theatres. In twenty-five years Offenbach produced no less 
than sixty-nine complete dramatic works, some of which were 
in three or even in four acts. Among the latest of these were 
Lc Docteur Ox, founded on a story by Jules Verne, and La Boitc 
au lait, both produced in 1877, and Madame Favart (1879). 
Offenbach died at Paris on the 5th of October 1880. 

OFFENBACH, a town of Germany, in the grand-duchy of 
Hesse, on the left bank of the Main, 5 m. S.E. of Frankfort-on- 
Main, with which it is connected by the railway to Bebra and 
by a local electric line. Pop. (1905) 58,806, of whom about 
20,000 were Roman Catholics and 1400 Jews. The most interest- 
ing building in the town is the Renaissance chateau of the counts 
of Isenburg. Offenbach is the principal industrial town of the 
duchy, and its manufactures are of the most varied description. 
Its characteristic industry, however, is the manufacture of 
portfolios, pocket-books, albums and other fancy goods in 
leather. The earliest mention of Offenbach is in a document 
of 970. In 14S6 it came into the possession of the counts of 
Isenburg, who made it their residence in 1685, and in 1816, 
when their lands were mediatized, it was assigned to Hesse. 
It owes its prosperity in the first place to the industry of the 
French Protestant refugees who settled here at the end of the 
17th, and the beginning of the 18th century, and in the 
second place to the accession of Hesse to the German Zollverein 
in 1828. 

See Jost, Offenbach am Main in Vergangenheit und Gegemoart 
(Offenbach, 1901); Hager, Die Lederwarenindusirie in Offenbach 
(Karlsruhe, 1905). 

OFFENBURG, a town of Germany, in the grand-duchy of 
Baden, 27 m. by rail S.W. of Baden, on the river Kinzig. Pop. 
(1905) 15,434. It contains a statue of Sir Francis Drake, a mark 
of honour due to the fact that Drake is sometimes regarded as 
having introduced the potato into Europe. The chief industries 
of the town are the making of cotton, linen, hats, malt, machinery, 
tobacco and cigars and glass. Offenburg is first mentioned about 
1100. In 1223 it became a town; in 1248 it passed to the bishop 
of Strassburg; and in 1289 it became an imperial free city. 
Soon, however, this position was lost, but it was regained about 
the middle of the 16th century, and Offenburg remained a free 
city until 1802, when it became part of Baden. In 1632 it was 
taken by the Swedes, and in 1689 it was destroyed by the French. 

See Walter, Kurzer Abriss der Geschichte der Reichsstadt Offenburg 
(Offenburg, 1896). 

OFFERTORY (from the ecclesiastical Lat. offcrtorium, Fr. 
offertoire, a place to which offerings were brought), the alms of 
a congregation collected in church, or at any religious service. 
Offertory has also a special sense in the services of both the 
English and Roman churches. It forms in both that part of 
the Communion service appointed to be said or sung, during 
the collection of alms, before the elements are consecrated. In 
music, an offertory is the vocal or instrumental setting of the 
offertory sentences, or a short instrumental piece played by the 
organist while the collection is being made. 

OFFICE (from Lat. officium, " duty," " service," a shortened 
form of opif actum, from facere, " to do," and either the stem of 
opes, " wealth," " aid," or opus, " work "), a duty or service, 
particularly the special duty cast upon a person by his position; 
also a ceremonial duty, as in the rites paid to the dead, the " last 
offices." The term is thus especially used of a religious service, 
the " daily office " of the English Church or the " divine office " 
of the Roman Church (see Breviary). It is also used in this 
sense of a service for a particular occasion, as the Office for the 
Visitation of the Sick, &c. From the sense of duty or function, 
the word is transferred to the position or place which lays 
on the holder or occupier the performance of such duties. 
This leads naturally to the use of the word for the buildings 
or the separate rooms in which the duties are performed, 
and for the staff carrying on the work or business in such 
offices. In the Roman curia the department of the Inquisi- 
tion is known as the Holy Office, in full, the Congregation 
of the Holy Office of the Inquisition (see Inquisition and 
Curia Romana). 



Offices of Profil. — The phrase " office of profit under the crown " 
is used with a particular application in British parliamentary 
practice. The holders of such offices of profit have been subject in 
regard to the occupation of seats in the House of Commons to 
certain disabilities which were in their origin due to the fear of 
the undue influence exercised by the crown during the constitu- 
tional struggles of the 17th century. Attempts to deal with the 
danger of the presence of " place-men " in the House of Commons 
were made by the Place Bills introduced in 1672-1673, 1694 and 
1743. The Act of Settlement 1700 (§ 3) laid it downthat no 
person who has an office or place of profit under the king or 
receives a pension from the crown shall be capable of serving as 
a member of the House of Commons. This drastic clause, which 
would have had the disastrous effect of entirely separating the 
executive from the legislature, was repealed and the basis of 
the present law was laid down in 1706 by 6 Anne (c. 41). This 
first disqualifies (§ 24) from membership all holders of " new 
offices," 1 i.e. those created after October 1705; secondly (§ 25) 
it renders void the election of a member who shall accept any 
office of profit other than " new offices " but allows the member 
to stand for re-election. The disqualification attaching to many 
" new offices " has been removed by various statutes, and by 
§ 52 of the Reform Act 1867 the necessity of re-election is avoided 
when a member, having been elected subsequent to the accept- 
ance of any office named in a schedule of that act, is transferred 
to any other office in that schedule. The rules as to what offices 
disqualify from membership or render re-election necessary are 
exceedingly complicated, [depending as they do on a large 
number of statutes (see Erskine May, Parliamentary Practice, 
nth ed., pp. 632-645, and Rogers, On Elections, vol. ii., 1906). 
The old established rule that a member, once duly elected, 
cannot resign his seat is evaded by the acceptance of certain 
minor offices (see Chiltern Hundreds). 

OFFICERS. Historically the employment of the word 
" officer " to denote a person holding a military or naval com- 
mand as representative of the state, and not as deriving his 
authority from his own powers or privileges, marks an entire 
change in the character of the armed forces of civilized nations. 
Originally signifying an official, one who performs an assigned 
duty (Lat. officium), an agent, and in the 15th century actually 
meaning the subordinate of such an official(even to-day a constable 
is so called), the word seems to have acquired a military signific- 
ance late in the 16th century. 2 It was at this time that armies, 
though not yet " standing," came to be constituted almost 
exclusively of professional soldiers in the king's pa)'. Mercen- 
aries, and great numbers of mercenaries, had always existed, and 
their captains were not feudal magnates. But the bond between 
mercenaries and their captains was entirely personal, and the 
bond between tbe captain and the sovereign was of the nature 
of a contract. The non-mercenary portion of the older armies was 
feudal in character. It was the lord and not a king's officer who 
commanded it, and he commanded in virtue of his rights, not 
of a warrant or commission. 

European history in the late 15th century is the story of the 
victory of the crown over the feudatories. The instrument of 
the crown was its army, raised and commanded by its deputies. 
But these deputies were still largely soldiers of fortune and, in the 
higher ranks, feudal personages, who created the armies them- 
selves by their personal influence with the would-be soldier or 
the unemployed professional fighting man. Thus the first system 
to replace the obsolete combination of feudalism and " free 
companies " was what may be called the proprietary system. 
Under this the colonel was the proprietor of his regiment, the 
captain the proprietor of his company. The king accepted them 
as his officers, and armed them with authority to raise men, 
but they themselves raised the men as a rule from experienced 
soldiers who were in search of employment, although, like 

1 This section also disqualifies colonial governors and deputy 
governors and holders of certain other offices. 

2 At sea the relatively clear partition of actual duties amongst 
the authorities of a ship brought about the adoption of the term 
" officer " somewhat earlier. 



OFFICERS 



i 



/ 



Falstaff, some captains and colonels " misused the King's press 
damnably." All alike were most rigorously watched lest by 
showing imaginary men on their pay-sheets they should make 
undue profits. A " muster " was the production of a number of 
living men on parade corresponding to the number shown on the 
pay-roll. An inspection was an inspection not so much of the 
efficiency as of the numbers and the accounts of units. A full 
account of these practices, which were neither more nor less 
prevalent in England than elsewhere, will be found in J. W. 
Fortescue's History of the British Army, vol. i. So faithfully 
was the custom observed of requiring the showing of a man for 
a man's pay, that the grant of a special allowance to officers 
administering companies was often made in the form of allowing 
them to show imaginary John Does and Richard Roes on the 
pay-sheets. 

The next step was taken when armies, instead of being raised 
for each campaign and from the qualified men who at each 
recruiting time offered themselves, became " standing " armies 
fed by untrained recruits. During the late 17th and the iSth 
centuries the crown supplied the recruits, and also the money 
for maintaining the forces, but the colonels and captains re- 
tained in a more or less restricted degree their proprietorship. 

Thus, the profits of military office without its earlier burdens 
were in time of peace considerable, and an officer's commission 
had therefore a " surrender value." The practice of buying and 
selling commissions was a natural consequence, and this continued 
long after the system of proprietary regiments and companies 
had disappeared. In England " purchase " endured until 1S73, 
nearly a hundred years after it had ceased on the continent of 
Europe and more than fifty after the clothing, feeding and pay- 
ment of the soldiers had been taken out of the colonels' hands. 
The purchase system, it should be mentioned, did not affect 
artillery and engineer officers, either in England or in the rest 
of Europe. These officers, who were rather semi-civil than 
military officials until about 1715, executed an office rather than 
a command — superintended gun-making, built fortresses and 
so on. As late as 17S0 the right of a general officer promoted 
from the Royal Artillery to command troops of other arms was 
challenged. In its original form, therefore, the proprietary system 
was a most serious bar to efficiency. So long as war was chronic, 
and self-trained recruits were forthcoming, it had been a good 
working method of devolving responsibility. But when drill 
and the handling of arms became more complicated, and, above 
all, when the supply of trained men died away, the state took 
recruiting out of the colonels' and captains' hands, and, as the 
individual officer had now nothing to offer the crown but his own 
potential military capacity (part of which resided in his social 
status, but by no means all), the crown was able to make him, 
in the full sense of the word, an 'officer of itself. This was most 
fully seen in the reorganization of the French army by Louis 
XIV. and Louvois. The colonelcies and captaincies of horse 
and foot remained proprietary offices in the hands of the' nobles 
but these offices were sinecures or almost sinecures. The colonels, 
in peace at any rate, were not expected to do regimental duty. 
They were at liberty to make such profits as they could make 
under a stringent inspection system. But they were expected 
to be the influential figure-heads of their regiments and to pay 
large sums for the privilege of being proprietors. This classifica- 
tion of officers into two bodies, the poorer which did the whole 
of the work, and the richer upon which the holding of a com- 
mission conferred an honour that birth or wealth did not confer, 
marks two very notable advances in the history of army organiza- 
tion, the professionalization of the officer and the creation of the 
prestige attaching to the holder of a commission because he holds 
it and not for any extraneous reason. 

The distinction between working and quasi-honorary officers 
was much older, of course, than Louvois's reorganization. 
Moreover it extended to the highest ranks. About 1600 the 
"general" of a European army 1 was always a king, prince 
or nobleman. The lieutenant-general, by custom the com- 
mander of the cavalry, was also, as a rule, a noble, in 
1 Except in the Italian republics. 



virtue of his command of the aristocratic arm. But the 
commander of the foot, the " sergeant-major-general " or 
" major-general," was invariably a professional soldier. It was 
his duty to draw up the army (not merely the foot) for battle, 
and in other respects to act as chief of staff to the general. 
In the infantry regiment, the " sergeant-major " or " major " 
was second-in-command and adjutant combined. Often, if not 
always, he was promoted from amongst the lieutenants and 
not the (proprietary) captains. The lieutenants were the back- 
bone of the army. 

Seventy years later, on the organization of the first great 
standing army by Louvois, the " proprietors," as mentioned 
above, were reduced to a minimum both in numbers and in 
military importance. The word " major " in its various 
meanings had come, in the French service, to imply staff 
functions. Thus the sergeant-major of infantry became the 
" adjudant-major." The sergeant-major-general, as commander 
of the foot, had disappeared and given place to numerous 
lieutenant-generals and " brigadiers," but as chief of the staff 
he survived for two hundred years. As late as 1870 the 
chief of staff of a French army bore the title of " the major- 
general." 

Moreover a new title had come into prominence, that of 
" marshal " or " field marshal." This marks ore of the most 
important points in the evolution of the military officer, his 
classification by rank and not by the actual command he holds. 
In the 1 6th century an officer was a lieutenant af, not in, 
a particular regiment, and the higher officers were general, 
lieutenant-general and major-general of a particular army. When 
their army was disbanded they had no command and possessed 
therefore no rank — except of course when, as was usually the 
case, they were colonels of permanent regiments or governors 
of fortresses. Thus in the British army it was not until 
late in the 18th century that general officers received any 
pay as such. The introduction of a distinctively military 
rank- of " marshal " or " field marshal," which took place in 
France and the empire in the first years of the 17th century, 
meant the establishment of a list of general officers, and the 
list spread downwards through the various regimental ranks, in 
proportion as the close proprietary system broke up, until it 
became the general army list of an army of to-day. At first 
field marshals were merely officers of high rank and experience, 
eligible for appointment to the offices of general, lieutenant- 
general, &c, in a particular army. On an army being formed, 
the list of field marshals was drawn upon, and the necessary 
number appointed. Thus an army of Gustavus Adolphus's 
time often included 6 or 8 field marshals as subordinate general 
officers. But soon armies grew larger, more mobile and more 
flexible and more general officers were needed. Thus fresh grades 
of general arose. The next rank below that of marshal, in France, 
was that of lieutenant-general, which had formerly implied the 
second-in-command of an army, and a little further back in 
history the king's lieutenant-general or military viceroy. 3 Below 
the lieutenant-general was the marcchal dc camp, the heir of the 
sergeant-major-general. In the imperial service the ranks were 
field marshal and lieutenant field marshal (both of which survive 
to the present day) and major-general. A further grade of general 
officer was created by Louis XIV., that of brigadier, and this 
completes the process of evolution, for the regimental system 
had already provided the lower titles. 

The ranks of a modern army, with slight variations in title, 
are therefore as follows: 

(a) Field marshal: in Germany, Generalfeldmarschall; in Spain 
" captain-general "; in France (though the rank is in abeyance) 
" marshal." The marshals of France, however, were neither so 
few in number nor so restricted to the highest commands as are 
marshals elsewhere. In Germany a new rank, " colonel-general " 

2 The title was, of course, far older. 

3 In England, until after Marlborough's death, rank followed 
command and not vice versa. The first field marshals were the 
duke of Argyll and the earl of Cadogan. Marlborough's title, or 
rather office, was that of captain-general. 



i8 



OFFICERS 



(Generaloberst), has come into existence — or rather has been revived ' 
— of late years. Most of the holders of this rank have the honorary 
style of general-field-marshal. 2 

(b) General: in Germany and Russia, "general of infantry," 
" general of cavalry," " general of artillery." In Austria generals of 
artillery and infantry were known by the historic title of Feldzeug- 
meister (ordnance-master) up to 1909, but the grade of general of 
infantry was created in that year, the old title being now restricted 
to generals of artillery. In France the highest grade of general 
officer is the " general of division." In the United States army the 
grade of full " general " has only been held by Washington, Grant, 
Sherman and Sheridan. 

(c) Lieutenant-general (except in France) : in Austria the old title 
of lieutenant field marshal is retained. In the United States army 
the title " lieutenant-general," except within recent years, has been 
almost as rare as " general." Winfield Scott was a brevet lieutenant- 
general. The substantive rank was revived for Grant when he was 
placed in command of the Union Army in 1864. It was abolished 
as an American rank in 1907. 

(d) Major-general (in France, general of brigade) : this is the 
highest grade normally found in the United States Army, generals 
and lieutenant-generals being promoted for special service only. 3 

(e) Brigadier-general, in the United States and (as a temporary 
rank only) in the British services. 

The above are the five grades of higher officers. To all intents 
and purposes, no nation has more than four of these five ranks, 
while France and the United States, the great republics, have only 
two. The correspondence between rank and functions cannot 
be exactly laid down, but in general an officer of the rank of 
lieutenant-general commands an army corps and a major-general 
a division. Brigades are commanded by major-generals, 
brigadier-generals or colonels. Armies are as a rule commanded 
by field marshals or full generals. In France generals of division 
command divisions, corps, armies and groups of armies. 

The above are classed as general officers. The " field officers " 
(French officiers superieurs, German Stabsoffiziere) are as follows: 

(a) Colonel. — This rank exists in its primitive significance in every 
army. It denotes a regimental commander, or an officer of corre- 
sponding status on the staff. In Great Britain, with the "linked 
battalion " system, regiments of infantry do not work as units, 
and the executive command of battalions, regiments of cavalry 
and brigades of field artillery is in the hands of lieutenant-colonels. 
Colonels of British regiments who are quasi-honorary (though no 
longer proprietary) chiefs are royal personages or general officers. 
Colonels in active employment as such are either on the staff, 
commanders of brigades or corresponding units, or otherwise extra- 
regimentally employed. 

(b) Lieutenant-colonel: in Great Britain " the commanding 
officer " of a unit. Elsewhere, where the regiment and not_ the 
battalion is the executive unit, the lieutenant-colonel sometimes 
acts as second in command, sometimes commands one of the bat- 
talions. In Russia all the battalion leaders are lieutenant-colonels. _ 

(c) Major. — This rank does not exist in Russia, and inFrance is 
replaced by chef de bataillon or chef d'escadron, colloquially com- 
mandant. In the British infantry he preserves some of the character- 
istics of the ancient "sergeant-major," as a _ second in command 
with certain administrative duties. The junior majors command 
companies. In the cavalry the majors, other than the second-in- 
command, command squadrons; in the artillery they command 
batteries. In armies which have the regiment as the executive unit, 
majors command battalions ("wings" of cavalry, "groups" of 
artillery). 

Lastly the " company officers " (called in France and Germany 
subaltern officers) are as follows: — 

(a) Captain (Germany and Austria, Hauptmann, cavalry Ritt- 
meister) : in the infantry of all countries, the company commander. 
In Russia there is a lower grade of captain called " staff-captain," 
and in Belgium there is the rank of " second-captain." In all 
countries except Great Britain captains command squadrons and 
batteries. Under the captain, with such commands and powers as 
are delegated to them, are the subalter ns, usually graded as — 

'The 16th-century "colonel-general" was the commander of a 
whole section of the armed forces. In France there were several 
colonels-general, each of whom controlled several regiments, or 
indeed the whole of an " arm." Their functions were rather those 
of a war office than those of a troop-leader. If they held high 
commands in a field army, it was by special appointment ad hoc. 
Colonels-general were also proprietors in France of one company 
in each regiment, whose services they accepted. 

- In Russia the rank of marshal has been long in abeyance. 

3 In the Confederate service the grades were general for army 
commanders, lieutenant-general for corps commanders, major- 
general for divisional commanders and brigadier-general for brigade 
commanders. 



(b) Lieutenant (first lieutenant in U.S.A., Oberleutnant in Germany 
and Austria). 

(c) Sub-lieutenant (second-lieutenant in Great Britain and U.S.A., 
Leutnanl in Germany and Austria). 

(d) Aspirants, or probationary young officers, not of full com- 
missioned status. 

The continental officer is on an average considerably older, 
rank for rank, than the British; but he is neither younger 
nor older in respect of command. In the huge " universal 
service " armies of to-day, the regimental officer of France or 
Germany commands, in war, on an average twice the number of 
men that are placed under the British officer of equal rank. 
Thus a German or French major of infantry has about 900 
rifles to direct, while a British major may have either half a 
battalion, 450, or a double company, 220; a German captain 
commands a company of 250 rifles as against an English captain's 
no and so on. At the same time it must be remembered that 
at peace strength the continental battalion and company are 
maintained at little more than half their war strength, and the 
under-officering of European armies only makes itself seriously 
felt on mobilization. 

It is different with the questions of pay and promotion, which 
chiefly affect the life of an army in peace. As to the former 
(see also Pensions) the Continental officer is paid at a lower rate 
than the British, as shown by the table of ordinary pay per 
annum (without special pay or allowances) below: — 



Lieutenant-colonel ' . 

Major ' 

Captain ' 

Oberleutnant (Lieutenant) ' . 

Second Lieutenant (Leutnant, 

Sous-lieutenant) l . . . 



Great 
Britain 



328 
248 
210 
118 

94 



France. 



263 

224 
139 to 200 
101 to 120 

93 



Germany. 



292 

292 

150 to 195 

78 

45 to 60 



1 Infantry, lowest scale, other arms and branches higher, often 
considerably higher. 

It must be noted that in France and Germany the major is a 
battalion commander, corresponding to the British lieutenant- 
colonel. But the significance of this table can only be realized 
when it is remembered that promotion is rapid in the British 
army and very slow in the others. The senior Oberlcutnants 
of the German army are men of 37 to 38 years of age; the senior 
captains 47 to 48. In 1908 the youngest captains were 36, the 
youngest majors 45 years of age. As another illustration, the 
captain's maximum pay in the French army, £10 per annum 
less than a British captain's, is only given after 12 years' service 
in that rank, i.e. to a man of at least twenty years' service. 
The corresponding times for British regular officers in 1905 
(when the effects of rapid promotions during the South African 
War were still felt) were 6 to 75 years from first commission to 
promotion to captain, and 14 to 19 years from first commission 
to promotion to major. In 1908, under more normal conditions, 
the times were 7 to Sj years to captain, 15 to 20 to major. In 
the Royal Engineers and the Indian army a subaltern is auto- 
matically promoted captain on completing 9 years' commissioned 
service, and a captain similarly promoted major after 18. 

The process of development in the case of naval officers (seeNAVY) 
presents many points of similarity, but also considerable differences. 
For from the first the naval officer could only offer to serve on the 
king's ship: he did not build a ship as a colonel raised a regiment, 
and thus there was no proprietary system. On the other hand the 
naval officer was even more of a simple office-holder than his comrade 
ashore. He had no rank apart from that which he held in the 
economy of the ship, and when the ship went out of commission 
the officers as well as the crew were disbanded. One feature of the 
proprietary system, however, appears in the navy organization; 
there was a marked distinction between the captain and the lieu- 
tenant who led the combatants and the master and the master's 
mate who sailed the ship. But here there were fewer " vested 
interests," and instead of remaining in the condition, so to speak, 
of distinguished passengers, until finally eliminated by the " levelling 
up " of the working class of officers, the lieutenants and captains 
were (in England) required to educate themselves thoroughly in 
the subjects of the sea officer's profession. When this process had 
gone on for two generations, that is, about 1670, the formation of a 



OFFICERS 



x 9 



permanent staff of naval officers was begun by the institution of 
half-pay for the captains, and very soon afterwards the methods of 
admission and early training of naval officers were systematized. 

The ranks in the British Royal Navy are shown with the relative 
ranks of the army in the following table (taken from King's Regu- 
lations), which also gives some idea of the complexity of the non- 
combatant branches of naval officers. 

Training of British Army Officers. — This may be conveniently 



by the Civil Service Commissioners as to their educational qualifica- 
tions. This examination is competitive in so far that vacancies at 
the Royal Military College at Sandhurst (for Cavalry, Infantry and 
Army Service Corps), or the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich 
(for Engineers and Artillery), go to those who pass highest, if physic- 
ally fit. Before presenting himself for this examination, the candidate 
must produce a " leaving certificate " from the school at which he 
was educated, showing that he already possesses a fair knowledge 



Corresponding Ranks. 



Army. 

1. Field Marshals . 

2. Generals 

3. Lieutenant-Generals 

4. Major-Generals . 

5. Brigadier-Generals . 

6. Colonels 



7. Lieutenant-Colonels 



8. Majors 



9. Captains 



10. Lieutenants .... 

11. Second Lieutenants . 

12. Higher ranks of Warrant Officers 



Na 



vy. 



Admirals of the Fleet 
Admirals 
Vice-Admirals . 
Rear-Admirals . 



Commodores 

Captains of 3 years' seniority 



Captains under 3 years' seniority 



Commanders, but junior of that rank 



Lieutenants of 8 years' seniority 



Lieutenants under 8 years' seniority 



Sub-Lieutenants 



Enginecr-in-Chief, if Engineer Vice-Admiral. 
Inspectors-General of Hospitals and Fleets. 
Engineer-in-Chief, if Engineer Rear-Admiral. 
Engineer Rear-Admiral. 

Deputy 1 nspcctors-General of Hospitals and Fleets. 

Secretaries to Admirals of the Fleet. 

Paymasters-in-Chicf. 

Engineer Captains of 8 years'seniority in that rank. 

Staff Captains of 4 years' seniority. 

Staff Captains under 4 years' seniority (navigating 

branch). 
Secretaries to Commanders-in-Chief, of 5 years' 

service as such. 
Engineer Captains under 8 years' seniority in that 

rank. 
Fleet-Surgeons. 1 
Secretaries to Commanders-in-Chief under 5 years' 

service. 1 
Fleet Paymasters. 1 
Engineer Commanders. 1 
Naval Instructors of 15 years' seniority. 1 
Engineer Lieutenants of 8 years' seniority, qualified 

and selected. 
Staff-Surgeons. 
Secretaries to Junior Flag Officers, Commodores, 1st 

Class. 
Staff Paymasters and Paymaster. 
Naval Instructors of 8 years' seniority. 
Carpenter Lieutenant of 8 years' seniority. 
Surgeons. 

Secretaries to Commodores, 2nd Class. 
Naval Instructors under 8 years' seniority. 
Engineer Lieutenant under 8 years' seniority, or 

over if not duly qualified and selected. 
Assistant Paymasters of 4 years' seniority. 
Carpenter Lieutenant under 8 years' seniority. 
Assistant Paymasters under 4 years' seniority. 
Engineer Sub-Lieutenants. 
Chief Gunner. 1 
Chief Boatswain. 1 
Chief Carpenter. 1 
Chief Artificer Engineer. 1 
Chief Schoolmaster. 1 
Midshipmen. 2 
Clerks. 2 
Gunners. 1 
Boatswains.- 
Carpenters. 1 
Artificer Engineer. 1 
Head Schoolmaster. 1 
Head Wardmaster. 1 



t * But junior of the army rank. 

divided into two parts: (I.) that which precedes the appointment 
to a commission; (11.) that which succeeds it. 

I. Omitting those officers who obtain their commissions from 
the ranks, the training which precedes the appointment to a com- 
mission is subdivided into: (<z) General Education; (6) Technical 
Instruction. 

(a) General Education. — A fairly high standard of education is 
considered essential. Candidates from universities approved by the 
Army Council must have resided for three academic years at their 
university, and have taken a degree in any subject or group of 
subjects other than Theology, Medicine, Music and Commerce. A 
university candidate for a commission in the Royal Artillery must 
further be qualified in Mathematics. The obtaining of first-class 
honours is considered equivalent to one year's extra service in the 
army, and an officer can count that year for calculating his service 
towards his pension. University candidates are eligible for com- 
missions in the Cavalry, Royal Artillery, Infantry, Indian Army 
and Army Service Corps. For other branches of the service special 
regulations are in force. 

Those candidates who have not been at a university are examined 



2 But senior of the army rank. 

of the subjects of examination. Candidates who fail to secure 
admission to these institutions, but satisfy the examiners that they 
are sufficiently well educated, can obtain commissions in the Special 
Reserve. 

Candidates for commissions in the Royal Army Medical Corps 
and the Army Veterinary Corps are not required to pass an 
educational examination, the ordinary course of medical or veterinary 
education being deemed sufficient, but the Army Council may reject 
a candidate who shows any deficiency in his general education. 

Officers of the Colonial military forces wishing to obtain com- 
missions in the British Army must either produce a school or college 
" leaving certificate " or pass an examination held by the Army 
Qualifying Board, or must show that they have passed one of certain 
recognized examinations. 

(b) Technical Instruction. — In addition to general educational 
attainments, a fair knowledge of technical matters is expected from 
candidates. 

For Cavalry, Infantry, Royal Engineers, Royal Artillery and Army 
Service Corps, an examination must be passed in administration 
and organization; military history, strategy' and tactics; military 



20 



OFFICERS 



topography, engineering and law. In addition, the following 
conditions must be complied with: (i) University candidates are 
required to be members of the Senior Division of the Officers' 
Training Corps (see United Kingdom: Army) should there be a 
unit of that corps at the university to which they belong. They 
are further required to be attached for six weeks to a Regular unit 
during their residence at the university. If there is no Officers' 
Training Corps at his university, the candidate is attached to a 
Regular unit for twelve weeks (consecutively or in two stages). 
The final examination in military subjects is competitive. (2) 
Cadets of the Royal Military College are instructed in the following 
additional subjects: sanitation, French or German (or both), 
riding and horse management, musketry, physical training, drill 
and signalling. Hindustani may be taken instead of French or 
German. (3) Cadets of the Royal Military Academy are instructed 
in the same subjects as the cadets at the Royal Military College, 
with the addition of artillery, advanced mathematics, chemistry, 
light, heat, electricity and workshop practice. Cadets who pass 
highest in the final examination for commissions are as a rule 
appointed to the Royal Engineers, the remainder to the Royal 
Artillery. (4) Officers of the Special Reserve, Territorial Force and 
certain other forces must have completed a continuous period of 
attachment of twelve months to a Regular unit of Cavalry, Artillery, 
Engineers or Infantry, and have served and been[trained for at least 
one year in the force to which they belong, before presenting them- 
selves at the competitive examination in military subjects. The 
period of attachment to Regular units may be reduced if certain 
certificates are obtained. Candidates for commissions in the artillery 
must belong to the artillery branches of the above forces and have a 
certificate in riding and mathematics. They are not eligible for the 
Royal Engineers. (5) The conditions for Officers of the Colonial 
Military Forces are similar to those for the Special Reserve, &c, 
except that only two months' attachment to a Regular unit, or unit 
of the Permanent Colonial Forces, is required. (6) Commissions 
are also given to Cadets of the Royal Military College, Kingston, 
Canada; the training of that establishment being similar to that 
at the Royal Military College and the Royal Military Academy. 

Candidates for commissions in the Royal Army Medical Corps and 
Army Veterinary Corps are not examined in military subjects, 
but must pass in the appropriate technical subjects; those for the 
Royal Army Medical Corps passing two written and two oral 
examinations, one each in medicine and surgery; those for the Army 
Veterinary Corps passing a written and an oral examination in 
veterinary medicine, surgery and hygiene. Candidates for the Royal 
Army Medical Corps have further to proceed to the Royal Army 
Medical College for instruction in recruiting duties, hygiene, 
pathology, tropical medicine, military surgery and military medical 
administration. 

Royal Engineers attend the School of Military Engineering at 
Chatham, where long and elaborate courses of instruction are given 
in all subjects appertaining to the work of the corps, including 
practical work in the field and in fortresses. 

II. The training which succeeds the appointment to a commission 
consists partly of more detailed instruction in the subjects already 
learned, partly of the practical application of those subjects, and 
partly of more advanced instruction with its practical application. 

On first joining his unit the young officer is put through a course 
of preliminary drills, lasting, as a rule, for from three months 
(infantry) to six months (cavalry), though the time depends upon 
the individual officer's rate of progress. During this period, and for 
some considerable time afterwards, officers are instructed in " regi- 
mental duties," consisting of the interior economy of a regiment, 
such as financial accounts, stores, correspondence, the minor points 
of military law in their actual working, customs of the service, 
the management of regimental institutes, &c, with, in the case of 
the mounted branches, equitation and the care and management of 
horses. They are required to attend a number of courts-martial, 
as supernumerary members, before being permitted to attend one 
in the effective and official capacities of member or prosecutor, 
although from a legal point of view their qualification depends simply 
upon their rank and length of service. A course of musketry, 
theoretical and practical, is then gone through. Field training 
begins with lectures on the various evolutions of the squadron, 
battery or company, followed by actual practice in the field, arranged 
by the commanders of squadrons, batteries or companies. 

Before promotion from the rank of second-lieutenant to lieutenant, 
an examination must be passed in " Regimental Duties " (practical, 
oral and written) and " Drill and Field Training " (practical only). 
The officer is then taken in hand by the commanding officer of his 
regiment, battalion or brigade. He is frequently examined in the 
subjects in which he has already been instructed, and is practically 
taught the more advanced stages of topography, engineering, 
tactics, law and organization. The next stage consists of regimental 
drills, which include every kind of practical work in the field which 
can be done by a unit under the command of a lieutenant-colonel. 
After this come brigade, division and army manceuvres. Officers 
have to pass examinations in military subjects for promotion until 
they attain the rank of major. The chief of these subjects are 
tactics, military topography, military engineering, military law, 
administration and military history. For majors, before promotion 



to lieutenant-colonel, an examination in " Tactical Fitness for 
Command " has to be passed. This examination is a test of ability 
in commanding the " three arms " in the field; a course of attach- 
ment to the two arms to which the officer does not belong being a 
necessary preliminary. 

Army Service Corps. — The officers of this corps have usually served 
for at least one year in the cavalry, infantry or Royal Marines, 
though commissions are also given to cadets of the Royal Military 
College. On joining, the officer first spends nine months on proba- 
tion, during which he attends lectures and practical demonstrations 
in the following subjects: military administration and organization 
generally; and as regards Army Service Corps work, in detail; 
organization of the Field Army and Lines of Communication; war 
organization and duties of the A.S.C.; registry and care of corre- 
spondence; contracts; special purchases; precautions in receiving 
supplies, and care and issue of same; accounts, forms, vouchers 
and office work in general and in detail; barrack duties (including 
all points relating to coal, wood, turf, candles, lamps, gas, water, &c). 
A thorough and detailed description of all kinds of forage, bread- 
stuffs, meat, groceries and other field supplies is given. The lectures 
and demonstrations in transport include, beside mounted and dis- 
mounted drill, wagon drill; carriages; embarkation and disem- 
barkation of men and animals; entraining and detraining; harness 
and saddlery; transport by rail and sea, with the office work 
involved. This course of instruction is given at the Army Service 
Corps Training Establishment at Aldershot. 

A satisfactory examination having been passed, the officer is 
permanently taken into the corps. Before promotion to captain he 
is examined in accounts, correspondence and contracts; judging 
cattle_ and supplies; duties of an A.S.C. officer in charge of a 
sub-district; interior economy of a company; military vehicles 
and pack animals; embarkation, disembarkation and duties on 
board ship; convoys; duties of brigade supply and transport 
officer in war. Captains, before promotion to major, are examined 
in lines of communication of an army in war; method of obtaining 
supplies and transport in war, and formation and working of depots; 
organization of transport in war; schemes of supply and transport 
for troops operating from a fixed base; duties of a staff-officer 
administering supply, transport and barrack duties at home. These 
are in addition to general military subjects. 

Royal Army Medical Corps.— On completion of the course of 
instruction at the Royal Army Medical College, lieutenants on pro- 
bation proceed to the R.A.M.C. School of Instruction at Aldershot 
for a two months' course in the technical duties of the corps, and at 
the end of the course are examined in the subjects taught. This 
passed, their commissions are confirmed. After eighteen months' 
service, officers are examined in squad, company and corps drills 
and exercises; the Geneva Convention; the administration, 
organization and equipment of the army in its relation to the medical 
services; duties of wardmasters and stewards in military hospitals 
and returns, accounts and requisitions connected therewith ; duties 
of executive medical officers; military law. These successful candi- 
dates are then eligible for promotion to captain. Before promotion 
to major the following examination must be passed, after a course of 
study under such arrangements as the director-general of the Army 
Medical Service may determine: (1) medicine, (2) surgery, (3) 
hygiene, (4) bacteriology, (5) one out of seven special subjects named, 
and (6) military law. The examination for promotion from major 
to lieutenant-colonel embraces army medical organization in peace 
and war; sanitation of towns, camps, transports, &c. ; epidemiology 
and the management of epidemics; medical history of important 
campaigns; the Army Medical Service of the more important 
powers; the laws and customs of war, so far as they relate to the 
sick and wounded; and a tactical problem in field medical adminis- 
tration. Officers who pass these examinations with distinction are 
eligible for accelerated promotion. 

Army Ordnance Department. — An officer of this department must 
have had at least four years' service in other branches of the army 
and must have passed for the rank of captain. They are then eligible 
to present themselves at an elementary examination in mathe- 
matics, -after passing which they attend a one year's course at the 
Ordnance College, Woolwich. The course comprises the following: 
(a) Gunnery (including principles of gun construction and practical 
optics); (b) Materiel, guns, carriages, machine guns, small arms 
and ammunition of all descriptions; (c) Army Ordnance Duties 
(functions of the corps; supply, receipt and issue of stores, &c.) ; 
{d) Machinery; (?) Chemistry and Metallurgy; (f) Electricity. 
An advanced course follows in which officers take up any two of the 
subjects of applied mathematics, chemistry and electricity, combined 
with either small arms, optics or mechanical design. They are then 
appointed to the department and hold their appointments for four 
years, with a possible extension of an additional three years. 

Army Veterinary Corps. — A candidate on appointment as veterinary 
officer, on joining at Aldershot, undergoes a course of special training 
at the Army Veterinary School. The course lasts one year, and 
consists of (a) hygiene ; conformation of the foot and shoeing, 
conformation, points, colours, markings; stable construction and 
management ; management of horses in the open and of large bodies 
of sick; saddles and sore backs; collars and sore shoulders; bits 
and bitting; transport by sea and rail; mules, donkeys, camels 



OFFICERS 



21 



and oxen; remount depots; training of army horses; marching. 
(b) Diseases met with specially on active service, (c) Military 
etiquette and ethics; accounts and returns; administration and 
organization; veterinary hospitals, mobilization, map-reading and 
law. At the end of the course he is examined, and if found satis- 
factory, is retained in the service. Before promotion to captain 
he is examined in the duties of executive veterinary officers and in 
law: before promotion to major, in medicine, surgery, hygiene, 
bacteriology and tropical diseases, and in one special subject selected 
by the candidate; and before promotion to lieutenant-colonel, 
in law, duties of administrative veterinary officers at home and 
abroad, management of epizootics, sanitation of stables, horse-lines 
and transports. 

Army Pay Department. — Officers arc appointed to the department, 
on probation for a period not exceeding one year, after serving for 
five years in one of the other arms or branches of the service. At 
the end of this period the candidates are examined in the following 
subjects: examination of company pay lists and pay and mess 
book; method of keeping accounts and preparing balance-sheets 
and monthly estimates; knowledge of pay-warrant, allowance 
regulations and financial instructions, book-keeping, by double entry 
and the duties attending the payment of soldiers; aptitude for 
accounts, and quickness and neatness in work. On completion of 
five years' service, officers return to their regiments, unless they 
elect to remain with the department or arc required by the Army 
Council to be permanently attached to it. 

Schools and Colleges. — The training of the officer in his regiment is 
necessarily incomplete, owing to a far wider knowledge of his pro- 
fession in general, and of his own branch of the service in particular, 
being essential, than can be acquired within the comparatively 
confined limits of his own unit. Accordingly, schools and colleges 
have been established, in which special courses of instruction arc 
given, dealing more fully with the generalities and details of the 
various branches of the service. 

There is a cavalry school at Netheravon. 

Mounted Infantry schools have been established at Longmoor, 
Bulford and Kilworth, which train both officers and men in mounted 
infantry duties. The officers selected to be trained at these schools 
must have at least two years' service, have completed a trained 
soldier's course of musketry and should have some knowledge of 
horsemanship and be able to ride. The instruction consists for the 
most part of riding school and field training. 

The School of Gunnery at Shoeburyness gives five courses of 
instruction per annum; one " Staff " course for Ordnance officers, 
lasting one month ; two courses for senior officers of the Royal 
Artillery, lasting a fortnight each, and two courses for junior officers 
of the same regiment, lasting one month each. For Royal Garrison 
Artillery officers there fs one Staff " course lasting for seven months 
(this being a continuation of the previous "Staff " course), and two 
courses, lasting four months each, for junior officers. There is also 
a school of gunnery at Lydd, where two courses, lasting for three 
weeks each, in siege artillery, are given each year. 

The Ordnance College at Woolwich provides various courses of 
instruction in addition to those intended for officers of the Ordnance 
Department. There is a " Gunnery Staff Course " for senior officers, 
in gunnery, guns, carriages, ammunition, electricity and machinery; 
two courses for junior officers of the Royal Artillery in the same 
subjects ; a course for officers of the Army Service Corps in mechanical 
transport, which includes instruction in allied subjects, such as 
electricity and chemistry. It also gives courses of instruction to 
officers of the Royal Navy. 

The School of Military Engineering at Chatham trains officers of 
the Royal Engineers, compiles official text-books on field defences, 
attack and defence of fortresses, military bridging, mining, encamp- 
ments, railways. 

The School of Musketry at Hythe (besides assisting and directing 
the musketry training of the army at large by revising regulations, 
experiments, &c.) trains officers of all branches of the service in 
theoretical and practical musketry, the courses lasting about a month 
each and embracing fire control, the training of the eye in quick 
perception, fire effect and so on. Courses in the Maxim gun usually 
follow. 

The Staff College (see also Staff) at Camberley is the most im- 
portant of the military colleges. Only specially selected officers 
are eligible to attempt the entrance examination. The course lasts 
two years, and is divided into: (a) military history, strategy, 
tactics, imperial strategy, strategic distribution, coast defence, 
fortification, war organization, reconnaissance; (b) staff duties, 
administration, peace distribution, mobilization, movements of 
troops by land and sea, supply, transport, remounts, organization, 
law and topographical reconnaissance. Visits are paid to workshops, 
fortresses, continental battlefields, &c, and staff tours are carried 
out. Officers of the non-mounted branches attend riding school, 
and students can be examined in any foreign languages they may 
have previously studied. They arc also attached for short periods 
to arms of the service other than those to which they belong, and 
attend at staff offices to ensure their being conversant with the work 
done there. 

The Army Service Corps Training Establishment at Aldershot 
gives courses of instruction to senior officers of the corps at which 



a limited number of officers of other corps may attend, provided 
they have passed through or been recommended for the Staff College. 
Other courses, in addition to the nine months' course for officers 
on probation for the corps are, one of twelve days for senior officers 
of the corps in mechanical transport; two (one long and one 
short) in the same subject for other officers; one for officers 
in other branches of the service in judging provisions; and one 
for lieutenants of the Royal Army Medical Corps in supply and 
transport. 

Other colleges and schools are: the Balloon School at Farn- 
borough, for officers of the Royal Engineers; Schools of Electric 
Lighting at Plymouth and Portsmouth; the School of Signalling at 
Aldershot, for officers of all branches of the service; the School of 
Gymnastics, also at Aldershot; and the Army Veterinary School, 
where a one month's course is given to officers of the mounted 
branches in the main principles of horsemastership, stable manage- 
ment and veterinary first aid, in addition to the one year's course for 
officers on probation for the Army Veterinary Corps. 

To encourage the study of foreign languages, officers who pass a 
preliminary examination in any language they may select are allowed 
to reside in the foreign country for a period of at least two months. 
After such residence they may present themselves for examination, 
and if successful, receive a grant in aid of the expenses incurred. 
The grant is £80 for Russian, £50 for German, £24 for French and 
£30 for other languages. _ The final or " lnterprctership " examina- 
tion for which the grant is given is of a very high standard. In the 
case of Russian, £80 is paid to the officer during his residence 
in Russia, in addition to the grant. Special arrangements are 
made with regard to the Chinese and Japanese languages; three 
officers for the former and four officers for the latter being selected 
annually for a two years' residence in those countries. During such 
residence officers receive £150 per annum, in addition to their pay, 
and a reward of £175 on passing the " lnterprctership " examination. 

There has been a tendency of late years to give officers facilities 
for going through civilian courses of instruction; for example, at 
the London School of Economics and in the workshops of the 
principal railway companies. These courses enable the officer not 
only to profit by civilian experience and progress, but also to form 
an opinion as to his own knowledge, as compared with the knowledge 
of those outside his immediate surroundings. 

Promotion from the Ranks. — In several armies aspirant officers 
may join as privates and pass through all grades. This is hardly 
promotion from the ranks, however, because it is understood from 
the first that the young avantageur , as he is called in Germany, is a 
candidate for officer's rank, and he is treated accordingly, generally 
living in the officers' mess and spending only a brief period in each 
of the non-commissioned ranks. True promotion from the ranks, 
won by merit and without any preferential treatment, is practically 
unknown in Germany. In France, on the other hand, one-third of 
the officers are promoted non-commissioned officers. In Italy also 
a large proportion of the officers comes from the ranks. In Great 
Britain, largely owing to the chances of distinction afforded by 
frequent colonial expeditions, a fair number of non-commissioned 
officers receive promotion to combatants' commissions. The 
number is, however, diminishing, as shown by the following extracts 
from a return of 1909 (combatants only) : — 

1885-1888 annual average 34 (Sudan Wars, &c.) 

1889-1892 " " 25 

1893-1898 " " 19 

1899-1902 " " 35 (S. African War) 

1903-1908 " " 14 

Quartermasters and riding masters are invariably promoted from 
the lower ranks. 

Officers of reserve and second line forces are recruited in Great 
Britain both by direct appointment and by transfer from the regular 
forces. In universal service armies reserve officers are drawn from 
retired regular officers, selected non-commissioned officers, and 
most of all from young men of good social standing who are gazetted 
after serving their compulsory period as privates in the ranks. 

Foreign, Armies 

The training of the officer of a foreign army differs very slightly 
from that of the British officer. Each country specializes according 
to its individual requirements, but in the main the training is much 
the same. 

Germany. — The Germans attend more closely to detail — being even 
microscopical — and it has been said that a little grit in the German 
military machine would cause a cessation of its working. Unfor- 
tunately for this argument, the German army has not yet given any 
signs of cessation of work, so few deviations from the smooth working 
of the military machine being permitted that the introduction of 
grit into this air-tight casing is practically impossible. At the same 
time, the German officer is trained to have initiative and to use 
that initiative, but he is expected to be discreet in the use of it and 
consequently undue insistence on literal obedience to instructions 
(as distinct from formal orders), and undue reticence on the part of 
senior, especially staff, officers is held to be dangerous, in that the 
regimental officer, if ignorant of the military situation, may, by acts 
of initiative out of harmony with the general plan, seriously prejudice 



OFFICIAL— OGDENSBURG 



the issue. The Germans attach special importance to instruction in 
the tactical handling of artillery. 

Italy. — The Italians make a speciality of horsemanship, their 
cavalry officers studying for two years at the cavalry school at 
Modena; later at the school at Pinerolo, and later still at the school 
at Tor di Quinto. They also attach much importance to mountain 
warfare. 

France. — The formal training of the French officer does not appear 
to differ seriously from that of the British officer, with this exception, 
that as one-third or so of French officers are promoted from the 
non-commissioned ranks, a great feature of the educational system 
is the group of schools comprising the Saumur (cavalry), St Maixent 
(infantry) and Versailles (artillery and engineers), which are intended 
for under-officer candidates for commissions. The generality of the 
officers comes from the " special school " of St Cyr (infantry and 
cavalry) and the Ecole Poly technique (artillery and engineers). 

(R. J. G.) 

United States. — The principal source from which officers are 
supplied to the army is the famous Military Academy at West Point, 
N.Y. The President may appoint forty cadets and generally chooses 
sons of army and navy officers. Each senator and each representa- 
tive and delegate in Congress may appoint one. These appointments 
are not made annually, but as vacancies occur through graduation of 
cadets, or their discharge before graduation. The maximum number of 
cadets under the Twelfth Census is 533. The commanding officer of 
the academy has the title of superintendent and commandant. He is 
detailed from the army, and has the temporary rank of colonel. The 
corps of cadets is organized as a battalion, and is commanded by an 
officer detailed from the army, having the title of commandant of 
cadets. He has the temporary rank of lieutenant-colonel. An 
officer of engineers and of ordnance are detailed as instructors of 
practical military engineering and of ordnance and gunnery respec- 
tively. The heads of the departments of instruction have the title 
of professors. They are selected generally from officers of the army, 
and their positions are permanent. The officers above mentioned 
and the professors constitute the academic board. The military staff 
and assistant instructors are officers of the army. The course of 
instruction covers four years and is very thorough. _ Theoretical 
instruction comprises mathematics, French, Spanish, English, 
drawing, physics, astronomy, chemistry, ordnance and gunnery, art 
of war, civil and military engineering, law (international, con- 
stitutional and military), history and drill regulations of all arms. 
Practical instruction comprises the service drills in infantry, cavalry 
and artillery, surveying, reconnaissances, field engineering, construc- 
tion of temporary bridges, simple astronomical observations, fencing, 
gymnastics and swimming. Cadets are a part of the army, and 
rank between second lieutenants and the highest grade of non- 
commissioned officers. They receive from the government a rate 
of pay sufficient to cover all necessary expenses at the academy. 
About 50% of those entering are able to complete the course. The 
graduating class each year numbers, on an average, about 60. A 
class, on graduating, is arranged in order according to merit, and its 
members are assigned as second lieutenants to corps and arm, 
according to the recommendation of the academic board. A few at 
the head of the class go into the corps of engineers; the next in order 
generally go into the artillery, and the rest of the class into the 
cavalry and infantry. The choice of graduates as to arm of service 
and regiments is consulted as far as practicable. Any enlisted man 
who has served honestly and faithfully not less than two years, who 
is between twenty-one and thirty years of age, unmarried, a citizen 
of the United States and of good moral character, may aspire to a 
commission. To obtain it he must pass an educational and physical 
examination before a board of five officers. This board must also 
inquire as to the character, capacity and record of the candidate. 
Many well-educated young men, unable to obtain appointments to 
West Point, enlist in the army for the express purpose of obtaining 
a commission. Vacancies in the grade of second lieutenant remain- 
ing, after the graduates of the Military Academy and qualified 
enlisted men have been appointed, are filled from civil life. To be 
eligible for appointment a candidate must be a citizen of the United 
States, unmarried, between the ages of twenty-one and twenty- 
seven years, and must be approved by an examining board of five 
officers as to habits, moral character, physical ability, education 
and general fitness for the service. In time of peace very few 
appointments from civil life are made, but in time of war there is a 
large number. 

There are, in addition to the Engineer School at Washington, 
D.C. four service schools for officers. These are: the Coast Artillery 
School at Fort Monroe, Virginia; the General Service and Staff 
College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas; the Mounted Service 
School at Fort Riley, Kansas; the Army Medical School at Wash- 
ington. The commandants, staffs and instructors at these schools 
are officers specially selected. The garrison at Fort Monroe is 
composed of several companies of coast artillery ._ The lieutenants 
of these companies, who constitute the class, are relieved and replaced 
by others on 1st September of each year. The course of instruction 
comprises the following subjects: artillery, ballistics, engineering, 
steam and mechanics, electricity and mines, chemistry and explosives, 
military science, practical military exercises, photography, telegraphy 
and cordage (the use of ropes, the making of various kinds of knots 



and lashings, rigging shears, &c, for the handling of heavy guns). 
July and August of each year are ordinarily devoted to artillery 
target practice. The course at the General Service and Staff 
College is for one year in each School. The class of student officers 
is made up of one lieutenant from each regiment of infantry and 
cavalry, and such others as may be detailed. They are assigned to 
the organizations comprising the garrison, normally a regiment of 
infantry, a squadron (four troops) of cavalry and a battery of field 
artillery. The departments of instruction are: military art, 
engineering, law, infantry, cavalry, military hygiene. Much attention 
is paid to practical work in the minor operations of war, the troops 
of the garrison being utilized in connexion therewith. At the close 
of the final examinations of each class at Fort Monroe and Fort 
Leavenworth, those officers most distinguished for proficiency are 
reported to the adjutant-general of the army. Two from each class 
of the Artillery School, and not more than five from each class at 
the General Service and Staff College, are thereafter, so long as they 
remain in the service, noted in the annual army register as " honour 
graduates." The work of the Mounted Service School at Fort Riley 
is mainly practical, and is carried on by the regular garrison, which 
usually, in time of peace, consists of two squadrons of cavalry and 
three field batteries. The government reservation at Fort Riley 
comprises about 40 sq. m. of varied terrain, so that opportunities are 
afforded, and taken advantage of, for all kinds of field operations. 
The Army Medical School is established at Washington. The faculty 
consists of four or more instructors selected from the senior officers 
of the medical department. The course of instruction covers a period 
of five months, beginning annually in November. The student officers 
are recently appointed medical officers, and such other medical 
officers, available for detail, as may desire to take the course. In- 
struction is by lecture and practical work, special attention being 
given to the following subjects: duties of medical officers in peace 
and war; hospital administration; military medicine, surgery and 
hygiene; microscopy and bacteriology; hospital corps drill and 
first aid to the wounded. (W. A. S.) 

OFFICIAL (Late Lat. officialis, for class. Lat. apparitor, from 
officium, office, duty), in general any holder of office under the 
state or a pubtic body. In ecclesiastical law the word " official " 
has a special technical sense as applied to the official exercising 
a diocesan bishop's jurisdiction as his representative and in 
his name (see Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction). The title of 
" official principal," together with that of " vicar-general," is in 
England now merged in that of " chancellor " of a diocese (see 
Chancellor). 

OFFICINAL, a term applied in medicine to drugs, plants and 
herbs, which are sold in chemists' and druggists' shops, and to 
medical preparations of such drugs, &c, as are made in accord- 
ance with the prescriptions authorized by the pharmacopoeia. 
In the latter sense, modern usage tends to supersede " officinal " 
by " official." The classical Lat. qfficina meant a workshop, 
manufactory, laboratory, and in medieval monastic Latin was 
applied to a general store-room (see Du Cange, Gloss., s.v.); 
it thus became applied to a shop where goods were sold rather 
than a place where things were made. 

OGDEN, a city and the county-seat of Weber county, Utah, 
U.S.A., at the confluence of the Ogden and Weber rivers, and 
about 35 m. N. of Salt Lake City. Pop. (1890) 14,889; (1900) 
16,313, of whom 3302 were foreign-born; (1906 estimate) 
17,165. It is served by the Union Pacific, the Southern Pacific, 
the Oregon Short Line, and the Denver & Rio Grande railways. 
It is situated at an elevation of about 4300 ft. in the picturesque 
region of the Wasatch Range, Ogden Canon and the Great 
Salt Lake. Ogden is in an agricultural and fruit-growing 
region, and gold and silver are mined in the vicinity. It has 
various manufactures, and the value of the factory product 
increased from $1,242,214 in 1900 to $2,997,057 in 1905, or 
141-3%. Ogden, which is said to have been named in honour 
of John Ogden, a trapper, was laid out under the direction of 
Brigham Young in 1850, and was incorporated in the next year; 
in 186 1 it received a new charter, but since 189S it has been 
governed under a general law of the state. 

OGDENSBURG, a city and port of entry of St Lawrence 
county, New York, U.S.A., on the St Lawrence river, at the 
mouth of the Oswegatchie, 140 m. N. by E. of Syracuse, New 
York. Pop. (1890) 11,662; (1900) 12,633, of whom 3222 were 
foreign-born; (1910 census) 15,933. It is served by the New 
York Central & Hudson River and the Rutland railways, and 
by several lake and river steamboat lines connecting with ports 
on the Great Lakes, the city being at the head of lake navigation 



OGEE— OGILBY 



23 



on the St Lawrence. Steam ferries connect Ogdensburg with 
Prescott, Ontario. The city is the seat of the St Lawrence State 
Hospital for the Insane (1890), and has a United States Customs 
House and a state armoury. The city became the see of a Roman 
Catholic bishop in 1872, and here Edgar Philip Wadhams (1817- 
1801) laboured as bishop in 1872-1891. It is the port of entry 
of the Oswcgatchie customs district, and has an extensive 
commerce, particularly in lumber and grain. The city has 
various manufactures, including lumber, flour, wooden-ware, 
brass-ware, silks, woollens and clothing. The value of the 
factory products increased from $2,260,889 in 1900 to $3,057,271 
in 1905, or 35-2%. The site of Ogdensburg was occupied in 
1749 by the Indian settlement of La Presentation, founded by 
the Abbe Frangois Piquet (1708-1781) for the Christian converts 
of the Iroquois. At the outbreak of the War of Independence 
the British built here Fort Presentation, which they held until 
1796, when, in accordance with the terms Of the Jay Treaty, 
the garrison was withdrawn. Abraham Ogdcn (1743-17Q8), 
a prominent New Jersey lawyer, bought land here, and the 
settlement which grew up around the fort was named Ogdensburg. 
During the early part of the War of 181 2 it was an important 
point on the American line of defence. On the 4th of October 
181 2 Colonel Lethhridge, with about 750 men, prepared to 
attack Ogdensburg but was driven off by American troops 
under General Jacob Brown. On the 22nd of February 1813 
both fort and village were captured and partially destroyed 
by the British. During the Canadian rising of 1837-1838 
Ogdensburg became a rendezvous of the insurgents. Ogdensburg 
was incorporated as a village in 1818, and was chartered as a 
city in 1868. 

OGEE (probably an English corruption of Fr. ogive, a diagonal 
groin rib, being a moulding commonly employed; equivalents 
in other languages are Lat. cyma-reversa, Ital. gola, Fr. cymaise, 
Ger. Kchllcisten), a term given in architecture to a moulding 
of a double curvature, convex and concave, in which the former 
is the uppermost (see Moulding). The name " ogee-arch " 
is often applied to an arch formed by the meeting of two con- 
trasted ogees (see Arch). 

OGIER THE DANE, a hero of romance, who is identified with 
the Frankish warrior Autchar (Autgarius, Auctarius, Otgarius, 
Oggerius) of the old chroniclers. In 771 or 772 Autchar accom- 
panied Gerberga, widow of Carloman, Charlemagne's brother, 
and her children to the court of Desidcrius, king of the Lombards, 
with whom he marched against Rome. In 773 he submitted 
to Charles at Verona. He finally entered the cloister of St Faro 
at Meaux, and Mabillon (Acta SS. ord. St Benedict!, Paris, 1677) 
has left a description of his monument there, which had figures 
of Ogier and his friend Benedict or Bcnoit, with smaller images 
of Roland and la belle Aude and other Carolingian personages. 
In the chronicle of the Pseudo Turpin it is stated that innumer- 
able cantilcnae were current on the subject of Ogier, and his 
deeds were probably sung in German as well as in French. The 
Ogier of romance may be definitely associated with the flight 
of Gerberga and her children to Lombardy, but it is not safe 
to assume that the other scattered references all relate to the 
same individual. Colour is lent to the theory of his Bavarian 
origin by the fact that he, with Duke Naimes of Bavaria, led 
the Bavarian contingent to battle at Roncesvaux. 

In the romances of the Carolingian cycle he is, on account 
of his revolt against Charlemagne, placed in the family of Doon 
de Mayence, being the son of Gaufrey de " Dannemarche." 
The Enjances Ogier of Adenes le Rois, and the Chcvalcrie Ogier 
de Dannemarche of Raimbert de Paris, are doubtless based on 
earlier chansons. The Chcvalcrie is divided into twelve songs or 
branches. Ogier, who was the hostage for his father at Charle- 
magne's court, fell into disgrace, but regained the emperor's 
favour by his exploits in Italy. One Easter at the court of Laon, 
however, his son Balduinet was slain by Charlemagne's son, 
Chariot, with a chess-board (cf. the incident of Renaud and 
Bertholais in the Quatre Fils Aymon). Ogier in his rage slays 
the queen's nephew Loher, and would have slain Charlemagne 
himself but for the intervention of the knights, who connived 



at his flight to Lombardy. In his stronghold of Castelfort he 
resisted the imperial forces for seven years, but was at last taken 
prisoner by Turpin, who incarcerated him at Reims, while his 
horse Broiefort, the sharer of his exploits, was made to draw 
stones at Meaux. He was eventually released to fight the 
Saracen chief Brehus or Braihicr, whose armies had ravaged 
France, and who had defied Charlemagne to single combat. 
Ogier only consented to fight after the surrender of Chariot, 
but the prince was saved from his barbarous vengeance by the 
intervention of St Michael. The giant Brehus, despite his 
17 ft. of stature, was overthrown, and Ogier, after marrying an 
English princess, the daughter of Angart (or Edgard), king of 
England, received from Charlemagne the fiefs of Hainaut and 
Brabant. 

A later romance in Alexandrines (Brit. Mus. MS. Royal 1 5 E vi.) 
contains marvels added from Celtic romance. Six fairies visit 
his cradle, the sixth, Morgan la Fay, promising that he shall 
be her lover. He has a conqueror's career in the East, and after 
two hundred years in the " castle " of Avalon returns to France 
in the days of King Philip, bearing a firebrand on which his life 
depends. This he destroys when Philip's widowed queen 
wishes to marry him, and he is again carried off by Morgan la 
Fay. The prose romance printed at Paris in 1498 is a version 
of this later poem. The fairy clement is prominent in the Italian 
legend of Uggicri il Danese, the most famous redaction being 
the prose Libro dele bataglic del Danese (Milan, 1498), and in the 
English Famous and renowned history of Morvinc, son to Oger 
the Dane, translated by J. M. (London, 161 2). The Spanish 
Urgel was the hero of Lope de Vega's play, the Marques de 
Mantua. Ogier occupies the third branch of the Scandinavian 
Karlamagnus saga; his fight with Brunamont {Enfanccs Ogier) 
was the subject of a Danish folk-song; and as Holgcr Danske 
he became a Danish national hero, who fought against the 
German Dietrich of Bern (Thcodoric " of Verona "), and was 
invested with the common tradition of the king who sleeps in 
a mountain ready to awaken at need. Whether he had originally 
anything to do with Denmark seems doubtful. The surname 
lc Danois has been explained as a corruption of 1'Ardennois and 
Dannemarche as the marches of the Ardennes. 

Bibliography. — La Chevalerie Ogier de Danernarche, ed. J. B. 
Barrois (2 vols., Paris, 1842); Les Enjances Ogier, ed. A. Scheler 
(Brussels, 1874); Hist. lift, de la France, vols. xx. and xxii.; G. Paris, 
Hist. poet, de Charlemagne (Paris, 1856); L. Gautier, Les Epopees 
francaiscs (2nd ed., 1 878-1 896); L. Pio, Sagnet om Holger Danske 
(Copenhagen, 1870); H. L. Ward, Catalogue of Romances, vol. i. 
pp. 604-610; C. Voretzsch, Uber die Sage von Ogier dem Danen 
(Halle, 1891); P. Paris, " Recherches sur Ogier le Danois," Bibl. de 
I'Mcole des Charles, vol. iii. ; P. Rajna, Le Origini dell' epopea francese 
(1884); Riezler, "Naimes v. Bayem und Ogier der Dane," in 
Sitzungsberichte der phil. hist. Classe der kl. Ahad. d. Wiss., vol. iv. 
(Munich, 1892). 

OGILBY, JOHN (1600-1676), British writer, was born in or 
near Edinburgh in November 1600. His father was a prisoner 
within the rules of King's Bench, but by speculation the son 
found money to apprentice himself to a dancing master and to 
obtain his father's release. He accompanied Thomas Wentworth, 
earl of Strafford, when he went to Ireland as lord deputy, and 
became tutor to his children. Strafford made him deputy-master 
of the revels, and he built a little theatre in St Werburgh Street, 
Dublin, which was very successful. The outbreak of the Civil 
War ruined his fortunes, and in 1646 he returned to England. 
Finding his way to Cambridge, he learned Latin from kindly 
scholars who had been impressed by his industry. He then 
ventured to translate Virgil into English verse (1649-1650), 
which brought him a considerable sum of money. The success 
of this attempt encouraged Ogilby to learn Greek from David 
Whitford, who was usher in the school kept by James Shirley the 
dramatist. Homer his Iliads translated . . . appeared in 1660, 
and in 1665 Homer his Odysscs translated . . . Anthony a 
Wood asserts that in these undertakings he had the assistance 
of Shirley. At the Restoration Ogilby received a commission 
for the " poetical part " of the coronation. His property was 
destroyed in the Great Fire of 1666, but he rebuilt his house 
in Whitefriars, and set up a printing press, from which he issued 



24 



OGILVIE— OGOWE 



many magnificent books, the most important of which were a 
series of atlases, with engravings and maps by Hollar and 
others. He styled himself " His Majesty's Cosmographer and 
Geographic Printer." He died in London on the 4th of 
September 1676. 

Ogilby also translated the fables of Aesop, and wrote three epic 
poems. His bulky output was ridiculed by John Dryden in Mac- 
Flecknoe and by Alexander Pope in the Dunciad. 

OGILVIE (or Ogilby), JOHN (c. 1580-1615), English Jesuit, 
was born in Scotland and educated mainly in Germany, where 
he entered the Society of Jesus, being ordained priest at Paris 
in 1 613. As an emissary of the society he returned to Scotland 
in this year disguised as a soldier, and in October 1614 he was 
arrested in Glasgow. He defended himself stoutly when he was 
tried in Edinburgh, but he was condemned to death and was 
hanged on the 2Sth of February 161 5. 

A True Relation of the Proceedings against John Ogilvie, a Jesuit 
(Edinburgh, 1615), is usually attributed to Archbishop Spottiswoode. 
See also James Forbes, L'Eglise catholique en Ecosse: martyre de 
Jean Ogilvie (Paris, 1885); and W. Forbes-Leith, Narratives of 
Scottish Catholics (1885). 

OGILVY, the name of a celebrated Scottish family of which 
the earl of Airlie is the head. The family was probably descended 
from a certain Gillebride, ear] of Angus, who received lands from 
William the Lion. Sir Walter Ogilvy (d. 1440) of Lintrathen, 
lord high treasurer of Scotland from 1425 to 1431, was the son 
of Sir Walter Ogilvy of Wester Powrie and Auchterhouse, a 
man, says Andrew of Wyntoun, " stout and manfull, bauld 
and wycht," who was killed in 1392. He built a castle at Airlie 
in Forfarshire, and left two sons. The elder of these, Sir John 
Ogilvy (d. c. 14S4), was the father of Sir James Ogilvy (c. 1430-c. 
1504), who was made a lord of parliament in 1491; and the 
younger, Sir Walter Ogilvy, was the ancestor of the earls of 
Findlater. The earldom of Findlater, bestowed on James 
Ogilvy, Lord Ogilvy of Deskford, in 1638, was united in 1711 
with the earldom of Seafield and became dormant after the 
death of James Ogilvy, the 7th earl, in October 1S11 (see Sea- 
pield, Earls of). 

Sir James Ogilvy's descendant, James Ogilvy, 5th Lord 
Ogilvy of Airlie (c. 1 541-1606), a son of James Ogilvy, master 
of Ogilvy, who was killed at the battle of Pinkie in 1547, took a 
leading part in Scottish politics during the reigns of JMary and 
of James VI. His grandson, James Ogilvy (c. 1 593-1666), was 
created earl of Airlie by Charles I. at York in 1639. A loyal 
partisan of the king, he joined Montrose in Scotland in 1644 and 
was one of the royalist leaders at the battle of Kilsyth. The 
destruction of the earl's castles of Airlie and of Forther in 1640 
by the earl of Argyll, who " left him not in all his lands a cock 
to crow day," gave rise to the song " The bonny house o'Airlie." 
His eldest son, James, the 2nd earl (c. 161 5-c. 1704) also fought 
among the royalists in Scotland; in 1644 he was taken prisoner, 
but he was released in the following year as a consequence of 
Montrose's victory at Kilsyth. He was again a prisoner after 
the battle of Philiphaugh and was sentenced to death in 1646, 
but he escaped from his captivity at St Andrews and was after- 
wards pardoned. Serving with the Scots against Cromwell 
he became a prisoner for the third time in 1651, and was in the 
Tower of London during most of the years of the Commonwealth. 
He was a fairly prominent man under Charles II. and James 
II., and in :689 he ranged himself on the side of William of 
Orange. This earl's grandson, James Ogilvy (d. 1731), took part 
in the Jacobite rising of 1715 and was attainted; consequently 
on his father's death in 17 17 he was not allowed to succeed 
to the earldom, although he was pardoned in 1725. When he 
died his brother John (d. 1761) became earl dejure, and John's 
son David (1725-1803) joined the standard of Prince Charles 
Edward in 1745. He was attainted, and after the defeat of the 
prince at Culloden escaped to Norway and Sweden, afterwards 
serving in the French army, where he commanded " le regiment 
Ogilvy " and was known as " le bcl Ecossais." In 177S he was 
pardoned and was allowed to return to Scotland, and his family 
became extinct when his son David died unmarried in April 
1812. After this event David's cousin, another David Ogilvy 



(1785-1849), claimed the earldom. He asserted that he was 
unaffected by the two attainders, but the House of Lords decided 
that these barred his succession; however, in 1826 the attainders 
were reversed by act of parliament and David became 6th 
earl of Airlie. He died on the 20th of August 1849 and was 
succeeded by his son, David Graham Drummond Ogilvy (1826- 
1881), who was a Scottish representative peer for over thirty 
years. The latter's son, David Stanley William Drummond 
Ogilvy, the 8th earl (1856-1900), served in Egypt in 1882 and 
1885, and was killed on the nth of June 1900 during the Boer 
War while at the head of his regiment, the 12th Lancers. His 
titles then passed to his son, David Lyulph Gore Wolseley 
Ogilvy, the 9th earl (b. 1893). 

A word may be said about other noteworthy members of the 
Ogilvy family. John Ogilvy, called Powrie Ogilvy, was a 
political adventurer who professed to serve King James VI. 
as a spy and who certainly served William Cecil in this capacity. 
Mariota Ogilvy (d. 1575) was the mistress of Cardinal Beaton. 
Sir George Ogilvy (d. 1663), a supporter of Charles I. during 
the struggle with the Covenanters, was created a peer as lord 
of Banff in 1642; this dignity became dormant, or extinct, 
on the death of his descendant, William Ogilvy, the 8th lord, 
in June 1S03. Sir George Ogilvy of Barras (d. c. 1679) defended 
Dunnottar Castle against Cromwell in 1651 and 1652, and was 
instrumental in preventing the regalia of Scotland from falling 
into his hands; in 1660 he was created a baronet, the title 
becoming extinct in 1S37. 

See Sir R. Douglas, Peerage of Scotland, new ed. by Sir J. B. Paul 
(1904 fol.). 

OGIVE (a French term, of which the origin is obscure; auge, 
trough, from Lat. augere, to increase, and an Arabic astrological 
word for the " highest point," have been suggested as derivations), 
a term applied in architecture to the diagonal ribs of a vault. 
In France the name is generally given to the pointed arch, 
which has resulted in its acceptance as a title for Gothic archi- 
tecture, there often called " le slvle ogival." 

OGLETHORPE, JAMES EDWARD (1696-1785), English 
general and philanthropist, the founder of the state of Georgia, 
was born in London on the 21st of December 1696, the son of 
Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe (1 650-1 702) of Westbrook Place, 
Godalming, Surrey. He entered Corpus Christi College, Oxford, 
in 1 714, but in the same year joined the army of Prince Eugene. 
Through the recommendation of the duke of Marlborough he 
became aide-de-camp to the prince, and he served with distinction 
in the campaign against the Turks, 1 716-17, more especially at 
the siege and capture of Belgrade. After his return to England 
he was in 1722 chosen member of parliament for Haslemere. 
He devoted much attention to the improvement of the circum- 
stances of poor debtors in London prisons; and for the purpose 
of providing an asylum for persons who had become insolvent, 
and for oppressed Protestants on the continent, he projected 
the settlement of a colony in America between Carolina and 
Florida (see Georgia). In 1745 Oglethorpe was promoted to 
the rank of major-general. His conduct in connexion with the 
Scottish rebellion of that year was the subject of inquiry by court- 
martial, but he was acquitted. In 1 765 he was raised to the 
rank of general. He died at Cranham Hall, Essex, on the 1st of 
July 17S5. 

Sir Theophilus Oglethorpe, the father, had four sons and four 
daughters, James Edward being the youngest son, and another 
James (b. 1688) having died in infancy. Of the daughters, Anne 
Henrietta (b. 1680-1683), Eleanor (b. 1684) and Frances Charlotte 
(Bolingbroke's " Fanny Oglethorpe ") may be specified as having 
played rather curious parts in the Jacobitism of the time; their 
careers are described in the essay on " Queen Oglethorpe " by Miss 
A. Shield and A. Lang, in the latter's Historical Mysteries (1904). 

OGOWE\ one of the largest of the African rivers of the second 
class, rising in 3 S. in the highlands known as the Crystal range, 
and flowing N.W. and W. to the Atlantic, a little south of the 
equator, and some 400 m. following the coast, north of the mouth 
of the Congo. Its course, estimated at 750 m., lies wholly within 
the colony of Gabun, French Congo. In spite of its considerable 
size, the river is of comparatively little use for navigation, as 



OGRE— OHIO 



rapids constantly occur as it descends the successive steps of the 
interior tablelands. The principal obstructions arc the falls of 
Dume, in 13° E.; Bunji, in 12° 35'; Chcngwe, in 12 16'; Boue, 
in 1 1° 53'; and the rapids formed in the passes by which it breaks 
through the outei chains of the mountainous zone, between ioJ° 
and iij° E. In its lower course the river passes through a 
lacustrine region in which it sends off secondary channels. 
These channels, before reuniting with the main stream, traverse 
a series of lakes, one north, the other south, of the river. These 
lakes are natural regulators of the river when in flood. The 
Ogowe has a large number of tributaries, especially in its upper 
course, but of these few are navigable. The most important are 
the Lolo, which joins on the south bank in 12 20' E., and the 
Ivindo, which enters the Ogowe a few miles lower down. Below 
the Ivindo the largest tributaries are the Ofowe, 400 yds. wide 
at its mouth (11° 47' E.), but unnavigable except in the rains, 
and the Ngunye, the largest southern tributary, navigable for 
60 m. to the Samba or Eugenie Falls. Apart from the narrow 
coast plain the whole region of the lower Ogowe is densely 
forested. It is fairly thickly populated by Bantu tribes who 
have migrated from the interior. The fauna includes tht r gorilla 
and chimpanzee 

The Ogowe rises in March and April, and again in October and 
November; it is navigable for steamers in its low-water condition 
as far as the junction of the Ngunye. At flood time the river 
can be ascended by steamers for a distance of 235 m. to a place 
called N'Jole. The first person to explore the valley of the 
Ogowe was Paul du Chaillu, who travelled in the country during 
1857—1859. The extent of the delta and the immense volume 
of water carried by the river gave rise to the belief that it must 
either be a bifurcation of the Congo or one of the leading rivers of 
Africa. However, in 1882 Savorgnan de Brazza (the founder of 
French Congo) reached the sources of the river in a rugged, sandy 
and almost treeless plateau, which forms the watershed between 
its basin and that of the Congo, whose main stream is only 140 m. 
distant. Since that time the basin of the Ogowe has been fully 
explored by French travellers. 

OGRE, the name in fairy tales and folk-lore of a malignant 
monstrous giant who lives on human flesh. The word is French, 
and occurs first in Charles Perrault's Hisloires on, contcs du 
temps passe (1697). The first English use is in the translation of 
a French version of the Arabian Nights in 17 13, where it is spelled 
hogre. Attempts have been made to connect the word with 
Ugri, the racial name of the Magyars or Hungarians, but it is 
generally accepted that it was adapted into French from the 
0. Span, huerco, huergo, uergo, cognate with Ital. orco, i.e. Orcus, 
the Latin god of the dead and the infernal regions (see Pluto), 
who in Romance folk-lore became a man-eating demon of the 
woods. 

OGYGES, or Ogygus, in Greek mythology, the first king of 
Thebes. During his reign a great flood, called the Ogygian 
deluge, was said to have overwhelmed the land. Similar legends 
were current in Attica and Phrygia. Ogyges is variously 
described as a Boeotian autochthon, as the son of Cadmus, or 
of Poseidon. 

O'HAGAN. THOMAS O'HAGAN, isx Baron (1812-1885), lord 
chancellor of Ireland, was born at Belfast, on the 29th of May 
1812. He was educated at Belfast Academical Institution, and 
was called to the Irish bar in 1836. In 1840 he removed to Dublin, 
where he appeared for the repeal party in many political trials. 
His advocacy of a continuance of the union with England, 
and his appointment as solicitor-general for Ireland in 1861 and 
attorney-general in the following year, lost him the support of 
the Nationalist party, but he was returned to parliament as 
member for Tralee in 1863. In 1865 he was appointed a judge of 
common pleas, and in 1868 became lord chancellor of Ireland in 
Gladstone's first ministry. He was the first Roman Catholic to 
hold the chancellorship since the reign of James II., an act 
throwing open the office to Roman Catholics having been passed 
in 1867. In 1870 he was raised to the peerage, and held office until 
the resignation of the ministry in 1874. In 1880 he again became 
lord chancellor on Gladstone's return to office, but resigned in 



1881. He died in London on the 1st of February 
succeeded by his eldest son, Thomas Towneley\ v 
and then by another son, Maurice Herbert Towncley (b. 

O'HIGGINS, BERNARDO (1778-1842), one of the fo. 
leaders in tho Chilean struggle for independence and heao 
the first permanent national government, was a natural son 01 
the Irishman Ambrosio O'Higgins, governor of Chile (1 788-1 796), 
and was born at Chilian on the 20th of August 1778. He was 
educated in England, and after a visit to Spain he lived quietly 
on his estate in Chile till the revolution broke out. Joining the 
nationalist party led by Martinez de Rozas, he distinguished 
himself in the early fighting against the royalist troops despatched 
from Peru, and was appointed in November 1813 to supersede 
J. M. Carrera in command of the patriot forces. The rivalry that 
ensued, in spite of O'lliggins's generous offer to serve under 
Carrera, eventually resulted in O'Higgins being isolated and 
overwhelmed with the bulk of the Chilean forces at Rancagua 
in 1 814. O'Higgins with most of the patriots fieri across the 
Andes to Mendoza, where Jose de San Martin (q.v.) was prepar- 
ing a force for the liberation of Chile. San Martin espoused 
O'Higgins's part against Carrera, and O'Higgins, recognizing the 
superior ability and experience of San Martin, readily consented 
to serve as his subordinate. The loyalty and energy with which 
he acted under San Martin contributed not a little to the organiza- 
tion of the liberating army, to its transportation over the Andes, 
and to the defeat of the royalists at Chacabuco (1817) and Maipo 
(1818). After the battle of Chacabuco O'Higgins was entrusted 
with the administration of Chile, and he ruled the country firmly 
and well, maintaining the close connexion with the Argentine, 
co-operating loyally with San Martin in the preparation of the 
force for the invasion of Peru, and seeking, as far as the confusion 
and embarrassments of the time allowed, to improve the welfare 
of the people. After the overthrow of the Spanish supremacy 
in Peru had freed the Chileans from fear of attack, an agitation 
set in for constitutional government. O'Higgins at first tried 
to maintain his position by calling a congress and obtaining a 
constitution which invested him with dictatorial powers. But 
popular discontent grew in force; risings took place in Concepcion 
and Coquimbo, and on the 28th of January 1823 O'Higgins 
was finally patriotic enough to resign his post of director-general, 
without attempting to retain it by force. He retired to Peru, 
where he was granted an estate and lived quietly till his death on 
the 24th of October 1842. 

See B. Vicuna Machenna, Vida de O'Higgins (Santiago, 1882), 
and M. L. Armunategni, La Dictadura de O'Higgins (Santiago, 1853) ; 
both containing good accounts of O'Higgins's career. Also P. B. 
Figueroa, Diccionario biogrdfico de Chile, 1550-1887 (Santiago, 
1888), and J. B. Suarez, Rasgos biogrdficos de hombres notables de 
Chile (Valparaiso, 1886). 

OHIO, a north central state of the United States of America, 
lying between latitudes 38° 27' and 41° 57' N. and between 
longitudes 8o° 34' and 84° 49' W. It is bounded N. by Michigan 
and Lake Erie, E. by Pennsylvania and by the Ohio river which 
separates it from West Virginia, S. by the Ohio river which 
separates it from West Virginia and Kentucky, and W. by 
Indiana. The total area is 41,040 sq. m., 300 sq. m. being water 
surface. 

Physiography. — The state lies on the borderland between 
the Prairie Plains and the Alleghany Plateau. The disturbances 
among the underlying rocks of Ohio have been slight, and 
originally the surface was a plain only slightly undulating; 
stream dissection changed the region to one of numberless hills 
and valleys; glacial drift then filled up the valleys over large 
broken areas, forming the remarkably level till plains of north- 
western Ohio; but at the same time other areas were broken by 
the uneven distribution of the drift, and south-eastern Ohio, 
which was unglaciated, retains its rugged hilly character, gradu- 
ally merging with the typical plateau country farther S.E. The 
average elevation of the state above the sea is about 850 ft., 
but extremes vary from 425 ft. at the confluence of the Great 
Miami and Ohio rivers in the S.W. corner to 1540 ft. on the 
summit of Hogues Hill about r| m. E. of Bellefontaine in the 
west central part. 



26 



OHIO 



The main water-parting is formed by a range of hills which are 
composed chiefly of drift and extend W.S.W. across the state from 
Trumbull county in the N.E. to Darke county, or about the middle 
of the VV. border. North of this water-parting the rivers flow into 
Lake Erie; S. of it into the Ohio river. Nearly all of the streams 
in the N.E. part of the state have a rapid current. Those that flow 
directly into the lake are short, but some of the rivers of this region, 
such as the Cuyahoga and the Grand, are turned by drift ridges into 
circuitous courses and flow through narrow valleys with numerous 
falls and rapids. Passing the. village of Cuyahoga Falls the Cuyahoga 
river descends more than 200 ft. in 3 m.; a part of its course is 
between walls of sandstone 100 ft. or more in height, and near its 
mouth, at Cleveland, its bed has been cut down through 60 ft. of 
drift. In the middle N. part of the state the Black, Vermilion and 
Huron rivers have their sources in swamps on thewater-parting and 
flow directly to the lake through narrow valleys. The till plains of 
north-western Ohio are drained chiefly by the Maumee and San- 
dusky rivers, with their tributaries, and the average fall of the 
Maumee is only 1-1 ft. per mile, while that of the Sandusky decreases 
from about 7 ft. per mile at Upper Sandusky to 2-5 ft. per mile below 
Fremont. South of the water-parting the average length of the 
rivers is greater than that of those N. of it, and their average fall per 
mile is much less. In the S.W. the Great Miami and Little Miami 
rivers have uniform falls through basins that are decidedly rolling 
and that contain the extremes of elevation for the entire state. 
The central and S. middle part is drained by the Scioto river and its 
tributaries. The basin of this river is formed mostly in Devonian 
shale, and is bounded on the W. by a limestone rim and on the E. 
by preglacial valleys filled with glacial drift. In its middle portion 
the basin is about 40 m. wide and only moderately rolling, but toward 
the mouth of the river the basin becomes narrow and is shut in by 
high hills. In the E. part of Ohio the Muskingum river and its 
tributaries drain an area of about 7750 sq. m. or nearly_ one-fifth 
of the entire state. Much of the unglacial or driftless portion of the 
state is embraced within its limits, and although the streams now 
have a gentle or even sluggish flow, they_ have greatly broken the 
surface of the country. The upper portion of the basin is about 
100 m. in width, but it becomes quite narrow below Zanesville. The 
Ohio river flows for 436 m. through a narrow valley on the S. border 
of the state, and Lake Erie forms the N. boundary for a distance of 
230 m. At the VV. end of the lake are Sandusky and Maumee bays, 
each with a good natural harbour. In this vicinity also are various 
small islands of limestone formation which are attractive summer 
resorts. On Put-in-Bay Island are some interesting " hydration " 
caves, i.e. caves formed by the uplifting and folding of the rocks 
while gypsum was forming beneath, followed by the partial collapse 
of those rocks when the gypsum passed into solution. Ohio has no 
large lakes within its limits, but there are several small ones on the 
water-parting, especially in the vicinity of Akron and Canton, 
and a few laige reservoirs in the VV. central section. 

Fauna. — Bears, wolves, bison, deer, wild turkeys and wild pigeons 
were common in the primeval forests of Ohio, but they long ago 
disappeared. Foxes are still found in considerable numbers in 
suitable habitats; opossums, skunks and raccoons are plentiful in 
some parts of the state; and rabbits and squirrels are still numerous. 
All the song-birds and birds of prey of the temperate zone are 
plentiful. VVhitefish, bass, trout and pickerel are an important food 
supply obtained from the waters of the lake, and some perch, catfish 
and sunfish are caught in the rivers and brooks. 

Flora. — Ohio is known as the " Buckeye State " on account of 
the prevalence of the buckeye (Aesculus glabra). The state was 
originally covered with a dense forest mostly of hardwood timber, 
and although the merchantable portion of this has been practically 
all cut away, there are still undergrowths of young timber and a 
great variety of trees. The white oak is the most common, but there 
are thirteen other varieties of oak, six of hickory, five of ash, five of 
poplar, five of pine, three of elm, three of birch, two of locust and 
two of cherry. Beech, black walnut, butternut, chestnut, catalpa, 
hemlock and tamarack trees are also common. Among native fruits 
are the blackberry, raspberry, elderberry, cranberry, wild plum and 
pawpaw (Asimina triloba). Buttercups, violets, anemones, spring 
beauties, trilliums, arbutus, orchids, columbine, laurel, honeysuckle, 
golden rod and asters are common wild flowers, and of ferns there 
are many varieties. 

Climate. — The mean annual temperature of Ohio is about 51 F.; 
in the N., 49-5°, and in the S., 53-5°. But except where influenced by 
Lake Erie the temperature is subject to great extremes; at Coalton, 
Jackson county, in the S.E. part of the state, the highest recorded 
range of extremes is from 104° to —38° or 142 ; at VVauseon, 
Fulton county, near the N.VV. corner, it is from i04°to — 32 "or 136 ; 
while at Toledo on the lake shore the range is only from 99° to — 16 
or 1 1 5 F. July is the warmest month, and in most parts of the state 
January is the coldest ; in a few valleys, however, February has a 
colder record than January. The normal annual precipitation for 
the entire state is 38-4 in. It is greater in the S.E. and least in the 
N.VV. At Marietta, for example, it is 42-1 in., but at Toledo it is 
only 30-8 in. Nearly 60% of it comes in the spring and summer. 
The average annual fall of snow is about 37 in. in the N. and 22 in. 
in the S. The prevailing winds in most parts are westerly, but 
sudden changes, as well as the extremes of temperature, are caused 



mainly by the frequent shifting of the wind from N.VV. to S.W. 
and from S.W. to N.VV. At Cleveland and Cincinnati the winds 
blow mostly from the S.E. 

Soil. — In the driftless area, the S.E. part of the state, the soil is 
largely a decomposition of the underlying rocks, and its fertility 
varies according to their composition; there is considerable lime- 
stone in the E. central portion, and this renders the soil very pro- 
ductive. In the valleys also are strips covered with a fertile alluvial 
deposit. In the other parts of the state the soil is composed mainly 
of glacial drift, and is generally deep and fertile. It is deeper and 
more fertile, however, in the basins of the Great Miami and Little 
Miami rivers, where there is a liberal mixture of decomposed limestone 
and where extensive areas with a clay subsoil are covered with 
alluvial deposits. North of the lower course of the Maumee river is a 
belt of sand, but Ohio drift generally contains a large mixture of clay. 

Agriculture. — Ohio ranks high as an agricultural state. Of its 
total land surface 24,501,820 acres or nearly 94% was, in 1900, 
included in farms and 78-5% of all the farm land was improved. 
There were altogether 276,719 farms; of these 93,028 contained less 
than 50 acres, 182,802 contained less than 100 acres, 150,060 con- 
tained less than 175 acres, 26,659 contained 175 acres or more, and 
164 contained 1000 acres or more. The average size of the farms 
decreased from 125-2 acres in 1850 to 99-2 acres in 1880 and 88-5 
acres in 1900. Nearly seven-tenths of the farms were worked in 
1900 by owners or part owners, 24,051 were worked by cash tenants, 
51,880 were worked by share tenants, and 1969 were worked by 
negroes as owners, tenants or managers. There is a great variety of 
produce, but the principal crops are Indian corn, wheat, oats, hay, 
potatoes, apples and tobacco. In 1900 the acreage of cereals con- 
stituted 68-4% of the acreage of all crops, and the acreage of 
Indian corn, wheat and oats constituted 99-3 % of the total acreage 
of cereals. The Indian corn crop was 67,501,144 bushels in 1870; 
152,055,390 bushels in 1899 and 153,062,000 in 1909, when it was 
grown on 3,875,000 acres and the state ranked seventh among the 
states of the Union in the production of this cereal. The wheat crop 
was 27,882,159 bushels in 1870; 50,376,800 bushels (grown on 
3,209,014 acres) in 1899; and 23,532,000 bushels (grown on 1,480,000 
acres) in 1909. The oat crop was 25,347,549 bushels in 1870; 
42,050,910 bushels (grown on 1,115,149 acres) in 1899; and 
56,225,000 bushels (grown on 1,730,000 acres) in 1909. The barley 
crop decreased from 1,715,221 bushels in 1870 to 1,053,240 bushels 
in 1899 and 829,000 bushels in 1909. The number of swine was 
1,964,770 in 1850; 3,285,789 in 1900; and 2,047,000 in 1910. 
The number of cattle was 1,358,947 in 1850; 2,117,925 in 1900; 
and 1,925,000 in 1910. In 1900 there were 868,832 and in 1910 
9^7,000 milch cows in the state. The number of sheep decreased 
slightly between 1870 and 1900, when there were 4,030,021; in 
1910 there were 3,203,000 sheep in the state. The number of horses 
was 463,397 in 1850; 1,068,170 in 1900; and 977,000 in 1910. 
The cultivation of tobacco was of little importance in the state until 
about 1840; but the product increased from 10,454,449 lb in 1850 
to 34,735,235 lb in 1880, and to 65,957,100 ft in 1899, when the crop 
was grown on 71,422 acres; in 1909 the crop was 83,250,000 ft, 
grown on 90,000 acres. The value of all farm products in 1899 was 
$257,065,826. Indian corn, wheat and oats are grown in all parts, 
but the VV. half of t he state produces about three-fourths of the 1 ndian 
corn and two-thirds of the wheat, and in the N. half, especially in 
the N.VV. corner, are the best oat-producing counties. The N.E. 
quarter ranks highest in the production of hay. Domestic animals 
are evenly distributed throughout the state ; in no county was their 
total value, in June 1900, less than $500,000, and in only three 
counties (Licking, Trumbull and Wood) did their value exceed 
$2,000,000; in 73 counties their value exceeded $1,000,000, but 
was less than $2,000,000. Dairying and the production of eggs are 
also important industries in all sections. Most of the tobacco is 
grown in the counties on or near the S.W. border. 

Fisheries. — Commercial fishing is important only in Lake Erie. 
In 1903 the total catch there amounted to 10,748,986 ft, valued at 
$317,027. Propagation facilities are being greatly, improved, and 
there are stringent laws for the protection of immature fish. Inland 
streams and lakes are well supplied with game fish ; state laws 
prohibit the sale of game fish and their being taken, except with 
hook and line. 

Mineral Products. — The mineral wealth of Ohio consists largely of 
bituminous coal and petroleum, but the state also ranks high in the 
production of natural gas, sandstone, limestone, grindstone, lime 
and gypsum. The coal fields, comprising a total area of 10,000 sq. m. 
or more, are in the E. half of the state. Coal was discovered here as 
early as 1770, and the mining of it was begun not later than 1828, 
but no accurate account of the output was kept until 1872, in which 
year it was 5,315,294 short tons; this was increased to 18,988,150 
short tons in 1900, and to 26,270,639 short tons in 1908 — in 1907 
it was 32,142,419 short tons. There are 29 counties in which 
coal is produced, but 81-4% of it in 1908 came from Belmont, 
Athens, Jefferson, Guernsey, Perry, Hocking, Tuscarawas and 
Jackson counties. Two of the most productive petroleum fields of 
the United States are in part in Ohio; the Appalachian field in the 
E. and S. parts of the state, and the Lima-Indiana field in the N.VV. 
part. Some petroleum was obtained in the S.E. as early as 1859, 
but the state's output was comparatively small until after petroleum 




OHIO 



o 5 10 



Scale, 1:1,575,000 

English Miles 
20 30 



FSsraa a/tfknSw f^fC ^ 5|oli1t^"W5Vw H Wf?#?l 



. -Falmouth \B r0 °ksvilIe 



40 



County Seats 

County Boundaries 
q Railways 
Canals 



MaysvilleG 



ss° 



A 



S/jo' 



r ~ ' c — ! — ^ ' C r »7SWfitinfitonJ^n 

R s,°' n. s ,"■»,' n s,° -p V 1 -"°*\9"«"> > 2^ 



rK^TT"— ^gN.SpnngfltM 



Knvirons of 

COLUMBUS 

St ale, i :300,00a 
Pnifli^h Miles 

! ? 3 1 







Emery Walkersc. 



OHIO 



27 



was discovered in the N.W. in 1884; in 1883 the output was only 
47,632 barrels, four years later it was 5,022,632 barrels, and in 
1S96 it was 23,941,169 barrels, or 39% of the total output in the 
United States. For the next ten years, however, there was a decrease, 
and in 1908 the output had fallen to 10,858,797 barrels, of which 
6,748,676 barrels (valued at §6,861,885), was obtained in the Lima 
district, 4,109,935 barrels (valued at $7,315,667) from the south- 
cast district, and 186 barrels (valued at $950), suitable for lubricat- 
ing purposes, from the Mecca-Belden district in Trumbull and 
Lorain counties. Natural gas abounds in the eastern, central and 
north-western parts of the state. That in the E. was first used 
in 1866, the N.W. field was opened in 1884, and the central field 
was opened in 1887. The value of the state's yearly flow increased 
steadily from $100,000 in 1885 to 85,215,669 in 1889, decreased 
from the latter year to Si, 171, 777 in 1897, and then increased to 
S8, 244, 835 in 1908. Some of the best-sandstone in the United States 
is obtained from Cuyahoga and Lorain counties; it is exceptionally 
pure in texture (about 97% being pure silica), durable and evenly 
coloured light buff, grey or blue grey. From the Ohio sandstone 
known as Bcrca grit a very large portion of the country's grindstones 
and pulpstones has been obtained; in 1908 the value of Ohio's 
output of these stones was 8482,128. Some of the Bcrea grit is also 
suitable for making oilstones and scythestones. Although the state 
has a great amount of limestone, especially in Erie and Ottawa 
counties, its dull colour renders it unsuitable for most building 
purposes. It is, however, much used as a flux for melting iron 
and for making quick lime. The quantity of Portland cement 
made in Ohio increased from 57,000 barrels in 1890 to 563,113 
barrels in 1902 and to 1,521,764 barrels in 1908. Beds of rock 
gypsum extend over an area of 150 acres or more in Ottawa county. 
There is some iron ore in the eastern and south-eastern parts of the 
state, and the mining of it was begun early in the 19th century; 
but the output decreased from 254,294 long tons in 1889 to only 
26,585 long tons (all carbonate) in 1908. Ohio, in 1908, produced 
3,427,478 barrels of salt valued at $864,710. Other valuable 
minerals are clay suitable for making pottery, brick and tile (in 
1908 the value of the clay working products was $26,622,490) and 
sand suitable for making glass. The total value of the state's 
mineral products in 1908 amounted to 8134,499,335. 

Manufactures. — The total value of the manufactures increased from 
8348,298,390 in 1880 to $641,688,064 in 1890, and to 8832,438,113 
in 1900. The value of the factory product was $748,670,855 in 1900 
and $960,811,857 in 1905. l The most important manufacturing 
industry is that of iron and steel. This industry was established 
near Youngstown in 1804. The value of the products increased 
from $65,206,828 in 1890 to $138,935,256 in 1900 and to 8152,859,124 
in 1905. Foundry and machine-shop products, consisting largely of 
engines, boilers, metal-working machinery, wood-working machinery, 
pumping machinery, mining machinery and stoves, rank second 
among the state's manufactures; their value increased from 
$43,617,072 in 1890 to 872,399,632 in 1900, and to 894,507,691 in 
1905. Flour and grist mill products rank third in the state; the 
value of the products decreased from $39,468,409 in 1890 to 
837,390,367 in 1900, and then increased to $40,855,566 in 1905. 
Meat (slaughtering and packing) was next in the value of the product, 
and increased from 820,660,780 in 1900 to 828,729,044 in 1905. 
Clay products rank fifth in the state; they increased in value from 
$16,480,812 in 1900 to $25,686,870 in 1905. Boots and shoes rank 
sixth; their value increased from $8,489,728 in 1890 to $17,920,854 
in 1900 and to 825,140,220 in 1905. Other leading manufactures arc 
malt liquors ($21,620,794 i n I9°5)> railway rolling-stock consisting 
largely of cars (821,428,227), men's clothing (818,496,173), planing 
mill products ($17,725,711), carriages and wagons (816,096,125), 
distilled liquors ($15,976,523), rubber and clastic goods ($15,963,603), 
furniture ($13,322,608), cigars and cigarettes ($13,241,230), agri- 
cultural implements ($12,891,197), women's clothing (812,803,582), 
lumber and timber products ($12,567,992), soap and candles 
($11,791,223), electrical machinery, apparatus and supplies 
($11,019,235), paper and wood pulp ($10,961,527) and refined 
petroleum (810,948,864). 

The great manufacturing centres are Cleveland, Cincinnati, 
Youngstown, Toledo, Columbus, Dayton and Akron, and in 1905 
the value of the products of these cities amounted to 56-7% of 
that for the entire state. A large portion of the iron and steel is 
manufactured in Cleveland, Youngstown, Steubenville, Bellaire, 
Lorain and Ironton. Most of the automobiles arc manufactured 
in Cleveland; most of the cash registers and calculating machines 
in Dayton; most of the rubber and elastic goods in Akron; nearly 
one-half of the liquors and about three-fourths of the men's clothing 
in Cincinnati. East Liverpool leads in the manufacture of pottery; 
Toledo in flour and grist mill products; Springfield in agricultural 
implements; Cincinnati and Columbus in boots and shoes; Cleve- 
land in women's clothing. 

Transportation and Commerce. — The most important natural 
means of transportation arc the Ohio river on the S. border and Lake 



1 The statistics of 1905 were taken under the direction of the 
United States Census Bureau, but products other than those of the 
factory system, such, for example, as those of the hand trades, were 
excluded. 



Eric on the N. border. One of the first great public improvements 
made within the state was the connexion of these waterways by 
two canals — the Ohio & Erie Canal from Cleveland to Portsmouth, 
and the Miami & Eric Canal from Toledo to Cincinnati. The Ohio & 
Eric was opened throughout its entire length (309 m.) in 1832. The 
Miami & Erie was completed from Middletown to Cincinnati in 1827; 
in 1845 it was opened to the lake (250 m. from Cincinnati). The 
national government began in 1825 to extend the National Road 
across Ohio from Bridgeport, opposite Wheeling, West Virginia, 
through Zancsvillc and Columbus, and completed it to Springfield 
in 1837. Before the completion of the Miami & Erie Canal to Toledo, 
the building of railways was begun in this region, and in 1836 a 
railway was completed from that city to Adrian, Michigan. By 
the close of 1850 the railway mileage had increased to 575 m., 
and for the next forty years, with the exception of the Civil War 
period, more than 2000 m. of railways were built during each decade. 
At the close of 1908 there was a total mileage of 9,300-45 m. Among 
the railways arc the Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago & St Louis, 
the Baltimore & Ohio, the Lake Shore & Michigan Southern, the 
New York, Chicago & St Louis, the Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, Chicago 
& St Louis (Pennsylvania), the Pittsburgh, Ft. Wayne & Chicago 
(Pennsylvania), the Nypano (Erie), the Wheeling & Lake Erie, the 
Cincinnati, Hamilton & Dayton, the Detroit, Toledo & Ironton, 
and the Norfolk & Western. As the building of steam railways 
lessened, the building of suburban and intcrurban electric railways 
was begun, and systems of these railways have been rapidly extended 
until all the more populous districts arc connected by them. 

Ohio has six ports of entry. They arc Cleveland, Toledo, San- 
dusky, Cincinnati, Columbus and Dayton, and the value of the foreign 
commerce passing through these in 1909 amounted to $9,483,974 
in imports (more than one-half to Cleveland) and $10,920,083 in 
exports (nearly eight-ninths from Cleveland). Of far greater volume 
than the foreign commerce is the domestic trade in coal, iron, lumber, 
&c, largely by way of the Great Lakes. 

Population. — The population of Ohio in the various census 
years was: (1800) 45,365; (1810) 230,760; (1820) 581,434; 
(1830) 937,903; (1840) 1,519,467; (1850) 1,980,329; (i860) 
2,339»S"; ( J 87°) 2,665,260; (1880) 3,198,062; (1890) 
3,672,316; (1900) 4,157,545; (1910) 4.767,121- In 1900 Ohio 
ranked fourth in population among the states. Of the total 
population in 1900, 4,060,204 or 97-6% were white and 
97,341 were coloured (96,901 negroes, 371 Chinese, 27 Japanese 
and 42 Indians). Of the same total 3,698,811 or 88-9% were 
native-born and 458,734 were foreign-born; 93-8% of the 
foreign-born consisted of the following: 204,160 natives of 
Germany, 65,553 of Great Britain, 55,018 of Ireland, 22,767 
of Canada (19,864 English Canadian), 16,822 of Poland, 15,131 
of Bohemia, 11,575 of Austria and 11,321 of Italy. In 1906 
there were 1,742,873 communicants of different religious de- 
nominations, over one-third being Roman Catholics and about 
one-fifth Methodists. From iSgoto 1900 the urban population 
(i.e. population of incorporated places having 4000 inhabitants 
or more) increased from 1,387,884 to 1,864,519, and the semi- 
urban (i.e. population of incorporated places having less than 
4000 inhabitants) increased from 458,033 to 549,741, but the 
rural (i.e. population outside of incorporated places) decreased 
from 1,826,412 to 1,743,285. The largest cities are Cleveland, 
Cincinnati, Toledo, Columbus (the capital), Dayton, Youngstown, 
Akron, Springfield, Canton, Hamilton, Zanesville and Lima. 

Administration. — Ohio is governed under the constitution of 
1S51 as amended in 1S75, 18S3, 1SS5, 1902, 1903. and 1905. An 
amendment may be proposed at any time by either branch of the 
General Assembly, and if after being approved by three-fifths of 
the members of both branches it is also approved at a general 
election by a majority of those voting on the question it is declared 
adopted; a constitutional convention may be called after a 
favourable two-thirds vote of the members of each branch of 
the Assembly and a favourable popular vote — a majority of those 
voting on the question; and the question of calling such a 
convention must be submitted to a popular vote at least once 
every twenty years. Under the constitution of 1S02 and 1851 
the suffrage was limited to " white male " citizens of the 
United States, but since the adoption of the Fifteenth Amend- 
ment to the Federal Constitution (1S70), negroes vote, though 
the constitution is unchanged. Since 1894 women who possess 
the usual qualifications required of men may vote for and be voted 
for as members of boards of education. The constitution requires 
that all elections be by ballot, and the Australian ballot system 
was adopted in 1S91; registration is required in cities having 



28 



OHIO 



a population of n,8oo or more. The executive department 
consists of a governor, lieutenant-governor, secretary of state, 
auditor, treasurer and attorney-general. As a result of the 
dispute hetween Governor Arthur St Clair and the Territorial 
legislature, the constitution of 1802 conferred nearly all of the 
ordinary executive functions on the legislature. The governor's 
control over appointments was strengthened hy the constitution 
of 1851 and hy the subsequent creation of statutory offices, 
hoards and commissions, hut the right of veto was not given to 
him until the adoption of the constitutional amendments of 
1903. The power as conferred at that time, however, is broader 
than usual, for it extends not only to items in appropriation bills, 
hut to separate sections in other measures, and, in addition to the 
customary provision for passing a hill over the governor's veto 
by a two-thirds vote of each house it is required that the votes 
for repassage in each house must not he less than those given on 
the original passage. The governor is elected in Novemher of 
even-numhered years for a term of two years. He is commander- 
in-chief of the static military and naval forces, except when 
they are called into the service of the United States. He grants 
pardons and reprieves on the recommendation of the state 
board of pardons. If he die in office, resign or be impeached, the 
officers standing next in succession are the lieutenant-governor, 
the president of the Senate, and the speaker of the House of 
Representatives in the order named. 

Memhers of the Senate and House of Representatives are 
elected for terms of two years; they must he residents of their 
respective counties or districts for one year preceding election, 
unless absent on puhlic business of the state or of the United 
States. The ratio of representation in the Senate is obtained 
by dividing the total population of the state by thirty-five, the 
ratio in the House hy dividing the population hy one hundred. 
The membership in each house, however, is slightly ahove these 
figures, owing to a system of fractional representation and to the 
constitutional amendment of 1903 which allows each county at 
least one representative in the House of Representatives. The 
constitution provides for a reapportionment every ten years 
beginning in 1861. Biennial sessions are held beginning on the 
first Monday in January of the even-numhered years. The 
powers of the two houses are equal in every respect except 
that the Senate passes upon the governor's appointments and 
tries impeachment cases hrought hefore it by the House of 
Representatives. The constitution prohibits special, local and 
retroactive legislation, legislation impairing the obligation of 
contracts, and legislation levying a poll tax for county or state 
purposes or a tax on state, municipal and public school bonds 
(amendment of 1905), and it limits the amount and specifies the 
character of public dehts which the legislature may contract. 

The judicial department in 1910 was composed of a supreme 
court of six judges, eight circuit courtsi 1 of three judges each, 
ten districts (some with suh-divisions) of the common pleas 
court, the superior court of Cincinnati, probate courts, courts 
of insolvency in Cuyahoga and Hamilton counties, juvenile 
courts (established in 1904), justice of the peace courts and 
municipal courts. Under the constitution of 1802 judges were 
chosen hy the legislature, but since 1851 they have heen elected 
hy direct popular vote — the judges of the supreme court heing 
chosen at large. They are removable on complaint by a con- 
current resolution approved hy a two-thirds majority in each 
house of the legislature. The constitution provides that the 
terms of supreme and circuit judges shall be such even numher 
of years not less than six as may be prescribed by the legislature — 
the statutory provision is six years — that of the judges of the 
common pleas six years, that of the probate judges four years, 
that of other judges such even number of years not exceeding 
six as may he prescribed by the legislature — the statutory 
provision is six years — and that of justices of the peace such 
even number of years not exceeding four as may he thus 
prescribed — the statutory provision is four years. 

Local Government. — The county and the township are the units 
of the rural, the city and the village t he units of the urban local 

1 The provision for circuit courts was first made in the constitution 
hy an amendment of 1883. 



government. The chief county authority is the board of com- 
missioners_ of three members elected for terms of two years. The 
other officials are the sheriff, treasurer and coroner, elected for two 
years; the auditor, recorder, clerk of courts, prosecuting attorney, 
surveyor and infirmary directors, elected for two years; and the 
board of school examiners (three) and the board of county visitors 
(six, of whom three are women), appointed usually by the probate 
judge for three years. The chief township authority is the board of 
trustees of three members, elected by popular vote for two years. 
In the parts of the state settled by people from New England 
township meetings were held in the early days, but their functions 
were gradually transferredjto the trustees, and by 1820 the meetings 
had been given up almost entirely. The other township officials are 
the clerk, treasurer, assessor, supervisor of roads, justices of the 
peace, constables, board of education and board of health. Under 
the constitution of 1802, municipal corporations were established 
by special legislation. The constitution of 1851, however, provided 
for a general law, and the legislature in 1852 enacted a "general 
municipal corporations act," the first of its kind in the United States. 
The system of classification adopted in time became so elaborate 
that many municipalities became isolated, each in a separate class, 
and the evils of special legislation were revived. Of the two chief 
cities, Cleveland (under a special act providing for the government 
of Columbus and Toledo, also) in 1892-1902 was governed under the 
federal plan, which centralized power in the hands of the mayor; 
in Cincinnati there was an almost hopeless diffusion of responsibility 
among the council and various executive boards. The supreme court 
in June 1902 decided that practically all the existing municipal 
legislation was special in character and was therefore unconstitu- 
tional. (State ex. rel. Kniseley vs. Jones, 66 Ohio State Reports, 
453. See also 66 Ohio State Reports, '491.) A special session of the 
legislature was called, and a new municipal code was adopted on 
the 22nd of October which went into effect in April 1903; it was 
a compromise between the Cleveland and the Cincinnati plans, 
with some additional features necessary to meet the conditions 
existing in the smaller cities. In order to comply with the court's 
interpretation of the constitution, municipalities were divided into 
only two classes, cities and villages, the former having a population 
of five thousand or more; the chief officials in both cities and 
villages were the mayor, council, treasurer and numerous boards of 
commissions. This was an attempt to devise a system of government 
that would apply to Cleveland, a city of 400,000 inhabitants, and to 
Painesville with its 5000 inhabitants. The code was replaced by 
the Paine Law of 1909, which provided for a board of control (some- 
thing like that under the " federal plan " in Cleveland, Columbus 
and Toledo) of three members: the mayor and the directors (ap- 
pointed and removable by the mayor) of two municipal departments 
—public service and public safety, the former including public works 
and parks, and the latter police, fire, charities, correction and 
buildings. The mayor's appointments are many, and are seldom 
dependent on the consent of the^council. A municipal civil service 
commission of three members (holding office for three years) is chosen 
by the president of the board of education, the president of the city 
council, and the president of the board of sinking fund commissioners; 
the pay (if any) of these commissioners is set by each city. The 
city auditor, treasurer and solicitor are elected, as under the 
code. 

In 1908 a direct primary law was passed providing for party 
primaries, those of all parties in each district to be held at the same 
time (annually) and place, before the same election board, and at 
public expense, to nominate candidates for township and municipal 
offices and members of the school board; nominations to be by 
petition signed by at least 2 % of the party voters of the political 
division, except that for United States senators 5 of 1 % is the 
minimum. The law does not make the nomination of candidates 
for the United States Senate by this method mandatory nor such 
choice binding upon the General Assembly. 

Laws. — The property rights of husband and wife are nearly equal ; 
a wife may hold her property the same as if single, and a widower 
or a widow is entitled to the use for life of one-third of the real estate 
of which his or her deceased consort was seized at the time of his or 
her death. Among the grounds on which a divorce may be obtained 
are adultery, extreme cruelty, fraud, abandonment for three years, 
gross neglect of duty, habitual drunkenness, a former existing 
marriage, procurement of divorce without the state by one party, 
which continues marriage binding on the other, and imprisonment in 
a penitentiary. For every family in which there is a wife, a minor 
son, or an unmarried daughter, a homestead not exceeding S1000 
in value, or personal property not exceeding S500 in value, is exempt 
from sale for the satisfaction of debts. 

In 1908 an act was passed providing for local option in regard 
to the sale of intoxicating liquors, by an election to be called an 
initiative petition, signed by at least 35 % of the electors of a county. 

Charitable and Penal Institutions. — The state charitable and penal 
institutions are supervised by the board of charities of six members 
(" not more than three . . . from the same political party ") 
appointed by the governor, and local institutions by boards of county 
visitors of six members appointed by the probate judge. Each state 
institution in addition has its own board of trustees appointed by 
the governor, and each county infirmary is under the charge of three 



OHIO 



29 



infirmary- directors chosen by popular vote. There are hospitals for 
the insane at Athens, Columbus, Dayton, Cleveland, Carthage (10 m. 
from Cincinnati; Longview Hospital), Massillon, Toledo and Lima; 
a hospital for epileptics at Gallipolis, opened in 1893; institutions 
for feeble-minded, for the blind (opened 1839) and for the deaf 
(opened 1829) at Columbus; a state sanatorium for tuberculous 
patients at Mt. Vernon (opened 1909); an institution for crippled 
and deformed children (authorized in 1907) ; a soldiers' and sailors' 
orphans' home at Xenia (organized in 1869 by the Grand Army of 
the Republic); a home for soldiers, sailors, marines, their wives, 
mothers and widows, and army nurses at Madison (established by 
the National Women's Relief Corps; taken over by the state, 1904); 
and soldiers' and sailors' homes at Sandusky (opened 1888), supported 
by the state, and at Dayton, supported by the United States. The 
state penal institutions are the boys' industrial school near Lancaster 
(established in 1854 as a Reform Farm), the girls' industrial home 
(1869) at Rathbone near Delaware, the reformatory at Mansfield 
(authorized 1884, opened 1896) and the penitentiary at Columbus 
(1816). 

Education. — Congress in 1785 set apart 1 sq. m. in each township 
of 36 sq. m. for the support of education. The public school system, 
however, was not established until 1825, and then it developed very 
slowly. The office of state commissioner of common schools was 
created in 1837, abolished in 1840 and revived in 1843. School 
districts fall into four classes — cities, villages, townships and special 
districts — each of which has its own board of education elected by 
popular vote. Laws passed in 1877, 1890, 1893 and 1902 have made 
education compulsory for children between the ages of eight and 
fourteen. The school revenues are derived from the sale and rental 
of public lands granted by Congress, and of the salt and swamp lands 
devoted by the state to such purposes, from a uniform levy of one 
mill on each dollar of taxable property in the state, from local levies 
(averaging 7-2 mills in township districts and 10-07 mills in separate 
districts in 1908), from certain fines and licences, and from tuition 
fees paid by non-resident pupils. The total receipts from all sources 
in 1908 amounted to $25,987,021; the balance from the preceding 
year was $11,714,135, and the total expenditures were $24,695,157. 
Three institutions for higher education are supported in large measure 
by the state: Ohio University at Athens, founded in 1804 on the 
proceeds derived from two townships granted by Congress to the 
Ohio Company; Miami University (chartered in 1809) at Oxford, 
which received the proceeds from a township granted by Congress in 
the Symmes purchase; and Ohio State University (1873) at Colum- 
bus, which received the proceeds from the lands granted by Congress 
under the act of 1862 for the establishment of agricultural and 
mechanical colleges, and reorganized as a university in 1878. Wilber- 
force University (1856), for negroes, near Xenia, is under the control 
of the African Methodist Episcopal Church ; but the state established 
a normal and industrial department in 1888, and has since contributed 
to its maintenance. Under an act of 1902 normal colleges, supported 
by the state, have also been created in connexion with Ohio and 
Miami universities. Among the numerous other colleges and uni- 
versities in the state are Western Reserve University (1826) at 
Cleveland, the university of Cincinnati (opened 1873) at Cincinnati, 
and Oberlin College (1833) at Oberlin. 

Finance. — The revenues of the state are classified into four funds; 
the general revenue fund, the sinking fund, the state common school 
fund and the university fund. The chief sources of the general 
revenue fund are taxes on real and personal property, on liquors and 
cigarettes, on corporations and on inheritances; in 1909 the net 
receipts for this fund were $8,043,257, the disbursements $9,103,301, 
and the cash balance at the end of the fiscal year 83,428,705. There 
is a tendency to reduce the rate on real property, leaving it as a 
basis for local taxation. The rate on collateral inheritances is 5%, 
on direct inheritances 2 %, on the excess above $3000. There are 
state, county and municipal boards of equalization. A special tax 
is levied for the benefit of the sinking fund — one-tenth of a mill in 
1909. The commissioners of{the fund are the auditor, the secretary 
of state and the attorney-general. The public debt, which began to 
accumulate in 1825, was increased by the canal expenditures to 
$16,880,000 in 1843. The constitution of 1851 practically deprived 
the legislature of the power to create new obligations. The funded 
debt was then gradually reduced until the last installment was paid 
in 1903. There still remains, however, an irredeemable debt due 
to the common schools, Ohio University and Ohio State University, 
in return for their public lands. About one-half of the annual common 
school fund is derived from local taxes; the state levy for this fund 
in 1909 was one mill, and the total receipts were $2,382,353. The 
university fund is derived from special taxes levied for the four 
institutions which receive aid from the state; in 1909 the levy was 
0-245 mills and the total receipts were $582,843. Several banks and 
trading houses with banking privileges were incorporated by special 
statutes between 1803 and 1817. Resentment was aroused by the 
establishment of branches of the Bank of the United States at Chilli- 
cothe and Cincinnati in 1817, and an attempt was made to tax them 
out of existence. State officials broke into the vaults of the Chilli- 
cothe branch in 1819 and took out $100,000 due for taxes. The 
Federal courts compelled a restoration of the money and pronounced 
the taxing law unconstitutional. In 1845 the legislature chartered 
for twenty years the State Bank of Ohio, based on the model of the 



State Bank of Indiana of 1834. It became a guarantee of conservative 
banking, and was highly successful. There were at one time thirty- 
six branches. Most of the state institutions secured Federal charters 
after the establishments of the national banking system (1863-1864), 
but the high price of government bonds and the large amount of capital 
required led to a reaction, which was only partially checked by the 
reduction of the minimum capital to 825,000 under the currency act 
of the 14th of March 1900. 

History. — Ohio was the pioneer state of the old North-West 
Territory, which embraced also what are now the states of 
Indiana, Illinois, Michigan and Wisconsin, and the N.E. corner 
of Minnesota. When discovered by Europeans, late in the first 
half of the 17th century, the territory included within what is 
now Ohio was mainly a battle-ground of numerous Indian tribes 
and the fixed abode of none except the Erics who occupied a 
strip along the border of Lake Erie. From the middle to the 
close of the 17th century the French were establishing a claim to 
the territory between the Great Lakes and the Ohio river by 
discovery and occupation, and although they had provoked 
the hostility of the Iroquois Indians they had helped the 
Wyandots, Miamis and Shawnccs to banish them from all 
territory W. of the Muskingum river. Up to this time the English 
had based their claim to the same territory on the discovery 
of the Atlantic Coast by the Cabots and upon the Virginia, 
Massachusetts and Connecticut charters under which these 
colonies extended westward to the Pacific Ocean. In 1701, 
New York, seeking another claim, obtained from the Iroquois 
a grant to the king of England of this territory which they claimed 
to have conquered but from which they had subsequently been 
expelled, and this grant was confirmed in 1726 and again in 1744. 
About 1730 English traders from Pennsylvania and Virginia 
began to visit the eastern and southern parts of the territory 
and the crisis approached as a French Canadian expedition under 
Celeron de Bienville took formal possession of the upper Ohio 
Valley by planting leaden plates at the mouths of the principal 
streams. This was in 1749 and in the same year George II. 
chartered the first Ohio Company, formed by Virginians and 
London merchants trading with Virginia for the purpose of 
colonizing the West. This company in 1750 sent Christopher 
Gist down the Ohio river to explore the country as far as the 
mouth of the Scioto river; and four years later the erection 
of a fort was begun in its interest at the forks of the Ohio. The 
French drove the English away and completed the fort (Fort 
Duquesne) for themselves. The Seven Years' War was the 
immediate consequence and this ended in the cession of the entire 
North-West to Great Britain. The former Indian allies of the 
French, however, immediately rose up in opposition to British 
rule in what is known as the Conspiracy of Pontiac (see Pontiac), 
and the supression of this was not completed until Colonel 
Henry Bouquet made an expedition (1764) into the valley of the 
Muskingum and there brought the Shawnees, Wyandots and 
Delawares to terms. With the North-West won from the French 
Great Britain no longer recognized those claims of ber colonies 
to this territory which she had asserted against that nation, but 
in a royal proclamation of the 7th of October 1763 the granting 
of land W. of the Alleghanies was forbidden and on the 22nd of 
June 1774 parliament passed the Quebec Act which annexed 
the region to the province of Quebec. This was one of the 
grievances which brought on the War of Independence and during 
that war the North-West was won for the Americans by George 
Rogers Clark (q.v.). During that war also, those states which 
had no claims in the West contended that title to these western 
lands should pass to the Union and when the Articles of Con- 
federation were submitted for ratification in 1777, Maryland 
refused to ratify them except on that condition. The result 
was that New York ceded its claim to the United States in 17S0, 
Virginia in 1784, Massachusetts in 1785 and Connecticut in 1786. 
Connecticut, however, excepted a strip bordering on Lake Erie 
for 120 m. and containing 3,250,000 acres. This district, known 
as the Western Reserve, was ceded in 1S00 on condition that 
Congress would guarantee the titles to land already granted by 
the state. Virginia reserved a tract between the Little Miami 
and Scioto rivers, known as the Virginia Military District, for 
her soldiers in the War of Independence. 



3° 



OHIO 



When the war was over and these cessions had been made 
a great number of war veterans wished an opportunity to repair 
their broken fortunes in the West, and Congress, hopeful of 
receiving a large revenue from the sale of lands here, passed an 
ordinance on the 20th of May 1785 by which the present national 
system of land-surveys into townships 6 m. sq. was inaugurated 
in what is now S.W. Ohio in the summer of 1786. In March 
1786 the second Ohio Company (q.v.), composed chiefly of New 
England officers and soldiers, was organized in Boston, Massa- 
chusetts, with a view to founding a new state between Lake 
Erie and the Ohio river. The famous North- West Ordinance 
was passed by Congress on the 13th of July 1787. This instru- 
ment provided a temporary government for the Territory with 
the understanding that, as soon as the population was sufficient, 
the representative system should be adopted, and later that 
states should be formed and admitted into the Union. There 
were to be not less than three nor more than five states. Of 
these the easternmost (Ohio) was to be bounded on the N., E. 
and S. by the Lakes, Pennsylvania and the Ohio river, and on 
the W. by a line drawn due N. from the mouth of the Great Miami 
river to the Canadian boundary, if there were to be three states, 
or to its intersection with an E. and W. line drawn through the 
extreme S. bend of Lake Michigan, if there were to be five. 
Slavery was forbidden by the sixth article of the ordinance; 
and the third article read: " Religion, morality and knowledge 
being necessary to good government and the happiness of man- 
kind, schools and the means of education shall for ever be 
encouraged." After the adoption of the North-West Ordinance 
the work of settlement made rapid progress. There were four 
main centres. The Ohio Company founded Marietta at the 
mouth of the Muskingum in 178S, and this is regarded as the 
oldest permanent settlement in the state. An association of 
New Jerseymen, organized by John Cleves Symmes, secured 
a grant from Congress in 1 788-1 792 to a strip of 248,540 acres 
on the Ohio between the Great Miami and the Little Miami, which 
came to be known as the Symmes Purchase. Their chief settle- 
ments were Columbia (1788) and Cincinnati (1789). The Virginia 
Military District, between the Scioto and the Little Miami, 
reserved in 1784 for bounties to Virginia continental troops, 
was colonized in large measure by people from that state. Their 
chief towns were Massieville or Manchester (1 790) and Chillicothe 
(1796). A small company of Connecticut people under Moses 
Cleaveland founded Cleveland in 1796 and Youngstown was 
begun a few years later, but that portion of the state made very 
slow progress until after the opening of the Ohio & Erie Canal 
in 1832. 

During the Territorial period (1 787-1803) Ohio was first a 
part of the unorganized North-West Territory (1787-1799), 
then a part of the organized North-West Territory (1799-1800), 
and then the organized North-West Territory (1800-1S03), 
Indiana Territory having been detached from it on the W. 
in 1800. The first Territorial government was established at 
Marietta in October 1787, and General Arthur St Clair (1734- 
181S), the governor, arrived in the summer of 1788. His ad- 
ministration was characterized by the final struggle with the 
Indians and by a bitter conflict between the executive and the 
legislature, which greatly influenced the constitutional history 
of the state. The War of Independence was succeeded by a 
series of Indian uprisings. Two campaigns, the first under 
General Josiah Harmar (1753-1S13) in 1790, and the second 
under General St Clair in 1791, failed on account of bad manage- 
ment and ignorance of Indian methods of warfare, and in 1793 
General Anthony Wayne (q.v.) was sent out in command of a 
large force of regulars and volunteers. The decisive conflict, 
fought on the 20th of August 1 794, near the rapids of the Maumee, 
is called the battle of Fallen Timbers, because the Indians 
concealed themselves behind the trunks of trees which had been 
felled by a storm. Wayne's dragoons broke through the brush- 
wood, attacked the left flank of the Indians and soon put them 
to flight. In the treaty of Greenville (3rd August 1795) the 
Indians ceded their claims to the territory E. and S. of the 
Cuyahoga, the Tuscarawas, and an irregular line from Fort 



Laurens (Bolivar) in Tuscarawas county to Fort Recovery in 
Mercer county, practically the whole E. and S. Ohio. The 
Jay Treaty was ratified in the same year, and in 1796 the British 
finally evacuated Detroit and the Maumee and Sandusky forts. 
By cessions and purchases in 1804, 1808 and 1817-1818 the 
state secured all of the lands of the Indians except their immediate 
homes, and these were finally exchanged for territory W. of the 
Mississippi. The last remnant migrated in 1841. General 
Wayne's victory was followed by an extensive immigration of 
New Englanders, of Germans, Scotch-Irish and Quakers from 
Pennsylvania, and of settlers from Virginia and Kentucky, 
many of whom came to escape the evils of slavery. This rapid 
increase of population led to the establishment of the organized 
Territorial government in 1799, to the restriction of that govern- 
ment in Ohio in 1800, and to the admission of the state into the 
Union in 1803. , 

The Congressional Enabh'ng Act of the 30th of April 1802 
followed that alternative of the North-West Ordinance which 
provided for five states in determining the boundaries, and in 
consequence the Indiana and Michigan districts were detached. 
A rigid adherence to the boundary authorized in 1787, however, 
would have resulted in the loss to Ohio of 470 sq. m. of territory 
in the N.W. part of the state, including the lake port of Toledo. 
After a long and bitter dispute — the Toledo War (see Toledo) — 
the present fine, which is several miles N. of the S. bend of Lake 
Michigan, was definitely fixed in 1837, when Michigan came into 
the Union. (For the settlement of the eastern boundary, see 
Pennsylvania.) 

After having been temporarily at Marietta, Cincinnati, Chilli- 
cothe and Zanesville the capital was established at Columbus 
in 1816. 

Since Congress did not pass any formal act of admission there 
has been some controversy as to when Ohio became a state. 
The Enabling Act was passed on the 30th of April 1802, the 
first state legislature met on the 1st of March 1803, the Territorial 
judges gave up their offices on the 15th of April 1803, and the 
Federal senators and representatives took their seats in Congress 
on the 17th of October 1803. Congress decided in 1806 in 
connexion with the payment of salaries to Territorial officials 
that the 1st of March 1803 was the date when state government 
began. During the War of 1812 the Indians under the lead of 
Tecumseh were again on the side of the British. Battles were 
fought at Fort Meigs (1813) and Fort Stephenson (Fremont, 
1813) and Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry's naval victory on 
Lake Erie in 1813 was on the Ohio side of the boundary line. 

Owing to the prohibition of slavery the vast majority of the 
early immigrants to Ohio came from the North, but, until the 
Mexican War forced the slavery question into the foreground, 
the Democrats usually controlled the state, because the principles 
of that party were more in harmony with frontier ideas of 
equality. The Whigs were successful in the presidential elections 
of 1836 and 1840, partly because of the financial panic and 
partly because their candidate, William Henry Harrison, was a 
" favourite son," and in the election of 1844, because of the 
unpopularity of the Texas issue. Victory was with the Democrats 
in 1848 and 1852, but since the organization of the Republican 
party in 1854 the state has uniformly given to the Republican 
presidential candidates its electoral votes. In the Civil War 
Ohio loyally supported the Union, furnishing 319,659 men for 
the army. Dissatisfaction with the President's emancipation 
programme resulted in the electionof aDemocratic Congressional 
delegation in 1862, but the tide turned again after Gettysburg 
and Vicksburg; Clement L. Vallandigham, the Democratic 
leader, was deported from the state by mih'tary order, and the 
Republicans were successful in the elections of 1S63 and 1864. 
A detachment of the Confederate cavalry under General John 
Morgan invaded the state in 1863, but was badly defeated in the 
battle of Buffington's Island (July 18th). Democratic governors 
were elected in 1873, 1S77, 1883, 1889, 1905, 1908 and 1910. 
Five presidents have come from Ohio, William Henry Harrison, 
Rutherford B. Hayes. James A. Garfield, William McKinley, Jr., 
and William Howard Taft. 



OHIO COMPANY 



3 1 



Governors of Ohio 
Territorial Period (1787-1803). 
Arthur St Clair .... 1787-1802 
Charles W. Byrd (Acting) . . 1802-1803 

Period of Statehood. 
Edward Tiffin .... 1803-1807 
Thomas Kirker (Acting) . . 1 807-1 809 
Samuel Huntington . . . 1 809-1 81 1 
Return Jonathan Meigs . . 1811-1814 
Othnicl Looker (Acting) . . 1 814-1 81 5 
Thomas Worthington . . . 1815-1819 
Ethan Allen Brown . . . 1819-1822 
Allen Trimble (Acting) . . 1 822-1 823 
Jeremiah Morrow. . . . 1823-1827 
Allen Trimble .... 1827-1831 
Duncan McArthur . . . 1831-1833 
Robert Lucas .... 1 833-1 837 
Joseph Vance .... 1837-1839 
Wilson Shannon .... 1839-1 841 
Thomas Corwin .... 1841-1843 
Wilson Shannon .... 1 843-1 844 
Thomas W. Bartley (Acting) . 1844-1845 
Mordecai Bartley. . . . 1845-1847 
William Bebb .... 1 847-1 849 
Seabury Ford .... I 849-1 851 
Reuben Wood .... 1851-1853 
William Medill (Acting, 1853) . 1853-1856 
Salmon P. Chase .... 1856-1860 
William Dennison, Jr.. . . 1 860-1 862 

David Tod 1862-1864 

John Brough .... 1 864-1 865 

Charles Anderson (Acting) . . 1 865-1 866 
Jacob D. Cox .... 1866-1868 
Rutherford B. Hayes . . . 1868-1872 
Edward F. Noyes. . . . 1872-1874 
William Allen .... 1874-1876 
Rutherford B. Hayes . . . 1 876-1 877 
Thomas L. Young (Acting). . 1877-1878 
Richard M. Bishop . . . 1 878-1 880 
Charles Foster .... 1 880-1 884 
George Hoadley .... 1 884-1 886 
Joseph B. Foraker . . . 1886-1890 
James E. Campbell . . . 1890-1892 
William McKinley, Jr.. . . 1892-1896 
Asa S. Bushnell .... 1896-1900 
George K. Nash .... 1900-1904 
Myron T. Herrick. . . . 1904-1906 
John M. Pattison 1 . . . 1906 
Andrew Lintner Harris . . 1 906-1 909 
Judson Harmon .... 1909- 



Federalist 
Dem.-Repub. 

Dem.-Repub. 



Democrat. 

Nat.-Repub. 

Democrat 

Whig 

Democrat 

Whig 

Democrat 

Whig " 

Democrat 
Republican 



Democrat 
Republican 

Democrat 

Republican 

Democrat 

Republican 

Democrat 

Republican 



Democrat 

Republican 

Democrat 



Bibliography. — For a brief but admirable treatment of the 
physiography see Stella S. Wilson, Ohio (New York, 1902), and a 
great mass of material on this subject is contained in the publications 
of the Geological Survey of Ohio (1837 et seq.). For the administra- 
tion see the Constitution of the State of Ohio, adopted June 1831 
(Norwalk, Ohio, 1897), and amendments of 1903 and 1905 published 
separately; the annual reports of the state treasurer, auditor, 
board of state charities and commissioner of common schools, the 
Ellis municipal code (1902) and the Harrison school code (1904). 
The Civil Code, issued 1852, the Criminal Code in 1869 and the 
Revised Statutes in 1879, have several tiroes been amended and 
published in new editions. There are two excellent secondary 
accounts: Samuel P. Orth, The Centralization of Administration 
in Ohio, in the Columbia University Studies in History, Economics 
and Public Law, xvi. No. 3 (New York, 1903); and Wilbur H. 
Siebert, The Government of Ohio, its History and Administration 
(New York, 1904). B. A. Hinsdale's History and Civil Government 
of Ohio (Chicago, 1896) is more elementary. For local government 
see J. A. Wilgus, " Evolution of Township Government in Ohio," 
in the Annual Report of the American Historical Association for 
1894, pp. 403-412 (Washington, _ 1 895); D. F. Wilcox, Municipal 
Government in Michigan and Ohio, in the Columbia University Studies 
in History, Economics and Public Law, v. No. 3 (New York, 1895); 
J. A. Fairlie, " The Municipal Crisis in Ohio," in the Michigan Law 
Review for February 1903; and Thomas L. Sidlo, " Centralization 
in Ohio Municipal Government," in the American Political Science 
Review for November 1909. On education see George B. Germann, 
National Legislation concerning Education, its Influence and Effect 
in the Public Lands east of the Mississippi River, admitted prior to 
1820 (New York, 1899); J. J. Burns, Educational History of Ohio 
(Columbus, 1905). 

Archaeology and History: P. G. Thomson's Bibliography of Ohio 
(Cincinnati, 1 880) is an excellent guide to the study of Ohio's history. 
For archaeology see Cyrus Thomas's Catalogue of Prehistoric Works 



1 Died in office. 



East of the Rocky Mountains (Washington, 1891), and his Report on 
the Mound Explorations of the Bureau of Ethnology in the 12th Report 
(1894) of that Bureau, supplementing his earlier bulletins, Problem 
of the Ohio Mounds and the Circular, Square and Octagonal Earthworks 
of Ohio (1889); and W. K. Moorehead, Primitive Man in Ohio 
(New York, 1892). The best history is Ktifus King, Ohio; First 
Fruits of the Ordinance of 1787 (Boston and New York, 1888), in the 
" American Commonwealths " series. Alexander Black's Story of 
Ohio (Boston, 1888) is a short popular account. B. A. Hinsdale, 
The Old North-west (2nd ed., New York, 1899), is good for the period 
before 1803. Of the older histories Caleb At water, History of the Stale 
of Ohio, Natural and Civil (Cincinnati, 1838), and James \v. Taylor, 
History of the State of Ohio: First Period 1650-1787 (Cincinnati, 
1854), arc useful. For the Territorial period, and especially for the 
I ndian wars of 1 790-1 794, see W. H. Smith (ed.), The St Clair Papers: 
Life and Services of Arthur St Clair (2 vols., Cincinnati, 1882); Jacob 
Burnet, Notes on the Early Settlement of the North-Western Territory 
(Cincinnati, 1847), written from the Federalist point of view, and 
hence rather favourable to St Clair; C. E. Slocum, Ohio Country 
between 1783 and 181$ (New York, 1910); and John Armstrongs 
Life of Anthony Wayne in Sparks' " Library of American Biography " 
(Boston, 1834-1838), series i. vol. iv. See also F. P. Goodwin, 
The Growth of Ohio (Cincinnati, 1907) and R. E. Chaddock, Ohio 
before 1850 (New York, 1908). There is considerable material of 
value, especially for local history, in the Ohio Archaeological and 
Historical Society Publications (Columbus, 1887), and in Henry Howe, 
Historical Collections of Ohio (1st ed., Cincinnati, 1847; Centennial 
edition [enlarged], 2 vols., Columbus, 1889-1891). T. B. Galloway, 
" The Ohio-Michigan Boundary Line Dispute," in the Ohio Archaeo- 
logical and Historical Society Publications, vol. iv. pp. 199-230, 
is a good treatment of that complicated question. W. F. Gephart's 
Transportation and Industrial Development in the Middle West (New 
York, 1909), in the Columbia University Studies in History, 
Economics and Public Law, is a commercial history of Ohio. 

OHIO COMPANY, a name of two 18th century companies 
organized for the colonization of the Ohio Valley. The first 
Ohio Company was organized in 1749, partly to aid in securing 
for the English control of the valley, then in dispute between 
England and France, and partly as a commercial project for 
trade with the Indians. The company was composed of Vir- 
ginians, including Thomas Lee (d. 1750) and the two brothers of 
George Washington, Lawrence (who succeeded to the manage- 
ment upon the death of Lee) and Augustine; and of Englishmen, 
including John Hanbury, a wealthy London merchant. George 
II. sanctioned a grant to the company of 500,000 acres generally 
N.W. of the Ohio, and to the eastward, between the Monongahela 
and the Kanawha rivers, but the grant was never actually 
issued. In 1 750-1751 Christopher Gist, a skilful woodsman and 
surveyor, explored for the company the Ohio Valley as far as 
the mouth of the Scioto river. In 1752 the company had a 
pathway blazed between the small fortified posts at Will's Creek 
(Cumberland), Maryland, and at Redstone Creek (Brownsville), 
Pennsylvania, which it had established in 1750; but it was 
finally merged in the Walpole Company (an organization in 
which Benjamin Franklin was interested), which in 1772 had 
received from the British government a grant of a large tract 
lying along the southern bank of the Ohio as far west as the 
mouth of the Scioto river. The War of Independence interrupted 
colonization and nothing was accomplished. 

The second company, the Ohio Company of Associates, was 
formed at Boston on the 3rd of March 17S6. The leaders in the 
movement were General Rufus Putnam, Benjamin Tupper 
(173S-1792), Samuel Holden Parsons (1 737-1789) and Manasseh 
Cutler. Dr Cutler was selected to negotiate with Congress, and 
seems to have helped to secure the incorporation in the Ordinance 
for the government of the North- West Territory of the paragraphs 
which prohibited slavery and provided for public education and 
for the support of the ministry. Cutler's original intention was 
to buy for the Ohio Company only about 1,500,000 acres, but 
on the 27th of July Congress authorized a grant of about 
5,000,000 acres of land for $3,500,000; a reduction of one-third 
was allowed for bad tracts, and it was also provided that the 
lands could be paid for in United States securities. On the 27th 
of October 17S7 Cutler and Major Winthrop Sargent (i753~ 
1820), who had' joined him in the negotiations, signed two con- 
tracts; one was for the absolute purchase for the Ohio Company, 
at 66f cents an acre, of 1,500,000 acres of land lying along the 
north bank of the Ohio river, from a point near the site of the 



32 



OHIO RIVER 



present Marietta, to a point nearly opposite the site of the present 
Huntington, Kentucky; the other was for an option to buy all 
the land between the Ohio and the Scioto rivers and the western 
boundary line of the Ohio Company's tract, extending north of 
the tenth township from the Ohio, this tract being pre-empted by 
" Manasseh Cutler and Winthrop Sargent for themselves and 
others " — actually for the Scioto Company (see Gallipolis). 
On the same day Cutler and Sargent " for themselves and 
associates " transferred to William Duer, then Secretary of the 
Treasury Board, and his associates " one equal moiety of the 
Scioto tract of land mentioned in the second contract," it being 
provided that both parties were to be equally interested in the 
sale of the land, and were to share equally any profit or loss. 
Colonists were sent out by the Ohio Company from New England, 
and Marietta, the first permanent settlement in the present state 
of Ohio, was founded in April 1788. 

OHIO RIVER, the principal eastern tributary of the Mississippi 
river, U.S.A. It is formed by the confluence of the Allegheny 
and Monongabela rivers at Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, and flows 
N.W. nearly to the W. border of Pennsylvania, S.S.W. between 
Ohio and West Virginia, W. by N. between Ohio and Kentucky, 
and W.S.W. between Indiana and Illinois on the N. and Kentucky 
on the S. It is the largest of all the tributaries of the Mississippi 
in respect to the amount of water discharged (an average of about 
158,000 cub. ft. per sec), is first in importance as a highway of 
commerce, and in length (967 m.) as well as in the area of its 
drainage basin (approximately 210,000 sq. m.) it is exceeded only 
by the Missouri. The slope of the river at low water ranges 
from 1 ft. or more per mile in the upper section to about 0-75 ft. 
per mile in the middle section and 0-29 ft. per mile in the lower 
section, and the total fall is approximately 500 ft. Nearly two- 
thirds of the bed is occupied by 1S7 pools, in which the fall is very 
gentle; and the greater part of the descent is made over inter- 
vening bars, which are usually composed of sand or gravel but 
occasionally of hard pan or rock. The greatest falls are at 
Louisville, where the river within a distance of 2-25 m. descends 
23-9 ft. over an irregular mass of limestone. The rock floor of the 
valley is usually 30 to 50 ft. below low water level, and when 
it comes to the surface, as it occasionally does, it extends at this 
height only part way across the valley. In the upper part of the 
river the bed contains much coarse gravel and numerous boulders, 
but lower down a sand bed prevails. The ordinary width of the 
upper half of the river is quite uniform, from 1200 to 1500 ft., but 
it widens in the pool above Louisville, contracts immediately 
below the Falls, and then gradually widens again until it reaches 
a maximum width of more than a mile about 20 m. from its 
mouth. Islands are numerous and vary in size from an acre or 
less to 5000 acres; above Louisville there are fifty or more, and 
below it about thirty. Many of them are cultivated. 

Besides its parent streams, the Allegheny and the Monongabela, 
the Ohio has numerous large branches. On the N. it receives the 
waters of the Muskingum, Scioto, Miami and Wabash rivers, and 
on the S. those of the Kanawha, Big Sandy, Licking, Kentucky, 
Green, Cumberland and Tennessee rivers. 

The drainage basin of the Ohio, in which the annual rainfall 
averages about 43 in., is, especially in the S. part of the river, 
of the " quick-spilling " kind, and as the swift mountain streams 
in that section are filled in February or March by the storms from 
the Gulf of Mexico, while the northern streams are swollen by 
melting snow and rain, the Ohio rises very suddenly and not 
infrequently attains a height of 30 to 50 ft. or more above low 
water level, spreads out ten to fifteen times its usual width, 
submerges the bottom lands, and often causes great damage to 
property in the lower part of the cities along its banks. 

Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, asserted that he discovered 
the Ohio and descended it until his course was obstructed by 
a fall (thought to be the Falls at Louisville) ; this was probably 
in 1670, but until the middle of the next century, when its 
strategic importance in the struggle of the French and the 
English for the possession of the interior of the continent became 
fully recognized, little was generally known of it. By the treaty 
of 1763 ending the Seven Years' War the English finally gained 



undisputed control of the territory along its banks. After 
Virginia had bought, in 1768, the claims of the Six Nations to the 
territory south of the Ohio, immigrants, mostly Virginians, began 
to descend the river in considerable numbers, but the Shawnee 
Indians, whose title to the land was more plausible than that of 
the Six Nations ever was, resisted their encroachments until the 
Shawnees were defeated in October 1774 at the battle of Point 
Pleasant. By the treaty of 17S3 the entire Ohio country became 
a part of the United States and by the famous Ordinance of 1787 
the north side was opened to settlement. Most of the settlers 
entered the region by the headwaters of the Ohio and carried 
much of their market produce, lumber, &c, down the Ohio and 
Mississippi to New Orleans or beyond. Until the successful 
navigation of the river by steamboats a considerable portion of 
the imports was carried overland from Philadelphia or Baltimore 
to Pittsburg. The first steamboat on the Ohio was the " New 
Orleans," which was built in 1S11 by Nicholas J. Roosevelt 
and sailed from Pittsburg to New Orleans in the same year, 
but it remained for Captain Henry M. Shreve (1 785-1854) to 
demonstrate with the " Washington," which he built in 1816, 
the success of this kind of navigation on the river. From 1820 
to the Civil War the steamboat on the system of inland water- 
ways of which the Ohio was a part was a dominant factor in the 
industrial life of the Middle West. Cincinnati, Louisville and 
Pittsburg on its banks were extensively engaged in building 
these vessels. The river was dotted with floating shops — dry- 
goods boats fitted with counters, boats containing a tinner's 
establishment, a blacksmith's shop, a factory, or a lottery office. 
Until the Erie Canal was opened in 1825 the Ohio river was the 
chief commercial highway between the East and the West. 
It was connected with Lake Erie in 1S32 by the Ohio & Erie 
Canal from Portsmouth to Cleveland, and in 1845 by the Miami 
& Erie Canal from Cincinnati to Toledo. 

In the natural state of the river navigation was usually almost 
wholly suspended during low water from July to November, 
and it was dangerous at all times on account of the numerous 
snags. The Federal government in 1827 undertook to remove 
the snags and to increase the depth of water on the bars by the 
construction of contraction works, such as dikes and wing dams, 
and appropriations for these purposes as well as for dredging 
were continued until 1844 and resumed in 1866; but as the 
channel obtained was less than 3 ft. in 1S70, locks with movable 
dams — that is, dams that can be thrown down on the approach 
of a flood — were then advocated, and five years later Congress 
made an appropriation for constructing such a dam, the Davis 
Island Dam immediately below Pittsburg, as an experiment. 
This was opened in 1885 and was a recognized success; and in 
1895 the Ohio Valley Improvement Association was organized 
in an effort to have the system extended. At first the association 
asked only for a channel 6 ft. in depth; and between 1896 and 
1905 Congress authorized the necessary surveys and made appro- 
priations for thirty-six locks and dams from the Davis Island 
Dam to the mouth of the Great Miami river. As the association 
then urged that the channel be made 9 ft. in depth Congress 
authorized the secretary of war to appoint a board of engineers 
which should make a thorough examination and report on the 
comparative merits of a channel 9 ft. in depth, and one 6 ft. in 
depth. The board reported in 1908 in favour of a 9-ft. channel 
and stated that fifty-four locks and dams would be necessary for 
such a channel throughout the course of the river, and Congress 
adopted this project. At the Falls is the Louisville & Portland 
Canal, originally built by a private corporation, with the United 
States as one of the stockholders, and opened in 1830, with a 
width of 50 ft., a length of 200 ft., and three locks, each with 
a lift of about 8f ft. In 1860-1872 the width was increased 
to 90 ft. and the three old locks were replaced by two new ones. 
The United States gradually increased its holdings of stock 
until in 1855 it became owner of all but five shares; it assumed 
the management of the canal in 1874, abolished tolls in 1880, 
and thereafter improved it in many respects. Sixty-eight locks 
and dams have been constructed on the principal tributaries, 
and tbe Allegheny, Monongahela, Cumberland, Tennessee, 



OHLAU— OHLENSCHLAGER 



33 



Muskingum, Kanawha, Little Kanawha, Big Sandy, Wabash, 
and Green now afford a total of about 960 m. of slack-water 

navigation. , 

See the Board of Engineers' Report of Examination of Ohio River 
with a view to obtaining Channel Depths of 6 and p ft. respectively 
(Washington, 1908); A. B. Hulbert, Waterways of Westward Ex- 
pansion (Cleveland, 1903) and The Ohio River, a Course of Empire 
(New York, 1906); also R. G. Thwaites, Afloat on the Ohio (New 
York, 1900). 

OHLAU, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of Silesia, 
16 m. by rail S.E. of Breslau, on the left bank of the Oder. Pop. 
(1905) 9233. It has two Roman Catholic and two Evangelical 
churches, and a castle. Ohlau is the centre of a tobacco-growing 
district and has manufactures of tobacco and cigars, machinery, 
beer, shoes and bricks. It became a town in 1291 and passed 
to Prussia in 1742. In the 17th and 18th centuries it was often 
the residence of the dukes of Brieg and of the Sobieski family. 

See Schulz, A usOhla us Vergangen heit (Ohlau, 1902). 

OHLENSCHLAGER, ADAM GOTTLOB (1779-1850), Danish 
poet, was born in Vesterbro, a suburb of Copenhagen, on the 
14th of November 1779. His father, a Schleswiger by birth, 
was at that time organist, and later became keeper, of the royal 
palace of Frederiksberg; he was a very brisk and cheerful man. 
The poet's mother, on the other hand, who was partly German 
by extraction, suffered from depressed spirits, which afterwards 
deepened into melancholy madness. Adam and his sister Sofia 
were allowed their own way throughout their childhood, and were 
taught nothing, except to read and write, until their twelfth 
year. At the age of nine Adam began to make fluent verses. 
Three years later, while walking in Frederiksberg Gardens, he 
attracted the notice of the poet Edvard Storm, and the result 
of the conversation was that he received a nomination to the 
college called " Posterity's High School," an important institution 
of which Storm was the principal. Storm himself taught the class 
of Scandinavian mythology, and thus Ohlenschlager received 
his earliest bias towards the poetical religion of his ancestors. 
He was confirmed in 1795, and was to have been apprenticed 
to a tradesman in Copenhagen. To his great delight there was 
a hitch in the preliminaries, and he returned to his father's 
house. He now, in his eighteenth year, suddenly took up study 
with great zeal, but soon again abandoned his books for the stage, 
where a small position was offered him. In 1797 he actually 
made his appearance on the boards in several successive parts, 
but soon discovered that he possessed no real histrionic talent. 
The brothers Orsted, with whom he had formed an intimacy 
fruitful of profit to him, persuaded him to quit the stage, and in 
1800 he entered the university of Copenhagen as a student. 
He was doomed, however, to disturbance in his studies, first 
from the death of his mother, next from his inveterate tendency 
towards poetry, and finally from the attack of the English upon 
Copenhagen in April 1801, which, however, inspired a dramatic 
sketch {April the Second 1S01) which is the first thing of the 
kind by Ohlenschlager that we possess. In the summer of 
1802, when Ohlenschlager had an old Scandinavian romance, 
as well as a volume of lyrics, in the press, the young Norse 
philosopher, Henrik Steffens, came back to Copenhagen after 
a long visit to Schelling in Germany, full of new romantic ideas. 
His lectures at the university, in which Goethe and Schiller 
were for the first time revealed to the Danish public, created 
a great sensation. Steffens and Ohlenschlager met one day at 
Dreier's Club, and after a conversation of sixteen hours the latter 
went home, suppressed his two coming volumes, and wrote 
at a sitting his splendid poem Guldhomene, in a manner totally 
new to Danish literature. The result of his new enthusiasm 
speedily showed itself in a somewhat hasty volume of poems, 
published in 1803, now chiefly remembered as containing the 
lovely piece called Sanct-H ansaften-Spil . The next two years saw 
the production of several exquisite works, in particular the 
epic of Tltors Reise til Jolunheim, the charming poem in hexa- 
meters called Langelandsreisen, and the bewitching piece of 
fantasy Aladdin's Lampe (1805). At the age of twenty-six 
Ohlenschlager was universally recognized, even by the opponents 
of the romantic revival, as the leading poet of Denmark. He 



now collected his Poetical Writings in two volumes. He found 
no difficulty in obtaining a grant for foreign travel from the 
government, and he left his native country for the first time, 
joining Steffens at Halle in August 1805. Here he wrote the 
first of his great historical tragedies, Hakon Jorl, which he sent 
off to Copenhagen, and then proceeded for the winter months 
to Berlin, where he associated with Humboldt, Fichte, and 
the leading men of the day, and met Goethe for the first time. 
In the spring of 1806 he went on to Weimar, where he spent 
several months in daily intercourse with Goethe. The 
autumn of the same year he spent with Tieck in Dresden, 
and proceeded in December to Paris. Here he resided eighteen 
months and wrote his three famous masterpieces, Baldur kin 
Gode (1808), Palnotoke (1809), and Axel og Valborg (1810). 
In July 1808 he left Paris and spent the autumn and winter 
in Switzerland as the guest of Madame dc Stael-Holstein at 
Coppet, in the midst of her circle of wits. In the spring of 1809 
Ohlenschlager went to Rome to visit Thorwaldsen, and in his 
house wrote his tragedy of Correggio. He hurriedly returned 
to Denmark in the spring of 1810, partly to take the chair of 
aesthetics at the university of Copenhagen, partly to marry 
the sister-in-law of Rahbek, to whom he had been longbetrothcd. 
His first course of lectures dealt with his Danish predecessor 
Ewald, the second with Schiller. From this time forward 
his literary activity became very great; in 181 1 he published 
the Oriental tale of AH og Gulhyndi, and in 181 2 the last of his 
great tragedies, Staerkodder. From 1814 to 1819 he, or rather 
his admirers, were engaged in a long and angry controversy with 
Baggesen, who represented the old didactic school. This contest 
seems to have disturbed the peace of Ohlenschlager's mind, and 
to have undermined his genius. His talent may be said to have 
culminated in the glorious cycle of verse-romances called Helge, 
published in 1814: The tragedy of Hagbarth og Signe, 1815, 
showed a distinct falling-off in style. In 1817 he went back 
to Paris, and published Hroars Saga and the tragedy of Fosl- 
brodrene. In 1818 he was again in Copenhagen, and wrote 
the idyll of Den lille Hyrdedreng and the Eddaic cycle called 
Nordens Guder. His next productions were the tragedies of 
Erik og Abel (1820) and Vaeringeme i Miklagaard (1826), and 
the epic of Hrolf Krake (1829). It was in the last-mentioned 
year that, being in Sweden, Ohlenschlager was publicly crowned 
with laurel in front of the high altar in Lund cathedral by 
Bishop Esaias Tegner, as the " Scandinavian King of Song." 
His last volumes were Tordenskjold (1833), Dronning Margrethe 
(1833), Sokroles (1835), Olaf den Hellige (1836), Knud den Store 
(1838), Dina (1842), Erik dipping (1843), and Kiartan og 
Gudrun (1847). On his seventieth birthday, 14th November 
1849, a public festival was arranged in his honour, and he was 
decorated by the king of Denmark under circumstances of great 
pomp. He died on the 20th of January 1850, and was buried 
in the cemetery of Frederiksberg. Immediately after his death 
his Recollections were published in two volumes. 

With the exception of Holberg, there has been no Danish writer 
who has exercised so wide an influence as Ohlenschlager. His 
great work was to awaken in the breasts of his countrymen an 
enthusiasm for the poetry and religion of their ancestors, and this 
he performed to so complete an extent that his name remains to 
this day synonymous with Scandinavian romance. He supplied 
his countrymen with romantic tragedies at the very moment 
when all eyes were turned to the stage, and when the old-fashioned 
pieces were felt to be inadequate. His plays, partly, no doubt, 
in consequence of his own early familiarity with acting, fulfilled 
the stage requirements of the day, and were popular beyond 
all expectation. The earliest are the best — Ohlenschlager's 
dramatic masterpiece being, without doubt his first tragedy, 
Hakon Jarl. In his poems and plays alike his style is limpid, 
elevated, profuse; his flight is sustained at a high pitch without 
visible excitement. His fluent tenderness and romantic zest have 
been the secrets of his extreme popularity. Although his 
inspiration came from Germany, he is not much like a German 
poet, except when he is consciously following Goethe; his 
analogy is much rather to be found among the English poets, 



XX. 2 



34 



/• : 



OHLIGS— OHMMETER u 



his contemporaries. His mission towards antiquity reminds 
us of Scott, but he is, as a poet, a better artist than Scott; 
he has sometimes touches of exquisite diction and of over- 
wrought sensibility which recall Coleridge to us. In his wide 
ambition and profuseness he possessed some characteristics 
of Southey, although his style has far more vitality. With all 
his faults he was a very great writer, and one of the principal 
pioneers of the romantic movement in Europe. (E. G.) 

OHLIGS, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine Province, 
17 m. by rail N. of Cologne, on the railway to Elberfeld. Pop. 
(1905) 24,264. Its chief manufactures are cutlery and hardware, 
and there are iron-foundries and flour-mills. Other industries 
are brewing, dyeing, weaving and brick-making. Before 1801 
it was known as Merscheid. 

OHM, GEORG SIMON (1787-1854), German physicist, was 
born at Erlangen on the 16th of March 1787, and was educated 
at the university there. He became professor of mathematics 
in the Jesuits' college at Cologne in 1817 and in the polytechnic 
school of Nuremberg in 1833, and in 1852 professor of experi- 
mental physics in the university of Munich, where he died on 
the 7th of July 1854. His writings were numerous, but, with 
one important exception, not of the first order. The excep- 
tion is his pamphlet published in Berlin in 1827, with the 
title Die galvanische Kette mathematisch bearbeitet. This work, 
the germs of which had appeared during the two preceding 
years in the journals of Schweigger and roggendorfT, has exerted 
most important influence on the whole development of the 
theory and applications of current electricity, and Ohm's name 
has been incorporated in the terminology of electrical science. 
Nowadays " Ohm's Law," as it is called, in which all that is 
most valuable in the pamphlet is summarized, is as universally 
known as anything in physics. The equation for the propaga- 
tion of electricity formed on Ohm's principles is identical with 
that of J. B. J. Fourier for the propagation of heat; and if, in 
Fourier's solution of any problem of heat-conduction, we change 
the word " temperature " to " potential " and write " electric 
current " instead of " flux of heat," we have the solution of 
a corresponding problem of electric conduction. The basis 
of Fourier's work was his clear conception and definition of 
conductivity. But this involves an assumption, undoubtedly 
true for small temperature-gradients, but still an assumption, 
viz. that, all else being the same, the flux of heat is strictly 
proportional to the gradient of temperature. An exactly similar 
assumption is made in the statement of Ohm's law, i.e. that, 
other things being alike, the strength of the current is at each 
point proportional to the gradient of potential. It happens, how- 
ever, that with our modern methods it is much more easy to test 
the accuracy of the assumption in the case of electricity than 
in that of heat; and it has accordingly been shown by J. Clerk 
Maxwell and George Chrystal that Ohm's law is true, within the 
limits of experimental error, even when the currents are so 
powerful as almost to fuse the conducting wire. 

OHMMETER, an electrical instrument employed for measuring 
insulation-resistance or other high electrical resistances. For 
the purpose of measuring resistances up to a few thousand ohms, 
the most convenient appliance is a Wheatstone's Bridge (q.v), 
but when the resistance of the conductor to be measured is 
several hundred thousand ohms, or if it is the resistance of a 
so-called insulator, such as the insulating covering of the copper 
wires employed for distributing electric current in houses and 
buildings for electric lighting, then the ohmmeter is more con- 
venient." An ohmmeter in one form consists of two pairs of coils, 
one pair called the scries coil and the other called the shunt coil. 
These coils are placed with their axes at right angles to one 
another, and at the point where the axes intersect a small pivoted 
needle of soft iron is placed, carrying a longer index needle 
moving over a scale. 

Suppose it is desired to measure the insulation-resistance of a 
system of electric house wiring ; the'ohmmeter circuits are then joined 
up as shown in fig:-i, where W represents a portion of the wiring 
of the building and 1 a portion of the insulating materials surrounding 
it. The object of the test is to discover the resistance of the insulator 
I, that is, to determine how much current flows through thisinsulator 



/" 



-VWWvV- 
Se ■ 
I 



FlG. I. 



w 



by leakage under a certain electromotive foree or voltage which must 
not be less than that which will be employed in practice when the 
electric lights supplied through these wires are in operation. For 
this purpose the ohmmeter is provided with a small dynamo D, 
contained in a box, which produces a continuous electromotive 
force of from 200 to 500 ._ w 

volts when the handle J- — * 

of the instrument is " 

steadily turned. In 
making the test, the 
whole of the copper 
wires belonging to any 
section of the wiring and 
the test must be con- ( D ) Sh. 

nected together at some 
point and then con- 
nected through the series 
coil of the ohmmeter 
with one terminal of the 
dynamo. The shunt coil 
Sh and the series coil Se 
are connected together 
at one point, and the 
remaining terminals of 

the dynamo and shunt coil must be connected to a " good 
earth," which is generally the gas or water pipes w of the 
building. On setting the dynamo in operation, a current passes 
through the shunt coil of the ohmmeter proportional to the voltage 
of the dynamo, and, if there is any sensible leakage through the 
insulator to earth, at the same time another current passes through 
the series coil proportional to the conductivity of the insulation of 
the wiring under the electromotive force used. The two coils, the 
shunt and the series coil, then produce two magnetic fields, with 
their lines of force at right angles to one another. The small pivoted 
iron needle ns placed in their common field therefore takes up a 
certain position, dependent on the relative value of these fields. 
The tangent of the angle of deflection 8 of this needle measured from 
its position, when the shunt coil is disconnected, is equal to the ratio 
of the voltage of the dynamo to the current through the insulator. If 
we call this last resistance R, the voltage of the working dynamo V, 
and the current through the insulator C, then tan 0=C/V'=R. 
Hence the deflection of the needle is proportional to the insulation 
resistance, and the scale can be graduated to show directly this 
resistance in megohms. 

The Evershed and Vignoles form of the instrument is much used 
in testing the insulation resistance of electric wiring in houses. 
In this case the dynamo and ohmmeter are combined in one instru- 
ment. The field magnet of the dynamo has two gaps in it. In one 
the exciting armature is rotated, producing the working voltage of 
250, 500 or 1000 volts. In the other gap are pivoted two coils 
wound on an iron core and connected at nearly a right angle to 
each other. One of these coils is in series with the armature circuit 
and with the insulation or high resistance to be measured. The other 
is a shunt across the terminals of the armature. When the armature 
is rotated, these two coils endeavour to place themselves in certain 
directions in the field so as to be perforated by the greatest magnetic 
flux. The exact position of the core, and, therefore, of an index 
needle connected with it, is dependent on the ratio of the voltage 
applied to the terminals of the high resistance or insulator and the 
current passing through it. This, however, is a measure of the 
insulation-resistance. Hence the instrument can be graduated to 
show this directly. 

In the Nalder ohmmeter the electrostatic principle is employed. 
The instrument consists of a high-voltage continuous -current 
dynamo which creates a potential difference between the needle 
and the two quadrants of a quadrant electrometer (see Electro- 
meter). These two quadrants are interconnected by the high resist- 
ance to be measured, and, therefore, themselves differ in potential. 
The exact position taken up by the needle is therefore determined 
by the potential difference (P.'D.) of the quadrants and the P.D. 
of the needle and each quadrant, and, therefore, by the ratios of the 
P.D. of the ends of the insulator and the current flowing through it, 
that is, by its insulation resistance. 

The ohmmeter recommends itself by its portability, but in 
default of the possession of an ohmmeter the insulation-resistance 
can be measured by means of an ordinary mirror galvanometer 
(see Galvanometer) and insulated battery of suitable voltage. 
In this case one terminal of the battery is connected to the earth, 
and the other terminal is connected through the galvanometer 
with the copper wire, the insulation of which it is desired to test. 
If any sensible current flows through this insulator the galvano- 
meter will show a deflection. 

The meaning of this deflection can be interpreted as follows: 
If a galvanometer has a resistance R and is shunted by a shunt of 
resistance S, and the shunted galvanometer is placed in series with 
a large resistance R' of the order of a megohm, -and' if the same 



OHNET--OIL ENGINE 



35 



battery is applied to the shunted galvanometer, then the current C 
passing through the galvanometer will be given by the expression 

" c , SV 

where V is the electromotive force of the battery. It is possible so 
to arrange the value of the shunt and of the high resistance R' 
that the same or nearly the same deflection of the galvanometer is 
obtained as when it is used in series with the battery and the insula- 
tion-resistance. In these circumstances the current passing through 
the galvanometer is known, provided that the voltage of the battery 
is determined by means of a potentiometer (q.v.) ; _ Hence the 
resistance of the insulator can be ascertained, since it is expressed 
in ohms by the ratio of the voltage of the battery in volts to the 

current through the 
C C galvanometer in 

amperes. In apply- 
ing this method to 
test the insulation of 
indiarubbcr - covered 
or. of insulated 
copper 'wire, before 
employing it for 
electrical purposes, 
it is usual to place 
the coil of wire W 
(fig. 2) in an insulated 
tank of water T, 
which is connected 
to one terminal of 




Fig. 2. 



the insulated battery ,B, the other terminal being connected to the 
metallic conductor CC of the wire under test, through a galvano- 
meter G. To prevent leakage over the surface of the insulating 
covering of the wire which projects above the surface of the water, 
it is necessary to employ a " guard wire '' P, which consists of a 
piece of fine copper wire, twisted round the extremity of the insu- 
lated wire and connected to the battery. This guard wire pre- 
vents any current which leaks over the surface of the insulator 
from passing through the galvanometer G, and the galvanometer 
indication is therefore only determined by the amount of current 
which passes through the insulator, or by its insulation-resistance. 

For further information on the measurement of high resistance, 
see J. A. Fleming, A Handbook for the Electrical Laboratory and 
Testing Room (2 vols., London, 1904); H. R. Kempe, A Handbook 
of Electrical Testing (London, 1900); H. L. Webb, A Practical Guide 
to the Testing of Insulated Wires and Cables (New York, 1902). 

(J. A. F.) 

OHNET, GEORGES (1848- ), French novelist' and man of 
letters, was born in Paris on the 3rd of April 1848. After the war 
of 1870 he became editor of the Pays and the Conslitutionnel in 
succession. In collaboration with the engineer and dramatist 
Louis Denayrouze (b. 1848) he produced the play Regina Sarpi, 
and in 1877 Marthe. He was an admirer of Georges Sand and 
bitterly opposed\to the realistic modern novel. He began a 
series of novels, Les Bataittes de la vie, of a' simple and idealistic 
character, which, although attacked by the critics as unreal and 
commonplace, were very popular. The series included Serge 
Panine. (1881) which was crowned by the Academy; Le Mailre 
de forges (1882), La Grande Marniere (1885), Volonte (1888), 
Dernier amour (1891). Many of his novels have been dramatized 
with great success, Le Mailre de forges, produced at the Gymnase 
in 1883, holding the stage for a whole year. His later publications 
include"Z,e Crepnscule (1902), Le Marchand de poisons (1903), 
La Conquerantc (1905), La Dixieme Muse (1906). 

OHRDRUF, a town of Germany in the duchy of Saxe-Coburg- 
Gotha, n m. by rail S.E. of Gotha. Pop. (1905) 61 14. It 
has a castle, two Evangelical churches, a technical and other 
schools, and manufactures of porcelain, paper, copper 
goods, shoes and small wares. Close by is the summer resort 
of Luisenthal. As early as 725 there was a monastery at 
Ohrdruf, which received municipal rights in 1399. With six 
neighbouring villages it forms the county of Obergleichen. 

OIHENART, ARNAULD DE (1592-1668), Basque historian 
and poet, was born at Mauleon, and studied law at Bordeaux, 
where he took his degree in 1612. He practised first in his native 
town, and after his marriage with Jeanne d'Erdoy, the heiress 
of a noble family of Saint-Palais, at the bar of the parlement 
of Navarre. He spent his leisure and his fortune in the search 
for documents bearing on'the old Basque and Bearnese provinces; 
and the fruits of his studies in the archives of Bayonne, Tbulouse, 



Pau, Perigord and other cities weie embodied in foity-five MS. 
volumes, which were sent by his son Gabriel to Colbert. Twenty- 
three of these are in the Bibliotheque Nationale of Paris (Coll. 
Duchesne). 

Oihenart published in 1625 a Declaration historique de I'injuste 
usurpation el retention de la Navarre par les Espagnols and a fragment 
of a Latin work on the same subject is included in Galland's Mtmoires 
pour I'hisloire de Navarre (1648). His most important work is 
Nolilia utriusque Vasconiae, turn Ibericae, turn Aquitanicae, qua 
praeter situm regionis el alia scitu digna, Navarrae regum coeter- 
arumque: in iis insignum vetustate et dignilate famiharum . . . 
(Paris, 1638 and 1656), a description of Gascony and Navarre. 
His collection of over five hundred Basque proverbs, Atsotizac edo 
Refravac, included in a volume of his poems O'™ Castaroa Nevrthize- 
tan, printed in Paris in 1657, was supplemented by a second collection, 
Alsotizen Vrrhenquina. The proverbs were edited by Francisque 
Michel (Paris, 1847), and the supplement by P. Hariston (Bayonne, 
1892) and by V. Stempf (Bordeaux, 1894). See Julien Vinson, Essai 
d'une bibliographie deja langue basque (Paris, 1891); J. B. E. de 
Jaurgain, Arnaud d 'Oihenart el sa famille (Paris, 1885). 

OIL CITY, a city of Venango county, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., 
on the Allegheny river, at the mouth of Oil Creek, about 55 m. 
S.S.E. of Erie and about 135 m. N. of Pittsburg. Pop. (1890) 
10,932; (1900) 13,264, of whom 2001 were foreign-born and 184 
were negroes; (1906 estimate) 14,662. It is served by the 
Pennsylvania (two lines), the Erie, and the Lake Shore & 
Michigan Southern railways. The city lies about 1000 ft. above 
the sea, and is divided by the river and the creek into three 
sections connected by bridges. The business part of the city 
is on the low ground north of the river; 'the residential districts 
are the South Side, a portion of the flats, the West Side, and 
Cottage Hill and Palace Hill on the North Side. Oil City is 
the centre and the principal market of the Pennsylvania oil 
region. It has extensive oil refineries and foundries and machine 
shops, and manufactures oil-well supplies and a few other 
commodities. The city's factory products were valued at 
$5,164,059 in 1900 and at $3,217,208 in 1905, and in the latter 
year foundry and machine-shop products were' "valued at 
$2,317,505, or 72% of the total. Natural gas is used for power, 
heat and light. Oil City was founded in i860, incorporated as 
a borough in 1863 and chartered as a city in 1874. The city 
was partially destroyed by flood in 1865, and by flood and fire 
in 1866 and again in 1892; on this last occasion Oil Creek was 
swollen by a cloud-burst on the 5th of June, and several tanks 
farther up the valley, which seem to have been struck by 
lightning, gave way and a mass of burning oil was carried by 
the creek to Oil City, where some sixty lives were lost and 
property valued at more than $1,000,000 was destroyed. 

OIL ENGINE. Oil engines, like gas engines {q.v.), are internal 
combustion motors in which motive power is produced by the 
explosion or expansion of a mixture of inflammable material 
and air. The inflammable fluid used, however, consists of 
vapour produced from oil instead of permanent gas. The 
thermodynamic operations are the same as in gas engines, and 
the structural and mechanical differences are due to the devices 
required to vaporize the oil and supply the measured proportion 
of vapour which is to mix with the air in the cylinders. 

Light and heavy oils are used; light oils may be defined as 
those which are readily volatile at ordinary atmospheric tempera- 
tures, while heavy oils are those which require special heating 
or spraying processes in order to produce an inflammable vapour 
capable of forming explosive mixture to be supplied to the 
cylinders. Of the light oils the most important is known as 
petrol. It is not a definite chemical compound. It is a mixture 
of various hydrocarbons of the paraffin and olefine series produced 
from the distillation of petroleum and paraffin oils. It consists, 
in fact, of the' lighter fractions which distil over first in the 
process of purifying petroleums or paraffins. 

The specific gravity of the standard petrols of commerce 
generally ranges hetween 0-700 to about 0-740; and the heat 
value on complete combustion per T V gallon burned varies 
from r4,24o to 14,850 British thermal units. The thermal 
value per gallon thus increases with the .density, but the volatility 
diminishes. Thus, samples' of petrol examined by Mr Blount 



36 



OIL ENGINE 



of from -700 to -730 specific gravity showed that 98% of the 
lighter sample distilled over below 120 C. while only 88% of 
the heavier came over within the same temperature range. 
The heavier petrol is not so easily converted into vapour. The 
great modern development of the motor car gives the light oil 
engine a most important place as one of the leading sources of 
motive power in the world. The total petrol power now applied 
to cars on land and to vessels on sea amounts to at least two 
million H.P. The petrol engine has also enabled aeroplanes to 
be used in practice. 

The earliest proposal to use oil as a means to produce motive 
power was made by an English inventor — Street — in 1794, but 
the first practical petroleum engine was that of Julius Hock 
of Vienna, produced in 1870. This engine, like Lenoir's gas 
engine, operated without compression. The piston took in a 
charge of air and light petroleum spray which was ignited by 
a flame jet and produced a low-pressure explosion. Like all 
non-compression engines, Hock's machine was very cumbrous 
and gave little power. In 1873, Brayton, an English engineer, 
who had settled in America, produced a light oil engine working 
on the constant pressure system without explosion. This 
appears to have been the earliest compression engine to use 
oil fuel instead of gas. 

Shortly after the introduction of the " Otto " gas engine 
in 1876, a motor of this type was operated by an inflammable 
vapour produced by passing air on its way to the cylinder 
through the light oil then known as gasolene. A further air 
supply was drawn into the cylinder to form the required explosive 
mixture, which was subsequently compressed and ignited in the 
usual way. The Spiel petroleum engine was the first Otto 
cycle motor introduced into practice which dispensed with an 
independent vaporizing apparatus. Light hydrocarbon of a 
specific gravity of not greater than 0.725 was injected directly 
into the cylinder on the suction stroke by means of a pump. 
In entering it formed spray mixed with the air, was vaporized, 
and on compression an explosion was obtained just as in the 
gas engine. 

Until the year 1883 the different gas and oil engines constructed 
were of a heavy type rotating at about 150 to 250 revolutions 
per minute. In that year Daimler conceived the idea of con- 
structing very small engines with light moving parts, in order 
to enable them to be rotated at such high speeds as 800 and 1000 
revolutions per minute. At that time engineers did not consider 
it practicable to run engines at such speeds; it was supposed 
that low speed was necessary to durability and smooth running. 
Daimler showed this idea to be wrong by producing bis first 
small engine in r883. In r886 he made his first experiment 
with a motor bicycle, and on the 4th of March 1887 he ran for 
the first time a motor car propelled by a petrol engine. Daimler 
deserves great credit for realizing the possibility of producing 
durable and effective engines rotating at such unusually high 
speeds; and, further, for proving that his ideas were right in 
actual practice. His little engines contained nothing new in 
their cycles of operation, but they provided the first step in the 
startlingly rapid development of petrol motive power which 
we have seen in the last twenty years. The high speed of 
rotation enabled motors to be constructed giving a very large 
power for a very small weight. 

Fig. I is a diagrammatic section of an early Daimler motor. A 
is the cylinder, B the piston, C the connecting rod, and D the 
crank, which is entirely enclosed in a casing. A small fly-wheel is 
carried by the crank-shaft, and it serves the double purpose of a fly- 
wheel and a clutch, o is the combustion space, E the single port, 
which serves both for inlet of the charge and for discharge of exhaust. 
W is the exhaust valve, F the charge inlet valve, which is automatic 
in its action, and is held closed by a spring /, G the carburettor, 
H the igniter tube, I the igniter tube lamp, K the charge inlet passage, 
L the air filter chamber, and M an adjustable air inlet cap for regu- 
lating the air inlet area. The light oil — or petrol, as it is commonly 
called — is supplied to the float chamber N of the vaporizer by means 
of the valve O. So long as the level of the petrol is high, the float n, 
acting by levers about it, holds the valve O closed against oil forced 
by air pressure along the pipe P When the level falls, however, 
the valve opens and more petrol is admitted. When the piston B 
makes its suction stroke, air passes from the atmosphere by the 



passage K through the valve F, which it opens automatically. 
The pressure falls within the passage K, and a spurt of petrol passes 
by the jet G\ separate air at the same time passing by the passage 
K 1 round the jet. The petrol breaks up into spray by impact 
against the walls of the passage K, and then it vaporizes and passes 
into the cylinder A as an inflammable mixture. When the piston B 
returns it compresses the charge into a, and upon compression the 
incandescent igniter tube H fires the charge. H is a short platinum 
tube, which is always open to the compression space. It is rendered 
incandescent by the burner I, fed with petrol from the pipe supplying 
the vaporizer. The open incandescent tube is found to act well 
for small engines, and it does not ignite the charge until the com- 
pression takes place, because the inflammable mixture cannot come 
into contact with the hot part till it is forced up the tube by the 




Fig. i. 

compression. The engine is started by giving the crank-shaft a 
smart turn round by means of a detachable handle. The exhaust is 
alone actuated from the valve shaft. The shaft Q is operated by 
pinion and a spur-wheel Q 2 at half the rate of the crank-shaft. The 
governing is accomplished by cutting out explosions as with the gas 
engine, but the governor operates by preventing the exhaust valve 
from opening, so that no charge is discharged from the cylinder, 
and therefore no charge is drawn in. The cam R operates the exhaust 
valve, the levers shown are so controlled by the governor (not shown) 
that the knife edge S is pressed out when speed is too high, and 
cannot engage the recess T until it falls. The engine has a water 
jacket V, through which water is circulated. Cooling devices are 
used to economize water. 

Benz of Mannheim followed close on the work of Daimler, 
and in France Panhard and Levassor, Peugeot, De Dion, 
Delahaye and Renault all contributed to the development 
of the petrol engine, while Napier, Lanchester, Royce and 
Austin were the most prominent among the many English 
designers. 

The modern petrol engine differs in many respects from 
the Daimler engine just described both as to general design, 
method of carburetting, igniting and controlling the power 
and speed. The carburettor now used is usually of the float 
and jet type shown in fig. 1, but alterations have been made to 



OIL ENGINE 



37 



allow of the production of uniform mixture in the cylinder 
under widely varying conditions of speed and load. The original 
form of carburettor was not well adapted to allow of great 
change of volume per suction stroke. Tube ignition has been 
abandoned, and the electric system is now supreme. The 
favourite type at present is that of the high-tension magneto. 
Valves are now all mechanically operated; the automatic inlet 
valve has practically disappeared. Engines are no longer 
controlled by cutting out impulses; the governing is effected 
by throttling the charge, that is by diminishing the volume 
of charge admitted to the cylinder at one stroke. Broadly, 
throttling by reducing charge weight reduces pressure of com- 
pression and so allows the power of the explosion to be graduated 
within wide limits while maintaining continuity of impulses. 
The object of the throttle control is to keep up continuous 
impulses for each cycle of operation, while graduating the power 
produced by each impulse so as to meet the conditions of the 
load. 

Originally three types of carburettor were employed for 
dealing with light oil; first, the surface carburettor; second, the 
wick carburettor; and third, the jet carburettor. The surface 
carburettor has entirely disappeared. In it air was passed over 
a surface of light oil or bubbled through it; the air carried off 
a vapour to form explosive mixture. It was found, however, 
that the oil remaining in the carburettor gradually became 
heavier and heavier, so that ultimately no proper vaporization 
took place. This was due to the fractional evaporation of the 
oil which tended to carry away the light vapours, leaving in the 
vessel the oil, which produced heavy vapours. To avoid this 
fractionation the wick carburettor was introduced and here 
a complete portion of oil was evaporated at each operation so 
that no concentration of heavy oil was possible. The wick 
carburettor is still used in some cars, but the jet carburettor 
is practically universal. It has the advantage of discharging 
separate portions of oil into the air entering the engine, each 
portion being carried away and evaporated with all its fractions 
to produce the charge in the cylinder. 

The modem jet carburettor appears to have originated with 
Butler, an English engineer, but it was first extensively used 
in the modification produced by Maybaeh as shown in fig. i . 

A diagrammatic section of a carburettor of the Maybaeh type is 
shown in a larger scale in fig. 2. 

Petrol is admitted to the chamber A by the valve B which is 
controlled by the float C acting through the levers D, so that the valve 




Fig. 2. 

B is closed when the float reaches a determined level and opened when 
it falls below it. The petrol flows into a jet E and stands at an 
approximately eonstant level within it. When the engine piston 
makes its suction stroke, the air enters from the atmosphere at F and 
passes to the cylinder through G. The pressure around the jet E 
thus falls, and the pressure of the atmosphere in the chamber A 
forces the petrol through E as a jet during the greater part of the 
suction stroke. An inflammable mixture is thus formed, which 
enters the cylinder by way of G. The area for the passage of air 
around the petrol jet E is constricted to a sufficient extent to produce 
the pressure fall necessary to propel the petrol through the jet E, 
and the area of the discharge aperture of the petrol jet E is pro- 




portioned to give the desired volume of petrol to form the proper 
mixture with air. The device in this form works quite well when the 
range of speed required from the engine is not great; that is, within 
limits, the volume of petrol thrown by the jet is fairly proportional 
to the air passing the jet. When, however, the speed range is great, 
such as in modern motors, which may vary from 300 to 1500 revolu- 
tions per minute under light and heavy loads, then it becomes 
impossible to secure proportionality sufficiently accurate for regular 
ignition. This implies not only a change of engine speed but 
a change of volume entering the cylinder at each stroke as deter- 
mined by the position of the throttle. This introduces further 
complications. Throttle control implies a change of total charge 
volume per stroke, which change may occur either at a low or at a 
high speed. To meet this change the petrol jet should respond in 
such manner as to give a constant proportionality of petrol weight 
to air weight throughout all the variations — otherwise sometimes 
petrol will be present in excess with no oxygen to burn it, and at 
other times the mixture may be so dilute as to miss firing altogether. 
To meet these varying conditions many carburettors have been pro- 
duced which seek by various devices to maintain uniformity of 
quality of mixture by the automatic change of throttle around the jet. 
Fig. 3 shows in diagrammatic section one of the simplest of 
these contrivances, known as the Krcbs carburettor. The petrol 
enters from the float 
chamber to the jet 
E; and, while the 
engine is running 
slowly, the whole 
supply of air enters 
by way of the 
passage F, mixes 
with the petrol and 
reaches the cylin- 
ders by way of the 
pipeG. The volume 
of charge entering 
the cylinder per 
stroke is controlled 
by the piston 
throttle valve H, 
operated by the rod 
I ; and so long as 
the charge volume 

required remains p ]G 

small, air from the " _ 

atmosphere enters only by F. When speed rises, however, and the 
throttle is sufficiently opened, the pressure within the apparatus^ falls 
and affects a spring-pressed diaphragm K, which actuates a piston 
valve controlling the air passages L, so that- this valve opens to the 
atmosphere more and more with increasing pressure reduction, and 
additional air thus flows into the carburettor and_ mixes with the 
air and petrol entering through F. By this device the required 
proportion of air to petrol is maintained through a comparatively 
large volume range. This change of air admission is rendered 
necessary because of the difference between the laws of air and 
petrol flow. In order to give a sufficient weight of petrol at low 
speeds when the pressure drop is small, it is necessary to provide 
a somewhat large area of petrol jet. When suction increases 
owing to high speed, this large area discharges too much petrol, and 
so necessitates a device, such as that described, which admits 
more air. 

A still simpler device is adopted in many carburettors — that of an 
additional air inlet valve, kept closed until wanted by a spring. 
Fig. 4 shows a diagrammatic section as used in the Vauxhall car- 
burettor. Here the petrol jet and primary and secondary air passages 
are lettered as before. 

The same effect is produced by devices which alter the area of the 
petrol jet or increase or diminish the number of petrol jets exposed 
as required. Although engine designers have succeeded in pro- 
portioning mixture through a considerable range of speed and charge 
demand, so as to obtain effective power explosions under all these 
conditions, yet much remains to be done to secure constancy of 
mixture at all speeds. Notwithstanding much which has been said 
as to varying mixture, there is only one mixture of air and petrol 
which gives the best results — that in which there is some excess of 
oxygen, more than sufficient to burn all the hydrogen and carbon 
present. It is necessary to secure this mixture under all conditions, 
not only to obtain economy in running but also to maintain purity 
of exhaust gases. Most engines at certain speeds discharge consider- 
able quantities of carbonic oxide into the atmosphere with their 
exhaust gases, and some discharge so much as to give rise to danger 
in a closed garage. Carbonic oxide is an extremely poisonous gas 
which should be reduced to the minimum in the interests of the health 
of our large cities. The enormous increase of motor traffic makes it 
important to render the exhaust gases as pure and innocuous as 
possible. Tests were made by the Royal Automobile Club some 
years ago which clearly showed that carbonic oxide should be kept 
down to 2 % and under when carburettors were properly adjusted. 
Subsequent experiments have been made by Hopkinson, Clerk and 



38 



OIL ENGINE 



Watson, which clearly prove that in some cases as much as 30% 
of the whole heat of the petrol is lost in the exhaust gases by im- 




perfect combustion This opens a wide field for improvement, and 
makes it probable that with better carburettors motor cars would 



not only discharge purer exhaust gases but would work on very 
much less petrol than they do at present. , ;. , . 

Practically all modern petrol engines are controlled by throttling 
the whole charge. In the earlier days several methods of control 
were attempted: (1) missing impulses as in fig. 1 of the Daimler 
engines; (2) altering the timing of spark; (3) throttling petrol 
supply, and (4) throttling the mixture of petrol and air. The 
last method has proved to be the best. By maintaining the 
proportion of explosive mixture, but diminishing the total 
volume admitted to the cylinder per stroke, graduated impulses 
are obtained without any, or but few, missed ignitions. The 
effect of the throttling is to reduce compression by diminish- 
ing total charge weight. To a certain extent the proportion of 
petrol to total charge also varies, because the residual exhaust 
gases remain constant through a wide range. The thermal 
efficiency diminishes as the throttling increases; but, down to 
a third of the brake power, the diminution is not great, because 
although compression is reduced the expansion remains the same. 
At low compressions, however, the engine works practically 
as a non-compression engine, and the point of maximum 
pressure becomes greatly delayed. The efficiency, therefore,, falls 
markedly, but this is not of much importance at light loads. 
Experiments by Callendar, Hopkinson, Watson and others 
have proved that the thermal efficiency obtained from these 
small engines with the throttle full open is very high indeed; 
28% of the whole heat in the petrol is often given as indicated 
work when the carburettor is properly adjusted. As a large gas 
engine for the same compression cannot do better than 35%, 
it appears that the loss of heat due to small dimensions is com- 
pensated by the small time of exposure of the gases of explosion 
due to the high speed of rotation. Throttle control is very 
effective, and it has the great advantage of diminishing maximum 




A, A.— Cylinders. 

B,B. — Water Jackets. 

G 1 . — Oil Scoops on Big Ends. 

I. — Water Uptake. 

J. — Crank Chamber. 



M 1 . — Oil Suction Pipe and Filler. 

N. — Oil Channels. 

O— Cam Shaft. 

Q. — Throttle and Automatic Air 

R. — Main Mixture Pipe. [Valve. 



J 1 .— Under Cover to Crank Chbr. S. — Carburetter. 

K. — Distribution Gear Case. U. — Magneto. 

L. — Oil Sump. V. — Inlet Valve. 

M.— Oil Pump. W— Inlet Trunk. 



Fig. 5. 



OIL ENGINE 



39 



pressures to which the piston and cylinders are exposed while the 
engine is running at the lower loads'. This is important both for 
smooth, running and good wearing qualities. Theoretically, 
better results could be obtained from the point of view of economy 
by retaining a constant compression pressure, constant charge 
of air, and producing ignition, somewhat in the manner of the 
Diesel engine. Such a method, however, would have the dis- 
advantage' of producing practically the same maximum pressure 
for allloads, and this would tend to give an engine which would 
not run smoothly at slow speeds. 

As has been said, tube 'ignition was speedily abandoned for 
electric ignition by accumulator, induction coil distributor and 
sparking plug. This in its turn was largely displaced by the 
low-tension magneto system, in which the spark was formed 
between contacts which were mechanically separated within the 
cylinders. ' The separable contacts gave rise to complications, 
and at present the most popular system of ignition is undoubtedly 
that of the high-tension magneto. In this system the ordinary 
high-tension sparking plugs are i used, and the high-tension 
current is generated in a secondary winding on the armature 
of the magneto,' and reaches the sparking plugs by way of a- 
rotary distributor. In many cases 'the high-tension magneto' 
system is used for the ordinary running of the engine, combined 
with an accumulator or battery and induction coil for starting 
the engine from rest. Such systems are called dual ignition 
systems. Sometimes the same ignition plugs are adapted to 
spark from either source, and in other cases separate plugs 
are used. The magneto systems have the great advantage of 
generating current without battery, and by their use noise is 
reduced to a minimum. All electrical systems are now arranged 
to allow of advancing and retarding the spark from the steering 
wheel. In modern magneto methods, however, the spark is 
automatically retarded when the engine slows and advanced 
when the speed rises, so that' less change is required from the 
wheel than is necessary with battery and coil. « 

Sir Oliver Lodge has invented a most interesting system of 
electric ignition, depending upon the production Of an extra 
oscillatory current of enormous tension produced by the combined 
use of spark gap and condenser. This extra spark passes freely 
even under water, and it is impossible to stop it by any ordinary 
sooting or fouling of the ignition plug. 

The most popular engines are now of the four and six cylinder 
types. 

Fig. 5 shows a. modern four-cylinder engine in longitudinal and 
transverse sections as made by the Wolseley Company. A, A are 
the cylinders; B, B, water jackets; G\ oil scoops on the large ends 
of the connecting-rods. These scoops take up oil from the crank 
chamber. Forced lubrication is used. The oil pump M is of the 
toothed wheel type, and it is driven by skew gearing. An oil sump 
is arranged at L, and the oil is pumped from this sump by the pump 
described. The overflow from the main bearings supplies the channels 
in the crank case from which the oil scoops take their charge. It will 
be seen that the two inside pistons are attached to cranks of co- 
incident centres, and this is true of the two outside pistons also. 
This is' the usual arrangement in four-cylinder engines. By this 
device the primary forces are balanced ; but a small secondary 
unbalanced force remains, due to the difference in motion of the 
pistons at the up and down portions of their stroke. A six-cylinder 
engine has the advantage of getting rid of this secondary unbalanced 
force; but it requires a longer and more rigid crank chamber. 
In this engine the inlet and exhaust valves of each cylinder are placed 
in the same pocket and are driven from one cam-shaft. This is a 
very favourite' arrangement; but many engines are constructed 
in which the inlet and exhaust valves operate on opposite sides of 
the cylinder in separate ports and are driven from separate cam- 
shafts. Dual ignition is applied to this engine; that is, an ignition 
composed of _ high-tension magneto and also battery and coil for 
starting. U is the high-tension magneto. Under the figure there is 
shown a list of parts which sufficiently indicate the nature of the 
engine. 

An interesting and novel form of engine is shown at fig. 6. .This 
is a well-known engine designed by M r Knight, an American inventor, 
and now made by the Daimler- and other companies. It will be 
observed ' in the figure that the ordinary lift Valves are entirely 
dispensed with, and slide valves are used of the cylindrical shell 
type. . The, engine operates on the ordinary Otto cycle, and all the 
valve actions necessary to admit charge and discharge.exhaust gases 
are accomplished by means of two sleeves sliding one within the other. 



The, outer_ sleeve slides in the main, cylinder and the inner sleeve 
slides within the outer sleeve. The piston fits within the inner sleeve. 
The sleeves receive separate motions from short connecting links 
C and E, driven by eccentrics carried on a shaft \V. This shaft is 
driven from themain crank-shaft b> a strong chain so as to make 
half the revolutions of the crank-shaft in the usual manner of the 
Otto cycle. The inlet port is formed on one side of the cylinder 
and is marked 1. The exhaust port is arranged on the other side 
and marked J. These ports are segmental. A water-jacketed 
cylinder head carries stationary rings L, K, which press outwards. 
These are clearly shown in the drawing. The inner sleeve ports run 
past the lower broad ring L when compression is to be accomplished, 
and the contents of the cylinder are retained within the cylinder and 
compression space by the piston rings and the fixed rings referred to. 




Fig. 6. 
The outer sleeve does not require rings at all. Its function is simply 
to distribute the gases so that the exhaust port is closed by the outer 
sleeve when the inlet port is open. The outer sleeve acts really as a 
distributor; the inner sleeve supplies the pressure tightness required 
to resist compression and explosion. The idea of working exhaust 
and inlet by two sleeves within which the main piston operates is 
very daring and ingenious; and for these small engines the sleeve 
valve system works admirably. There are many advantages; the 
shape of the compression space is a most favourable one for reducing 
loss by cooling. All the valve ports required in ordinary lift valve 
engines are entirely dispensed with; that is, the surface exposed to 
the explosion causing loss of heat is reduced to a minimum. The 
engines are found in use to be very flexible and economical. 

The petrol engines hitherto described, although light compared 
to the old stationary gas engines, are heavy when compared 
with recent motors developed for the purpose of aeroplanes. 
Many of these motors have been produced, but two only will 
be noticed here — the Anzani, because Bleriot's great flight 



4° 



OIL ENGINE 



across the Channel was accomplished by means of an Anzani 
engine, and the Gnome engine, because it was used in the aero- 
plane with which Paulhan flew from London to Manchester. 

Fig. 7 shows transverse and longitudinal sections through the 
Anzani motor. Looking at the longitudinal section it will be observed 
that the cylinders are of the air-cooled type; the exhaust valves 
alone are positively operated, and the inlet valves are of the auto- 
matic lift kind. The transverse section shows that three radially 
arranged cylinders are used and three pistons act upon one crank-pin. 
The Otto cycle is followed, so that two impulses are obtained for 





Fig. 7. 

every three revolutions. The cylinders are spaced apart 6o° and 
project from the upper side of the crank chamber. Although not 
shown in the drawing, the pistons overrun a row of holes at the 
out end of the stroke and the exhaust first discharges through these 
holes. This is a very common device in aeroplane engines, and it 
greatly increases the rapidity of the exhaust discharged and reduces 
the work falling upon the exhaust valve. The pistons and cylinders 
are of cast iron; the rings are of cast iron; the ignition is electric, 
and the petrol is fed by gravity. The engine used by Blenot in his 
Cross-Channel flight was 25 H.P., cylinders 105 mm. boreX 130 mm. 
stroke; revolutions, 1600 per minute; total weight, 145 ft- The 
engine, it will be seen, is exceedingly simple, although air-cooling 
seems somewhat primitive for anything except short flights. The 
larger Anzani motors are water-cooled. 

A diagrammatic transverse section of the Gnome motor is shown 
at fig. 8. In this interesting engine there are seven cylinders disposed 



radially round a fixed crank-shaft. The seven pistons are all con- 
nected to the same crank-shaft, one piston being rigidly connected 
to a big end of peculiar construction by a connecting-rod, while 
the other connecting-rods are linked on to the same big end by pins; 
that is, a hollow fixed crank-shaft has a single throw to which only 
one connecting-rod is attached; all the other connecting-rods 
work on pins let into the big end of that connecting-rod. The 
cylinders revolve round the fixed crank in the manner of the well- 
known engines first introdued to practice by Mr John Rigg. The 
explosive mixture is led from the carburettor through the hollow 
crank-shaft into the crank-case, and it is admitted into the cylinders 
by means of automatic inlet valves placed in the heads of the pistons. 
The exhaust valves are arranged on the cylinder heads. Dual 
ignition is provided by high tension magneto and storage battery and 
coil. The cylinders are ribbed outside like the Anzani, and are 
very effectively air-cooled by their rotation through the air as 
well as by the passage of the aeroplane through the atmosphere. 
The cylinders in the 35 H.P. motor are no mm. bore X 120 mm. 
stroke. The speed of rotation is usually 1200 revolutions per minute. 
The total weight of the engine complete is 180 ft, or just over 5 ft 
per brake horse-power. The subject of aeroplane petrol engines is a 
most interesting one, and rapid progress is being made. 

So far, only 4-cycle engines have been described, and they are 
almost universal for use in motor-cars and aeroplanes. Some 
motor cars, however, use 2-cycle engines. Several types follow 
the "Clerk" cycle (see Gas Engine) and others the "Day" 
cycle. In America the Day cycle is very popular for motor 




Fig. 8. 

launches, as the engine is of ,a very simple, easily managed kind. 
At present, however, the two-cycle engine has made but little ' 
way in motor car or aeroplane work. It is capable of great 
development and the attention given to it is increasing. 

So far, petrol has been alluded to as the main liquid fuel for 
these motors. Other hydrocarbons have also been used; benzol, 
for example, obtained from gas tar is used to some extent, and 
alcohol has been applied to a considerable extent both for 
stationary and locomotive engines. Alcohol, however, has not 
been entirely successful. The amount of heat obtained for a 
given monetary expenditure is only about half that obtained 
by means of petrol. On the continent of Europe, however, 
alcohol motors have been considerably used for public vehicles. 

The majority of petrol motors are provided with water jackets 
around their cylinders and combustion spaces. As only a small 
quantity of water can be carried, it is necessary to cool the water 
as fast as it becomes hot. For this purpose radiators of various 
constructions are applied. Generally a pump is used to produce 
a forced circulation, discharging the hot water from the engine 
jackets through the radiator and returning the cooled water to 
the jackets at another place. The radiators consist in some 
cases of fine tubes covered with projecting fins or gills ; the motion 
of the car forces air over the exterior of those surfaces and is 
assisted by the operation of a powerful fan driven from the 
engine. A favourite form of radiator consists of numerous 
small tubes set into a casing and arranged somewhat like a steam- 
engine condenser. Water is forced by the pump round these 
tubes, and air passes from the atmosphere through them. This 
type of radiator is sometimes known as the " honeycomb " 



OIL ENGINE 



4i 



radiator. A very large cooling surface is provided, so that the 
same water is used over and over again. In a day's run with a 
modern petrol engine very little water is lost from the system. 
Some engines dispense with a pump and depend on what is 
called the thermo-syphon. This is the old gas-engine system 
of circulation, depending on the different density of water when 
hot and cool. The engine shown at fig. 5 is provided with a 
water-circulation system of this kind. For the smaller engines 
the thermo-syphon works extremely well. 

Heavy oil engines are those which consume oil having a 
flashing-point above 73 F. — the minimum at present allowed 
by act of parliament in Great Britain for oils to be consumed 
in ordinary illuminating lamps. Such oils are American and 
Russian petroleums and Scottish paraffins. They vary in specific 
gravity from -78 to -825, and in flashing-point from 75° to 152° 
F. Engines burning such oils may be divided into three distinct 
classes: (1) Engines in which the oil is subjected to a spraying 
operation before vaporization; (2) Engines in which the oil 
is injected into the cylinder and vaporized within the cylinder; 
(3) Engines in which the oil is vaporized in a device external to 
the cylinder and introduced into the cylinder in the state of 
vapour. 

The method of ignition might also be used to divide the engines 
into those igniting by the electric spark, by an incandescent tube, 
by compression, or by the heat of the internal surfaces of the 
combustion space. Spiel's engine was ignited by a flame igniting 
device similar to that used in Clerk's gas engine, and it was the 
only one introduced into Great Britain in which this method 
was adopted, though on the continent flame igniters were not 
uncommon. Electrically-operated igniters have come into ex- 
tensive use throughout the world. 

The engines first used in Great Britain which fell under the 
first head were the Priestman and Samuelson, the oil being 

,.. _ sprayed before being 
vaporized in both. The 
principle of the spray pro- 
ducer used is that so well 
and so widely known in 
connexion with the atom- 
izers or spray producers 
used by perfumers. Fig. 9 
shows such a spray pro- 
ducer in section. An air 
blast passing from the 
small jet A crosses the top 
of the tube B and creates 
within it a partial vacuum. 
The liquid contained in C 
flows up the tube B and issuing at the top of the tube through 
a small orifice is at once blown into very fine spray by the action 
of the air jet. If such a scent distributor be filled with petroleum 
oil, such as Royal Daylight or Russoline, the oil will be blown 
into fine spray, which can be ignited by a flame and will burn, 
if the jets be properly proportioned, with an intense blue non- 
luminous flame. The earlier inventors often expressed the idea 
that an explosive mixture could be prepared without any 
vaporization whatever, by simply producing an atmosphere 
containing inflammable liquid in extremely small particles dis- 
tributed throughout the air in such proportion as to allow of 
complete combustion. The familiar explosive combustion of 
lycopodium, and the disastrous explosions caused in the exhaus- 
tion rooms of flour-mills by the presence of finely divided flour 
in the air, have also suggested to inventors the idea of producing 
explosions for power purposes from combustible solids. Al- 
though, doubtless, explosions could be produced in that way, yet 
in oil engines the production of spray is only a preliminary to 
the vaporization of the oil. If a sample of oil is sprayed in the 
manner just described, and injected in a hot chamber also filled 
with hot air, it at once passes into a state of vapour within 
that chamber, even though the air be at a temperature far 
below the boiling-point of the oil; the spray producer, in fact, 
furnishes a ready means of saturating any volume of air with 




Fig. 9. — Perfume Spray Producer. 



heavy petroleum oil to the full extent possible from the vapour 
tension of the oil at that particular temperature. The oil 
engines described below are in reality explosion gas engines of 
the ordinary Otto type, with special arrangements to enable 
them to vaporize the oil to be used. Only such parts of them 
as are necessary for the treatment and ignition will therefore 
be described. 

Fig. 10 is a vertical section through the cylinder and vaporizer 
of a Priestman engine,_ and fig. 1 1 is a section on a larger scale, 
showing the vaporizing jet and the air admission and regulation valve 




Fig. 10. — Priestman Oil Engine (vertical section through cylinder 
and vaporizer). 

leading to the vaporizer. Oil is forced by means of air pressure from 
a reservoir through a pipe to the spraying nozzle a, and air passes 
from an air-pump by way of the annular channel b into the sprayer c, 
and there meets the oil jet issuing] from a. The^oil is thus broken 
up into spray, and the air charged with spray flows into the vaporizer 
E, which is heated up in the first place on starting the engine by 
means of a lamp. In the vaporizer the oil spray becomes oil vapour, 
saturating the air within the hot walls. On the out-charging stroke 
of the piston the mixture passes by way of the inlet valve H into the 
cylinder, air flowing into the vaporizer to replace it through the 
valve / (fig. 11). The cylinder K is thus charged with a mixture of 
air and hydrocarbon vapour, some of which may exist in the form of 
very fine spray. The piston L then returns and compresses the 
mixture, and when the compression is quite complete an electric 
spark is passed between the points M. and a compression explosion 
is obtained precisely similar to that obtained in the gas engine. 
The piston moves out, and on its return stroke the exhaust valve N 
is opened and the exhaust gases discharged by way of the pipe O, 
round the jacket P, enclosing 
t he vaporizing chamber. The 
latter is thus kept hot by 
the exhaust gases when the 
engine is at work, and it 
remains sufficiently hot with- 
out the use of the lamp pro- 
vided for starting. To obtain 
the electric spark a bi- 
chromate battery with an 
induction coil is used. The 
spark is timed by contact 
pieces operated by an 
eccentric rod, used to actuate 
the exhaust valve and the 
air-pump for supplying the 
oil chamber and the spraying 
jet. To start the engine a 
hand pump is worked until 
the pressure is sufficient to 
force the oil through the 
spraying nozzle, and oil spray 




Fig. ri. — Priestman Oil Engine 
(section on a larger scale). 



is formed in the starting lamp; the spray and air mixed produce 
a blue flame which heats the vaporizer. The fly-wheel is then rotated 
by hand and the engine moves away. The eccentric shaft is driven 
from the crank-shaft by means of toothed wheels, which reduce the 
speed to one-half the revolutions of the crank-shaft. The charging 
inlet valve is automatic. Governing is effected by throttling the 
oil and air supply. The governor operates on the butterfly valve T 
(fig. 11), and on the plug-cock t connected to it, by means of the 
spindle t'. The air and oil are thus simultaneously reduced, and the 
attempt is madeto maintain the charge entering the cylinder at a 
constant proportion by weight of oil and air, while reducing the total 
weight, and therefore volume, of the charge entering. The Priestman 
engine thus gives an explosion on every second revolution in all 
circumstances, whether the engine be running light or loaded. 

xx. 2 a 



42 



OIL ENGINE 



The compression pressure of the mixture before admission is, however, 
steadily reduced as the load is reduced, and at very light loads the 
engine is running practically as a non-compression engine. 

A test by Professor Unwin of a 4j nominal horse-power Priestman 
engine, cylinder 8-5 in. diameter, 12 in. stroke, normal speed 180 
revolutions per minute, showed the consumption of oil per indicated 
horse-power hour to be 1 -066 lb and per brake horse-power hour 
1-243 ft- The oil used was that known as Broxburn Lighthouse, a 
Scottish paraffin oil produced by the destructive distillation of 
shale, having a density of -8i and a flashing-point about 152° F. 
With a 5 H.P. engine of the same dimensions, the volume swept by 
the piston per stroke being -395 cub. ft. and the clearance space in 
the cylinder at the end of the stroke -210 cub. ft., the principal results 
were : — 



Indicated horse-power .... 

Brake horse-power 

Mean speed (revolutions per minute) 
Mean available pressure (revolutions per 

minute) 

Oil consumed per indicated horse-power 

per hour 

Oil consumed per brake horse-power per 

hour 



Daylight 
Oil. 



9-369 
7-722 

204-33 
53-2 
•694 lb 
•842 ft 



Russoline 
Oil. 



7-408 

6-765 
207-73 

41-38 
•S64 lb 
•946 ft 



With daylight oil the explosion pressure was 151-4 ft per square 
inch above atmosphere, and with Russoline 134-3 ft- The terminal 
pressure at the moment of opening the exhaust valve with daylight 
oil was 35-4 ft and with Russoline 33-7 per square inch. The 
compression pressure with daylight oil was 35 ft, and with Russoline 
27-6 lb pressure above atmosphere. Professor Unwin calculated 
the amountof heat accounted for by the indicator as 18-8% in the 
case of daylight oil and 15-2 in the case of Russoline oil. 

The Hornsby-Ackroyd engine is an example of the class in which 
the oil is injected into the cylinder and there vaporized. Fig. 12 





Fig. 12. — Hornsby-Ackroyd 
Engine (section through 
vaporizer and cylinder). 



Fig. 13. — -Hornsby - Ackroyd 
Engine (section through valves, 
vaporizer and cylinder). 



is a section through the vaporizer and cylinder of this engine, and 
fig. 13 shows the inlet and exhaust valves also in section placed in 
front of the vaporizer and cylinder section. Vaporizing is conducted 
in the interior of the combustion chamber, which is so arranged that 
the heat of each explosion maintains it at a temperature sufficiently 
high to enable the oil to be vaporized by mere injection upon the hot 
surfaces. The vaporizer A is heated up by a separate lamp, the oil 
is injected at the oil inlet B, and the 
engine is rotated by hand. The piston 
then takes in a charge of air by the air- 
inlet valve into the cylinder, the air 
passing by the port directly into the 
cylinder without passing through the 
vaporizer chamber. While the piston is 
moving forward, taking in the charge of 
air, the oil thrown into the vaporizer is 
vaporizing and diffusing itself through 
the vaporizer chamber, mixing, how- 
ever, only with the hot products of com- 
bustion left by the preceding explosion. 
During the charging stroke the air enters 
through the cylinder, and the vapour 
formed from the oil is almost entirely 
confined to the combustion chamber. 
On the return stroke of the piston air is 
forced through the somewhat narrow 
neck a into the combustion chamber, and 
is there mixed with the vapour contained 
in it. At first, however, the mixture is 
too rich in inflammable vapour to be 
capable of ignition. As the compression 

proceeds, however, more and more air is forced into the vaporizer 
chamber, and just as compression is completed the mixture attains 
proper explosive proportions. The sides of the chamber are suffi- 
ciently hot to cause explosion, under the pressure of which the piston 
moves forward. As the vaporizer A is not water-jacketed, and is 
connected to the metal of the back cover only by the small section 
or area of cast-iron forming the metal neck a, the heat given to the 



surface by each explosion is sufficient to keep its temperature at 
about 700-800 C. Oil vapour mixed with air will explode by 
contact with a metal surface at a comparatively low temperature; 
this accounts for the explosion of the compressed -mixture in the 
combustion chamber A, which is never really raised to a red heat. 
It has long been known that under certain conditions of. internal 
surface a gas engine may be made to run with very great regularity, 
without incandescent tube or any other form of igniter, if some 
portion of the interior surfaces of the cylinder or combustion space 
be so arranged that the temperature can rise moderately; then, 
although the temperature may be too low to ignite the mixture at 
atmospheric temperature, yet when compression is completed the 
mixture will often ignite in a perfectly regular manner. It is a curious 
fact that with heavy oils ignition is more easily accomplished at a 
low temperature than with light oils. The explanation seems to 
be that, while in the case of light oils the hydrocarbon vapours 
formed are tolerably stable from a chemical point of view, the heavy 
oils very easily decompose by heat, and separate out their carbons, 
liberating the combined hydrogen, and at the moment of liberation 
the hydrogen, being in what chemists know as the nascent state, 
very readily enters into combination with the oxygen beside it. To 
start the engine the vaporizer is heated by a separate heating lamp, 
which is supplied with an air blast by means of a hand-operated fan. 
This operation should take about nine minutes. The engine is then 
moved round by hand, and starts in the usual manner. The oil tank 
is placed in the bed plate of the engine. The air and exhaust valves 
are driven by cams on a valve shaft. The governing is effected by a 
centrifugal governor which operates a by-pass valve, opening it 
when the speed is too high, and causes the oil pump to return the 
oil to the oil tank. At a test of one of these engines, which weighed 
40 cwt. and was given as of 8 brake horse-power, with cylinder 10 in. 
in diameter and 15 in. stroke, according to Professor Capper's report, 
the revolutions were very constant, and the power developed did not 
vary one quarter of a brake horse-power from day to day. The oil 
consumed, reckoned on the average of the three days over which the 
trial extended, was -9i9Jlbper brake horse-power per hour, the mean 
power exerted being 8-35 brake horse. At another full-power trial 
of the same engine a brake horse-power of 8-57 was obtained, the 
mean speed being 239-66 revolutions per minute and the test lasting 
for two hours; the indicated power was 10-3 horse, the explosions 
per minute 119-83, the mean effective pressure 28-9 per sq. in., 
the oil used per indicated horse-power per hour was -8i ft, and per 
brake horse-power per hour —-977 lb. In a test at half power, the 
brake horse-power developed was 4-57 at 235-9 revolutions per 
minute, and the oil used per brake horse-power was 1-48 lb. On a 
four hours' test, without a load, at 240 revolutions per minute, the 
consumption of oil was 4-23 lb per hour. Engines of this class are 
those manufactured by Messrs Crossley Bros., Ltd., and the National 
Gas Engine Co., Ltd. 

Figs. 14 and 15 show a longitudinal section and detail views of the 
operative parts of the Crossley oil engine. On the suction stroke, 
air is drawn into the cylinder by the piston A through the automatic 
inlet valve D, and oil is then pumped into the heated vaporizer C 
through the oil sprayer G, as seen in section at fig. 15. The vaporizer 
C is bolted to the water-jacketed part B; and, like the Hornsby, 
this vaporizer is first heated by lamp and then the heat of the ex- 
plosions keeps up its temperature to a sufficiently high point to 
vaporize the oil when sprayed against it. On the compression stroke 




Fig. 14. — Crossley Oil Engine. 

of the piston A the charge of air is forced into the combustion 
chamber B and the vaporizer chamber C, where it mixes with the oil 
vapour, and the mixture is ignited at the termination of the stroke 
by the ignition tube H. This tube is isolated to some extent from the 
vaporizer chamber C, and so it becomes hotter than the chamber C 
and is relied upon to ignite the mixture when formed at times when C 
would be too cold for the, purpose. E is the exhaust valve, which 



OILLETS^-OILS 



43 



operates in the .usual way. The water circulation passes through 
the jacket by' way of the pipes J and K. When the engine is running 
at heavy loads with full charges of oil delivered by the oil pump 
through the sprayer G, a second pump is caused to come into action, 
which discharges a very small quantity qf water through the water 
sprayer valve F. This, water passes, into the vaporizer and com- 
bustion chamber, together with a little air, which' enters by the 
automatic inlet valve, which serves as sprayer. This contrivance 
is found useful to prevent the vaporizer from overheating at heavy 




Fig. 15. — Crossley Oil Engine. <■ 

loads., The principal difference between this engine and the Hornsby 
engine already described lies in the use of the separate ignition tube 
H and in the water sprayer F, which acts as a snifting valve, taking 
in a little air and water when the engine becomes hot. Messrs 
Crossley inform the writer that the consumption of cither crude or 
refined oil is about -63 of a pint per horse-power on full load. They 
also give a test of a small engine developing 7 B.H.P., which consumed 
•601 pint per B.H.P. per hour of Rock Light refined lamp oil and only 
•603 pint per B.H.P. per hour of crude Borneo petroleum oil. 

Engines in which the oil is vaporized in a device external to the 
cylinder have almost disappeared, because of the great success of the 
Hornsby-Ackroyd type, where oil is injected into, and vaporized 
within, the cylinder. It has been found, however, that many petrol 
engines having jet carburettors will operate with the heavier oils 
if the jet carburettor is suitably heated by means of the exhaust gases. 
In some engines it is customary to start with petrol, and then when 
the parts have become sufficiently heated to substitute paraffin or 
heavy petroleum oil, putting the heavy oil through the same spraying 
process as the petrol and evaporating the spray by hot walls before 
entering the cylinder. 

Mr Diesel has produced a very interesting engine which departs 
considerably from other types. In it air alone is drawn into the 
cylinder on the charging stroke; the air is compressed on the return 
stroke to a very high pressure generally to over 400 lb per sq. in. 
This compression raises the air to incandescence, and then heavy oil 
is injected into the incandescent air by a small portion of air com- 
pressed to a still higher point. The oil ignites at once as it enters 
the combustion space, and so a power impulse is obtained, but with- 
out explosion. The pressure does not rise above the pressure of 
air and oil injection. The Diesel engine thus embodies two very 
original features; it operates at compression pressures very much 
higher than those used in any other internal combustion engines, 
and it dispenses with the usual igniting devices by rendering the air 
charge incandescent by compression. The engine operates generally 
on the Otto cycle, but it is also built giving an impulse at every 
revolution. Mr Diesel has shown great determination and persever- 
ance, and the engine has now attained a position of considerable 
commercial importance. It is made on the continent, in England 
and in America in sizes up to 1000 H.P., and it has been applied to 
many purposes on land and also to the propulsion of small vessels. 
The engine gives a very high thermal efficiency. The present writer 
has calculated the following values from a test of a 500 B.H.P. Diesel 
oil engine made by Mr Michael Longridge, M.Inst.C.E. The 
engine had three cylinders, each of 22-05 m - diameter and stroke 
29-52 in., each cylinder operating on the " Otto " cycle. The main 
results were as follows: — > 

- Indicated power . . ' 1 595 horse 

Brake power 459 ,, 

Mechanical efficiency . . . . .77% 

', Indicated thermal efficiency 41% 

Brake thermal efficiency. . . ' . . . 31-7 % 

(D. C.) 

OILLETS (from an 0. Fr. diminutive of mil, eye, in Mod. Fr. 
eeillet; other English variants are oylets, eyelets, or eyelet-holes), 
the architectural term given to the arrow slits in the walls of 
medieval fortifications, but more strictly applied to the round 



hole or circle with which the openings terminate. The same 
term is applied to the small circles inserted in the tracery-head 
of the windows of the Decorated and Perpendicular periods, 
sometimes varied with trefoils and quatrefoils. 

OILS (adopted from the Fr. oile, mod. huile, Lat. oleum, olive 
oil), the generic expression for substances belonging to extensive 
series of bodies of diverse chemical character, all of which have 
the common physical property of being fluid either at the ordinary 
temperature or at temperatures below the boiling-point of water. 
Formerly, when substances were principally classified by obvious 
characteristics, the word included such a body as " oil of vitriol " 
(sulphuric acid), which has of course nothing in common with 
what is now understood under the term oils. In its most com- 
prehensive ordinary acceptation the word embraces at present 
the. fluid fixed oils or fatty oils {e.g. olive oil), the soft fats which 
may be fluid in their country of origin (e.g. coco-nut oil, palm 
oil), the hard fats (e.g. tallow), the still harder vegetable and 
animal waxes (e.g. carnaiiba wax, beeswax), the odoriferous 
ethereal (essential) oils, and the fluid and solid volatile hydro- 
carbons — mineral hydrocarbons — found in nature or obtained 
from natural products by destructive distillation. 

The common characteristic of all these substances is that 
they consist principally, in some cases exclusively, of carbon 
and hydrogpn. They are all readily inflammable and are practi- 
cally insoluble in water. The mineral hydrocarbons found in 
nature or obtained by destructive distillation do not come 
within the range of this article (see Naphtha,- Paraffin, 
Petroleum), which is restricted to the following two large groups 
of bodies, formed naturally within the vegetable and animal 
organisms, viz. (1) Fixed oils, fats and waxes, and (2) Essential, 
ethereal or volatile oils. 

1. Fixed Oils, Fats and Waxes. 

The substances to be considered under this head divide 
themselves naturally into two large classes, viz. fatty (fixed) 
oils and fats on the one hand, and waxes on the other, the dis- 
tinction between the two classes being based on a most important 
chemical difference. The fixed oils and fats consist essentially 
of glycerides, i.e. esters formed by the union of three molecules 
of fatty acids with one molecule of the trihydric alcohol glycerin 
(q.v.), whereas the waxes consist of esters formed by the union of 
one molecule of fatty acid with one molecule of a monohydric 
alcohol, such as cetyl alcohol, cholesterol, &c. Only in the case 
of the wax cocccrin two molecules of fatty acids are combined 
with one molecule of a dihydric (bivalent) alcohol. It must 
be pointed out that in common parlance this distinction does not 
find its ready expression. Thus Japan wax is a glyceride and 
should be more correctly termed Japan tallow, whereas sperm oil 
is, chemically speaking, a wax. Although these two classes of 
substances have a number of physical properties in common, 
they must be considered under separate heads. The true 
chemical constitution of oils and fats was first expounded by 
the classical researches of Chevreul, embodied in his work, 
Rcchcrches sur les corps gras d'origine animate (1823, reprinted 
1889). 

(a) Fatty (fixed) Oils and Fats. — The fatty (fixed) oils and fats 
form a -well-defined and homogeneous group of substances, 
passing through all gradations of consistency, from oils which are 
fluid even below the freezing-point of water, up to the hardest 
fats which melt at about 50° C. Therefore, no sharp distinction 
can be made between fatty oils and fats. Nevertheless, it is 
convenient to apply the term " oil " to those glycerides which are 
fluid below about 20 C, and the term " fat " to those which are 
solid above this temperature. 

Chemical Composition. — No oil or fat is found in nature con- 
sisting of a single chemical individual, i.e. a fat consisting of the 
glyceride of one fatty acid only, such as stearin or tristearin, 
C3H 5 (0-CisH3 5 0)3, the glycerin ester of stearic acid, CivH 35 -C02H. 
The natural oils and fats are mixtures of at least two or three 
different triglycerides, the most important of which are tristearin, 
tripalmitin, C3H 5 (0-Ci 6 H 3 i0)3 and triolein, C3H5 (0-Ci S H 33 0) 3 . 
These three glycerides have been usually considered the chief 



44 



OILS 



constituents of most oils and fats, but latterly there have been 
recognized as widely distributed trilinolin, the glyceride of 
linolic acid, and trilinolenin, the glyceride of linolenic acid. 
The two last-named glycerides are characteristic of the semi- 
drying and drying oils respectively. In addition to the fatty 
acids mentioned already there occur also, although in much 
smaller quantities, other fatty acids combined with glycerin, as 
natural glycerides, such as the glyceride of butyric acid in butter- 
fat, of caproic, caprylic and capric acids in butter-fat and in 
coco-nut oil, Iauric acid in coco-nut and palm-nut oils, and 
myristic acid in mace butter. These glycerides are, therefore, 
characteristic of the oils and fats named. 

In the classified list below the most important fatty acids 
occurring in oils and fats are enumerated (cf. Waxes, below). 



Oils and fats must, therefore, not be looked upon as definite 
chemical individuals, but as representatives of natural species 
which vary, although within certain narrow limits, according 
to the climate and soil in which the plants which produce them 
are grown, or, in the case of animal fats, according to the climate, 
the race, the age of the animal, and especially the food, and also 
the idiosyncrasy of the individual animal. The oils and fats 
are distributed throughout the animal and vegetable kingdom 
from the lowest organism up to the most highly organized 
forms of animal and vegetable life, and are found in almost 
all tissues and organs. The vegetable oils and fats occur chiefly 
in the seeds, where they are stored to nourish the embryo, 
whereas in animals the oils and fats are enclosed mainly in the 
cellular tissues of the intestines and of the back. 







Boiling-point. 














Melting-point. 
°C. 


Characteristic of 


mm. 


°C. 






Pressure. 






I. Acids of the Acetic series C n H 2n 02 — 














C2H4O2 


760 


119 


17 


Spindle-tree oil, Macassar oil 




C4H8O2 


760 


162-3 


-6-5 


Butter fat, Macassar oil 




C5IL0O2 


760 


173-7 


-5i 


Porpoise and dolphin oils 




C6H1202 


770 


202-203 


-8 


) Butter fat, coco-nut oil, 




C8H1602 


761 


236-^37 


16-5 


I palm nut oil 




C10H20O2 


760 


268-270 


3i-3 




C12H2402 


100 


225 


43-6 


Laurel oil, coco-nut oil 




C14H2802 


100 


250-5 


53-8 


Mace butter, nutmeg butter 


lsocetic acid (?) 


C15H30O2 






55 


Purging nut 




C160 3202 


100 


271-5 


62-62 


Palm oil, Japan wax, myrtle 
wax, lard, tallow, &c. 




C18H3602 


IOO 


291 


69-32 


Tallow, cacao butter, &c. 




C20H 40O2 






77-0 


Arachis oil 


Behenic acid 


C22H4402 






83-84 


Ben oil 


Lignoceric acid 


C24H4802 






80-5 


Arachis oil 


1 1 . Acids of the Acrylic or Oleic series C„H2n_202 — 














C 6 H 8 2 


760 


198-5 


64-5 


Croton oil 




C16H 30O2 


15 


236 


33-34 


Arachis oil 


Physetoleic acid . ._ . 


C16H30O2 






30 


Caspian seal oil 




C18H34O2 


100 


285-5-286 


14 


Most oils and fats 


Rapic acid 


C18H34O2 








Rape oils 




C22H 42O2 


3° 


281 


33-34 


Rape oils, fish oils 


III. Acids of the Linolic series CH2T1-4O2 — 












Linolic acid 


C18H32O2 








Maize oil, cotton-seed oil 


Tariric acid 


C18H32O2 






50-5 


Oil of Picramnia Camboiia 


Telfairic acid 


C18H32O2 


13 


220-225 




Koeme oil 


Elaeomargaric acid 


C18H32O2 






48 


Tung oil 


IV. Acids of the cyclic Chaulmoogric series 












CH2J1-4O2 — 

Hydnocarpic acid 


C16H28O2 






59-60 


\ Hydnocarpus, Lukrabo and 
\ Chaulmoogra oils 




C18H32O2 


20 


247-248 


68 


V. Acids of the Linolenic series Cnt^r^O* — 














C18H30O2 








> Linseed oil 


Isolinolenic acid 


CisH 30O2 








VI. Acids of the series CtLn-sOa — 












Clupanodonic acid 


C18H28O2 






(liquid) 


Fish, liver and blubber oils 


VII. Acids of the Ricinoleic series C.H2T1-2O3 — 














C18H34O3 


15 


250 


4-5 


Castor oil 


Quince oil acid 


C1SH34O3 








Quince oil 


VIII. Dihydroxylated acids of the series C.H211O4 — 














C18H36O4 






I4I-I43 


Castor oil 


IX. Acids of the series C„H2»_204 — 














C22H12O4 






117-7-117-9 


Japan wax 



Up to recently the oils and fats were looked upon as consisting 
in the main of a mixture of triglycerides, in which the three 
combined fatty acids are identical, as is the case in the above- 
named glycerides. Such glycerides are termed " simple 
glycerides." Recently, however, glycerides have been found 
in which the glycerin is combined with two and even three 
different acid radicals; examples of such glycerides are dis- 
tearo-olein, C 3 H 5 (0-Ci8H350)2, (0-C 18 H 3 30), and stearo-pal- 
mito-olein, C 3 H 5 (0-C, 8 H350) (0-C, 6 H 3 ,0) (O-QsI^O). Such 
glycerides are termed " mixed glycerides." The glycerides 
occurring in natural oils and fats differ, therefore, in the first 
instance by the different fatty acids contained in them, and 
secondly, even if they do contain the same fatty acids, by 
different proportions of the several simple and mixed glycerides. 



Since the methods of preparing the vegetable and animal 
fats are comparatively crude ones, they usually contain certain 
impurities of one kind or another, such as colouring and mucilagi- 
nous matter, remnants of vegetable and animal tissues, &c. For 
the most part these foreign substances can be removed by pro- 
cesses of refining, but even after this purification they still retain 
small quantities of foreign substances, such as traces of colouring 
matters, albuminoid and (or) resinous substances, and other 
foreign substances, which remain dissolved in the oils and fats, 
and can only be isolated after saponification of the fat. These 
foreign substances are comprised in the term " unsaponifiable 
matter." The most important constituents of the " unsaponifiable 
matter " are phytosterol C^erL^O or C! 7 H440(?), and the isomeric 
cholesterol. The former occurs in all oils and fats of vegetable 



OILS 



45 



origin; the latter is characteristic of all oils and fats of animal 
origin. This important difference furnishes a method of dis- 
tinguishing by chemical means vegetable oils and fats from 
animal oils and fats. This distinction will be made use of in 
the classification of the oils and fats. A second guiding principle 
is afforded by the different amounts of iodine (see Oil Testing 
below) the various oils and fats are capable of absorbing. Since 
this capacity runs parallel with one of the best-known properties 
of oils and fats, viz. the power of absorbing larger or smaller 
quantities of oxygen on exposure to the air, we arrive at the 
following classification: — 

I. Fatty Oils or Liquid Fats 

A. Vegetable oils. B. Animal oils. 

i. Drying oils. i. Marine animal oils. 

2. Semi-drying oils. (a) Fish oils. 

3. Non-drying oils. (b) Liver oils. 

(c) Blubber oils. 
2. Terrestrial animal oils. 



A. Vegetable fats. 



II. Solid Fats 

B. Animal fats. 

1. Drying fats. 

2. Semi-drying fats. 

3. Non-drying fats. 



Physical Properties. — The specific gravities of oils and fats vary 
between the limits of O-gio and 0-975. The lowest specific gravity 
is owned by the oils belonging to the rape oil group — from 0-913 to 
0-916. The specific gravities of most non-drying oils lie between 
0-916 and 0-920, and of most semi-drying oils between 0-920 and 
0-925, whereas the drying oils have specific gravities of about 0-930. 
The animal and vegetable fats possess somewhat higher specific 
gravities, up to 0-930. The high specific gravity, 0-970, is owned by 
castor oil and cacao butter, and the highest specific gravity observed 
hitherto, 0-975, by Japan wax and myrtle wax. 

In their liquid state oils and fats easily penetrate into the pores of 
dry substances; on paper they leave a translucent spot — "grease 
spot " — which cannot be removed by washing with water and subse- 
quent drying. A curious fact, which may be used for the detection 
of the minutest quantity of oils and fats, is that camphor crushed 
between layers of paper without having been touched with the 
fingers rotates when thrown on clean water, the rotation ceasing 
immediately when a trace of oil or fat is added, such as introduced 
by touching the water with a needle which has been passed previously 
through the hair. 

The oils and fats are practically insoluble in water. With the 
exception of castor oil they are insoluble in cold alcohol; in boiling 
alcohol somewhat larger quantities dissolve. They are completely 
soluble in ether, carbon bisulphide, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, 
petroleum ether, and benzene. Oils and fats have no distinct melting 
or solidifying point. This is not only due to the fact that they are 
mixtures of several glycerides, but also that even pure glycerides, 
such as tristearin, exhibit two melting-points, a so-called " double 
melting-point," the triglycerides melting at a certain temperature, 
then solidifying at a higher temperature to melt again on further 
heating. This curious behaviour was looked upon by Duffyasbeing 
due to the existence of two isomeric modifications, the actual 
occurrence of which has been proved (1907) in the case of several 
mixed glycerides. 

The freezing-points of those oils which are fluid at the ordinary 
temperature range from a few degrees above zero down to -28° C. 
(linseed oil). At low temperatures solid portions — usually termed 
" stearine " — separate out from many oils; in the case of cotton-seed 
oil the separation takes place at 12° C. These solid portions can be 
filtered off, and thus are obtained the commercial " demargarinated 
oils " or " winter oils." 

Oils and fats can be heated to a temperature of 200 to 250° C. 
without undergoing any material change, provided prolonged 
contact with air is avoided. On being heated above 250° up to 300 ° 
some oils, like linseed oil, safflower oil, tung oil (Chinese or Japanese 
wood oil) and even castor oil, undergo a change which is most likely 
due to polymerization. In the case of castor oil solid products are 
formed. Above 300 C. all oils and fats are decomposed; this is 
evidenced by the evolution of acrolein, which possesses the well- 
known pungent odour of burning fat. At the same time hydro- 
carbons are formed (see Petroleum). 

On exposure to the atmosphere, oils and fats gradually undergo 
certain changes. The drying oils absorb oxygen somewhat 
rapidly and dry to a film or skin, especially if exposed in a thin 
layer. Extensive use of this property is made in the paint and 
varnish trades. The semi-drying oils absorb oxygen more 
slowly than the drying oils, and are, therefore, useless as paint 
oils. Still, in course of time, they absorb oxygen distinctly 
enough to become thickened. The property of the semi-drying 



oils to absorb oxygen is accelerated by spreading such oils over 
a large surface, notably over woollen or cotton fibres, when 
absorption proceeds so rapidly that frequently spontaneous 
combustion will ensue. Many fires in cotton and woollen mills 
have been caused thereby. The non-drying oils, the type of 
which is olive oil, do not become oxidized readily on exposure 
to the air, although gradually a change takes place, the oils 
thickening slightly and acquiring that peculiar disagreeable 
smell and acrid taste, which are defined by the term " rancid." 
The changes conditioning rancidity, although not yet fully 
understood in all details, must be ascribed in the first instance 
to slow hydrolysis (" saponification ") of the oils and fats by the 
moisture of the air, especially if favoured by insolation, when 
water is taken up by the oils and fats, and free fatty acids are 
formed. The fatty acids so set free are then more readily 
attacked by the oxygen of the air, and oxygenated products 
are formed, wbich impart to the oils and fats the rancid smell 
and taste. The products of oxidation are not yet fully known; 
most likely they consist of lower fatty acids, such as formic 
and acetic acids, and perhaps also of aldehydes and ketones. 
If the fats and oils are well protected from air and light, they 
can be kept indefinitely. In fact C. Friedel has found unchanged 
triglycerides in the fat which had been buried several thousand 
years ago in the tombs of Abydos. If the action of air and 
moisture is allowed free play, the hydrolysis of the oils and 
fats may become so complete that only the insoluble fatty 
acids remain behind, the glycerin being washed away. This 
is exemplified by adipocere, and also by Irish bog butter, which 
consist chiefly of free fatty acids. 

The property of oils and fats of being readily hydrolysed is a most 
important one, and very extensive use of it is made in the arts (soap- 
making, candle-making and recovery of their by-products). If oils 
and fats are treated with water alone under high pressure (corre- 
sponding to a temperature of about 220° C), or in the presence of 
water with caustic alkalis or alkaline earths or basic metallic oxides 
(which bodies act as " catalysers ") at lower pressures, they are 
converted in the first instance into free fatty acids and glycerin. 
If an amount of the bases sufficient to combine subsequently with 
the fatty acids be present, then the corresponding salts of these fatty 
acids are formed, such as sodium salts of fatty acids (hard soap) or 
potassium salts of the fatty acids (soft soap), soaps of the alkaline 
earth (lime soap), or soaps of the metallic oxides (zinc soap, &c). 
The conversion of the glycerides (triglycerides) into fatty acids 
and glycerin must be looked upon as a reaction which takes place in 
stages, one molecule of a triglyceride being converted first into 
diglyceride and one molecule of fatty acid, the diglyceride then being 
changed into monoglyceride, and a second molecule of fatty acid, 
and finally the monoglyceride being converted into one molecule of 
fatty acid and glycerin. All these reactions take place concurrently, 
so that one molecule of a diglyceride may still retain its ephemeral 
existence, whilst another molecule is already broken up completely 
into free fatty acids and glycerin. 

The oils and fats used in the industries are not drawn from 
any very great number of sources. The tables on the following 
pages contain chiefly the most important oils and fats together 
with their sources, yields and principal uses, arranged according 
to the above classification, and according to the magnitude of 
the iodine value. It should be added that many other oils and 
fats are only waiting improved conditions of transport to enter 
into successful competition with some of those that are already 
on the market. 

Extraction. — Since the oils and fats have always served the 
human race as one of the most important articles of food, the 
oil and fat industry may well be considered to be as old as the 
human race itself. The methods of preparing oils and fats 
range themselves under three heads: (1) Extraction of oil by 
" rendering," i.e. boiling out with water; (2) Extraction of oil 
by expression; (3) Extraction of oil by means of solvents. 

Rendering. — The crudest method of rendering oils from seeds, still 
practised in Central Africa, in Indo-China and on some of the South 
Sea Islands, consists in heaping up oleaginous fruits and allowing 
them to melt by the heat of the sun, when the exuding oil runs off 
and is collected. In a somewhat improved form this process of 
rendering is practised in the preparation of palm oil, and the rendering 
the best (Cochin) coco-nut oil by boiling the fresh kernels with water. 
Since hardly any machinery, or only the simplest machinery, is 
required for these processes, this method has some fascination for 



4-6 



OILS 



inventors, and even at the present day processes are being patented, 
having for their object the boiling but of fruits with water or salt 
solutions, so as to facilitate the separation of the oil from the pulp by 
gravitation. Naturally these processes can only be applied to those 
seeds which contain large quantities of fatty matter, such as coco- 
nuts and olives. The rendering process is, however, applied on a 
very large scale to the production of animal oils and fats. Formerly 
the animal oils and fats were obtained by heating the tissues con- 
taining the oils or fats over a free fire, when the cell membranes 
burst and the liquid fat flowed out. The cave-dweller who first 
collected the fat dripping off the deer on the roasting spit may well 
be looked upon as the first manufacturer of tallow. This crude 
process is now classed amongst the noxious trades, owing to the 
offensive stench given off, and must be considered as almost extinct 
in this country. Even on whaling vessels, where up to recently 



whale oil, seal oil , and, sperm oil (see Waxes, below) were obtained 
exclusively by " trying, 1 ' i.e. by melting the blubber over a free fire, 
the process of rendering is fast becoming obsolete, the modern prac- 
tice being to deliver the blubber in as fresh a state as possible to the 
" whaling establishments," where the oil is rendered by methods 
closely resembling those worked in the enormous rendering establish- 
ments (for tallow, lard, bone fat) in the United States and in South 
America. The method consists essentially in cutting up the fatty 
matter into small fragments, which are transferred into vessels 
containing water, wherein the comminuted mass is heated by 
steam, either under ordinary pressure in open vessels or under 
higher pressure in digestors. The fat gradually exudes and collects 
on the top of the water, whilst the membranous matter, " greaves," 
falls to the bottom. The fat is then drawn off the aqueous (gluey) 
layer, and strained through sieves or filters. The greaves are placed 



Vegetable Oils 



Name of Oil. 



Linseed 

Tung (Chinese or Japanese wood) 

Candle nut 

Hemp seed 

Walnut; Nut 

Safflower . 

Poppy seed 

Sunflower . 

Madia 



Cameline (German Sesame) 

Soja bean . 

Maize; Corn 

Beech nut 

Kapok 

Cotton-seed 

Sesame 

Curcas, purging nut 

Brazil nut 

Croton 

Ravison 

Rape (Colza) 

Jamba 



Apricot kernel 

Peach kernel 

Almond 

Arachis (ground rmt) 

Hazel nut 

Olive 

Olive kernel 

Ben . 

Grape seed 

Castor 



Name of Oil. 



Fish oils — 

Menhaden 

Sardine oil . 

Salmon . 

Herring 
Liver oils — 

Cod liver 

Shark liver (Arctic) 
Blubber oils — 

Seal 

Whale . 



Dolphin, black fish, body oil 
Jaw oil . 

Porpoise Body oil 
Porpoise Jaw oil . 

Sheep's foot 

Horses' foot 

Neat's foot 

Egg 



Source. 



Yield 
per cent. 



Drying Oils. 
Linum usitalissimum 
Aleurites cordata 
Aleurites moluccana 
Cannabis saliva 
Juglans regia .... 
Carlhamus tinctorius 
Pa paver somnifermn 
Ilclianlhus animus . 
Madia saliva .... 

Semi-drying Oils. 

Camelina saliva .... 

Soja hispida 

Zea Mays 

Fagus sylvatica .... 

Bombax pentandrum (Eriodendron 
anfractuosum) .... 
Gossypium herbaceum 
Sesamum orientate, S. indicum 
Jatroplia ciircas .... 
Bertholletia exeelsa .... 
Croton Tiglium .... 
Wild Brassica campestris 
Brassica campestris 
Brassica campestris var.? 

Non-drying Oils 

Prunus armeniaca 
Primus persica 
Prunus amygdalus 
Arachis hypogaea 
Corylus avellana 
Olea europaea . 
Olea europaea . 
Moringa oleifera 
Vitis vinifera . 
Ricinus communis 



38-40 
40-41 
62-64 
30-35 
63-65 
3»-32 
41-50 
21-22 

32-33 



31-34 

6-10 
43-45 

30-32 
24-26 
50-57 
55-57 

53-56 

33-40 

33-43 

24 



40-45 
32-35 
45-55 
43-45 
50-60 
40-60 
12-15 
35-36 
10-20 
46-53 



Iodine 
Value. 



175-205 
150-165 

163 

148 

145 
130-147 
123-143 
1 19-135 

nS-5 



135 
122 

113-125 
111-120 

116 

10S-110 

103-108 

98-1 10 

90-106 

102-104 

105-117 

94-102 

95 



96-108 

93-109 

93-100 

83-100 

83-90 

79-88 

87 
82 

96 
83-86 



Principal Use. 



Paint, varnish, linoleum, soap 
Paint and varnish 
Burning oil, soap, paint 
Paints and varnishes, soft soap 
Oil painting 

Burning, varnish (" roghan ") 
Salad oil, painting, soft soap 
Edible oil, soap 
Soap, burning 



Burning, soap 
Edible, burning 
Edible, soap 
Food, burning 



Food, soap 
Food, soap 
Food, soap 
Medicine, soap 
Edible, soap 
Medicine 

Lubricant, burning 
Lubricant, burning 
Burning, lubricant 



Perfumery, medicine 
Perfumery, medicine 
Perfumery, medicine 
Edible, soap 

Edible, perfumery, lubricating 
Edible, lubricating, burning, soap 
Edible, lubricating, burning, soap 
Edible, perfumery, lubricating 
Food, burning 

Medicine, soap, lubricating, Turkey 
red oil 



Animal Oils 



Source. 



Yield 
per cent. 



Marine Animal Oils. 



Alosa menhaden 
Clupea sardinus 
Sahno salar 
Clupea harengus 

Gadus morrhua 
Scymnus borealis 

Phoca vitulina . 
Balaena mysticetus, &c. 

Delphinus globiceps 
Delphinus phocaena 



Iodine 
Value. 



Terrestrial Animal Oils. 



Ovis aries . 
Equus caballus 
Bos taurus 
Gallus domesticus 



140-173 
161-193 

161 
124-142 

167 
"5 

127-147 
121-136 

99-126 

33 
119 

36 

74 
74-90 
67-73 
68-82 



Principal Use. 



Currying leather 
Currying leather 
Currying leather 
Currying leather 

Medicine, currying leather 
Currying leather 

Burning, currying leather 
Burning, soap-making, fibre dress- 
ing, currying leather 



Lubricating oil for delicate 
machinery 



Lubricating 

Lubricating 

Lubricating, leather dressing 

Leather dressing 



OILS 



47 



Vegetable Fats 







Yield 


Iodine 




Name of Fat. 


Source. 


per cent. 


Value. 


Principal Use. 


Laurel oil 


Lauras nobilis 


24-26 


. 68-80 


Medicine 


Mahua butter, Illipe butter . 




Bassia latifolia .... 


50-55 


53-67 


Food, soap, candles 


Mowrah butter 




Bassia longifolia .... 


50-55 


50-62 


Food, soap, candles 


Shea butter (Galam butter) . 




Bassia Parkii 


49-52 


56 


Food, soap, candles 






Elaeis guineensis, E. melanococca 


65-72 


53 


Candles, soap 


Maee butter .... 




Myrislica officinalis 


38-40 


40-52 


Medicine, perfumery 


Ghee butter (Phulwara butter) 




Bassia butyracea . ... 


50-52 


42 


Food 


Cacao butter .... 




Theobroma cacao .... 


44-50 


32-41 


Chocolate 


Chinese vegetable tallow 




Stillingia sebifera (Croton sebiferum) 


22 


28-32 


Soap, candles 


Kokum butter (Goa butter) . 




Garcinia indica .... 


49 


33 


Food 


Borneo tallow .... 




Shorea stenoplcra, Hopea aspcra . 


45-50 


15-31 


Food, candles 


Mocaya oil 






Cocos sclerocarpa .... 


60-70 


24 


Food, soap 


Maripa fat 






Paltna (?) Maripa .... 




17 


Food, soap 


Palm kernel oil / 
Palm nut oil ) 






Elaeis guineensis, ) . 
E. melanococca ) 


45-50 


13-H 


Food, soap 


Coco-nut oil 






Cocos nucifera, C. butyracea . 


20-25 


8-9 


Food, soap, candles 


Japan wax 






Rhus succedanea, R. vernicifera 


25 


4-10 


Polishes 


Dika oil(oba oil, wild mango oil) 




Irvingia gabonensis .... 


60-65 


5-2 


Food 


Myrtle wax .... 




Myrica cerifera, M. carolinensis . 


20-25 


2-4 


Soap, candles (?) 


Animal Fats 






Yield 


Iodine 




Name of Fat. 


Source. 


per cent. 


Value. 


Principal Use. 




Drying Fats. 








lee bear 


Ursus maritimus .... 




147 


Pharmacy 


Rattlesnake 


Crotalus durissus .... 




106 


Pharmacy 


Semi-drying Fa 


s. 






Horses' fat | Equus caballus . . . . ] 


■ • 1 


75-85 1 Food, soap 


Non-drying Fat 


s. 






Goose fat 


Anser cinereus . 




70 


Food, pomades 


Lard 






Sits scrofa 






50-70 


Food, soap, candles 


Beef marrow . 






Bos taunts 






55 


Pomades 


Bone .... 






Bos, Ovis * 






46-56 


Soap, candles 


Tallow, beef 






Bos taunts 






38-46 


Food, soap, candles, lubricants 


Tallow, mutton 






Ovis aries 






35-46 


Food, soap, candles, lubricants 


Butter 






Bos taunts 






26-38 


Food 



in hair or woollen bags and submitted to hydraulic pressure, by 
which a further portion of oil or fat is obtained (cf. Pressing, below). 
In the case of those animal fats which are intended for edible pur- 
poses, such as lard, suet for margarine, the greatest cleanliness must, 
of course, be observed, and the temperature must be kept as low as 
possible in order to obtain a perfectly sweet and pure material. 

Pressing. — The boiling out process cannot be applied to small 
seeds, such as linseed and rape seed. Whilst the original method of 
obtaining seed oils may perhaps have been the same which is still 
used in India, viz. trituration of (rape) seeds in a mortar so that the 
oil can exude, it may be safely assumed that the process of expressing 
has been applied in the first instance to the preparation of olive oil. 
The first woman who expressed olives packed in a sack by heaping 
stones on them may be considered as the forerunner of the inventors 
of all the presses that subsequently came into use. Pliny describes 
in detail the apparatus and processes for obtaining olive oil in vogue 
among his Roman contemporaries, who used already a simple screw 
press, a knowledge of which they had derived from the Greeks. 
In the East, where vegetable oils form an important article of food 
and serve also for other domestic purposes, various ingenious 
applications of lever presses and wedge presses, and even of com- 
bined lever and wedge presses, have been used from the remotest 
time. At an early stage of history the Chinese employed the same 
series of operations which are followed in the most advanced oil mills 
of modern time, viz. bruising and reducing the seeds to meal under an 
edge-stone, heating the meal in an open pan, and pressing out the 
oil in a wedge press in which the wedges were driven home by 
hammers. This primitive process is still being carried out in Man- 
churia, in the production of soja bean cake and soja bean oil, one of 
the staple industries of that country. The olive press, which was 
also used in the vineyards for expressing the grape juice, found its 
way from the south of France to the north, and was employed there 
for expressing poppy seed and rape seed. The apparatus was then 
gradually improved, and thus were evolved the modern forms of 
the screw press, next the Dutch or stamper press, and finally the 
hydraulic press. With the screw press, even in its most improved 
form, the amount of pressure practically obtainable is limited from 
the failure of its parts under the severe inelastic strain. Hence this 
kind of press finds only limited application, as in the industry of 
olive oil for expressing the best and finest virgin oil, and in the 
production of animal fats for edible purposes, such as lard and 
oleomargarine. The Dutch or stamper press, invented in Holland 
in the' 17th century, was up to the early years of the 19th century 



almost exclusively employed in Europe for pressing oil-seeds. It 
consists of two principal parts, an oblong rectangular box with an 
arrangement of plates, blocks and wedges, and over it a framework 
with heavy stampers which produce the pressure by their fall. 
The press box first consisted of strongly bound oaken planks, but 
later on east-iron boxes were introduced. At each extremity of the 
box a bag of oil-meal was placed between two perforated iron plates, 
next to which were inserted filling-up pieces of wood, two of which 
were oblique, so that the wedges which exercised the pressure could 
be readily driven home. This press has had to yield place to the 
hydraulic press, although in some old-fashioned establishments in 
Holland the stamper press could still be seen at work in the 'eighties 
of the 19th century. The invention of the hydraulic press in 1795 
by Joseph Bramah (Eng. pat., 30th April 1795) effected the greatest 
revolution in the oil industry, bringing a new, easily controlled and 
almost unlimited source of power into play; the limit of the power 
being solely reached by the limit of the strength of the material 
which the engineer is able to produce. Since then the hydraulie 
press has practically completely superseded all other appliances 
used for expression, and in consequence of this epoch-making in- 
vention, assisted as it was later on by the accumulator — invented by 
William George (later Lord) Armstrong in 1843 — the seed-crushing 
industry reached a perfection of mechanical detail which soon 
secured its supremacy for England. 

The sequence of operations in treating oil seeds, oil nuts, &c, 
for the separation of their contained oils is at the present time as 
follows: As a preliminary operation the oil seeds and nuts are freed 
from dust, sand and other impurities by sifting in an inclined re- 
volving cylinder or sieving machine, covered with woven wire, 
having meshes varying according to the size and nature of the seed 
operated upon. This preliminary purification is of the greatest 
importance, especially for the preparation of edible oils and fats. 
In the case of those seeds amongst which are found pieces of iron 
(hammer heads amongst palm kernels, &c), the seeds are passed 
over magnetic separators, which retain the pieces of iron. The seeds 
and nuts are then decorticated (where required), the shells removed, 
and the kernels (" meats ") converted into a pulpy mass or meal 
(in older establishments by crushing and grinding between stones in 
edge-runners) on passing through a hopper over rollers consisting 
of five chilled iron or steel cylinders mounted vertically like the bowls 
of a calendar. These rollers are finely grooved so that the seed is 
cut up whilst passing in succession between the first and second 
rollers in the series, then between the second and the third, and so 



48 



OILS 



on to the last, when the grains are sufficiently bruised, crushed and 
ground. The distance between the rollers can be easily regulated 
so that the seed leaving the bottom roller has the desired fineness. 
The comminuted mass, forming a more or less coarse meal, is either 
expressed in this state or subjected to a preliminary heating, accord- 
ing to the quality of the product to be manufactured. For the 
preparation of edible oils and fats the meal is expressed in the cold, 
after having been packed into bags and placed in hydraulic presses 
under a pressure of three hundred atmospheres or even more. The 
cakes are allowed to remain under pressure for about seven minutes. 
The oil exuding in the cold dissolves the smallest amount of colouring 
matter, &c, and hence has suffered least in its quality. Oils so 
obtained are known in commerce as "cold drawn oils," " cold pressed 
oils," " salad oils," " virgin oils." 

By pressing in the cold, obviously only part of the oil or fat is 
recovered. A further quantity is obtained by expressing the seed 
meal at a somewhat elevated temperature, reached by warming the 
comminuted seeds or fruits either immediately after they leave the 
five-roller mill, or after the " cold drawn oil " has been taken off. 
Of course the cold pressed cakes must be first disintegrated, which 
may be done under an edge-runner. The same operation may be 
repeated once more. Thus oils of the " second expression " and of 
the " third expression " are obtained. 

In the case of oleaginous seeds of low value (cotton-seed, linseed) 
it is of importance to express in one operation the largest possible 
quantity of oil. Hence the bruised seed is, after leaving the five- 
roller mill, generally warmed at once in a steam-jacketed kettle 
fitted with a mixing gear, by passing steam into the jacket, and send- 
ing at the same time some steam through a rose, fixed inside the 
kettle, into the mass while it is being agitated. This practice is a 
survival of the older method of moistening the seed with a little 
water, while the seeds were bruised under edge-runners, so as to 
lower the temperature and facilitate the bursting of the cells. The 
warm meal is then delivered through measuring boxes into closed 
pressbags (" scourtins " of the " Marseilles " press), or through 
measuring boxes, combined with an automatic moulding machine, 
into cloths open at two sides (Anglo-American press), so that the 
preliminarily pressed cakes can be put at once into the hydraulic 
press. In the latest constructions of cage presses, the use of bags is 
entirely dispensed with, a measured-out quantity of seed falling 
direct into the circular press cage and being separated from the 
material forming the next cake by a circular plate of sheet iron. 
The essentials of proper oil pressing are a slowly accumulating 
pressure, so that the liberated oil may have time to flow out and 
escape, a pressure that increases in proportion as the resistance of 
the material increases, and that maintains itself as the volume of 
material decreases through the escape of oil. 

Numerous forms of hydraulic presses have been devised. Hori- 
zontal presses have practically ceased to be used in this branch of 
industry. At present vertical presses are almost exclusively in 
vogue; the three chief types of these have been already mentioned. 
Continuously working presses (compression by a conical screw) have 
been patented, but hitherto they have not been found practicable. 
Of the vertical presses the Anglo-American type of press is most in 
use. It represents an open press fitted with a number (usually 
sixteen) of iron press plates, between which the cakes are inserted 
by hand. A hydraulic ram then forces the table carrying the cakes 
against a press-head, and the exuding oil flows down the sides into 
a tank below. The " Marseilles press " is largely used in the south 
of France. There the meal is packed by hand in " scourtins," bags 
made of plaited coco-nut leaves — replacing the woollen cloths used 
in England. The packing of the press requires more manual labour 
than in the case of the Anglo-American press; moreover, the Mar- 
seilles press offers inconvenience in keeping the bags straight, and 
the pressure cannot be raised to the same height as in the more 
modern hydraulic presses. Oil obtained from heated meal is usually 
more highly coloured and harsher to the taste than cold drawn oil, 
more of the extractive substances being dissolved and intermixed 
with the oil. Such oils are hardly suitable for edible purposes, and 
they are chiefly used for manufacturing processes. According to 
the care exercised by the manufacturer in the range of temperature 
to which the seed is heated, various grades of oils are obtained. 

In the case of those seeds which contain more than 40% of oil, 
such as arachis nuts and sesame seed, the first expression in pressbags 
leads to difficulty, as the meal causes " spueing," i.e. the meal exudes 
and escapes from the press. Hence, in modern installations, the 
first expression of those seeds is carried out in so-called cage (clodding) 
presses, consisting of hydraulic presses provided with circular boxes 
or cages, into which the meal is filled. These cages or boxes are either 
constructed of metal staves held together by a number of steel rings, 
or consist of one cylinder having a large number of perforations. 
The presses having perforated cylinders, although presenting 
mechanically a more perfect arrangement, are not preferable to the 
press cages formed by staves, as the holes become easily clogged up 
by the meal, when the cylinder must be carefully cleaned out. 
Modern improvements, with a view to cheapening of cost, effect the 
transport of the cages from one press battery to another on rails. 
In order to dispense even with the charging of the presses by hand, 
in some systems the cages are first charged in a preliminary press, 



from which they are transferred mechanically by a swinging arrange- 
ment into the final press. 

Whilst the meal is under pressure the oil works its way to the edge 
of the cake, whence it exudes. For this reason an oblong form is the 
most favourable one for the easy separation of the oil. The edges 
of the cakes invariably retain a considerable portion of oil; hence 
the soft edges are pared off, in the case of the oblong cake in a cake- 
paring machine, and the parings are returned to edge-runners, to 
be ground up and again pressed with fresh meal. Through the 
introduction of the cage (clodding) presses circular cakes have become 
fashionable, and as the material of these presses can be made much 
stronger and therefore higher pressure can be employed, more oil is 
expressed from the meal than in open presses. The oil flowing from 
the presses is caught in reservoirs placed under the level of the floor, 
from, which it is pumped into storage tanks for settling and clarifying. 

Extraction by Solvents. — The cakes obtained in the foregoing 
process still retain considerable proportions of oil, not less than 
4 to 5% — usually, however, about 10%. If it be desired to obtain 
larger quantities than are yielded by the above-described methods, 
processes having for their object the extraction of the seeds by 
volatile solvents must be resorted to. Extraction by means o f carbon 
bisulphide was first introduced in 1843 by Jesse Fisher of Birming- 
ham. Thirteen years later E. Deiss of Brunswick again patented 
the extraction by means of carbon bisulphide (.Eng. Pat. No. 390, 
1 856), and added "chloroform, ether, essences, or benzine or benzole" 
to the list of solvents. For several years afterwards the process 
made little advance, for the colour of the oils produced was higher 
and the taste much sharper. The oil retained traces of sulphur, 
which showed themselves disagreeably in the smell of soaps made 
from it, and in the blackening of substances with which it was used. 
Of course, the meal left by the process was so tainted with carbon 
bisulphide that it was absolutely out of the question to use the 
extracted meal as cattle food. With the improvement in the manu- 
facture of carbon bisulphide, these drawbacks have been surmounted 
to a large extent, and the process of extracting with carbon bisulphide 
has specially gained much extension in the extraction of expressed 
olive marc in the south of France, in Italy and in Spain. Yet even 
now traces of carbon bisulphide are retained by the extracted meal, 
so that it is impossible to feed cattle with it. Carbon bisulphide is 
comparatively cheap, and it is heavier than water, hence there are 
certain advantages in storing so volatile and inflammable a liquid. 
But owing to the physiological effect carbon bisulphide has on the 
workmen, coupled with the chemical action of impure carbon 
bisulphide on iron which has frequently led to conflagrations, the 
employment of carbon bisulphide must remain restricted. In 1863 
Richardson, Lundy and Irvine secured a patent {Eng. Pat. No. 
2315) for obtaining oil from crushed seeds, or from refuse cake, 
by the solvent action of volatile hydrocarbons from " petroleum, 
earth oils, asphaltum oil, coal oil or shale oil, such hydrocarbons 
being required to be volatile under 212° F." Since that time the 
development of the petroleum industry in all parts of the world 
and the large quantities of low boiling-point hydrocarbons — naphtha 
— obtained from the petroleum fields, and also the improvements 
in the apparatus employed, have raised this system of extraction 
to the rank of a competing practical method of oil production. 
Of the other proposed volatile solvents ordinary ether has found no 
practical application, as it is far too volatile and hence far too 
dangerous. Carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, acetone and benzene 
are far too expensive. Carbon tetrachloride would be an ideal 
solvent, as it is non-inflammable and shares with carbon bisulphide 
the advantage of being heavier than water. Efforts have been made 
during the last few years to introduce this solvent on a large scale, 
but its high price and its physiological effect on the workmen have 
hitherto militated against it. At the present time the choice lies 
practically only between the two solvents, carbon bisulphide and 
naphtha (petroleum ether). Naphtha is preferable for oil seeds, as 
it extracts neither resins nor gummy matters from the oil seeds, 
and takes up less colouring matter than carbon bisulphide. Yet even 
with naphtha traces of the solvents remain, so that the meal obtained 
cannot be used for cattle feeding, notwithstanding the many state- 
ments by interested parties to the contrary. It is true that on the 
continent extracted meal, especially rape meal from good Indian 
seed and palm kernel meal, are somewhat largely used as food for 
cattle in admixture with press cakes, but in England no extracted 
meal is used for feeding cattle, but finds its proper use in manuring 
the land. 

The apparatus employed on a large scale depends on the tempera- 
ture at which the extraction is carried out. In the main two types 
of extracting apparatus are differentiated, viz. for extraction in the 
cold and for extraction in the hot. The seed is prepared in a similar 
manner as for pressing, except that it is not reduced to a fine meal, 
so as not to impede the percolation of the solvent through the mass. 
In the case of cold extraction the seed is placed in a series of closed 
vessels, through which the solvent percolates by displacement, on 
the " counter-current " system. A battery of vessels is so arranged 
that one vessel can always be made the last of the series to discharge 
finished meal and to be recharged with fresh meal, so that the 
process is practically a continuous one. The solution of the extracted 
oil or fat is then transferred to a steam-heated still, where the solvent 



OILS 



+9 



is driven off and recovered by condensing the vapours in a cooling 
coil, to be used again. The last remnant of volatile solvent in the oil 
is driven off by a current of open steam blown through the oil in the 
warm state. The extracting process in the hot is carried out in 
apparatus, the principle of which is exemplified by the well-known 
Soxhlet extractor. The comminuted seed is placed inside a vessel 
connected with an upright refrigerator on trays or baskets, and is 
surrounded there by the volatile solvent. On heating the solvent 
with steam through a coil or jacket, the vapours rise through and 
around the meal. They pass into the refrigerator, where they are 
condensed and fall back as a condensed liquid through the meal, 
percolating it as they pass downwards, and reaching to the bottom 
of the vessel as a more or less saturated solution of oil in the solvent. 
The solvent is again evaporated, leaving the oil at the bottom of the 
vessel until the extraction is deemed finished. The solution of fat is 
then run off into a still, as described already, and the last traces of 
solvent are driven out. The solvent is recovered and used again. 

With regard to the merits and demerits of the last two mentioned 
processes — expression and extraction — the adoption of either will 
largely depend on local conditions and the objects for which the pro- 
ducts are intended. Wherever the cake is the main product, ex- 
pression will commend itself as the most advantageous process. 
Where, however, the fatty material forms the main product, as in the 
case of palm kernel oil, or sesame and coco-nut oils from damaged 
seeds (which would no longer yield proper cattle food), the process of 
extraction will be preferred, especially when the price of oils is high. 
In some cases the combination of the two processes commends 
itself, as in the case of the production of olive oil. The fruits are 
expressed, and after the edible qualities and best class of oils for 
technical purposes have been taken off by expression, the remaining 
pulp is extracted by means of solvents. This process is known under 
the name of mixed process {huilerie mixte). 

Refining and Bleaching. — The oils and fats prepared by any 
of the methods detailed above are in their fresh state, and, if 
got from perfectly fresh (" sweet ") material, practically neutral. 
If care be exercised in the process of rendering animal oils 
and fats or expressing oils in the cold, the products are, as a 
rule, sufficiently pure to be delivered to the consumer, after a 
preliminary settling has allowed any mucilaginous matter, such 
as animal or vegetable fibres or other impurities, and also traces 
of moisture, to separate out. This spontaneous clarification 
was at one time the only method in vogue. This process is 
now shortened by filtering oils through filter presses, or otherwise 
brightening them, e.g. by blowing with air. In many cases 
these methods still suffice for the production of commercial 
oils and fats. 

In special cases, such as the preparation of edible oils and fats, a 
further improvement in colour and greater purity is obtained by 
filtering the oils over charcoal, or over natural absorbent earths, 
such as fuller's earth. Where this process does not suffice, as in the 
case of coco-nut oil or palm kernel oil, a preliminary purification 
in a current of steam must be resorted to before the final purifica- 
tion, described above, is carried out. Oils intended for use on the 
table which deposit " stearine " in winter must be freed from such 
solid fats. This is done by allowing the oil to cool down to a low 
temperature and pressing it through cloths in a press, when a 
limpid oil exudes, which remains proof against cold — " winter oil." 
Most olive oils are naturally non-congealing oils, whereas the 
Tunisian and Algerian olive oils deposit so much " stearine " 
that they must be " demargarinated." Similar methods are em- 
ployed in the production of lard oil, edible cotton-seed oil, &c. 
For refining oils and fats intended for edible purposes only the 
foregoing methods, which may be summarized by the name of 
physical methods, can be used; the only chemicals permissible 
are alkalis or alkaline earths to remove free fatty acids present. 
Treatment with other chemicals renders the oils and fats unfit 
for consumption. Therefore all bleaching and refining pro- 
cesses involving other means than those enumerated can only 
be used for technical oils and fats, such as lubricating oils, 
burning oils, paint oils, soap-making' oils, &c. 

Bleaching by the aid of chemicals requires great circumspec- 
tion. There is no universal method of oil-refining applicable 
to any and every oil or fat. Not only must each kind of oil or 
fat be considered as a special problem, but frequently even 
varieties of one and the same oil or fat are apt to cause the 
same difficulties as would a new individual. In many cases the 
purification by means of sulphuric acid, invented and patented 



by Charles Gower in 1792 (frequently ascribed to Thenard), is 
still usefully applied. It consists in treating the oil with 
a small percentage of a more or less concentrated sulphuric 
acid, according to the nature of the oil or fat. The acid not 
only takes up water, but it acts on the suspended impurities, 
carbonizing them to some extent, and thus causing them to 
coagulate and fall down in the form of a floceulent mass, which 
carries with it mechanically other impurities which have not 
been acted upon. This method is chiefly used in the refining 
of linseed and rape oils. Purification by means of strong 
caustic soda was first recommended as a general process by 
Louis C. Arthur Barreswil, his suggestion being to heat the oil 
and add 2% to 3% of caustic soda. In most cases the purifica- 
tion consisted in removing the free fatty acids from rancid oils 
and fats, the caustic soda forming a soap with the fatty acids, 
which would either rise as a scum and lift up with it impurities, 
or fall to the bottom and carry down impurities. This process 
is a useful one in the case of cotton-seed oil. As a rule, 
however, it is a very precarious one, since emulsions are formed 
which prevent in many cases the separation of oil altogether. 
After the treatment with sulphuric acid or caustic soda, the oils 
must be washed to remove the last traces of chemicals. The 
water is then allowed to settle out, and the oils are finally 
filtered. The number of chemicals which have been proposed 
from time to time for the purification of oils and fats is almost 
legion, and so long as the nature of oils and fats was little 
understood, a secret trade in oil-purifying chemicals flourished. 
With our present knowledge most of these chemicals may 
be removed into the limbo of useless things. The general 
methods of bleaching besides those mentioned already as 
physical methods, viz. filtration over charcoal or bleaching 
earth, are chiefly methods based on bleaching by means of 
oxygen or by chlorine. The methods of bleaching by oxygen 
include all those which aim at the bleaching by exposure to 
the air and to sunlight (as in the case of artists' linseed-oil), 
or where oxygen or ozone is introduced in the form of gas or 
is evolved by chemicals, as manganese dioxide, potassium 
bichromate or potassium permanganate and sulphuric acid. 
In the process of bleaching by means of chlorine either bleach- 
ing powder or bichromates and hydrochloric acid are used. It 
must again be emphasized that no general rule can be laid 
down as to which process should be employed in each given 
case. There is still a wide field open for the application of 
proper processes for the removal of impurities and colouring 
matters without running the risk of attacking the oil or fat 
itself. 

Oil Testing. — Reliable scientific methods for testing oils and 
fats date back only to the end of the 'seventies of the 19th 
century. Before that time it was believed that not only could 
individual oils and fats be distinguished from each other by 
colour reactions, but it was also maintained that falsification 
could be detected thereby. With one or two exceptions (detec- 
tion of sesame oil and perhaps also of cotton-seed oil) all colour 
reactions are entirely useless. The modern methods of oil 
testing rest chiefly on so-called " quantitative " reactions, a 
number of characteristic " values " being determined which, 
being based on the special nature of the fatty acids contained in 
each individual oil or fat, assist in identifying them and also 
in revealing adulteration. These " values," together with other 
useful methods, are enumerated in the order of their utility for 
the purposes of testing. 

The saponification value {saponification number) denotes the 
number of milligrams which one gramme of an oil or fat requires for 
saponification, or, in other words, for the neutralization of the total 1 
fatty acids contained in an oil or fat. We thus measure the alkali 
absorption value of all fatty acids contained in an oil or fat. The 
saponification values of most oils and fats lie in the neighbourhood 
of 195. But the oils belonging to the rape oil group are characterized 
by considerably lower saponification values, viz. about 175 on 
account of their containing notable quantities of erucic acid, CJt\ K 0-.. 
[n the case of those oils which do not belong to the rape oils and yet 
show abnormally low saponification values, the suspicion is raised at 
once that a certain amount of mineral oils (which do not absorb 



■5° 



OILS 



alkali and are therefore termed ■" unsaponifiable ") has been admixed 
fraudulently. Their amount can be determined in a direct manner 
by exhausting the saponified mass, after dilution with water, with 
ether, evaporating the latter and weighing the amount of mineral 
oil left behind. A few of the blubber oils, like dolphin jaw and 
porpoise jaw oils (used for lubricating typewriting machines), have 
exceedingly high saponification values owing to their containing 
volatile fatty acids with a small number of carbon atoms. Notable 
also are coco-nut and palm-nut oils, the saponification numbers of 
which vary from 24.6 to 260, and especially butter-fat, which has a 
saponification value of about 227. These high saponification values 
are due to the presence of (glyecrides of) volatile fatty acids, and are 
of extreme usefulness to the analyst, especially in testing butter-fat 
for added margarine and other fats. These volatile acids are specially 
measured by the Reichert value (Reichert-Wollny value). To ascertain 
this value the volatile acids contained in 5 grammes of an oil or fat 
are distilled in a minutely prescribed manner, and the distilled-off 
acids are measured by titration with decinormal alkali. Whereas 
most of the oils and fats, viz. all those the saponification value of 
which lies at or below 195, contain practically no volatile acids.i.e. 
have extremely low Reichert-Wollny values, all those oils and fats 
having saponification values above 195 contain notable amounts of 
volatile fatty acids. Thus, the Reichert-Meissl value of butter-fat 
is 2 5~~3°. that of coco-nut oil 6-7, and of palm kernel oil about 
5-6. This value is indispensable for judging the purity of a butter. 

One of the most important values in oil testing is the iodine value. 
This indicates the percentage of iodine absorbed by an oil or fat when 
the latter is dissolved in chloroform or carbon tetrachloride, and 
treated with an accurately measured amount of free iodine supplied 
in the form of iodine chloride. By this means a measure is obtained 
of the unsaturated fatty acids contained in an oil or fat. On this 
value a scientific classification of all oils and fats can be based, as is 
shown by the above-given list of oils and fats. The unsaturated 
fatty acids which occur chiefly in oils and fats are oleic acid, iodine 
value 90-07; erucic acid, iodine value 75-15; linolic acid, iodine 
value 181-42; linolenic acid, iodine value 274-1; and clupanodonic 
acid, iodine value 367-7. Oleic acid occurs in all non-drying oils 
and fats, and to some extent in the semi-drying oils and fats. Linolic 
acid is a characteristic constituent of all semi-drying, and to some 
extent of all drying oils. Linolenic acid characterizes all vegetable 
drying oils; similarly clupanodonic acid characterizes all marine 
animal oils. 

If one individual oil or fat is given, the iodine value alone 
furnishes the readiest means of finding its place in the above system, 
and in many cases of identifying it. Even if a mixture of several 
oils and fats be present, the iodine value assists greatly in the 
identification of the components of the mixture, and furnishes the 
most important key for the attacking and resolving of this not very 
simple problem. Thus it points the way to the application of a 
further method to resolve the isolated fatty acids of an oil or fat 
into saturated fatty acids, which do not absorb iodine, and into un- 
saturated fatty acids, which absorb iodine in various proportions as 
shown above. This separation is effected by converting the alkali 
soaps of the fatty acids into lead soaps and treating the latter with 
ether, in which the lead salts of the saturated acids are insoluble, 
whereas the salts of the above-named unsaturated acids are soluble. 
The saturated fatty acids can then be further examined, and valuable 
information is gained by the determination of the melting-points 
and by treatment with solvents. Thus some individual fatty acids, 
such as stearic acid and arachidic acid (which is characteristic of 
ground nut oil) can be identified. In the mixture of unsaturated 
fatty acids, by means of some more refined methods, clupanodonic 
acid, linolenic acid, linolic acid and oleic acid can be recognized. 
By combining the various methods which have been outlined here, 
and by the help of some further additional special methods, and 
by reasoning in a strictly logical manner, it is possible to resolve a 
mixture of two oils and fats, and even of three and four, into their 
components and determine approximately their quantities. The 
methods sketched here do not yet exhaust the armoury of the 
analytical chemist, but it can only be pointed out in passing that the 
detection of hydroxylatcd acids enables the analyst to ascertain the 
presence of castor oil, just as the isolation and determination of 
oxidized fatty acids enables him to differentiate blown oils from 
other oils. 

Tests such as the Maumene test, the elaidin test and others, 
which formerly were the only resource of the chemist, have been 
practically superseded by the foregoing methods. The viscosity 
test, although of considerable importance in the examination of 
lubricating oils, has been shown to have very little discriminative 
value as a general test. 

Commerce. — It may be safely said of the United Kingdom 
that it takes the foremost position in the world as regards the 
extent of the oil and fat industries. An estimate made by the 
writer (Cantor Lectures, " Oils and Fats, their Uses and Applica- 
tions," Society of Arts, 1904, p. 705), and based on the most 
reliable information obtainable, led to the conclusion that the 
sums involved in the oil and fat trade exceeded £1,000,000 per 



week; in 1907 they approximated £1,250,000 per week. The 
great centres of the seed-oil trade (linseed, cotton-seed, rape- 
seed, castor-seed) are Hull, London, Liverpool, Bristol, Leith and 
Glasgow. Linseed is imported principally from the East Indies, 
Argentina, Canada, Russia and the United States; cotton-seed 
is chiefly supplied by Egypt and East India; rape-seed and 
castor-seed chiefly by East India. The importation of copra 
and palm kernels for the production of coco-nut oil and palm- 
nut oil is also considerable, but in these two cases Great Britain 
does not take the first place. Fish and blubber oils are principally 
produced in Dundee, London and Greenock. The manufacture 
of cod-liver oil for pharmaceutical purposes is naturally some- 
what limited, as Norway, Newfoundland, and latterly also 
Japan, are more favourably situated as regards the supply of 
fresh cod, but the technical liver oils (cod oil, shark-liver oil) 
are produced in very large quantities in Grimsby, Hull, Aberdeen, 
and latterly also on the west coasts of the United Kingdom. 
The production of edible fats (margarine, lard compounds, 
and vegetable butters) has taken root in this country, and bids 
fair to extend largely. With regard to edible oils, edible cotton- 
seed oil is the only table oil produced in Great Britain. The 
United Kingdom is also one of the largest importers of fatty 
materials. 

Practically the whole trade in palm oil, which comes 
exclusively from West Africa, is confined to Liverpool, and 
the bulk of the tallow imported into Europe from Australasia, 
South America and the United States, is sold in the marts of 
London and Liverpool. Lard reaches Great Britain chiefly from 
the United States. Amongst the edible oils and fats which are 
largely imported, butter takes the first rank (to an amount of 
almost £25,000,000 per annum). This food-stuff reaches Great 
Britain not only from all butter-exporting countries of the 
continent of Europe, but in increasing quantities also from 
Australia, Canada, Argentine, Siberia and the United States of 
America. Next in importance is margarine, the British produc- 
tion of which does not suffice for the consumption, so that large 
quantities must be imported from Holland, edible olive oil 
from Italy, the south of France, Spain and the Mediterranean 
ports generally. Coco-nut oil and copra, both for edible and 
technical purposes, are largely shipped to Great Britain from 
the East Indies and Ceylon, Java and the West Indies. Of 
lesser importance are greases, which form the by-product of 
the large slaughter-houses in the United States and Argentina, 
and American (Canadian) and Japanese fish oils. 

On the continent of Europe the largest oil-trading centres are 
on the Mediterranean (Marseilles and Triest), which are geo- 
graphically more favourably placed than England for the produc- 
tion of such edible oils (in addition to the home-grown olive oil) 
as arachis oil, sesame oil and coco-nut oil. Moreover, the native 
population itself constitutes a large consumer of these oils. In 
the north of Europe, Hamburg, .Rotterdam, Antwerp and 
Copenhagen are the largest centres of the oil and fat trade. 
Hamburg and its neighbourhood produces, curiously enough, at 
present the largest amount of palm-nut oil. The United St? tes 
takes the foremost place in the world for the production of cotton- 
seed and maize oils, lard, bone fat and fish oils. Canada is 
likely to outstrip the United States in the trade of fish and 
blubber oils, and in the near future Japan bids fair to become 
a very serious competitor in the supply of these oils. Vast 
stores of hard vegetable fats are still practically wasted in 
tropical countries, such as India, Indo-China and the Sunda 
Islands, tropical South America, Africa and China. With the 
improvement in transport these will no doubt reach European 
manufacturing centres in larger quantities than has been the 
case hitherto. 

Waxes 

The waxes consist chiefly of the fatty acid esters of the higher 
monohydric alcohols, with which are frequently associated free 
alcohols as also free fatty acids. In the following two tables 
the " acids " and " alcohols " hitherto identified in waxes are 
enumerated in a classified order: — 



OlbS 



51 



In., J.,, 1 ,,1 <,.'./■ ' ,. 


" rt £'• > 


,t; 






Acids 












Boiling 


Point. 


Melting Point. 
°C. 








mm. 




Characteristic of 






Pressure. 


C. 






I. Acids of the Acetic series C„H2n02 — 












Ficocerylic acid ...... 


C13H20O2 






57 


Gondang wax 


Myristic acid . 








CuUMz 


100 


250-5 


53-8 


Wool wax 


Palmitic acid ., 








C16H32O2 


100 


271-5 


62-62 


Beeswax, spermaceti 


Carnaubic acid 








C2lH4s02 






72-5 


Carnaiiba wax, wool wax 


Pisangcerylic acid . 








C2(H4 8 02 






7i 


Pisang wax 


.Cerotic acid 








C26H62O2 






77-8 


Beeswax, wool wax, insect wax 


, Melissic acid . 








CaoHflo02 






9i 


Beeswax 


Psyllostearylic acid 








C30HM1O2 






94-95 


Psylla wax 


II. Acids of the Acrylic or Oleic series 












CnH2n_2 O2 












Physetoleic acid 


C16H30O2 






3° 


f Sperm oil 


Doeglic acid (?) . ., . . ' . 


C19H30O2 








III. Hydroxylated acids of the series CH2.1O3 — 












Lanopalmic acid 


C16H32O2 






87-88 


Wool wax 




C31I162O3 






92-93 


Cochineal wax 


IV. Dihydroxylated acids of the series CnHinOi — 














C30HG0O4 






104-105 


Wool wax 



r 


Al 


;oiiols 














Boiling 


Point. 


Melting Point. 
°C. 


Characteristic of 




mm. 








Pressure. 


C. 








I. Alcohols of the Ethane series CJ 
Pisangceryl alcohol 
Cetyl alcohol (Ethal) 
Octodecyl alcohol . 
Carnaiibyl alcohol . 
Ceryl alcohol . 
Myricyl (Melissyl) alcohol 
Psyllostearyl alcohol 


l2n+20 

Cl6H 3) 

. . Ci«Hi 6 

ClsH3 S 

. . . C24H50O 

C26H540 
C30H62O 
C33H8SVJ 


760 
15 


344 
210-5 


78 

50 

59 

68-69 

79 
85-88 
68-70 


Pisang wax 

> Spermaceti 

Wool wax 

Chinese wax, opium wax, 
Beeswax, Carnaiiba wax 
Psylla wax 


wool fat 


II. Alcohols of the Allylic scries C„H 
Lanolin alcohol 


2*0— 

. . . C2H240 






102-104 


Wool wax 




III. Alcohols of the series C„Ho„_ 5 0— 
Ficoceryl alcohol 


. . " ' . . C„H S8 






198 


Gondang wax 




IV. Alcohols of the Glycolic series C„ 
Cocceryl alcohol 


■W0 2 — 

. C30H62O, 




t 


101-104 


Cochineal wax 




V. Alcohols of the Cholesterol serie 
1 Cholesterol 
Isocholesterol . 


=; — 

C26H440 
C26H440 






148-4-150-8 
137-138 


[ Wool wax 





Spermaceti consists practically of cetyl palmitate, Chinese wax of 
ceryl palmitate. The other waxes are of more complex composition, 
especially so wool wax. 

The waxes can be classified similarly to the oils and fats as 

follows: — , , • • , 

1 I. Liquid waxes. 

11. Solid waxes. 

A. Vegetable waxes. 

B. Animal waxes. 

The table enumerates the most important waxes: — : 

Waxes 



Name of Wax. 


Source. 


Iodine 
Value. 


Principal Use. 


Arctic sperm oil (Bottlenose oil) 

Vegetable Waxes — 
Carnaiiba wax 

Animal Waxes — 
Wool wax . 

Beeswax .... 
Spermaceti (Cetin) 
Insect wax, Chinese wax . 


Liquid Waxes. 
Physeter macrocephalus 
Ilyperoodon rostratus 

Solid Waxes. 
Corypha cerifera . 

Ovis aries 

Apis mellifica .... 
Physeter macrocephalus 
Coccus ceriferus 


81-90 
67-82 

13 

102 
8-11 

o-4 
0-14 


Lubricant ,, 
Lubricant 

Polishes. Phonograph mass 

Ointment 
Candles, polishes 
Candles, surgery 
Candles, polishes, sizes 



There are only two liquid waxes known, sperm oil and arctic 
sperm oil (bottlenose- whale oil), formerly always classed together 
with the animal oils. In their physical properties the natural 
waxes simulate the fatty oils and fats. They behave similarly 



to solvents; and in their liquid condition leave a grease spot 
on paper. An important property of waxes is that of easily 
forming emulsions with water, so that large quantities of water 
can be incorporated with them (lanolin). 

The liquid waxes occur in the blubber of the sperm whale, 
and in the head cavities of those whales which yield spermaceti; 
this latter is obtained by cooling the crude oil obtained from 
the head cavities. Vegetable waxes appear to be very widely 
distributed throughout the vegetable kingdom, and occur mostly 

as a very thin film covering 
leaves and also fruits. A few 
only are found in sufficiently 
large quantities to be of com- 
mercial importance. So far 
carnaiiba wax is practically 
the only vegetable wax which 
is of importanceinthe world's 
markets. The animal waxes 
arc widely distributed 
amongst the insects, the most 
important being beeswax, 
which is collected in almost 
all parts of the world. An ex- 
ceptional position is occupied 
by wool wax, the main constituent of the natural wool fat which 
covers the hair of sheep, and is obtained as a by-product in scour- 
ing the raw wool. Wool fat is now being purified on a large scale 
and brought into commerce, under the name of lanolin, as an 



52 



OILS 



ointment the beneficent properties of which were known to 
Dioscorides in the beginning of the present era. Its chemical 
composition is exceedingly complex, and specially remarkable 
on account of the considerable proportions of cholesterol and 
isocholesterol it contains. 

Commerce. — The sperm oils are generally sold in the same 
markets as the fish and blubber oils (see above). For beeswax 
London is one of the chief marts of the world. In Yorkshire, 
the centre of the woollen industry, the largest amounts of wool- 
fat are produced, all attempts to recover the hitherto wasted 
material in Argentine and Australia having so far not been 
attended with any marked success. Spermaceti is a compara- 
tively unimportant article of commerce; and of Chinese wax 
small quantities only are imported, as the home consumption 
takes up the bulk of the wax for the manufacture of candles, 
polishes and sizes. 

2. Essential or Ethereal Oils. 

The essential, ethereal, or " volatile " oils constitute a very 
extensive class of bodies, which possess, in a concentrated form, 
the odour characteristic of the plants or vegetable substances 
from which they are obtained. The oils are usually contained 
in special cells, glands, cavities, or canals within the plants 
either as such or intermixed with resinous substances; in the 
latter case the mixtures form oleo-resins, balsams or resins 
according as the product is viscid, or solid and hard. A few 
do not exist ready formed in the plants, but result from chemical 
change of inodorous substances; as for instance, bitter almonds 
and essential oil of mustard. 

The essential oils are for the most part insoluble or only very 
sparingly soluble in water, but in alcohol, ether.'fatty oils and mineral 
oils they dissolve freely. They ignite with great ease, emitting a 
smoke freely, owing to the large proportion of carbon they contain. 
Their chief physical distinction from the fatty oils is that they are 
as a rule not oleaginous to the touch and leave no permanent grease 
spot. They have an aromatic smell and a hot burning taste, and 
can be distilled unchanged. The crude oils are at the ordinary 
temperature mostly liquid, some are solid substances, others, again, 
deposit on standing a crystalline portion (" stearoptene " in 
contradistinction to the liquid portion (" elaeoptene "). The essential 
oils possess a high refractive power, and most of them rotate the 
plane of the polarized light. Even so nearly related oils as the oils 
of turpentine, if obtained from different sources, rotate the plane of 
the polarized light in opposite directions. In specific gravity the 
essential oils range from 0-850 to 1-142; the majority are, however, 
specifically lighter than water. In their chemical constitution the 
essential oils present no relationship to the fats and oils. They 
represent a large number of classes of substances of which the most 
important are: (1) Hydrocarbons, such as pinene in oil of turpentine, 
camphene in citronella oil, limoncne in lemon and orange-peel oils, 
caryophyllene in clove oil and cumene in oil of thyme; (2) ketones, 
such as camphor from the camphor tree, and irone which occurs in 
orris root; (3) phenols, such as eugenol in clove oil, thymol in thyme 
oil, saffrol in sassafras oil, anethol in anise oil; (4) aldehydes, such 
as citral and citronellal, the most important constituents of lemon 
oil and lemon-grass oil, benzaldehyde in the oil of bitter almonds, 
cinnamic aldehyde in cassia oil, vanillin in gum benzoin and helio- 
tropin in the spiraea oil, &c; (5) alcohols and their esters, such as 
geraniol (rhodinol) in rose oil and geranium oil, linalool, occurring 
in bergamot and lavender oils, and as the acetic ester in rose oil, 
tcrpineol in cardamom oil, menthol in peppermint oil, eucalyptol in 
eucalyptus oil and borneol in rosemary oil and Borneo camphor; 
(6) acids and their anhydrides, such as cinnamic acid in Peru balsam 
and coumarin in woodruff; and (7) nitrogenous compounds, such as 
mustard oil, indol in jasmine oil and anthranilic methyl-ester in 
neroli and jasmine oils. 

Preparation from Plants. — Before essential oils could be 
prepared synthetically they were obtained from plants by one 
of the following methods: (1) distillation, (2) expression, 
(3) extraction, (4) enfleurage, (5) maceration. 

The most important of these processes is the first, as it is applicable 
to a large number of substances of the widest range, such as oil of 
peppermint;and camphor. The process is based on the principle that 
whilst the odoriferous substances are insoluble in water, their 
vapour tension is reduced on being treated with steam so that they 
are carried over by a current of steam. The distillation is generally 
performed in a still with an inlet for steam and an outlet to carry 
the vapours laden with essential oils into a condenser, where the 
water and oil vapours are condensed. On standing, the distillate 
separates into two layers, an aqueous and an oily layer, the oil 
floating on or sinking through the water according to its specific 



gravity. The process of expression is applicable to the obtaining of 
essential oils which are contained in the rind or skin of the fruits 
belonging to the citron family, such as orange and lemon oils. The 
oranges, lemons, &c, are peeled, and the peel is pressed against a 
large number of fine needles, the exuding oil being absorbed by 
sponges. It is intended to introduce machinery to replace manual 
labour. The process of extraction with volatile solvents is similar 
to that used in the extraction of oils and fats, but as only the most 
highly purified solvents can be used, this process has not yet gained 
commercial importance. The process of enfleurage is used in those 
cases where the odoriferous substance is present to a very small 
extent, and is so tender and liable to deterioration that it cannot be 
separated by way of distillation. Thus in the case of neroli oil the 
petals of orange blossom are loosely spread on trays covered with 
purified lard or with fine olive oil. The fatty materials then take up 
and fix the essential oil. This process is principally employed for 
preparing pomades and perfumed oils. Less tender plants can be 
treated by the analogous method of maceration, which consists in 
extracting the odoriferous substances by macerating the flowers 
in hot oil or molten fat. The essential oil is then dissolved by the 
fatty substances. The essential oil itself can be recovered from the 
perfumed oils, prepared either by enfleurage or maceration, by 
agitating the perfumed fat in a shaking machine with pure concen- 
trated alcohol. The essential oil passes into the alcoholic solution, 
which is used as such in perfumery. 

Synthetic Preparation. — Since the chemistry of the essential 
oils has been investigated in a systematic fashion a large number 
of the chemical individuals mentioned above have been isolated 
from the oils and identified. 

This first step has led to the synthetical production of the most 
characteristic substances of essential oils in the laboratory, and the 
synthetical manufacture of essential oils bade fair to rival in im- 
portance the production of tar colours from the hydrocarbons 
obtained on distilling coal. One of the earliest triumphs of synthetical 
chemistry in this direction was the production of terpineol, the 
artificial lilac scent, from oil of turpentine. At present it is almost 
a by-product in the manufacture of artificial camphor. This was 
followed by the production of heliotropin, coumarin and vanillin, 
and later on by the artificial preparation of ionone, the most char- 
acteristic constituent of the violet scent. At present the manufacture 
of artificial camphor may be considered a solved problem, although 
it is doubtful whether such camphor will be able to compete in price 
with the natural product in the future. The aim of the chemist to 
produce essential oils on a manufacturing scale is naturally confined 
at present to the more expensive oils. For so long as the great bulk 
of oils is so cheaply produced in nature's laboratory, the natural 
products will hold their field for a long time to come. 

Applications. — Essential oils have an extensive range of uses, 
of which the principal are their various applications in perfumery 
(q.v.). Next to that they play an important part in connexion 
with food. The value of flavouring herbs, condiments and 
spices is due in a large measure to the essential oils contained 
in them. The commercial value of tea, coffee, wine and other 
beverages may be said to depend largely on the delicate aroma 
which they owe to the presence of minute quantities of ethereal 
oils. Hence, essential oils are extensively used for the flavour- 
ing of liqueurs, aerated beverages and other drinks. Nor is their 
employment less considerable in the manufacture of confectionery 
and in the preparation of many dietetic articles. Most fruit 
essences now employed in confectionery are artificially prepared 
oils, especially is this the case with cheap confectionery (jams, 
marmalades, &c.) in which the artificial fruit esters to a large 
extent replace the natural fruity flavour. Thus amyl acetate 
is used as an imitation of the jargonelle-pear flavour; amyl 
valerate replaces apple flavour, and a mixture of ethyl and propyl 
butyrates yields the so-called pine-apple flavour. Formic ether 
gives a peach-like odour, and is used for flavouring fictitious 
rum. Many of the essential oils find extensive use in medicine. 
In the arts, oil of turpentine is used on the largest scale in the 
manufacture of varnishes, and in smaller quantities for the 
production of terpineol and of artificial camphor. Oil of cloves 
is used in the silvering of mirror glasses. Oils of lavender and 
of spike are used as vehicles for painting, more especially for 
the painting of pottery and glass. 

The examination of essential oils is by no means an easy task. 
Eachoil requires almost a special method, but with the progress of 
chemistry the extensive adulteration that used to be practised with 
fatty oils has almost disappeared, as the presence of fatty oils is 
readily detected. Adulteration of expensive oil with cheaper oils is 
now more extensively practised, and such tests as the determination 



OIRON— OISE 



53 



of the saponification value (see above) and of the optical rotation, 
and in special cases the isolation and quantitative determination of 
characteristic substances, leads in very many cases to reliable 
results. The colour, the boiling-point, the specific gravity and 
solubility in alcohol serve as most valuable adjuncts in the examina- 
tion with a view to form an estimate of the genuineness and value 
of a sample. Quite apart from the genuineness of a sample, its special 
aroma constitutes the value of an oil, and in this respect the judging 
of the value of a given oil may, apart from the purity, be more 
readily solved by an experienced perfumer than by the chemist. 
Thus roses of different origin or even of different years will yield rose 
oils of widely different value. The cultivation of plants for essential 
oils has become a large industry, and is especially practised as an 
industry in the south of France (Grasse, Nice, Cannes). The rose 
oil industry, which had been for centuries located in the valleys of 
Bulgaria, has now been taken up in Germany (near Leipzig), where 
roses are specially cultivated for the production of rose oil. India 
and China are also very large producers of essential oils. Owing to 
the climate other countries are less favoured, although lavender and 
peppermint are largely cultivated at Mitcham in Surrey, in Hertford- 
shire and Bedfordshire. Lavender and peppermint oils of English 
origin rank as the best qualities. As an illustration of the extent 
to which this part of the industry suffers from the climate, it may be 
stated that oil from lavender plants grown in England never produces 
more than 7 to 10% linalool acetate, which gives the characteristic 
scent to lavender oil, whilst oil from lavender grown in the south of 
France frequently yields as much as 35 % of the ester. The proof 
that this is due mainly to climatic influences is furnished by the fact 
that Mitcham lavender transplanted to France produces an oil 
which year by year approximates more closely in respect of its 
contents of linalool acetate to the product of the French plant. 

Bibliography. — For the fixed oils, fats and waxes, see C. R. A. 
Wright, Fixed Oils, Fats, Butlers and Waxes (London, 2nd ed. by 
C. A. Mitchell, 1903); W. Brannt, Animal and Vegetable Fats and 
Oils (London, 1896); J. Lewkowitsch, Chemical Technology and 
Analysis of Oils, Fats and Waxes (London, 4th ed., 3 vols., 1909; 
also German ed., Brunswick, 1905; French ed., Paris, vol. i. 1906, 
vol. ii. 1908, vol. iii. 1909); Laboratory Companion to Fats and Oil 
Industries (London, 1902) ; Cantor Lectures of the Society of Arts, 
Oils and Fats, tlteir Uses and Applications; Groves and Thorp, 
Chemical Technology, vol. ii.; A. H. Gill, Oil Analyses (1909); 
G. Hefter, Technologie der Fette und Ole (Berlin, vol. i. 1906; vol. ii. 
1008) ; L. Ubbelohde, Handbuch der Chemie und Technologie der 
Ole und Fette (Leipzig, vol. i., 1908) ; R. Benedikt and F. Ulzer, 
Analyse der Fette und Wachsarlen (Berlin, 1908); J. Fritsch, Les 
Huiles et graisses d'origine animate (Paris, 1907). 

For the essential oils, see F. B. Power, Descriptive Catalogue of 
Essential Oils; J. C. Sawer, Odorographia (London, 1892 and 1894); 
E. Gildemeister and F. Hoffmann, Die aelherischen Ole (Berlin, 
1899), trans. (1900) by E. Kremers under the title Volatile Oils (Mil- 
waukee, Wisconsin) ; F. W. Semmler, Die aelherischen Ole nach 
ihren chemischen Beslandleilen unter Beriicksichtigung der geschicht- 
lichen Entwickelung (Leipzig); M. Otto, L' Industrie des parfums 
(Paris, 1909); O. Aschan, Chemie der alicykhschen Verbindungen 
(Brunswick, 1905); F. R. Heussler (translated by Pond), The 
Chemistry of the Terpenes (London, 1904). (J. Lh.) 

OIRON, a village of western France, in the department of 
Deux-Sevres, 7! m. E. by S. of Thouars by road. Oiron is 
celebrated for its chateau, standing in a park and originally 
built in the first half of the 16th century by the GoufBer family, 
rebuilt in the latter half of the 17th century by Francis of 
Aubusson, duke of La Feuillade, and purchased by Madame 
de Montespan, who there passed the latter part of her life. 
Marshal Villeroy afterwards lived there. The chateau consists 
of a main building with two long projecting wings, one of which 
is a graceful structure of the Renaissance period built over a 
cloister. The adjoining church, begun in 1518, combines the 
Gothic and Renaissance styles and contains the tombs of four 
members of the Gouffier family. These together with other parts 
of the chateau and church were mutilated by the Protestants 
in 1568. The park contains a group of four dolmens. 

For the Oiron pottery see Ceramics. 

OISE, a river of northern France, tributary to the Seine, 
flowing south-west from the Belgian frontier and traversing the 
departments of Aisne, Oise and Seine-et-Oise. Length, 187 m.; 
area of basin 6437 sq. m. Rising in Belgium, 5 m. S.E. of 
Chimay (province of Namur) at a height of 980 ft., the river 
enters France after a course of little more than 9 m. Flowing 
through the district of Thierache, it divides below Guise into 
several arms and proceeds to the confluence of the Serre, near 
La Fere (Aisne). Thence as far as the confluence of the Ailette 
its course lies through well-wooded country to Compiegne, 



a short distance above which it receives the Aisne. Skirting 
the forests of Compiegne, Halatte and Chantilly, all on its left 
bank, and receiving near Creil the Therain and the Breche, 
the river flows past Pontoise and debouches into the Seine 
39 m. below Paris. Its channel is canalized (depth 6 ft. 6 in.) 
from Janville above Compiegne, to its mouth over a section 
60 m. in length. Above Janville a lateral canal continued by 
the Sambre-Oise canal accompanies the river to Landrecies. It 
communicates with the canal system of Flanders and with the 
Somme canal by way of the St Quentin canal (Crozat branch) 
which unites with it at Chauny. The same town is its point of 
junction with the Aisne-Oise canal, by which it is linked with 
the Eastern canal system. 

OISE, a department of northern France, three-fourths of 
which belonged to lle-de-France and the rest to Picardy, bounded 
N. by Somme, E. by Aisne, S. by Seine-et-Marne and Seine-et- 
Oise, and W. by Eure and Seine-lnferieure. Pop. (1906) 
410,049; area 2272 sq. m. The department is a moderately 
elevated plateau with pleasant valleys and fine forests, such 
as those of Compiegne, Ermenonville, Chantilly and Halatte, 
all in the south-east. It belongs almost entirely to the basin of 
the Seine — the Somme and the Bresle, which flow into the 
English Channel, draining but a small area. The most important 
river is the Oise, which flows through a broad and fertile valley 
from north-east to south-west, past the towns of Noyon, Com- 
piegne, Pont St Maxence and Creil. On its right it receives 
the Breche and the Therain, and on its left the Aisne, which 
brings down a larger volume of water than the Oise itself, the 
Authonne, and the Nonette, which irrigates the valley of Senlis 
and Chantilly. The Ourcq, a tributary of the Marne, in the 
south-east, and the Epte, a tributary of the Seine, in the west, 
also in part belong to the department. These streams are 
separated by ranges of slight elevation or by isolated hills, the 
highest point (770 ft.) being in the ridge of Bray, which stretches 
from Dieppe to Precy-sur-Oise. The lowest point is at the 
mouth of the Oise, only 66 ft. above sea-level. The climate 
is very variable, but the range of temperature is moderate. 

Clay for bricks and earthenware, sand and building-stone are 
among the mineral products of Oise, and peat is also worked. 
Pierrefonds, Gouvieux, Chantilly and Fontaine Bonneleau 
have mineral springs. Wheat, oats and other cereals, potatoes 
and sugar beet are the chief agricultural crops. Cattle are 
reared more especially in the western districts, where dairying is 
actively carried on. Bee-keeping is general. Racing stables 
are numerous in the neighbourhood of Chantilly and Compiegne. 
Among the industries of the department of manufacture of 
sugar and alcohol from beetroot occupies a foremost place. 
The manufacture of furniture, brushes (Beauvais) and other 
wooden goods and of toys, fancy-ware, buttons, fans and other 
articles in wood, ivory, bone or mother-of-pearl are widespread 
industries. There are also woollen and cotton mills, and the 
making of woollen fabrics, blankets, carpets (Beauvais), hosiery 
and lace (Chantilly and its vicinity) is actively carried on. 
Creil and the neighbouring Montataire form an important 
metallurgical centre. Oise is served by the Northern railway, 
on which Creil is an important junction, and its commerce is 
facilitated by the Oise and its lateral canal and the Aisne, which 
afford about 70 m. of navigable waterway. 

There are four arrondissements — Beauvais, Clermont, Com- 
piegne and Senlis — with 35 cantons and 701 communes. The 
department forms the diocese of Beauvais (province of Reims) 
and part of the region of the II. army corps and of the academie 
(educational division) of Paris. Its court of appeal is at Amiens. 
The principal places are Beauvais, the capital, Chantilly, Cler- 
mont-en-Beauvoisis, Compiegne, Noyon, Pierrefonds, Creil and 
Senlis, which are treated separately. Among the more populous 
places not mentioned is Meru (5317), a centre for fancy-ware 
manufacture. The department abounds in old churches, among 
which, besides those of Beauvais, Noyon and Senlis, may be 
mentioned those at Morienval (nth and 12th centuries), 
Maignelay (15th and 16th centuries), Crepy-en-Valois (St Thomas, 
12th, 13th and 15th centuries), St Leu d'Esserent (mainly 12th 



54 

century), Tracy-le-Val , (mainly 12th century), Villers St Paul 
(12th and 13th centuries), St Germer-de-Fly (a fine example 
of the transition from Romanesque to Gothic architecture), 
and St Martin-aux-Bois (13th, 14th and 15th centuries). Pont- 
point preserves the buildings of an abbey founded towards 
the end of the 14th century and St Jean-aux-Bois the remains 
of a priory including a church of the 13th century. There 
are Gallo-Roman remains of Champlieu close to the forest of 
Compiegne. At Ermenonville there is a chateau of the 17th 
century where Rousseau died in 1778. 

OJIBWAY (Ojibwa), or Chifpeway (Chippewa), the name 
given by the English to a large tribe of North American Indians 
of Algonquian stock. They must not be confused with the 
Chipewyan , tribe of Athabascan stock settled around Lake 
Athabasca, Canada. They formerly occupied a vast tract of 
country around Lakes Huron and Superior, and now are settled 
on reservations in the neighbourhood. The name is from a 
word meaning " to roast till puckered " or " drawn up," in refer- 
ence, it is suggested, to a peculiar seam in their mocassins, though 
other explanations have been proposed. They call themselves 
Anishinabeg ("spontaneous men"), and the French called 
them Saulteurs ("People of the Falls"), from the first group 
of them being met at Sault Ste Marie. Tribal traditions declare 
they migrated from the St Lawrence region together with 
the Ottawa and Potawatomi, with which tribes they formed 
a confederacy known as " The Three Fires." When first en- 
countered about 1640 the Ojibway were inhabiting the coast 
of Lake Superior, surrounded by the Sioux and Foxes on the 
west and south. During the 18th century they conquered these 
latter and occupied much of their territory. Throughout the 
Colonial wars they were loyal to the French, but fought for the 
English in the War of Independence and the War of 181 2, 
and thereafter permanently maintained peace with the Whites. 
The tribe was divided into ten divisions. They lived chief!)' 
by hunting and fishing. They had many tribal myths, which 
were collected by Henry R. Schoolcraft in his Algic Researches 
(1S39), upon which Longfellow founded his " Hiawatha." 

See Indians, North American, also W. J. Hoffmann, "Midewiwin 
of the Ojibwa," in yth Report of Bureau of American Ethnology (1891) ; 
W. W. Warren, " History of the Ojibways," vol. v., Minnesota 
Historical Society's Collections; G. Copway, History of the Ojibway 
Indians (Boston, 1850); P. Jones, History of the Ojebway Indians 
(i860; A. E. Jenks, " Wild Rice Gatherers," 19th Report of Bureau of 
American Ethnology (1900). 

OKAPI, the native name of an African ruminant mammal 
(Ocapia johnstoni), belonging to the Giraffidac, or giraffe-family, 
but distinguished from giraffes by its shorter limbs and neck, 
the absence of horns in the females, and its very remarkable type 
of colouring. Its affinity with the giraffes is, however, clearly 
revealed by the structure of the skull and teeth, more especially 
the bilobed crown to the incisor-like lower canine teeth. At 
the shoulder the okapi stands about 5 ft. In colour the sides of 
the face are puce, and the neck and most of the body purplish, 
but the buttocks and upper part of both fore and hind limbs are 
transversely barred with black and white, while their lower 
portion is mainly white with black fetlock-rings, and in the front 
pair a vertical black stripe on the anterior surface. Males have 
a pair of dagger-shaped horns on the forehead, the tips of which, 
in some cases at any rate, perforate the hairy skin with which 
the rest of the horns are covered. As in all forest-dwelling 
animals, the ears are large and capacious. The tail is shorter 
than in giraffes, and not tufted at the tip. The okapi, of which 
the first entire skin sent to Europe was received in England 
from Sir H. H. Johnston in the spring of 1901, is a native of the 
Semliki forest, in the district between Lakes Albert and Albert 
Edward. From certain differences in the striping of the legs, as 
well as from variation in skull-characters, the existence of more 
than a single species has been suggested; but further evidence 
is required before such a view can be definitely accepted. 

Specimens in the museum at Tervueren near Brussels show that 
in fully adult males the horns are subtriangular and inclined 
somewhat backwards; each being capped with a small polished 
epiphysis, which projects through the skin investing the rest 
of the horn. As regards its general characters, the skull of the 



OJIBWAY^-OKAPI 



okapi appears to be intermediate between that of the giraffe 
on the one hand and that of the extinct Palaeatragus (or Samo- 
thcrium) of the Lower Pliocene deposits of southern Europe on the 
other. It has, for instance, a greater development of air-cells in 
the diploc than in the latter, but much less than in the former. 
Again, in Palacotragus the horns (present only in the male) 
are situated immediately over the eye-sockets, in Ocapia they are 
placed just behind the latter, while in Girajfa they are partly on 
the parietals. In general form, so far as can be judged from 
the disarticulated skeleton, the okapi was more like an antelope 
than a giraffe, the fore and hind cannon-bones, and consequently 
the entire limbs, being of approximately equal length. From 
this it seems probable that Palaeatragus and Ocapia indicate the 
ancestral type of the giraffe-line; while it has been further 
suggested that the apparently hornless Helladotherium of the 



> 1 / , 




Female Okapi. 

! 

Grecian Pliocene may occupy a somewhat similar position in 
regard to the horned Sivatherium of the Indian Siwaliks. 

For these and other allied extinct genera see Pecora; for a full 
description of the okapi itself the reader should refer to an illustrated 
memoir by Sir E. Ray Lankester in the Transactions of the Zoological 
Society of London (xvi. 6, 1902), entitled " On Okapia, a New 
Genus of Giraffidae from Central Africa." 

Little is known with regard to the habits of the okapi. It 
appears, however, from the observations of Dr J. David, who spent 
some time in the Albert Edward district, that the creature dwells 
in the most dense parts of the primeval forest, where there is an 
undergrowth of solid-leaved, swamp-loving plants, such as 
arum, Donax and Phryniuin, which, with orchids and climbing 
plants, form a thick and confused mass of vegetation. The 
leaves of these plants are blackish-green, and in the gloom of the 
forest, grow more or less horizontally, and are glistening with 
moisture. The effect of the light falling upon- them is to produce 
along the midrib of each a number of short white streaks of 
light, which contrast most strongly with the shadows cast by the 
leaves themselves, and with the general twilight gloom of the 
forest. On the other hand, the thick layer of fallen leaves on 
the ground, and the bulk of the stems of the forest trees are bluish- 
brown and russet, thus closely resembling the decaying leaves in 
an European forest after heavy rain; while the whole effect is 
precisely similar to that produced by the russet head and body 
and the striped thighs and limbs of the okapi. The long and 
mobile muzzle of the okapi appears to be adapted for feeding 



OKEHAMPTON— OKEN 



55 



on the low forest underwood and the swamp-vegetation. The 
small size of the horns of the males is probably also an adaptation 
to life in thick underwood. In Dr David's opinion an okapi in 
its native forest eould not be seen at a distance of more than 
twenty or twenty-five paces. At distances greater than this it 
is impossible to see anything clearly in these equatorial forests, 
and it is very difficult to do so even at this short distance. This 
suggests that the colouring of the okapi is of purely protective 
type. 

By the Arabianized emancipated slaves of the Albert Edward 
district the okapi is known as the kenge,6-a-pi being the Pigmies' 
name for the creature. Dr David adds that Junker may un- 
doubtedly claim to be the discoverer of the okapi, for, as stated 
on p. 299 of the third volume of the original German edition of 
his Travels, he saw in 1878 or 1879 in the Nepo district a portion 
of the skin with the characteristic black and white stripes. 
Junker, by whom it was mistaken for a large water-ehevrotain 
or zebra-antelope, states that to the natives of the Nepo district 
the okapi is known as the makape. (R. L.*) 

OKEHAMPTON, a market town and municipal borough in the 
Tavistock parliamentary division of Devonshire, England, 
on the east and west Okement rivers, 22 m. W. by N. of Exeter 
by the London & South-Western railway. Pop. (1901) 2569. 
The church of All Saints has a fine Perpendicular tower, left 
uninjured when the nave and chancel were burned down in 1842. 
Glass is made from granulite found in the Meldon Valley, 3 m. 
distant. Both branches of the river abound in small trout. 
Okehampton Castle, one of the most picturesque ruins in Devon, 
probably dates from the 15th century, though its keep may be 
late Norman. It was dismantled under Henry VIII., but 
considerable portions remain of the chapel, banqueting hall and 
herald's tower. Immediately opposite are the traces of a sup- 
posed British camp, and of the Roman road from Exeter to 
Cornwall. The custom of tolling the curfew still prevails in 
Okehampton. The town is, governed by a mayor, 4 aldermen 
and 12 councillors. Area, 503 acres. 

Okehampton (Oakmanton) was bestowed by William the 
Conqueror on Baldwin de Brioniis, and became the caput of 
the barony of Okehampton. At the time of the Domesday 
Survey of 1086 it already ranked as a borough, with a castle, 
a market paying 4 shillings, and four burgesses. In the 18th 
century the manor passed by marriage to the Courtenays, 
afterwards carls of Devon, and Robert de Courtenay in 1220 
gave the king a palfrey to hold an annual fair at his manor of 
Okehampton, on the vigil and feast day of St Thomas the 
Apostle. In the reign of Henry III. the inhabitants received a 
charter (undated) from the earl of Devon, confirming their 
rights " in woods and in uplands, in ways and in paths, in 
common of pastures, in waters and in mills. They were to be 
free from all toll and to elect yearly a portreeve and a beadle." 
A further grant of privileges was bestowed in 1292 by the earl 
of Devon, but no charter of incorporation was granted until 
that from James I. in 1623, and the confirmation of this by 
Charles II. in 1684 continued to be the governing charter, the 
corporation consisting of a mayor, seven principal burgesses 
and eight assistant burgesses, until the Municipal Corporations 
Act of 1882. On a petition from the inhabitants the town was 
reincorporated by a new charter in 18S5. Okehampton returned 
two members to parliament in 1300, and again in 131 2 and 
1313, after which there was an intermission till 1640, from 
which date two members were returned regularly until by the 
Reform Act of 1832 the borough was disfranchised. 

See Victoria County History, Devonshire; W. B. Bridges, History of 
Okehampton (1889). 

OKEN, LORENZ (1779-1851), German naturalist, was born at 
Bohlsbach, Swabia, on the 1st of August 1779. His real name 
was Lorenz Ockenfuss, and under that name he was entered at 
the natural history and medical classes in the university of 
Wiirzburg, whence, he proceeded to that of Gottingen, where he 
became a privat-docent, and abridged his name to Oken. As 
Lorenz Oken he published in 1802 his small work entitled Grund- 
riss der Natur philosophic, der Theorie der Sinnc, und der daraitf 



gegrilndeten Classification der Thiere, the first of the. series of 
works which placed him at the head of the " natur-philosophie " 
or physio-philosophical school of Germany. In it he extended 
to physical science the philosophical principles which Kant 
had applied to mental and moral science. Oken had, however, 
in this application been preceded by J. G. Fichte, who, acknow- 
ledging that the materials for a universal science had been 
discovered by Kant, declared that nothing more was needed 
than a systematic co-ordination of these materials; and this 
task Fichte undertook in his famous Doctrine of Science (Wissen- 
sehaftslehre), the aim of which was to construct a priori all 
knowledge. In this attempt, however, Fichte did little more 
than indicate the path; it was reserved for F. \V. J. von Schilling 
fairly to enter upon it, and for Oken, following him, to explore 
its mazes yet further, and to produce a systematic plan of the 
country so surveyed. 

In the Grundriss der Natur philosophic of 1802 Oken sketched 
the outlines of the scheme he afterwards devoted himself to 
perfect. The position which he advanced in that remarkable 
work, and to which he ever after professed adherence, is that 
" the animal classes are virtually nothing else than a representa- 
tion of the sense-organs, and that they must be arranged in 
accordance with them." Agreeably with this idea, Oken con- 
tended that there are only five animal classes: (1) the Der- 
matozoa, or invertebrates; (2) the Glossozoa, or Fishes, as being 
those animals in which a true tongue makes, for the first time, 
its appearance; (3) the Rhinozoa, or Reptiles, wherein the nose 
opens for the first time into the mouth and inhales air; (4) the 
Olozoa, or Birds, in which the ear for the first time opens extern- 
ally; and (5) Ophthalmozoa, or Mammals, in which all the 
organs of sense are present and complete, the eyes being movable 
and covered with two fids. 

In 1805 Oken made another characteristic advance in the 
application of the a priori principle, by a book on generation 
{Die Zcagung), wherein he maintained the proposition that 
" all organic beings originate from and consist of vesicles or cells. 
These vesicles, when singly detached and regarded in their 
original process of production, are the infusorial mass or proto- 
plasma (urschlcim) whence all larger organisms fashion themselves 
or are evolved. Their production is therefore nothing else 
than a regular agglomeration of Infusoria — not, of course, 
of species already elaborated or perfect, but of mucous vesicles 
or points in general, which first form themselves by their union 
or combination into particular species." 

One year after the production of this remarkable treatise, 
Oken advanced another step in the development of his system, 
and in a volume published in 1S06, in which D. G. Kieser (1779- 
1S62) assisted him, entitled Bcitrage zur vcrglcichcndcn Zoologie, 
Anatomie, und Physiologic, he demonstrated that the intestines 
originate from the umbilical vesicle, and that this corresponds 
to the vitellus or yolk-bag. Caspar Friedrich Wolff had previ- 
ously proved this fact in the chick (Thcoria Generationis, 1774), 
but he did not see its application as evidence of a general law. 
Oken showed the importance of the discovery as an illustration 
of his system. In the same work Oken described and recalled 
attention to the corpora Wolffiaua, or " primordial kidneys." 

The reputation of the young privat-docent of Gottingen had 
meanwhile reached the ear of Goethe, and in 1S07 Oken was 
invited to fill the office of professor extraordinarius of the 
medical sciences in the university of Jena. He accepted the 
call, and selected for the subject of his inaugural discourse his 
ideas on the " Signification of the Bones of the Skull," based 
upon a discovery he had made in the previous year. This 
famous lecture was delivered in the presence of Goethe, as privy- 
councillor and rector of the university, and was published in 
the same year, with the title, Ucbcr die Bcdeutung der Schddel- 
knoehen. 

With regard to the origin of the idea, Oken narrates in his 
Isis that, walking one autumn day in 1806 in the Harz forest, 
he stumbled upon the blanched skull of a deer, picked up the 
partially dislocated bones, and contemplated them for a while, 
when the truth flashed across his mind, and he exclaimed, ''It 



56 



OKEN 



is a vertebral column!" At a meeting of the German naturalists 
held at Jena some years afterwards Professor Kieser gave an 
account of Oken's discovery in the presence of the grand-duke, 
which account is printed in the tageblatt, or " proceedings," of 
that meeting. The professor stated that Oken communicated 
to him his discovery when journeying in 1806 to the island of 
Wangeroog. On their return to Gottingen Oken explained his 
ideas by reference to the skull of a turtle in Kieser's collection, 
which he disarticulated for that purpose with his own hands. 
" It is with the greatest pleasure," wrote Kieser, " that I am 
able to show here the same skull, after having it thirty years 
in my collection. The single bones of the skull are marked by 
Oken's own handwriting, which may be so easily known." 

The range of Oken's lectures at Jena was a wide one, and they 
were highly esteemed. They embraced the subjects of natural 
philosophy, general natural history, zoology, comparative 
anatomy, the physiology of man, of animals and of plants. 
The spirit with which he grappled with the vast scope of science is 
characteristically illustrated in his essay Ueber das Universum als 
Fortsctzung des Sinncnsy stems, 1808. In this work he lays it 
down that " organism is none other than a combination of all the 
universe's activities within a single individual body." This 
doctrine led him to the conviction that " world and organism are 
one in kind, and do not stand merely in harmony with each 
other." In the same year he published his Erste Ideen zur 
Theorie des Lichts, &c, in which he advanced the proposition 
that " light could be nothing but a polar tension of the ether, 
evoked by a central body in antagonism with the planets, and 
heat was none other than a motion of this ether " — a sort of 
vague anticipation of the doctrine of the " correlation of physical 
forces." In 1S00 Oken extended his system to the mineral world, 
arranging the ores, not according to the metals, but agreeably 
to their combinations with oxygen, acids and sulphur. In 1810 
he summed up his views on organic and inorganic nature into 
one compendious system. In the first edition of the Lehrbuch 
der Naturphilosophie, which appeared in that and the following 
years, he sought to bring his different doctrines into mutual con- 
nexion, and to " show that the mineral, vegetable and animal 
kingdoms are not to be arranged arbitrarily in accordance with 
single and isolated characters, but to be based upon the cardinal 
organs or anatomical systems, from which a firmly established 
number of classes would necessarily be evolved; that each class, 
moreover, takes its starting-point from below, and consequently 
that all of them pass parallel to each other "; and that, " as in 
chemistry, where the combinations follow a definite numerical 
law, so also in anatomy the organs, in physiology the functions, 
and in natural history the classes, families, and even genera of 
minerals, plants, and animals present a similar arithmetical 
ratio." The Lehrbuch procured for Oken the title of Hofrath, or 
court-councillor, and in 1S12 he was appointed ordinary professor 
of the natural sciences. 

In 1816 he commenced the publication of his well-known 
periodical, entitled Isis, cine encyclopadische Zeitschrift, vorziiglich 
jiir Naturgeschichte, vergleichende Anatomic and Physiologic 
In this journal appeared essays and notices not only on the 
natural sciences but on other subjects of interest; poetry, and 
even comments on the politics of other German states, were 
occasionally admitted. This led to representations and remon- 
strances from the governments criticized or impugned, and the 
court of Weimar called upon Oken either to suppress the Isis or 
resign his professorship. He chose the latter alternative. The 
publication of the Isis at Weimar was prohibited. Oken made 
arrangements for its issue at Rudolstadt, and this continued 
uninterruptedly until the year 1848. 

In 1821 Oken promulgated in his Isis the first idea of the 
annual general meetings of the German naturalists and medical 
practitioners, which happy idea was realized in the following 
year, when the first meeting was held at Leipzig. The British 
Association for the Advancement of Science was at the outset 
avowedly organized after the German or Okenian model. 

In 1828 Oken resumed his original humble duties as privat- 
docent in the newly-established university of Munich, and soon 



afterwards he was appointed ordinary professor in the same 
university. In 1832, on the proposal hy the Bavarian govern- 
ment to transfer him to a professorship in a provincial university 
of the state, he resigned his appointments and left the kingdom. 
He was appointed in 1S33 to the professorship of natural history 
in the then recently-established university of Zurich. There he 
continued to reside, fulfilling his professional duties and pro- 
moting the progress of his favourite sciences, until his death on 
the nth of August 1851. 

All Oken's writings are eminently deductive illustrations of a 
foregone and assumed principle, which, with other philosophers of 
the transcendental school, he deemed equal to the explanation of 
all the mysteries of nature. According to him, the head was a 
repetition of the trunk— a kind of second trunk, with its limbs 
and other appendages; this sum of his observations and comparisons 
— fewjjof which he ever gave in detail — ought always to be borne 
in mind in comparing the share taken by Oken in homological 
anatomy with the progress made by other cultivators of that 
philosophical branch of the science. 

The idea of the analogy between the skull, or parts of the skull, 
and the vertebral column had been previously propounded and 
ventilated in their lectures by J. H. F. Autenreith and K. F. Kiel- 
meyer, and in the writings of J. P. Frank. By Oken it was applied 
chiefly in illustration of the mystical system of Schelling — the " all- 
in-all " and " all-in-every-part." From the earliest to the latest of 
Oken's writings on the subject, " the head is a repetition of the whole 
trunk with all its systems: the brain is the spinal cord; the cranium 
is the vertebral column; the mouth is intestine and abdomen; 
the nose is the lungs and thorax; the jaws are the limbs; and the 
teeth the claws or nails." J. B. von Spix, in his folio Cephalogenesis 
(1818), richly illustrated comparative craniology, but presented the 
facts under the same transcendental guise; and Cuvier ably availed 
himself of the extravagances of these disciples of Schelling to cast 
ridicule on the whole inquiry into those higher relations of parts to 
the archetype which Sir Richard Owen called " general homologies." 

The vertebral theory of the skull had practically disappeared 
from anatomical science when the labours of Cuvier drew to their 
close. In Owen's Archetype and Homologies of the Vertebrate Skeleton 
the idea was not only revived but worked out for the first time 
inductively, and the theory rightly stated, as follows: "The head 
is not a virtual equivalent of the trunk, but is only a portion, i.e. 
certain modified segments, of the whole body. The jaws are the 
' haemal arches ' of the first two segments; they are not limbs of 
the head " (p. 176). 

Vaguely and strangely, however, as Oken had blended the idea 
with his a priori conception of the nature of the head, the chance 
of •appropriating it seems to have overcome the moral sense of 
Goethe — unless indeed the poet deceived himself. Comparative 
osteology had early attracted Goethe's attention. In 1786 he 
published at Jena his essay Ueber den Zivischenkieferhiochen des 
Menschen itnd der Thiere, showing that the intermaxillary bone 
existed in man as well as in brutes. But not a word in this essay 
gives the remotest hint of his having then possessed the idea of the 
vertebral analogies of the skull. In 1820, in his Morphologie, he 
first publicly stated that thirty years before the date of that publi- 
cation he had discovered the secret relationship between the verte- 
brae and the bones of the head, and that he had always continued 
to meditate on this subject. The circumstances under which the 
poet, in 1820, narrates having become inspired with the original 
idea are suspiciously analogous to those described by Oken in 1807, 
as producing the same effect on his mind. A bleached skull is 
accidentally discovered in both instances: in Oken's it was that of 
a deer in the Harz forest; in Goethe's it was that of a sheep picked 
up on the shores of the Lido, at Venice. 

It may be assumed that Oken when a privat-docent at Gottingen 
in 1806 knew nothing of this unpublished idea or discovery of 
Goethe, and that Goethe first became aware that Oken had the idea 
of the vertebral relations of the skull when he listened to the intro- 
ductory discourse in which the young professor, invited by the 
poet to Jena, selected this very idea for its subject. It is incredible 
that Oken, had he adopted the idea from Goethe, or been aware of 
an anticipation by him, should have omitted to acknowledge the 
source — should not rather have eagerly embraced so appropriate 
an opportunity of doing graceful homage to the originality and 
genius of his patron. 

The anatomist having lectured for an hour plainly unconscious 
of any such anticipation, it seems hardly less incredible that the 
poet should not have mentioned to the young lecturer his previous 
conception of the vertebro-cranial theory, and the singular coinci- 
dence of the"accidental circumstance which he subsequently alleged 
to have produced that discovery. On the contrary, Goethe permits 
Oken to publish his famous lecture, with the same unconsciousness 
of any anticipation as when he delivered it; and Oken, in the same 
state of belief, transmits a copy to Goethe {Isis, No. 7) who thereupon 
honours the professor with special marks of attention and an invita- 
tion to his house. No hint of any claim of the host is given to the 
guest; no word of reclamation in any shape appears for some 



OKHOTSK— OKLAHOMA 



SI 



years. In Goethe's Tages- und Jahres-IIefte, he refers to two friends, 
Reimer and Voigt, as being cognizant in 1807 of his theory. Why 
did not one or other of these make known to Oken that he had 
been so anticipated? " I told my friends to keep quiet," writes 
Goethe in 1825! Spix, in the meanwhile, in 1815, contributes 
his share to the development of Oken's idea in his Cephalogenesis. 
Ulrich follows in 1816 with his Schildkrotenschadel; next appears 
the contribution, in 1818, by L. H. Bojanus, to the vertebral theory 
of the skull, amplified in the Paragon to that anatomist's admirable 
Anatome Testudinis Europaeae (1821). And now for the first time, 
in 1818, Bojanus, visiting some friends at Weimar, there hears the 
rumour that his friend Oken had been anticipated by the great 
poet. He communicates it to Oken, who, like an honest man, at 
once published the statement made by Goethe's friends in the Isis 
of that year, offering no reflection on the poet, but restricting himself 
to a detailed and interesting account of the circumstances under 
which he himself had been led independently to make his discovery 
when wandering in 1806 through the Harz. It was enough for him 
thus to vindicate his own claims; he abstains from any comment 
reflecting on Goethe, and maintained the same blameless silence 
when Goethe ventured for the first time to claim for himself, in 1820, 
the merit of having entertained the same idea, or made the discovery, 
thirty years previously. 

The German naturalists held their annual meeting at Jena in 
1836, and there Kieser publicly bore testimony, from personal 
knowledge, to the circumstances and dates of Oken's discovery. 
However, in the edition of Hegel's works by Michelet (Berlin, 1842), 
there appeared the following paragraph: "The type-bone is the 
dorsal vertebra, provided inwards with a hole and outwards with 
processes, every bone being only a modification of it. This idea 
originated with Goethe, who worked it out in a treatise written in 
1785, and published it in his Morphologie (1820), p. 162. Oken, to 
whom the treatise was communicated, has pretended that the idea was 
his own property, and has reaped the honour of it." This accusation 
again called out Oken, who thoroughly refuted it in an able, circum- 
stantial and temperate statement in part vii. of the Isis (1847). 
Goethe's osteological essay of 1785, the only one he printed in that 
century, is on a different subject. In the Morphologie of 1820-1824 
Goethe distinctly declares that he had never published his ideas on 
the vertebral theory of the skull. He could not, therefore, have sent 
any such essay to Oken before the year 1807. Oken, in reference to 
his previous endurance of Goethe's pretensions, states that, " being 
well aware that his fellow-labourers in natural science thoroughly 
appreciated the true state of the case, he confided in quiet silence 
in their judgment. Meckel, Spix, Ulrich, Bojanus, Carus, Cuvier, 
GeofFroy St Hilaire, Albers, Straus-Durckheim, Owen, Kieser and 
Lichtenstein had recorded their judgment in his favour and against 
Goethe. But upon the appearance of the new assault in Michelet 's 
edition of Hegel he could no longer remain silent." 

Oken's bold axiom that heat is but a mode of motion of light, 
and the idea broached in his essay on generation (1805) that " all 
the parts of higher animals are made up of an aggregate of Infusoria 
or animated globular monads," are both of the same order as his 
proposition of the head being a repetition of the trunk, with its 
vertebrae and limbs. Science would have profited no more from 
the one idea without the subsequent experimental discoveries of 
H. C. Oersted and M. Faraday, or from the other without the micro- 
scopical observations of Robert Brown, J. M. Schleiden and T. 
Schwann, than from the third notion without the inductive demon- 
stration of the segmental constitution of the skull by Owen. It is 
questionable, indeed, whether in either case the discoverers of the 
true theories were excited to their labours, or in any way influenced, 
by the a priori guesses of Oken ; more probable is it that the requisite 
researches and genuine deductions therefrom were the results of the 
correlated fitness of the stage of the science and the gifts of its true 
cultivators at such particular stage. 

The following is a list of Oken's principal works: Grundriss der 
Nalurphilosophie, der Theorie der Sinne, und der darauf gegriindeten 
Classification der Thiere (1802); Die Zeugung (1805); Abriss der 
Biologie (1805); Beitrage zur vergleichenden-Zoologie, Anatomie und 
Physiologie (along with Kieser, 1806-1807); Ueber die Bedeutung 
der Schddelknochen (1807); Ueber das Universum als Fortsetzungdes 
Sinnensystems (1808) ; Erste Ideen zur Theorie des Lichts, der Finster- 
niss, der Farben und der Warme (1808); Grundzeichnung des natiir- 
lichen Systems der Erze (1809); Ueber den Werth der Naturgeschichte 
(1809); Lehrbuch der Nalurphilosophie (1809-1811; 2nd ed., 1831; 
3rd ed., 1843; Eng. trans., Elements of Physiophilosophy, 1847); 
Lehrbuch der Naturgeschichte (1813, 1815, 1825); Handbuch der 
Naturgeschichte zum Gebrauch bei Vorlesungen (1816-1820) ; Natur- 
geschichte fur Schulen (1821); Esquissed'un Systeme d' Anatomie, de 
Physiologie, el d'Histoire Naturelle (1812); Allgemeine Naturgeschichte 
(1833-1842, 14 vols.). He also contributed a large number of papers 
to the Isis and other journals. (R. 0.) 

OKHOTSK, SEA OF, a part of the western Pacific Ocean, lying 
between the peninsula of Kamchatka, the Kurile Islands, the 
Japanese island of Yezo, the island of Sakhalin, and the Amur 
province of East Siberia. The Sakhalin Gulf and Gulf of 
Tartary connect it with the Japanese Sea on the west of 



the island of Sakhalin, and on the south of this island is the La 
Perouse Strait. 

OKI, a group of islands belonging to Japan, lying due north 
of the province of Izumo, at the intersection of 36 N. and 133 E. 
The group consists of one large island called Dogo, and three 
smaller isles — Chiburi-shima, Nishi-no-shima, and Naka-no- 
shima — which are collectively known as Dozen. These four 
islands have a coast-line of 182 m., an area of 130 sq. m., and a 
population of 63,000. The island of Dogo has two high peaks, 
Daimanji-mine (2185 ft.) and Omine-yama (2128 ft.). The chief 
town is Saigo in Dogo, distant about 40 m. from the port of Sakai 
in Izumo. The name Oki-no-shima signifies " islands in the 
offing," and the place is celebrated in Japanese history not only 
because the possession of the islands was much disputed in 
feudal days, but also because an ex-emperor and an emperor were 
banished thither by the Hojo regents in the 13th century. 

OKLAHOMA (a Choctaw Indian word meaning " red people "), 
a south central state of the United States of America lying 
between 33 35' and 37 N. lat. and 94 29' and 103 W. long. 
It is bounded N. by Colorado and Kansas; E. by Missouri and 
Arkansas; S. by Texas, from which it is separated in part by the 
Red river; and W. by Texas and New Mexico. It has a total 
area of 70,057 sq. m., of which 643 sq. m. are water-surface. 
Although the extreme western limit of the state is the 103rd 
meridian, the only portion W. of the 100th meridian is a strip of 
land about 35 m. wide in the present Beaver, Texas and Cimarron 
counties, and formerly designated as " No Man's Land." 

Physiography. — The topographical features of the state exhibit 
considerable diversity, ranging from wide treeless plains in the 
W. to rugged and heavily wooded mountains in the E. In general 
terms, however, the surface may be described as a vast rolling 
plain having a gentle southern and eastern slope. The elevations 
above the sea range from 4700 ft. in the extreme N.W. toabout 
350 ft. in the S.E. The southern and eastern slopes are remark- 
ably uniform; between the northern and southern boundaries 
E. of the 100th meridian there is a general difference in elevation 
of from 200 to 300 ft., while from W. to E. there is an average 
decline of about 3 ft. to the mile. The state has a mean elevation 
of 7300 ft. with 34,930 sq. m. below 1000 ft; 25,400 sq. m. 
between 1000 and 2000 ft.; 6500 sq. m. between 2000 and 
3000 ft.; and 3600 sq. m. between 3000 and 5000 ft. 

The western portion of the Ozark Mountains enters Oklahoma 
near the centre of the eastern boundary, and extends W.S.W. half 
way across the state in a chain of hills gradually decreasing in height. 
In the south central part of the state is an elevated tableland known 
as the Arbuckle Mountains. In its western portion this tableland 
attains an elevation of about 1350 ft. above the sea and lies about 
400 ft. above the bordering plains. At its eastern termination, 
where it merges with the plains, it has an elevation of about 750 ft. 
Sixty miles N.W. of this plateau lie the Wichita Mountains, a 
straggling range of rugged peaks rising abruptly from a level plain. 
This range extends from Fort Sill north-westward beyond Granite, a 
distance of 65 m., with some breaks in the second half of this area. 
The highest peaks are not more than 1500 ft. above the plain, but on 
account of their steep and rugged slopes they are difficult to ascend. 
A third group of hills, the Chautauqua Mountains, lie in the W. in 
Blaine and Canadian counties, their main axis being almost parallel 
with the North Fork of the Canadian river. With the exception of 
these isolated clusters of hills the western portion of the state con- 
sists almost entirely of rolling prairie. The extreme north-western 
part of Oklahoma is a lofty tableland forming part of the Great 
Plains region E. of the Rocky Mountains. 

The prairies N. of the Arkansas and W. of the Neosho rivers are 
deeply carved by small streams, and in the western portion of this 
area, where the formation consists of alternating shales and sand- 
stones, the easily eroded rocks have been carved into canyons, buttes 
and mesas. South of the Arkansas river these ledges of sandstone 
continue as far as Okmulgee, but the evidences of erosion are less 
noticeable. East of the Neosho river the prairies merge into a hilly 
woodland. In the N.W. four large salt plains form a striking 
physical feature. Of these the most noted is the Big Salt Plain of 
the Cimarron river, in Woodward county, which varies in width 
from i m. to 2 m. and extends along the river for 8 m. The plain 
is almost perfectly level, covered with snowy-white saline crystals, 
and contains many salt springs. The other saline areas are the 
Little Salt Plain, which lies on the Cimarron river, near the Kansas 
boundary; the Salt Creek Plain, 3 m. long and 100 yds. wide, in 
Blaine county; and the Salt Fork Plain, 6 m. wide and 8 m. long, 
so called from its position on the Salt Fork of the Arkansas river. 



58 



OKLAHOMA 



;o 



Following the slope of the land, the important streams flow from 
N.W. to S.E. The Arkansas river enters the state from the N. near 
the 97th meridian, and after following a general south-easterly 
course, leaves it near the centre of the eastern boundary. Its tribu- 
taries from the N. and E. — the Verdigris, Grand or Neosho and 
Illinois — are small and unimportant; but from the S. and W. it 
receives the waters of much larger streams — the Salt Fork, the 
Cimarron and the Canadian, with its numerous tributaries. The 
extreme southern portion of the state is drained by the Red River, 
which forms the greater part of the southern boundary, and by its 
tributaries, the North Fork, the Washita and the Kiamichi. 

Fauna and Flora. — Of wild animals the most characteristic are 
the black bear, puma, prairie wolf, timber wolf, fox, deer, 
antelope, squirrel, rabbit and prairie dog. Hawks and turkey 
buzzards are common types of the larger birds, and the wild turkey, 
prairie chicken and quail are the principal game birds. The total 
woodland area of the state was estimated in 1900 at 24,400 sq. m., 
or 34-8 % of the land area. The most densely wooded section is the 
extreme E.; among the prairies of the YV. timber is seldom found 
beyond the banks of streams. The most common trees are the 
various species of the oak and cedar. The pine is confined to the 
more mountainous sections of the E., and the black walnut is found 
among the river bottom lands.. These four varieties are of commercial 
value. Other varieties, most of which are widely distributed, are 
the ash, pecan, cottonwood, sycamore, elm, maple, hickory, elder, 
gum, locust and river birch. The prairies are covered with valuable 
bunch, grama and dropseed grasses; in ,the extreme -N.YV._ the 
cactus, sagebrush and yucca, types characteristic of more arid regions, 
are found. 

1 Climate. — The climate of the state is of a continentaltype, with 
great annual variations of temperature and a rainfall which, though 
generally sufficient for the needs of vegetation, is considerably less 
than that of the Atlantic Coast or the Mississippi Valley. The 
western and central portions of the state are in general cooler and 
dryer than the E., onaccount of their greater elevation and greater 
distance from the Gulf Coast. Thus at Beaver, in the extreme N.W., 
the mean annual temperature is 57 F. and the mean annual rainfall 
18-9 in.; while at Lehigh, in the S.E., these figures are respectively 
62 and 35-1 .in. At Oklahoma City, in the centre of the state, the 
mean annual temperature is 59 ; the mean for the summer (June, 
July and August) is 78°, with an extreme recorded of 104 ; the 
mean for the winter (December, January and February) is 38 °, 
with an extreme recorded of -I7°. At Mangum, in the S.W., the 
mean annual temperature is 61 ; the mean for the summer is 8i° 
and for the winter 41 °, while the highest and lowest temperatures 
ever recorded are respectively 114 and -1?°- The mean annual 
precipitation (or the state is 317 in.; the variation between the E. 
and the W. being about 12 in. 

Soils. — The prevailing type of soil is a deep dark-red loam, some- 
times (especially in the east central part of the state) made up of a 
decomposed sandstone, and again (in the north central part) made 
up of shales and decomposed limestone. Not infrequently there are 
a belt of red sandy loam on uplands N. of a river, a rich deposit of 
black alluvium on valley bottom lands, a belt of red clay loam on 
uplands S. of a river, and a deposit of wind-blown loess on the water 
parting. Loess, often thin and always containing^ little humus, 
also covers large areas on the high, semi-arid plains in the western 
part of the state. 

Agriculture and Stock-raising. — For some time before the first 
opening to settlement by white men in 1899, the territory now em- 
braced in Oklahoma was largely occupied by great herds of cattle 
driven in from Texas, and since then, although the opening was 
piecemeal, the agricultural development has been remarkably rapid. 
By 1900, 22,988,339 acres, or 52-1 %, of the total land surface was 
included in farms, and 8,574,187 acres, or 37-7 %, of the farm land 
was improved. 1 The farm land was divided among 108,000 farms 
containing an average of 212-85 acres; 26,121 of them contained 
less than 50 acres, but the most usual size was 160 acres; and 
48,983, or 45-35 %, contained from 100 to 174 acres. _ A considerable 
portion of the larger farms (there were 2390 containing 500 acres or 
more) were owned by Indians but leased to white men. Much land 
as late as 1900 was held in common by Indian tribes, but has since 
been allotted to the members of those tribes and most of it is leased to 
whites. In 1900, 59,367 (or a little more than one-half of all) farms 
were worked by owners or part owners, 33,347 were workedby share 
tenants, and 13,903 were worked by cash tenants. Indian corn, 
wheat, cotton, oats and hay are the principal crops, but the variety 
of farm and garden produce is great, and includes Kafir corn, broom 
corn, barley, rye, buckwheat, flax, tobacco, beans, castor beans, 
peanuts, pecans, sorghum cane, sugar cane, and nearly allthe fruits 
and vegetables common to the temperate zone; stock-raising, too, 
is a very important industry. Of the total acreage of all crops in 
1900, 4,431,819 acres, or 68-64 %■ were of cereals; and of the cereal 
acreage 56-45 % was of fndian corn, 34-45 % was of wheat and 
7-15 % was of oats. The acreage of Indian corn increased from 

1 The statistics in .this article were obtained by adding to those 
for Oklahoma those lor Indian Territory, which was combined with 
it in 1907. ( , 



2,501,945 acres in 1900 to 5,950,000 acres in 1909; 2 between 1899 
and 1909 the yield increased from 68,949,300 bushels to 101,150,006 
bushels. The acreage of wheat decreased during this period from 
1,704,909 acres to 1,225,000 acres, and the yield from 20,328,300 
bushels to 15,680,000 bushels. The acreage of oats increased from 
317,076 acres to 550,000 acres, and the yield increased Irom 
9,511,340 bushels to 15,950,000 bushels. The hay crop of 1899 was 
grown on 1,095,706 acres and amounted to 1,617,905 tons, but 
nearly one-half of this was made from wild grasses; since then the 
amounts of fodder obtained from alfalfa, Kafir corn, sorghum cane 
and timothy have much increased, and that obtained from wild 
grasses has decreased; in 1909 the acreage was 900,000 and the 
crop 810,000 tons. Except in theW. section, where there is good 
grazing but generally an insufficient rainfall for growing crops, 
cattle-raising on the range has in considerable measure given way to 
stock-raising on the farm, and nearly everywhere the quality of the 
cattle has been greatly improved. The total number of cattle 
decreased from 3,236,008 in 1900 to 1,992,000 in 1910, but at the same 
time the number of dairy cows increased from 276,539 to 355,000. 
The number of horses increased from 557,153 in 1900 to 804,000 in 
1910; of mules from 117,562 to 191,000 ; of swine from 1,265,189 
to 1,302,000; and of sheep from 88,741 to 108,000. Winter wheat is 
used extensively for pasturage during the winter months with little 
or no damage to the crop. No other branch of agriculture in Okla- 
homa has advanced so rapidly as the production of cotton; the 
culture of this fibre was introduced in 1890, and the acreage increased 
from 682,743 acres in 1899 t0 2,037,000 acres in 1909, and the yield 
increased from 227,741 bales to 617,000 bales (in 1907 it was 862,383 
bales). There was only a very small crop of broom corn in 1889, but 
In 1899 the crop was 3,565,510 lb. The state has risen to high rank 
in the production of sorghum cane and castor beans also; in 1899 
16,477 acres of the cane yielded 40,259 tons, and 14,070 acres of 
castor beans yielded 77,409 bushels. Two crops of potatoes may be 
grown on the same ground in one year, and the acreage of potatoes 
increased from 15,360 acres in 1899 to 27,000 acres in 1909, and the 
yield from 1,191,997 bushels to 1,890,000 bushels. Oklahoma is 
already producing large crops of apples, peaches, grapes, water-melons 
and musk-melons, and many large apple and peach orchards and 
vineyards have been planted. Pears, plums, apricots, cherries; 
strawberries, blackberries, raspberries, currants, gooseberries, 
cabbages, onions, sweet potatoes, tomatoes and cucumbers are 
grown in considerable quantities. The cereals and most of the 
fruits and vegetables are grown throughout the greater portion of 
the middle and E. parts of the state, although the soil of the N-. 
middle section yields the best crops of wheat. Kafir corn and sorghum 
cane are the most common in the W. sections, where the climate is 
too dry for other crops. Some cotton is grown N. of the middle of 
the state, but the S.E. quarter takes in most of the cotton belt. 
Broom corn grows best in Woods county on the N. border, and 
castor beans in the central and N. central sections. About 3000 
acres (nearly one-half in the narrow extension in the N.W.) were 
already irrigated in 1909, and surveys had been made by the Federal 
Reclamation Service with a view to irrigating about 100,000 acres 
more — 10,000 to 14,000 acres in Beaver and Woodward counties, 
under the Cimarron project, and 80,000 to 100,000 acres in Kiowa 
and Comanche counties, under the Red River project. 

Lumber and Timber Products. — The merchantable timber is mostly 
in that part of the state which formerly constituted Indian Territory, 
and consists largely of black walnut and other valuable hard woods 
in the bottom lands, of black jack and post oak on the uplands 
and of pine on the higher elevations S. of the Arkansas river. The 
manufactured forest products of Indian Territory increased in value 
from §189,373 in 1900 to $588,078 in 1905, or 205-78 %. 

Minerals. — The coal-fields extend from Kansas on the N. to 
Arkansas on the E., and have an area of about 20,000 sq. m. The 
principal mining centres are McAIester, Wilburton, Hartshorn, 
Coalgate and Phillips. In quality the coal varies from a low grade 
to a high grade bituminous, and some of the latter is good for coking. 
The output increased from 446,429 short tons in 1885 to 1,922,298 
short tons in 1900, and to 2,948,116 short tons in 1908, the output 
lor the last-named year being much less than for 1906 or 1907, 
when it was over 3,500,000 tons. The range of hills extending 
from the centre of the state N.W. to and beyond the Kansas border 
are composed chiefly of great deposits of rock gypsum. A similar 
but minor range extends parallel with it 40 to 50 m. S.W. There are 
also deposits in Greer county in the S.W. corner, and some gypsite 
in Kay county on the N. middle border. For working these extensive 
deposits there are, however, few mills; these are in Kay, Canadian 
and Blaine counties. Some petroleum was discovered in the N. part 
of Indian Territory near the Oklahoma border as early as 1890, 
but there was little development until 1903, when several wells 
were drilled in the vicinity of Bartlesville. Then wells were drilled 
to the W. on the Osage Reservation, and to the S., until in 1906 
about no wells were drilled into the famous Glen Pool near Sapulpa. 
One of these wells has a flow of about 1000 barrels a day, and the 
total product from the Oklahoma oil-field (which includes wells in 

2 The agricultural statistics for 1909 are taken from the Year-Book 
of the United States Department of Agriculture. 




X3W^M3N/ — 



OKLAHOMA 



'59 



what was Indian Territory) increased from 10,000 barrels in 1901 
to 138,911 in 1903, 1,366,748 in 1904 and 45,798,765 in 1908, when 
it was valued at $17,694,843. Natural gas abounds in the same 
region, and several strong wells were developed in 1906, and immedi- 
ately afterwards gas began to be used largely for industrial purposes 
for which in 1908 the price was from l§ to 15 cents per 1000ft. Pipe 
lines have been constructed. The value of the output increased 
from $360 in 1902 to $130,137 in 1905 andto $860,159 in 1908. 
In the central rjart of the state S. of the Canadian river are extensive 
deposits of asphaltum, but their development has been undertaken 
onlyon a small scale: 1 in 1908, 2402 short tons were put on the 
market, the'value being $23,820. Lead and zinc are found in the 
Miami district, the Peoria district and the Quapaw district; and in 
1908 the'lead (1409' tons) was valued at $118,356 and the zinc (2235 
tons) at $210,090'. The total value of the mineral products in 1908 
was $26,586,751. ' 

■ Manufactures. — The manufactures in 1905 were still largely such 
as are closely related to agriculture. Measured by the value of the 
products, 61 -8% were represented by flour and grist_ mill products 
and cottonseed oil and cake. Among the manufacturing centres are 
Oklahoma City and Guthrie, and the combined value of their factory 
products increased from $1,493,998 in 1900 to $4,871,392 in 1905. 

Transportation and Commerce. — The navigable waters in Oklahoma 
are of little importance, and the state is almost wholly dependent 
on railways as a means of transportation. The first railway was that 
of the Missouri, Kansas & Texas, which completed a line across the 
territory to Denison, Texas, in 1872. The railway mileage was slowly 
increased to 1260 m. in 1890, and on the 1st of January 1909 was 
5829 m. The Missouri, Kansas & Texas railway crosses the E. part 
of the state, and somewhat parallel with this to the westward are 
the St Louis & San Francisco, the Atchison, Topeka & Santa F6, 
two lines' of the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific, and the Kansas 
City, Mexico & Orient railways. The Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific 
also crosses the middle of the state from E. to W. The Atchison, 
Topeka & Santa F6 and the Chicago, Rock Island & Gulf cross the 
N.W. part. The St Louis & San Fiancisco crosses the S.E. quarter. 
A line of the Frisco system extends along the S. border from the 
Arkansas' line to the middle of the state, and with these main lines 
numerous branches form an extensive network. 

'''^Population. — The population of the territory now embraced 
within the state increased from 258,657 in 1890, wben the first 
census was taken, to 790,391 in 1900, or 205-6%, to 1,414,177 
in 1907, and to 1,657,155 in 1910. Of the- total population 
in 1900, 769,853, or 97-4%, were native-born. The white popula- 
tion increased from 172,554 in 1890 to 1,054,376 in 1907, or 
611%, the negro population during the same period from 21,609 
to 112,160, or 419%, and the Indian population from 64,456 
to 75,012, or 16-3 %.' In 1890 the Indians and negroes constituted 
33 - 3% of the total population, but in 1907 they (with the 
Mongolians, who numbered 75) constituted only 13-2% of the 
total. ■ The only Indians who are natives of this region are a 
few members of the Kiowa, Comanche and Apache tribes. 
The others are the remnants of a number of tribes collected here 
from various parts of the country; Choctaws, Chickasaws, 
Cherokees, Creeks, Scminoles, Osages, Kaws, Poncas, Otoes, 
Cheyennes, Iowas, Kickapoos, Sauk and Foxes, Sioux, Miamis, 
Shawnees, Pawnees, Ottawas and several others. Until 1906 
the Osages lived on a reservation touching Kansas on the N. and 
the' Arkansas river on the W. (since then almost all allotted); 
but to the greater portion of the Indians the government has 
made individual allotments. Only about one-fourth of the so- 
called Indians are full bloods. A large portion are one-half or 
more white blood and the Creeks and some others have more or 
less negro blood. In 1906 there were 257,100 communicants 
of various churches in Oklahoma and Indian Territory, the 
Methodist Episcopalians being the most numerous, and next 
to them the Baptists. The population in places having 4000 
inhabitants or more increased from 29,978 in 1900 to 140,579 
in 1907, or 368-9%, while the population outside of such places 
increased from 760,413 to 1,273,598, or only 67-5%. The 
principal cities in 1907 were Oklahoma City, Muskogee, Guthrie 
(the capital), Shawnee, Enid, Ardmore, McAlester and Chickasha. 
Administration. — The constitution' now in operation was 
adopted in 'September 1907, and is that with which the state 
was admitted into the Union in November of the same year. 
Amendments may be submitted through a majority of the 
members elected to both houses of the legislature or through a 
petition 'signed by 15% of the electorate, and a proposed 
amendment becomes a part' of the constitution if the 'majority 



of the votes dast'at a popular election aire in favour of it. The 
legislature, may also at any time propose a convention for 
amending or revising the constitution, but no such convention 
can be called without first obtaining the approval of the elector- 
ate. An elector must be" able to read or write (unless he or an 
ancestor was a voter in 1866 or then lived in some foreign 
nation) and must be 21 years old, and a resident of the state 
for one year, in the county six months, and in the election 
precinct 30 days, and women have the privilege of voting at 
school meetings. General elections are held on the first Tuesday 
after the first Monday in November in odd-numbered years and 
party candidates for state, district, county and municipal 
offices and for the United States Senate are chosen at primary 
elections held on the first Tuesday in August. The Massa- 
chusetts ballot which had been in use in 1897-1899 was again 
adopted in 1909. Oklahoma has put into its constitution many 
things which in the older states were left to legislative enactment. 

The governor is elected for a term of four years but is in- 
eligible for the next succeeding term. The number of officers 
whom he appoints is rather limited and for most of his appoint- 
ments the confirmation of the Senate is required. He is not 
permitted to pardon a criminal until he has obtained the advice 
of the board of pardons which is composed of the state super- 
intendent of public instruction, the president' of the board of 
agriculture and the state auditor. He is a member of some 
important administrative boards, his veto power extends to 
items in appropriation bills, and to pass a bill over his veto a 
vote of two-thirds of the members elected to each house is re- 
quired. A lieutenant-governor, secretary of state, treasurer, 
auditor, examiner, and inspector, commissioner of labour, com- 
missioner of insurance, chief mine inspector, commissioner of 
charities and corrections, and president of the board of agri- 
culture are elected each for a term of four years, and the 
secretary of state, auditor and treasurer are, like the governor, 
ineligible for the next succeeding term. 

The law-making bodies are a Senate and a House of Repre- 
sentatives. One-half the senators and all the representatives 
are elected every "two years, senators by districts and repre- 
sentatives by counties. Sessions are held biennially in even- 
numbered years and begin the first Tuesday after the first Monday 
in January. The constitution reserves to the people the privilege 
of rejecting any act or any item of any act whenever 5% of the 
legal voters ask that the matter be voted upon at a general 
election; and the people may initiate legislation by a petition 
signed by 8% of the electorate. 

For the administration of justice there have been established 
a supreme court composed of six justices elected for a term of 
six years; a criminal court of appeals composed of three justices 
appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of the 
Senate; twenty-one district courts each with one or more 
justices elected for a term of four years; a county court in each 
county with one justice elected for a term of two years; a court 
of a, justice of the peace, elected for a term of two years, in each 
of six districts of each county, and police courts in the cities. 
The supreme court has appellate jurisdiction in all civil cases, 
bu,t its original jurisdiction is restricted to a general control of 
the lower courts. The criminal court of appeals has jurisdiction 
in all criminal cases appealed from the district and county courts. 
The district courts have exclusive jurisdiction in civil actions 
for sums exceeding $1000, concurrent jurisdiction with the 
county courts in civil actions for sums greater than $500 and not 
exceeding $rooo, and original or appellate in criminal cases. 
The county courts have, besides the concurrent jurisdiction 
above stated, original jurisdiction in all probate matters, original 
jurisdiction in civil actions for sums greater, than $200 and 
not exceeding $500, concurrent jurisdiction with the justices 
of the peace in misdemeanour cases, and appellate jurisdiction 
in all cases brought from a justice of the peace or a police court. 

Local Government.— The general management of county affairs 
is intrusted to three commissioners' elected by districts, but these 
commissioners are' not permitted to incur extraordinary expenses 
or levy a tax exceeding five mills on a dollar without first obtaining 
the consent of the people at a general or special election. The 



6o 



OKLAHOMA 



other county officers are a treasurer, clerk, register of deeds, attorney, 
surveyor, sheriff, assessor and superintendent of public instruction. 
The counties have been divided into municipal townships, each of 
which elects a trustee, a clerk and a treasurer, who together con- 
stitute a board of directors for the management of township affairs. 
The trustee is also the assessor. Cities or towns having a population 
of 2000 or more may become cities of the first class when- 
ever a favourable majority vote is obtained at a general or special 
election held in that city or town, and this question must be sub- 
mitted at such an election whenever 35 % of the legal voters 
petition for it. 

Miscellaneous Laws. — The property rights of husband and wife are 
practically equal, and either may buy, sell or mortgage real estate, 
other than the homestead, without the consent of the other. Among 
the grounds for a divorce are adultery, extreme cruelty, habitual 
drunkenness, gross neglect of duty and imprisonment for felony. 
Article XII. of the constitution exempts from forced sale the home- 
stead of any family in the state to the extent of 160 acres of land in 
the country, or 1 acre in a city, town or village, provided the value 
of the same does not exceed S5000 and that the claims against it are 
not for purchase money, improvements or taxes. A corporation 
commission of three members, elected for a term of six years, is 
intrusted with the necessary powers for a rigid control of public 
service corporations. A state board of arbitration, composed of 
two farmers, two employers and two employes is authorized to 
investigate the causes of any strike affecting the public interests, 
and publish what it finds to be the facts in the case, together with 
recommendations for settlement. Labour laws, passed by the first 
legislature (1908), were amended and made more radical by the 
legislature of 1909: a child labour law forbids the employment of 
children under 14 in factories, workshops, theatres, bowling-alleys, 
pool-halls, steam-laundries or other dangerous places (to be defined 
by the commissioner of labour), and no child under 16 is to be 
employed in such places unless able to read and write simple English 
sentences or without having attended school during the previous 
year; no child under 16 is to be employed in any of several 
(enumerated) dangerous occupations; no child under 16 is to be 
employed more than 8 hours in any one day, or more than 48 hours 
in any one week in any gainful occupation other than agriculture 
or domestic service; age and schooling certificates are required of 
children between 14 and 16 in certain occupations. A state dis- 
pensary system for the sale of intoxicating liquors was authorized 
by the constitution, but the popular vote in 1908 was unfavourable 
to the continuance of the system, the sentiment seeming to be 
for rigid prohibition of the sale of intoxicating liquors. A law 
passed in May 1908 against nepotism (closely following the Texas 
law of 1907) forbids public officers to appoint (or vote for) any 
person related to them by affinity or consanguinity within the 
third degree to any position in the government of which they are a 
part; makes persons thus related to public officers ineligible to 
positions in the branch in which their relative is an official; and 
renders any official making such an appointment liable to fine and 
removal from office. 

Education. — The common school system is administered by a 
state superintendent of public instruction, a state board of education, 
county superintendents and district boards. The state board is 
composed of the state superintendent, who is president of the board ; 
the secretary of state, who is secretary of the board ; the attorney- 
general and the governor. Each district board is composed of three 
members elected for a term of three years, one each year. Each 
district school must be open at (east three months each year, and 
children between the ages of eight and sixteen are required to 
attend either a public or a private school, unless excused because 
of physical or mental infirmity. There are separate schools for whites 
and negroes. In addition to instruction in the ordinary branches, 
the teaching in the district schools of the elementary principles of 
agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry, stock-feeding, forestry, 
building country roads and domestic science is required. A law of 
1908 requires that an agricultural school of secondary grade be 
established in each of the five supreme court judicial districts, and 
that an experimental farm be operated in connexion with each ; 
and in 1909 the number of these districts was increased to six. 
There is a state industrial school for girls, teaching domestic science 
and the fine arts. The higher institutions of learning established 
by the state are the Oklahoma Agricultural and Mechanical College, 
a land grant college with an agricultural experiment station at 
Stillwater; the Oklahoma School of Mines at Wilburton; the 
Colored Agricultural and Normal University at Langston; the 
Central Normal School at Edmond; the North-western Normal 
School at Alva; the South-western Normal School at Weatherford, 
Custer county; the South-eastern Normal School at Durant, Bryan 
county; the East Central Normal School at Ada; the North- 
eastern Normal School at Tahlequah, Cherokee county; and the 
University of Oklahoma at Norman. The State University (estab- 
lished in 1892, opened in 1893) embraces a college of arts and sciences, 
and schools of fine arts, applied science, medicine, mines and phar- 
macy. In 1907-1908 it had 40 instructors and 790 students. There 
is a University Preparatory School (1901) at Tonkawa in Kay 
county, and there are state schools of agriculture at Tishomingo and 



at Warner. The common schools are in large part maintained out 
of the proceeds of the school lands (about 1,200,000 acres), which 
are sections 16 and 36 in each township of that portion of the state 
which formerly constituted Oklahoma Territory, and a Congres- 
sional appropriation of §5,000,000 in lieu of these sections in 
what was formerly Indian Territory. The university, agricultural 
and mechanical college and normal schools also are maintained 
to a considerable extent out of the proceeds of section 13 in 
several townships. The university owns land valued at $3,670,000. 
Among the institutions of learning, neither maintained nor controlled 
by the state, are Epworth University (Methodist Episcopal, 1901) 
at Oklahoma City, and Kingfisher College at Kingfisher. 

Charities and Correctional Institutions. — The state has a hospital 
for the insane at Fort Supply, the Whitaker Orphans' Home at 
Pryor Creek, the Oklahoma School for the Blind at Fort Gibson 
and the Oklahoma School for the Deaf at Sulphur; and the legisla- 
ture of 1908 appropriated money for the East Oklahoma Hospital 
for the Insane at Vinita, a School for the Feeble-Minded at Enid, a 
State Training School for Boys at Wynnewood and a State Reforma- 
tory (at Granite, Greer county) for first-time convicts between the 
ages of sixteen and twenty-five. Under the constitution the super- 
vision and inspection of charities and institutions of correction is 
in the hands of a State Commissioner of Charities and Corrections, 
elected by the people. The commissioner must inspect once each 
year all penal, correctional and eleemosynary institutions, including 
public hospitals, jails, poorhouses and corporations and organizations 
doing charitable work; and the commissioner appears as next friend 
in cases affecting the property of orphan minors, and has power to 
investigate complaints against public and private institutions whose 
charters may be revoked for cause by the commissioner. By act of 
legislature a State Board of Public Affairs was created; it is made of 
five members appointed by the governor, with charge of the fiscal 
affairs of all state institutions. Convicts were sent to the state 
penitentiary of Kansas until January 1909, when it was charged 
that they were treated cruelly there; in 1909 work was begun on a 
penitentiary at McAlester. 

Banking and Finance. — The unique feature of the banking system 
(with amendments adopted by the second legislature becoming 
effective on the nth of June 1909) is a fund for the guaranty of 
deposits. The state banking board, which is composed of the 
governor, lieutenant-governor, president of the board of agriculture, 
state treasurer and state auditor, levies against the capital stock of 
each state bank and trust company, organized or existing, under 
the laws of the state to create a fund equal to 5% of average daily 
deposits other than the deposits of state funds properly secured. 
One-fifth of this fund is payable the first year and one-twentieth 
each year thereafter; 1 % of the increase in average deposits is 
collected each year. Emergency assessments, not to exceed 2 %, 
may be made whenever necessary to pay in full the depositors in an 
insolvent bank; if the guaranty fund is impaired to such a degree 
that it is not made up by the 2 % emergency assessment, the state 
banking board issues certificates of indebtedness which draw 6% 
interest and which are paid out of the assessment. Any national bank 
may secure its depositors in this manner if it so desires. The bank 
guarantee law was held to be valid by the United States Supreme 
Court in 1908 after the attorney-general of the United States had 
decided that it was illegal. 

The revenue for state and local purposes is derived chiefly from 
taxes. The constitutional, limit on the state tax levy is 3j mills on 
a dollar, and legislation has fixed the limit of the county levy at 5 
mills, of the levy in cities at 7, in incorporated towns at 5, in town- 
ships at 3, and in school districts at 5. There is a tax on the gross 
receipts of corporations, a graduated land tax on all holdings exceed- 
ing 640 acres, a tax on income exceeding $3500, and a tax on gifts 
and inheritances. The aggregate amount of indebtedness which 
the state may have at any time is limited by the constitution to 
8400,000, save when borrowing is necessary to repel an invasion, 
suppress an insurrection or defend the state in war. 

History. — With the exception of the narrow strip N. of the 
most N. section of Texas the territory comprising the present 
state of Oklahoma was set apart by Congress in 1834, under the 
name of Indian Territory, for the possession of the five southern 
tribes (Cherokees, Creeks, Seminoles, Choctaws and Chickasaws) 
and the Quapaw Agency. Early in 1809 some Cherokees in 
the south-eastern states made known to President Jefferson 
their desire to remove to hunting grounds W. of the Mississippi, 
and at first they were allowed to occupy lands in what is now 
Arkansas, but by a new arrangement first entered into in 1828 
they received instead, in 3838, a patent for a wide strip extending 
along the entire N. border of Indian Territory with the exception 
of the small section in the N.E. corner which was reserved to 
the Quapaw Agency. By treaties negotiated in 1820, 1825, 
1830 and 1842 the Choctaws received for themselves and the 
Chickasaws a patent for all that portion of the territory which 



OKLAHOMA CITY— OKUMA 



61 



lies S. of the Canadian and Arkansas rivers, and by treaties 
negotiated in 1824, 1833 and 1851 the Creeks received for them- 
I selves and the Seminoles a patent for the remaining or middle 
I portion. Many of the Indians of these tribes brought slaves with 
I them from the Southern states and during the Civil War they 
I supported the Confederacy, but when that war was over the 
I Federal government demanded not only the liberation of the 
I slaves but new treaties, partly on the ground that the tribal lands 
I must be divided with the freedmen. By these treaties, negotiated 
in 1866, the Cherokees gave the United States permission to 
settle other Indians on what was approximately the western 
half of their domain; the Seminoles, to whom the Creeks in 
1855 had granted as their portion the strip between the Canadian 
river and its North Fork, ceded all of theirs, and the Creeks, 
Choctaws and Chickasaws ceded the western half of theirs back 
to the United States for occupancy by freedmen or other Indians. 
In the E. portion of the lands thus placed at its disposal by the 
Cherokees and the Creeks the Federal government within the 
next seventeen years made a number of small grants as follows: 
to the Seminoles in 1866, to the Sauk and Foxes in 1867, to the 
Osages, Kansas, Pottawatomics, Absentee Shawnees and 
Wichitas in 1871-1872, to the Pawnees in 1876, to the Poncas 
and Nez Perces in 1878, to the Otoes and Missouris in 1881, 
and to the Iowas and Kickapoos in 1883; in the S.W. quarter 
of the Territory, also, the Kiowas, Comanches and Apaches 
were located in 1867 and the Cheyennes and Arapahoes in 1869. 
There still remained unassigned the greater part of the Cherokee 
Strip besides a tract embracing 1,887,800 acres of choice land 
in the centre of the Territory, and the agitation for the opening 
of this to settlement by white people increased until in 1889 a 
complete title to the central tract was purchased from the 
Creeks and Seminoles. Soon after the purchase President 
Benjamin Harrison issued a proclamation announcing that this 
land would be opened to homestead settlement at twelve o'clock 
noon, on the 2 2nd of April 1 889. At that hour no less than 20,000 
people were on the border, and when the signal was given there 
ensued a remarkably spectacular race for homes. In the next 
year that portion of Indian Territory which lay S. of the Cherokee 
Strip and W. of the lands occupied by the five tribes, together 
with the narrow strip N. of Texas which had been denied to that 
state in 1850, was organized as the Territory of Oklahoma. In 
the meantime negotiations were begun for acquiring a clear 
title to the unoccupied portion of the Cherokee Strip, for in- 
dividual allotments to the members of the several small tribes 
who had received tribal allotments since 1866, and for the 
purchase of what remained after such individual allotments 
had been made. As these negotiations were successful most of 
the land between the tract first opened and that of the Creeks 
was opened to settlement in 1891, a large tract to the W. of the 
centre was opened in 1892, a tract S. of the Canadian river and 
W. of the Chickasaws was opened in 1902, and by 1904 the entire 
Territory had been opened to settlement with the exception of 
a tract in the N.E. which was occupied by the Osages, Kaws, 
Poncas and Otoes. By the treaties with the five southern tribes 
they were to be permitted to make their own laws so long as 
they preserved their tribal relations, but since the Civil War 
many whites had mingled with these Indians, gained control 
for their own selfish ends of such government as there was, 
and made the country a refuge for fugitives from justice. Con- 
sequently, in 1893, Congress appointed the Dawes Commission 
to induce the tribes to consent to individual allotments as well 
as to a government administered from Washington, and in 1898 
the Curtis Act was passed for making such allotments and for the 
establishment of a territorial government. When the allot- 
ments were nearly all made Congress in 1 906 authorized Oklahoma 
and Indian Territories to qualify for admission to the Union as 
one state. As both Territories approved, a constitutional 
convention (composed of 100 Democrats and 12 Republicans) 
met at Guthrie on the 20th of November 1906. The constitution 
framed by this body was approved by the electorate on the 
17th of September 1907, and the state was admitted to the 
Union on the 16th of November. 



Governors of Oklahoma — Territorial. 

George W. Steele 1 890-1 891 

Robert Martin (acting) 1891-1892 

Abraham J. Seay 1892-1893 

William Cary Renfrow 1 893-1 897 

Cassius McDonald Barnes 1897-1901 

William M. Jenkins 1901 

Thompson B. Ferguson 1901-1906 

Frank Frantz 1906-1907 

State. 

Charles Nathaniel Haskell, Democrat. . . 1907-1911 

Lee Cruce, Democrat 191 1— 

Bibliography. — See the Biennial Reports (Guthrie, 1904 sqq.) 
of the Oklahoma Department of Geology and Natural History; 
the Oklahoma Geological Survey, Bulletin No. 1: Preliminary 
Report on the Mineral Resources of Oklahoma (Norman, 1908) ; 
C. N. Gould, Geology and Water Resources of Oklahoma (Washington, 
'9°5)> being Water Supply and Irrigation Paper, No. 148 of the 
United States Geological Survey; A. J. Henry, Climatology of the 
United Slates, pp. 442-453 (Washington, 1906), being Bulletin Q of 
the Weather Bureau of the United States Department of Agriculture ; 
Mineral Resources of the United States, annual reports published by 
the United States Geological Survey (Washington, 1883 sqq.); 
Charles Evans and C. O. Bunn, Oklahoma Civil Government (Ardmore, 
1908); C. A. Beard, " Constitution of Oklahoma," in the Political 
Science Quarterly, vol. 24 (Boston, 1909); R. L. Owen, "Com- 
ments on the Constitution of Oklahoma, in the Proceedings of the 
American Political Science Association, vol. 5 (Baltimore, 1909); 
S. J. Buck, The Settlement of Oklahoma (Madison, 1907), reprinted 
from the Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of Sciences, Arts and 
Letters; and D. C. Gideon, Indian Territory, Descriptive, Biographical 
and Genealogical . . . with a General History of the Territory (New 
York, 1901). 

OKLAHOMA CITY, a city and the county-seat of Oklahoma 
County, Oklahoma, U.S.A., on the North Fork of the Canadian 
river, near the geographical centre of the state. Pop. (1890) 
4151; (1900) 10,037; (i9 7) 32,4S 2 ; (191°) 64,205. It 
is served by the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe, the Chicago, 
Rock Island & Pacific, the Missouri, Kansas & Texas, and the 
St Louis & San Francisco railways, and by inter-urban electric 
lines. It lies partly in a valley, partly on an upland, in a rich 
agricultural region. The city is the seat of Epworth University 
(founded in 1901 by the joint action of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church and the Methodist Episcopal Church, South). Oklahoma 
City's prosperity is due chiefly to its jobbing trade, with an 
extensive farming and stock-raising region, but it has also cotton 
compresses and cotton gins, and various manufactures. The 
total value of the factory products in 1905 was $3,670,730. 
Natural gas is largely used as a fuel. A large settlement was 
established here on the 22nd of April 1889, the day on which 
the country was by proclamation declared open for settlement. 
The city was chartered in 1890. 

OKUBO TOSHIMITSU (1830-1878), Japanese statesman, a 
samurai of Satsuma, was one of the five great nobles who led 
the revolution in 1868 against the shogunate. He became one 
of the mikado's principal ministers, and in the Satsuma troubles 
which followed he was the chief opponent of Saigo Takamori. 
But the suppression of the Satsuma rebellion brought upon him 
the personal revenge of Saigo's sympathizers, and in the spring 
of 1878 he was assassinated by six clansmen. Okubo was one 
of the leading men of his day, and in 1872 was one of the Japanese 
mission which was sent round the world to get ideas for organizing 
the new regime. 

OKUMA (SHIGENOBU), Count (1838- ), Japanese states- 
man, was born in the province of Hizen in 1838. His father was 
an officer in the artillery, and during his early years his education 
consisted mainly of the study of Chinese literature. Happily 
for him, however, he was able to acquire in his youth a knowledge 
of English and Dutch, and by the help of some missionaries he 
succeeded in obtaining books in those languages on both scientific 
and political subjects. These works effected a complete revolu- 
tion in his mind. He had been designed by his parents for the 
military profession, but the new light which now broke in upon 
him determined him to devote his entire energies to the abolition 
of the existing feudal system and to the establishment of a 
constitutional government. With impetuous zeal he urged his 
views on his countrymen, and though he took no active part 



62 



A 



^OLAF/ 



-'O 



in the revolution of 186S, the effect of his opinions exercised no 
slight 'weight in the struggle. Already he was a marked man, 
and no sooner was the government reorganized, with the mikado 
as the sole wielder of power, than he was appointed chief assistant 
in the department of foreign affairs. In 1869 he succeeded to the 
post of secretary of the joint departments of the interior and of 
finance, and for the next fourteen years he devoted himself 
wholly to politics. In 1870 he was made a councillor of state, 
and a few months later he accepted the office of president of 
the commission which represented the Japanese government 
at the Vienna Exhibition. In 1872 he was again appointed 
minister of finance, and when the expedition under General 
Saigo was sent to Formosa (1874) to chastise the natives of that 
island for the murder of some shipwrecked fishermen, he was 
nominated president of the commission appointed to supervise 
the campaign. By one of those waves of popular feeling to which 
the Japanese people are peculiarly liable, the nation which had 
supported him up to a certain point suddenly veered round 
and opposed him with heated violence. So strong was the feeling 
against him that on one occasion a would-be assassin threw at 
him a dynamite shell, which blew off one of his legs. During 
the whole of his public life he recognized the necessity of promot- 
ing education. When he resigned office in the early 'eighties 
he established the Semmon Gako, or school for special studies, 
at the cost of the 30,000 yen wbich had been voted him when he 
received the title of count, and subsequently he was instrumental 
in founding other schools and colleges. In 1896 he joined the 
Matsukata cabinet, and resigned in the following year in conse- 
quence of intrigues which produced an estrangement between 
him and the prime minister. On the retirement of Marquis 
Ito in 1898 he again took office, combining the duties of premier 
with those of minister of foreign affairs. But dissensions having 
arisen in the cabinet, he resigned a few months later, and retired 
into private life, cultivating his beautiful garden at Waseda 
near Tokyo. 

OLAF, the name of five kings of Norway. 

Olaf I. Tryggvesson (969-1000) was born in 969, and began 
his meteoric career in exile. It is even said that he was bought as 
a slave in Esthonia. After a boyhood spent in Novgorod under 
the protection of King Valdemar, Olaf fought for the emperor 
Otto III. under the Wendish king Burislav, whose daughter he 
had married. On her death he followed the example of his 
countrymen, and harried in France arid the British Isles, till, 
in a good day for the peace of those countries, he was converted 
to Christianity by a hermit in the Scilly Islands, and his maraud- 
ing expeditions ceased since he would not harry those of his new 
faith. In England he married Gyda, sister of Olaf Kvaran, 
king of Dublin, and it was 1 only after some years spent in admini- 
stering her property in England and Ireland that he set sail 
for Norway, fired by reports of the unpopularity of its ruler 
Earl Haakon. Arriving in Norway in the autumn of 995, he 
was unanimously accepted as king, and at once set about the 
conversion of the country to Christianity, undeterred by the 
obstinate resistance of the people. It has been suggested that 
Olaf's ambition was to rule a united, as well as a Christian, 
Scandinavia, and we know that he made overtures of marriage 
to Sigrid, queen of Sweden', and set about adding new ships to 
his fleet, when negotiations fell through owing to her obstinate 
heathenism. He made an enemy of her, and did not hesitate 
to involve himself in a quarrel with King Sveyn of Denmark 
by marrying his sister Thyre, who had fled from her heathen 
husband Burislav in defiance of her brother's authority. 
Both his Wendish and his Irish wife had brought Olaf wealth and 
good fortune, but Thyre was his undoing, for it was on an 
expedition undertaken in the year 1000 to wrest her lands from 
Burislav that he was waylaid off the island Svold, near Riigen, 
by the combined Swedish and Danish fleets, together with the 
ships of Earl Haakon's sons. The battle ended in the annihila- 
tion of the Norwegians. j Olaf fought to the last on his great 
vessel, the " Long Snake," the mightiest ship in the North, and 
finally leapt' overboard and was no more seen. Full of energy 
and daring, skilled in the use of every kind of weapon, genial and 



open-handed to his friends, implacable to his enemies', Olaf's 
personality was the ideal of the heathendom he had trodden « 
down with such reckless disregard of his people's prejudices, 
and it was no doubt as much owing to the popularity his char- 
acter won for him as to the strength of his position that he was 
able to force his will on the country with impunity. After his 
death he remained the hero of his people, who whispered that 
he was yet alive and looked for his return. " But however 
that may be," says the story, " Olaf Tryggvesson never came 
back to his kingdom in Norway." 

Olaf (II.) Haraldsson (995-1030), king from 1016-1029, 
called during his lifetime " the Fat," and afterwards known as • 
St Olaf, was born in 995, the year in which Olaf Tryggvesson 
came to Norway. After some years' absence in England, 
fighting the Danes, he returned to Norway in 1015 and declared 
himself king, obtaining the support of the five petty kings of the 
Uplands. In 1016 he defeated Earl Sveyn, hitherto the virtual 
ruler of Norway, at the battle of Nesje, and within a few years" 
had won more power than had been enjoyed by any of his pre- 
decessors on the throne. He had annihilated the petty kings 
of the South, had crushed the aristocracy, enforced the acceptance 
of Christianity throughout the kingdom, asserted his suzerainty 
in the Orkney Islands, had humbled the king of Sweden and 
married his daughter in his despite, and had conducted a success- 
ful raid on Denmark. But his success was short-lived, for in 
1029 the Norwegian nobles, seething with discontent, rallied 
round the invading Knut the Great, and Olaf had to flee to : 
Russia. On his return a year later he fell at the battle of Stikle-' 
stad, where his own subjects were arrayed against him. The 
succeeding years of disunion and misrule under the Danes 
explain the belated affection with which his countrymen came 
to regard him. The cunning and cruelty which marred his 
character were forgotten, and his services to his church and 
country remembered. Miracles were worked at his tomb, and 
in 1 164 he was canonized and was declared the patron ■ saint 
of Norway, whence his fame spread throughout Scandinavia 
and even to England, where churches are dedicated to' him. 
The Norwegian order of knighthood of St Olaf was founded in 
1847 by Oscar I., king of Sweden and Norway, in memory of this 
king. 

The three remaining Norwegian kings of this name are persons 
of minor importance (see Norway: History). 

OLAF, or Anlaf (d. 981), king of the Danish kingdoms of 
Northumbria and of Dublin, was a son of Sitric, king of Deira, and 
was related to the English king /Ethelstan. As his name indicates 
he was of Norse descent, and he married a daughter of Constan- 
tine II., king of the Scots. When Sitric died about 927 iEthelstan 
annexed Deira, and Olaf took refuge in Scotland and in Ireland 
until 937, when he was one of the leaders of the formidable 
league of princes which was destroyed by iEthelstan at the 
famous battle of Brunanburh. Again he sought a home among 
his kinsfolk in Ireland, but just after j-Ethelstan's death in 940 
he or Olaf Godfreyson was recalled to England by the North- 
umbrians. Both crossed over, and in 941 the new English king, 
Edmund, gave up Deira to the former. The peace between the 
English and the Danes did not, however, last long. Wulfstan, 
archbishop of York, sided with Olaf; but in 944 this king was 
driven from Northumbria by Edmund, and crossing to Ireland 
he ruled over the Danish kingdom of Dublin. From 949 to 
952 he was again king of Northumbria, until he was expelled 
once more, and he passed the remainder of his active life in 
warfare in Ireland. But in 980 his dominion was shattered by 
the defeat of the Danes at the battle of Tara. He went to Iona, 
where he died probably in 981, although one account says he 
was in Dublin in 994. This, however, is unlikely. In the 
sagas he is known as Olaf the Red. 

This Olaf must not be confused with his kinsman and ally, 
Olaf (d. 941), also king of Northumbria and of Dublin, who was 
a son of Godfrey, king of Dublin.' The latter Olaf became king 
of Dublin in 934; but he was in England in 937, as he' took part' 
in the fight at Brunanburh: After this event he returned 
to Ireland, but he appears to have acte.d for a very short* 



■OUAND— OL'BIA/ ! 



1 



63 



time as' joint king of Northumbria with Olaf Sitricson. It is 
possible that he was the " Olaf of Ireland " who was called by 
the Northumbrians after ^Ethelstan's death, but both the Olafs 
appear to have accepted the invitation. He was killed in 941 
at Tyningham near Dunbar. 

See W. F. Skene, Celtic Scotland, vol. i. (1876), and J. R. Green, 
The Conquest oj England, vol. i. (1899). 

OLAND, an island in the Baltic Sea, next to Gotland the 
largest belonging to Sweden, stretching for 85 m. along the east 
coast of the southern extremity of that country, from which 
it is separated by Kalmar Sound which is from 5 to 15 m. broad. 
The greatest' breadth of the island is 10 m., and its area 519 sq. m - 
Pop. (1900) 30,408. Consisting for the most part of Silurian 
limestone, and thus forming a striking contrast to the mainland 
with its granite and gneiss, Oland is further remarkable on 
account of the peculiarities of its structure. Down the west side 
for a considerable distance runs a limestone ridge, rising usually 
in terraces, but at times in steep cliffs, to an extreme height of 
'200 ft.; and along the east side there is a parallel ridge of sand, 
resting on limestone, never exceeding 90 ft. These ridges, known 
as the Western and Eastern Landborgar, are connected towards 
the north and the south by belts of sand and heath; and the 
hollow between them is occupied by a desolate and almost barren 
tract: the southern portion, or Alfvar (forming fully half of the 
southern part of the island), presents a surface of bare red lime- 
stone scored by superficial cracks and unfathomed fissures, and 
calcined by the heat refracted from the surrounding heights. 
The northern portion is covered at best with a copse of hazel 
bushes. Outside the ridges, however, Oland has quite a different 
aspect, the hillsides being not infrequently .clothed with clumps 
of trees, while the narrow strip of alluvial coast-land, with its 
cornfields, windmills, villages and church towers, appears 
fruitful and prosperous. There are a few small streams in the 
island; and one lake, Hornsjo, about 3 m.-long, deserves mention. 
Of the fir woods which once clothed a considerable area in the 
north the Boda crown-park is the only remnant. Grain, especi- 
ally barley, and sandstone, are exported from the island, and 
there are cement works. A number of monuments of unknown 
age exist, including stones (stcnsdttningar) arranged in groups 
to represent ships. The only town is Borgholm, a watering-place 
on the west coast, with one of the finest castle ruins in Sweden. 
The town was founded in 181 7, but the castle, dating at least 
from the 13th century, was one of the strongest fortresses, and 
afterwards, as erected by the architect , Nicodemus Tessin the 
elder (1615-1681), one of the most stately palaces in the country. 
The island was joined in 1824 to the administrative district (Ian) 
of Kalmar. Its inhabitants were formerly styled Oningar, and 
show considerable diversity of origin in the matter of speech, 
local customs and physical appearance. 

From the raid of Ragnar Lodbrok's sons in 775 Oland is 
frequently mentioned in Scandinavian history, and especially as a 
battleground in the wars between Denmark and the northern 
kingdoms. . In the middle ages it formed a separate legislative 
and -administrative unity. 

OLAUS MAGNUS, or Magni (Magnus, i.e. Slora, great, being 
the family name, and not a personal epithet), Swedish ecclesi- 
astic and author, was born at Linkoping in 1490 and died at 
Rome in 1538. Like his elder brother, Johannes Magnus, he 
obtained several ecclesiastical preferments (a canonry at Upsala 
and at Linkoping, and the archdeaconry of Strengnes), and was 
employed on various diplomatic services (such as a mission to 
Rome, from Gustavus I., to procure the appointment of Johannes 
Magnus as archbishop of Upsala); but on the success of the 
reformation in Sweden his attachment to the old church led 
him to accompany his brother into exile. Settling at Rome, 
from 1527, he acted as his brother's secretary, and ultimately 
became his successor in the (now titular) archbishopric of 
Upsala. Pope Paul III., in 1546, sent him ;to the council of 
Trent; later,, he became canon of St Lambert in Liege; King 
Sigismund I. of Poland also offered him a canonry at Posen; 
but most pf his, life, after his _brother's death, seems to have 
been spent in the monastery of St- Brigittain, Rome, where he 



subsisted on a pension assigned him by the pope. He is best 
remembered as the author of the famous Historia dc Gcntibus 
Septentrioiialibus (Rome, 1555), a work which long remained for 
the rest of Europe the chief authority on Swedish matters and 
is still a valuable repertory of much curious information in 
regard to Scandinavian customs and folk-lore. 

The Historia was translated into Italian (Venice, 1565), German 
(Strassburg, 1567), English (London, 1658) and Dutch (Amsterdam, 
1665); abridgments of the work appeared also at Antwerp (1558 
and 1562), Paris (a French abridged version, t56i), Amsterdam 
(1586), Frankfort (1618) and Leiden (1652). Olaus also wrote a 
Tabula terrarum sepienlrionalium . . . (Venice, 1539). 

OLBERS, HEINRICH WILHELM MATTHIAS (1758-1840), 
German astronomer, was born on the nth of October 1758 
at Arbergen, a village near Bremen, where his father was minister. 
He studied medicine at Gottingen, 1777-1780, attending at the 
same time Kaestner's mathematical course; and in 1779, while 
watching by the sick-bed of a fellow-student, he devised a method 
of calculating cometary orbits which made an epoch in the 
treatment of the subject, and -is still extensively used. The 
treatise containing this important invention was made public 
by Baron von Zach under the title Ucbcr die Icic/iteste und 
bequemste Methode die Balm cincs Cometen zu bcrcchnen (Weimar, 
1797). A table of eighty-seven calculated orbits 'was appended, 
enlarged by Encke in the second edition (1847) to 178, and by 
Galle in the third (1864) to 242. Olbers settled as a physician 
in Bremen towards the end of 1781, and practised actively for 
above forty years, finally retiring on the 1st of January 1823. 
The greater part of each night (he never slept more than four 
hours) was meantime devoted to astronomy, the upper portion 
of his house being fitted up as an observatory. He paid special 
attention to comets, and that of 1815 (period seventy-four 
years) bears his name in commemoration of its detection by 
him. He also took a leading part in the discovery of the minor 
planets, re-identified Ceres on the 1st of January 1802, and 
detected Pallas on the 28th of March following. His bold 
hypothesis of their origin by the disruption of a primitive 
large planet (Monatliche Ccrrespondcnz, vi. 88), although now 
discarded, received countenance from the finding of Juno by 
Harding, and of Vesta by himself, in the precise regions of 
Cetus and Virgo where the nodes of such supposed planetary 
fragments should be situated.- > Olbers was deputed by his 
fellow-citizens to assist at the baptism of the king of Rome 
on the 9th of June 181 1, and he was a member of the corps 
Icgislatif in Paris 1812-1813. He died on the 2nd of March 
1840, at the age of eighty-one. He was twice married, and one 
son survived him. 

See Biographische Skizzen verstorbener Bremischer Aerzte, by Dr 
G. Barkhausen (Bremen, 1844); Allgemeine geographische Ephemeri- 
den, iv. 283 (1799); Abstracts Phil. Trans, iv. 268 (1843): 
Astronomische Nachrichten, xxii. 265 (Bessel), also appended 
to A. Erman's Briefwechsel zwischen Olbers und Bessel (2 vols., 
Leipzig, 1852); Allgemeine Deutsche Biographic (S. Giinther) ; 
R. Grant, Hist, of Phys. A sir. p. 239; R. Wolf, Geschichte der 
Astronomie, p. 517. The first two volumes of Dr C. Schilling's 
exhaustive work, Wilhclm Olbers, sein Leben und seine Werke, appeared 
at Berlin in 1894 and 1900, a third and later volume including his 
personal correspondence and biography. A list of Olbers's contri- 
butions to scientific periodicals is given at p. xxxv of the 3rd ed. of 
his Leichteste Methode, and his unique collection of works relating 
to comets now forms part of the Pulkowa library. 

OLBIA, the chief Greek settlement in the north-west of the 
Euxine. It was generally known to the Greeks of Hellas as 
Borysthenes, though its actual site was on the right bank of 
the'Hypanis (Bug) 4 m. above its junction with the estuary of 
the Borysthenes river (Dnieper). Eusebius says that it was 
founded from Miletus c. 650 B.C., a statement which is borne 
out by the discovery of Milesian pottery of the 7th century. 
It first appears as enjoying friendly relations with its neighbours 
the Scythians and standing at the head of trade routes leading 
far to the north-east (Herodotus iv.). Its wares also penetrated 
northward. It exchanged the manufactures of Ionia and, 
from the 5th century, of Attica for the slaves, hides and corn of 
Scythia. Changes of the native population (see Scythia) 
interrupted this commerce, and the city was .hard put to it' to 



64 



OLBIA— OLD-AGE PENSIONS 



defend itself against the surrounding barbarians. We know 
of these difficulties and of the democratic constitution of the 
city from a decree in honour of Protogenes in the 3rd century 
B.C. (C.I.G. ii. 2058, Inscr. Or. Septent. Pont. Euxin. i. 16). 
In the following century it fell under the suzerainty of Scilurus, 
whose name appears on its coins, and when his power was 
broken by Mithradates VI. the Great, of Pontus, it submitted 
to the latter. About 50 B.C. it was entirely destroyed by the 
Getae and lay waste for many years. Ultimately at the wish 
of, and, to judge by the coins, under the protection of the natives 
themselves, it was restored, but Dio Chrysostom (Or. xxxvi.), 
who visited it about a.d. 83, gives a curious picture of its poor 
state. During the 2nd century a.d. it prospered better with 
Roman support and was quite flourishing from the time of 
Septimius Severus, when it was incorporated in Lower Moesia, 
to 248, when its coins came to an end, probably owing to its 
sack by the Goths. It was once more restored in some sort 
and lingered on to an unknown date. Excavations have shown 
the position of the old Greek walls and of those which enclosed 
the narrower site of the Roman city, an interesting Hellenistic 
house, and cemeteries of various dates. The principal cult 
was that of Achilles Pontarches, to whom the archons made 
dedications. It has another centre at Leuce (Phidonisi) and 
at various points in the north Euxine. Secondary was that 
of Apollo Prostates, the patron of the strategi; but the worship 
of most of the Hellenic deities is testified to in the inscriptions. 
The coinage begins with large round copper pieces comparable 
only to the Roman aes grave and smaller pieces in the shape of 
dolphins; these both go back into the 6th century B.C. Later 
the city adopted silver and gold coins of the Aeginetic standard. 
See E. H. Minns, Scythians and Greeks (Cambridge, 1909); V. V. 
Latyshev, Olbia (St Petersburg, 1887, in Russian). For inscriptions, 
Boeckh, C.I.G. vol. ii. ; V. V. Latyshev, Inscr. Orae Septent. Ponti 
Euxini, vols. i. and iv. For excavations, Reports of B. V. Pharmak- 
ovsky in Compte rendu de la Comm. imp. archeolog. (St Petersburg, 
1901 sqq.), and Bulletin of the same, Nos. 8, 13, &c., summarized in 
Archaotogischer Anzeiger (1903 sqq.). (E. H. M.) 

OLBIA (Gr. oKflia, i.e. happy; mod. Terranova Pausania, 
q.v.),an ancient seaport city of Sardinia, on the east coast. The 
name indicates that it was of Greek origin, and tradition attri- 
butes its foundation to the Boeotians and Thespians under 
Iolaus (see Sardinia). Pais considers that it was founded by 
the Phocaeans of Massilia before the 4th century B.C. (in Tam- 
poni, op. cit. p. 83). It is situated on low ground, at the extremity 
of a deep recess, now called the Golfo di Terranova. It was 
besieged unsuccessfully by L. Cornelius Scipio in 259 B.C. Its 
territory was ravaged in 210 B.C. by a Carthaginian fleet. In 
Roman times it was the regular landing-place for travellers 
from Italy. Cicero notes the receipt of a letter from his brother 
from Olbia in 56 B.C., and obviously shared the prevailing 
belief as to the unhealthiness of Sardinia. Traces of the pre- 
Roman city have not been found. The line of the Roman city 
walls has been determined on the N. and E., the N.E. angle 
being at the ancient harbour, which lay to the N. of the modern 
(Notizie degli Scavi, 1890, p. 224). Among the inscriptions are 
two tombstones, one of an imperial freedwoman, 1 the other 
of a freedman of Acte, the concubine of Nero; a similar tomb- 
stone was also found at Carales, and tiles bearing her name 
have been found in several parts of the island, but especially 
at Olbia, where in building a modern house in 1881 about one 
thousand were discovered. Pais (op. cit. 89 sqq.) attributes 
to Olbia an inscription now in the Campo Santo at Pisa, an 
epistyle bearing the words " Cereri sacrum Claudia Aug. lib. 
Acte," and made of Sardinian (?) granite. In any case it is 
clear that Acte must have had considerable property in the 
island (Corp. Inscr. Lat. x. 7980). Discoveries of buildings 
and tombs have frequently occurred within the area of the 
town and in its neighbourhood. Some scanty remains of an 
aqueduct exist outside the town, but hardly anything else of 

1 The freedwoman had been a slave of Acte before passing into 
the property of the emperor, and took the cognomen Acteniana — a 
practice which otherwise only occurs in the case of slaves of citizens 
of the highest rank or of foreign kings. 



antiquity is to be seen in situ. A large number of milestones, 
fifty-one in all, with inscriptions, and several more with illegible 
ones, belonging to the first twelve miles of the Roman road 
between Olbia and Carales, have been discovered, and are now 
kept in the church of S. Simplicio (Notizie degli Scavi, 1888, 
p. 535; 1889, p. 258; 1892, pp. 217, 366; Classical Review, 1889, 
p. 228; 1890, p. 65; P. Tamponi, Silloge Epigrafica, Olbiense, 
Sassari, 1895). This large number may be accounted for by the 
fact that a new stone was often erected for a new emperor. They 
range in date from a.d. 245 to 375 (one is possibly of Domitian). 
The itineraries state that the main road from Carales to Olbia 
ran through the centre of the island to the east of Gennargentu 
(see Sardinia); but a branch certainly diverged from the main 
road from Carales to Turris Libisonis (which kept farther west, 
more or less along the line foDowed by the modern railway) and 
came to Olbia. The distance by both lines is much the same; 
and all these milestones belong to the last portion which was 
common to both roads. (T. As.) 

OLD-AGE PENSIONS. The provision of annuities for aged 
poor by the state was proposed in England in the 18th century — 
e.g. by Francis Maseres, cursitor baron of the Exchequer, in 
1772, and by Mr Mark Rolle, M.P., in 1787. Suggestions for 
subsidizing friendly societies have also been frequent — e.g. by T. 
Paine in 1795, tentatively in Sturges Bourne's Report on the 
Poor Laws, 1817, and by Lord Lansdowne in 1837. The subject 
again became prominent in the latter part of the 19th century. 
Canon Blackley, who started this movement, proposed to com- 
pel every one to insure with a state department against sickness 
and old age, and essentially his scheme was one for the relief 
of the ratepayers and a more equitable readjustment of the poor- 
rate. The terms provisionally put forward by him required 
that every one in youth should pay £10, in return for which the 
state was to grant 8s. a week sick allowance and 4s. pension 
after seventy. These proposals were submitted to the Select 
Committee on National Provident Insurance, 1885-1887. This 
body reported unfavourably, more especially on the sick in- 
surance part of the scheme, but the idea of old-age pension 
survived, and was taken up by the National Provident League, 
of which Mr (afterwards Sir) J. Rankin, M.P., was chairman. 
The subject was discussed in the constituencies and expectation 
was aroused. An unofficial parliamentary committee was 
formed, with Mr J. Chamberlain as chairman. This committee 
published proposals in March 1892, which showa very interesting 
change of attitude on the part of the promoters. Compulsion, 
which at the earlier period had found favour with Canon Blackley, 
Sir J. Rankin and even Mr Chamberlain, was no longer urged. 
The annuitant was no longer required to pay a premium adequate 
to the benefits promised, as in Canon Blackley's proposal. The 
benefit was no longer a pure annuity, but premiums were, in 
certain cases, returnable, and allowances were provided for 
widows, children (if any) and for the next of kin. Canon 
Blackley's professed object was to supersede the friendly societies, 
which, he alleged, were more or less insolvent; a proposal was 
now introduced to double every half-crown of pension derived 
by members from their friendly societies. This suggestion 
was criticized, even by supporters of the principle of state aid, 
on the ground that unless a pension was gratuitous, the class 
from which pauperism is really drawn could not profit by it. 
Mr Charles Booth in particular took this line. He accordingly 
proposed that there should be a general endowment of old 
age, 5s. a week to every one at the age of sixty-five. 
This proposal was calculated to involve an expenditure of 
£18,000,000 for England and Wales and £24,000,000 for the 
United Kingdom, exclusive of the cost of administration. While 
Mr Booth severely criticized the weak points of the contributory 
and voluntary schemes, their most influential advocate, Mr 
Chamberlain, did not spare Mr Booth's proposals. Speaking 
at Highbury, for instance, on the 24th of May 1S99, he described 
Mr Booth's universal scheme as " a gigantic system of out-door 
relief for every one, good and bad, thrifty and unthrifty, the 
waster, drunkard and idler, as well as the industrious," and 
very forcibly stated his inability to support it. 



OLD-AGE PENSIONS 



65 



In 1893 Mr Gladstone referred the whole question to a 
royal commission (Lord Aberdare, chairman). A majority 
report, adverse to the principle of state pensions, was issued 
in 1895. A minority report, signed by Mr Chamberlain and 
others, dissented, mainly on the ground that public expectation 
would be disappointed if nothing was done. In 1896 Lord 
Salisbury appointed a committee " of experts " (Lord Rothschild, 
chairman) to report on schemes submitted, and, if necessary, 
to devise a scheme. The committee were unable to recommend 
any of the schemes submitted, and added that, " we ourselves 
are unable, after repeated attempts, to devise any proposal free 
from grave inherent disadvantages." This second condemnation 
was not considered conclusive, and a select committee of the 
House of Commons (Mr Chaplin, chairman) was appointed to 
consider the condition of " the aged deserving poor." After 
an ineffectual attempt by Mr Chaplin to induce the committee 
to drop the pension idea, and to consider the provision made 
for the aged by the poor law, the committee somewhat hastily 
promulgated a scheme of gratuitous pensions for persons possess- 
ing certain qualifications. Of these the following were the most 
important: age of sixty-five; no conviction for crime; no 
poor-law relief, " unless under exceptional circumstances," 
! within twenty years; non-possession of income of 10s. a week; 
proved industry, or proved exercise of reasonable providence 
by some definite mode of thrift. The committee refrained 
from explaining the machinery and from estimating the cost, 
and suggested that this last problem should be submitted to 
yet another committee. 

Accordingly a departmental committee (chairman, Sir E. 
Hamilton) was appointed, which reported in January 1900. 
The estimated cost of the above plan was, by this committee, 
calculated at £10,300,000 in 1901, rising to £15,650.000 in 1921. 
Mr Chaplin had publicly suggested that £2,000,000, the proceeds 
of a' is. duty on corn, would go a long way to meet the needs of 
the case — a conjecture which was obviously far too sanguine. 
These unfavourable reports discouraged the more responsible 
advocates of state pensions. Mr Chamberlain appealed to the 
friendly societies to formulate a plan, an invitation which they 
showed no disposition to accept. Efforts continued to be made 
to press forward Mr Booth's universal endowment scheme or 
some modification of it. To this Mr Chamberlain declared his 
hostility. And here the matter rested, till in his Budget speech 
in 1907 Mr Asquith pledged the Liberal government to start 
a scheme in 1908. 

In 1908 accordingly there was passed the Old-Age Pensions 
Act, which carried into effect a scheme for state pensions, 
payable as from the 1st of January 1909 to persons of the age 
of 70 years and over. The act grants a pension according to 
a graduated scale of not exceeding 5s. a week to every person, 
male and female, who fulfils certain statutory conditions, and at 
the same time is not subject to certain disqualifications. The 
statutory conditions, as set out in § 2 of the act, are: (1) The 
person must have attained the age of seventy; (2) must satisfy 
the pension authorities that for at least twenty years up to the 
date of receipt of pension he has been a British subject and has 
had his residence in the United Kingdom; and (3) the person 
must satisfy the pension authorities that his yearly means do 
not exceed £31, 10s. In § 4 of the act there are elaborate pro- 
visions for the calculation of yearly means, but the following 
may be particularly noticed: (1) in calculating the means of 
a person being one of a married couple living together in the 
same house, the means shall not in any case be taken to be a 
less amount than half the total means of the couple, and (2) if 
any person directly or indirectly deprives himself of any income 
or property in order to qualify for an old-age pension, it shall 
nevertheless be taken to be part of his means. The disqualifica- 
tions are (1) receipt of poor-law relief (this qualification was 
specially removed as from the 1st of January 1911); (2) habitual 
failure to work (except in the case of those who have continuously 
for ten years up to the age of sixty made provision for their 
future by payments to friendly, provident or other societies or 
trade unions; (3) detention in a pauper or criminal lunatic 
asylum; (4) imprisonment without the option of a fine, which 



disqualifies for ten years; and (5) liability to disqualification 
for a period not exceeding ten years in the case of an habitual 
drunkard. The graduated scale of pensions is given in a schedule- 
to the act, and provide that when the yearly means of a pensioner 
do not exceed £21 he shall have the full pension of 5s. a week, 
which diminishes by is. a week for every addition of £2, 12s. 6d. 
to his income, until the latter reaches £31, 10s., when no pension 
is payable. The pension is paid weekly, on Fridays (§ 5), and is 
inalienable (§ 6). 

All claims for, and questions relating to, pensions are deter- 
mined by the pension authorities. They are (1) pension officers 
appointed by the Treasury from among inland revenue officers; 
(2) a central pension authority, which is the Local Government 
Board or a committee appointed by it, and (3) local pension com- 
mittees appointed for every borough and urban district with a 
population of over 20,000, and for every county. 

During the first three months of the year 1909, in which the 
act came into operation, there were 837,831 claims made for 
pensions: 490,755 in England and Wales, 85,408 in Scotland, 
and 261,668 in Ireland. Of these claims a total of 647,494 were 
granted: 393,700 in England and Wales, 70,294 in Scotland, and 
183,500 in Ireland. The pensions in force on the 31st of March 
1909 were as follows: 582,565 of 5s., 23,616 of 4s., 23,275 of 
3s., 11,429 of 2s., and 6609 of is. By the 30th of September 
the total amount of money paid to 682,768 pensioners was 
£6,063,658, and,in the estimates of 1909-1910 a sum of £8,750,000 
was provided for the payment of pensions. 

Germany. — The movement in favour of state aid to provision 
for old age has been largely due to the example of Germany. 
The German system (which for old age dates from 1891) is 
a form of compulsory and contributory insurance. One half 
of the premium payable is paid by the labourer, the other 
half by the employer. The state adds a subvention to the 
allowances paid to the annuitant. (See Germany.) 

France. — By a law of April 1910 a system of old-age 
pensions, designed to come into operation in 191 1, was adopted. 
It is a contributory system, embracing all wage-earners, with 
the exception of railway servants, miners and sailors on the 
special reserve list of the navy. It applies also to small 
landowners, tenant farmers and farm labourers. All are 
eligible for a pension at the age of 65, if in receipt of less 
than £120 a year. The actual rente or pension is calculated 
on the basis of the total obligatory contribution, together 
with a fixed viagere or state annuity. Male wage-earners are 
required to contribute 9 francs a year, and females 6 francs, 
the employers contributing a like amount. The largest pension 
obtainable is for life contributions and amounts to 414 francs. 
A clause in the act permits wage-earners to claim the rente 
at the age of 55 on a proportionately reduced scale without 
the viagere. The total cost of providing pensions in 1911 is 
estimated at over £5,500,000. 

Denmark. — The Danish system of old-age pensions was in- 
stituted by a law of 1891, and has been extended by further 
acts of 1902 and 1908. By the law of 1891 the burden of 
maintaining the aged was in part transferred from the local to 
the national taxes, and relief from this latter source was called 
a pension. Recipients of public assistance must be over 
60 years of age, they must be of good character and for 5 
years previous to receipt must have had their domicile in 
Denmark without receiving public charity. Such public assist- 
ance may be granted either in money, or kind, or by residence 
in an institution, such as an hospital. The assistance given, 
whatever it may be, must be sufficient for maintenance, and 
for attendance in case of illness. The actual amount is 
determined by the poor-law authorities, but all private assist- 
ance amounting to more than 100 kroner (£5, 13s.) a year is 
taken into account in measuring the poverty of the applicant. 
The cost of assistance is met in the first case by the commune 
in which the recipient is domiciled, but half the amount is 
afterwards refunded by the state. In 1907-190S, 71,185 persons 
were assisted — 53,008 by money and 18,177 otherwise. The 
total expenditure was £489,200, £242,660 being refunded by 
the state. 

xx. 3 



66 



OLDBURY— OLDCASTLE 



New Zealand. — In 1898 a bill, introduced by the Rt. Hon. R. J. 
Seddon, premier, became law which provided for the payment of 
an old-age pension out of the consolidated fund (revenue of the 
general government) to persons duly qualified, without contribution 
by the beneficiaries. The claimants must be 65 years of age, 
resident in the colony, and have so resided for 25 years. They must 
be free from conviction for lesser legal offences for 12 years, and 
for more serious breaches of the law for 25 years, previous to the 
application. They must be of good moral character and have a 
record of sobriety and respectability for five years. Their yearly 
income must not exceed £52, and they must not be owners of 
property exceeding in value £270. Aliens, aborigines, Chinese 
and Asiatics are excluded. The pensions are for £18 per annum, 
but for each £1 of yearly income over and above £34, and also for 
each £15 of capital over and above £50, £1 is deducted from the 
amount of the pension. Applications have to be made to the 
deputy registrars of one of 72 districts into which the colony is 
for this purpose divided. The claim is then recorded and submitted 
to a stipendiary magistrate, before whom the claimant has to prove 
his qualifications and submit to cross-examination. If the claim is 
admitted, a certificate is issued to the deputy registrar and in due 
course handed to the claimant. Payment is made through the local 
post-office as desired by the pensioner. The act came into force 
on the 1st of November 1898. An amending act of 1905 increased 
the amount of the maximum pension to £26 a year. See further, New 
Zealand. The authors of the measure maintain that it is a great 
success, while others point to the invidious character of the cross- 
examination required in proving the necessary degree of poverty, 
and allege that the arrangement penalizes the thrifty members of the 
poorer class, and is a direct incentive to transfer of property, of a 
more or less fraudulent character, between members of a family. 

Victoria. — By the Old-Age Pensions Act 1900, £75,000 was 
appropriated for the purpose of paying a pension of not more than 
10s. per week to any person who fulfilled the necessary conditions, 
of which the following were the principal: The pensioner must 
be 65 years of age or permanently disabled, must fill up a declara- 
tion that he has lived twenty years in the state ; has not been 
convicted of drunkenness, wife-desertion, &c; that his weekly 
income and his property do not exceed a given sum (the regulation 
of this and other details is intrusted to the governor in council). 
Further sums were subsequently appropriated to the purposes of 
the act. 

Authorities. — Report and Evidence of Select Committee on 
National Provident Insurance (1887); Report of Royal Commission 
on Aged Poor (1895); Report of Lord Rothschild's Committee 
(1898); Report of the Select Committee on Aged Deserving Poor 
(1899); Report of Departmental Committee, &c, about the Aged 
Deserving Poor (1900); J. A. Spender, The Slate and Pensions 
in Old Age (1892); George King, Old Age Pensions (1899); Reports 
of Poor Law Conferences; Annual Reports of the Chief Registrar 
of Friendly Societies; E. W. Brabrook, Provident Societies and the 
Public Welfare (1898), ch. viii. For: Charles Booth, The Aged Poor 
in England and Wales (1894); Old Age Pensions (1899); Right Hon. 
Joseph Chamberlain, " The Labour Question," Nineteenth Century 
(November 1892); Speeches (21st April 1891 and 24th May 1899) ; 
Rev. J. Frome Wilkinson, Pensions and Pauperism (1892); Publi- 
cations of the National Providence League. Against: C. J. Radley, 
Self-Help versus Stale-Pensions (3rd edition) ; Plea for Liberty (1892) ; 
Report of Royal Commission from a Friendly Society Point of View, 
reprint from Oddfellows' Magazine (1895); The Foresters' Miscellany 
(February 1902); Unity, a Monthly Journal of Foresters, &c. 
(February 1902); C. S. Loch, Old-Age Pensions and Pauperism 
(1892); Reply of Bradfield Board of Guardians to circular of 
National Provident League (1891); Publications of the Charity 
Organization Society. 

OLDBURY, an urban district in the Oldbury parliamentary 
division of Worcestershire, England, 5 m. W. of Birmingham, 
on the Great Western and London & North- Western railways 
and the Birmingham canal. Pop. (1901) 25,191. Coal, iron and 
limestone abound in the neighbourhood, and the town possesses 
alkali and chemical works, railway-carriage works, iron, edge- 
tool, nail and steel works, makings, corn-mills, and brick and 
tile kilns. The urban district includes the townships of Langley 
and Warley. 

OLDCASTLE, SIR JOHN (d. 1417), English Lollard leader, was 
son of Sir Richard Oldcastle of Almeley in Herefordshire. He 
is first mentioned as serving in the expedition to Scotland in 1400, 
when he was probably quite a young man. Next year he was 
in charge of Builth castle in Brecon, and serving all through 
the Welsh campaigns won the friendship and esteem of Henry, 
the prince of Wales. Oldcastle represented Herefordshire in the 
parliament of 1404. Four years later he married Joan, the heiress 
of Cobham, and was thereon summoned to parliament as Lord 
Cobham in her right. As a trusted supporter of the prince, 
Oldcastle held a high command in the expedition which the young 



Henry sent to France in 1411. Lollardy had many supporters 
in Herefordshire, and Oldcastle himself had adopted Lollard 
opinions before 1410, when the churches on his wife's estates 
in Kent were laid under interdict for unlicensed preaching. 
In the convocation which met in March 1413, shortly before the 
death of Henry IV., Oldcastle was at once accused of heresy. 
But his friendship with the new king prevented any decisive 
action till convincing evidence was found in a book belonging to 
Oldcastle, which was discovered in a shop in Paternoster Row. 
The matter was brought before the king, who desired that nothing 
should be done till he had tried his personal influence. Old- 
castle declared his readiness to suhmit to the king " all his fortune 
in this world," but was firm in his religious beliefs. When he 
fled from Windsor to his own castle at Cowling, Henry at last 
consented to a prosecution. Oldcastle refused to obey the 
archbishop's repeated citations, and it was only under a royal 
writ that he at last appeared before the ecclesiastical court on 
the 23rd of September. In a confession of his [faith he declared 
his belief in the sacraments and the necessity of penance and 
true confession; but to put hope, faith or trust in images was 
the great sin of idolatry. But he would not assent to the ortho- 
dox doctrine of the sacrament as stated by the bishops, nor 
admit the necessity of confession to a priest. So on the 25th of 
September he was convicted as a heretic. Henry was still anxious 
to find a way of escape for his old comrade, and granted a respite 
of forty days. Before that time had expired Oldcastle escaped 
from the Tower by the help of one Wilb'am Fisher, a parchment- 
maker of Smithfield (Riley, Memorials of London, 641). Old- 
castle now put himself at the head of a wide-spread Lollard 
conspiracy, which assumed a definitely political character. 
The design was to seize the king and his brothers during a 
Twelfth-night mumming at Eltham, and perhaps, as was alleged, 
to establish some sort of commonwealth. Henry, forewarned 
of their intention, removed to London, and when the Lollards 
assembled in force in St Giles's Fields on the 10th of January 
they were easily dispersed. Oldcastle himself escaped into 
Herefordshire, and for nearly four years avoided capture. 
Apparently he was privy to the Scrope and Cambridge plot in 
July 141 5, when he stirred some movement in the Welsh Marches. 
On the failure of the scheme he went again into hiding. Oldcastle 
was no doubt the instigator of the abortive Lollard plots of 1416, 
and appears to have intrigued with the Scots. But at last his 
hiding-place was discovered and in November 141 7 he was 
captured by the Lord Charlton of Powis. Oldcastle who was 
" sore wounded ere he would be taken," was brought to London 
in a horse-litter. On the 14th of December he was formally 
condemned, on the record of his previous conviction, and that 
same day was hung in St Giles's Fields, and burnt " gallows and 
all." It is not clear that he was burnt alive. 

Oldcastle died a martyr. He was no doubt a man of fine 
quality, but circumstances made him a traitor, and it is impossible 
altogether to condemn his execution. His unpopular opinions 
and early friendship with Henry V. created a traditional scandal 
which long continued. In the old play The Famous Victories 
of Henry V., written before 1588, Oldcastle figures as the prince's 
boon companion. When Shakespeare adapted that play in 
Henry IV., Oldcastle still appeared; but when the play was 
printed in 1598 Falstaff's name was substituted, in deference, 
as it is said, to the then Lord Cobham. Though the fat knight 
still remains " my old lad of the Castle," the stage character 
has nothing to do with the Lollard leader. 

Bibliography. — The record of Oldcastle's trial is printed in 
Fasciculi Zizaniorum (Rolls series) and in Wilkins's Concilia, iii. 
35 ! -357- The chief contemporary notices of his later career are 
given in Gesta Henrici Quinti (Eng. Hist. Soc.) and in Walsingham's 
Hisloria Anglicana. There have been many lives of Oldcastle, 
mainly based on Tlie Actes and Monuments of John Foxe, who in his 
turn followed the Briefe Chronycle of John Bale, first published 
in 1544. For notes on Oldcastle's early career, consult J. H. Wylie, 
History of England under Henry IV. For literary history see the 
Introductions to Richard James's Iter Lancaslrense (Chetham Soc, 
1845) and to Grosart's edition of the Poems of Richard, James (1880). 
See also W. Barske, Oldcastle- Falslaff in der englischen Literatur bis 
su Shakespeare (Palaestra, 1. Berlin, 1905). For a recent Life, see 
W. T. Waugh in the English Historical Review, vol. xx. (C. L. K.) 



OLD CATHOLICS 



6 7 



OLD CATHOLICS (Ger. Alikatholiken) , the designation assumed 
by those members of the Roman Catholic Church who refused 
to accept the decrees of the Vatican Council of 1870 defining 
the dogma of papal infallibility (see Vatican Council and 
Infallibility) and ultimately set up a separate ecclesiastical 
organization on the episcopal model. The Old Catholic move- 
ment, at the outset at least, differed fundamentally from the 
Protestant Reformation of the 16th century in that it aimed 
not at any drastic changes in doctrine but at the restoration 
of the ancient Catholic system, founded on the diocesan episco- 
pate, which under the influence of the ultramontane movement 
of the 19th century had been finally displaced by the rigidly 
centralized system of the papal monarchy. In this respect it 
represented a tendency of old standing within the Church and 
one which, in the 18th century, had all but gained the upper 
hand (see Febronianism and Gallicanism). Protestantism 
takes for its standard the Bible and the supposed doctrines 
and institutions of the apostolic age. Old Catholicism sets up 
the authority of the undivided Church, and accepts the decrees 
of the first seven general councils — down to the second council 
of Nicaea (787), a principle which has necessarily involved a 
certain amount of doctrinal divergence both from the standards 
of Rome and those of the Protestant Churches. 

The proceedings of the Vatican council and their outcome 
had at first threatened to lead to a serious schism in the Church. 
The minority against the decrees included many of the most 
distinguished prelates and theologians of the Roman com- 
munion, and the methods by which their opposition had been 
overcome seemed to make it difficult for them to submit. The 
pressure put upon them was, however, immense, and the reasons 
for submission may well have seemed overwhelming; in the 
end, after more or less delay, all the recalcitrant bishops gave 
in their adhesion to the decrees. 

The " sacrificio dell' intelletto," as it was termed — the sub- 
ordination of individual opinion to the general authority of 
the Church — was the maxim adopted by one and all. Seventeen 
of the German bishops almost immediately receded from the 
position they had taken up at Rome and assented to the dogma, 
publishing at the same time a pastoral letter in which they sought 
to justify their change of sentiment on the ground of expediency 
in relation to the interests of the Church (Michelis, Der neue 
Fuldaer Hirtenbrief, 1870). Their example was followed by all 
the other bishops of Germany. Darboy, archbishop of Paris, 
and Dupanloup, bishop of Orleans, in France adopted a like 
course, and took with them the entire body of the French clergy. 
Each bishop demanded in turn the same submission from the 
clergy of his diocese, the alternative being suspension from 
pastoral functions, to be followed by deprivation of office. It 
may be urged as some extenuation of this general abandonment 
of a great principle, that those who had refused to subscribe 
to the dogma received but languid support, and in some cases 
direct discouragement, from their respective governments. 
The submission of the illustrious Karl Joseph von Hefele was 
generally attributed to the influence exerted by the court of 
Wurttemberg. 

The universities, being less directly under the control of 
the Church, were prepared to show a bolder front. Dr J. F. 
von Schulte, professor at Prague, was one of the first to publish 
a formal protest. A meeting of Catholic professors and dis- 
tinguished scholars convened at Nuremberg (August 1870) 
recorded a like dissent, and resolved on the adoption of measures 
for bringing about the assembling of a really free council north 
of the Alps. The Appel aux Evtqucs Catholiques of M. Hyacinthe 
Loyson (better known as " Pere Hyacinthe" ), after referring 
to the overthrow of " the two despotisms," " the empire of the 
Napoleons and the temporal power of the popes," appealed 
to the Catholic bishops throughout the world to put an end 
to the schism by declaring whether the recent decrees were or 
were not binding on the, faith of the Church. This appeal, on 
its appearance in La Libertd. early in 1871, was suppressed by 
the order of the king of Italy. On the 28th of March Dollinger, 
in a letter of some length, set forth the reasons which com- 



pelled him also to withhold his submission alike as " a Christian, 
a theologian, an historical student and a citizen." The publica- 
tion of this letter was shortly followed by a sentence of ex- 
communication pronounced against Dollinger and Professor 
Johannes Friedrich (q.v.), and read to the different congrega- 
tions from the pulpits of Munich. The professors of the univer- 
sity, on the other hand, had shortly before evinced their resolu- 
tion of affording Dollinger all the moral support in their power 
by an address (April 3, 1871) in which they denounced the 
Vatican decrees with unsparing severity, declaring that, at the 
very time when the German people had " won for themselves 
the post of honour on the battlefield among the nations of 
the earth," the German bishops had stooped to the dishonouring 
task of " forcing consciences in the service of an unchristian 
tyranny, of reducing many pious and upright men to distress 
and want, and of persecuting those who had but stood steadfast 
in their allegiance to the ancient faith" (Friedberg, Aktenstiicke 
z. erslen Valicanischen Concil, p. 187). An address to the king, 
drawn up a few days later, received the signatures of 12,000 
Catholics. The refusal of the rites of the Church to one of the 
signatories, Dr Zenger, when on his deathbed, elicited strong 
expressions of disapproval ;' and when, shortly after, it became 
necessary to fill up by election six vacancies in the council of 
the university, the feeling of the electors was indicated by the 
return of candidates distinguished by their dissent from the 
new decrees. In the following September the demand for 
another and a free council was responded to by the assembling 
of a congress at Munich. It was composed of nearly 500 dele- 
gates, convened from almost all parts of the world; but the 
Teutonic element was now as manifestly predominant as the 
Latin element had been at Rome. The proceedings were pre- 
sided over by Professor von Schulte, and lasted three days. 
Among those who took a prominent part in the deliberations 
were Landammann Keller, Windscheid, Dollinger, Reinkens, 
Maassen (professor of canon law at Vienna), Friedrich and 
Huber. The arrangements finally agreed upon were mainly 
provisional; but one of the resolutions plainly declared that 
it was desirable if possible to effect a reunion with the Oriental 
Greek and Russian Churches, and also to arrive at an " under- 
standing " with the Protestant and Episcopal communions. 

In the following year lectures were delivered at Munich by 
various supporters of the new movement, and the learning and 
eloquence of Reinkens were displayed with marked effect. In 
France the adhesion of the abbe Michaud to the cause attracted 
considerable interest, not only from his reputation as a preacher, 
but also from the notable step in advance made by his declara- 
tion that, inasmuch as the adoption of the standpoint of the 
Tridentine canons would render reunion with the Lutheran 
and the Reformed Churches impossible, the wisest course would 
be to insist on nothing more with respect to doctrinal belief 
than was embodied in the canons of the first seven oecumenical 
councils. In the same year the Old Catholics, as they now 
began to be termed, entered into relations with the historical 
little Jansenist Church of Utrecht. Dollinger, in delivering his 
inaugural address as rector of the university of Munich, expressed 
his conviction that theology had received a fresh impulse and 
that the religious history of Europe was entering upon a new 
phase. 

Other circumstances contributed to invest Old Catholicism 
with additional importance. It was evident that the relations 
between the Roman Curia and the Prussian government were 
becoming extremely strained. In February 1872 appeared 
the first measures of the Falk ministry, having for their object 
the control of the influence of the clergy in the schools, and in 
'May the pope refused to accept Cardinal Hohenlohe, who during 
the council had opposed the definition of the dogma, as Prussian 
minister at the Vatican. In the same year two humble parish 
priests, Renftle of Mering in Bavaria and Tangermann of Unkel 
in the Rhineland, set an example of independence by refusing 

1 The rites were administered and the burial service conducted 
by Friedrich, who had refused to acknowledge his excom- 
munication. 



68 



OLD CATHOLICS 



to accept the decrees. The former, driven from his parish 
church, was followed by the majority of his congregation, who, 
in spite of every discouragement, continued faithful to him; 
and for years after, as successive members were removed by 
death, the crosses over their graves recorded that they had died 
" true to their ancient belief." Tangermann, the poet, expelled 
in like manner from his parish by the archbishop of Cologne, 
before long found himself the minister of a much larger congre- 
gation in the episcopal city itself. These examples exercised 
no little influence, and congregations of Old Catholics were 
shortly after formed at numerous towns and villages in Bavaria, 
Baden, Prussia, German Switzerland, and even in Austria. 
At Warnsdorf in Bohemia a congregation was collected which 
still represents one of the most important centres of the move- 
ment. In September the second congress was held at Cologne. 
It was attended by some 500 delegates or visitors from all parts 
of Europe, and the English Church was represented by the 
bishops of Ely and Lincoln and other distinguished members. 
At this congress Friedrich boldly declared that the movement 
was directed " against the whole papal system, a system of 
errors during a thousand years, which had only reached its 
climax in the doctrine of infallibility." 

The movement thus entered a new phase, the congress 
occupying itself mainly with the formation of a more definite 
organization and with the question'of reunion with other Churches. 
The immediate effect was a fateful divergence of opinion; for 
many who sympathized with the opposition to the extreme 
papal claims shrank from the creation of a fresh schism. Prince 
Chlodwig Hohenlohe, who as prime minister of Bavaria had 
attempted to unite the governments against the definition of 
the dogma, refused to have anything to do with proceedings 
which could only end in the creation of a fresh sect, and would 
make the prospect of the reform of the Church from within 
hopeless; more] important still, Dollinger refused to take part 
in setting up a separate organization, and though he afterwards 
so far modified his opinion as to help the Old Catholic community 
with sympathy and advice, he never formally joined it. 

Meanwhile, the progress of the quarrel between the Prussian 
government and the Curia had been highly favourable to the 
movement. In May 1873 the celebrated Falk laws were enacted, 
whereby the articles 15 and 18 of the Prussian constitution were 
modified, so as to legalize a systematic state supervision over 
the education of the clergy of all denominations, and also over 
the appointment and dismissal of all ministers of religion. The 
measure, which was a direct response to the Vatican decrees, 
inspired the Old Catholics with a not unreasonable expectation 
that the moral support of the government would henceforth 
be enlisted on their side. On the nth of August Professor J. H. 
Reinkens of Breslau, having been duly elected bishop of the 
new community, 1 was consecrated at Rotterdam by Bishop 
Heykamp of Deventer, the archbishop of Utrecht, who was 
to have performed the ceremony, having died a few days hefore. 
In the meantime the extension of the movement in Switzerland 
had been proceeding rapidly, and it was resolved to hold the 
third congress at Constance. The proceedings occupied three 
days (12th to 14th Septemher), the subjects discussed being 
chiefly the institution of a synod 2 as the legislative and executive 
organ of the Church, and schemes of reunion with the Greek, 
the African and the Protestant communions. On the 20th 
of September the election of Bishop Reinkens was formally 
recognized by the Prussian government, and on the 7th of 
October he took the oath of allegiance to the king. 

The following year (1874) was marked by the assembling 
of the firstsynod and a conference at Bonn, and of a congress 

1 Reinkens was elected at Cologne in primitive Christian fashion 
by clergy and people, the latter being representatives of Old Catholic 
congregations. 

2 The diocesan synod, under the presidency of the bishop, consists 
of the clergy of the diocese and one lay delegate for every 200 
church members. It now meets twice a year and transacts the 
business prepared for it by an executive committee of 4 clergy and 
5 laymen. In Switzerland the organization is still more democratic; 
the bishop does not preside over the synod and may be deposed by it. 



at Freiburg-im-Breisgau. At the congress Bishop Reinkens spoke 
in hopeful terms of the results of his observations during a 
recent missionary tour throughout Germany. The conference, 
held on the 14th, 15th and 16th of September, had for its special 
object the discussion of the early confessions as a basis of agree- 
ment, though not necessarily of fusion, between the different 
communions above-named. The meetings, which were presided 
over by Dollinger, successively took into consideration the 
Filioque clause in the Nicene creed, the sacraments, the canon of 
Scripture, the episcopal succession in the English Church, the 
confessional, indulgences, prayers for the dead, and the eucharist 
(see Dollinger). The synod (May 27-29) was the first of a 
series, held yearly till 1879 and afterwards twice a year, in which 
the doctrine and discipline of the new Church were gradually 
formulated. The tendency was, naturally, to move further 
and further away from the Roman model; and though the synod 
expressly renounced any claim to formulate dogma, or any 
intention of destroying the unity of the faith, the " Catholic 
Catechism" adopted by it in 1874 contained several articles 
fundamentally at variance with the teaching of Rome. 3 At the 
first synod, too, it was decided to make confession and fasting 
optional, while later synods pronounced in favour of using the 
vernacular in public worship, allowing the marriage of priests, and 
permitting them to administer the communion in both kinds 
to members of the Anglican Church attending their services. 
Of these developments that abolishing the compulsory celibacy 
of the clergy led to the most opposition; some opposed it as 
inexpedient, others — notably the Jansenist clergy of Holland — 
as wrong in itself, and when it was ultimately passed in 1878 
some of the clergy, notably Tangermann and Reusch, withdrew 
from the Old Catholic movement. 

Meanwhile the movement had made some progress in other 
countries — in Austria, in Italy and in Mexico; but everywhere 
it was hampered by the inevitable controversies, which either 
broke up its organization or hindered its development. In 
Switzerland, where important conferences were successively 
convened (at Solothurn in 187 1, at Olten in 1872, 1873 and 
1874), the unanimity of the " Christian Catholics," as they 
preferred to call themselves, seemed at one time in danger of 
being shipwrecked on the question of episcopacy. It was not 
until September 18th, 1876, that the conflict of opinions was 
so far composed as to allow of the consecration of Bishop Herzog 
by Bishop Reinkens. The reforms introduced by M. Hyacinthe 
Loyson in his church at Geneva received only a partial assent 
from the general body. Among the more practical results of 
his example is to be reckoned, however, the fact that in French 
Switzerland nearly all the clergy, in German Switzerland about 
one half, are married men. 

The end of the KulturkampJ in 1878, and the new alliance 
between Bismarck and Pope Leo XIII. against revolutionary. 
Socialism, deprived the Old Catholics of the special favour 
which had been shown them by the Prussian government; they 
continued, however, to enjoy the legal status of Catholics, and 
their communities retained the rights and the property secured 
to them by the law of the 4th of July 1875. In Bavaria, on the 
other hand, they were in March 1890, after the death of Dollinger, 
definitely reduced to the status of a private religious sect, 
with very narrow rights. When Bishop Reinkens died in 
January 1896 his successor Theodor Weber, professor of theology 
at Breslau, elected bishop on the 4th of March, was recognized 
only by the governments of Prussia, Baden and Hesse. The 
present position of the Old Catholic Church has disappointed 
the expectation of its friends and of its enemies. It has neither 
advanced rapidly, as the former had hoped, nor retrograded, 
as the latter have frequently predicted it would do. In Germany 
there are 90 congregations, served by 60 priests, and the number 
of adherents is estimated at about 60,000. In Switzerland there 
are 40 parishes (of which only one, that at Lucerne, is in the 

\E.g. especially Question 164: "this (the Christian) community 
is invisible," and Question 167, " one may belong to the invisible 
Church (i.e. of those sharing in Christ's redemption) without belong- 
ing to the visible Church." 



OLD DEER— OLDENBARNEVELDT 



69 



Roman Catholic cantons), 60 clergy and about 50,000 adherents. 
In Austria, though some accessions have been received since 
the Lbs von Rom movement began in 1899, t ne Old Catholic 
Church has not made much headway; it has some 15 churches 
and about 15,000 adherents. In Holland the Old Catholic or 
Jansenist Church has 3 bishops, about 30 congregations and over 
8000 adherents. ' In France the movement headed by Loyson 
did not go far. There is but one congregation, in Paris, 
where it has built for itself a beautiful new church on 
the Boulevard Blanqin. Its priest is George Volet, who was 
ordained by Herzog, and it has just over 300 members. It 
is under the supervision of the Old Catholic archbishops of 
Utrecht. In Italy a branch of the Old Catholic communion 
was established in 1881 by Count Enrico di Campello, a former 
canon of St Peter's at Rome. A church was opened in Rome 
by Monsignor Savarese and Count Campello, under the super- 
vision of the, bishop of Long Island in the United States, who 
undertook the superintendence of the congregation in accordance 
with the regulations laid down by the Lambeth conference. 
But dissensions arose between the two men. The church in 
Rome was closed; Savarese returned to the Roman Church; 
and Campello commenced a reform work in the rural districts 
of Umbria, under the episcopal guidance of the bishop of Salisbury. 
This was in 1885. In 1900 Campello returned to Rome, and once 
more opened a church there. In 1902 he retired from active 
participation in the work, on account of age and bodily infirmity; 
and his place at the head of it was taken by Professor Cicchitti 
of Milan. Campello ultimately returned to the Roman com- 
munion. There are half-a-dozen priests, who are either in 
Roman or Old Catholic orders, and about twice as many con- 
gregations. Old Catholicism has spread to America. The 
Polish Romanists there, in 1899, complained of the rule of Irish 
bishops; elected a bishop of their own, Herr Anton Kozlowski; 
presented him to the Old Catholic bishops in Europe for consecra- 
tion; and he presides over seven congregations in Chicago and 
th'e neighbourhood. The Austrian and Italian churches possess 
no bishops, and the Austrian government refuses to allow the 
Old Catholic bishops of other countries to perform their functions 
in Austria. Every Old Catholic congregation has its choral 
union, its 'poor relief, and its mutual improvement society. 
Theological faculties exist at Bonn and Bern, and at the former 
a residential college for theological students was established 
by Bishop Reinkens. Old Catholicism has eight newspapers — 
two in Italy, two in Switzerland, and one each in Holland,' 
Germany, Austria and France. It has held reunion conferences 
at Lucerne in 1892, at Rotterdam in 1894, and at Vienna in 1897. 
At these, members of the various episcopal bodies have been 
welcomed. It has also established a quarterly publication, the 
Revue Internationale de theologie, which has admitted articles 
in French; German and English, contributed not merely by 
Old Catholics, but by members of the Anglican, Russian, Greek 
and Slavonic churches. Old Catholic theologians have been 
very active, and the work of Dbllinger and Reusch on the Jesuits, 
and the history of the Roman Church by Professor Langen; 
have attained a European reputation. 

An outline of the whole movement up to the year 1875 will be 
found in The New Reformation, by " Theodorus "(J- Bass Mullinger) ; 
and an excellent resum6 of the main facts in the history of the 
movement in each European country, as connected with other 
developments of liberal thought, and with political history, is giver 
in the second volume of ' Dr F. Nippold's HandBuch der neuesten 
Kirchengeschichte; vol. ii. (1883). See also A. M. E. Scarth, The 
Story of the Old Catholic and Kindred Movements (London, 1883); 
Biihler, Der Altkatholicismus (Leiden, 1880); J. F von Schulte, 
Der Altkalholizismus (Giessen, 1887); and article in Hauck-Herzog's 
Realencyk. fur prbt. Theol. und Kirche, i. 415. For details the follow- 
ing sources ,may be consulted: (a) For the proceedings of the 
successive congresses: the Stenographische Berichte, published at 
Munich, Cologne, Constance, &c. ; those of the congress of Constance 
were summarized in an English form, with other elucidatory matter, 
by Professor John Mayor. (6) For the questions involved in the 
consecration of Bishop Reinkens: Rechtsgutachten iiber die Frage der 
Anerkennung des altkatholischen Bischofs Dr Reinkens in Bayern 
(Munich, 1874); Emil Friedberg, Der Staat und d. Bischofswahlen in 
Deutschland (Leipzig, 1874) ; F. von Sybel, Das altkatholische Bisthum 
und das Vermogen d. romischkatholischen Kirchengesellschaften in 



Preussen (Bonn, 1874). (c) Reinkens's own speeches and pastorals, 
some of which have been translated into English, give his personal 
views and experiences; the Life of Huber has been written and 
published by Eberhard Stirngiebl; and the persecutions to which 
the Old Catholic clergy were exposed have been set forth in a pamphlet 
by J. Mayor, Facts and Documents (London, 1875). (d) For Switzer- 
land; C. Herzog, Beitrage zur Vorgeschichte der Christkalhol. Kirche der 
Schweiz (Bern, 1896). 

OLD DEER, a parish and village in the district of Buchan, 
Aberdeenshire, Scotland. Pop. (1901), 4313. The village lies 
on the Deer or South Ugie Water, io£ m. W. of Peterhead, 
and 2 m. from Mintlaw station on the Great North of Scotland 
Railway Company's branch line from Aberdeen to Peterhead. 
The industries include distilling, brewing, and the manufacture 
of woollens, and there are quarries of granite and limestone. 
Columba and his nephew Drostan founded a monastery here in 
the 6th century, of which no trace remains. A most interesting 
relic of the monks was discovered in 1857 in the Cambridge 
University library by Henry Bradshaw. ' It consisted of a small 
MS. of the Gospels in the Vulgate, fragments of the liturgy 
of the Celtic church, and notes, in the Gaelic script of the 12th 
century, referring to the charters of the ancient monastery,- 
including a summary of that granted by David I. These are 
among the oldest examples of Scottish Gaelic. The MS. was also 
adorned with Gaelic designs. It had belonged to the. monks of 
Deer and been in the possession of the University Library since 
1 715. It was edited by John Stuart (1813-1877) for the Spalding 
Club, by whom it was published in 1869 under the title of 
The Book of Deer. In 12 18 William Comyn, earl of Buchan, 
founded the Abbey of St Mary of Deer, now in ruins, £ m. farther 
up the river than the monastery and on the opposite bank. 
Although it was erected for Cistercians from the priory of Kinloss, 
near Forres, the property of the Columban monastery was re- 
moved to it. The founder (d. 1 233) and his countess were buried 
in the church. The parish is rich in antiquities, but the most 
noted of them — the Stone of Deer, a sculptured block of syenite, 
which stood near the Abbey — was destroyed in 1854. The 
thriving village of New Deer (formerly called Auchriddie) 
lies about 7 m. W. of the older village; it includes the ruined 
castle of Fedderat. 

OLDENBARNEVELDT, JOHAN VAN (1547-1619), Dutch 
statesman, was born at Amersfoort on- the 14th of September 
1547. The family from which he claimed descent was of ancient 
lineage. After studying law at Louvain, Bourges and Heidelberg, 
and travelling in France and Italy, Oldenbarneveldt settled down 
to practise in the law courts at the Hague. In religion a moderate 
Calvinist, he threw himself with ardour into the revolt against 
Spanish tyranny and became a zealous adherent of William the 
Silent. He served as a volunteer for the relief of Haarlem (1573) 
and again at Leiden (1574). In 1576 he obtained the important 
post of pensionary of Rotterdam, an office which carried with it 
official membership of the States of Holland. In this capacity 
his industry, singular 'grasp of affairs, and persuasive powers of 
speech speedily gained for him a position of influence. He was 
active in promoting the Union of Utrecht (1579) and the accept- 
ance of the countship of Holland and Zeeland by William (1584) 
On the assassination of Orange it was at the proposal of Olden- 
barneveldt that the youthful Maurice of Nassau was at once 
elected stadholder, captain-general and admiral of Holland. 
During the governorship of Leicester he was the leader of the 
strenuous opposition offered by the States of Holland to the 
centralizing policy of the governor. In 15S6 he was appointed, 
in succession to Paul Buys, to the post of Land's Advocate of 
Holland. This great office, which he held for 32 years, gave 
to a man of commanding ability and industry unbounded 
influence in a many-headed republic without any central executive 
authority. Though nominally the servant of the States of 
H611and he made himself politically the personification of the 
province which bore more than half the entire charge of the union, 
and as its mouthpiece in the states-general he practically 
dominated that assembly. In a brief period he became entrusted 
with such large and far-reaching authority in all the details 6i 
administration, as to be virtually " minister of all affairs." 



7° 



T i 



OLDENBARNEVELDT 



During the two critical years which followed the withdrawal 
of Leicester, it was the statesmanship of the advocate which kept 
the United Provinces from falling asunder through their own 
inherent separatist tendencies, and prevented them from becom- 
ing an easy conquest to the formidable army of Alexander of 
Parma. Fortunately for the Netherlands the attention of Philip 
was at their time of greatest weakness riveted upon his con- 
templated invasion of England, and a respite was afforded 
which enabled Oldenbarneveldt to supply the lack of any central 
organized government by gathering into his own hands the con- 
trol of administrative affairs. His task was made the easier 
by the whole-hearted support he received from Maurice of 
Nassau, who, after 1589, held the Stadholderate of five provinces, 
and. was likewise captain-general and admiral of the union. 
The interests and ambitions of the two men did not clash, for 
Maurice's thoughts were centred on the training and leadership 
of armies and he had no special capacity as a statesman or in- 
clination for politics. The first rift between them came in 1600, 
when Maurice was forced against his will by the states-general, 
under the advocate's influence, to undertake an expedition 
into Flanders, which was only saved from disaster by desperate 
efforts which "ended in victory at Nieuwport. In 1598 Olden- 
barneveldt took part in special embassies to Henry IV. and 
Elizabeth, -and again in 1605 in a special mission sent to con- 
gratulate James I. on his accession. 

. The opening of negotiations by Albert and Isabel in 1606 for 
a peace or long truce led to a great division of opinion in the 
Netherlands. ■ The archdukes having consented to treat with the 
United Provinces " as free provinces and states over which they 
had no pretensions," Oldenbarneveldt, who had with him the 
States of Holland and the majority of burgher regents throughout 
the county, was for peace, provided that liberty of trading was 
conceded. .Maurice and his cousin William Louis, stadholder of 
Frisia, .with the military and naval leaders and the Calvinist 
clergy, were opposed to it, on the ground that the Spanish king 
was merely seeking an interval of repose in which to recuperate 
his strength for' a renewed attack on the independence of the 
Netherlands. For some three years the negotiations went on, 
but at last after endless parleying, on the 9th of April 1609, a 
truce for twelve years was concluded. All that the Dutch asked 
was directly or indirectly granted, and Maurice felt obliged to 
give a reluctant and somewhat sullen assent to the favourable 
conditions obtained by the firm and skilful diplomacy of the 
advocate. 

The immediate effect of the truce was a strengthening of 
Oldenbarneveldt 's influence in the government of the republic, 
now recognized as a "free and independent state"; external peace, 
however, was to bring with it internal strife. For some years 
there had been a war of words between the religious parties, 
known as the Gomarists (strict Calvinists) and the Arminians 
(moderate Calvinists). In 1610 the Arminians drew up a petition, 
known as the Remonstrance, in which they asked that their 
tenets (defined in five articles) should be submitted to a national 
synod, summoned by the civil government. It was no secret that 
this action of the Arminians was taken with the approval and 
connivance of the advocate, who was what was styled a libertine, 
i.e. an upholder of the principle of toleration in religious opinions. 
The Gomarists in reply drew up a Contra-Remonstrance in seven 
articles, and appealed to a purely church synod. The whole land 
was henceforth divided into Remonstrants and Contra-Re- 
monstrants; the States of Holland under the influence of 
Oldenbarneveldt supported the former, and refused to sanction 
the summoning of a purely church synod (1613). They likewise 
(1614) forbade the preachers in the Province of Holland to treat 
of disputed subjects from their pulpits. Obedience was difficult 
to enforce without military help, riots broke out in certain towns, 
and when' Maurice was appealed to, as captain-general, he 
declined to act: He did more, though in no sense a theologian; he 
declared himself on the side of the Contra-Remonstrants, and 
established a 1 preacher of that persuasion in a church at the 
Hague (i6r7). 

The advocate now took a bold step. He proposed that the 



States of Holland should, on their own authority, as a sovereign 
province, raise a local force of 4000 men (waardgelders) to keep 
the peace. The states-general meanwhile by a 'bare majority 
(4 provinces to 3) agreed to the summoning of a national church 
synod. The States of Holland, also by a narrow majority, refused 
their assent to this, and passed (August 4, 161 7) a strong 
resolution (Scherpe Resolutie) by which all magistrates, officials 
and soldiers in the pay of the province were required to take an 
oath of obedience to the states on pain of dismissal, and were to be 
held accountable not to the ordinary tribunals, but to the States 
of Holland. It was a declaration of sovereign independence on 
the part of Holland, and the states-general took up the challenge 
and determined on decisive action. A commission was appointed 
with Maurice at its head to compel the disbanding of the waard- 
gelders. On the 31st of July 1618 the stadholder appeared at 
Utrecht, which had thrown in its lot with Holland, at the head 
of a body of troops, and at his command the local levies at once 
laid down their arms. His progress through the towns of 
Holland met with no opposition. The states party was crushed 
without a blow being struck. On the 23rd of August, by order of 
the states-general, the advocate and his chief supporters, de 
Groot and Hoogerbeets, were arrested. 

Oldenbarneveldt was with his friends kept in the strictest 
confinement until November, and then brought for examination 
before a commission ' appointed by the states-general. He 
appeared more than sixty times before the commissioners and 
was examined most severely upon the whole course of his 
official life, and was, most unjustly, allowed neither to consult 
papers nor to put his defence in writing. On the 20th of February 
1619 he was arraigned before a special court of twenty-four 
members, only half of whom were Hollanders, and nearly all of 
them his personal enemies. It was in no sense a legal court, nor 
had it any jurisdiction over the prisoner, but the protest of the 
advocate, who claimed his right to be tried by the sovereign 
province of Holland, whose servant he was, was disregarded. 
He was allowed no advocates, nor the use of documents, pen or 
paper. It was in fact not a trial at all, and the packed bench of 
judges on Sunday, the 1 2th of May, pronounced sentence of death. 
On the following day the old statesman, at the age of seventy-one, 
was beheaded in the Binnenhof at the Hague. Such, to use his 
own words, was his reward for serving his country forty-three 
years. 

The accusations brought against Oldenbarneveldt of having 
been a traitor to his country, whose interests he had betrayed for 
foreign gold, have no basis in fact. The whole life of the 
advocate disproves them, and not a shred of evidence has ever 
been produced to throw suspicion upon the patriot statesman's 
conduct. All his private papers fell into the hands of his foes, 
but not even the bitterest and ablest of his personal enemies, 
Francis Aarssens (see Aarssens), could extract from them, 
anything to show that Oldenbarneveldt at any time betrayed 
his country's interests. That he was an ambitious man, fond 
of power, and haughty in his attitude to those who differed from 
him in opinion, may be granted, but it must also be conceded 
that he sought for power in order to confer invaluable services 
upon his country, and that impatience of opposition was not 
unnatural in a man who had exercised an almost supreme 
control of administrative affairs for upwards of three decades. 
His high-handed course of action in defence of what he conceived to 
be the sovereign rights of his own province of Holland to decide 
upon religious questions within its borders may be challenged on 
the ground of inexpediency, but not of illegality. 1 The harshness 
of the treatment meted out by Maurice to his father's old friend, 
the faithful counsellor and protector of his own early years, 
leaves a stain upon the stadholder's memory which can never be 
washed away. That the prince should have felt compelled in the 
last resort to take up arms for the Union against the attempt of 
the province of Holland to defy the authority of the Generality 
may be justified by the plea reipublicae salus suprema lex. To 
eject the advocate from power was one thing,' to execute him as 
a traitor quite another. The condemnation of Oldenbarneveldt 
was carried out with Maurice's consent and approval, and, he 



OLDENBURG 



7i 



cannot be acquitted of a prominent share in what posterity has 
pronounced to be a judicial murder. 

Oldenbarneveldt was married in 1575 to Maria van Utrecht. 
He left two sons, the lords of Groeneveld and Stoutenburg, and 
two daughters. A conspiracy against the life of Maurice, 'in 
which the sons of Oldenbarneveldt took part, was discovered in 
1623. Stoutenburg, who was the chief accomplice, made his 
escape and entered the service of Spain; Groeneveld was 
; executed. 

Bibliography. — L. v. Deventer, Gedenkstukken van Johan v. 
Oldenbarneveldt en zijn tijd (1577-1609; 3 vols., 1860-1865); J. van 
Oldenbarneveldt, Historie Warachtige van de ghevanckennise . . . 
leslk wonder ende droevige doot van J. v. 0. . . . uyt de verklaringe 
van Z. E. dienaar Johan Francken (1620); Historie van het leven en 
slerven van den Heer Johan van Olden Barneveldt (1648); Groen van 
Prinsterer, Maurice, el Barneveldt (1875); J. L. Motley, Life and 
Death qf John of Barneveldt (2 vols., 1874). (G. E.) 

OLDENBURG, a grand-duchy of Germany, with an area of 
2479 sq. m. It consists of three widely separated portions of 
territory — (1) the duchy of Oldenburg, (2) the principality of 
Lubeck, and (3) the principality of Birkenfeld. It ranks tenth 

"among the states of the German empire and has one vote in 
the Bundesrat (federal council) and three members in the 
Reichstag. i 

I: The duchy of Oldenburg, comprising fully four-fifths of 
the entire 'area and population, lies between 52° 29' and 53 
44' N. and between 7 37' and 8° 37' E., and is bounded on the N. 
by the North Sea and on the other three sides by Hanover, with 
the exception of a small strip on the east, where it is conter- 
minous with the territory of the free city' of Bremen. It forms 

•part of the north-western German plain lying between the VVeser 
arid the Ems, and, except on the south, where the Dammerge- 
birge attain a height of '478 ft., it is almost entirely flat, with a 
slight inclination towards the sea. In respect of its soil it is 

'divided broadly into two parts — the higher and inland-lying 
Geest, consisting of -sandy plains intermixed with extensive 
heaths and moors, and the marsh lands along the coast, con- 
sisting of rich but somewhat swampy alluvial soil. The latter, 
which compose about one-fifth of the duchy, are protected 
against the inroads "of the sea by dikes as in Holland; 'and 
beyond these are the so-called Watlen, generally covered at high 
tide, but at many points being gradually reclaimed. The 
climate'is temperate-and humid; the mean temperature of the 
coldest month at the town of Oldenburg is 26° F. of the warmest 
66°.'" Storms'a're numerous^ and their violence is the more felt 
owing to 'the almost entire absence of trees; and fogs and ague 
are prevalent in the marsh lands." The chief rivers are the 
Hunte, flowing into the Weser, and the Hase and Leda flowing 
into 'the Ems. The Weser itself forms the eastern boundary 
for 42'm., and 'internal navigation is greatly facilitated by a 
canal, passing through the heart of the duchy and connecting 
the H unte an d the Leda. On the north there are several small 
coast streams conducted through the' dikes by sluices, the only 
one, of importance being the Jade, which empties itself into the 
Jade Busen, a deep gulf affording good accommodation for 
shipping. The duchy also contains numerous small lakes, the 
chief of which is the Diimmer See in the south-east corner, 
measuring 4 m. in length by 25 in width. About 30% of the 
area of the duchy is under cultivation and 17% under pasture 
and meadows, while the rest consists mainly of marsh, moor and 
heath". Forests occupy 'a very small proportion of the whole, but 
there are some fine old oaks. In the Geest the principal crops are 
rye, oats, potatoes and buckwheat, for which the heath is some- 
times prepared by burning. Large tracts of moorland, however, 
are useful only as producing peat for fuel, or as affording pasture 
to the flocks of small coarse-woolled Oldenburg sheep. The rich 
soil of the marsh lands produces good crops of wheat, oats, rye, 
hemp and rape, but is especially adapted for grazing. 'The 
cattle and horses raised on it are highly esteemed throughout 
Germany, and the former are exported .in large numbers to 
England. Bee-keeping is much in vogue on the moors. . The live 
stock of Oldenburg forms a great part of its wealth, and the ratio 
of cattle, sheep and horses to the population is one'of the highest 



among the German states. There are few large estates, and the 
ground is mostly in the hands of small farmers, who enjoy the 
right of fishing and shooting on their holdings. Game is scarce, 
but fishing is fairly productive. The mineral wealth of Oldenburg 
is very small. Woollen and cotton fabrics, stockings, jute and 
cigars are made at Varel, Delmenhorst and Lohne; cork-cutting 
is extensively practised in some districts, and there 'are a few 
iron-foundries. Trade is relatively of more importance', chiefly 
owing to the proximity of Bremen. The agricultural produce of 
the duchy is exported to Scandinavia, Russia, England and the 
United States, in return for colonial 'goods and manufactures. 
Varel, Brake and Elsfleth are the chief commercial harbours. 

II.' The principality of Lubeck has an area of 209 sq. m: and 
shares in the general physical characteristifea of east Holstein, 
within which it lies. ' On the east if extends to "Lubeck Bay of the 
Baltic Sea, and on the south-east it is bounded 1 by the Trave. 
The chief rivers are the Schwartau, a tributary of the Trave, and 
the Schwentine, flowing northwards to the Gulf of Kiel. ■ The 
scenery of Lubeck is often picturesque, especially in the vicinity 
of the'Plon See and the Eutin See, the most important of the small 
lakes with which it is dotted. Agriculture is practised here 
even more extensively than in the duchy of Oldenburg, about 
75% of the area being cultivated. The population in 1905 "was 

38,583. -■ ■"•,■':,' 

III. The principality of Birkenfeld, 312 sq. m. in extent, lies in 
the midst of the Prussian province of the Rhine, about 30 m. W. 
of the Rhine at Worms and 150 m. S- of the duchy of Oldenburg. 
The population in 1905 was 46,484. ' .(See' BiRKEriFELDl) '; 

The total population of the grand-duchy of Oldenburg in 1880 
was 337,478, and in 1905 438,856. The bulk of the'inhabitants 
are of the Saxon stock, but' to the north and' west of the duchy 
there' are numerous descendants of the ancient Frisians.- 1 " The 
differences between the two races are still to some extent 'percept- 
ible, but Low German (Plall-deutsch) is universally spoken," except 
in one limited district, 'where' a Frisian dialect has maintained 
itself. In general characteristics the Oldenburg peasants resemble 
the Dutch, and the absence of large landowners has contributed 
to make them sturdy and independent." The population 6f 
Oldenburg is somewhat unequally distributed, some parts of the 
■ marsh lands containing over 300 persons to the square rriile, 
while in the Geest the number occasionally sinks as low- as '40. 
About 70% of the inhabitants belong to the " rural " population. 
The town of Oldenburg is the capital of the. grarid-duchy. The 
war-harbour of Wilhelmshaven, on the shore of the Jade Busen, 
was built by Prussia on land bought ' from Oldenburg/ 1 "The 
chief towns' of Birkenfeld and Lubeck respectively' are Birkenfeld 
and Eutin. 

Oldenburg is a Protestant country, and' the grand-duke 'is 
required to be a member of the Lutheran Church/ '.'"Roman 
Catholicism, however, preponderates in the south-western' pro- 
vinces, which formerly belonged to the bishopric of Miinster. 
Oldenburg Roman Catholics are under the sway of the bishops of 
Miinster, who is represented by an official at Vechta. , The 
educational system' 'of Oldenburg is on a similar footing 'to 
that of north Germany in general, though the scattered posi- 
tion of the farmhouses interferes to some extent with school 
attendance. 

The constitution of Oldenburg, based upon a decree of 184b, 
revised in 1852, is one of the most liberal in Germany. It pro- 
vides for a single representative chamber {Landtag), elected 
indirectly'by universal suffrage and exercising concurrent rights 
of legislation and taxation with the grand-duke. The chamber, 
which consists of forty members, one for every 10,000 inhabitants, 
is elected every three years. The executive 'consists of three 
ministers, who are aided by a committee of the Landtag, when 
that body is 'not in session. -'The local affairs of Birkenfeld and 
Lubeck are entrusted to provincial councils of fifteen members 
each. All citizens paying taxes and not' having been convicted 
'of felony are enfranchised.' The municipal communities" enjoy 
an unusual amount of independence. The finances of Teach 
constituent state of the grand-duchy are managed' separately, 
and there is also a fourth budget concerned - with the joint 



7-2 



OLDENBURG 



administration. The total revenue and expenditure are each 
about £650,000 annually. The grand-duchy had a debt in 1907 
of £2,958,409. 

History.- — The earliest recorded inhabitants of the district 
now called Oldenburg were a Teutonic people, the Chauci, who 
were afterwards merged in the Frisians. The chroniclers delight 
in tracing the genealogy of the counts of Oldenburg to the Saxon 
hero, Widukind, the stubborn opponent of Charlemagne, but 
their first historical representative is one Elimar (d. 1108) who 
is described as comes in confinio Saxoniae et Frisiae. Elimar's 
descendants appear as vassals, although sometimes rebellious 
ones, of the dukes of Saxony; but they attained the dignity 
of princes of the empire when the emperor Frederick I. dis- 
membered the Saxon duchy in 1180. At this time the county of 
Delmenhorst formed part of the dominions of the counts of 
Oldenburg, but afterwards it was on several occasions separated 
■from them to form an apanage for younger branches of the 
family. /This was the case between 1262 and 1447, between 
1463 and 1547, and between 1577 and 161 7. The northern and 
western parts of the present grand-duchy of Oldenburg were in 
the hands of independent, or semi-independent, Frisian princes, 
who were usually heathens, and during the early part of the 
13th century the counts carried on a series of wars with these 
small potentates which resulted in a gradual expansion of their 
territory. The free city of Bremen and the bishop of Miinster 
were also frequently at war with the counts of Oldenburg. 

The successor of Count Dietrich (d. 1440), called Forlunatus, 
was his son Christian, who in 1448 was chosen king of Denmark 
as Christian I. In 1450 he became king of Norway and in 1457 
king of Sweden; in 1460 he inherited the duchy of Schleswig 
and the county of Holstein, an event of high importance for 
the future history of Oldenburg. In 1454 he handed over Olden- 
burg to his brother Gerhard (c. 1430-1499) a turbulent prince, 
who was constantly at war with the bishop of Bremen and other 
neighbours. In 1483 Gerhard was compelled to abdicate in 
favour of his sons, and he died whilst on a pilgrimage in Spain. 
Early in the 16th century Oldenburg was again enlarged at the 
expense of the Frisians. Protestantism was introduced into the 
county by Count Anton I. (1505-1573), who also suppressed 
the monasteries; however, he remained loyal to Charles V. 
during the war of the league of Schmalkalden, and was able 
thus to increase his territories, obtaining Delmenhorst in 1547. 
One of Anton's brothers, Count Christopher (c. 1 506-1 560), 
won some reputation as a soldier. Anton's grandson, Anton 
Giinther (1 583-1667), who succeeded in 1603, proved himself 
the wisest prince who had yet ruled Oldenburg. Jever had been 
acquired before he became count, but in 1624 he added Knyp- 
hausen and Varel to his lands, with which in 1647 Delmenhorst 
was finally united. By his prudent neutrality during the 
Thirty Years' War Anton Giinther secured for his dominions an 
immunity from the terrible devastations to which nearly all 
the other states of Germany were exposed. He also obtained 
from the emperor the right to levy tolls on vessels passing along 
the Weser, a lucrative grant which soon formed a material 
addition to his resources. 

When Count Anton Giinther died in June 1667 Oldenburg 
was inherited by virtue of a compact made in 1649 by Frederick 
III., king of Denmark, and Christian Albert, duke of Holstein- 
Gottorp. Some difficulties, however, arose from this joint 
• ownership, but eventually these were satisfactorily settled, and 
from 1702 to 1773 the county was ruled by the kings of Denmark 
only, this period being on the whole one of peaceful development. 
Then in 1773 another change took place. Christian VII. of 
Denmark surrendered Oldenburg to Paul, duke of Holstein- 
Gottorp, afterwards the emperor Paul of Russia, 1 and in return 
Paul gave up to Christian his duchy of Holstein-Gottorp and his 
claims on the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. At once Paul 
handed over Oldenburg to his kinsman, Frederick Augustus, 
bishop of Liibeck, the representative of a younger branch of 

1 His father, Charles Frederick of Holstein-Gottorp (1700-1739), 
a descendant of Christian I. of Denmark, married Anne, daughter of 
Peter the Great, and became tsar as Peter III. in 1762. 



the family, 2 and in 1777 the county was raised to the rank of a 
duchy. The bishop's son William, who succeeded his father 
as duke in 1785, was a man of weak intellect, and his cousin 
Peter Frederick, bishop of Liibeck, acted as administrator and 
eventually, in 1823, inherited the duchy. This prince is the 
direct ancestor of the present grand duke. 

To Peter fell the onerous task of governing the duchy during 
the time of the Napoleonic wars. In 1806 Oldenburg was occupied 
by the French and the Dutch, the duke and the regent being 
put to flight; but in 1807 William was restored, and in 1808 he 
joined the Confederation of the Rhine. However, in 1810 his 
lands were forcibly seized by Napoleon because he refused to 
exchange them for Erfurt. This drove him to join the Allies, 
and at the congress of Vienna his services were rewarded by the 
grant of Jthe principality of Birkenfeld, an addition to his lands 
due to the good offices of the tsar Alexander I. At this time 
Oldenburg was made a grand duchy, but the title of grand-duke 
was not formally assumed until 1829, when Augustus succeeded 
his father Peter as ruler. Under Peter's rule the area of Olden- 
burg had been increased, not only by Birkenfeld, but by the 
bishopric of Liibeck (secularized in 1802) and some smaller 
pieces of territory. 

Oldenburg did not entirely escape from the revolutionary 
movement which swept across Europe in 1848, but no serious 
disturbances took place therein. In 1849 the grand-duke granted 
a constitution of a very liberal character to his subjects. Hitherto 
his country had been ruled in the spirit of enlightened despotism, 
which was strengthened by the absence of a privileged class of 
nobles, by the comparative independence of the peasantry, 
and by the unimportance of the towns; and thus a certain 
amount of friction was inevitable in the working of the new order. 
In 1852 some modifications were introduced into the constitution, 
which, nevertheless, remained one of the most liberal in Germany. 
Important alterations were made in the administrative system 
in 1855, and again in 1868, and church affairs were ordered by 
a law of 1853. In 1863 the grand-duke Peter II. (1827-1900), 
who had ruled Oldenburg since the death of his father Augustus 
in 1853, seemed inclined to press a claim to the vacant duchies 
of Schleswig and Holstein, but ultimately in 1867 he abandoned 
this in favour of Prussia, and received some slight compensation. 
In 1866 he had sided with this power against Austria and had 
joined the North German Confederation; in 1871 Oldenburg 
became a state of the new German empire. In June 1900 
Frederick Augustus (b. 1852) succeeded his father Peter as grand- 
duke. By a law passed in 1904 the succession to Oldenburg 
was vested in Frederick Ferdinand, duke of Schleswig-Holstein- 
Sonderburg-Gliicksburg, and his family, after the extinction of 
the present ruling house. This arrangement was rendered 
advisable because the grand-duke Frederick Augustus had only 
one son Nicholas (b. 1897), and his only brother George Louis 
(1855) was unmarried. 

For the history of Oldenburg see Runde, Oldenburgische Chronik 
(Oldenbuig, 1863); E. Pleitner, Oldenburg im ig Jahrhundert 
(Oldenburg, 1899-1900); and Oldenburgisches Quellenbuch (Olden- 
burg, 1903). See also the Jahrbuch fur die Geschichte des Herzogtums 
Oldenburg (1892 seq.). 

OLDENBURG, a town of Germany, and capital of the grand- 
duchy of Oldenburg. It is a quiet and pleasant-looking town, 
situated 27 m. by rail W. of Bremen, on the navigable Hunte 
and the Hunte-Ems canal. Pop. (1905), including the suburbs, 
28,565. The inner or old town, with its somewhat narrow 
streets, is surrounded by avenues laid out on the site of the 
former ramparts, beyond which are the villas, promenades 
and gardens of the modern quarters. Oldenburg has almost 
nothing to show in the shape of interesting old buildings. The 

2 To this branch belonged Adolphus Frederick, son of Christian 
Augustus bishop of Liibeck (d. 1726), who in 1751 became king of 
Sweden. 

Another branch of the Oldenburg family, descended from John, 
son of Christian III. of Denmark, is that of Holstein-Sonderburg. 
This was subdivided into the lines of Sonderburg-Augustenburg and 
Sonderburg-Gliicksburg. Prince Christian, who married Princess 
Helena of Great Britain, belongs to the former of them. To the 
latter belong the kings of Denmark, Greece and Norway. 



OLDFIELD— OLDHAM, T. 



73 



Evangelical Lambert ikirche, though dating from the 13th century, 
has been so transformed in the last century (1874-1886) as to 
show 110 trace of its antiquity. The palaces of the grand-duke 
and the old town-hall are Renaissance buildings of the 17 th and 
iSth centuries. Among the other prominent buildings — all 
modern— are ( the palace of the heir apparent, the new town- 
hall, the theatre, the law-courts, the gymnasium, the com- 
mercial school, the three hospitals and the new Roman Catholic 
church. The grand-ducal picture gallery in the Augusteum 
includes works by Veronese, Velasquez, Murillo and Rubens, 
and there are collections of modern paintings and sculptures 
in the two palaces. The public library contains 1 10,000 volumes 
and the duke's private library 55,000. There is also a large 
natural history museum and a museum with a collection of 
antiquities. The industries of Oldenburg, which are of no 
great importance, include iron-founding, spinning and the 
making of glass, tobacco, gloves, soap and leather. A consider- 
able trade is carried on in grain, and the horse fairs are largely 
frequented. According to popular tradition Oldenburg was 
founded by Walbert, grandson of the Saxon hero, Widukind, 
and was named after his wife Altburga, but the first historical 
mention of it occurs in a document of 1108. It was fortified 
in 1 1 55, and received a municipal charter in 1345. The sub- 
sequent history of the town is merged in that of the grand- 
duchy. 

See Sello, Historische Wanderung durch die Stadt Oldenhurg (Olden- 
burg, 1896)1 and Alt-Oldenburg (Oldenburg, 1903); and Kohl, 
Die AUmende der Stadt Oldenburg (Oldenburg, 1903). 

OLDFIELD, ANNE (1683-1730), English actress, was born 
in London, the daughter of a soldier. She worked for a time 
as apprentice to a semptress, until she attracted George 
Farquhar's attention by reciting some lines from a play in his 
hearing. She thereupon obtained an engagement at Drury 
Lane, where her beauty rather than her ability slowly brought 
her into favour, and it was not until ten years later that she 
was generally acknowledged as the best actress of her time. 
In polite comedy, especially, she was unrivalled, and even the 
usually grudging Cibber acknowledged that she had as much as 
he to do with the success of the Careless Husband (1704), in 
which she created the part of Lady Modish, reluctantly given 
her because Mrs Verbruggen was ill. In tragedy, too, she won 
laurels, and the list of her parts, many of them original, is a 
long and varied one. She was the theatrical idol of her day. 
Her exquisite acting and lady-like carriage were the delight 
of her contemporaries, and her beauty and generosity found 
innumerable eulogists, as well as sneering detractors. Alexander 
Pope, in his Sober Advice from Horace, wrote of her — 
" Engaging Oldfield, who, with grace and ease, 
' Could join the arts to ruin and to please." 

It was to her that the satirist alluded as the lady who detested 

being buried in woollen, who said to her maid — 

" No, let a charming chintz and Brussels lace 
Wrap my cold limbs and shade my lifeless face; 
One would not, sure, be frightful when one's dead, 
And — Betty — give this cheek a little red." 

She was but forty-seven when she died on the 23rd of October 
1730, leaving all the court and half the town in tears. 

She divided her property, for that time a large one, between 
her natural sons, the first by Arthur Mainwaring (166S-1712) — 
who had left her and his son half his fortune on his death — 
and the second by Lieut. -General Charles Churchill (d. 1745). 
Mrs Oldfield was buried in Westminster Abbey, beneath the 
monument to Congreve, but when Churchill applied for per- 
mission to erect a monument there to her memory the dean of 
Westminster refused it. 

OLD FORGE, a borough of Lackawanna county, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., on the Lackawanna river, about 6 m. S.W. of Scranton. 
Pop. (1900) 5630, of whom 2494 were foreign-born (principally 
Italians). It is served by the Delaware, Lackawanna & Western 
and the Lehigh Valley railways. The principal public buildings 
are the town-hall and the high school. The borough is situated 
in the anthracite coal region, and the mining of coal is the 
principal industry, though there are also various manufactures. 



Old Forge was settled in 1830 and incorporated as a borough 
in 1899. 

OLDHAM, JOHN (1653-1683), English satirist, £6n t of f 'a 
Presbyterian minister, was born at Shipton Moyne, near Tetbury, 
Gloucestershire, on the 9th of August 1653. He graduated 
from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, in 1C74, and was for three years 
an usher in a school at Croydon. Some of his verses attracted 
the attention of the town, and the earl of Rochester, with Sir 
Charles Sedley and other wits, came down to see him. The 
visit did not affect his career apparently, for he stayed at Croy- 
don until 1681, when he became tutor to the grandsons of Sir 
Edward Thurland, near Reigate. Meanwhile he had tried, he 
says, to conquer his inclination for the unprofitable trade of 
poetry, but in the panic caused by the revelations of Titus 
Oates, he found an opportunity for the^'exercise of his gift for 
rough satire. Garnet's Ghost was pubh'shed as a broadside in 
1679, but the other Satires on the Jesuits, although written at 
the same time, were not printed until 1681. The success of these 
dramatic and unsparing invectives apparently gave Oldham 
hope that he might become independent of teaching. But his 
undoubted services to the Country Party brought no reward 
from its leaders. He became tutor to the son of Sir William 
Hickes, and was eventually glad to accept the patronage of 
William Pierrepont, earl of Kingston, whose kindly offer of a 
chaplaincy he had refused earlier. He died at Holme-Pierre- 
point, near Nottingham, on the 9th of December 1683^ 
of smallpox. ... -■■' 

Oldham took Juvenal for his model, and in breadth of treat- 
ment and power of invective surpassed his English predecessors. 
He was original in the dramatic setting provided for his satires. 
Thomas Garnet, who suffered for supposed implication in the 
Gunpowder Plot, rose from the dead to encourage the Jesuits 
in the first satire, and in the third Ignatius Loyola is represented 
as dictating his wishes to his disciples from his death-bed. Old- 
ham wrote other satires, notably one " addressed to a friend 
about to leave the university," which contains a well-known 
description of the state of slavery of the private chaplain, and 
another " dissuading from poetry," describing the ingratitude 
shown to Edmund Spenser, whose ghost is the speaker, to 
Samuel Butler and to Abraham Cowley. Oldham's verse is 
rugged, and his rhymes often defective, but he met with a 
generous appreciation from Dryden, whose own satiric bent 
was perhaps influenced by his efforts. He says (" To the Memory 
of Mr Oldham," Works, ed. Scott, vol. xi. p. 99):— 

" For sure our souls were near allied, and thine 
Cast in the same poetic mould with mine." 

The real wit and rigour of Oldham's satirical poetry are un- 
deniable, while its faults— its frenzied extravagance and lack 
of metrical polish— might, as Dryden suggests, have been' cured 
with time, for Oldham was only thirty when he died. 

The best edition of his works is The Compositions in Prose and 
Verse of Mr John Oldham . . . (1770), with memoir and explanatory 
notes by Edward Thompson. 

OLDHAM, THOMAS (1816-1878) British geologist, was born 
in Dublin on the 4th of May 1816. He was educated there at 
Trinity College, graduating B.A. in 1836, and afterwards studied 
engineering in Edinburgh, where he gained a good knowledge 
of geology and mineralogy under Jameson. On his return to 
Ireland in 1S39 he became chief assistant to Captain (afterwards 
Major General) Portlock, who conducted the geological depart- 
ment of the Ordnance Survey, and he rendered much help in 
the field and office in the preparation of the Report on the Geology 
of Londonderry, &c (1S43). Subsequently he served under 
Captain (afterwards Sir Henry) James, the first local director 
of the Geological Survey of Ireland, whom he succeeded in 1S46. 
Meanwhile in 1845 he was appointed professor of Geology in 
the university of Dublin. In 1848 he was elected F.R.S. In 
1S49 he discovered in the Cambrian rocks of Bray Head the 
problematical fossil named Oldhamia. In 1850 he was selected 
to take charge of the Geological Survey of India, which he 
organized, and in due course he established the Memoirs, the 
Palaeontologia Indica and the Records, to which he contributed 

xx. 3 a 



74 



OLDHAM— OLD TOWN. 



many important articles. In 1864 he published an elaborate 
report On the Coal Resources of India. He retired in 1876, and 
died at .Rugby on the 17th of July 1878. 

OLDHAM, a municipal county and parliamentary borough of 
Lancashire, England, 7 m. N.E. of Manchester, on the London & 
North-Western, Great Central and Lancashire & Yorkshire 
railways and the Oldham canal. Pop. (1891) 131,463; (1901) 
137,246. The principal railway station is called Mumps, but 
there are several others. The town lies high, near the source of 
the small river Medlock. Its growth as a manufacturing centre 
gives it a wholly modern appearance. Among several handsome 
churches the oldest dates only from the later 18th century. 
The principal buildings and institutions include the town-hall, 
with tetrastyle portico copied from the Ionic temple of Ceres 
near Athens, the reference library, art gallery and museum, 
the Union Street baths, commemorating Sir Robert Peel the 
statesman, and the county court. Of educational establishments 
the chief are the Lyceum, a building in Italian style, containing 
schools of art and science, and including an observatory; the 
largely-endowed blue-coat school founded in 1808 by Thomas 
Hensha'w, a wealthy manufacturer of hats; the Hulme grammar 
school (1S95), and municipal technical schools. The Alexandra 
Park, opened in 1865, was laid out by operatives who were 
thrown out of employment owing to the cotton famine in the 
years previous to that date. The site is picturesquely undulating 
and terraced. Oldham is one of the most important centres 
of the cotton manufactures, the consumption of cotton being 
about one-fifth of the total importation into the United Kingdom, 
the factories numbering some 230, and the spindles over 13 
millions, while some 35,000 operatives are employed. The 
principal manufactures are fustians, velvets, cords, shirtings, 
sheetings and nankeens. There are also large foundries and 
mill and cotton machinery works; and works for the construction 
of gas-meters and sewing-machines; while all these industries 
are assisted by the immediate presence of collieries. There are 
extensive markets and numerous fairs are held. Oldham was 
incorporated in 1849, and became a county borough in 1888. 
The corporation consists of a mayor, 12 aldermen and 36 
councillors. The parliamentary borough has returned two 
members since 1832. Area of municipal borough, 4736 acres. 

A Roman road, of which some traces are still left, passes 
through the site of the township, but it does not appear to have 
been a Roman station. It is not mentioned in Domesday; but 
in the reign of Henry III. Alwardus de Aldholme is referred to as 
holding land in Vernet (Werneth). A daughter and co-heiress 
of this Alwardus conveyed Werneth Hall and its manor to the 
Cudworths, a branch of the Yorkshire family, with whom it 
remained till the early part of the 18th century. From the 
Oldhams was descended Hugh Oldham, who died bishop of Exeter 
in 1519. From entries in the church registers it would appear 
that linens were manufactured in Oldham as early as 1630. 
Watermills were introduced in 1770, and with the adoption of 
Arkwright's inventions the cotton industry grew with great 
rapidity. 

OLD MAID, a game of cards. Any number may play, and the 
full pack is used, the Queen of Hearts being removed. The 
cards are dealt out one by one until exhausted, and each player 
then sorts his hand and discards the pairs. The dealer then 
offers his hand, spread out face downwards to the next player, 
who draws a card, which, if it completes a pair, is discarded, 
but otherwise remains in the hand. The process continues from 
player to player, until all the cards have been paired and dis- 
carded excepting the odd queen, the holder of which is the " Old 
Maid." 

OLDMIXON, JOHN (1673-1742), English historian, was a son 
of John Oldmixon of Oldmixon, near Bridgwater. His first 
writings were poems and dramas, among them being A mores 
Brftannici; Epistles historical and gallant (1703); and a tragedy, 
The' Governor of Cyprus. His earliest historical work was 
The British Empire in America (1708 and again 1741), which 
was followed by The Secret History of Europe (1712-1715); by 
Arcana Gallica, or the Secret History of France for the last Century 



(17 14); and by other smaller writings. More important, how- 
ever, although of a very partisan character, are Oldmixon's 
works on English history. His Critical history of England (1724- 
1726) contains attacks on Clarendon and a defence of Bishop 
Burnet, and its publication led to a controversy between Dr 
Zachary Grey (1688-1766) and the author, who replied to Grey 
in his Clarendon and Whitlock compared (1727). On the same 
lines he wrote his History of England during the Reigns of the Royal 
House of Stuart (1730). Herein he charged Bishop Atterbury and 
other of Clarendon's editors with tampering with the text of the ! 
History. From his exile Atterbury replied to this charge, in a 
Vindication, and although Oldmixon continued the controversy 
it is practically certain that he was in the wrong. He completed 
a continuous history of England by writing the History of England 
during the Reigns of William and Mary,Anne'and George I. (1735); 
and the History of England during the Reigns of Henry VIII., 
Edward VI., Mary and Elizabeth (1739). Among his other 
writings are, Memoirs of North Britain ^715), Essay on Criticism 
(172S) and Memoirs of the Press 17 10-1740 (1742), which was only 
published after his death. Oldmixon had much to do with . 
editing two periodicals, The Muses Mercury and The Medley, 
and he often complained that his services were overlooked by 
the government. He died on the 9th of July 1742. 

OLD POINT COMFORT, a summer and winter resort, in 
Elizabeth City county, Virginia, U.S.A., at the southern end 
of a narrow, sandy peninsula projecting into Hampton Roads 
(at the mouth of the James river), about 12 m. N. by W. of 
Norfolk. It is served directly by the Chesapeake & Ohio railway, 
and indirectly by the New York, Philadelphia & Norfolk (Penn- 
sylvania System), passengers and freight being carried by 
steamer from the terminus at Cape Charles; by steamboat lines 
connecting with the principal cities along the Atlantic coast, 
and with cities along the James river; by ferry, connecting with 
Norfolk and Portsmouth; and by electric railway (3 m.) to 
Hampton and (1 2 m.) to Newport News. There is a U.S. garrison 
at Fort Monroe, one of the most important fortifications on the 
Atlantic coast of the United States. Old Point Comfort is 
included in the reservation of Fort Monroe. The fort lies within 
the tract of 252 acres ceded, for coast defence purposes, to the 
Federal government by the state of Virginia in 1821, the survey 
for the original fortifications having been made in 1818, and the 
building begun in 1819. It was named in honour of President 
Monroe and was first regularly garrisoned in 1823; in 1824 the 
Artillery School of Practice (now called the United States ,' 
Coast Artillery School) was established to provide commissioned 
officers of the Coast Artillery with instruction in professional 
work and to give technical instruction to the non-commissioned 
staff. During the Civil War the fort was the rendezvous for 
several military expeditions, notably those of General Benjamin 
F. Butler to Hatteras Inlet, in 1861; of General A. E. Burnside, 
to North Carolina, in 1862; and of General A. H. Terry, against 
Fort Fisher, in 1865; within sight of its parapets was fought the 
famous duel between the " Monitor " and the " Merrimac " 
(March 9, 1862). Jefferson Davis was a prisoner here for two 
years, from the 22nd of May 1865, and Clement Claiborne Clay 
(1819-1882), a prominent Confederate, from the same date until 
April 1866. Between Fort Monroe and Sewell's Point is Fort ■ 
Wool, almost covering a small island called Rip Raps. The 
expedition which settled Jamestown rounded this peninsula 
(April 26, 1607), opened its sealed instructions here, and named 
the peninsula Poynt Comfort, in recognition of the sheltered 
harbour. (The " Old " was added subsequently to distinguish 
it from a Point Comfort settlement at the mouth of the York 
river on Chesapeake Bay). On the site of the present fortifica- 
tion a fort was erected by the whites as early as 1630. 

OLD TOWN, a city of Penobscot county, Maine, U.S.A., on 
the Penobscot river, about 12 m. N.E. of Bangor. Pop. (1890) 
5312; (1900) 5763, of whom 1247 were foreign born. It is 
served by the Maine Central and the Bangor & Aroostook 
railways, and by an electric line connecting with Bangor. The 
city proper is on an island (Marsh, or Old Town Island), but 
considerable territory on the W. bank of the river is included 



OLDYS— OLEASTER 



within "the municipal limits. The manufacture of lumber is 
the principal industry of the city. On Indian Island (opposite 
the city) is the principal settlement of the Penobscot Indians, 
an Abnaki tribe, now wards of the state. The abbe Louis 
Pierre Thury was sent here from Quebec about 1687 and built 
a church in 1688-1689; in 1705 the mission » passed under the 
control of. the Jesuits. The first white settler in the vicinity 
seems to have been John Marsh, who came about 1774, and who 
bought the island now known as Marsh Island. From 1806 to 
1840, when 'it was incorporated as a separate township, Old 
Town was a part of Orono. In 1891 it was chartered as a city. 
One of the oldest "railways in the United States, and the first in 
Maine, was completed to Old Town from Bangor in 1836. 

OLDYS, WILLIAM (1696-1761), English antiquary and biblio- 
grapher, natural son of Dr William Oldys, chancellor of Lincoln, 
was born on the 14th of July 1696, probably in London. His 
father Tiad also held the office of advocate of the admiralty, but 
lost it in 1693 because he would not prosecute as traitors and 
pirates the sailors who had served against England under 
James II. William Oldys, the younger, lost part of his small 
patrimony in the South Sea Bubble, and in 1724 went to York- 
shire, spending the greater part of the next six years as the 
guest of the earl of Malton. On his return to London he found 
that his landlord had disposed of the books and papers left 
in his charge. Among these was an annotated copy of Gerard 
Langbaine's Dramatick Poets. The book came into the hands of 
Thomas Coxeter (1689-1747), and subsequently into Theophilus 
Cibt'er's possession, and furnished the basis of the Lives of 
the Poets (1753) published with Cibber's name on the title page, 
though most of it was written by Robert Shiels. In 1731 Oldys 
sold his collections to Edward Harley, second earl of Oxford, 
who appointed him his literary secretary in 1738. Three years 
later his patron died, and from that time he worked for the 
booksellers. His habits were irregular, and in 1751 his debts 
drove him to the Fleet prison. After two years' imprisonment 
he was released through the kindness of friends who paid his 
debts, and in April 1755 he was appointed Norroy king-at-arms 
by the duke of Norfolk. He died on the 15th of April 1761. 

Oldys's chief works are: The British Librarian, a review of scarce 
and valuable books in print and in manuscript (1737-1738); the 
Harleian Miscellany (1744-1746), a collection of tractsand pamphlets 
in the earl of Oxford's library, undertaken in conjunction with 
Dr Johnson; twenty-two articles contributed to the Biographia 
Brilannica (1747-1760) ; an edition of Raleigh's History of the World, 
with a Life of the author (1736); Life of Charles Cotton prefixed to 
Sir John Hawkins's edition (1760) of the Compleat Angler. In 1727 
Oldys began to annotate another Langbaine to replace the one he 
had lost'/ This valuable book, with a MS. collection of notes by 
Oldys on various bibliographical subjects, is preserved in the British 
Museum. 

OLEAN, a city of Cattaraugus county, in south-western New 
York, U.S.A., on Olean Creek and the N. side of the Allegheny 
river, 70 m. S.E. of Buffalo. Pop. (1880), 3036; (1890), 7358; 
(1900), 9462, of whom 1514 were foreign-born and 122 were 
negroes; (1910 census), 14,743. The city is served by the 
Erie, the Pittsburg, Shawmut & Northern, and the Pennsylvania 
railways (the last has large car shops here); and is connected 
with Bradford, Pa., Allegany, Pa., Salamanca, N.Y., Little 
Valley, N.Y., and Bolivar, N.Y., by electric lines. Olean is 
situated in a level valley 1440 ft. above sea-level. The sur- 
rounding country is rich in oil and natural gas. Six miles from 
Olean and 2000 ft. above the sea-level is Rock City, a group of 
immense, strangely regular, conglomerate rocks (some of them 
pure white) covering about 40 acres. They are remnants of 
a bed of Upper Devonian Conglomerate, which broke along 
the joint planes, leaving a group of huge blocks. In the city 
are' a public library, a general hospital and a state armoury; 
and at Allegany (pop. 1905, 1330), about 3 m. W. of Olean, is 
St Bonaventure's College (1859; Roman Catholic). Olean's 
factory product was valued at $4,677,477 in 1905; the city is 
the terminus of an Ohio pipe line, and of a sea-board pipe line 
for petroleum; and among its industries are oil-refining and 
the refining of wood alcohol, tanning, currying, and finishing 
leather; and the manufacture of flour, glass (mostly bottles), 



75 

lumber, &c. The vicinity was settled in '1804, and' this' was 
the first township organized (1808), being then coextensive with 
the county. Olean Creek was called lschue (or Ischua) ; then 
Olean was suggested, possibly in reference to trie oil-springs in 
the vicinity. The village was officially called Hamilton for a 
time, but Olean was the name given to the post-office in f i'8i7, 
and Olean Point was the popular local name. In '1909 severaj 
suburbs, including the village of North Olean (pop. in 1905", 
1761), were annexed to Olean, considerably increasing its area 
and population. 

See History of Cattaraugus County, New York (Philadelphia, 1879). 

OLEANDER, the common name for the shrub known to 
botanists as Nerium Oleander. It is a native of the Mediterranean 
and Levant, and is characterized by its tall shrubby, habit and 
its thick lance-shaped opposite leaves, which exude a milky 
juice when punctured. The flowers are borne in terminal 
clusters, and are like those of the common peri winkle (Vinca), but 
are of a rose colour, rarely white, and the throat or, upper edge 
of the tube of the corolla is occupied by outgrowths in the 
form of lobed and fringed petal-like scales. The hairy anthers 
adhere to the thickened stigma. The fruit or seed-vessel consists 
of two long pods, which, bursting along one edge, liberate a 
number of seeds, each of which has a tuft of silky hairs like thistle 
down at the upper end. 
The genus belongs to 
the natural order 
Apocynaceae, a family 
that, as is usual where 
the juice has a milky 
appearance, is marked 
by its poisonous pro- 
perties. Cases are re- 
corded by Lindley of 
children poisoned by 
the flowers. The same 
author also narrates how 
inthecourseof thePenin- 
sular War some French 
soldiers died in conse- 
quence of employing 
skewers made from 
fieshly-cut twigs of oleander for roasting their meat. The 
oleander was known to the Greeks under three names, viz. 
rhododendron, nerion and rhododaphnc, and is weD described 
by Pliny (xvi. 20), who mentions its rose-like flowers and 
poisonous qualities, at the same time stating that it was 
considered serviceable as a remedy against snake-bite. . The 
name is supposed to' be a corruption of lorandrum, lauridendr'um 
(Du Cange), influenced by olea, the olive-tree, lorandrum being 
itself a corruption of rhododendron. The modern Greeks still 
know the plant asftoSoSdcjivi], although in a figure in the Rinuccini 
MSS. of Dioscorides a plant is represented under this name, 
which, however, had rather the appearance of a willow herb 
{Epilobium). The oleander has long been cultivated -in green- 
houses in England, being, as Gerard says, " a small shrub of a 
gallant shewe"; numerous varieties, differing in the colour of their 
flowers, which are often double, have been introduced. 

OLEASTER, known botanically as Elaeagnus hortensis, a 
handsome deciduous tree, 15 to 20 ft. .high, growing in the 
Mediterranean region and temperate Asia, where it is commonly 
cultivated for its edible fruit. The brown smooth branches 
are more or less spiny; the narrow leaves have a hoary look 
from the presence of a dense covering of star-shaped hairs; 
the small fragrant yellow flowers, which are borne in the axils 
of the leaves, are scaly on the outside. The genus contains other 
species of ornamental deciduous or evergreen shrubs or small 
trees. E. argentea, a native of North America, has leaves and 
fruit covered with shining silvery scales. In E. glabra, from 
Japan, the evergreen leaves are clothed beneath with rust- 
coloured scales; variegated forms of this are cultivated, as 
also of E. pungens, another Japanese species, a spiny shrub 
with leaves silvery beneath. 




Nerium Oleander. 



/6 



OLEFINE— OLEG 



OLEFINE, in organic chemistry, the generic name given to 
open chain [hydrocarbons having only singly and doubly linked 
pairs of carbon atoms. The word is derived from the French 
defiant (from olefier, to make oil), which was the name given to 
ethylene, the first member of the series, by the Dutch chemists, 
J. R. Deiman, Paets van Troostwyk, N. Bondt and A. Lauweren- 
burgh in 1795. The simple defines containing one doubly- 
linked pair of carbon atoms have the general formula (CnH 2n ; 
the di-olefines, containing two doubly-linked pairs, have the 
general formula C n H 2n _ 2 and are consequently isomeric with the 
simple acetylenes. Tri-, tetra- and more complicated members 
are also known. The name of any particular member of the 
series is derived from that of the corresponding member of the 
paraffin series by removing the final syllable " -ane," and replac- 
ing it by the syllable " ylene." Isomerism in the define series 
does not appear until the third member of the series is reached. 

The higher defines are found in the tar which is obtained by 
distilling bituminous shales, in illuminating gas, and among the 
products formed by distilling paraffin under pressure (T. E. 
Thorpe and J. Young, Ann., 1873, 165, p. 1). The defines 
may be synthetically prepared by eliminating water from the 
alcohols of the general formula C„H 2n+1 -OH, using sulphuric 
acid or zinc chloride generally as the dehydrating agent, although 
phosphorus pentoxide, syrupy phosphoric acid and anhydrous 
oxalic acid may frequently be substituted. In this method of 
preparation it is found that the secondary alcohols decompose 
more readily that the primary alcohols of the series, and when 
sulphuric acid is used, two phases are present in the reaction, 
the first being the building up of an intermediate sulphuric acid 
ester, which then decomposes into sulphuric acid and hydro- 
carbon: C 2 H50H->C 2 H5-HS04->C 2 H4-fH 2 S04. As an alter- 
native to the above method, V. Ipatiew (Ber., 1901, 34, p. 596 
ct seq.) has shown that the alcohols break up into ethylenes and 
water when their vapour is passed through a heated tube 
containing some " contact " substance, such as graphite, kiesel- 
guhr, &c. (see also J. B. Senderens, Comptes rendus, 1907, 144, 
pp. 382, 1109). 

They may also be prepared by eliminating the halogen hydride 
from the alkyl halides by heating with alcoholic potash, or with 
litharge at 220° C. (A. Eltekow, Ber., 1878, 11, p. 414); by the 
action of metals on the halogen compounds CH 2n Br 2 ; by boiling 
the aqueous solution of nitrites of the primary amines (V. Meyer, 
Ber., 1876, 9, p. 543), C 3 H 7 NH 2 -t-HN02 = N 2 +2H 2 0-t-C 3 H 6 ; by the 
electrolysis of the alkali salts of saturated dicarboxylic acids; by 
the decomposition of /3-haloid fatty acids with sodium carbonate, 
CH 3 CHBr-CH(CH 3 )-C0 2 H = C0 2 -|-HBr+CH 3 CH :CH-CH 3 ; by dis- 
tilling the barium salts of acids CnH 2n _ 2 2 with sodium methylate 
in vacuo (I. Mai, Ber., 1889, 22, p. 2135); from the higher alcohols 
by converting them into esters which are then distilled (F. Krafft, 
Ber., 1883, 16, p. 3018): 
Ci 6 H 33 -CH 2 -CH 2 -OH->Ci 6 H 33 CH 2 -CH 2 -0'CO-R^ 

C 16 H 33 CH : CH 2 +R-COOH ; 
from tertiary alcohols by the action of acetic anhydride in the 
presence of a small quantity of sulphuric acid (L. Henry, Comptes 
rendus, 1907, 144, p. 552): 
(CH 3 ) 2 -C(OH)-CH(CH 3 ) 2 -^(CH 3 ) 2 C:C(CH 3 ) 2 +CH 2 :C(CH 3 )-CH 

(CH 3 ) 2 ; 
from unsaturated alcohols by the action of metal-ammonium com- 
pounds (E. Chablay, Comptes rendus, 1906, 143, p. 123): 
2CH 2 :CH-CH 2 OH+2NH 3 Na = CH 2 :CH-CH 3 +CH 2 :CH-CH 2 ONa 

+ NaOH+2NH 3 ; 
from the lower members of the series by heating them with alkyl 
halides in the presence of lead oxide or lime: C 6 Hio-(-2CH 3 I = 2HI + 
C7HH; and by the action of the zinc alkyls upon the halogen 
substituted defines. 

A. Mailhe {Chem. Zeit., 1906, 30, p. 37) has shown that on passing 
the monohalogen derivatives of the paraffins through a glass tube 
containing reduced nickel, copper or cobalt at 250° C, defines are 
produced, together with the halogen acids, and recombination 
is prevented by passing the gases through a solution of potash. 
The reaction probably proceeds thus: MCl 2 +C n H 2n+ iCl— >HC1 + 
C1-M-C„H 2 „C1— >MCl 2 -t-C n H 2n , since the haloid derivatives of the 
monovalent metals do not act similarly. The anhydrous chlorides 
of nickel, cobalt, cadmium, barium, iron and lead act in the same way 
as catalysts at about 300° C, and the bromides of lead, cadmium, 
nickel and barium at about 320° C. 

In their physical properties, the olefines resemble the normal 
paraffins, the lower members of the series being inflammable 
gases, the members from C 6 to Cu liquids insoluble in water, 



and from C16 upwards of solids. The chief normal members 
of the series are shown in the table. 



Name. 


Formula. 


Melting- 
point. C. 


Boiling-point. C. 


Ethylene 


CH 2 :CH 2 


-169° 


-102-7° (757 mm.) 


Propylene . 


CH 3 CH:CH 2 




-50-2° (749 mm.) 


Butylene 


C 2 H 5 -CH:CH 2 




-5° 


Amylene 


CaHj-CH :CH2 




39°— 40° 


Hexylene . 


C 4 H 9 CH:CH 2 




68°— 70° 


Heptylene . 


C 6 HuCH:CH 2 




95° 


Octylene 


C 6 H 13 CH:CH 2 




122°— 123° 


Decylene 


C 8 H 17 CH:CHjj 
C 9 H I9 CH:CH3 




172° 


Undecylcne. 




84° (18 mm.) 


Duodecylene . 


C10H21CH :CH 2 


-3i° 


96° (15 mm.) -" 



In chemical properties, however, they differ very markedly 
from the paraffins. As unsaturated compounds they can combine 
with two monovalent atoms. Hydrogen is absorbed readily at 
ordinary temperature in the presence of platinum black, and 
paraffins are formed; the halogens (chlorine and bromine) 
combine directly with them, giving dihalogen substituted com- 
pounds; the halogen halides to form monohalogen derivatives 
(hydriodic acid reacts most readily, hydrochloric acid, least); 
and it is to be noted that the haloid acids attach themselves 
in such a manner that the halogen atom unites itself to the 
carbon atom which is in combination with the fewest hydrogen 
atoms (W. Markownikow, Ann., 1870, 153, p. 256). 

They combine with hypochlorous acid to form chlorhydrins; 
and are easily soluble in concentrated sulphuric acid, giving rise to 
sulphuric acid esters; consequently if the solution be boiled with 
water, the alcohol from which the olefine was in the first place derived 
is regenerated. The oxides of nitrogen convert them into nitrosites 
and nitrosates (O. Wallach, Ann., 1887, 241, p. 288, &c; J. Schmidt, 
Ber., 1902, 35, pp. 2323 et seq.). They also combine with nitrosyl 
bromide and chloride, and with many metallic haloid salts (platinum 
bichloride, iridium chloride), with mercury salts (see K. A. Hofmann 
and J. Sand, Ber., 1900, 33, pp. 1340 et seq.), and those with a 
tertiary carbon atom yield double salts with zinc chloride. Dilute 
potassium permanganate oxidizes the olefines to glycols (G. Wagner, 
Ber., 1888, 21, p. 3359). With ozone they form ozonides (C. Harries, 
Ber., 1904, 37, p. 839). The higher members of the series readily 
polymerize in the presence of dilute sulphuric acid, zinc chloride, &c. 

For the first member of the series see Ethylene. 

Propylene, C 3 H 6 , may be obtained by passing the vapour of 
trimethylene through a heated tube (S. M. Tanatar, Ber., 1899, 32, 
pp. 702, 1965). It is a colourless gas which may be liquefied by a 
pressure of 7 to 8 atmospheres. Butylene, C^Hg, exists in three 
isomeric forms: normal butylene, "C 2 Hs-CH :CH 2 ; pseudo-butylene, 
CH 3 -CH:CH-CH 3 ;andisobutylene, (CH ? ) 2 C:CH 2 . Normal butylene 
is a readily condensible gas. Two spatial modifications of pseudo- 
butylene, CH 3 -CH:CH-CH 3 ,are known, the cis and the trans; they 
are prepared by heating the sodium salts of hydro-iodo-tiglic and 
hydro-iodo-angelic acids respectively (J. Wislicenus, Ann., 1900, 
313, p. 228). Isobutylene, (CH 3 ) 2 C:CH 2 , is formed in the dry distil- 
lation of fats, and also occurs among the products obtained when the 
vapour of fusel oil is led through a heated tube. It is a gas at 
ordinary temperature, and may be liquefied, the liquid boiling at 
-5° C. It combines with acetyl chloride in the presence of zinc 
chloride to form a ketone, which on warming breaks down into 
hydrochloric acid and mesityl oxide (I. L. Kondakow, Jour. Russ. 
phys. chem. Soc. 26, p. 12). It polymerizes, giving isodibutylene, 
C 8 Hi6, and isotributylene, Ci 2 H 24 , liquids which boil at 110-113° 
and 178-181° C. Amylene, C 3 Hio, exists in five isomeric forms, viz. 
(k) propylethylene, CH 3 -CH 2 -CH 2 -CH :CH 2 ; isopropylethylene, 
CCH 3 ) 2 CH • CH : CH 2 ; symmetrical methy 1-ethy 1-ethylene, 
CH 3 - CH : CH • C 2 Ht; unsymmetrical methyl-ethyl-ethylene, 
(CH 3 )(C 2 H 6 )C:CH 2 ; and trimethyl ethylene, (CH 3 ) 2 C: CH(CH 3 ). 
The highest members of the series as yet known are cerotene, C 2 6H6 2 , 
which is obtained by the distillation of Chinese wax and is a paraffin- 
like solid which melts at 57° C, and melene, C 3 oH«i(?), which is 
obtained by the distillation of bees'-wax. It melts at 62° C. (B. J. 
Brodie, Ann., 1848, 67, p. 210; 1849, 71, p. 156). 

OLEG (?-9i2), prince of Kiev, succeeded Rurik, as being the 
eldest member of the ducal family, in the principality of Great 
Novgorod, the first Russian metropolis. Three years later he 
moved southwards and, after taking Smolensk and other places, 
fixed his residence at Kiev, which he made his capital. He then 
proceeded to build a fortress there and gradually compelled the 
surrounding tribes to pay him tribute, extending his conquests 
in all directions (883-903) at the expense of the Khazars, who 
hitherto had held all southern Russia to tribute. In 907, 



OLEIC ACID— OLFACTORY SYSTEM 



77 



with a host made up of all the subject tribes, Slavonic and Finnic, 
he sailed against the Greeks in a fleet consisting, according to 
the lyetopis, of 2000 vessels, each of which held 40 men; but this 
estimate is plainly an exaggeration. On reaching Constantinople, 
Oleg disembarked his forces, mercilessly ravaged the suburbs 
of the imperial city, and compelled the emperor to pay tribute, 
provide the Russians with provisions for the return journey, 
and take fifty of them over the city. A formal treaty was then 
concluded, which the Slavonians swore to observe in the names 
of their gods Perun and Volos. Oleg returned to Kiev laden with 
golden ornaments, costly cloths, wines, and all manner of precious 
things. In 911 he sent an embassy of fourteen persons to 
Constantinople to get the former treaty confirmed and enlarged. 
The names of these ambassadors are preserved and they point 
to the Scandinavian origin of Oleg's host; there is not a Slavonic 
name among them. A new and elaborate treaty, the terms of 
which have come down to us, was now concluded between the 
Russians and Greeks, a treaty which evidently sought to bind 
the two nations closely together and obviate all possible differences 
which might arise between them in the future. There was also 
to be free trade between the two nations, and the Russians 
might enter the service of the Greek emperor if they desired it. 
The envoys returned to Kiev in 912 after being shown the 
splendours of the Greek capital and being instructed in the 
rudiments of the Greek faith. In the autumn of the same year 
Oleg died and was buried at Kiev. 

See S. M. Solovev, History of Russia (Rus.), vol. i. (St Petersburg, 
1895, &c.) ; M. F. Vladimirsky-Budanov, Chrestomathy of the History 
of Russian Law (Rus.), pt. i. (Kiev, 1889). (R. N. B.) 

OLEIC ACID, C 13 H M 2 or C 8 H„-CH:CH- [CH 2 ] 7 ■ C0 2 H, an 
organic acid occurring as a glyceride, triolein, in nearly all fats, 
and in many oils — olive, almond, cod-liver, &c. (see Oils). It 
appears as a by-product in the manufacture of candles. To 
prepare it olive oil is saponified with potash, and lead acetate 
added; the lead salts are separated, dried, and extracted with 
ether, which dissolves the lead oleate; the solution is then 
treated with hydrochloric acid, the lead chloride filtered off, 
the liquid concentrated, and finally distilled under diminished 
pressure. Oleic acid Is a colourless, odourless solid, melting at 
14 and boiling at 223 (10 mm.). On exposure it turns yellow, 
becoming rancid. Nitric acid oxidizes it to all the fatty acids 
from acetic to capric. Nitrous acid gives the isomeric elaidic 
acid, C 8 Hi7-CH:CH-(CH 2 ]7 -CO^H, which is crystalline and 
melts at 51 . Hydriodic acid reduces both oleic and elaidic 
acids to stearic acid. 

Erucic acid, C 8 H n , CH:CH4CH2]irC02H, and the isomeric 
brassidic acid, belong to the oleic acid series. They occur as gly- 
cerides in rape-seed oil, in the fatty oil of mustard, and in the oil of 
grape seeds. Linoleic acid, C18H32O2, found as glyceride in drying 
oils, and ricinoleic acid, Ci 8 H 3 s(OH)02, found as glyceride in castor 
oil, closely resemble oleic acid. 

OLEN, a semi-legendary Greek bard and seer, and writer of 
hymns. He is said to have been the first priest of Apollo, his 
connexion with whom is indicated by his traditional birthplace — 
Lycia or the land of the Hyperboreans, favourite haunts of the 
god. The Delphian poetess Boeo attributed to him theintroduc- 
ion of the cult of Apollo and the invention of the epic metre. 
Many hymns, nomes (simple songs to accompany the circular 
dance of the chorus), and oracles, attributed to Olen, were pre- 
served in Delos. In his hymns he celebrated Opis and Arge, 
two Hyperborean maidens who founded the cult of Apollo in 
Delos, and in the hymn to Eilythyia the birth of Apollo and 
Artemis and the foundation of the Delian sanctuary. His reputed 
Lycian origin corroborates the view that the cult of Apollo was 
an importation from Asia to Greece. His poetry generally was 
of the kind called hieratic. 

See Callimachus, Hymn to Delos, 305; Pausanias i. 18; ii. 13; 
v. 7; ix. 27; x. 5; Herodotus iv. 35. 

OLERON, an island lying off the west coast of France, opposite 
the mouths of the Charente and Seudre, and included in the 
department of Charente-Inferieure. In 1906 the population 
numbered 16,747. In area (66 sq. m.) it ranks next to Corsica 
among French islands. It is about 18 m. in length from N.W. 



to S.E., and 7 in extreme breadth; the width of the strait 
(Pcrtuis de Maumusson) separating it from the mainland is at 
one point less than a mile. The island is flat and low-lying and 
fringed by dunes on the coast. The greater part is very fertile, 
but there are also some extensive salt marshes, and oyster 
culture and fishing are carried on. The chief products are 
corn, wine, fruit and vegetables. The inhabitants are mostly 
Protestants and make excellent sailors. The chief places are 
St Pierre (pop. 1582 in 1906), Le Chateau d'Oleron (1546), 
and the watering-place of St Trojan-les-Bains. 

Oleron, the Uliarns Insula of Pliny, formed part of the duchy 
of Aquitaine, and finally came into the possession of the French 
crown in 1370. It gave its name to a medieval code of maritime 
laws promulgated by Eleanor of Guicnne. 

OLFACTORY SYSTEM, in anatomy. The olfactory system 
consists of the outer nose, which projects from the face, and the 
nasal cavities, contained in the skull, which support the olfactory 
mucous membrane for the perception of smell in their upper 
parts, and act as respiratory passages below. ' 

The bony framework of the nose is part of the skull (q.v.), but the 
outer nose is only supported by bone above; lower down its 
shape is kept by an " upper " and " lower lateral cartilage " and 
two or three smaller plates known as " carlilagines minorcs." 



Nasal bone 



Nasal process of 
superior maxilla' 




From R. Howden, in Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 
Fig. 1. — Profile View of the Bony and Cartilaginous Skeleton of 
the Nose. 

The expanded lower part of the side of the outer nose is known 
as the " ala " and is only formed of skin, both externally and 
internally, with fibro-fatty tissue between the layers. The inner 
nose or nasal cavities are separated by a septum, which is seldom 
quite median and is covered in its lower two-thirds by thick, 
highly vascular mucous membrane composed of columnar 
ciliated epithelium with masses of acinous glands (see Epithelial 
Tissues) embedded in it, while in its upper part it is covered 
by the less vascular but more specialized olfactory membrane. 
Near the front of the lower part of the septum a slight opening 
into a short blind tube, which runs upward and backward, may 
sometimes be found; this is the vestigial remnant of " Jacobson's 
organ," which will be noticed later. The supporting framework 
of the septum is made up of ethmoid above, vomer below, and 
the " septal cartilage " in front. The outer wall of each nasal 
cavity is divided into three meatus by the overhanging turbinated 



78 



OLFACTORY SYSTEM 



! 



bones (see fig. 2). Above the superior turbinated is a space 
between it and the roof known as the " recessus spheno-ethmoi- 
dalis," into the back of which the " sphenoidal air sinus " opens. 
Between the superior and middle turbinated bones is the 
" superior meatus," containing the openings of the " posterior 
ethmoidal air cells," while between the middle and inferior 
turbinateds is the "middle meatus," which is the largest of the 
three and contains a rounded elevation known as the " bulla 
ethmoidalis." Above and behind this is often an opening for 
the " middle ethmoidal cells," while below and in front a deep 
sickle-shaped gutter runs, the " hiatus semilunaris," which 
communicates above with the " frontal air sinus " and below 
with the opening into the " antrum of Highmore " or " maxillary 
antrum." So deep is this hiatus semilunaris that if, in the dead 
subject, water is poured into the frontal sinus it all passes into]the 



Frontal air-sinus. 

Bristle passed, 

from it into 

infundibulum 



Opening of middle ethmoidal cells 

Openings of posterior ethmoidal cells 
Recessus spheno-ethmoidalis 

Sphenoidal air -sinus 




From R. Howden, in Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 
Fig. 2. — View of the Outer Wall of the Nose 

1. Vestibule. 

2. Opening of antrum of Highmore. 

3. Hiatus semilunaris.- 

4. Bulla ethmoidalis. 

5. Agger nasi. 



Cut edge of inferior turbinated hone 



Bristle passed into opening of nasal duct 



-the Turbinated Bones having been removed 

6. Opening of anterior ethmoidal cells. 

7. Cut edge of superior turbinated bone. 

8. Cut edge of middle turbinated bone. 

9. Pharyngeal orifice of Eustachian tube. 



antrum and none escapes through the nostrils until that cavity 
is full. The passage from the frontal sinus to the hiatus semi- 
lunaris is known as the " infundibulum," and into this open the 
" anterior ethmoidal cells," so that the antrum acts as a sink 
for the secretion of these cells and of the frontal sinus. Running 
downward and forward from the front of the middle turbinated 
bone is a curved ridge known as the " agger nasi," which forms 
the anterior boundary of a slightly depressed area called the 
" atrium." 

The " inferior meatus " is below the inferior turbinated bone, 
and, when that is lifted up, the valvular opening of the nasal 
duct (see Eye) is seen. In front of the inferior meatus there is a 
depression just above the nostril which is lined with skin instead 
of mucous membrane and from which short hairs grow; this is 
called the " vestibule." The roof of the nose is very narrow, 
and here the olfactory nerves pass in through the cribriform 
plate. The floor is a good deal wider so that a coronal section 
through each nasal cavity has roughly the appearance of a right- 
angled triangle. The anterior wall is formed by the nasal bones 
and the upper and lower lateral cartilages, while posteriorly 



the sphenoidal turbinated bone separates the nasal cavity from 
the sphenoidal sinus above, and below there is an opening into 
the naso-pharynx known as the " posterior nasal aperture " 
or " choana." The mucous membrane of the outer wall is 
characteristic of the respiratory tract as high as the superior 
turbinated bone; it is ciliated all over and very vascular where 
it covers the inferior turbinated ; superficial to and above the 
superior turbinated the olfactory tract is reached and the 
specialized olfactory epithelium begins. 

Embryology. 

In the third week of intra-uterine life two pits make their appear- 
ance on the under side of the front of the head, and are known as the 
olfactory or nasal pits; they are the first appearance of the true 
olfactory region of the nose, and some of their epithelial lining cells 
send off axons (see Nervous System) which arborize with the 
dendrites of the cells of the olfactory lobe 
of the brain and so form the olfactory 
nerves (see J. Disse, Anal. Hefte, 1897; 
also P. Anat. Soc, J. Anat. and Phys:, 
1897, p. 12). Between the olfactory pits 
the broad median fronto-nasal process 
grows down from the forehead region to 
form the dorsum of the nose (see fig. 3), 
and the anterior part of the nasal septum, 
while outside them the lateral nasal pro- 
cesses grow down, and later on meet the 
maxillary processes from the first visceral 
arch. In this way the nasal cavities are 
formed, but for some time they are 
separated from the mouth by a thin bucco- 
nasal membrane which eventually is broken 
through; after this the mouth and nose 
are one cavity until the formation of the 
palate in the third month (see Mouth and 
Salivary Glands). In the third month 
Jacobson's organ may be seen as a well- 
marked tube lined with respiratory mucous 
membrane and running upward and back- 
ward, close to the septum, from its orifice, 
which is just above the foramen of Stensen 
in the anterior palatine canal. In man it 
never has any connexion with the olfactory 
membrane or olfactory nerves. Internally 
and below it is surrounded by a delicate 
sheet of cartilage, which is distinct from 
that of the nasal septum. No explana- 
tion of the function of Jacobson's organ in 
man is known, and it is probably entirely 
atavistic. At birth the nasal cavities are 
very shallow from above downward, but 
they rapidly deepen till the age of puberty. 
The external nose at birth projects very 
little from the plane of the face except at 
the tip, the button-like shape of which in 
babies is well known. In the second and 
third year the bridge becomes more promi- 
nent, but after puberty the nasal bones tend 
to tilt upward at their lower ends to form 
the eminence which is seen at its best in 
the Roman nose. (For further details see 
Quain's Anatomy, vol. i., London, 1908.) 

Comparative Anatomy. 
In Amphioxus among the Acrania there is a ciliated pit above the 
anterior end of the central nervous system, which is probably a rudi- 
ment of an unpaired olfactory organ. In the Cyclostomata (lampreys 
and hags) the pit is at first ventral, but later becomes dorsal and 
shares a common opening with the pituitary invagination. It 
furthermore becomes divided internally into two lateral halves. 
In fishes there are also two lateral pits, the nostrils of which open 
sometimes, as in the elasmobranchs (sharks and rays), on to the 
ventral surface of the snout, and sometimes, as in the higher fishes, 
on to the dorsal surface. Up to this stage the olfactory organs are 
mere pits, but in the Dipnoi (mud-fish) an opening is established 
from them into the front of the roof of the mouth, and so they serve 
as respiratory passages as well as organs for the sense of smell. 
In the higher Amphibia the nasal organ becomes included in the skull 
and respiratory and olfactory parts are distinguished. In this class, 
too, turbinal ingrowths are found, aad the naso-lachrymal duct 
appears. In the lizards, among the Reptilia, the olfactory and 
respiratory parts are very distinct, the latter being lined only by 
stratified epithelium unconnected with the olfactory' nerves. There 
is one true turbinal bone growing from the outer wall, and close to 
this is a large nasal gland. In crocodiles the hard palate is formed, 
and there is henceforward a considerable distance between the open- 
ings of the external and interna] nares. In this order, too (Crocodilia) 



OLFACTORY SYSTEM 



79 



air sinuses are first found extending from the olfactory cavities 
into the skull-bones. The birds' arrangement is very like that of the 
reptiles; olfactory and respiratory chambers are present, and into 
the latter projects the true turbinal, though there is a pseudo-turbinal 
in the upper or olfactory chamber. In mammals the olfactory 
chamber of the nose is variously developed; most of them are 
" macrosmatic," and have a large area of olfactory mucous mem- 
brane; some, like the seals, whalebone whales, monkeys and man are 
" microsmatic," while the toothed whales have the olfactory region 
practically suppressed in the adult, and are said to be "anosmatic." 
There are generally five turbinal bones in macrosmatic mammals, 
so that man has a reduced number. The lowest of the series or 
" maxillo-turbinal " is the equivalent of the single true turbinal bone 
of birds and reptiles, and in most mammals is a double scroll, one 



Mesencephalon 



Prosencephalon 




Prosencephalon 

Mesial nasal 
process 



Stomatodaeum 



From A. H. Young and A. Robinson, in Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy 

Fig. 3. 

I. Side view of the head of human embryo 

about 27 days old, showing the olfactory 
pit and the visceral arches and clefts 
(from His). 

II. Transverse section through the head of 

an embryo, showing the relation of the 
olfactory pits to the forebrain and to 
the roof of the stomatodaeal space. 
III. Head of human embryo about 29 days 
old, showing the division of the lower 
part of the mesial frontal process into 



P. Zool. Soc. (1891), and in the kangaroo, J. Anal. and Phys., vol. 
26 (1891); also G. Eliot Smith on Jacobson's organ, Anatorn. 
Anzeiger, xi. Band No. 6 (1895). For general literature on the 
comparative anatomy of the olfactory system up to 1906, see 
R. Wiedersheim's Comparative Anatomy of Vertebrates, translated 
and adapted by W. N. Parker (London, 1907). (F. G. P.) 

Diseases of Olfactory System 
External Affections and Injuries of the Nose. — Acne rosacea is one 
of the most frequent nasal skin affections. In an early stage it 
consists of dilatation or congestion of the capillaries, and later of a 
hypertrophy of the sebaceous follicles. This may be accompanied 
by the formation of pustules. In an exaggerated stage the sebaceous 
glands become overgrown, forming large protuberant nodular masses 
over which the dilated capillaries are 
plainly visible. This condition is termed 
lipoma nasi (rhinophynia or hammer 
nose), though there is no increase in fatty 
tissue. Nasal acne occurs mainly in 
dyspeptics and tea drinkers, and the 
more advanced condition, lipoma nasi, 
chiefly in elderly men addicted to al- 
coholism. The treatment of acne is the 
removal of the dyspepsia with the local 
application of sulphur ointment or of a 
lotion of perchloride of mercury. Un- 
sightly capillaries may be destroyed by an 
application of the galvano-cautery or by 
electrolysis. Free dissection of the re- 
dundant tissue from around the nasal 
cartilages is necessary in lipoma nasi, 
skin being grafted on to the raw surface. 
The nasal bones are frequently frac- 
tured as the result of direct violence, as 
by a blow from a cricket ball or stick. 
The fracture is usually transverse, and 
may be communicated, leading to much 
deformity if left untreated. The treat- 
ment is the immediate reposition of the 
bony fragments. The old-standing cases 
where there is considerable depression 
Cerebral wiring the fragments may be resorted to. 
hemi- In numerous cases the subcutaneous 
sphere injection of paraffin may improve the 
shape of the organ. Deflection of the 
septum may also result from similar 
injuries, and lateral displacement may 
cause subsequent nasal obstruction and 
Pj,, require the straightening of the septum. 

y Lesions involving considerable loss of 
substance due to injury or to syphilitic or 
tuberculous disease have led to many 
methods being devised to supply the 
missing part. In the Indian method of 
rhinoplasty a flap is cut from the fore- 
head, to which it is left attached by a 
pedicle; the flap is then turned down- 
wards to cover the missing portion of the 
nose; when the parts have united, the 
the two globular processes, the inter- pedicle is cut through. In the Italian 
vention of the olfactory pits between operation devised by Tagliacotius (Taglia 



the mesial and lateral nasal processes 
and the approximation of the maxillary 
and lateral nasal processes, which, how- 
ever, are separated by the oculo-nasal 
sulcus (from His). 
IV. Transverse section of head of embryo, 
showing the deepening of the olfactory 



leaf turning upward and the other down. Jacobson's organ first 
appears in amphibians, where it is found as an anteroposterior 
gutter in the floor of the nasal cavity, sometimes being close to the 
septum, at other times far away, though the former position is the 
more primitive. In reptiles the roof of the gutter closes in on each 
side, and a tube is formed lying below and internal to the nasal 
cavity, opening anteriorly into the mouth and ending by a blind 
extremity, posteriorly to which branches of the olfactory and tri- 
geminal nerves are distributed. In the higher reptiles (crocodiles 
and chelonians) the organ is suppressed in the adult, and the same 
applies to birds; but in the lower mammals, especially the raono- 
tremes, it is very well developed, and is enclosed in a cartilaginous 
sheath, from which a turbinal process projects into its interior. 
In other mammals, with the exception of the Primates and perhaps 
the Chiroptera, the organ is quite distinct, though even in man, 
as has been shown, its presence can be demonstrated in the embryo. 
The special opening through which it communicates with the mouth 
is the foramen of Stensen in the anterior palatine canal. 

See J. Symington on the organ of Jacobson in the Ornithorynchus, 



cozzi), a flap was taken from the patient's 
arm, the arm being kept fixed to the 
head until the flap has united. 

Diseases of the Interior of the Nose. — 
Epistaxis or bleeding of the nose may 
arise from many conditions. It is par- 
ticularly common in young girls at the 
pits and their relation to the hemi- time of puberty, being a form of vicarious 
sphere vesicles of the fore-brain. menstruation. It also occurs in cerebral 

congestion, heart disease, scurvy, haemo- 
phylia, or as a sign of local disease. The treatment will depend 
upon the cause. In patients with high arterial tension epistaxis 
may be of direct benefit. In other cases rest on the back may be 
tried, with the local application of tanno-gallic acid or hazelin or 
adrenalin, either in a spray or on absorbent cotton. If these should 
not stop the haemorrhage the nose must be plugged. In cases which 
arise from specific forms of ulceration, such as tuberculosis and 
syphilis, the area should be rendered anaesthetic by cocaine, the 
bleeding points found, and the vessels obliterated by the electro- 
cautery. Polypi in the nasal passages are also a frequent cause of 
epistaxis. 

Rhinitis, or inflammation of the mucous membrane of the nose, 
occurs both in acute and chronic forms. Of the acute the simple 
catarrhal form termed " coryza " forms the widely known " cold in 
the head." The tendency of acute coryza to affect entire families, 
and to be communicable from one person to another, points to its 
infectious nature, though probably some predisposing condition of 
health is necessary for its development. It is considered proved 
that the symptoms are due to the presence and development of 



8o 



OLGA— OLHAO 



several distinct micro-organisms. Of these the most important is the 
micrococcus catarrhalis described by Martin Kirchner in 1890, but 
Friedlander's pneumo-bacillus has also been found. In ordinary 
cases of coryza, sneezing, congestion of the nasal mucous membrane 
and a profuse watery discharge usher in the attack, and the inflam- 
mation may extend to the pharynx, larynx and trachea, blocking 
of the Eustachian tube producing a temporary deafness. Later the 
discharge may become muco-purulent. One attack of coryza 
conveys no immunity from subsequent attacks, and some persons 
seem particularly susceptible. The treatment is directed towards 
increasing the action of the kidneys, skin and bowels. A brisk 
mercurial purgative is indicated, and salicin and aspirin are useful 
in many cases. Considerable relief may be obtained by washing 
out the nasal cavities several times a day with a warm lotion con- 
taining boric acid. Those who are unusually prone to catch cold 
should habituate themselves to an open air life by day and an open 
window by night, adenoids or enlarged tonsils should be removed, 
and the diet should be modified so as not to contain an excess of 
starchy foods. An acute croupous inflammation occasionally attacks 
the nasal mucous membrane when the Klebs-Loffler bacillus is not 
present, but the nasal membrane often shares in true diphtheria, 
or it may be the only organ to be infected thereby. The diagnosis is 
of course bacteriological. 

As a result of frequent catarrhal attacks the nasal mucous mem- 
brane may become the seat of a chronic rhinitis in which the turbinals 
become swollen with oedema, and congested and finally thickened 
by increase in the fibrous tissue. There is an excessive muco-purulent 
discharge, and the patient is unable to breathe through the nose; 
deafness and adenoid vegetations may be the result. In the early 
stages the nasal cavity should be washed out night and morning 
with an alkaline lotion, such as bicarbonate of soda, or a caustic, 
such as chromic acid, should be used in swabbing over the affected 
part. The application of the galvano-cautery here is useful, but 
when the areas are much hypertrophied the hypertrophied portion 
of the inferior turbinals may have to be removed under cocaine. 
A special form of recurrent hypertrophic rhinitis is hay fever (q.v.). 

Rhinitis Sicca is a form of chronic rhinitis in which there is but 
little discharge, crusts or scabs which may be difficult to remove 
forming in the nasal cavities; the pharynx may be also affected. 

Atrophic rhinitis or ozaena usually attacks children and young 
adults, following on measles or scarlet fever. Crusts form, and favour 
the retention of the purulent discharge. The disease may extend to 
the nasal sinuses and septic absorption take place. The treatment 
is to keep the nasal cavity clean by irrigation with solution of per- 
manganate of potash or carbolic acid lotion, the nose then being 
wiped and smeared with lanolin or partially plugged with a tampon 
of cotton-wool, the process being repeated at frequent intervals, the 
general treatment being that for anaemia. Disease of the middle 
turbinated bone is also a cause of an offensive nasal discharge, and 
rhinitis occurring in infants gives rise to the obstructed respiration 
known as " the snuffles." 

Three forms of nasal polypi are described, the mucous, the fibrous 
and the malignant. The general symptoms of nasal polypus are a 
feeling of stuffiness in one or both nostrils, inability to breathe down 
the nose and a thin watery discharge. A nasal tone of voice, together 
with cough and asthma, may be present, or there may be partial 
or complete loss of the sense of smell (anosmia). The treatment of 
mucous polypi is their removal by the forceps or the snare, the base 
of the growth being afterwards carefully examined and cauterized 
with the galvano-cautery. 

Fibrous polypi are usually very vascular, and may be a cause of 
severe epistaxis as well as of obstruction of breathing, " dead voice," 
sleepiness and deafness. The increasing growth may lead to ex- 
pansion of the bridge of the nose and deformity of the facial bones, 
known as " frog-face." The tendency of fibrous polypi to take on 
malignant sarcomatous characters is specially noticeable. Extir- 
pation of the growth as soon as its nature is recognized is therefore 
urgently demanded. 

The chief diseases of the nasal septum are abscesses, due to the 
breaking down of haematomata, syphilitic gummata (leading to deep 
excavation and bony destruction), tuberculous disease in which 
a small yellowish grey ulcer forms and what is known as perforating 
ulcer of the septum, which is met with just within the nostril. 
The latter tends to run a chronic course, and the detachment of one 
of its crusts may cause epistaxis. Rhinoscleroma was first described 
by F. Hebra in 1870, and is endemic in Russian Poland, Galicia and 
Hungary, but is unknown in England, except amongst alien immi- 
grants. The infecting organism is a specific bacillus, and the disease 
starts as a chronic smooth painless obstruction with the formation 
of dense plate-like masses_ of tissue of stony hardness. Treatment 
other than that of excision of the masses has proved useless, 
though the recent plan of introduction of the injection of a 
vaccine of the bacillus may in future modify the progress of the 
disease. 

The accessory sinuses of the nose are also prone to disease. The 
maxillary antrum may become filled with muco-pus, forming an 
empyema, pus escaping intermittently by way of the nose. The 
condition causes pain and swelling, and may require the irrigation 
and drainage of the antrum. The frontal sinuses may become filled 
with mucous, owing to the swelling of the nasal mucous membrane 



over the middle turbinated bone, or an acute inflammation may 
spread to the frontal sinuses, giving rise to an empyema in that 
locality. There is severe frontal pain, and in some cases a fulness 
on the forehead over the affected side, the pus often pointing in this 
site, or there may be a discharge of pus through the nose. The 
treatment is that of incision and irrigation of the sinus (in some cases 
scraping out of the sinus) and the re-establishment of communication 
with the nose, with free drainage. The ethmoidal and sphenoidal 
sinuses are also frequently the site of empyemata, giving rise to pain 
in the orbit and the back of the nose, and a discharge into the naso- 
pharynx. In the case of the ethmoidal sinus it may give rise to' 
exophthalmus and to strabismus (squint), with the formation of a 
tumour at the inner wall of the orbit and fever and delirium at night: 
In the young the condition may become rapidly fatal. Suppuration 
in the sphenoidal sinus may lead to blindness from involvement of 
the sheath of the optic nerve, and dangerous complications such as 
septic basal meningitis and thrombosis of the cavernous sinus may 
occur. Acute ethmoiditis and sphenoiditis are serious conditions 
demanding immediate surgical intervention. (H. L. H.) 

OLGA, wife of Igor, prince of Kiev, and afterwards (from 945) 
regent for Sviatoslav her son, was baptized at Constantinople 
about 955 and died about 969. She was afterwards canonized in 
the Russian church, and is now commemorated on the nth of 

July. 

OLGIERD (d. 1377), grand-duke of Lithuania, was one of the 
seven sons of Gedymin, grand-duke of Lithuania, among whom 
on his death in 1341 he divided his domains, leaving the youngest, 
Yavnuty, in possession of the capital, Wilna, with a nominal 
priority. With the aid of his brother Kiejstut, Olgierd in 1345 
drove out the incapable Yavnuty and declared himself grand- 
duke. The two and thirty years of his reign (1345-1377) were 
devoted to the development and extension of Lithuania, and he 
lived to make it one of the greatest states in Europe. Two 
factors contributed to produce this result, the extraordinary 
political sagacity of Olgierd and the life-long devotion of his 
brother Kiejstut. The Teutonic knights in the north and the 
Tatar hordes in the south were equally bent on the subjection 
of Lithuania, while Olgierd 's eastern and western neighbours, 
Muscovy and Poland, were far more frequently hostile competitors 
than serviceable allies. Nevertheless, Olgierd not only succeeded 
in holding his own, but acquired influence and territory at the 
expense of both Muscovy and the Tatars, and extended the 
borders of Lithuania to the shores of the Black Sea. The principal 
efforts of this eminent empire-maker were directed to securing 
those of the Russian lands which had formed part of the ancient 
grand-duchy of Kiev. He procured the election of his son 
Andrew as prince of Pskov, and a powerful minority of the citizens 
of the republic of Novgorod held the balance in his favour against 
the Muscovite influence, but his ascendancy in both these 
commercial centres was at the best precarious. On the other 
hand he acquired permanently the important principalities of 
Smolensk and Bryansk in central Russia. His relations with 
the grand-dukes of Muscovy were friendly on the whole, and 
twice he married orthodox Russian princesses; but this did not 
prevent him from besieging Moscow in 1368 and again in 1372, 
both times unsuccessfully. Olgierd's most memorable feat was 
his great victory over the Tatars at Siniya Vodui on the Bug in 
1362, which practically broke up the great Kipchak horde and 
compelled the khan to migrate still farther south and establish his 
headquarters for the future in the Crimea. Indeed, but for the 
unceasing simultaneous struggle with the Teutonic knights, 
the burden of which was heroically borne by Kiejstut, Russian 
historians frankly admit that Lithuania, not Muscovy, must have 
become the dominant power of eastern Europe. Olgierd died 
' n 1377, accepting both Christianity and the tonsure shortly 
before his death. His son Jagiello ultimately ascended the 
Polish throne, and was the founder of the dynasty which ruled 
Poland for nearly 200 years. 

See Kazimierz Stadnicki, The Sons of Gedymin (Pol.) (Lemberg, 
1849-1853); Vladimir Bonifatevich Antonovich, Monograph on the 
History of Western Russia (Rus.), vol. i. (Kiev, 1885). (R. N. B.) 

OLHAO, a seaport of southern Portugal, in the district of 
Faro; 5 m. E. of Faro, on the Atlantic coast. Pop. (1900) 10,009. 
Olhao has a good harbour at the head of the Barra Nova, a deep 
channel among the sandy islands which fringe the coast. Wine, 
fruit, cork, baskets and sumach are exported in small coasting 



OLIGARCHY— OLIGOCENE SYSTEM 



8r 



vessels; there are important' sardine and tunny fisheries; and 
boats, sails and cordage' .are manufactured. 

OLIGARCHY (Gr. 6X1701, few, apxv, rule), in political philo- 
sophy, the term applied to a government exercised by a relatively 
small number of the members of a community. It is thus the 
appropriate term for what is now generally known as " aristo- 
cracy " (q-v.). The meaning of the terms has substantially 
altered since Plato's day, for in the Republic "oligarchy" 
meant the rule of the wealthy, and " aristocracy " that of the 
really best people. 

OLIGOCENE SYSTEM (from the Gr. 6X1705, few, and ffliw, 
recent), in geology, the name given to the second division of the 
older Tertiary rocks, viz. those which occur above the Eocene 
and below the Miocene strata. These rocks were originally classed 
by Sir C. Lyell as " older Miocene," the term Oligocene being 
proposed by H. E. Beyrich in 1854 and again in 1858. Following 
A. de Lapparent, the Oligocene is here regarded as divisible 
into two stages, an upper one, the Etampian (from Etampes), 
equivalent to the Rupelian of A. Dumont (1849), and a lower 
one, the Sannoisian (from Sannois near Paris), equivalent to 
the Tongrian (from Tongris in Limburg) of Dumont (1859). 
This lower division is the Ligurian of some authors, and corre- 
sponds with the Lattorfian (Latdorf) of K. Mayer in north 
Germany; it is in part the equivalent of the older term Ludian 
of de Lapparent. It should be pointed out that several authors 
retain the Aquitanian stage (see Miocene) at the top of the 
Oligocene, but there are sufficiently good reasons for removing 
it to the younger system. 

The Oligocene deposits are of fresh-water, brackish, marine 
and terrestrial origin; they include soft sands, sandstones, grits, 
marls, shales, limestones, conglomerates and lignites. The 
geographical aspect of Europe during this period is indicated 
on the accompanying map. Here and there, as in N. Germany, 




f Map of 

Europe 

lo the early part of the 

Oligocene Period 






After A.de L*J5Mf«W 



Emery Wauter sc 



the sea gained ground that had been unoccupied by Eocene 
waters, but important changes, associated with the continuation 
of elevatory processes in the Pyrenees and Alps which had 
begun in the preceding period, were in progress, and a general 
relative uplifting took place which caused much of the Eocene 
sea floor to be occupied at this time by lake basins and lagoons. 
The movements, however, were not all of a negative character 
as regards the water areas, for oscillations were evidently 
frequent, and subsidence must have been considerable in some 
regions to admit of the accumulation of the great thickness of 
material found deposited there. Perhaps the most striking 
change from Eocene topography in Europe is to be seen in the 
extension of the Oligocene sea over North Germany, whence 
it extended eastward through Poland and Russia to the Aral- 
Caspian region, communicating thence with Arctic waters by 
way of a Ural depression. The Asian extension of the central 
mediterranean sea appears to have begun to be limited. It was 
later in the period when the wide-spread emersion set in. 



In Britain Oligocene formations are found only in the Hampshire 
Basin and the Isle of Wight; from the admixture of fresh-water, 
marine and estuarine deposits, E. Forbes named these the " Fluvio- 
marine series." The following are the more important subdivisions, 
in descending order: The Hamstcad (Hampstead) beds, marine at 
the top, with Ostrea callifera, Natica, &c, estuarine and fresh- 
water below, with Unio, Viviparus and the remains of crocodiles, 
turtles and mammals. The Bembridge marls, fresh-water, estuarine 
and marine, resting upon the Bembridge limestone, with many 
fresh-water fossils such as Limnaea, Planorbis, Chara, large land 
snails, Amphidromus, Helix, Glandina, and many insects and plant 
leaves. The Osborne beds, marls, clays and limestones, with Unio, 
Limnaea, &c. The Headon beds (upper), fresh-water clays, marls 
and limestones (middle), brackish and marine, more sandy (lower), 
brackish and fresh-water clays, marls, tufaceous limestones and 
sandstones. The clays and sands of the Bovey Basin in Devonshire 
were formerly classed as Miocene, but they are now regarded by 
C. Reid as Eocene on the evidence of the plant remains, though there 
is still a possibility that they may be found to be of Oligocene age. 

In France the best-known tract of Oligocene rocks rests in the 
Paris basin in close relationship with the underlying Eocene. These 
rocks include the first and second gypsum beds, the source of " plaster 
of Paris"; at Montmartre the first or upper bed is 20 metres in 
thickness, and some of the beds contain siliceous nodules (fusils) 
and numerous mammalian remains. Above the gypsum beds is the 
travertine of Champigny-sur-Marne, a series of blue and white marls 
(supra-gypseous marls), followed by the " glaises verts " or greenish 
marls. At the top of the lower Oligocene of this district is the 
lacustrine " calcaire de Brie " or middle travertine, which at Ferte- 
sous-Jouane is exploited for millstones; this is associated with the 
Fontainebleau limestone, which at Chateau-Landon and Souppes is 
sufficiently compact to form an important building stone, used in the 
Arc de Triomphe and other structures in Paris. The upper Oligocene 
of Paris begins with the marnes d huitres, followed by the brackish 
and fresh-water molasse of Etrechy, and a series of sandy beds, of 
which the best known are those of Fontainebleau, Etampes and 
Ormoy; in these occur the groups of calcite crystals, charged with 
sand, familiar in all mineral collections. Elsewhere in France similar 
mixed marine, fresh-water and brackish beds are found: in Aqui- 
taine there are marine and lacustrine marls, limestones and molasse; 
marine beds occur at Biarritz; lacustrine and fresh-water marls and 
limestones with lignite appear in the sub-Pyrenees; in Provence 
there are brackish red clays, conglomerates and lignites, with 
limestones in the upper parts; and in Limagne there are mottled 
sands, arkoses, clays and fresh-water limestones. In the Jura region 
and on the borders of the central massif a peculiar group of deposits, 
the terrain siderolithiqiie, is found in beds and in pockets in Jurassic 
limestones. Sometimes this deposit consists of red clay (bolus) with 
nests of pisolitic iron, as in Jura and Franche-comte, Alsace, &c. ; 
occasionally, as in Bourgogne, Berry, the valley of the Aubois, 
Chatillon, it is made up of a breccia or conglomerate of Jurassic 
pebbles cemented with limonite and carbonate of lime or silica 
(an intimate mixture of marl and iron ore in these districts is called 
" castillard "). At Quercy the cementing material is phosphate of 
lime derived from the bones of mammals (Adapts, Necrolemur, 
Palaeotherium, Xiphodon, &c), which are so numerous that it has 
been suggested that these animals must have been suffocated by 
gaseous emanations. Similar ferruginous deposits occur in South 
Germany. 

In the Alpine region the Oligocene rocks assume the character 
of the Flysch, a complex assemblage of marly and sandy shales and 
soft sandstones with calcareous cement (" macigno "). The Flysch 
phase of deposition had begun before the close of the preepding 
period, but the bulk of it belongs to the Oligocene, and is especially 
characteristic of the lower part. The Flysch may attain a very great 
thickness; in Dauphine it is said to be 2000 metres. Obscure plant- 
like impressions are common on certain horizons of this formation, 
and have received such names as Chondrites, Fucoids, Helmin- 
thoidea. The " gres de Taveyannaz " and " Wildflysch " of Lake 
Thun contain fragments of eruptive rocks. Marine beds occur at 
Barreme, Desert, Chambery, &c, and parallel with the normal Flysch 
in the higher Alps of Vaudois is a nummulitic limestone; both 
here and near Interlaken, in the marble of Ralligstocke, calcareous 
algae are abundant. Part of the " schistes des Grisons " (" Biindner 
Schiefer ") have been regarded as of Oligocene age. In the Leman 
region the " Flysch rouge " at the foot of the Dent du Midi belongs 
to the upper part of the Flysch formation. 

In North Germany the lower Oligocene consists largely of sandy 
marls, often glauconitic; typical localities are Egeln near Magdeburg 
and Latdorf near Bernburg; at Samland the glauconitic sand con- 
tains nodules of amber, with insects, derived from Eocene strata. 
The upper Oligocene beds, which cover a wide area, comprise the 
Stettin sands and Septarian Clay or Rupelton, marine beds tending 
to merge laterally one into another. In the Mainz basin a petroleum- 
bearing sandy marl is found at Pechelbronn and Lobsann in Alsace 
underlying a fresh-water limestone which is followed by the marine 
" Meeressand " of Alzey. Lignites (Braunkohl) are widely spread in 
this region and appear at Latdorf, Leipzig, in Westphalia and 
Mecklenburg; at Halle is a variety called pyropissite, which is 
exploited at Weissenfels for the manufacture of paraffin. 



82 



OLIGOCLASE— OLIPHANT, - L. 



In Belgium a sandy series (Wemmelian, Asschian, Henisian), 
mainly of brackish-water origin, is succeeded by the marine sands of 
Bergh (with the elay of Boom), which pass up through the inferior 
sands of Bolderberg into the Miocene. In Switzerland, beyond the 
limits of the Flysch, nearer the Alpine massif, is a belt of grits, 
limestones and clays in an uncompacted condition, to which the name 
" molasse " is usually given; mixed with the molasse is an inconstant 
conglomeratic littoral formation, called Nagelfluh. The molasse 
occurs also in Bavaria, where it is several thousand feet thick and 
contains lignites. Oligocene deposits occur in the Carpathian region 
and Tirol ; as Flysch and brackish and lacustrine beds with lignite 
in Klausenburg, lignites at Hiring in Tirol. In the Spanish Pyrenees 
they are well developed; in the Apennines the scaly clays (" argille 
scagliose ") are of this age; while in Calabria they are represented 
by thick conglomerates and Flysch. Flysch appears also in Dalmatia 
and Istria (where it is called " tassello ") and in North Bosnia, 
where it contains marine limestones. Lignites are found at Sotzka 
and Styria, marine beds in the Balkan peninsula, glauconitic sands 
prevail in South Russia, Flysch with sands and grits in the Caucasus, 
while marine deposits also occupy the Aral-Caspian region and Ar- 
menia, and are to be traced into Persia. Oligocene rocks are known 
in North Africa, Algeria, Tunis and Egypt, with the silicified trees 
and basalt sheets north of the Fayum. In North America the rocks 
of this period have not been very clearly differentiated, but they 
may possibly be represented by the White river beds of S. Dakota, 
the white and blue marls of Jackson on the Mississippi, the " Jack- 
sonian " white limestone of Alabama, the limestone of Ocala in 
Florida, certain lacustrine clays in the Uinta basin, and by the rib- 
band shales with asphalt and petroleum in the coastal range of 
California. In South America and the Antilles upper Oligocene is 
found, and the lignite beds of Coronel and Lota in Chile and in the 
Straits of Magellan may be of this age ; in Patagonia are the lower 
Oligocene marine beds (" Patagonian ") and beds with mammalian 
remains. In New Zealand the Oamaru series of J. Hutton is regarded 
as Oligocene; at its base are interstratified basic volcanic rocks. 

A correlation of Oligocene strata is summarized in the following 
table : — 



in the Eocene seas (Coelopleurus, Echinolampus , Clypeaster, Scutella). 
Corals were abundant, and nummulites still continued till near the 
close of the period, but they were diminished in size. 

References. — " Geology of the Isle of Wight," 'Mem. Geol. 
Survey (2nd ed. 1889); A. von Koenen, Abhand. geol. Specialkart 
Preuss. x. (1889-1894); M. Vollest, Der BraunkoMenbergbaum 
(Halle, 1889); E. van den Brocek, " Materiaux pour l'etude de 
l'Oligocene beige," Bull. Soc. Belg. Geol. (1894); also the works of 
O. Heer, H. Filhol, G. Vasseur, H. F. Osborn, A. Gaudry, H. Douville, 
R. B. Newton, H. Dall, M. Cossmann, G. Lambert, &c, and the 
article Flysch. (J. a. H.) 

OLIGOCLASE, a rock-forming mineral belonging to the 
plagioclase (q.v.) division of the felspars. In chemical com- 
position and in its crystallographical and physical characters 
it is intermediate between albite (NaAlSi 3 8 ) and anorthite 
(CaAljSijOs), being an isomorphous mixture of -three to six 
molecules of the former with one of the latter. It is thus a soda- 
lime felspar crystallizing in the anorthic system. Varieties 
intermediate between oligoclase and albite are known as oligo- 
clase-albite. The name oligoclase was given by A. Breithaupt 
in 1826 from the Gr. 6X170S, little, and k\(Jlv, to break, because the 
mineral was thought to have a less perfect cleavage than albite. 
It had previously been recognized as a distinct species by J. J. 
Berzelius in 1824, and was named by him soda-spodumene 
(Natron -spodumen), because of its resemblance in appearance 
to spodumene. The hardness is 6\ and the sp. gr. 2-65-2-67. 
In colour it is usually whitish, with shades of grey, green or red. 
Perfectly colourless and transparent glassy material found at 
Bakersville in North Carolina has occasionally been faceted as 
a gem-stone. Another variety more frequently used as a gem- 
stone is the aventurine-felspar or " sun-stone " (q.v.) found as 
reddish cleavage masses in gneiss at Tvedestrand in southern 



Oligocene System 8. 





Englaod . 


Paris Basia. 


Belgium. 


North Germaa Regioa. 


Other Localities. 


Alps and S. 
Europe. 


a 




Sands and sandstones of 


Lower sands of 


Septariao Clay, 


Cyrena marls of Mainz. 








Ormoy, Fontainebleau aad 


Bolderberg. 


or 








Pierrefitte. 




Rupelton. 






oil 

x*3 3 


Hamstead Beds. 


Sands of Morigny, Falun of 
Jeurre, Oyster marls. 


Sands of Bergh 
with 


Stettin saQds. 


Lignites of Haring, 
Gypsiferous limestone of Aix, 


a 
.S 






Molasse of Etrechy. 


Clay of Boom. 




Lower marine Molasse of 


g -B 


D 










Basel. 


rt 
3 J3 














e 




Limestone of Brie, 


Sands of Vieux-Jones. 


Clays of Egeln aad 


Lignites of Celas 




Bembridge Beds. 


marine heds of Sannois, 




Latdorf. 


(Languedoc). 


Q U 


°-~ § 




"Glaises vertes," aad 








a _>. 


5'|i 


Osborne Beds. 


Cyrene marls. 


Clays of Henis. 


Amber-bearing 


Lignites of Brunstatt. 


3 5 
£ 




Supragypseous marls, 




Glauconitic sands of 






IfS 




limestones of Champigny, 


Sands of Grimmertingen. 


Samland. 


Marls of Priabona, 




jwC 


Headoa Bed-;. 


"First" and "Second" 






limestoaes of Crosara. 




,-] 




masses of gypsum. 


Sarjds of Wemmel. 









The land flora of this period was a rich one consisting largely of 
evergreens with characters akin to those of tropical India and 
Australia and subtropical America. Sequoias, sabal palms, ferns, 
cinnamon-trees, gum-trees, oaks, figs, laurels and willows were 
common. Chara is a common fossil in the fresh-water beds. The 
most interesting feature of the land fauna was undoubtedly the 
astonishing variety of mammalians, especially the long series from 
the White river beds and others in the interior of North America. 
Pachyderms were very numerous. Many of the mammals were of 
mixed types, Hyaenodon (between marsupials and placentals), 
Adapts (between pachyderms and lemurs), and many were clearly 
the forerunners of living genera. Rhinocerids were represented in 
the upper Oligocene by the hornless Aceratherium; Palaeomaslodon 
and Arshioitherium, from Egypt are early proboscidian forms 
which may have lived in this period; Anchitheriutn, Anchippus, &c, 
were forerunners of the horse. Palaeotherium, Anthracotherium, 
Palaeogale, Steneofiber, Cynodictis, Dinictis, Ictops, Palaeolagus, 
Sciurus, Colodon, Hyopotamus, Oreodon, Poebrotherium, Protoceras, 
Hypertragulus and the gigantic Titanotherids (Tilanolherium, 
Brontotherium, &c.) are some of the important genera, representatives 
of most of the modern groups, including carnivores (Canidae and 
Felidae), insectivores, rodents, ruminants, camels. Tortoises were 
abundant, and the genus Rana made its appearance. Rays and dog- 
fish were the dominant marine fish ; logoonal brackish-water fish 
are represented by Prolebias, Smerdis, &c. Insects abounded and 
arachnids were rapidly developing. Gasteropods were increasing in 
importance, most of the genera still existing (Cerithium, Potamides, 
Melania, large Naticas, Pleurolomaria, Volula, Tvrritella, Rostellaria, 
Pyrida). Cephalopods, on the other hand, show a falling off. 
Pelecypods include the genera Cardita, Pectuncnlus, Lucina, Ostrea, 
Cyrena, Cytherea. Bryozoa were very abundant (Membranipora, 
Lepralia, Hornera, Idmonea). Echinoids were less numerous than 



1 Norway; this presents a brilliant red metallic glitter, due to the 
presence of numerous small scales of haematite or gothite enclosed 
in the felspar. 

Oligoclase occurs, often accompanying orthoclase, as a con- 
stituent of igneous rocks of various kinds; for instance, amongst 
plutonic rocks in granite, syenite, diorite; amongst dike-rocks 
in porphyry and diabase; and amongst volcanic rocks in andesite 
and trachyte. It also occurs in gneiss. The best developed and 
largest crystals are those found with orthoclase, quartz, epidote 
and calcite in veins in granite at Arendal in Norway. (L. J. S.) 

OLIPHANT, LAURENCE (1829-1SSS), British author, son 
of Anthony Oliphant (1 793-1859) , ] was born at Cape Town. 

1 The family to which Oliphant belonged is old and famous in 
Scottish history. Sir Laurence Oliphant of Aberdalgie, Perthshire, 
who was created a lord of the Scottish parliament before 1458, was 
descended from Sir William Oliphant of Aberdalgie and on the 
female side from King Robert the Bruce. Sir William (d. 1329) is 
renowned for his brave defence of Stirling castle against Edward I. 
in 1304. Sir Laurence was sent to conclude a treaty with England 
in 1484; he helped to establish the young king James IV. on his 
throne, and he died about 1500. His son John, the 2nd lord (d. 1516), 
having lost his son and heir, Colin, at Flodden, was succeeded 
by his grandson Laurence (d. 1566), who was taken prisoner by the 
English at the rout of Solway Moss in 1542. Laurence's son, Laur- 
ence, the 4th lord (1529-1593), was a partisan of Mary queen of 
Scots, and was succeeded by his grandson Laurence (1583-1631), 
who left no sons when he died. The 6th lord was Patrick Oliphant, 
a descendant of the 4th lord, and the title was held by his descendants 



OLIPHANT, M. O. 



83 



His father was then attorney-general in Cape Colony, but was 
soon transferred as chief justice to Ceylon. The boy's education 
was of the most desultory kind. Far the least useless portion 
of it belonged to the years T848 and 1849, when he accompanied 
his parents on a tour on the continent of Europe. In 1851 
he accompanied Jung Bahadur from Colombo to Nepaul. He 
passed an agreeable time there, and saw enough that was new 
to enable him to write his first book, A Journey to Katmandu 
(T852). From Nepaul he returned to Ceylon and thence to 
England, dallied a little with the English bar, so far at least 
as to eat dinners at Lincoln's Inn, and then with the Scottish 
bar, so far at least as to pass an examination in Roman law. 
He was more happily inspired when he threw over his legal 
studies and went to travel in Russia. The outcome of that tour 
was his book on The Russian Shores oj the Black Sea (1853). 
Between 1853 and 1861 he was successively secretary to Lord 
Elgin during the negotiation of the Canada Reciprocity treaty 
at Washington, the companion of the duke of Newcastle on a 
visit to the Circassian coast during the Crimean War, and Lord 
Elgin's private secretary on his expedition to China. Each 
of these experiences produced a pleasant book of travel. In 
i86r he was appointed first secretary in Japan, and might have 
made a successful diplomatic career if it had not been interrupted, 
almost at the outset, by a night attack on the legation, in which 
he nearly lost his life. It seems probable that he never properly 
recovered from this affair. He returned to England and resigned 
the service, and was elected to parliament in 1865 for the Stirling 
Burghs. 

Oliphant did not show any conspicuous parliamentary ability, 
but made a great success by his vivacious and witty novel, 
Piccadilly (1870). He fell, however, under the influence of the 
spiritualist prophet Thomas Lake Harris (q.v.), who about 1861 
had organized a small community, the Brotherhood of the New 
Life, 1 which at this time was settled at Brocton on Lake Erie 
and subsequently moved to Santa Rosa in California. Harris 
obtained so strange an ascendancy over Oliphant that the latter 
left parliament in 1868, followed him to Brocton, and lived there 
the life of a farm labourer, in obedience to the imperious will of 
his spiritual guide. The cause of this painful and grotesque 
aberration has never-been made quite clear. It was part of the 
Brocton regime that members of the community should be 
allowed to return into the world from time to time, to make 
money for its advantage. After three years this was permitted 
to Oliphant, who, when once more in Europe, acted as corres- 
pondent of The Times during the Franco-German War, and spent 
afterwards several years at Paris in the service of that journal. 
There he met Miss Alice le Strange, whom he married. In 1873 
he went back to Brocton, taking with him his wife and mother. 
During the years which followed he continued to be employed 
in the service of the community and its head, but on work very 
different from that with which he had been occupied on his first 
sojourn. His new work was chiefly financial, and took him much 
to New York and a good deal to England. As late as December 
1878 he continued to believe that Harris was an incarnation of 
the Deity. By that time, however, his mind was occupied with 
a large project of colonization in Palestine, and he made in 1879 
an extensive journey in that country, going also to Constantinople, 

until the death of Francis, the loth lord, in April 1748. It has 
since been claimed by several persons, but without success. 

Another member of the family was Laurence Oliphant (1691- 
1767) the Jacobite, who belonged to a branch settled at Gask in 
Perthshire. He took part in the rising of 171 5, and both he and his 
son Laurence (d. 1792) were actively concerned in that of 1745, 
being present at the battles of Falkirk and Culloden. After the ruin 
of the Stuart cause they escaped to France, but were afterwards 
allowed to return to Scotland. One of this Oliphant's descendants 
was Carolina, Baroness Nairne (q.v.). 

1 It should be mentioned that the unfavourable view of Harris 
taken by Oliphant's own biographer, and certainly not shaken by 
subsequent evidence, has been strongly repudiated by some who 
knew him. Mr J. Cuming Walters, for instance, in the Westminster 
Gazette (London, July 28, 1906) defends the purity of his character. 
It is difficult to arrive at the exact truth as to Oliphant's relations 
with him, or the financial scandal which ended them; and it must 
be admitted that Oliphant himself was at least decidedly cranky. 



in the vain hope of obtaining a lease of the northern half of the 
Holy Land with a view to settling large numbers of Jews there. 
This he conceived would be an easy task from a financial point 
of view, as there were so many persons in England and America 
" anxious to fulfil the prophecies, and bring about the end of the 
world." He landed once more in England without having 
accomplished anything definite; but his wife, who had been 
banished from him for years and had been living in California, 
was allowed to rejoin him, and they went to Egypt together. 
In 1881 he crossed again to America. It was on this visit that 
he became utterly disgusted with Harris, and finally split from 
him. He was at first a little afraid that his wife would not 
follow him in his renunciation of " the prophet," but this 
was not the case, and they settled themselves very agree- 
ably, with one house in the midst of the German community 
at Haifa, and another about twelve miles off at Dalieh on Mount 
Carmel. 

It was at Haifa in 1884 that they wrote together the strange 
book called Sympneumala: Evolutionary Forces now active in 
Man, and in the next year Oliphant produced there his novel 
Masollam, which may be taken to contain its author's latest 
views with regard to the personage whom he long considered 
as " a new Avatar." One of his cleverest works, Altiora Peto, 
had been published in 1883. In 1886 an attack of fever, caught 
on the shores of the Lake of Tiberias, resulted in the death of his 
wife, whose constitution had been undermined by the hardships 
of her American life. He was persuaded that after death he was 
in much closer relation with her than when she was still alive, 
and conceived that it was under her influence that he wrote 
the book to which he gave the name of Scientific Religion. In 
November 1887 he went to England to publish that book. 
By the Whitsuntide of 1888 he had completed it and started 
for America. There he determined to marry again, his second 
wife being a granddaughter of Robert Owen the Socialist. They 
were married at Malvern, and meant to have gone to Haifa, but 
Oliphant was taken very ill at Twickenham, and died on the 
23rd of December 1888. Although a very clever man and a 
delightful companion, full of high aspiration and noble feeling, 
Oliphant was only partially sane. In any case, his education 
was ludicrously inappropriate for a man who aspired to be an 
authority on religion and philosophy. He had gone through 
no philosophical discipline in his early life, and knew next to 
nothing of the subjects with regard to which he imagined it 
was in his power to pour a flood of new light upon the world. 
His shortcomings and eccentricities, however, did not prevent 
his being a brilliant writer and talker, and a notable figure in 
any society. 

See Mrs (Margaret) Oliphant, Memoir 0} the Life of Laurence 
Oliphant and of Alice Oliphant his Wife (1892). (M. G. D.) 

OLIPHANT, MARGARET OLIPHANT (1828-1897), British 
novelist and historical writer, daughter of Francis Wilson, was 
born at Wallyford, near Musselburgh, Midlothian, in 1828. Her 
childhood was spent at Lasswade (near Dalkeith), ' Glasgow 
and Liverpool. As a girl she constantly occupied herself with 
literary experiments, and in 1849 published her first novel, 
Passages in the Life of Mrs Margaret Maitland. It dealt with the 
Scottish Free Church movement, with which Mr and Mrs Wilson 
both sympathized, and had some success. This she followed 
up in 1851 with Caleb Field, and in the same year met Major 
Blackwood in Edinburgh, and was invited by him to contribute 
to the famous Blackwood's Magazine. The connexion thus 
early commenced lasted during her whole lifetime, and she 
contributed considerably more than 100 articles to its pages. 
In May 1852 she married her cousin, Frank Wilson Oliphant, 
at Birkenhead, and settled at Harrington Square, in London. 
Her husband was an artist, principally in stained glass. He 
had very delicate health, and two of their children died in infancy, 
while the father himself developed alarming symptoms of 
consumption. For the sake of his health they moved in January 
1S59 to Florence, and thence to Rome, where Frank Oliphant 
died. His wife, left almost entirely without resources, returned 
to England and took up the burden of supporting her three 



8 4 



OLTPHANT— OLIVARES 



children by her own literary activity. She had now become a 
popular writer, and worked with amazing industry to sustain 
her position. Unfortunately, her home life was full of sorrow 
and disappointment. In January 1864 her only daughter died 
in Rome, and was buried in her father's grave. Her brother, 
who had emigrated to Canada, was shortly afterwards involved 
in financial ruin, and Mrs Oliphant offered a home to him and 
his children, and added their support to her already heavy 
responsibilities. In 1866 she settled at Windsor to be near her 
sons who were being educated at Eton. This was her home for 
the rest of her life, and for more than thirty years she pursued 
a varied literary career with courage scarcely broken by a series 
of the gravest troubles. The ambitions she cherished for her 
sons were unfulfilled. Cyril Francis, the elder, died in 1890, 
leaving a Life of Alfred de Mussel, incorporated in his mother's 
Foreign Classics for English Readers. The younger, Frank, 
collaborated with her in the Victorian Age of English Literature 
and won a position at the British Museum, but was rejected by 
the doctors. He died in 1894. With the last of her children 
lost to her, she had but little further interest in life. Her health 
steadily declined, and she died at Wimbledon, on the 25th of 
June 1897. 

In the course of her long struggle with circumstances, Mrs 
Oliphant produced more than 120 separate works, including 
novels, books of travel and description, histories and volumes 
of literary criticism. Among the best known of her works of 
fiction are Adam Graeme (1852), Magdalen Hepburn (1854), 
Lilliesleaf (1855), The Laird of Norlaw (1858) and a series of 
stories with the collective title of The Chronicles of Carlingford, 
which, originally appearing in Blackwood' s Magazine (1862-1865), 
did much to widen her reputation. This series included Salem 
Chapel (1863), The Rector; and the Doctor's Family (1863), 
The Perpetual Citrate (1864) and Miss Marjoribanks (1866). 
Other successful novels were Madonna Mary (1867), Squire Ardcn 
(1871), Hethatwill not when he may (1880), Hester (1883), Kirsteen 
(1890), The Marriage of Elinor (1892) and The Ways of Life (i8gy). 
Her tendency to mysticism found expression in The Beleaguered 
City (1880) and A Little Pilgrim in the Unseen (1882). Her 
biographies of Edward Irving (1&62) and Laurence Oliphant (1892), 
together with her life of Sheridan in the "English Men of Letters" 
(1883), have vivacity and a sympathetic touch. She also wrote 
historical and critical works of considerable variety, including 
Historical Sketches of the Reign of George II. (1869), The Makers 
of Florence (1876), A Literary History of England from ijqo to 
1825 (1882), The Makers of Venice (1887), Royal Edinburgh 
(1890), Jerusalem (1891) and The Makers of Modem Rome{i8gs), 
while at the time of her death she was still occupied upon Annals 
of a Publishing House, a record of the progress and achievement 
of the firm of Blackwood, with which she had been so long and 
honourably connected. 

Her Autobiography and Letters, which present a touching picture of 
her domestic anxieties, appeared in 1899. 

OLIPHANT, Olifant (Ger. H elf ant), the large' signal horn of 
the middle ages, made, as its name indicates, from the tusk of 
an elephant. The oliphant was the instrument of knights and 
men of high degree, and was usually ornamented with scenes of 
hunting or war carved either lengthways or round the horn in 
sections divided by bands of gold and studded with gems. The 
knights used their oliphants in the hunting field and in battle, 
and the loss of this precious horn was considered as shameful as 
the loss of sword or banner. 

OLIVA, FERNAN PEREZ DE (1492M530), Spanish man of 
letters, was born at Cordova about 1492. After studying at 
Salamanca, Alcala, Paris and Rome, he was appointed rector 
at Salamanca, where he died in 1530. His Didlogo de la dignidad 
del hombre (1543), an unfinished work completed by Francisco 
Cervantes de Salazar, was written chiefly to prove the suitability 
of Spanish as a vehicle for philosophic discussion. He also 
published translations of the Amphitruo (1525), the Electra 
(1528) and the Hecuba (1528). 

OLIVARES, GASPAR DE GUZMAN, count of Olivares and 
duke of San Lucar (1587-1645), Spanish royal favourite and 



minister, was born in Rome, where his father was Spanish 
ambassador, on the 6th of January 1587. His compound title is 
explained by the fact that he inherited the title of count of 
Olivares, but was created duke of San. Lucar by the favour of 
Philip IV. He begged the king to allow him to preserve his 
inherited title in combination with the new honour — according 
to a practice of which there are a few other examples in Spanish 
history. Therefore he was commonly spoken of as el conde- 
duque. During the life of Philip III. he was appointed to a post 
in the household of the heir apparent, Philip, by the interest of 
his maternal uncle Don Baltasar de Zuniga, who was the head of 
the prince's establishment. Olivares made it his business to 
acquire the most complete influence over the young prince. 
When Philip IV. ascended the throne in 1621, at the age of six- 
teen, he showed his confidence in Olivares by ordering that all 
papers requiring the royal signature should first be sent to the 
count-duke. Olivares could now boast to his uncle Don 
Baltasar de Zuniga that he was " all." He became what is 
known in Spain as a valido — something more than a prime 
minister, the favourite and alter ego of the king. For twenty-two 
years he directed the policy of Spain. It was a period of constant 
war, and finally of disaster abroad and of rebellion at home. 
The Spaniards, who were too thoroughly monarchical to blame 
the king, held his favourite responsible for the misfortunes of the 
country. The count-duke became, and for long remained, in 
the opinion of his countrymen, the accepted model of a grasping 
and incapable favourite. Of late, largely under the inspiration 
of Don Antonio Canovas, there has been a certain reaction in his 
favour. It would certainly be most unjust to blame Olivares 
alone for the decadence of Spain, which was due to internal 
causes of long standing. The gross errors of his policy — the 
renewal of the war with Holland in 1621, the persistence of Spain 
in taking part in the Thirty Years' War, the lesser wars undertaken 
in northern Italy, and the entire neglect of all effort to promote 
the unification of the different states forming the peninsular 
kingdom — were shared by him with the king, the Church and 
the commercial classes. When he had fallen from power he 
wrote an apology, in which he maintained that he had always 
wished to see more attention paid to internal government, and 
above all to the complete unification of Portugal with Spain. 
But if this was not an afterthought, he must, on his own showing, 
stand accused of having carried out during long years a policy 
which he knew to be disastrous to his country, rather than risk 
the loss of the king's favour and of his place. Olivares did not 
share the king's taste for art and literature, but he formed a vast 
collection of state papers, ancient and contemporary, which he 
endeavoured to protect from destruction by entailing them as an 
heirloom. He also formed a splendid aviary which, under the 
name of the " hencoop," was a favourite subject of ridicule with 
his enemies. Towards the end of his period of favour he caused 
great offence by legitimizing a supposed bastard son of very 
doubtful paternity and worthless personal character, and by 
arranging a rich marriage for him. The fall of Olivares was 
immediately due to the revolts of Portugal and Catalonia in 1640. 
The king parted with him reluctantly, and only under the pressure 
of a strong court intrigue headed by Queen Isabella. It was 
noted with anxiety by his enemies that he was succeeded in the 
king's confidence by his nephew the count of Haro. There 
remains, however, a letter from the king, in which Philip tells his 
old favourite, with frivolous ferocity, that it might be necessary 
to sacrifice his life in order to avert unpopularity from the royal 
house. Olivares was driven from office in 1643. He retired by 
the king's order to Tore Here he endeavoured to satisfy his 
passion for activity, partly by sharing in the municipal govern- 
ment of the town and the regulation of its commons, woods and 
pastures, and partly by the composition of the apology he 
published under the title of El Nicandro, which was perhaps 
written by an agent, but was undeniably inspired by the fallen 
minister. The Nicandro was denounced to the Inquisition, and 
it is not impossible that Olivares might have ended in the prisons 
of the Holy Office, or on the scaffold, if he had not died on the 
22nd of July 1645. t 



OLIVE 



85 



See the Esludios del reinado de Felipe IV. of Don Anton io'.Ca novas 
(Madrid, 1889); and Don F. Silvela's introduction, much less 
favourable to Olivares, to his edition of the Cartas de Sor Maria de 
Agreda y del rey Felipe IV. (Madrid, 1885-1886). 

OLIVE (Olea europaea), the plant that yields the olive oil of 
commerce, belonging to a section of the natural order Oleaceae, 
of which it has been taken as the type. The genus Olea includes 
about thirty species, very widely scattered, chiefly over the 
Old World, from the basin of the Mediterranean to South 
Africa and New Zealand. The wild olive is a small tree or 
bush of rather straggling growth, with thorny branches, and 
opposite oblong pointed leaves, dark greyish-green above and, 
in the young state, hoary beneath with whitish scales; the small 
white flowers, with four-cleft calyx and corolla, two stamens 
and bifid stigma, are borne on the last year's wood, in racemes 
springing from the axils of the leaves; the drupaceous fruit 
is small in the wild plant, and the fleshy pericarp, which gives 
the cultivated olive its economic value, is hard and comparatively 
thin. In the cultivated forms the tree acquires a more compact 
habit, the branches lose their spinous character, while the young 
shoots become more or less angular; the leaves are always 

hoary on the under-side, 
and are generally lanceo- 
late in shape, though 
varying much in breadth 
and size in the different 
kinds. The fruit is sub- 
ject to still greater 
changes of form and 
colour; usually oval or 
nearly globular, in some 
sorts it is egg-shaped, in 
others much elongated; 
while the dark hue that 
it commonly assumes 
when ripe is exchanged 
in many varieties for 
violet, green or almost 
white. At present the 
wild olive is found in 
most of the countries 
around the Mediter- 
ranean, extending its 

A, Shoot of olive (Olea europaea) (from ram ? e on the west t0 
nature), reduced; B, opened flower; 0, Portugal, and eastward 
vertical section of pistil. B and C en- to the vicinity of the 
lar S ed - Caspian, while, locally, 

it occurs even in Afghanistan. An undoubted native of 
Syria and the maritime parts of Asia Minor, its abund- 
ance in Greece and the islands of the Archipelago, and the 
frequent allusions to it by the earliest poets, seem to 
indicate that it was there also indigenous; but in localities 
remote from the Levant it may have escaped from cultivation, 
reverting more or less to its primitive type. It shows a marked 
preference for calcareous soils and a partiality for the sea-breeze, 
flourishing with especial luxuriance on the limestone slopes 
and crags that often form the shores of the Greek peninsula 
and adjacent islands. 

The varieties of olive known to the modern cultivator are 
extremely numerous — according to some authorities equalling 
or exceeding in number those of the vine. In France and Italy 
at least thirty kinds have been enumerated, but comparatively 
few are grown to any large extent. None of these can be safely 
identified with ancient descriptions, though it is not unlikely 
that some of the narrow-leaved sorts that are most esteemed 
may be descendants of the famed " Licinian " (see below). 
Italy retains its old pre-eminence in olive cultivation; and, 
though its ancient Gallic province now excels it in the production 
of the finer oils, its fast-improving culture may restore the old 
prestige. The broad-leaved olive trees of Spain bear a larger 
fruit, but the pericarp is of more bitter flavour and the oil of 
ranker quality. The olive tree, even when free increase is 




unchecked by pruning, is of very slow growth; but, where 
allowed for ages its natural development, the trunk sometimes 
attains a considerable diameter. De Candolle records one 
exceeding 23 ft. in girth, the age being supposed to amount 
to seven centuries. Some old Italian olives have been credited 
with an antiquity reaching back to the first years of the empire, 
or even to the days of republican Rome; but the age of such 
ancient trees is always doubtful during growth, and their identity 
with old descriptions still more difficult to establish. The tree 
in cultivation rarely exceeds 30 ft. in height, and in France 
and Italy is generally confined to much more limited dimensions 
by frequent pruning. The wood, of a yellow or light greenish- 
brown hue, is often finely veined with a darker tint, and, being 
very hard and close grained, is valued by the cabinetmaker 
and ornamental turner. 

The olive is propagated in various ways, but cuttings or layers are 
generally preferred ; the tree roots in favourable soil almost as easily 
as the willow, and throws up suckers from the stump when cut down. 
Branches of various thickness are cut into lengths of several feet 
each, and, planted rather deeply in manured ground, soon vegetate; 
shorter pieces are sometimes laid horizontally in shallow trenches, 
when, covered with a few inches of soil, they rapidly throw up sucker- 
like shoots. In Greece and the islands grafting the cultivated tree 
on the wild form is a common practice. In Italy embryonic buds, 
which form small swelling9 on the stems, are carefully excised and 
planted beneath the surface, where they grow readily, these " uovoli " 
soon forming a vigorous shoot. Occasionally the larger boughs are 
inarched, and young trees thus soon obtained. The olive is also 
sometimes raised from seed, the oily pericarp being first softened by 
slight rotting, or soaking in hot water or in an alkaline solution, to 
facilitate germination. The olives in the East often receive little 
attention from the husbandman, the branches being allowed to grow 
freely and without curtailment by the pruning-knife; water, how- 
ever, must be supplied in long droughts to ensure a crop; with this 
neglectful culture the trees bear abundantly only at intervals of 
three or four years; thus, although wild growth is favourable to 
the picturesque aspect of the plantation, it is not to be recommended 
on economic grounds. Where the olive is carefully cultivated, as in 
Languedoc and Provence, it is planted in rows at regular intervals, 
the distance between the trees varying in different "olivettes," 
according to the variety grown. Careful pruning is practised, the 
object being to preserve the flower-bearing shoot9 of the preceding 
year, while keeping the head of the tree low, so as to allow the easy 
gathering of the fruit; a dome or rounded form is generally the aim 
of the pruner. The spaces between the trees are occasionally 
manured with rotten dung or other nitrogenous matter; in France 
woollen rags are in high esteem for this purpose. Various annual 
crops are sometimes raised between the rows, and in Calabria wheat 
even is grown in this way; but the trees are better without any 
intermediate cropping. Latterly a dwarf variety, very prolific and 
with green fruit, has come into favour in certain localities, especially 
in America, where it is said to have produced a crop two or three 
seasons after planting. The ordinary kinds do not become profitable 
to the grower until from five to seven years after the cuttings are 
placed in the olive-ground. Apart from occasional damage by 
weather or organic foes, the olive crop is somewhat precarious even 
with the most careful cultivation, and the large untended trees so 
often seen in Spain and Italy do not yield that certain income to the 
peasant proprietor that some authors have attributed to them; the 
crop from these old trees is often enormous, but they seldom bear 
well two years in succession, and in many instances a luxuriant 
harvest can only be reckoned upon every sixth or seventh season. 
The fruit when ripe is, by the careful grower, picked by hand and 
deposited in cloths or baskets for conveyance to the mill; but in 
many parts of Spain and Greece, and generally in Asia, the olives 
are beaten down by poles or by shaking the boughs, or even allowed 
to drop naturally, often lying on the ground until the convenience 
of the owner admits of their removal ; much of the inferior oil 
owes its bad quality to the carelessness of the proprietor of the trees. 
In southern Europe the olive harvest is in the winter months, con- 
tinuing for several weeks; but the time varies in each country, and 
also with the season and the kinds cultivated. The amount of oil 
contained in the fruit differs much in the various sorts; the pericarp 
usually yields from 60 to 70%. The ancient agriculturists believed 
that the olive would not succeed if planted more than a few leagues 
from the sea (Theophrastus gives 300 stadia as the limit), but modern 
experience does not confirm the idea, and, though showing a prefer- 
ence for the coast, it has long been grown far inland. A calcareous 
soil, however dry or poor, seems best adapted to its healthy develop- 
ment, though the tree will grow in any light soil, and even on clay if 
well drained; but, as remarked by Pliny, the plant is more liable to 
disease on rich soils, and the oil is inferior to the produce of the 
poorer and more rocky ground the species naturally affects. The 
olive suffers greatly in some years from the attacks of various 
enemies. A fungoid growth has at times infested the trees for several 



86 



OLIVE 



successive seasons, to the grea-t damage of the plantations. A 
species of coccus, C. oteae, attaches itself to the shoots, and certain 
lepidopterous caterpillars feed on the leaves, while the " olive-fly " 
attacks the fruit. In France the olivettes suffer occasionally 
from frost; in the early part of the 18th century many trees 
were cut to the ground by a winter of exceptional severity. Gales 
and long-continued rains during the gathering season also cause 
mischief. 

The unripe fruit of the olive is largely used in modern as in ancient 
times as an article of dessert, to enhance the flavour of wine, and to 
renew the sensitiveness of the palate for other viands. For this 
purpose the fruit is picked while green, soaked for a few hours in an 
alkaline ley, washed well in clean water and then placed in bottles 
or jars filled with brine; the Romans added amurca to the salt to 
increase the bitter flavour of the olives, and at the present day spices 
are sometimes used. 

The leaves and bark of the tree are employed in the south, as a 
tonic medicine, in intermittent fever. A resinous matter called 
" olive gum," or Lucca gum, formed by the exuding juice in hot 
seasons, was anciently in medical esteem, and in modern Italy is used 
as a perfume. 

In England the olive is not hardy, though in the southern counties 
it will stand ordinary winters with only the protection of a wall, 
and will bear fruit in such situations; but the leaves are generally 
shed in the autumn, and the olives rarely ripen. 

The genus Olea includes several other species of some economic 
importance. 0. paniculata is a larger tree, attaining a height of 50 
or 60 ft. in the forests of Queensland, and yielding a hard and tough 
timber. The yet harder wood of 0. laurifolia, an inhabitant of Natal, 
is the black ironwood of the South African colonist. 

At what remote period of human progress the wild olive 
passed under the care of the husbandman and became the 
fruitful garden olive it is impossible to conjecture. The frequent 
reference in the Bible to the plant and its produce, its implied 
abundance in the land of Canaan, the important place it has 
always held in the economy of the inhabitants of Syria, lead 
us to consider that country the birthplace of the cultivated 
olive. An improved variety, possessed at first by some small 
Semitic sept, it was probably slowly distributed to adjacent 
tribes; and, yielding profusely, with little labour, that oily 
matter so essential to healthy life in the dry hot climates of the 
East, the gift of the fruitful tree became in that primitive age 
a symbol of peace and goodwill among the warlike barbarians. 
At a later period, with the development of maritime enterprise, 
the oil was conveyed, as an article of trade, to the neighbouring 
Pelasgic and Ionian nations, and tbe plant, doubtless, soon 
followed. 

In the Homeric world, as depicted in the Iliad, olive oil is 
known only as a luxury of the wealthy — an exotic product, 
prized chiefly for its value in the heroic toilet; the warriors 
anoint themselves with it after the bath, and the body of Patroclus 
is similarly sprinkled; but no mention of the culture of the plant 
is made, nor does it find any place on the Achillean shield, 
on which a vineyard is represented. But, although no reference 
to the cultivation of the olive occurs in the Iliad, the presence 
of the tree in the garden of Alcinous and other familiar allusions 
show it to have been known when the Odyssey was written. 
Whenever the introduction may have taken place, all tradition 
points to the limestone hills of Attica as the seat of its first 
cultivation on the Hellenic peninsula. When Poseidon and 
Athena contended for the future city, an olive sprang from the 
barren rock at the bidding of the goddess, the patron of those 
arts that were to bring undying influence to the rising state. 
That this myth has some relation to the first planting of the 
olive in Greece seems certain from the remarkable story told 
by Herodotus of the Epidaurians, who, on their crops failing, 
applied for counsel to the Delphic oracle, and were enjoined 
to erect statues to Damia and Auxesia (symbols of fertility) 
carved from the wood of the true garden olive, then possessed 
only by the Athenians, who granted their request for a tree on 
condition of their making an annual sacrifice to Athena, its 
patron; they thus obeyed the command of the Pythian, and their 
lands became again fertile. The sacred tree of the goddess long 
stood on the Acropolis, and, though destroyed in the Persian 
invasion, sprouted again from the root — some suckers of which 
were said to have produced those olive trees of the Academy in 
an after age no less revered. By the time of Solon the olive had 



so spread that he found it necessary to enact laws to regulate 
the cultivation of the tree in Attica, from which country it was 
probably distributed gradually to all the Athenian allies and 
tributary states. To the Ionian coast, where it abounded in 
the time of Thales, it may have been in an earlier age brought 
by Phoenician vessels; some of the Sporades may have received 
it from the same source; the olives of Rhodes and Crete had 
perhaps a similar origin. Samos, if we may judge from the 
epithet of Aeschylus (eXcu6<£uTas) , must have had the fruitful 
plant long before the Persian wars. 

It is not unlikely that the valued tree was taken to Magna 
Graecia by the first Achaean colonists, and the assertion of 
Pliny (quoted from Fenestella), that no olives existed in Italy 
in the reign of Tarquinius Priscus, must be received with the 
caution due to many statements of that industrious compiler. 
In Latin Italy the cultivation seems to have spread slowly, 
for it was not until the consulship of Pompey that the production 
of oil became sufficient to permit of its exportation. In Pliny's 
time it was already grown abundantly in the two Gallic provinces 
and in Spain; indeed, in the earlier days of Strabo the 
Ligurians supplied the Alpine barbarians with oil, in exchange 
for the wild produce of their mountains; the plant may have 
been introduced into those districts by Greek settlers in a 
previous age. Africa was indebted for the olive mainly to 
Semitic agencies. In Egypt the culture never seems to have 
made much progress; the oil found in Theban tombs was 
probably imported from Syria. Along the southern shore of 
the great inland sea the tree was carried by the Phoenicians, 
at a remote period, to their numerous colonies in Africa — ■ 
though the abundant olives of Cyrene, to which allusion 
is made by Theophrastus, and the glaucous foliage of whose 
descendants still clothes the rocks of the deserted Cyrenaica, 
may have been the offspring of Greek plants brought by the 
first settlers. The tree was most likely introduced into southern 
Spain, and perhaps into Sardinia and the Balearic Islands, by 
Phoenician merchants; and, if it be true that old olive trees 
were found in the Canaries on their rediscovery by medieval 
navigators, the venerable trees probably owed their origin 
to the same enterprising pioneers of the ancient world. De 
Candolle says that the means by which the olive was distributed 
to the two opposite shores of the Mediterranean are indicated 
by the names given to the plant by their respective inhabitants — 
the Greek eXata passing into the Latin olea and oliva, that in 
its turn becoming the ulivo of the modern Italian, the olivo 
of the Spaniard, and the olive, olivier, of the French, while in 
Africa and southern Spain the olive retains appellatives derived 
from the Semitic zait or seit; but the complete subjugation of 
Barbary by the Saracens sufficiently accounts for the prevalence 
of Semitic forms in that region; and aceytano (Arab, zeitiin), 
the Andalusian name of the fruit, locally given to the tree 
itself, is but a vestige of the Moorish conquest. 

Yielding a grateful substitute for the butter and animal fats 
consumed by the races of the north, the olive, among the southern 
nations of antiquity, became an emblem not only of peace but of 
national wealth and domestic plenty; the branches borne in the 
Panathenaea, the wild olive spray of the Olympic victor, the olive 
crown of the Roman conqueror at ovation, and those of the 
equites at their imperial review alike typified gifts of peace that, 
in a barbarous age, could be secured by victory alone. Among 
the Greeks the oil was valued as an important article of diet, 
as well as for its external use. The Roman people employed 
it largely in food and cookery — the wealthy as an indispensable 
adjunct to the toilet; and in the luxurious days of the later 
empire it became a favourite axiom that long and pleasant life 
depended on two fluids, " wine within and oil without." Pliny 
vaguely describes fifteen varieties of olive cultivated in his day, 
that called the " Licinian " being held in most esteem, and the 
oil obtained from it at Venafrum in Campania the finest known 
to Roman connoisseurs; the produce of Istria and Baetica was 
regarded as second only to that of the Italian peninsula. The gour- 
met of the empire valued the unripe fruit, steeped in brine, as a 
provocative to the palate, no less than his modern representative; 



OLIVEIRA MARTINS— OLIVENITE 



87 



and pickled olives, retaining their characteristic flavour, have 
been found among the buried stores of Pompeii. The bitter 
juice or refuse deposited during expression of the oil (called 
amurca), and the astringent leaves of the tree have many virtues 
attributed to them by ancient authors. The oil of the bitter wild 
olive was employed by the Roman physicians in medicine, 
but does not appear ever to have been used as food or in the 
culinary art. 

In modern times the olive has been spread widely over the 
world; and, though the Mediterranean lands that were its ancient 
home still yield the chief supply of the oil, the tree is now culti- 
vated successfully in many regions unknown to its early dis- 
tributors. Soon after the discovery of the American continent 
it was conveyed thither by the Spanish settlers. In Chile it 
flourishes as luxuriantly as in its native land, the trunk some- 
times becoming of large girth, while oil of fair quality is yielded 
by the fruit. To Peru it was carried at a later date, but has not 
there been equally successful. Introduced into Mexico by the 
Jesuit missionaries of the 17th century, it was planted by similar 
agency in Upper California, where it has prospered latterly under 
the more careful management of the Anglo-Saxon conqueror. Its 
cultivation has also been attempted in the south-eastern states, 
especially in S. Carolina, Florida and Mississippi. In the eastern 
hemisphere the olive has been established in many inland districts 
which would have been anciently considered ill-adapted for its 
culture. To Armenia and Persia it was known at a comparatively 
early period of history, and many olive-yards now exist in Upper 
Egypt. The tree has been introduced into Chinese agriculture, 
and has become an important addition to the resources of the 
Australian planter. In Queensland the olive has found a climate 
specially suited to its wants; in South Australia, near Adelaide, 
it also grows vigorously; and there are probably few coast 
districts of the vast island-continent where the tree would not 
flourish. It has likewise been successfully introduced into some 
parts of Cape Colony. 

OLIVEIRA MARTINS, JOAQUIM PEDRO DE (1843-1894), 
Portuguese writer, was born in Lisbon and received his early 
education at the Lyceo Nacional and the Academia das Bellas 
Artes. At the age of fourteen his father's death compelled him 
to seek a living as clerk in a commercial house, but he gradually 
improved his position until in 1870 he was appointed manager 
of the mine of St Eufemia near Cordova. In Spain he wrote 
0. Socialismo, and developed that sympathy for the industrial 
classes of which he gave proof throughout his life. Returning to 
Portugal in 1874, he became administrator of the railway from 
Oporto to Povoa, residing in Oporto. He had married when only 
nineteen, and for many years devoted his leisure hours to the 
study of economics, geography and history. In 1878 his memoir 
A CirculaQao fidicciaria brought him the gold medal and member- 
ship of the Royal Academy of Sciences of Lisbon. Two years 
later he was elected president of the Society of Commercial 
Geography of Oporto, and in 1884 he became director of the 
Industrial and Commercial Museum in that city. In 1885 he 
entered public life, and in the following year represented Vianna 
do Castello in parliament, and in 1887 Oporto. Removing to 
Lisbon in 1888, he continued the journalistic work which he had 
commenced when living in the north, by editing the Reporter, 
and in 1889 he was named administrator of the Tobacco Regie. 
He represented Portugal at international conferences in Berlin 
and Madrid in 1890, and was chosen to speak at the celebration of 
the fourth centenary of Columbus held in Madrid in 1891, which 
gained him membership of the Spanish Royal Academy of 
History. He became minister of finance on the 17th of January 
1S92, and later vice-president of the Junta do Credito Publico. 
His health, however, began to break down as a result of a life 
spent in unremitting toil, and he died on the 24th of August 
1S94. 

His youthful struggles and privations had taught him a serious 
view of life, which, with his acute sensibility, gave him a reserved 
manner, but Oliveira Martins was one of the most generous and 
noble, of men. Like Anthero de Quental, he was impregnated 
with modern German philosophy, and his perception of the low 



moral standard prevailing in puhlic life made him a pessimist 
who despaired of his country's future, but his sense of proportion, 
and the necessity which impelled him to work, saved him from 
the fate which befell his friend, and he died a believing Catholic. 
At once a gifted psychologist, a profound sociologist, a stern 
moralist, and an ardent patriot, Oliveira Martins deserved his 
European reputation. His Bibliothcca das sciencias sociacs, 
a veritable encyclopaedia, comprises literary criticism, socialism, 
economics, anthropology, histories of Iberian civilization, of the 
Roman Republic, Portugal and Brazil. Towards the end of his 
life he specialized in the 15th century and produced two notable 
volumes, Os filhas de D. Joao I. and A vida de Nun'Alvarcs, 
leaving unfinished principe perjeilo, a study on King 
John II., which was edited by his friend Henrique de Barros 
Gomes. 

As the literary leader of a national revival, Oliveira Martins 
occupied an almost unique position in Portugal during the last 
third of the 19th century. If he judged and condemned the 
parliamentary regime and destroyed many illusions in his sensa- 
tional Contemporary Portugal, and if in his philosophic History oj 
Portugal he showed, in a series of impressionist pictures, the slow 
decline of his country commencing in the golden age of the 
discoveries and conquests, he at the same time directed the gaze 
of his coisntrymen to the days of their real greatness under the 
House of Aviz, and incited them to work for a better future by 
describing the faith and patriotism which had animated the 
foremost men of the race in the middle ages. He had neither 
time nor opportunity for original research, but his powerful 
imagination and picturesque style enabled him to evoke the 
past and make it present to his readers. 

The chief characteristics of the man — psychological imagination 
combined with realism and a gentle irony — make his strength 
as a historian and his charm as a writer. When some critics 
objected that his Historia de Portugal ought rather to be named 
" Ideas on Portuguese History," he replied that a synthetic 
and dramatic picture of one of those collective beings called 
nations gives the mind a clearer, truer and more lasting impression 
than a summary narrative of successive events. But just 
because he possessed the talents and temperament of a poet, 
Oliveira Martins was fated to make frequent mistakes as well as 
to discover important truths. He must be read with'care because 
he is emotional, and cannot let facts speak for themselves, but 
interrupts the narrative with expressions of praise or blame. 
Some of his books resemble a series of visions, while, despite his 
immense erudition, he does not always supply notes or refer to 
authorities. He can draw admirable portraits, rich with colour 
and life; in his Historia dc Portugal and Contcmporaneo Portugal 
those of King Pedro I. and Herculano are among the best known. 
He describes to perfection such striking events as the Lisbon 
earthquake, and excels in the appreciation of an epoch. In 
these respects Castelar considered him superior to Macaulay, 
and declared that few men in Europe possessed the universal 
aptitude and the fullness of knowledge displayed by Oliveira 
Martins. 

The works of Oliveira Martins include Elcmentos de anthropologia, 
As Racas Jiumanas e a civilisacao primitiva, Systema dos mythos 
religiosos, Quadro das insiiiuicoes primitivas, Regime das 
riquezas, Politica e economia nacional, Taboas de chronologia e 
geographia historica, O Hellenismo e a civilisacao christa, Historia 
da Republica Romana, Historia da civilisacao iberica, Historia de 
Porttigual, Brazil e as colonias portuguezas, Portugal nos Mares, 
Portugal em Africa, Portugal content poraneo, Cam&s os Lusiadas 
e a renascenca em Portugal — a brilliant commentary on the physiog- 
nomy of the poet and his poem, Os Filhos de D. Joao I., the preface 
to which gives his views on the writing of history — A Vida de 
Nun' Alvares; and A. Inglaterra de Hoje — the result of a visit to 
England. 

See Moniz Barreto, Oliveira Martins, estudo de psyclwlogia (Paris, 
1887), a remarkable study; F. Diniz D'Ayalla, Os Ideaes de Oliveira 
Marlins (Lisbon, 1897), which contains an admirable statement of 
his ideas, philosophical and otherwise; Anthero de Quental, Oliveira 
Martins (Lisbon, 1894) an d Diccionario bibliographico poriuguez, 
xii. 125. (E. PR.) 

OLIVENITE, a mineral consisting of basic copper arsenate 
with the formula Cu 2 (OH)As04- It crystallizes in the ortho- 



88 



OLIVER, L— OLIVIER 



rhombic system, and is sometimes found in small brilliant crystals 
of simple prismatic habit terminated by domal faces. More 
usually, however, it occurs as globular aggregates of acicular 
crystals, these fibrous forms often having a velvety lustre: 
sometimes it is lamellar in structure, or soft and earthy. A 
characteristic feature, and one to which the name alludes (German, 
Olivenerz, of A. G. Werner, 1789), is the olive-green colour, 
which varies in shade from blackish-green in the crystals to 
almost white in the finely fibrous variety known as " wood- 
copper." The hardness is 3, and the sp. gr. 4-3. The 
mineral was formerly found in some abundance, associated with 
limonite and quartz, in the upper workings in the copper mines 
of the St Day district in Cornwall; also nearRedruth, and in the 
Tintic district in Utah. It is a mineral of secondary origin, 
having been formed by the alteration of copper ores and 
mispickel. 

The arsenic of olivenite is sometimes partly replaced by a small 
amount of phosphorus, and in the species libethenite we have 
the corresponding basic copper phosphate Cu 2 (OH)P0 4 . This 
is found as small dark green crystals resembling olivenite at 
Libethen in Hungary, and in small amount also in Cornwall. 
Other members of this isomorphous group of minerals are adamite, 
Zn 2 (OH)As0 4 , and descloizite (q.v.). (L. J. S.) 

OLIVER, ISAAC (c. 1566-1617), English miniature painter, was 
probably born in London, as in 1571 a certain Peter Olivier of 
Rouen was residing in London with his wife and had been there 
for three years with one " chylde " named " Isake." It would 
seem likely, therefore, that he was not at that time more than six 
years old. It has been suggested by Mr Lionel Cust, from the 
Huguenot records, that he is identical with one Isaac Oliver of 
Rouen, married at the Dutch church in Austin Friars in 1602. 
His death occurred in 1617, and he was buried in the church 
of St Anne, Blackfriars. He was probably a pupil of Nicholas 
Hilliard, and connected through his wife, whose name is un- 
known, with the artists Gheeraerts and De Critz. He was an 
exceedingly expert miniature painter, and splendid examples of 
his work can be seen at Montagu House, Windsor Castle, Sher- 
borne Castle and in the collections of Mr J. Pierpont Morgan 
and the late Baroness Burdett-Coutts. Some of his pen draw- 
ings are in the British Museum. (G. C. W.) 

OLIVER, PETER (1594-1648), English miniature painter, was 
the eldest son of Isaac Oliver, probably by his first wife; 
and to him Isaac Oliver left his finished and unfinished 
drawings, with the hope that he would live to exercise the 
art of his father. The younger sons of the artist appear to 
have been under age at the time of his death, and were probably 
therefore sons by a later wife than the mother of Peter Oliver. 
He resided at Isleworth, and was buried beside his father at 
St Anne's, Blackfriars. He was even more eminent in minia- 
ture painting than his father, and is specially remarkable for a 
series of copies in water-colour he made after celebrated pictures 
by old masters. Most of these were done by the desire of the 
king, and seven of them still remain at Windsor Castle. A great 
many of Oliver's works were purchased by Charles II. from his 
widow; several of his drawings are in existence, and a leaf from 
his pocket-book in the collection of the earl of Derby. His most 
important work is the group of the three grandsons of the 1st 
Viscount Montacute with their servant, now belonging to the 
marquess of Exeter; and there are fine miniatures by him at 
Welbeck Abbey, Montagu House, Sherborne Castle, Minley 
Manor, Belvoir Castle and in the private collection of the queen 
of Holland. (G. C. W.) 

OLIVES, MOUNT OF, or Mount Olivet ("Opos 'EXauOos or 
toiv 'EXaiSy; mod. Jebel-et-Tur), the ridge facing the Temple 
Mount at Jerusalem on the east, and separated from it by the 
Kidron. A basis of hard cretaceous limestone is topped with 
softer deposits of the same, quaternary deposits forming the 
summit. There are four distinct elevations in the ridge: tradi- 
tionally the southernmost, which is separated by a cleft from the 
others, is called the " Hill of Offence," and said to be the scene of 
Solomon's idolatry. The summit to the north of this is often 
(wrongly) spoken of as Olivet proper. Still worse is the error of 



calling the next hill but one to the north " Scopus." The top of 
the ridge affords a comprehensive view. There are four Old 
Testament references: 2 Sam. xv. 30 sqq., Neh. viii. 15, Ezek. xi. 
23, Zech. xiv. 4. In the New Testament the place is mentioned 
in connexion with the last days of the' life of Jesus. He crossed 
it on his kingly entry into Jerusalem, and upon it he delivered 
his great eschatological address (Markxiii.3). That the Ascension 
took place/row the summit of the Mount of Olives is not necessarily 
implied in Acts i. 12; the words "over against Bethany" 
(Luke xxiv. 50) perhaps mean one of the secluded ravines on 
the eastern slope, beside one of which that village stands. But 
since Constantine erected the " Basilica of the Ascension " on the 
spot marked by a certain sacred cave (Euseb. Vita Const, ill. 41), 
the site of this event has been placed here and marked by a 
succession of churches. The present building is quite modern, 
and is in the hands of the Moslems. Close to the Chapel of the 
Ascension is the vault of St Pelagia, and a little way down the 
hill is the labyrinth of early Christian rock-hewn sepulchral 
chambers now called the " Tombs of the Prophets." During 
the middle ages Olivet was also shown as the mount of the 
Transfiguration. A chapel, bearing the name of the Caliph Omar, 
and said to occupy the place where he encamped when Jerusalem 
surrendered to the Moslems, formerly stood beside the Church 
of the Ascension. There are a considerable number of monasteries 
and churches of various religious orders and sects on the hill, 
from whose beauty their uniform and unredeemed ugliness 
detracts sadly. On Easter day 1907 was laid the foundation 
of a hospice for pilgrims, under the patronage of the German 
empress. 

OLIVETANS, one of the lesser monastic orders following the 
Benedictine Rule, founded by St Bernard Tolomei, a Sienese 
nobleman. At the age of forty, when the leading man in Siena, 
he retired along with two companions to live a hermit's life at 
Accona, a desert place fifteen miles to the south of Siena, 1313. 
Soon others joined them, and in 1324 John XXII. approved of 
the formation of an order. The Benedictine Rule was taken as 
the basis of the life; but austerities were introduced beyond 
what St Benedict prescribed, and the government was framed 
on the mendicant, not the monastic, model, the superiors being 
appointed only for a short term of years. The habit is white. 
Partly from the olive trees that abound there, and partly out of 
devotion to the Passion, Accona was christened Monte Oliveto, 
whence the order received its name. By the end of the 14th 
century there were upwards of a hundred monasteries, chiefly 
in Italy; and in the 18th there still were eighty, one of the most 
famous being San Miniato at Florence. The monastery of 
Monte Oliveto Maggiore is an extensive building of considerable 
artistic interest, enhanced by frescoes of Signorelli and Sodoma; 
it is now a national monument occupied by two or three monks 
as custodians, though it could accommodate three hundred. The 
Olivetans have a house in Rome and a few others, including one 
founded in Austria in 1899. There are about 125 monks in all, 
54 being priests. In America are some convents of Olivetan 
nuns. 

See Helyot, Hist, des ordres religieux (1718), vi. c. 24; Max 
Heimbucher, Orden it. Kongregationen (1907), i. § 30; Wetzer u. 
Welte, Kirchenlexicoyi (ed. 2); J. A. Symonds, Sketches and Studies 
in Italy (1898), " Monte Oliveto "; B. M. Marechaux, Vie de bien- 
heureux Bernard Tolomei (1888). (E. C. B.) 

OLIVIER, JUSTE DANIEL (1807-1876), Swiss poet, was born 
near Nyon in the canton of Vaud; he was brought up as a 
peasant, but studied at the college of Nyon, and later at the 
academy of Lausanne. Though originally intended for the 
ministry, his poetic genius (foreshadowed by the prizes he 
obtained in 1825 and 1828 for poems on Marcos Bolzaris and 
Julia Alpinula respectively) inclined him towards literary 
studies. He was named professor of literature at Neuchatel 
(1830), but before taking up the duties of his post made a visit 
to Paris, where he completed his education and became associated 
with Ste Beuve, especially from 1837 onwards. He professed 
history at Lausanne from 1S33 to 1846, when he lost his chair 
in consequence of the religious troubles. He then went to Paris, 



I 



OLIVINE— OLLI VIER 



8 9 



where he remained till 1870, earning his bread by various means, 
but being nearly forgotten in his native land, to which he 
remained tenderly attached. From 1845 till i860 (when the 
magazine was merged in the Bibliothegue universelle) Olivier 
and his wife wrote in the Revue Suisse the Paris letter, which 
had been started by Ste Beuve in 1843, when Olivier became 
the owner of the periodical. After the war of 1870 he settled 
down in Switzerland, spending his summers at his beloved Gryon, 
and died at Geneva on the 7th of January 1876. Besides some 
novels, a semi-poetical work on the Canton of Vaud (2 vols., 
1837-1841), and a volume of historical essays entitled Etudei 
d'ldstoir'e nation'ale (1842), he pubh'shed several volumes of 
poems, Deux Voix (1835), Chansons lointaines (1847) and its 
continuation Chansons du soir (1867), and Sentiers de monlagne 
(Gryon, 1875). His younger brother, Urbain (1810-1888), was 
well known from 1856 onwards as the author of numerous 
popular tales of rural life in the Canton of Vaud, especially of the 
region near Nyon. 

Life by Rambert (1877), republished in his £crivains de la Suisse 
romande (1889), and also prefixed to his edition of Olivier's (Euvres 
choisies (Lausanne, 1879). (W. A. B. C.) 

OLIVINE, a rock-forming mineral composed of magnesium 
and ferrous orthosilicate, the formula being (Mg, Fe)2Si0.i. 
The name olivine, proposed by A. G. Werner in 1790, alludes to 
the olive-green colour commonly shown by the mineral. The 
transparent varieties, or " precious olivine " used in jewelry, 
are known as chrysolite (q.v.) and peridot (?.».)• The term 
olivine is often applied incorrectly by jewellers to various green 
stones. 

Olivine crystallizes in the orthorhombic system, but distinctly 
developed crystals are comparatively rare, the mineral more 
often occurring as compact or granular masses or as grains and 
blebs, embedded in the igneous rocks of which it forms a con- 
stituent part. There are indistinct cleavages parallel to the 
macropinacoid (M in the fig.) and the brachypinacoid. The 
hardness is 6J; and the sp. gr. 3-27-3-37, 
but reaching 3-57 in the highly ferru- 
ginous variety known as hyalosiderite. 
The amount of ferrous oxide varies from 
S (about 9 % in the gem varieties to 30 % 
in hyalosiderite. The depth of the green, 
or yellowish-brown colour, also varies with 
the amount of iron. The lustre is vitreous. 
The indices of refraction ( i-66 and 1-70) 
and the double refraction are higher than 
in many other rock-forming minerals; and 
these characters, together with the indistinct cleavage, enable 
the mineral to be readily distinguished in thin rock-sections 
under the microscope. The mineral is decomposed by hot 
hydrochloric acid with separation of gelatinous silica. Olivine 
often contains small amounts of nickel and titanium dioxide; 
the latter replaces silica, and in the variety known as titan- 
olivine reaches 5 %. 

Olivine is a common constituent of many basic and ultrabasic 
, rocks, such as basalt, diabase, gabbro and peridotite: the 
dunite, of Dun Mountain near Nelson in New Zealand, is an 
almost pure olivine-rock. In basalts it is often present as small 
porphyritic crystals or as large granular aggregates. It also 
occurs as an accessory constituent of some granular dolomitic 
limestones and crystalline schists. With enstatite it forms the 
bulk of the material of meteoric stones; and in another type of 
meteorites large blebs of glassy olivine fill spaces in a cellular 
mass of metallic iron. 

Olivine is especially liable to alteration into serpentine (hydrated 
magnesium silicate) ; the alteration proceeds from the outside of 
the crystals and grains or along irregular cracks in their interior, 
and gives rise to the separation of iron oxides and an irregular 
net-work of fibrous serpentine, which in rock-sections presents 
a very characteristic appearance. Large greenish-yellow crystals 
from Snarum in Buskerud, Norway, at one time thought to be 
crystals of serpentine, really consist of serpentine pseudo- 
morphous after olivine. Many of the large rock-masses of 




serpentine have been derived by the serpentinization of olivine- 
rocks. Olivine also sometimes alters, especially in crystalline 
schists, to a fibrous, colourless amphibole, to which the name 
pilite has been given. By ordinary weathering processes it 
alters to limonite and silica. 

Closely related to olivine are several other species, which are 
included together in the olivine group : they have the orthosilicate 
formula R jSKL, where R" represents calcium, magnesium, iron, 
manganese and rarely zinc; they all crystallize in the orthorhombic 
system, and are isomorphous with olivine. The following may be 
mentioned : — 

Monticellite, CaMgSi04, a rare mineral occurring as yellowish- 
grey crystals and grains in granular limestone at Monte Somma, 
Vesuvius. 

Forsterite, Mg a SiO<, as colourless or yellowish grains embedded 
in many crystalline limestones. 

Fayalite, Fe2SiO<, or iron olivine is dark brown or black in colour. 
It occurs as nodules in a volcanic rock at Fayal in the Azores, and in 
granitejat the Mourne Mountains in Ireland; and as small crystals in 
cavities in rhyolite at the Yellowstone Park, U.S.A. It is a common 
constituent of crystalline iron slags. 

Tephroite, MnaSi04, a grey (t«j>p6s, ash-coloured), cleavable 
mineral occurring with other manganiferous minerals in Sweden and 
New Jersey. (L. J. S.) 

OLLIVIER, OLIVIER EMILE (1825- ), French statesman, 
was born at Marseilles on the 2nd of July 1825. His father, 
Demosthenes Ollivier (1799-1884), was a vehement opponent 
of the July monarchy, and was returned by Marseilles to the 
Constituent Assembly in 1848. His opposition to Louis Napoleon 
led to his banishment after the coup d'etat of December 1851, and 
he only returned to France in i860. On the establishment of 
the short-lived Second Republic his father's influence with 
Ledru-Rollin secured for fimile Ollivier the position of com- 
missary-general of the department of Bouches-du-Rhone. 
Ollivier was then twenty-three and had just been called to the 
Parisian bar. Less radical in his political opinions than his 
father, his repression of a socialist outbreak at Marseilles com- 
mended him to General Cavaignac, who continued him in his 
functions by making him prefect of the department. He was 
shortly afterwards removed to the comparatively unimportant 
prefecture of Chaumont (Haute-Marne), a semi-disgrace which 
he ascribed to his father's enemies. He therefore resigned from 
the civil service to take up practice at the bar, where his brilliant 
abilities assured his success. 

He re-entered political life in 1857 as deputy for the 3rd 
circumscription of the Seine. His candidature had been sup- 
ported by the Steele, and he joined the constitutional opposition. 
With Alfred Darimon, Jules Favre, J. L. Henon and Ernest 
Picard he formed the group known as Les Cinq, which wrung 
from Napoleon III. some concessions in the direction of con- 
stitutional government. The imperial decree of the 24th of 
November, permitting the insertion of parliamentary reports 
in the Monileur, and an address from the Corps Legislatif in 
reply to the speech from the throne, were welcomed by him as a 
first instalment of reform. This acquiescence marked a consider- 
able change of attitude, for only a year previously a violent attack 
on the imperial government, in the course of a defence of fitienne 
Vacherot, brought to trial for the publication of La Democratic, 
had resulted in his suspension from the bar for three months. 
He gradually separated from his old associates, who grouped 
themselves around Jules Favre, and during the session of 1866- 
1867 Ollivier formed a third party, which definitely supported the 
principle of a Liberal Empire. On the last day of December 1866, 
Count A. F. J. Walewski, acting in continuance of negotiations 
already begun by the due de Morny, offered Ollivier the ministry 
of education with the function of representing the general policy 
of the government in the Chamber. The imperial decree of the 
19th of January 1867, together with the promise inserted in 
the Monitcur of a relaxation of the stringency of the press laws 
and of concessions in respect of the right of public meeting, failed 
to satisfy Ollivier's demands, and he refused office. On the eve 
of the general election of 1869 he published a manifesto, Le ig 
Janvier, in justification of his policy. The sSnatus-consulte of the 
8th of September 1869 gave the two chambers the ordinary 



9° 



OLMSTED, D.— OLMSTED, F. L. 



parliamentary rights, and was followed by the dismissal of 
Rouher and the formation in the last week of 1869 of a responsible 
ministry of which M. Ollivier was really premier, although that 
office was not nominally recognized by the constitution. The 
new cabinet, known as the ministry of the 2nd of January, had 
a hard task before it, complicated a week after its formation by 
the shooting of Victor Noir by Prince Pierre Bonaparte. Ollivier 
immediately summoned the high court of justice for the judgment 
of Prince Bonaparte and Prince Joachim Murat. The riots 
following on the murder were suppressed without bloodshed; 
circulars were sent round to the prefects forbidding them in 
future to put pressure on the electors in favour of official candi- 
dates; Baron Haussmann was dismissed from the prefecture 
of the Seine; the violence of the press campaign against the 
emperor, to whom he had promised a happy old age, was broken 
by the prosecution of Henri Rochefort; and on the 20th of 
April a sanatus-considte was issued which accomplished the 
transformation of the Empire into a constitutional monarchy. 
Neither concessions nor firmness sufficed to appease the " Irre- 
concilables " of the opposition, who since the relaxation of the 
press laws were able to influence the electorate. On the 8th 
of May, however, the amended constitution was submitted, 
on Rouher's advice, to a plebiscite, which resulted in a vote of 
nearly seven to one in favour of the government. The most 
distinguished members of the Left in his cabinet — L. J. Buffet, 
Napoleon Daru and Talhouet Roy — resigned in April on the 
question of the plebiscite. Ollivier himself held the ministry of 
foreign affairs for a few weeks, until Daru was replaced by the 
due de Gramont, destined to be Ollivier's evil genius. The 
' other vacancies were filled by J. P. Mege and C. I. Plichon, both 
of them of Conservative tendencies. 

The revival of the candidature of Prince Leopold of Hohen- 
zollern-Sigmaringen for the throne of Spain early in 1870 dis- 
concerted Ollivier's plans. The French government, following 
Gramont's advice, instructed Benedetti to demand from the king 
of Prussia a formal disavowal of the Hohenzollern candidature. 
Ollivier allowed himself to be gained by the war party. The 
story of Benedetti's reception at Ems and of Bismarck's mani- 
pulation of the Ems telegram is told elsewhere (see Bismarck). 
It is unlikely that Ollivier could have prevented the eventual 
outbreak of war, but he might perhaps have postponed it at that 
time, if he had taken time to hear Benedetti's account of the 
incident. He was outmanoeuvred by Bismarck, and on the 
15th of July he made a hasty declaration in the Chamber that the 
Prussian government had issued to the powers a note announcing 
the rebuff received by Benedetti. He obtained a war vote of 
500,000,000 francs, and used the fatal words that he accepted 
the responsibility of the war " with a light heart," saying that the 
war had been forced on France. On the 9th of August, with the 
news of the first disaster, the Ollivier cabinet was driven from 
office, and its chief sought refuge from the general rage in Italy. 
He returned to France in 1873, but although he carried on an 
active campaign in the Bonapartist Eslafette his political power 
was gone, and even in his own party he came into collision in 
1880 with M. Paul de Cassagnac. During his retirement he 
employed himself in writing a history of L' Empire liberal, the first 
volume of which appeared in 1895. The work really dealt with 
the remote and immediate causes of the war, and was the author's 
apology for his blunder. The 13th volume showed that the 
immediate blame could not justly be placed entirely on his 
shoulders. His other works include Democratic el liberie (1867), 
Le Ministerc du 2 Janvier, mes discours (1875), Principes ct 
conduite (1875), L'Eglise et I'Etat an candle du Vatican (2 vols., 
1879), Solutions politiqucs ct sacialcs (1893), Nouveau Manuel 
du droit ecclesiastiquc francais (1885). He had many connexions 
with the literary and artistic world, being one of the early 
Parisian champions of Wagner. Elected to the Academy 
in 1870, he did not take his seat, his reception being 
indefinitely postponed. His first wife, Blandine Liszt, was 
the daughter of the Abbe Liszt by Mme d'Agoult (Daniel 
Stern). She died in 1862, and Ollivier married in 1869 Mile 
Gravier. 



Ollivier's own view of his political life is given in his L'Empire 
liberal, which must always be an important " document " for the 
history of his time; but the book mustbe treated with no less 
caution than respect. 

OLMSTED, DENISON (1797-1859), American man of science, 
was born at East Hartford, Connecticut, U.S.A., on the 18th of 
June 1791, and in 1813 graduated at Yale, where he acted as 
college tutor from 1815 to 1817. In the latter year he was 
appointed to the chair of chemistry, mineralogy and geology in 
the university of North Carolina. This chair he exchanged for 
that of mathematics and physics at Yale in 1825; in 1836, when 
this professorship was divided, he retained that of astronomy 
and natural philosophy. He died at New Haven, Connecticut, 
on the 13th of May 1859. 

His first publication (1824-1825) was the Report of his geological 
survey cf the state of North Carolina. It was followed by various 
text-books on natural philosophy and astronomy, but he is chiefly 
known to the scientific world for his observations on hail (1830), 
on meteors and on the aurora borealis (see Smithsonian Contributions, 
vol. viii.). 

OLMSTED, FREDERICK LAW (1822-1903), American land- 
scape architect, was born in Hartford, Connecticut, on the 27th 
of April 1822. From his earliest years' he was a wanderer. 
While still a lad he shipped before the mast as a sailor;' then he 
took a course in the Yale Scientific School; worked for several 
farmers; and, finally, began farming for himself on Staten 
Island, where he met Calvert Vaux, with whom later he formed 
a business partnership. All this time'he wrote for the agricul- 
tural papers. In 1850 he made a walking tour through England, 
his observations being published in Walks and Talks of an 
American Farmer in England (1852). A horseback trip through 
the Southern States was recorded in A Journey in the Seaboard 
Slave States (1S56), A Journey through Texas (1857) and A 
Journey in the Back Country (i860). These three volumes, 
reprinted in England in two as Journeys and Explorations in the 
Cotton Kingdom (1861 ), gave a picture of the conditions surround- 
ing American slavery that had great influence on British opinion, 
and they were much quoted in the controversies at the time of the 
Civil War. During the war he was the untiring secretary of the 
U.S. Sanitary Commission. He happened to be in New York 
City when Central Park was projected, and, in conjunction with 
Vaux, proposed the plan which, in competition with more than 
thirty others, won first prize. Olmsted was made superintendent 
to carry out the plan. This was practically the first attempt" in 
the United States to apply art to the improvement or embellish- 
ment of nature in a public park; it attracted great attention, 
and the work was so satisfactorily done that he was engaged 
thereafter in most of the important works of a similar nature in 
America — Prospect Park, Brooklyn; Fairmount Park, Phila- 
delphia; South Park, Chicago; Riverside and Morningside 
Parks, New York; Mount Royal Park, Montreal; the grounds 
surrounding the Capitol at Washington, and at Leland Stanford 
University at Palo Alto (California) ; and many others. He took 
the bare stretch of lake front at Chicago and developed it into 
the beautiful World's Fair grounds, placing all the buildings and 
contributing much to the architectural beauty and the success 
of the exposition. He was greatly interested in the Niagara 
reservation, made the plans for the park there, and also did much 
to influence the state of New York to provide the Niagara Park. 
He was the first commissioner of the National Park of the 
Yosemite and the Mariposa Grove, directing the survey and 
taking charge of the property for the state of California. He 
had also held directing appointments under the cities of New 
York, Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Wilmington and San 
Francisco, the Joint Committee on Buildings and Grounds of 
Congress, the Niagara Falls Reservation Commission, the 
trustees of Harvard, Yale, Amherst and other colleges andpublic 
institutions. Subsequently to 1886 he was largely occupied in 
laying out an extensive system of parks and parkways for the 
city of Boston and the town of Brooklirie, and on a scheme of 
landscape improvement of Boston harbour. Olmsted received 
honorary degrees from Harvard, Amherst and Yale in 1864, 
1S67 and 1893. He died on the 28th of August 1903. 



OLMUTZ— OLONETS 



9 1 



OLMUTZ (Czech, Olontouc or Holomanc), a town of Austria, 
in Moravia, 67 m. N.E. of Brtinn'by rail. Pop. (1900; 21,933, 
of which two-thirds are Germans. It is situated on the March, 
and is the ecclesiastical metropolis of Moravia. Until 1886 
Olmiitz was one of the strongest fortresses of Austria, but the 
fortifications have been removed, and their place is occupied by 
a town park, gardens and promenades. Like most Slavonic 
towns, it contains several large squares, the chief of which is 
adorned with a trinity column, 115 it. high, erected in 1740. 
The most prominent church is the cathedral, a Gothic building 
of the 14th century, restored in 1883-1886, with a tower 328 ft. 
high and the biggest church-bell in Moravia. It contains the 
tomb of King Wenceslaus III., who was murdered here in 1306. 
The Mauritius church, a fine Gothic building of the 15th century, 
and the St Michael church are also worth mentioning. The 
principal secular building is the town-hall, completed in the 
15th century, flanked on one side by a Gothic chapel, trans- 
formed now into a museum. It possesses a tower 250 ft. high, 
adorned with an astronomical clock, an artistic and famous 
work, executed by Anton Pohl in 1422. The old university, 
founded in 1570 and suppressed in 1858, is now represented by 
a theological seminary, which contains a very valuable library 
and ari important collection of manuscripts and early prints. 
Olmiitz is an important railway junction, and is the emporium 
of a busy mining and industrial district. Its industries include 
brewing and distilling and the manufacture of malt, sugar and 
starch. 

Olmiitz is said to occupy the site of a Roman fort founded 
in the imperial period, the original name of which, Mons Julii, 
has been gradually corrupted to the present form. At a later 
period Olmiitz was long the capital of the Slavonic kingdom of 
Moravia, but it ceded that position to Briinn in 1640. The 
Mongols were defeated here in 1241 by Yaroslav von Sternberg. 
During the Thirty Years' War it was occupied by the Swedes 
for eight years. The town was originally fortified by Maria 
Theresa during the wars with Frederick the Great, who besieged 
the town unsuccessfully for seven weeks in 1758. In 1848 
Olmiitz was the scene of the emperor Ferdinand's abdication, 
and in 1850 an important conference took place here between 
Austrian and German statesmen. The bishopric of Olmiitz 
was founded in 1073, and raised to the rank of an archbishopric 
in 1777. The bishops were created princes of the empire in 1 58S. 
The archbishop is the only one in the Austrian empire who is 
elected by the cathedral chapter. 

See \V. Miiller, Geschichte der koniglichen Hauptstadt Olmiitz 
(2nd ed., Olmiitz, 1895). 

OLNEY, RICHARD (1835- ), American statesman, was 
bom at Oxford, Massachusetts, on the 15th of September 1835. 
He graduated from Brown University in 1856, and from the Law 
School of Harvard University in 1858. In 1859 he began the 
practice of law at Boston, Massachusetts, and attained a high 
position at the bar. He served in the state house of repre- 
sentatives in 1874, and in March 1893 became attorney-general 
of the United States in the cabinet of President Cleveland. 
In this position, during the strike of the railway employes in 
Chicago in 1894, he instructed the district attorneys to secure 
from 1 the Federal Courts writs of injunction restraining the 
strikers from acts of violence, and thus set a precedent for 
" government by injunction." He also advised the use of 
Federal troops to quell the disturbances in the city, on the 
ground that the government must prevent interference with its 
mails and with the general railway transportation between the 
states. Upon the death of Secretary W. Q. Gresham (1832-1895), 
Olney succeeded him as secretary of state on the 10th of June 
1895. He became specially prominent in the controversy with 
Great Britain concerning the boundary dispute between the 
British and Venezuelan .governments (see Venezuela), and in 
his correspondence with Lord Salisbury gave an extended 
interpretation to the Monroe Doctrine which went considerably 
beyond previous statements on the subject. In 1897, at 'the 
expiration of President Cleveland's term, he returned to the 
practice of the law. 



OLNEY, a market town in the Buckingham parliamentary 
division of Buckinghamshire, England, 59 m. N.W. by N. of 
London, on a branch of the Midland railway. Pop. of urban 
district (1901) 2634. It lies in the open valley of the Ouse on 
the north (left) bank of the river. The church of St Peter and 
St Paul is Decorated. It has a fine tower and spire; and the 
chancel has a northerly inclination from the alignment of the 
nave. The town is chiefly noted for its connexion with William 
Cowper, who came to live here in 1767 and remained until 1786, 
when he removed to the neighbouring village of Weston Under- 
wood. His house and garden at Olney retain relics of the poet, 
and the house at Weston also remains. In the garden at Olney 
are his favourite seat and the house in which he kept his tame 
hares. John Newton, curate of Olney, had the assistance of 
Cowper in the production of the collection of Olney Hymns. 
The trade of Olney is principally agricultural; the town also 
shares in the manufacture of boots and shoes common to many 
places in the neighbouring county of Northampton. 

OLNEY, a city and the county-seat of Richland county, 
Illinois, U.S.A., about 30 m. W. of Vincennes, Indiana. Pop. 
(1890) 3831; (1900) 4260 (235 foreign-born); (1910) 5011. 
Olney is served by the Baltimore & Ohio South-western, the 
Illinois Central, and the Cincinnati, Hamilton & Dayton railways, 
and is a terminus of the Ohio River Division of the last. It 
has a Carnegie library and a city park of 55 acres. Olney is 
an important shipping point for the agricultural products of 
this district; oil is found in the vicinity; and the city has various 
manufactures. The municipality owns its water-works. Olney 
was settled about 1842 and was first chartered as a city in 1867. 

OLONETS, a government of north-western Russia, extending 
from Lake Ladoga almost to the White Sea, bounded W. by 
Finland, N. and E. by Archangel and Vologda, and S. by 
Novgorod and St Petersburg. The area is 57,422 sq. m., of which 
6794 sq. m. are lakes. Its north-western portion belongs oro- 
graphically and geologically to the Finland region; it is thickly 
dotted with hills reaching 1000 ft. in altitude, and diversified 
by numberless smaller ridges and hollows running from north- 
west to south-east. The rest of the government is a flat plateau 
sloping towards the marshy lowlands of the south . The geological 
structure is very varied. Granites, syenites and diorites, 
covered with Laurentian metamorphic slates, occur extensively 
in the north-west. Near Lake Onega they are overlain with 
Devonian sandstones and limestones, yielding marble and 
sandstone for building; to the south of that lake Carboniferous 
limestones and clays make their appearance. The whole is 
sheeted with boulder-clay, the bottom moraine of the great 
ice-sheet of the Glacial period. The entire region bears traces 
of glaciation, either in the shape of scratchings and elongated 
grooves on the rocks, or of eskers {asar, selgas) running parallel to 
the glacial striations. Numberless lakes occupy the depressions, 
while a great many more have left evidences of their existence 
in the extensive marshes. Lake Onega covers 3764 sq. m., and 
reaches a depth of 400 ft. Lakes Zeg, Vyg, Lacha, Loksha, 
Tulos and Vodl cover from 140 to 480 sq. m. each, and their 
crustacean fauna indicates a former connexion with the Arctic 
Ocean. The south-eastern part of Lake Ladoga falls also within 
the government of Olonets. The rivers drain to the Baltic and 
White Sea basins. To the former system belong Lakes Ladoga 
and Onega, which are connected by the Svir and receive numerous 
streams; of these the Vytegra, which communicates with the 
Mariinsk canal-system, and the Oyat, an affluent of Lake Ladoga, 
are important for navigation. Large quantities of timber, 
fire-wood, stone, metal and flour are annually shipped on waters 
belonging to this government. The Onega river, which has its 
source in the south-east of the government and flows into the 
White Sea, is of minor importance. Sixty-three per cent of the 
area of Olonets is occupied by forests; those of the crown, 
maintained for shipbuilding purposes, extend to more than 
800,000 acres. The climate is harsh and moist, the average 
yearly temperature at Petrozavodsk (6i° 8' N.) being 33-6° F. 
(12-0° in January, S7'4° i n July); but the thermometer rarely 
falls below — 30 F. 



9 2 



OLOPAN— OLYBRIUS 



The population, which numbered 321,250 in 1881, reached 
367,902 in 1897, and 401,100 (estimate) in 1906. They are 
principally Great Russians and Finns. The people belong 
mostly to the Orthodox Greek Church, or are Nonconformists. 
Rye and oats are the principal crops, and some flax, barley 
and turnips are grown, but the total cultivated area does not 
exceed 25% of the whole government. The chief source of 
wealth is timber, next to which come fishing and hunting. 
Mushrooms and berries are exported to St Petersburg. There 
are quarries and iron-mines, saw-mills, tanneries, iron-works, 
distilleries and flour-mills. More than one-fifth of the entire 
male population leave their homes every year in search of tem- 
porary employment. Olonets is divided into seven districts, 
of which the chief towns are Petrozavodsk, Kargopol, Lodeinoye 
Pole, Olonets, Povyenets, Pudozh and Vytegra. It includes 
the Olonets mining district, a territory belonging to the crown, 
which covers 432 sq. m. and extends into the Serdobol district 
of Finland; the ironworks were begun by Peter the Great in 
1701-1714. Olonets was colonized by Novgorod in the nth 
century, and though it suffered much from Swedish invasion its 
towns soon became wealthy trading centres. Ivan III. annexed 
it to the principality of Moscow in the second half of the 16th 
century. 

OLOPAN, Olopuen or Olopen (probably a Chinese form 
of the Syriac Rabban, i.e. monk: fl. a.d. 635), the first Christian 
missionary in China (setting aside vague stories of St Thomas, 
St Bartholomew, &c), and founder of the Nestorian Church 
in the Far East. According to the Si-ngan-fu inscription, our 
sole authority, Olopan came to China from Ta T'sin (the Roman 
empire) in the ninth year of the emperor T'ai-Tsung (a.d. 635), 
bringing sacred books and images. He was received with favour; 
his teaching was examined and approved; his Scriptures were 
translated for the imperial library; and in 638 an imperial edict 
declared Christianity a tolerated religion. T'ai-Tsung's successor, 
Kao-Tsung (650-683), was still more friendly, and Olopan now 
became a " guardian of the empire " and " lord of the great 
law." After this followed (c. 683-744) a time of disfavour and 
oppression for Chinese Christians, followed by a revival dating 
from the arrival of a fresh missionary, Kiho, from the Roman 
empire. 

The Si-ngan-fu inscription, which alone records these facts, 
was erected in 781, and rediscovered in 1625 by workmen digging 
in the Chang-ngan suburb of Si-ngan-fu city. It consists of 
1789 Chinese characters, giving a history of the Christian mission 
down to 78r, together with a sketch of Nestorian doctrine, the 
decree of T'ai-Tsung in favour of Christianity, the date of erection, 
and names of various persons connected with the church in China 
when the monument was put up. Additional notes in Syriac 
(Estrangelo characters) repeat the date and record the names 
of the reigning Nestorian patriarch, the Nestorian bishop in 
China, and a number of the Nestorian clergy. 

See Kircher, China Illustrata; G. Pauthier, De I'authenticite de 
I 'inscription nestorienne de Si-ngan-fon (Paris, 1857) and L'inscription 
syro-chinoise de Si-ngan-fou (Paris, 1858); Henry Yule, Cathay, 
Preliminary Essay, xcii.-xciv. clxxxi.-clxxxiii. (London, Hakluyt Soc, 
1866); F. Hirth, China and the Roman Orient, 323, &c. ; Father 
Henri Havret, La stele chretienne de Si-ngan-fou, two parts (text 
and history) published out of three (Shanghai, 1895 and 1897); 
Dr James Legge's edition and translation of the text, The Nestorian 
Monument of Hsi-an-Fu (London, 1888); Yule and Cordier, Marco 
Polo, ii. 27-29 (London, 1903); C. R. Beazley, Dawn of Modern 
Geography, i. 215-218. 

OLORON-SAINTE-MARIE, a town of south-western France, 
capital of an arrondissement in the department of Basses- 
Pyrenees, 21 m. S.W. of Pau on a branch of the Southern railway. 
It lies at the confluence of the mountain torrents (locally known 
as gaves) Aspe and Ossau, which, after dividing it into three 
parts, unite to form the Oloron, a tributary of the Pau. The 
united population of the old feudal town of Sainte-Croix or 
Oloron proper, which is situated on an eminence between the 
two rivers, of Sainte-Marie on the left hank of the Aspe, and of 
the new quarters on the right bank of the Ossau, is 7715. Oloron 
has remains of old ramparts and pleasant promenades with 
beautiful views, and there are several old houses of the 15th, 



1 6th and 17th centuries, one of which is occupied by the h&tel 
de ville. The church of Sainte-Croix, the building of most 
interest, belongs mainly to the nth century; the chief feature 
of the exterior is the central Byzantine cupola; in the interior 
there is a large altar of gilded wood, constructed bi the Spanish 
style of the 17th century. The church of Sainte-Marie, which 
formerly served as the cathedral of Oloron, is in the old ecclesi- 
astical quarter of Sainte-Marie. It is a medley of various styles 
from the nth to the 14th century. A square tower at the west 
end shelters a fine Romanesque portal. In the new quarter 
there is the modern church of Notre-Dame. Remains of a castle- 
of the 14th century are also still to be seen. Oloron is the 
seat of a sub-prefect, and its public institutions include tribunals 
of first instance and of commerce, and a chamber of arts arid 
manufactures. It is the most important commercial centre of its 
department after Bayonne, and carries on a thriving trade with 
Spain by way of the passes of Somport and Anso. 

A Celtiberian and then a Gallo-Roman town, known as Iluro, 
occupied the hill on which Sainte-Croix now stands. Devastated 
by the Vascones in the 6th and by the Saracens in the 8th century, 
it was abandoned, and it was not until the nth century that 
the quarter of Sainte-Marie was re-established by the bishops. 
In 1080 the viscount of Beam took possession of the old town. 
The two quarters remained distinct till the union of Beam with 
the crown at the accession of Henry IV. At the Reformation 
the place became a centre of Catholic reaction. In the 17th 
century it carried on a considerable trade with Aragon, until 
the Spaniards, jealous of its prosperity, pillaged the establish- 
ments of the Oloron merchants at Saragossa in 1694 — a disaster 
from which it only slowly recovered. The bishopric was sup- 
pressed in 1790. 

OLSHAUSEN, HERMANN (1796-1839), German theologian, 
was born at Oldeslohe in Holstein on the 21st of August 1796', 
and was educated at the universities of Kiel (1814) and Berlin 
(1816), where he was influenced by Schlciermacher and Neander. 
In 1820 he became Privatdozent and in 1821 professor extra- 
ordinarius at Berlin; in 1S27 professor at Konigsberg, in 1834 
atErlangen. He died on the 4th of September 1839. Olshausen's 
department was New Testament exegesis; his Commentary 
(completed and revised by Ebrard and Wiesinger) began to 
appear at Konigsberg in 1830, and was translated into English 
in 4 vols. (Edinburgh, 1847-1849). He had prepared for it by 
his other works, Die Achtheit d. vier Kanon. Evangelien (1823), 
Ein Wort ilber tieferen Schrijtsinn (1824) and Die biblische 
Schriftauslegung (1S25). 

OLTENITZA (Oltenita), a town of Rumania, on the left bank 
of the river Argesh, 33 m. from its outflow into the Danube, 
and at a terminus of a branch railway from Bucharest. Pop. 
(1900) 5S01. The principal trade is in grain, timber (floated 
down the Argesh) and fish. Lake Greca, famous for its carp, 
lies 10 m. E. and has an area of about 45 sq. m. Its waters 
reach the Danube through a network of streams, marshes and 
meres. Oltenitza is the ancient Constantiola, which was the 
seat of the first bishopric established in Dacia. In the Crimean 
War the Turks forced the river at this point and inflicted heav/ 
losses on the Russians. 

OLUSTEE, a village of Baker county, Florida, U.S.A., in 
the precinct of Olustee, about 46 m. W. by S. of Jacksonville. 
Pop. of the precinct (1905) 397. The village is served by the 
Seaboard Air Line. The battle of Olustee, or Ocean Pond (the 
name of a small body of water in the vicinity), one of the most 
sanguinary engagements of the Civil War in proportion to the 
numbers engaged, was fought on the 20th of February 1864, about 
2 m. east of Olustee, between about 5500 Federal troops, under 
General Truman Seymour (1824-189^, and about 5400 Con- 
federates, under General Joseph Finegan, the Federal forces 
being decisively defeated, with a loss, in killed and wounded, 1 
of about one-third of their number, including several officers.. 
The Confederate losses, in killed and wounded, were about 940. 

OLYBRIUS, Roman emperor of the West from the nth of 
July to the 23rd of October 472, was a member of a noble family 
and a native of Rome. After the sack of the city by Genseric 



OLYMPIA 



93 



(Geiseric) in 455, he fled to Constantinople, where in 464 he was 
made consul, and about the same time married Plaeidia, daughter 
of Valentinian III. and Eudoxia. This afforded Genseric, 
whose son Hunneric had married Eudocia, the elder sister 
of Plaeidia, the opportunity of claiming the empire of the 
West for Olybrius. In 472 Olybrius was sent to Italy by the 
emperor Leo to assist the emperor Anthemius against his 
son-in-law Ricimer, but, having entered into negotiations with 
the latter, was himself proclaimed emperor against his will, and 
on the murder of his rival ascended the throne unopposed. His 
reign was as uneventful as it was brief. 

See Gibbon, Decline and Fall, eh. xxxvi. ; J. B. Bury, Later Roman 
Empire. 

OLYMPIA, the scene of the famous Olympic games, is on the 
right or north bank of the Alpheus (mod. Ruphia), about n m. 
E. of the modern Pyrgos. The course of the river is here from 
E. to W., and the average breadth of the valley is about £ m. 
At this point, a small stream, the ancient Cladeus, flows from 
the north into the Alpheus. The area known as Olympia is 
bounded on the west by the Cladeus, on the south by the Alpheus, 
on the north by the low heights which shut in the Alpheus valley, 
and on the' east by the ancient racecourses. One group of the 
northern heights terminates in a conical hill, about 400 ft. high, 
which is cut off from the rest by a deep cleft, and descends 
abruptly on Olympia. This hill is the famous Cronion, sacred to 
Cronus, the father of Zeus. 

The natural situation of Olympia is, in one sense, of great 
beauty. When Lysias, in his Olympiacus (spoken here), calls it 
" the fairest spot of Greece," he was doubtless thinking also — 
or perhaps chiefly — of the masterpieces which art, in all its forms, 
had contributed to the embellishment of this national sanctuary. 
But even now the praise seems hardly excessive to a visitor who, 
looking eastward up the fertile and well-wooded valley of Olympia, 
sees the snow-crowned chains of Erymanthus and Cyllene rising 
in the distance. The valley, at once spacious and definite, is a 
natural precinct, and it is probable that no artificial boundaries 
of the Altis, or sacred grove, existed until comparatively late 
times. 

History. — The importance of Olympia in the history of 
Greece is religious and political. The religious associations of the 
place date from the prehistoric age, when, before the states of 
Elis and Pisa had been founded, there was a centre of worship 
in this valley which is attested by early votive offerings found 
beneath the Heraeum and an altar near it. The earliest extant 
building on the site is the temple of Hera, which probably dates 
in its original form from about 1000 B.C. There were various 
traditions as to the origin of the games. According to one of 
them, the' first race was that between Pelops and Oenomaus, 
who used to challenge the suitors of his daughter Hippodameia 
and then slay them. According to another, the festival was 
founded by Heracles, either the well-known hero or the Idaean 
Dactyl of that name. The control of the festival belonged in 
early times to Pisa, but Elis seems to have claimed association 
with it. Sixteen women, representing eight towns of Elis and 
eight of Pisatis, wove the festal robe for the Olympian Hera. 
Olympia thus became the centre of an amphictyony (q.v.), or 
federal'league under religious sanction, for the west coast of 
the Peloponnesus, as Delphi was for its neighbours in northern 
Greece. It suited the interests of Sparta to join this amphictyony; 
and, before the regular, catalogue of Olympic victors begins in 
776 B.C., Sparta had formed an alliance with Elis. Aristotle 
saw in the temple of Hera at Olympia a bronze disk, recording 
the traditional laws of the festival, on which the name of Lycurgus 
stood next to that of Iphitus, king of Elis. Whatever may have 
been the age of the disk itself, the relation which it indicates is 
well attested. "• Elis, and Sparta, making common cause, had no 
difficulty in excluding the Pisatans from their proper share in the 
management of the Olympian sanctuary. Pisa had, indeed, a 
brief moment of better fortune, when Pheidon of Argos 
celebrated the 28th Olympiad under the presidency of the 
Pisatans. This festival, from which the Eleans and Spartans 
were excluded, was afterwards struck out of the official register, 



as having no proper existence. The destruction of Pisa (before 
572 B.C.) by the combined forces of Sparta and Elis put an end 
to the long rivalry. Not only Pisatis, but also the district of 
Triphylia to the south of it, became dependent on Elis. So far 
as the religious side of the festival was concerned, the Eleans had 
an unquestioned supremacy. It was at Elis, in the gymnasium, 
that candidates from all parts of Greece were tested, before they 
were admitted to the athletic competitions at Olympia. To have 
passed through the training (usually of ten months) at Elis was 
regarded as the most valuable preparation. Elean officials, who 
not only adjudged the prizes at Olympia, but decided who should 
be admitted to compete, marked the national aspect of their 
functions by assuming the title of Hellanodicae. 

Long before the overthrow of Pisa the list of contests had been 
so enlarged as to invest the celebration with a Panhellenic 
character. Exercises of a Spartan type — testing endurance and 
strength with an especial view to war — had almost exclusively 
formed the earlier programme. But as early as the 25th 
Olympiad — i.e. several years before the interference of Pheidon 
on behalf of Pisa — the four-horse chariot-race was added. This 
was an invitation to wealthy competitors from every part of 
the Hellenic world, and was also the recognition of a popular 
or spectacular element, as distinct from the skill which had 
a merely athletic or military interest. Horse-races were added 
later. For such contests the hippodrome was set apart. Mean- 
while the list of contests on the old racecourse, the stadium, had 
been enlarged. Besides the foot-race in which the course was 
traversed once only, there were now the diaulos or double 
course, and the " long " foot-race (dolichos). Wrestling and 
boxing were combined in the pancration. Leaping, quoit- 
throwing, javelin-throwing, running and wresth'ng were com- 
bined in the pentathlon. The festival was to acquire a new 
importance under the protection of the Spartans, who, having 
failed in their plans of actual conquest in the Peloponnese, sought 
to gain at least the hegemony (acknowledged predominance) 
of the peninsula. As the Eleans, therefore, were the religious 
supervisors of Olympia, so the Spartans aimed at constituting 
themselves its political protectors. Their military strength — 
greatly superior at the time to that of any other state — enabled 
them to do this. Spartan arms could enforce the sanction which 
the Olympian Zeus gave to the oaths of the amphictyones, 
whose federal bond was symbolized by common worship at his 
shrine. Spartan arms could punish any violation of that " sacred 
truce " which was indispensable if Hellenes from all cities were 
to have peaceable access to the Olympian festival. And in the 
eyes of all Dorians the assured dignity thus added to Olympia , 
would be enhanced by the fact that the protectors were the 
Spartan Hera'clidae. 

■ Olympia entered on a new phase of brilliant and secure exist- 
ence as a recognized Panhellenic institution. This phase may 
be considered as beginning after the establishment of Elean 
supremacy in 57 2 B.C. And so to the last Olympia always remained 
a central expression of the Greek ideas that the body of man has 
a glory as well as his intellect and spirit, that body and mind 
should alike be disciplined, and that it is by the harmonious 
discipline of both that men best honour Zeus. The significance 
of Olympia was larger and higher than the political fortunes 
of the Greeks who met there, and it survived the overthrow of 
Greek independence. In the Macedonian and Roman ages the 
temples and contests of Olympia still interpreted the ideal at 
which free Greece had aimed. Philip of Macedon and Nero are, 
as we shall see, among those whose names have a record in the 
Altis. Such names are typical of long series of visitors who paid 
homage to Olympia. According to Cedrenus, a Greek writer 
of the nth century (Svvoipis 'lcropMV, i. 326), the Olympian 
festival ceased to be held after a.d. 393, the first year of the 293rd 
Olympiad. The list of Olympian victors, which begins in 776 B.C. 1 
with Coroebus of Elis, closes with the name of an Armenian, 
Varastad, who is said to have belonged to the race of the Arsacidae. ■ 
In the 5th century the desolation of Olympia had set in. The 
chryselephantine statue of the Olympian Zeus, by Pheidias, was 
carried to Constantinople, and perished in a great fire, a.d. 476. 



94 



OLYMPIA 



The Olympian temple of Zeus is said to have been dismantled, 
either by the Goths or by Christian zeal, in the reign of Theodosius 
II. (a.d. 402-450). After this the inhabitants converted the 
temple of Zeus and the region to the south of it into a fortress, by 
constructing a wall from materials found among the ancient 
buildings. The temple was probably thrown down by earth- 
quakes in the 6th century a.d. 

Excavations. — The German excavations were begun in 1875. 
After six campaigns, of which the first five lasted from September 
to June, they were completed on the 20th of March 1881. The 
result of these six years' labours was, first, to strip off a thick 
covering of earth from the Altis, the consecrated precinct of 
the Olympian Zeus. This covering had been formed, during some 
twelve centuries, partly by clay swept down from the Cronion, 
partly by deposit from the overflowings of the Cladeus. The 
coating of earth over the Altis had an average depth of no less 
than 16 ft. 

The work could not, however, be restricted to the Altis. It 
was necessary to dig beyond it, especially on the west, the south 
and the east, where several ancient buildings existed, not in- 
cluded within the sacred precinct itself. The complexity of the 
task was further increased by the fact that in many places early 
Greek work had later Greek on top of it, or late Greek work 
had been overlaid with Roman. In a concise survey of the results 
obtained, it will be best to begin with the remains external to 
the precinct of Zeus. 

I. Remains outside the Altis 

A. West Side. — The wall bounding the Altis on the west belongs 
probably to the time of Nero. In the west wall were two gates, 
one at its northern and the other at its southern extremity. The 
latter must have served as the processional entrance. Each gate 
was irponrvAos, having before it on the west a colonnade consisting 
of a row of four columns. There is a third and smaller gate at about 
the middle point of the west wall, and nearly opposite the Pelopion 
in the Altis. 

West of the west Altis wall, on the strip of ground between the 



Altis and the river Cladeus (of which the course is roughly parallel 
to the west Altis wall), the following buildings were traced. The 
order in which they are placed here is that in which they succeed 
each other from north to south. 

1. Just outside the Altis at its north-west corner was a Gymnasium. 
A large open space, not regularly rectangular, was enclosed on two 
sides — possibly on three — by Doric colonnades. On the south it 
was bordered by a portico with a single row of columns in front; 
on the east by a double portico, more than a stadium in length 
(220 yds.), and serving as a racecourse for practice in bad weather. 
At the south-east corner of the gymnasium, in the angle between 
the south and the east portico, was a Corinthian doorway, which a 
double row of columns divided into three passages. Immediately 
to the east of this doorway was the gate giving access to the Altis 
at its north-west corner. The gymnasium was uied as an exercise 
ground for competitors during the last month of their training. 

2. Immediately adjoining the gymnasium on the bouth.was a 
Palaestra, the place of exercise for wrestlers and boxers. It 'was 
in the form of a square, of which each side was about 70 yds. long, 
enclosing an inner building surrounded by a Doric colonnade. 
Facing this inner building on north, east and west were rooms of 
different sizes, to which doors or colonnades gave access. The 
chief entrances to the palaestra were at south-west and south-east, 
separated by a double colonnade which extended along the south 
side. 

3. Near the palaestra on the south a' Byzantine church forms 
the central point in a complex group_ of remains, (a) The church 
itself occupies the site of an older brick building, which is perhaps 
a remnant of the " workshop of Pheidias " seen by Pausanias. 
(6) North of the church is a square court with a well in the middle, 
of the Hellenic age. (c) West of this is a small circular structure, 
enclosed by square walls. An altar found {in situ) on the south side 
of the circular enclosure shows by an inscription that this was the 
Heroum, where worship of the heroes was practised down to a late 
period, (d) East of the court stood a large building, of Roman 
age at latest, arranged round an inner hall with colonnades. These 
buildings probably formed the Theocoleon, house of the priests. 
(e) There is also a long and narrow building on the south of the 
Byzantine church. This may have been occupied by the (pcuSpvvrai, 
those alleged" descendants of Pheidias" (Pausanias v. 14) whose 
hereditary privilege it was to keep the statue of Zeus clean. The 
so-called " workshop of Pheidias " (see a) evidently owed its preser- 
vation to the fact that it continued to be used for actual work, 




EirwrvU/alkcr ^. 



OLYMPIA 



95 



and the adjacent building would have been a convenient lodging 
for the artists. 

4. South of the group described above occur the remains of a 
large building shown by its inscription to be the Leonidaeum, 
dedicated by an Elean named Leonidas in the 4th century B.C., 
and probably intended for the reception of distinguished visitors 
during the games, such as the heads of the special missions from 
the various Greek cities. It is an oblong, of which the north and 
south sides measure about 250 ft., the east and west about 230. 
Its orientation differs from that of all the other buildings above 
mentioned, being not from N. to S., but from VV.S.W. to E.N.E. 
Externally it is an Ionic peripteros, enclosing suites of rooms, large 
and small, grouped round a small interior Doric peristyle. In Roman 
times it was altered in such a way as to distribute the rooms into 
(apparently) four quarters, each having an atrium with six or four 
columns. Traces existing within the exterior porticos on north, 
west and east indicate much carriage traffic. 

B. South Side. — Although the limits of the Altis on the south 
{i.e. on the side towards the Alpheus) can be traced with approxi- 
mate accuracy, the precise line of the south wall becomes doubtful 
after we have advanced a little more than one-third of the distance 
from the west to the east end of the south side. The middle and 
eastern portions of the south side were places at which architectural 
changes, large or small, were numerous down to the latest times, 
and where the older buildings met with scant mercy. 

1. The Council Hall (Bouleuterium, _ Paus. v. 23) was just outside 
the Altis, nearly at the middle of its south wall. It comprised 
two separate Doric buildings of different date but identical form, viz. 
oblong, having a single row of columns dividing the length into two 
naves and terminating to the west in a semicircular apse. The 
orientation of each was from west-south-west to east-north-east, one, 
being south-south-east of the other. In the space between stood a 
small square building. In front, on the east, was a portico extending 
along the front of all three buildings; and east of this again a 
large trapeze-shaped vestibule or fore-hall, enclosed by a colonnade. 
This bouleuterium would have been available on all occasions when 
Olympia became the scene of conference or debate between the 
representatives of different states — whether the subject was properly 
political, as concerning the amphictyonic treaties, or related more 
directly to the administration of the sanctuary and festival. Two 
smaller Hellenic buildings stood immediately west of the bouleu- 
terium. The more northerly of the two opened on the Altis. Their 
purpose is uncertain. 

2. Close to the bouleuterium on the south, and running parallel 
with it from south-west by west to north-east by east, was the South 
Colonnade, a late but handsome structure, closed on the north side, 
open on the south and at the east and west ends. _ The external 
colonnade (on south, east and west) was Doric; the interior row of 
columns Corinthian. It was used as a promenade, and as a place 
Irom which to view the festal processions as they passed towards 
the Altis. 

3. East of the bouleuterium was a triumphal gateway of Roman 
age, with triple entrance, the central being the widest, opening on 
the Altis from the south. North of this gateway, but at a somewhat 
greater depth, traces of a pavement were found in the Altis. 

C. East Side. — The line of the east wall, running due north and 
south, can be traced from the north-east corner of the Altis down 
about three-fifths of the east side, when it breaks off at the remains 
known as " Nero's house."- These are the first which claim attention 
on the east side.. 

1. To the south-east of the Altis is a building of 4th-century date 
and of uncertain purpose. This was afterwards absorbed into a 
Roman house which projected beyond the Altis on the east, the 
south part of the east Altis wall being destroyed to admit of this. 
A piece of leaden water-pipe found in the house bears NER. AVG. 
Only a Roman master could have dealt thus with the Altis, and with 
a building which stood within its sacred precinct. It cannot be 
doubted that the Roman house — from which three doors gave access 
to the Altis — was that occupied by Nero when he visited Olympia. 
Later Roman hands 1 again enlarged and altered the building, 
which may perhaps have been used for the reception of Roman 
governors. 

2. Following northwards the line of the east wall, we reach at 
the north-east corner of the' Altis the entrance to the Stadium, which 
extends east of the Altis in a direction from west-south-west to 
east-north-east. The apparently strange and inconvenient position 
of the Stadium relatively to the Altis was due simply to the necessity 
of obeying the conditions of the ground, here determined by the 
curve of the lower slopes which bound the valley on the north. The 
German explorers excavated the Stadium so far as was necessary 
for the ascertainment of all essential points. Low embankments 
had originally been built on west, east and south, the north boundary 
being formed by the natural slope of the hill. These were after- 
wards thickened and raised. The space thus defined was a large 
oblong, about 234 yds. in length by 35 in breadth. There were no 
artificial seats. It is computed that from 40,000 to 45,000 spectators 
could have found sitting-room, though it is hardly probable that 
such a number was ever reached. The exact length of the Stadium 
itself — which was primarily the course for the foot-race — was about 
210 yds. or 192-27 metres— an important result, as it determines 



the Olympian foot to be 0-3204 metre or a little more than an 
English foot (1-05). In the Heraeum at Olympia, it may be remarked, 
the unit adopted was not this Olympian foot, but an older one of 
0-297 metre, and in the temple of Zeus an Attic foot of 1-08 English 
foot was used. The starting-point and the goal in the Stadium 
were marked by limestone thresholds. Provision for drainage was 
made by a channel running round the enclosure. The Stadium was 
used not only for foot-races, but for boxing, wrestling, leaping, 
quoit-throwing and javelin-throwing. 

The entrance to the Stadium from the north-east corner of the 
Altis was a privileged one, reserved for the judges of the games, 
the competitors and the heralds. Its form was that of a vaulted 
tunnel, 100 Olympian feet in length. It was probably constructed 
in Roman times. To the west was a vestibule, from which the Altis 
was entered by a handsome gateway. 

3. The Hippodrome, in which the chariot-races and horse-races 
were held, can no longer be accurately traced. The overflowings of 
the Alpheus have washed away all certain indications of its limits. 
But it is clear that it extended south and south-east of the Stadium, 
and roughly parallel with it, though stretching far beyond it to 
the east. From the state of the ground the German explorers 
inferred that the length of the hippodrome was 770 metres or 4 
Olympic stadia. 

D. North Side. — If the northern limit of the Altis, like the west, 
south and east, had been traced by a boundary wall, this would 
have had the effect of excluding from the precinct a spot so sacred 
as the Cronion, " Hill of Cronus," inseparably associated with the 
oldest worship of Zeus at Olympia. It seems therefore unlikely 
that any such northern boundary wall ever existed. But the line 
which such a boundary would have followed is partly represented by 
the remains of a wall running from east to west immediately north 
of the treasure-houses (see below), which it was designed to protect 
against the descent of earth from the Cronion just above. This 
was the wall along which, about a.d. 157, the main water-channel 
constructed by Herodes Atticus was carried. 

Having now surveyed the chief remains external to the sacred 
precinct on west, south, east and north, we proceed to notice those 
which have been traced within it. 

II. — Remains within the Altis 
The form of the Altis, as indicated by the existing traces, is not 
regularly rectangular. The length of the west side, where the line 
of direction is from south-south-east to north-north-west, is about 
215 yds. The south side, running nearly due east and west, is 
about equally long, if measured from the end of the west wall to 
the point which the east wall would touch when produced due south 
in a straight line from the place at which it was demolished to 
make way for " Nero's house." The east side, measured to a point 
just behind the treasure-houses, is the shortest, about 200 yds. 
The north side is the longest. A line drawn eastward behind the 
treasure-houses, from the Prytaneum at the north-west angle, would 
give about 275 yds. 

The remains or sites within the Altis may conveniently be classed 
in three main groups, viz. — (A) the chief centres of religious worship; 
(B) votive buildings; (C) buildings, &c, connected with the ad- 
ministration of Olympia or the reception of visitors. 

A. Chief Centres of Religious Worship. — 1. There are traces of an 
altar near the Heraeum which was probably older than the great 
altar of Zeus; this was probably the original centre of worship. 
The great altar of Zeus was of elliptic form, the length of the.lozenge 
being directed from south-south-west to north-north-east, in such a 
manner that the axis would pass through the Cronion. The upper 
structure imposed on this basis was in two tiers, and also, probably, 
lozenge-shaped. This was the famous " ash-altar " at which the 
lamidae, the hereditary gens of seers, practised those rights of divina- 
tion by fire in virtue of which more especially Olympia is saluted 
by Pindar as " mistress of truth." The steps by which the priests 
mounted the altar seem to have been at north and south. 

2. The Pelopium, to the west of the Altar of Zeus, was a small 
precinct in which sacrifices were offered to the hero Pelops. The 
traces agree with the account of Pausanias. Walls, inclined to each 
other at obtuse angles, enclosed a plot of ground having in the 
middle a low tumulus of elliptic form, about 35 metres from east 
to west by 20 from north to south. A Doric propylon with three 
doors gave access on the south-west side. 

The three temples of the Altis were those of Zeus, Hera and the 
Mother of the gods. All were Doric. All, too, were completely 
surrounded by a colonnade, i.e. were " peripteral." 

3. The Temple of Zeus, south of the Pelopium, stood on a high 
substructure with three steps. It was probably built about 470 B.C. 
The colonnades at the east and west side were of six columns each; 
those at the north and south sides (counting the corner columns 
again) of thirteen each. The cella had a prodomos on the east and 
an opisthodomos on the west. The cella itself was divided longi- 
tudinally {i.e. from east to west) into three partitions by a double 
row of columns. The central partition, which was the widest, 
consisted of three sections. The west section contained the throne 
and image of the Olympian Zeus. The middle section, next to the 
east, which was shut off by low screens, contained a table and 
stelae. Here, probably, the wreaths were presented to the victors. 



9 6 



OLYMPIA 



The third or easternmost section was open to the public. This 
temple was most richly adorned with statues and reliefs. On the 
east front were represented in twenty-one colossal figures the moment 
before the contest between Oenomaus and Pelops. The west front 
exhibited the fight of the Lapithae and Centaurs. The statement of 
Pausanias that the two pediments were made by Paeonius and 
Alcamenes is now generally supposed to be an error. The Twelve 
Labours of Heracles were depicted on the metopes of the prodomos 
and opisthodomos; and of these reliefs much the greater part was 
found — enough to determine with certainty all the essential features 
of the composition. It was near this temple, at a point about 38 yds. 
E.S.E. from the south-east angle, that the explorers found the statue 
of a flying goddess of victory — the Nike of Paeonius. 

4. The Temple of Hera (Heraeum), north of the Pelopium, was 
raised on two steps. It is probably the oldest of extant Greek 
temples, and may date from about 1000 B.C. It has colonnades of 
six columns each at east and west, and of sixteen each (counting 
the corner columns again) at north and south. It was smaller than 
the temple of Zeus, and, while resembling it in general plan, differed 
from it by its singular length relatively to its breadth. When 
Pausanias saw it, one of the two columns of the opisthodomos (at 
the west end of the cella) was of wood; and for a long period all 
the columns of this temple had probably been of the same material. 
A good deal of patch-work in the restoration of particular parts 
seems to have been done at various periods. Only the lower part 
of the cella wall was of stone, the rest being of unbaked brick; the 
entablature above the columns was of wood covered with terra- 
cotta. The cella — divided, like that of Zeus, into three partitions 
by a double row of columns — had four " tongue-walls," or small 
screens, projecting at right angles from its north wall, and as many 
from the south wall. Five niches were thus formed on the north side 
and five on the south. In the third niche from the east, on the north 
side of the cella, was found one of the greatest of all the treasures 
which rewarded the German explorers — the Hermes of Praxiteles 
(1878). 

5. The Temple of the Great Mother of the Gods (Metroum) was again 
considerably smaller than the Heraeum. It stood to the east of the 
latter, and had a different orientation, viz. not west to east, but 
west-north-west to east-south-east. It was raised on three steps, 
and had a peripteros of six columns (east and west) by eleven (north 
and south), having thus a slightly smaller length relatively to its 
breadth than either of the other two temples. Here also the cella 
had prodomos and opisthodomos. The adornment and painting of 
this temple had once been very rich and varied. It was probably 
built in the 4th century, and there are indications that in Roman 
times it underwent a restoration. 

B. Votive Edifices. — Under this head are placed buildings erected, 
either by states or by individuals, as offerings to the Olympian god. 

1. The twelve Treasure-houses on the north side of the Altis, 
immediately under the Cronion, belong to this class. 

The same general character — that of a Doric temple in antis, 
facing south — is traceable in all the treasure-houses. In the cases 
of several of these the fragments are sufficient to aid a reconstruction. 
Two — viz. the 2nd and 3rd counting from the west — had been dis- 
mantled at an early date, and their site was traversed by a roadway 
winding upward towards the Cronion. This roadway seems to have 
been older at least than A.D. 157, since it caused a deflexion in the 
watercourse along the base of the Cronion constructed by Herodes 
Atticus. Pausanias, therefore, would not have seen treasure-houses 
Nos. 2 and 3. This explains the fact that, though we can trace 
twelve, he names only ten. 

As the temples of ancient Greece partly served the purposes of 
banks in which precious objects could be securely deposited, so the 
form of a small Doric chapel was a natural one for the " treasure- 
house " to assume. Each of these treasure-houses was erected by a 
Greek state, either as a thank-offering for Olympian victories gained 
by its citizens, or as a general mark of homage to the Olympian Zeus. 
The treasure-houses were designed to contain the various hvaBrniara 
or dedicated gifts (such as gold and silver plate, &c), in which the 
wealth of the sanctuary partly consisted. The temple inventories 
recently discovered at Delos illustrate the great quantity of such 
possessions which were apt to accumulate at a shrine of Panhellenic 
celebrity. Taken in order from the west, the treasure-houses 
were founded by the following states: I, Sicyon; 2, 3, unknown; 
4, Syracuse (referred by Pausanias to Carthage); 5, Epidamnus; 
6, Byzantium; 7, Sybaris; 8, Cyrene; 9, Selinus; 10, Metapontum; 
11, Megara; 12, Gela. It is interesting to remark how this list 
represents the Greek colonies, from Libya to Sicily, from the Euxine 
to the Adriatic. Greece proper, on the other hand, is represented 
only by Megara and Sicyon. The dates of the foundations cannot 
be fixed. The architectural members of some of the treasure-houses 
have been found built into the Byzantine wall, or elsewhere on 
the site, as well as the terra-cotta plates that overlaid the stone- 
work in some cases, and the pedimental figures, representing the 
battle of the gods and giants, from the treasure-house of the 
Megarians. 

2. The Philippewn stood near the north-west corner of the Altis, 
a short space west-south-west of the Heraeum. It was dedicated 
by Philip of Macedon, after his victory at Chaeronea (338 B.C.). 
As a thank-offering for the overthrow of Greek freedom, it might 



seem strangely placed in the Olympian Altis. But it is, in fact, 
only another illustration of the manner in which Philip's position 
and power enabled him to place a decent disguise on the real nature 
of the change. Without risking any revolt of Hellenic feeling, 
the new " captain-general " of Greece could erect a monument of 
his triumph in the very heart of the Panhellenic sanctuary. The 
building consisted of a circular Ionic colonnade (of eighteen columns), 
about 15 metres in diameter, raised on three steps and enclosing 
a small circular cella, probably adorned with fourteen Corinthian 
half-columns. It contained portraits by Leochares of Philip, 
Alexander, and other members of their family, in gold and ivory. 

3. The Exedra of Herodes Atticus stood at the north limit of the 
Altis, close to the north-east angle of the Heraeum, and immediately 
west of the westernmost treasure-house (that of Sicyon). It con- 
sisted of a half-dome of brick, 54 ft. in diameter, with south-south- 
west aspect. Under the half-dome were placed twenty-one marble 
statues, representing the family of Antoninus Pius, of Marcus 
Aurelius, and of the founder, Herodes Atticus. In front of the half- 
dome on the south, and extending slightly beyond it, was a basin of 
water for drinking, 71 \ ft. long. The ends of the basin at north- 
north-west and south-south-east were adorned by very small open 
temples, each with a circular colonnade of eight pillars. A marble 
bull, in front of the basin, bore an inscription saying that Herodes 
dedicates the whole to Zeus, in the name of his wife, Annia Regilla. 
The exedra must have been seen by Pausanias, but he does not 
mention it. 

C. It remains to notice those features of the Altis which were 
connected with the management of the sanctuary or with the 
accommodation of its guests. 

1. Olympia, besides its religious character, originally possessed 
also a political character, as the centre of an amphictyony. It 
was, in fact, a sacred mSXis. We have seen that it had a bouleu- 
terium for purposes of public debate or conference. So also it was 
needful that, like a Greek city, it should have a public hearth or 
prytaneum, where fire should always burn on the altar of the 
Olympian Hestia, and where the controllers of Olympia should 
exercise public hospitality. The Prytaneum was at the north-west 
corner of the Altis, in such a position that its south-east angle was 
close to the north-west angle of the Heraeum. It was apparently a 
square building, of which each side measured 100 Olympian feet, 
with a south-west aspect. It contained a chapel of Hestia at the 
front or south-west side, before which a portico was afterwards 
built. The dining-hall was at the back (north-east), the kitchen 
on the north-west side. On the same side with the kitchen, and 
also on the opposite side (south-east), there were some smaller 
rooms. 

2. The Porch of Echo, also called the " Painted Porch," extended 
to a length of 100 yds. along the east Altis wall. Raised on three 
steps, and formed by a single Doric colonnade, open towards the 
Altis, it afforded a place from which spectators could conveniently 
view the passage of processions and the sacrifices at the great altar 
of Zeus. It was built in the Macedonian period to replace an earlier 
portico which stood farther back. In front of it was a series of 
pedestals for votive offerings, including two colossal Ionic columns. 
These columns, as the inscriptions show, once supported statues of 
Ptolemy and Berenice. 

3. The Agora was the name given to that part of the Altis which 
had the Porch of Echo on the east, the Altar of Zeus on the west, the 
Metroum on the north, and the precinct of the Temple of Zeus on 
the south-west. In this part stood the altars of Zeus Agoraios and 
Artemis Agoraia. 

4. The Zanes were bronze images of Zeus, the cost of making 
which was delrayed by the fines exacted from competitors who had 
infringed the rules of the contests at Olympia. These images stood 
at the northern side of the Agora, in a row, which extended from the 
north-east angle of the Metroum to the gate of the private entrance 
from the Altis into the Stadium. Sixteen pedestals were here dis- 
covered in situ. A lesson of loyalty was thus impressed on aspirants 
to renown by the last objects which met their eyes as they passed 
from the sacred enclosure to the scene of their trial. 

5. Arrangements for Water-supply. — A copious supply of water 
was required for the service of the altars and temples, for the private 
dwellings of priests and officials, for the use of the gymnasium, 
palaestra, &c, and for the thermae which arose in Roman times. 
In the Hellenic age the water was derived wholly from theCladeus 
and from the small lateral tributaries of its valley. A basin, to serve 
as a chief reservoir, was built at the north-west corner of the Altis; 
and a supplementary reservoir was afterwards constructed a little 
to the north-east of this, on the slope of the Cronion. A new source 
of supply was for the first time made available by Herodes Atticus, 
c. A.D. 157. At a short distance east of Olympia, near the village of 
Miraka, small streams flow from comparatively high ground through 
the side-valleys which descend towards the right or northern bank 
of the Alpheus. From these side-valleys water was now conducted 
to Olympia, entering the Altis at its north-east corner by an arched 
canal which passed behind the treasure-houses to the reservoir at the 
back of the exedra. The large basin of drinking-water in front of the 
exedra was fed thence, and served to associate the name of Herodes 
with a benefit of the highest practical value. Olympia further 
possessed several fountains, enclosed by 'round or square walls, 



OLYMPIA— OLYMPUS 



97 



chiefly in connexion with the buildings outside the Altis. The 
drainage of the Altis followed two main lines. One, for the west 
part, passed from the south-west angle of the Heraeum to the south 
portico outside the south Altis wall. The other, which served for the 
treasure-houses, passed in front of the Porch of Echo parallel with 
the line of the east Altis wall. 

See the official Die Ausgrabungen zu Olympia (5 vols., 1875-1881); 
Laloux and Monceaux, Restauration de V Olympic (1889); Curtius 
and Adler, Olympia die Ergebnisse der Ausgrabungen (1890-1897), 
I. " Topograph ie und Geschichte," II. " Baudenkmaler," 111. 
" Bildwerke in Stein und Thon " (Treu), IV. " Bronzen " (Furt- 
wangler), V. " Inschriften " (Dittenberger and Purgold). 

(R. C. J.;E. Gr.) 

OLYMPIA, the capital of the state of Washington, U.S.A'., 
and the county-seat of Thurston county, on the Des Chutes 
river and Budd's Inlet, at the head of Puget Sound, about 50 m. 
S.S.W. of Seattle. Pop. (1890) 4698; (1900) 3863, of whom 
59 r were foreign-born; (state estimate, 1905) 8000. It is 
served by the Northern Pacific and the Port Townsend Southern 
railways, and by steamboat lines to other ports on the Sound 
and along the Pacific coast. Budd's Inlet is spanned here by a 
wagon bridge and a railway bridge. Among the prominent 
buildings are the Capitol, which is constructed of native sand- 
stone and stands in a park of considerable beauty, the county 
court-house, St Peter's hospital, the governor's mansion and 
the city hall. The state library is housed in the Capitol. At 
Tumwater, the oldest settlement (1845) on Puget Sound, about 
2 m. S. of Olympia, are the Tumwater Falls of the Des Chutes, 
which provide good water power. The city's chief industry is 
the cutting, sawing and dressing of lumber obtained from the 
neighbouring forests. Olympia oysters are widely known in 
the Pacific coast region; they are obtained chiefly from 
Oyster Bay, Skookum Bay, North Bay and South Bay, all 
near Olympia. Olympia was laid out in 1851, became the 
capital of Washington in 1853, and was chartered as a city 
in 1859. 

OLYMPIAD, in Greek chronology, a period of four years, used 
as a method of dating for literary purposes, but never adopted 
in every-day life. The four years were reckoned from one 
celebration of the Olympian games to another, the first Olympiad 
beginning with 776 B.C., the year of Coroebus, the first victor in 
the games after their suspension for 86 years, the last with 
a.d. 394, when they were finally abolished during the reign of 
Theodosius the Great. The system was first regularly used by 
the Sicilian historian Timaeus (352-256 B.C.). 

OLYMPIAS, daughter of Neoptolemus, king of Epirus, wife 
of Philip II. of Macedon, and mother of Alexander the Great. 
Her father claimed descent from Pyrrhus, son of Achilles. It 
is said that Philip fell in love with her in Samothrace, where 
they were both being initiated into the mysteries (Plutarch, 
Alexander, 2). The marriage took place in 359 B.C., shortly 
after Philip's accession, and Alexander was born in 356. The 
fickleness of Philip and the jealous temper of Olympias led to 
a growing estrangement, which became complete when Philip 
married a new wife, Cleopatra, in 337. Alexander, who sided 
with his mother, withdrew, along with her, into Epirus, whence 
they both returned in the following year, after the assassination 
of Philip, which Olympias is said to have countenanced. During 
the absence of Alexander, with whom she regularly corresponded 
on public as well as domestic affairs, she had great influence, and 
by her arrogance and ambition caused such trouble to the regent 
Antipater that on Alexander's death (323) she found it prudent 
to withdraw into Epirus. Here she remained until 317, when, 
allying herself with Polyperchon, by whom her old enemy had 
been succeeded in 319, she took the field with an Epirote army; 
the opposing troops at once declared in her favour, and for a 
short period Olympias was mistress of Macedonia. Cassander, 
Antipater's son, hastened from Peloponnesus, and, after an 
obstinate siege, compelled the surrender of Pydna, where she 
had taken refuge. One of the terms of the capitulation had been 
that her life should be spared; but in spite of this she was brought 
to trial for the numerous and cruel executions of which she had 
been guilty during her short lease of power. Condemned 
without a hearing, she was put to death (316) by the friends 



of those whom she had slain, and Cassander is said to have 
denied her remains the rites of burial. 

See Plutarch, Alexander, 9, 39, 68; Justin, vii. 6, ix. 7, xiv. 5, 6; 
Arrian, Anab. vii. 12; Diod. Sic. xviii. 49-65, xix. 11-51; also the 
articles Alexander III. the Great and Macedonian Empire. 

OLYMPIODORUS, the name of several Greek authors, of 
whom the following are the most important. (1) An historical 
writer (5th century a.d.), born at Thebes in Egypt, who was 
sent on a mission to Attila by the emperor Honorius in 412, 
and later lived at the court of Theodosius. He was the author 
of a history ('lcropiKol A6701) in 22 books of the Western Empire 
from 407 to 425. The original is lost, but an abstract is given 
by Photius, according to whom he was an alchemist (^01177-175). 
A MS. treatise on alchemy, reputed to be by him, is preserved 
in the National Library in Paris, and was printed with a transla- 
tion by P. E. M. Berthelot in his Collcclion des alchimistes grecs 
(1887-1888). (2) A Peripatetic philosopher (5th century a.d.), 
an elder contemporary of Proclus. He lived at Alexandria and 
lectured on Aristotle with considerable success. His best-known 
pupil was Proclus, to whom he wished to betroth his daughter. 
(3) A Neoplatonist philosopher, also of Alexandria, who flourished 
in the 6th century of our era, during the reign of Justinian. He 
was, therefore, a younger contemporary of Damascius, and 
seems to have carried on the Platonic tradition after the closing 
of the Athenian School in 529, at a time when the old pagan 
philosophy was at its last ebb. His philosophy is in close 
conformity with that of Damascius, and, apart from great 
lucidity of expression, shows no striking features. He is, 
however, important as a critic and a commentator, and preserved 
much that was valuable in the writings of lamblichus, Damascius 
and Syrianus. He made a close and intelligent study of the 
dialogues of Plato, and his notes, formulated and collected by 
his pupils (a7ro <fx>>vrjs '0\v(nrio8<bpov rod fieyaXov <£iXotr6$ou), are 
extremely valuable. In one of his :ommentaries he makes the 
interesting statement that the Platonic succession had not been 
interrupted by the numerous confiscations it bad suffered. 
Zeller points out that this refers to the Alexandrian, not to the 
Athenian, succession; but internal evidence makes it clear 
that he does not draw a hard line of demarcation between 
the two schools. The works which have been preserved are a 
life of Plato, an attack on Strato and Scholia on the Phacdo, 
Alcibiades I., Philebus and Gorgias. (4) An Aristotelian who 
wrote a commentary on the Meleorologica of Aristotle. He also 
lived at Alexandria in the 6th century, and from a reference 
in his work to a comet must have lived after a.d. 564. But 
Zeller (iii. 2, p. 582, n. 1) maintains that he is identical with the 
commentator on Plato (2, above) in spite of the late date of his 
death. His work, like that of Simplicius, endeavours to reconcile 
Plato and Aristotle, and refers to Proclus with reverence. The 
commentary was printed by the Aldine Press at Venice about 

1550- 

OLYMPUS, the name of many mountains in Greece and Asia 
Minor, and of the fabled home of the gods, and also a city name 
and a personal name. 

I. Of the mountains bearing the name the most famous 
is the lofty ridge on the borders of Thessaly and Macedonia. 
The river Peneus, which drains Thessaly, finds its way to the 
sea through the great gorge of Tempe, which is close below the 
south-eastern end of Olympus and separates it from Mount Ossa. 
The highest peak of Olympus is nearly 10,000 ft. high; it is 
covered with snow for great part of the year. Olympus is a 
mountain of massive appearance, in many places rising in 
tremendous precipices broken by vast ravines, above which 
is the broad summit. The lower parts are densely wooded; 
the summit is naked rock. Homer calls the mountain 
kykwi^o^, fiaxpos, TroXvSeipas: the epithets VL<f>ous, iro\vS(vSpos, 
Jrondosus and opacus are used by other poets. The modern 
name is "EXu/otto, a dialectic form of the ancient word. 

The peak of Mount Lycaeus in the south-west of Arcadia 
was called Olympus. East of Olympia, on the north bank of 
the Alpheus, was a hill bearing this name; beside Sellasia in 
Laconia another. The name was even commoner in Asia 

xx. 4 



9 8 



OLYNTHUS— OMAHA 



Minor: a lofty chain in Mysia (Keshish Dagh), a ridge east 
of Smyrna (Nif Dagh), other mountains in Lycia, in Galatia, 
in Cilicia, in Cyprus, &c, were all called Olympus. 

II. A lofty peak, rising high above the clouds of the lower 
atmosphere into the clear ether, seemed to be the chosen seat 
of the deity. In the Iliad the gods are described as dwelling on 
the top of the mountain; in the Odyssey Olympus is regarded 
as a more remote and less definite locality; and in later poets 
we find similar divergence of ideas, from a definite mountain to 
a vague conception of heaven. In the elaborate mythology of 
Greek literature Olympus was the common home of the multitude 
of gods. Each deity had his special haunts, but all had a 
residence at the court of Zeus on Olympus; here were held the 
assemblies and the common feasts of the gods. 

III. There was a city in Lycia named Olympus; it was a 
bishopric in the Byzantine time. 

OLYNTHUS, an ancient city of Chalcidice, situated in a 
fertile plain at the head of the Gulf of Torone, near the neck 
of the peninsula of Pallene, at some little distance from the 
sea, and about 60 stadia (7 or 8 m.) from Potidaea. The district 
had belonged to a Thracian tribe, the Bottiaeans, in whose 
possession the town of Olynthus remained till 479 B.C. 1 In that 
year the Persian general Artabazus, on his return from escorting 
Xerxes to the Hellespont, suspecting that a revolt from the 
Great King was meditated, slew the inhabitants and handed the 
town over to a fresh population, consisting of Greeks from the 
neighbouring region of Chalcidice (Herod, viii. 127). Olynthus 
thus became a Greek polis, but it remained insignificant (in the 
quota-lists of the Delian League it appears as paying on the 
average 2 talents, as compared with paid by Scione, 8 by Mende, 
6 by Torone) until the synoecism (owouacTjUOs) , effected in 
432 through the influence of King Perdiccas of Macedon, as the 
result of which the inhabitants of a number of petty Chalcidian 
towns in the neighbourhood were added toitspopulation(Thucyd. 
i. 58). Henceforward it ranks as the chief Hellenic city west of 
the Strymon. It had been enrolled as a member of the Delian 
League (q.v.) in the early days of the league, but it revolted from 
Athens at the time of its synoecism, and was never again reduced. 
It formed a base for Brasidas during his expedition (424). In 
the 4th century it attained to great importance in the politics of 
the age as the head of the Chalcidic League (to koivov tuv 
XaXuSeuv). The league may probably be traced back to the 
period of the peace of Nicias (421), when we find the Chalcidians 
(ot cirt &pd,Kr]s XaXK;5i)s) taking diplomatic action in common, 
and enrolled as members of the Argive alliance. There are coins 
of the league which can be dated with certainty as early as 
405; one specimen may perhaps go back to 415-420. Un- 
questionably, then, the league originated before the end of the 
5th century, and the motive for its formation is almost certainly 
to be found in the fear of Athenian attack. After the end of 
the Peloponnesian War the development of the league was rapid. 
About 390 we find it concluding an important treaty with 
Amyntas, king of Macedon (the father of Philip), 2 and by 382 
it had absorbed most of the Greek cities west of the Strymon, 
and had even got possession of Pella, the chief city in Macedonia 
(Xenophon, Hell. v. 2, 12). In this year Sparta was induced 
by an embassy from Acanthus and Apollonia, which anticipated 
conquest by the league, to send an expedition against Olynthus. 
After three years of indecisive warfare Olynthus consented 
to dissolve the confederacy (379). It is clear, however, that the 
dissolution was little more than formal, as the Chalcidians 
(Xa\Ki5?5s euro Qpdn-ns) appear, only a year or two later, among 
the members of the Athenian naval confederacy of 378~377- 3 
Twenty years later, in the reign of Philip, the power of Olynthus 
is asserted by Demosthenes to have been much greater than 
before the Spartan expedition. 4 The town itself at this period 

1 If Olynthus was one of the early colonies of Chalcis (and there 
is numismatic evidence for this view; see Head, Hist. Numorum, 
p. 185) it must have subsequently passed into the hands of the 
Bottiaeans. 

2 For the inscription see Hicks, Manual of Greek Inscriptions, 
No. 74. 3 Hicks, No. 81; CIA. ii. 17. 

4 Demosthenes, De falsa legatione, §§ 263-266. 



is spoken of as a city of the first rank (iroXts nvplavdpos) , and 
the league included thirty-two cities. When war broke out 
between Philip and Athens (357), Olynthus was at first in 
alliance with Philip. Subsequently, in alarm at the growth of his 
power, it concluded an alliance with Athens; but in spite of all 
the efforts of the latter state, and of its great orator Demosthenes, 
it fell before Philip, who razed it to the ground (348). 

The history of the confederacy of Olynthus illustrates at once 
the strength and the weakness of that movement towards federa- 
tion which is one of the most marked features of the later stages 
of Greek history. The strength of the movement is shown 
both by the duration and by the extent of the Chalcidic League. 
It lasted for something like seventy years; it survived defeat 
and temporary dissolution, and it embraced upwards of 'thirty 
cities. Yet, in the end, the centrifugal forces proved stronger 
than the centripetal; the sentiment of autonomy stronger 
than the sentiment of union. It is clear that Philip's victory 
was mainly due to the spirit of dissidence within the league itself, 
just as the victory of Sparta had been (cf. Diod. xvi. 53, 2 with 
Xen. Hell. v. 2, 24). The mere fact that Philip captured all 
the thirty-two towns without serious resistance is sufficient 
evidence of this. It is probable that the strength of the league 
was more seriously undermined by the policy of Athens than 
by the action of Sparta. The successes of Athens at the 
expense of Olynthus, shortly before Philip's accession, must 
have fatally divided the Greek interest north of the Aegean 
in the struggle with Macedon. 

Authorities. — The chief passages in ancient literature are the 
Olynthiac Orations of Demosthenes, and Xenophon, Hell. v. 2. 
See E. A. Freeman, History of Federal Government, ch. iv. ; A. H. J. 
Greenidge, Handbook of Greek Constitutional History (1896), p. 228; 
B. V. Head, Historia Numorum, pp. 184-186; G. Gilbert, Griechische 
Staatsalterthiimer, vol. ii. pp. 197-198. The view taken by all these 
authorities as to the date of the formation of the Confederacy of 
Olynthus differs widely from that put forward above. Freeman 
and Greenidge suppose the league to have originated in 382, Head in 
392, Hicks (Manual of Greek Inscriptions, No. 74) before 390. The 
decisive test is the numismatic one. There are coins of the league 
in the British Museum which are earlier than 400, and one in the 
possession of Professor Oman, of Oxford, which he and Mr Head 
are disposed to think may be as early as 415-420. (E. M. W.) 

OMAGH, a market town and the county town of county 
Tyrone, Ireland, on the river Strule, 1295 m. N.W. by N. from 
Dublin by the Londonderry line of the Great Northern railway, 
here joined by a branch from Enniskillen. Pop. (1901) 4789. 
The greater part of the town is picturesquely situated on a steep 
slope above the river. The milling and linen industries are 
carried on, and monthly fairs are held. The Protestant church 
has a lofty and handsome spire, and the Roman Catholic church 
stands well on the summit of a hill. A castle, of which there are 
scanty remains, was of sufficient importance to stand sieges 
in 1509 and 1641, being rebuilt after its total destruction 
in the first case. The town is governed by an urban district 
council. 

OMAGUAS, Ujianas or Cambevas (flat-heads), a tribe 
of South American Indians of the Amazon valley. Fabulous 
stories about the wealth of the Omaguas led to several early 
expeditions into their country, the most famous of which were 
those of George of Spires in 1536, of Philip von Hutten in 1541 
and of Pedro de Ursua in 1560. In 1645 Jesuits began work. 
In 1687 Father Fritz, " apostle of the Omaguas," established 
some forty mission villages. The Omaguas are still numerous 
and powerful around the head waters of the Japura and Uaupes. 

OMAHA, the county-seat of Douglas county and the largest 
city in Nebraska, U.S.A., situated on the W. bank of the Missouri 
river, about 20 m. above the mouth of the Platte. Pop. (1SS0) 
30,518, (1890) 66,536, 5 (1900) 102,555, of whom 23,552 
(comprising 5522 Germans, 3968 Swedes, 2430 Danes, 2170 
Bohemians, 2164 Irish, 1526 English, 1141 English Canadians, 

6 These are the figures given in Census Bulletin 71, Estimates of 
Population, IQ04, 1905, 1906 (1907), and are the arithmetical mean 
between the figures for 1880 and those for 1900, those of the census 
of 1890 being 140,452; these are substituted by the Bureau of the 
Census, as the 1890 census was in error. In 1910, according to 
the U.S. census, the population was 124,096. 



OMAHAS— OMAN 



99 



997 Russians, &c.) were foreign-born and 3443 were negroes, 
(1906 estimate) 124,167. Originally, with Council Bluffs, Iowa, 
tbe eastern terminus of the first Pacific railway, Omaha now has 
outlets over nine great railway systems: the Chicago, Burlington & 
Quincy, the Union Pacific, the Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific, 
the Chicago Great-Western, the Chicago & North-Western, the 
Chicago, Milwaukee & St Paul, the Illinois Central, the Missouri 
Pacific and the Wabash. Bridges over the Missouri river 
connect Omaha with Council Bluffs. The original town site 
occupied an elongated and elevated river terrace, now given over 
wholly to business; behind this are hills and bluffs, over which 
the residential districts have extended. 

Among the more important buildings are the Federal 
Building, Court House, a city-hall, two high schools, one of 
which is one of the finest in the country, a convention hall, the 
Auditorium and the Public Library. Omaha is the see of Roman 
Catholic and Protestant Episcopal bishoprics. Among the 
educational institutions are a state school for the deaf (1867); 
the medical department and orthopaedic branch of the University 
of Nebraska (whose other departments are at Lincoln); a 
Presbyterian Theological Seminary (1891); and Creighton 
University (Roman Catholic, under Jesuit control). This 
university, which was founded in honour of Edward Creighton 
(d. 1874) (whose brother, Count John A. Creighton, d. 1907, 
gave large sums in his lifetime and about $1,250,000 by his will), 
by his wife Mary Lucretia Creighton (d. 1876), was incorporated 
in 1879; it includes the Creighton Academy, Creighton College 
(1875), to which a Scientific Department was added in 1883, the 
John A. Creighton Medical College (1892), the Creighton Univer- 
sity College of Law (1904), the Creighton University Dental 
College (1905) and the Creighton College of Pharmacy (1905). 
In 1909-1910 it had 120 instructors and 800 students. St 
Joseph's Hospital (Roman Catholic) was built as a memorial 
to John A. Creighton. The principal newspapers are the Omaha 
Bee, the World-Herald and the News. The Omaha Bee was 
established in 1871 by Edward Rosewater (1841-1906), who 
made it one of the most influential Republican journals in the 
West. The World-Herald (Democratic), founded in 1865 by 
George L. Miller, was edited by William Jennings Bryan from 
1894 to 1S96. 

Omaha is the headquarters of the United States military 
department of the Missouri, and there are military posts at Fort 
Omaha (signal corps and station for experiments with war bal- 
loons), immediately north, and Fort Crook (infantry), 10 m. S. 
of the city. A carnival, the "Festival of Ak-Sar-Ben,"is held 
in Omaha every autumn. Among the manufacturing establish- 
ments of Omaha are breweries (product value in 1905,11,141,424) 
and distilleries, silver and lead smelting and refining works, 
railway shops, flour and grist-mills and dairies. The product- 
value of its manufactures in 1900 ($43,168,876) constituted 30% 
of the total output of the state, not including the greater product 
(48-7% of the total) of South Omaha (g.v.), where the industrial 
interests of Omaha are largely concentrated. The " factory " 
product of Omaha in 1905 was valued at $54,003,704, an increase 
of 41-8 % over that ($38,074,244) for 1900. The net debt of 
the city on the 1st of May 1909 was $5,770,000; its assessed 
value in 1909 (about ^ of cash value) was $26,749,148, and its 
total tax-rate was $5-73 per $1000. 

In 1804 Meriwether Lewis and William Clark camped on the 
Omaha plateau. In 1825 a licensed Indian post was established 
here. In 1846 the Mormons settled at " Winter Quarters " — 
after 1854 called Florence (pop. in 1900, 668), and in the immedi- 
ate environs (6 m. N.) of the present Omaha — and by 1847 had 
built up camps of some 12,000 inhabitants on the Nebraska and 
Iowa sides of the Missouri. Compelled to remove from the Indian 
reservation within which Winter Quarters lay, they founded 

Kanesville" on the Iowa side (which also was called Winter 
Quarters by the Mormons, and after 1853 was known as Council 
Bluffs), gradually emigrating to Utah in the years following. 
Winter Quarters (Florence) was deserted in 1848, but many 
Mormons were still in Nebraska and Iowa, and their local in- 
fluence was strong for nearly a decade afterwards. Not all had 



left Nebraska in 1853. Speculative land " squatters " intruded 
upon the Indian lands in that year, and a rush of settlers followed 
the opening of Nebraska Territory under the Kansas-Nebraska 
Bill of 1854. Omaha (named from the Omaha Indians) was 
platted in 1854, and was first chartered as a city in 1857. It was 
the provisional territorial capital in 1854-1855, and the regular 
capital in 1855-1867. Its charter status has often been modified. 
Since 1887 it has been the only city of the state governed under 
the general charter for metropolitan cities. Prairie freighting 
and Missouri river navigation were of importance before the 
construction of the Union Pacific railway, and the activity of 
the city in securing the freighting interest gave her an initial 
start over the other cities of the state. Council Bluffs was the 
legal, but Omaha the practical, eastern terminus of that great 
undertaking, work on which began at Omaha in December 1863. 
The city was already connected as early as 1863 by telegraph 
with Chicago, St Louis, and since 1861 with San Francisco. 
Lines of the present great Rock Island, Burlington and North- 
Western railway systems all entered the city in the years 1867- 
1868. Meat-packing began as early as 1871, but its first great 
advance followed the removal of the Union stock yards south 
of the city in 1884. South Omaha (q.v.) was rapidly built up 
around them. A Trans-Mississippi Exposition illustrating the 
progress and resources of the states west of the Mississippi was 
held at Omaha in 1898. It represented an investment of 
$2,000,000, and in spite of financial depression and wartime, 
90% of their subscriptions were returned in dividends to the 
stockholders. 

OMAHAS, a tribe of North American Indians of Siouan stock. 
They were found on St Peter's river, Minnesota, where they 
lived an agricultural life. Owing to a severe epidemic of small- 
pox they abandoned their village, and wandered westward to 
the Niobrara river in Nebraska. After a succession of treaties 
and removals they are now located on a reservation in eastern 
Nebraska, and number some 1200. 

OMALIUS D'HALLOY, JEAN BAPTISTE JULIEN D' (1783- 
1S75), Belgian geologist, was born on the 16th of February 1783 
at Liege, and educated firstly in that city and afterwards in 
Paris. While a youth he became interested in geology, and 
being of independent means he was able to devote his energies 
to geological researches. As early as 1S08 he communicated to 
the Journal des mines a paper entitled Essai sur la geologie 
du Nord de la France. He became maire of Skeuvre in 1807, 
governor of the province of Namur in 1815, and from 184S 
occupied a place in the Belgian senate. He was an active 
member of the Belgian Academy of Sciences from 1S16, and 
served three times as president. He was likewise president of 
the Geological Society of France in 1S52. In Belgium and the 
Rhine provinces he was one of the geological pioneers in deter- 
mining the stratigraphy of the Carboniferous and other rocks. 
He studied also in detail the Tertiary deposits of the Paris Basin, 
and ascertained the extent of the Cretaceous and some of the 
older strata, which he for the first time clearly depicted on a 
map (1817). He was distinguished as an ethnologist, and when 
nearly ninety years of age he was chosen president of the Congress 
of Pre-histoiic Archaeology (Brussels, 1872). He died on the 
15th of January 1875. His chief works were: Memoircs pour 
servir a la description gcologique des Pays-Bas, de la France ct de 
quelques contrecs voisines (1S2S); Elements de giologie (1S31, 
3rd ed. 1S39); Abrege de geologie (1S53, 7th ed. 1S62); Des 
races humaines, oil elements d' ethnographic (5th ed., 1S69). 

Obituary by J. Gosselet, Bull. soc. geol. de France, ser. 3, vol. vi. 
(1878). 

OMAN, a kingdom occupying the south-eastern coast districts 
of Arabia, its southern limits being a little to the west of the 
meridian of 55 E. long., and the boundary on the north the 
southern borders of El Hasa. Oman and Hasa between them 
occupy the eastern coast districts of Arabia to the head of the 
Persian Gulf. The Oman-Hasa boundary has been usually drawn 
north of the promontory of El Katr. This is, however, incorrect. 
In 1870 Katr was under Wahhabi rule, but in the year 1S71 
Turkish assistance was requested to aid the settlement of a 



IOO 



OMAR— f OMAR KHAYYAM 



family quarrel between certain Wahhabi chiefs, and the Turks 
thus obtained a footing in Katr, which they have retained ever 
since. Turkish occupation (now firmly established throughout 
El Hasa) includes Katif (the ancient Gerrha), and El Bidia on the 
coast of Katr. But the pearl fisheries of Katr are still under the 
protection of the chiefs of Bahrein, who are themselves under 
British suzerainty. In 1895 the chief of Katr (Sheikh Jasim ben 
Thani), instigated by the Turks, attacked Sheikh Isa of Bahrein, 
but his fleet of dhows was destroyed by a British gunboat, and 
Bahrein (like Zanzibar) has since been detached from Oman 
and placed directly under British protection. 

Oman is a mountainous district dominated by a range called 
Jebel Akhdar (or the Green Mountain), which is 10,000 ft. in 
altitude, and is flanked by minor ranges running approximately 
parallel to the coast, and shutting off the harbours from the 
interior. They enclose long lateral valleys, some of which are 
fertile and highly cultivated, and traversed by narrow precipitous 
gorges at intervals, which form the only means of access to the 
interior from the sea. Beyond the mountains which flank the 
cultivated valleys of Semail and Tyin, to the west, there stretches 
the great Ruba el Khali, or Dahna, the central desert of southern 
Arabia, which reaches across the continent to the borders of 
Yemen, isolating the province on the landward side just as the 
rugged mountain barriers shut it off from the sea. The wadis 
(or valleys) of Oman (like the wadis of Arabia generally) are 
merely torrential channels, dry for the greater part of the year. 
Water is obtained from wells and springs in sufficient quantity 
to supply an extensive system of irrigation. 

The only good harbour on the coast is that of Muscat, the capital 
of the kingdom, which, however, is not directly connected with 
the interior by any mountain route. The little port of Matrah, 
immediately contiguous to Muscat, offers the only opportunity 
for penetrating into the interior by the wadi Kahza, a rough pass 
which is held for the sultan or imam of Muscat by the Rehbayin 
chief. In 1883, owing to the treachery of this chief, Muscat 
was besieged by a rebel army, and disaster was only averted by 
the guns of H.M.S. " Philomel." About 50 na. south of Muscat 
the port of Kuryat is again connected with the inland valleys 
by the wadi Hail, leading to the gorges of the wadi Thaika or 
" Devil's Gap." Both routes give access to the wadi Tyin, which, 
enclosed between the mountain of El Beideh and Hallowi (from 
2000 to 3000 ft. high), is the garden of Oman. Fifty miles to the 
north-west of Muscat this interior region may again be reached 
by the transverse valley of Semail, leading into the wadi Munsab, 
and from thence to Tyin. This is generally reckoned the easiest 
line for travellers. But all routes are difficult, winding between 
granite and limestone rocks, and abounding in narrow defiles 
and rugged torrent beds. Vegetation is, however, tolerably 
abundant — tamarisks, oleanders, kafas, euphorbias, the milk 
bush, rhamnus and acacias being the most common and most 
characteristic forms of vegetable life, and pools of water are 
frequent. The rich oasis of Tyin contains many villages em- 
bosomed in palm groves and surrounded with orchards and 
fields. 

In addition to cereals and vegetables, the cultivation of 
fruit is abundant throughout the valley. After the date, vines, 
peaches, apricots, oranges, mangoes, melons and mulberries find 
special favour with the Rehbayin, who exhibit all the skill and 
perseverance of the Arab agriculturist of Yemen, and cultivate 
everything that the soil is capable of producing. 

The sultan, a descendant of those Yemenite imams who con- 
solidated Arab power in Zanzibar and on the East African coast, 
and raised Oman to its position as the most powerful state 
in Arabia during the first half of the 19th century, resides at 
Muscat, where his palace directly faces the harbour, not far 
from the British residency. The little port of Gwadar, on the 
Makran coast of the Arabian Sea, a station of the Persian Gulf 
telegraph system, is still a dependency of Oman. 

See Colonel Miles, Geographical Journal, vol. vii. (1896); Com- 
mander Stiffe, Geographical Journal (1899). (T. H. H.*) 

OMAR (c. 581-644), in full 'Omar ibn al-Khattab, the second 
of the Mahommedan caliphs (see Caliphate, A, §§ 1 and 2). 



Originally opposed to Mahomet, he became later one of the ablest 
advisers both of him and of the first caliph, Abu Bekr. His own 
reign (634-644) saw Islam's transformation from a religious 
sect to an imperial power. The chief events were the defeat 
of the Persians at Kadisiya (637) and the conquest of Syria and 
Palestine. The conquest of Egypt followed (see Egypt and 
Amr ibn el-Ass) and the final rout of the Persians at Nehawend 
(641) brought Iran under Arab rule. Omar was assassinated by 
a Persian slave in 644, and though he lingered several days after 
the attack, he appointed no successor, but only a body of six 
Muhajirun who should select a new caliph. Omar was a wise 
and far-sighted ruler and rendered great service to Islam. 
He is said to have built the so-called " Mosque of Omar " 
(" the Dome of the Rock ") in Jerusalem, which contains the 
rock regarded by Mahommedans as the scene of Mahomet's 
ascent to heaven, and by the Jews as that of the proposed 
sacrifice of Isaac. 

'OMAR KHAYYAM [in full, Ghiyathuddin Abulfath 
'Omar bin Ibrahim al-Khayyami], the great Persian mathe- 
matician, astronomer, freethinker and epigrammatist, who 
derived the epithet Khayyam (the tentmaker) most likely from 
his father's trade, was born in or near Nishapur, where he is said 
to have died in a.h. 517 (a.d. 1123). At an early age he entered 
into a close friendship both with Nizam-ul-mulk and his school- 
fellow Hassan ibn Sabbah, who founded afterwards the terrible 
sect of the Assassins. When Nizam-ul-mulk was raised to the 
rank of vizier by the Seljuk sultan Alp-Arslan (a.d. 1063-1073) 
he bestowed upon Hassan ibn Sabbah the dignity of a chamber- 
lain, whilst offering a similar court office to 'Omar Khayyam. 
But the latter contented himself with an annual stipend which 
would enable him to devote all his time to his favourite studies 
of mathematics and astronomy. His standard work on algebra, 
written in Arabic, and other treatises of a similar character 
raised him at once to the. foremost rank among the mathemati- 
cians of that age, and induced Sultan Malik-Shah to summon him 
in a.h. 467 (a.d. 1074) to institute astronomical observations 
on a larger scale, and to aid him in his great enterprise of a 
thorough reform of the calendar. The results of 'Omar's research 
were — a revised edition of the Zij or astronomical tables, and the 
introduction of the Ta'rlkh-i-Malikshahl or Jalall, that is, the 
so-called Jalalian or Seljuk era, which commences in a.h. 471 
(a.d. 1079, 15th March). 

'Omar's great scientific fame, however, is nearly eclipsed by 
his still greater poetical renown, which he owes to his ruba' is or 
quatrains, a collection of about 500 epigrams. The peculiar 
form of the riiba'l — viz. four lines, the first, second and fourth 
of which have the same rhyme, while the third usually (but not 
always) remains rhymeless — was first successfully introduced 
into Persian literature as the exclusive vehicle for subtle thoughts 
on the various topics of Sufic mysticism by the sheikh Abu Sa'ld 
bin Abulkhair, 1 but 'Omar differs in its treatment considerably 
from Abu Sa'ld. Although some of his quatrains are purely 
mystic and pantheistic, most of them bear quite another stamp; 
they are the breviary of a radical freethinker, who protests in 
the most forcible manner both against the narrowness, bigotry 
and uncompromising austerity of the orthodox ulema and the 
eccentricity, hypocrisy and wild ravings of advanced Sufis, 
whom he successfully combats with their own weapons, using 
the whole mystic terminology simply to ridicule mysticism 
itself. There is in this respect a great resemblance between 
him and Hafiz, but 'Omar is decidedly superior. He has often 
been called the Voltaire of the East, and cried down as materialist 
and atheist. As far as purity of diction, fine wit, crushing 
satire against a debased and ignorant clergy, and a general 
sympathy with suffering humanity are concerned, 'Omar certainly 
reminds us of the great Frenchman; but there the comparison 
ceases. Voltaire never wrote anything equal to 'Omar's fascinat- 
ing rhapsodies in praise of wine, love and all earthly joys, 
and his passionate denunciations of a malevolent and inexorable 

1 Died Jan. 1049. Comp. Ethd's edition of his ruba'is in Sitzungs- 
berichtederbayr. A kademie (187 5), pp. I45seq._,and (1878) pp. 38seq.; 
and E. G. Browne's Literary Hist, of Persia, ii. 261. 






OMBRE— OMELETTE 



ior 



fate which dooms to slow decay or sudden death and to eternal 
oblivion all that is great, good and beautiful in this world. 
There is a touch of Byron, Swinburne and even of Schopenhauer 
in many of his rubais, which clearly proves that the modern 
pessimist is by no means a novel creature in the realm of philo- 
sophic thought and poetical imagination. 

The Leiden copy of 'Omar Khayyam's work on algebra was 
noticed as far back as 1742 by Gerald Meerman in the preface to 
his Specimen calculi fiuxionatis; further notices of the same work 
by Sddillot appeared in the Nouv. Jour. As. (1834) and in vol. xiii. 
of the Notices et extraits des MSS. de la Bibl. roy. The complete 
text, together with a French translation (on the basis of the Leiden 
and Paris copies, the latter first discovered by M. Libri, sec his 
Histoire des sciences mathematiques en Italie, i. 300), was edited 
by F. Woepcke, L'Atgebre d'Omar Alkhayyami (Paris, 1851). Articles 
on 'Omar's life and works arc found in Reinaud's C&ographie d'Aboul- 
feda, pref., p. 101 ; Notices et extraits, ix. 143 scq.; Garcin de Tassy, 
Note stir les Ruba'iyat de 'Omar Hhaiyam (Paris, 1857); Rieu, Cat. 
Pers. MSS. in the Br. Mus., ii. 546; A. Christensen, Recherches 
sur les Ruba'iyat de 'Omar Hayyam (Heidelberg, 1905); V. Zhukov- 
ski's 'Umar Khayyam and"the " Wandering" Quatrains, translated 
from the Russian by E. D. Ross in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, xxx. (1898); E. G. Browne, Literary History of Persia, ii. 
246. The quatrains have been edited at Calcutta (1836) and 
Teheran (1857 and 1862); text and French translation by J. B. 
Nicolas (Paris, 1867) (very incorrect and misleading); a portion of 
the same, rendered in English verse, by E. FitzGerald (London, 
1859, 1872 and 1879). FitzGerald's translation has been edited 
with commentary by H. M. Batson (1900), and the 2nd ed. of the 
same (1868) by E. Heron Allen (1908). A new English version was 
published in Trubner's " Oriental " series (1882) by E. H. Whinficld, 
and the first critical edition of the text, with translation, by the 
same (1883). Important later works are N. H. Dole's variorum 
edition (1896), J. Payne's translation (1898), E. Heron Allen's 
edition (1898) and the Life by J. K. M. Shirazi (1905); but the 
literature in new translations and imitations has recently multiplied 
exceedingly. (H. E.; X.) 

OMBRE, a card game, very fashionable at the end of the 18th 
century, but now practically obsolete. The following recom- 
mendation of the game is taken from the Court Gamester, a 
book published in 1720 for the use of the daughters of the prince 
of Wales, afterwards George II: — 

"The game of Ombre owes its invention to the Spaniards, and it 
has in it a great deal of the gravity peculiar, to that nation. It is 
called Ombre, or The Man. It was so named as requiring thought 
and reflection, which are qualities peculiar to many or rather alluding 
to him who undertakes to play the game against the rest of the 
gamesters, and is called the man. To play it well requires a great 
deal of application, and let a man be ever so expert, he will be apt 
to fall into mistakes if he think of anything else or is disturbed by 
the conversation of them that look on. ... It will be found the 
most delightful and entertaining of all games to those who have 
anything in them of what we call the spirit of play." 

Ombre is played by three players with a pack of 40 cards, 
the 8, 9 and 10 being dispensed with. The order of value 
of the hands is irregular, being different for trumps and suits not 
trumps. In a suit not trumps the order is, for red suits: K, Q, 
Kn, ace, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7; for black suits: K, Q, Kn, 7, 6, 5, 4, 
3, 2. In trump suits the ace of spades, called spadille, is always 
a trump, and the highest one, whichever of the four suits may 
be trumps. The order for red suit trumps is; ace of spades 7 
(called manille), ace of clubs (called basto), ace (called ponto), 
K, Q, Kn, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. For black suit trumps: ace of spades 
(spadille), 2 (manille), ace (basto), K, Q, Kn, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3. There 
is no ponto in black trumps. The three highest trumps are 
called matadores (or mats). The holder of them has the privilege 
of not following suit, except when a higher mat is played, which 
forces a lower one if the hand contains no other trump. 

Cards are dealt round, and the receiver of the first black ace 
is the dealer. He deals (towards his right) nine cards, by threes, 
to each player. The remaining 13 cards form the stock or talon, 
as at piquet. Each deal constitutes a game. One hand plays 
against the other two, the solo player being called the Ombre. 
The player at the dealer's right has the first option of being 
Ombre, which entails two privileges: that of naming the trump 
suit, and that of throwing away as many of his cards as he chooses, 
receiving new ones in their place, as at poker. If, with these 
advantages in mind, he thinks he can win against the other 
two hands, he says, " I ask leave," or " I play." But in this 
case his right-hand neighbour has the privilege of claiming 



Ombre for himself, providing he is willing to play his hand without 
drawing new cards, or, as the phrase goes, sans prendre. If, how- 
ever, the other player reconsiders and decides that he will himself 
play without drawing cards, he can still remain Ombre. If 
the second player passes, the dealer in his turn may ask to play 
sans prendre, as above. If all three pass a new deal ensues. 
After the Ombre discards (if he does not play sans prendre) the 
two others in turn do likewise, and, if any cards are left in the 
stock, the last discarder may look at them (as at piquet) and the 
others after him. But if he does not look at them the others 
lose the privilege of doing so. 

The manner of play is like whist, except that it is towards 
the right. The second and third players combine to defeat 
Ombre. If in the sequel Ombre makes more tricks than either 
of his opponents he wins. If one of his opponents makes more 
than Ombre the latter loses (called codillc). If Ombre and one 
or both of his opponents make the same number of tricks the 
game is drawn. When Ombre makes all nine tricks he wins 
a vole. The game is played with counters having certain 
values, the pool being emptied by the winner. If all pass, a 
counter of low value is paid into the pool by each player. If 
Ombre wins he takes the entire pool. If he draws he forfeits 
to the pool a sum equal to that already in it, i.e. the pool is 
doubled. If either of his opponents makes the majority of the 
tricks (codille), Ombre pays him a sum equal to that in the pool, 
which itself remains untouched until the next game. When the 
pool is emptied each player pays in three counters. 

OMDURMAN, a town of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, on the 
west bank of the Nile, immediately north of the junction of the 
White and Blue Niles in 15° 38' N., 32 29' E., 2 m. N. by W. 
of Khartum. Pop. (1909 census) 42,779, of whom 541 were 
Europeans. The town covers a large area, being over 5 m. long 
and 2 broad. It consists for the most part of mud huts, but 
there are some houses built of sun-dried bricks. Save for two or 
three wide streets which traverse it from end to end the town is 
a network of narrow lanes. In the centre facing an open space are 
the ruins of the tomb of the Mahdi and behind is the house in 
which he lived. The Khalifa's house (a two-storeyed building), 
the mosque, the Beit el Amana (arsenal) and other houses famed 
in the history of the town also face the central square. A high 
wall runs behind these buildings parallel with the Nile. 
Omdurman is the headquarters of the native traders in the 
Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, the chief articles of commerce being 
ivory, ostrich feathers and gum arabic from Darfur and Kordofan. 
There is also an important camel and cattle market. Nearly 
every tribe in the Sudan is represented in the population of the 
city. Among the native artificers the metal workers and leather 
dressers are noted. The government maintains elementary 
and technical schools. Mission work is undertaken by various 
Protestant and Roman Catholic societies. 

Omdurman, then an insignificant village, was chosen in 1884 
by the Mahdi Mahommed Ahmed as his capital and so continued 
after the fall of Khartum in January 1885. Its growth was 
rapid, the Khalifa (who succeeded the Mahdi) compelling 
large numbers of disaffected tribesmen to live in the town under 
the eye of his soldiery. Here also were imprisoned the European 
captives of the Mahdists — notably Slatin Pasha and Father 
Ohrwalder. On the 2nd of September 1898 the Anglo-Egyptian 
army under Lord Kitchener totally defeated the forces of the 
Khalifa at Kerreri, 7 m. N. of the town. A marble obelisk marks 
the spot where the 21st Lancers made a charge. Within the 
enclosure of the Khalifa's house is the tomb of Hubert Howard, 
son of the 9th earl of Carlisle, who was killed in the house at the 
capture of the city by a splinter of a shell fired at the Mahdi's 
tomb. (See Sudan: Angle-Egyptian.) 

OMELETTE, sometimes Anglicized as "omelet," a French 
word of which the history is an example of the curious changes 
a word may undergo. The ultimate origin is Lat. lamella, 
diminutive of lamina, plate; this became in French lamcllc, and 
a wrong division of la lamclle gave alamelle, alemelle, or alumelle; 
thence alemette, metathesized to amelette and aumelctc, the form 
in which the word appears in the 15th and 16th centuries. The 



102 



OMEN 



original meaning seems to be a pancake of a thin fiat shape. 
Omelettes are made with eggs, beaten up lightly, with the 
addition of milk, flour, herbs, cheese, mushrooms, &c, according 
to the requirement, and cooked quickly in a buttered pan. 

OMEN (a Latin word, either connected with os, mouth, or 
more probably with auris (Gr. o5s, ear; apparently, meaning 
" a thing heard " or " spoken "), a sign in divination, favourable 
or unfavourable as the case may be (see Divination, Augurs 
and Oracle). The taking of omens may be said to be a part of 
all systems of divination, in which the future is predicted by 
means of indications of one sort or another; and tradition has 
thus gathered round many subjects — events, actions, colours, 
numbers, &c. — which are considered " ominous," an adjective 
which generally connotes ill-fortune. 

One of the oldest and most widespread methods of divining 
the future, both among primitive people and among several of 
the civilizations of antiquity, was the reading of omens in the 
signs noted on the liver of the animal offered as a sacrifice to 
some deity. The custom is vouched for by travellers as still 
observed in Borneo, Burma, Uganda and elsewhere, the animal 
chosen being a pig or a fowl. It constituted the most common 
form of divination in ancient Babylonia, where it can be traced 
back to the 3rd millennium B.C. Among the Etruscans the 
prominence of the rite led to the liver being looked upon as 
the trade-mark of the priest. From the Etruscans it made its 
way to the Romans, though as we shall see it was also modified 
by them. The evidence for the rite among the Greeks is sufficient 
to warrant the conclusion of its introduction at a very early 
period and its persistence to a late day. 

The theory 'upon which the rite everywhere rests is clearly 
the belief, for which there is an abundance of concurrent testi- 
mony, that the liver was at one time regarded as the seat of 
vitality. This belief appears to be of a more primitive character 
than the view which places the seat of life in the heart, though 
we are accustomed to think that the latter was the prevailing 
view in antiquity. The fact, however, appears to be that the 
prominence given to the heart in popular beliefs dates from the 
time when in the course of the development of anatomical 
knowledge the important function of the heart in animal life 
came to be recognized, whereas the supposition that the liver 
is the seat of vitality rests upon other factors than anatomical 
knowledge, and, being independent of such knowledge, also 
antedates it. Among the reasons which led people to identify 
the liver with the very source of life, and bence as the seat of all 
affections and emotions, including what to us are intellectual 
functions, we may name the bloody appearance of that organ. 
Filled with blood, it was natural to regard it as the seat of the 
blood, and as a matter of fact one-sixth of the entire blood of 
man is in the liver, while in the case of some animals the propor- 
tion is even larger. Now blood was everywhere in antiquity 
associated with life, and the biblical passage, Genesis ix. 3, 
which identifies the blood with the soul of the animal and there- 
fore prohibits its use fairly represents the current conception 
both among primitive peoples as well as among those who had 
advanced along the road of culture and civilization. The liver 
being regarded as the seat of the blood, it was a natural and 
short step to identify the liver with the soul as well as with the 
seat of life, and therefore as the centre of all manifestations of 
vitality and activity. In this stage of belief, therefore, the liver 
is the'seatof all emotions and affections, as well as of intellectual 
functions, and it is only when with advancing anatomical know- 
ledge the functions of the heart and then of the brain come to be 
recognized that a differentiation of functions takes place which 
had its outcome in the assignment of intellectual activity to the 
brain or head, of the higher emotions and affections (as love and 
courage) to the heart, while the liver was degraded to the rank 
of being regarded as the seat of the lower emotions and affections, 
such as jealousy, moroseness and the like. 

Hepatoscopy, or divination through the liver, belongs therefore 
to the primitive period when that organ summed up all vitality 
and was regarded as the seat of all the emotions and affections — 
the higher as well as the lower — and also astheseatof intellectual 



functions. The question, however, still remains to be answered 
how people came to the belief or to the assumption that through 
the soul, or the seat of life of the sacrificial animal, the intention 
of the gods could be divined. There are two theories that may 
be put forward. The one is that the animal sacrificed was looked 
upon as a deity, and that, therefore, the liver represented the 
soul of the god; the other theory is that the deity in accepting 
the sacrifice identified himself with the animal, and that, there- 
fore, the fiver as the soul of the animal was the counterpart of 
the soul of the god. It is true that the killing of the god plays 
a prominent part in primitive cults, as has been shown more 
particularly through the valuable researches of J. G. Frazer 
{The Golden Bough). On the other hand, serious difficulties 
arise if we assume that every animal sacrificed represents a 
deity; and even assuming that such a belief underlies the rite 
of animal sacrifice, a modification of the belief must have been 
introduced when such sacrifices became a common rite resorted 
to on every occasion when a deity was to be approached. It is 
manifestly impossible to assume, e.g. that the daily sacrifices 
which form a feature of advanced cults involved the belief of the 
daily slaughter of some deity, and even before this stage was 
reached the primitive belief of the actual identification of the 
god with the animal must have yielded to some such belief as 
that the deity in accepting the sacrifice assimilates the animal 
to his own being, precisely as man assimilates the food that 
enters into his body. The animal is in a certain sense, indeed, 
the food of the god. 

The theory underlying hepatoscopy therefore consists of these 
two factors: the belief (1) that the liver is the seat of life, or, 
to put it more succinctly, what was currently regarded as the 
soul of the animal; and (2) that the liver of the sacrificial 
animal, by virtue of its acceptance on the part of the god, took 
on the same character as the soul of the god to whom it was 
offered. The two souls acted in accord, the soul of the animal 
becoming a reflection, as it were, of the soul of the god. If, 
therefore, one understood the signs noted on a particular liver, 
one entered, as it were, into the mind — as one of the manifesta- 
tions of soul-life — of the deity who had assimilated the being of 
the animal to his own being. To know the mind of the god was 
equivalent to knowing what the god in question proposed to do. 
Hence, when one approached a deity with an inquiry as to the 
outcome of some undertaking, the reading of the signs on the 
liver afforded a direct means of determining the course of future 
events, which was, according to current beliefs, in the control 
of the gods. That there are defects in the logical process as here 
outlined to account for the curious rite constitutes no valid 
objection to the theory advanced, for, in the first place, primitive 
logic in matters of belief is inherently defective and even contra- 
dictory, and, secondly, the strong desire to pierce the mysterious 
future, forming an impelling factor in all religions — even in the 
most advanced of our own day — would tend to obscure the 
weakness of any theory developed to explain a rite which 
represents merely one endeavour among many to divine the 
intention and plans of the gods, upon the knowledge of which 
so much of man's happiness and welfare depended. 

Passing now to typical examples, the beginning must be made 
with Babylonia, which is also the richest source of our knowledge 
of the details of the rite. Hepatoscopy in the Euphrates valley 
can be traced back to the 3rd millennium before our era, which 
may be taken as sufficient evidence for its survival from the 
period of primitive culture, while the supreme importance 
attached to signs read on the livers of sacrificial animals — usually 
a sheep — follows from the care with which omens derived from 
such inspection on occasions of historical significance were pre- 
served as guides to later generations of priests. Thus we have 
a collection of the signs noted during the career of Sargon I. of 
Agade (c. 2800 B.C.), which in some way were handed down till 
the days of the Assyrian king Assur-bani-pal (668-626 B.C.). One 
of the chief names for the priest was barii — literally the " in- 
spector " — which was given to him because of the prominence 
of his function as an inspector of livers for the puipose of divining 
the intention of the gods. It is to the collections formed by these 






OMEN 



103 



bdru-priests as a guidance for themselves and as a basis of 
instruction for those in training for the priesthood that we owe 
our knowledge of the parts of the liver to which particular 
attention was directed, of the signs noted, and of the principles 
guiding the interpretation of the signs. 

The inspection of the liver for purposes of divination led to 
the study of the anatomy of the liver, and there are indeed good 
reasons for believing that hepatoscopy represents the starting- 
point for the study of animal anatomy in general. We find in 
the Babylonian-Assyrian omen-texts special designations for 
the three main lobes of the sheep's liver — the lobus dexter, the 
lobus sinister and the lobus caudatus; the first-named being 
called " the right wing of the liver," the second " the left wing 
of the liver," and the third " the middle of the liver." Whether 
the division of the lobus dexter into two divisions — (1) lobus 
dexter proper and (2) lobus quadralus, as in modern anatomical 
nomenclature — was also assumed in Babylonian hepatoscopy, 
is not certain, but the groove separating the right lobe into two 
sections — the fossa venae umbilicalis — was recognized and dis- 
tinguished by the designation of " river of the liver." The two 
appendixes attached to the upper lobe or lobus pyramidalis, 
and known in modern nomenclature as processus pyramidalis and 
processus papillaris, were described respectively as the " finger " 
of the liver and as the " offshoot." The former of these two 
appendixes plays an especially important part in hepatoscopy, 
and, according to its shape and peculiarities, furnishes a good 
or bad omen. The gall-bladder, appropriately designated as 
" the bitter," was regarded as a part of the liver, and the cystic 
duct (compared, apparently, to a " penis ") to which it is joined, 
as well as the hepatic duct (pictured as an " outlet ") and the 
ductus choleductus (described as a " yoke "), all had their special 
designations. The depression separating the two lower lobes 
from the lobus caudatus, and known as the porta hepalis, was 
appropriately designated as the " crucible " of the liver. Lastly, 
to pass over unnecessary details, the markings of various kinds 
to be observed on the lobes of the livers of freshly-slaughtered 
animals, which are due mainly to the traces left by the sub- 
sidiary hepatic ducts and hepatic veins on the liver surface, 
were described as " holes," " paths," " clubs " and the like. 
The constantly varying character of these markings, no two 
livers being alike in this respect, furnished a particularly large 
field for the fancy of the 6<zn7-priest. 

In the interpretation of these signs the two chief factors were 
association of ideas and association of words. If, for example, 
the processus pyramidalis was abnormally small and the pro- 
cessus papillaris abnormally large, it pointed to a reversion of 
the natural order, to wit, that the servant should control the 
master or that the son would be above the father. A long cystic 
duct would point to a long reign of the king. If the gall-bladder 
was swollen, it pointed to an extension or enlargement of some 
kind. If the porta hepalis was torn it prognosticated a plundering 
of the enemy's land. As among most people, a sign on the right 
side was favourable, but the same sign on the left side unfavour- 
able. If, for example, the porta hepatis was long on the right 
side and short on the left side, it was a good sign for the king's 
army, but if short on the right side and long on the left, it was 
unfavourable; and similarly for a whole series of phenomena 
connected with any one of the various subdivisions of the liver. 
Past experience constituted another important factor in establish- 
ing the interpretation of signs noted. If, for example, on a certain 
occasion when the liver of a sacrificial animal was examined, 
certain events of a favourable character followed, the conclusion 
was drawn that the signs observed were favourable, and hence 
the recurrence of these signs on another occasion suggested a 
favourable answer to the question put to the priests. With 
this in view, omens given in the reigns of prominent rulers were 
preserved with special care as guides to the priests. 

In the course of time the collections of signs and their inter- 
pretation made by the 6an7-priests grew in number until elaborate 
series were produced in which the endeavour was made to exhaust 
so far as possible all the varieties and modifications of the many 
signs, so as to furnish a complete handbook both for purposes 



of instruction and as a basis for the practical work of divination. 
Divination through the liver remained in force among the 
Assyrians and Babylonians down to the end of the Babylonian 
Empire. 

Among the Greeks and Romans likewise it was the liver that 
continued throughout all periods to play the chief role in divina- 
tion through the sacrificial animal. Blecher (De Extispicio 
Capita Tria, Giessen, 1905, pp. 3-22) has recently collected most 
of the references in Greek and Latin authors to animal divination, 
and an examination of these shows conclusively that, although 
the general term used for the inspection of the sacrificial animal 
was iera or iereia {i.e. " victims " or " sacred parts ") in Greek, 
and cxta in Latin, when specific illustrations are introduced, 
the reference is almost invariably to some sign or signs on the 
liver; and we have an interesting statement in Pliny (Hist. Nat. 
xi. § 186), furnishing the date (274 B.C.) when the examination 
of the heart was for the first time introduced by the side of the 
liver as a means of divining the future, while the lungs are not 
mentioned till we reach the days of Cicero (de Divinatione, i. 85). 
We are justified in concluding, therefore, that among the Greeks 
and Romans likewise the examination of the liver was the basis 
of divination in the case of the sacrificial animal. It is well 
known that the Romans borrowed their methods of hepatoscopy 
from the Etruscans, and, apart from the direct evidence for this 
in Latin writings, we have, in the case of the bronze model of 
a liver found near Piacenza in 1877, and of Etruscan origin, the 
unmistakable proof that among the Etruscans the examination 
of the liver was the basis of animal divination. Besides this 
object dating from about the 3rd century B.C., according to the 
latest investigator, G. Korte (" Die Bronzeleber von Piacenza," 
in Mitt. d. K. D. Arckaeol. Instituts, 1905, xx. pp. 348-379), 
there are other Etruscan monuments, e.g. the figure of an 
Etruscan augur holding a liver in his hand as his trade-mark 
(Korte, ib. pi. xiv.), which point in the same direction, and 
indicate that the model of the liver was used as an object lesson 
to illustrate the method of divination through the liver. For 
further details the reader is referred to Thulin's monograph, 
Die Etruskischc Disciplin, II Die Harusplcin (Gothenburg, 
1906). 

As for the Greeks, it is still an open question whether they 
perfected their method of hepatoscopy under Etruscan influence 
or through the Babylonians. In any case, since the Eastern 
origin of the Etruscans is now generally admitted, we may 
temporarily, at least, accept the conclusion that hepatoscopy 
as a method of divination owes its survival in advanced forms 
of culture to the elaborate system devised in the course of 
centuries by the Babylonian priests, and to the influence, direct 
and indirect, exerted by this system in the ancient world. But 
for this system hepatoscopy, the theoretic basis of which as 
above set forth falls within the sphere of ideas that belong to 
primitive culture, would have passed away as higher stages of 
civilization were reached; and as a matter of fact it plays no 
part in the Egyptian culture or in the civilization of India, while 
among the Hebrews only faint traces of the primitive idea of 
the liver as the seat of the soul are to be met with in the Old 
Testament, among which an allusion in the indirect form of a 
protest against the use of the sacrificial animal for purposes of 
divination in the ordinance (Exodus xxix. 13, 22; Leviticus 
iii. 4, 10, 15, &c.) to burn the processus pyramidalis of the liver, 
which played a particularly significant role in hepatoscopy, 
calls for special mention. 

In modern times hepatoscopy still survives among primitive 
peoples in Borneo, Burma, Uganda, &c. 

It but remains to call attention to the fact that the earlier 
view of the liver as the seat of the soul gave way among many 
ancient nations to the theory which, reflecting the growth of 
anatomical knowledge, assigned that function to the heart, 
while, with the further change which led to placing the seat 
of soul-life in the brain ; an attempt was made to partition the 
various functions of manifestations of personality among the 
three organs, brain, heart and liver, the intellectual activity 
being assigned to the first-named; the higher emotions, as love 



104 



OMICHUND— ONAGRACEAE 



and courage, to the second; while the liver, once the master 
of the entire domain of soul-life as understood in antiquity, was 
degraded to serve as the seat of the lower emotions, such as 
jealousy, anger and the like. This is substantially the view set 
forth in the Timaeus of Plato (§ 71 c). The addition of the heart 
to the liver as an organ of the revelation of the divine will, 
reflects the stage which assigned to the heart the position once 
occupied by the liver. By the time the third stage, which placed 
the seat of soul-life in the brain, was reached through the further 
advance of anatomical knowledge, the religious rites of Greece 
and Rome were too deeply incrusted to admit of further radical 
changes, and faith in the gods bad already declined too far to 
bring new elements into the religion. In phrenology, however, 
as popularly carried on as an unofficial cult, we may recognize 
a modified form of divination, co-ordinate with the third stage 
in the development of heliefs regarding the seat of soul and based 
on the assumption that this organ is — as were its predecessors— 
a medium of revelation of otherwise hidden knowledge. 

(M. Ja.) 

OMICHUND (d. 1767), an Indian whose name is indelibly 
associated with the treaty negotiated by Clive before the battle 
of Plassey in 1757. His real name was Amir Chand; and he 
was not a Bengali, as stated by Macaulay, but a Sikh from the 
Punjab. It is impossible now to unravel the intrigues in which 
he may have engaged, but some facts ahout his career can be 
stated. He had long been resident at Calcutta, where he had 
acquired a large fortune by providing the " investment " for 
the Company, and also by acting as intermediary hetween the 
English and the native court at Murshidabad. In a letter of 
Mr Watts of later date be is represented as saying to the nawab 
(Suraj-ud-daula) : " He had lived under the English protection 
these forty years; that he never knew them once to break their 
agreement, to the truth of which he took his oath by touching a 
Brahman's foot; and that if a lie could he proved in England 
upon any one, they were spit upon and never trusted." Several 
houses owned by him in Calcutta are mentioned in connexion 
with the fighting that preceded the tragedy of the Black Hole 
in 1756, and it is on record that he suffered heavy losses at that 
time. He had been arrested by the English on suspicion of 
treachery, but afterwards he was forward in giving help to the 
fugitives and also valuable advice. On the recapture of Calcutta 
he was sent by Clive to accompany Mr Watts as agent at Mur- 
shidabad. It seems to have been through his influence that the 
nawab gave reluctant consent to Clive's attack on Chandernagore. 
Later, when the treaty with Mir Jafar was being negotiated, he 
put in a claim for 5% on all the treasure to be recovered, under 
threat of disclosing the plot. To defeat him, two copies of the 
treaty were drawn up: the one, the true treaty, omitting his 
claim; the other containing it, to be shown to him, which 
Admiral Watson refused to sign, but Clive directed the admiral's 
signature to be appended. When the truth was revealed to 
Omichund after Plassey, Macaulay states (following Orme) that 
he sank gradually into idiocy, languished a few months, and 
then died. As a matter of fact, he survived for ten years, till 
1767; and by his will he bequeathed £2000 to the Foundling 
Hospital (where his name may be seen in the list of benefactors 
as " a black merchant of Calcutta ") and also to the Magdalen 
Hospital in London. (J. S. Co.) 

OMNIBUS (Lat. " for all "), a large closed public conveyance 
with seats for passengers inside and out (see Carriage). The 
name, colloquially shortened to " bus," was, in the form voiture 
omnibus, first used for such conveyances in Paris in 182S, and 
was taken by Shillibeer for the vehicle he ran on the Paddington 
road in 1829. The word is also applied to a box at the opera 
which is shared by several subscribers, to a bill or act of parlia- 
ment dealing with a variety of subjects, and in electrical engineer- 
ing to the bar to which the terminals of the generators are 
attached and from which the current is taken off by the wires 
supplying the various consumers. 

OMRI, in the Bible, the first great king of Israel after the 
separation of the two kingdoms of Israel and Judah, who 
flourished in the early part of the 9th century B.C. The 



dynasty of Jeroboam had been exterminated by Baasha (see 
Asa) at a revolt when the army was besieging the Philistines at 
Gibbethon, an unidentified Danite site. A quarter of a century 
later, Baasha's son Elah, after a reign of two years, was slain by 
Zimri, captain of the chariots, in a drinking bout, and again the 
royal family were put to the sword. Meanwhile, the general 
Omri, who was at Gibbethon, was promptly elected king by the 
army, and Zimri himself in a short while ' met his death in the 
royal city of Tirzah. However, fresh disturbance was caused by 
Tibni ben Ginath (perhaps of Naphtali), and Israel was divided 
into rival factions. Ultimately Tibni and his brother Joram 
(1 Kings xvi. 22, LXX.) were overcome, and Omri remained in 
sole possession of the throne. The compiler of the biblical 
narratives takes little interest in Omri's work (1 Kings xvi. 
15-28), and records briefly his purchase of Samaria, which became 
the capital of his dynasty (see Samaria). The inscription of 
Mesha throws welcome light upon his conquest of Moab (?.».); 
the position of Israel during the reign of Omri's son Ahab (q.v.) 
bears testimony to the success of the father; and the fact that 
the land continued to be known to the Assyrians down to the time 
of Sargon as " house of Omri " indicates the reputation which 
this little-known king enjoyed. (S. A. C) 

OMSK, a town of Russia, capital of the province of Akmolinsk, 
capital of western Siberia from 1839 to 1882, and now capital 
of the general-governorship of the Steppes. Pop. (1881) 31,000, 
(1900) 53,050. It is the seat of administration of the Siberian 
Cossacks, and the see of the bishop of Omsk. Situated on the 
right bank of the Irtysh, at its confluence with the Om, at an 
altitude of 285 ft., and on the Siberian railway, 1862 m. via 
Chelyabinsk from Moscow, and 586 m. W.S.W. of Tomsk, it is 
the meeting-place of the highways to middle Russia, Orenburg 
and Turkestan. Steamers ply down the Irtysh and the Ob, 
and up the former to the Altai towns and Lake Zaisan. The 
climate is dry and relatively temperate, but marked hy violent 
snow-storms and sand-storms. The average temperatures are, 
for the year, 31 F.; for January, 5 ; for July, 68°; the annual 
rainfall is 12-4 in. The town is poorly built. Apart from the 
railway workshops, its industries are unimportant (steam saw- 
mill, tanneries) ; but the trade, especially since the construction 
of the railway, is growing. There are two yearly fairs. Omsk 
has a society for education, which organizes schools, kinder- 
gartens, libraries and lectures for the people. There are a corps 
of cadets, medical, dramatic and musical societies, and the 
west Siberian section of the Russian Geographical Society, with 
a museum. 

The " fort " of Omsk was erected in 1716 to protect the block- 
houses on the Russian frontier, along the Ishim and the Irtysh. 
In consequence of the frequent incursions of the Kirghiz about 
the end of the 18th century, stronger earthworks were erected 
on the right bank of the Om; but these have now almost entirely 
disappeared. 

ONAGRACEAE, in botany, an order of dicotyledons belonging 
to the series Myrtiflorae, to which belongs also the myrtle 
order, Myrtaceae. It contains about 36 genera and 300 species, 
and occurs chiefly in the temperate zone of the New World, 
especially on the Pacific side. It is represented in Britain by 
several species of Epilobium (willow-herb), Circaea (enchanter's 
nightshade), and Ludwigia, a small perennial herb very rare in 
boggy pools in Sussex and Hampshire. The plants are generally 
herbaceous, sometimes annual, as species of Epilobium, Clarkia, 
Godetia, or biennial, as Oenothera biennis — evening primrose — 
or sometimes become shrubby or arborescent, as Fuchsia {q.v.). 
The simple leaves are generally entire or inconspicuously toothed, 
and are alternate, opposite or whorled in arrangement; they are 
generally exstipulate, but small caducous stipules occur in 
Fuchsia, Circaea and other genera. The flowers are often 
solitary in the leaf-axils, as in many fuchsias, Clarkia, &c, or 
associated, as in Epilobium and Oenothera, in large showy 
terminal spikes or racemes; in Circaea the small white or red 

1 He is said to have reigned seven days, but the LXX. (B) in 
1 Kings xvi. 15 read seven years. Further confusion is caused by 
the fact that the LXX. reads Zimri throughout for Omri. 






ONATAS— ONEGA 



J °5 



flowers are borne in terminal and lateral racemer.' The regular 
flowers have the parts in fours, the typical arrangement as 
illustrated by Epilobium, Oenothera and Fuchsia being as 

follows: 4 sepals, 4 
petals, two alternating 
whorls of 4 stamens, and 
4 inferior carpels. The 
floral receptacle is pro- 
duced above the ovary 
into the so-called calyx- 
tube, which is often 
petaloid, as in Fuchsia, 
and is sharply distin- 
guished from the ovary, 
from which it separates 
after flowering. 

In Clarkia the inner 
whorl of stamens is often 
barren, and in an allied 
genus, Eucharidium, it 
is absent. In Circaea 
the flower has its parts 





Fig. 1. — Fuchsia coceinea, | nat. size. Fig. 2. — Floral diagram 
1, Flower cut open after removal of of Circaea. 

sepals; 2, fruit; 3, floral diagram. 

in twos. Both sepals and petals are free; the former have 
a broad insertion, are valvate in bud, and reflexed in the 
flower; in Fuchsia they are petaloid. The petals have a narrow 
attachment, and are generally convolute in bud; they are entire 
(Fuchsia) or bilobed (Epilobium); in some species of Fuchsia 
they are small and scale-like, or absent (F. apelala). The 
stamens are free, and those of the inner whorl are generally shorter 
than" those of the outer whorl. The flowers olLopczia (Central 
America) have only one fertile stamen. The large spherical 

pollen grains are connected by 
viscid threads. The typically 
quadrilocular ovary contains 
numerous ovules on axile 
placentas; the i-to-2-celled 
ovary of Circaea has a single 
ovule in each loeulus. The 
long slender style has a capitate 
(Fuchsia), 4-rayed (Oenothera, 
Epilobium) or 4-notched (Cir- 
caea) stigma. The flowers, 
which have generally an at- 
tractive corolla and honey 
secreted by a swollen disk "at 
the base of the style or on the 
lower part of the " calyx-tube," 
are adapted for pollination by 
insects, chiefly bees and lepi- 
dorjtera; sometimes by night- 
flying insects when the flowers 
are pale and open towards 




From Vines' Students* Text-Book of Botany, 
by permission of Swan Sonnenschein & Co. 



Fig. 3. 

A Young flower of Epilobium evening, asm evening primrose. 

hirsutum. c, petals; /, inferior ™_ , °.' . ,. or , 

ovary; k, sepals; 5, pedicel. The frult ls generally a capsule 

B, Fruit of Epilobium after splitting into 4 valves and 

dehiscence, w, outer wall; m, leaving a central column on 

columella formed by the septa; which the seeds are borne as 

sa, seed with, tufts 01 hairs. . „,., ,. , ~ Ml 

in Epilobium and Oenothera — 

in the former the seeds are scattered by aid of a long tuft of 

silky hairs on the broader end. In Fuchsia the fruit is a berry, 

which is sometimes edible, and in Circaea a nut bearing 

recurved bristles. The seeds are exalbuminous. Several of 



the genera are well known as garden plants, e.g. Fuchsia, 
Oenothera, Clarkia and Godctia. Evening primrose (Oenothera 
biennis), a native of North America, occurs apparently wild as 
a garden escape in Britain. Jussieua is a tropical genus 
of water- and marsh-herbs with well-developed aerating 
tissue. 

ONATAS, a Greek sculptor of the time of the Persian wars, a 
member ci the flourishing school of Aegina. Many of his works 
are mentioned by Pausanias; they included a Hermes carrying 
the ram, and a strange image of the Black Demeter made for the 
people of Phigalia; also some elaborate groups in bronze set up 
at Olympia and Delphi. For Hiero I., king of Syracuse, Onatas 
executed a votive chariot in bronze dedicated at Olympia. If we 
compare the descriptions of the works of Onatas given us by 
Pausanias with the well-known pediments of Aegina at Munich 
we shall find so close an agreement that we may safely take 
the pedimental figures as an index of the style of Onatas. They 
are manly, vigorous, athletic, showing great knowledge of the 
human form, but somewhat stiff and automaton-like. 

ONEGA, the largest lake in Europe next to Ladoga, having an 
area of 3764 sq. m. It is situated in the government of Olonets 
in European Russia, and, discharging its waters by the Svir into 
Lake Ladoga, belongs to the system of the Neva. The lake basin 
extends north-west and south-east, the direction characteristic 
of the lakes of Finland and the line of glacier-scoring observed in 
that region. Between the northern and southern divisions of 
the lake there is a considerable difference: while the latter has a 
comparatively regular outline, and contains hardly any islands, 
the former splits up into a number of inlets, the largest being 
Povyenets Bay, and is crowded with islands (e.g. Klimetsk) and 
submerged rocks. It is thus the northern division which brings 
the coast-line up to 870 m. and causes the navigation of the 
lake to be so dangerous. The north-western shore between Petro- 
zavodsk and the mouth of the river Lumbosha consists of dark 
clay slates, generally arranged in horizontal strata and broken 
by protruding, parallel ridges of diorite, which extend far into the 
lake. The eastern shore, as far as the mouth of the Andoma, is 
for the most part alluvial, with outcroppings of red granite and 
in one place (the mouth of the Pyalma) diorite and dolomite. 
To the south-east are sedimentary Devonian rocks, andthe general 
level of the coast is broken by Mount Andoma and Cape Petro- 
pavlovskiy (160 ft. above the lake); to the south-west a quartz 
sandstone (used as a building and monumental stone in St 
Petersburg) forms a fairly bold rim. Lake Onega lies 125 ft. 
above the sea. The greatest depths, 318 to 408 ft., occur at the 
entrance to the double bay of Lizhemsk and Unitsk. On the 
continuation of this line the depth exceeds 240 ft. in several 
places. In the middle of the lake the depth is 120 to 282 ft., and 
less than 120 ft. in the south. The lake is 145 m. long, with an 
average breadth of 50 m. The most important affluents, the 
Vodka, the Andoma and the Vytegra, come from the east. The 
Kumsa, a northern tributary, is sometimes represented as if it 
connected the lake with Lake Seg, but at the present time the 
latter drains to the White Sea. The Onega canal (45 m. long) 
was constructed ^1818-1851 alongthe southern shore in order 
to connect the Svir (and hence Lake Ladoga and the Baltic) 
with the Vytegra, which connects with the Volga. Lake 
Onega remains free from ice for 209 days in the year 
(middle of May to second week of December). The water is 
at its lowest level in the beginning of March; by June it has 
risen 2 ft. A considerable population is scattered along the 
shores of the lake, mainly occupied in the timber trade, fisheries 
and mining industries. Salmon, palya (a kind of trout), burbot, 
pike, perchpike and perch are among the fish caught in the lake. 
Steamboats were int roduced in 1 83 2. 

The river Onega, which, after a course of 250 m., reaches the 
Gulf of Onega, an inlet of the White Sea, has no connexion 
with Lake Onega. At the mouth of this river (on the right bank) 
stands the town and port of Onega (pop. 2694 in 1897), which 
dates from settlements made by the people of Novgorod in the 
15th century, and known in history as Ustenskaya or Ustyans- 
kaya. It has a cathedral, erected in 1796. (P. A. K.; J. T.Be.) 

xx. 4 a 



io6 



ONEIDA— ONEIDA COMMUNITY 



ONEIDA, a city of Madison county, New York, U.S.A., 
on Oneida Creek, about 6 m. S.E. of Oneida Lake, about 26 m. 
W. of Utica, and about 26 m. E.N.E. of Syracuse. Pop. (1890) 
6083; (1900) 6364, of whom 784 were foreign-born; (1910, 
U.S. census) 8317. It is served by the New York Central & 
Hudson River, the New York, Ontario & Western, the West 
Shore and the Oneida (electric) railways (the last connecting 
with Utica and Syracuse), and by the Erie Canal. The city 
lies about 440 ft. above the sea on a level site. Across Oneida 
Creek, to the south-east, in Oneida county, is the village of 
Oneida Castle (pop. in 1905, 357), situated in the township of 
Vernon (pop. in 1905, 3072), and the former gathering place of 
the Oneida Indians, some of whom still live in the township of 
Vernon and in the city of Oneida. In the south-eastern part of 
the city is the headquarters of the Oneida Community (g.v.), 
which controls important industries here, at Niagara Falls, and 
elsewhere. Immediately west of Oneida is the village of Wamps- 
ville (incorporated in 1908), the county-seat of Madison county. 
Among the manufactures of Oneida are wagons, cigars, furniture, 
caskets, silver-plated ware, engines and machinery, steel and 
wooden pulleys and chucks, steel grave vaults, hosiery, and milk 
bottle caps. In the vicinity the Oneida Community manu- 
factures chains and animal traps. The site of Oneida was 
purchased in 1829-1830 by Sands Higinbotham, in honour of 
whom one of the municipal parks (the other is Allen Park) 
is named. Oneida was incorporated as a village in 1848 and 
chartered as a city in 1901. 

ONEIDA (a corruption of their proper name Oneyotka-ono, 
" people of the stone," in allusion to the Oneida stone, a granite 
boulder near their former village, which was held sacred by 
them), a tribe of North American Indians of Iroquoian stock, 
forming one of the Six Nations. They lived around Oneida 
Lake in New York state, in the region southward to the 
Susquehanna. They were not loyal to the League's policy of 
friendliness to the English, but inclined towards the French, 
and were practically the only Iroquois who fought for the 
Americans in the War of Independence. As a consequence 
they were attacked by others of the Iroquois under Joseph 
Brant and took refuge within the American settlements till the 
war ended, when the majority returned to their former home, 
while some migrated to the Thames river district, Ontario. 
Early in the 19th century they sold their lands, and most of 
them settled on a reservation at Green Bay, Wisconsin, some 
few remaining in New York state. The tribe now numbers 
more than 3000, of whom about two-thirds are in Wisconsin, a 
few hundreds in New York state, and about 800 in Ontario. 
They are civilized and prosperous. 

ONEIDA COMMUNITY (or Bible Communists), an American 
communistic society at Oneida, Madison county, New York, which 
has attracted wide interest on account of its pecuniary success 
and its peculiar religious and social principles (see Communism). 

Its founder, John Humphrey Noyes (1811-1886), was born 
in Brattleboro, Vermont, on the 3rd of September 1811. He 
was of good parentage; his father, John Noyes (1763-1841), 
was a graduate of and for a time a tutor in Dartmouth College, 
and was a representative in Congress in i8rs-iSi7; and his 
mother, Polly Hayes, was an aunt of Rutherford B. Hayes, 
president of the United States. The son graduated at Dartmouth 
in 1830, and studied law for a year, but having been converted 
in a protracted revival in 1831 he turned to the ministry, studied 
theology for one year at Andover (where he was a member of 
" The Brethren," a secret society of students preparing for 
foreign missionary work), and then a year and a half at Yale, 
and in 1 833 was licensed to preach by the New Haven Association ; 
but his open preaching of his new religious doctrines, and 
especially that of present salvation from sin, resulted in the 
revocation of his license in 1834, and his thereafter being called 
a Perfectionist. He continued to promulgate his ideas of a 
higher Christian life, and soon had disciples in many places, one of 
whom, Harriet A. Holton, a woman of means, he married in 
1838. In 1836 he returned to his father's home in Putney, 
Vt., and founded a Bible School; in 1843 he entered into 



a " contract of Partnership " with his Putney followers; and in 
March 1845 the Putney Corporation or Association of Perfec- 
tionists was formed. 

Although the Putney Corporation or Association was never 
a community in the sense of common-property ownership, yet 
it was practically a communal organization, and embodied the 
radical religious and social principles that subsequently gave 
such fame to the Oneida Community, of which it may justly 
be regarded as the beginning and precursor. These principles 
naturally excited the opposition of the churches in the small 
Vermont village where the Perfectionists resided, and indignation 
meetings against them were held; and although they resulted 
in no personal violence Mr Noyes and his followers considered 
it prudent to remove to a place where they were sure of more 
liberal treatment. They accordingly withdrew from Putney 
in 1847, and accepting the invitation of Jonathan Burt and 
others, settled near Oneida, Madison county, New York. 

Here the community at first devoted itself to agriculture and 
fruit raising, but had little financial success until it began the 
manufacture of a steel trap, invented by one of its members, 
Sewall Newhouse; the manufacture of steel chains for use with 
the traps followed; the canning of vegetables and fruits was 
begun about 1854, and the manufacture of sewing and embroidery 
silk in 1866. Having started with a very small capital (the 
inventoried valuation of its property in 1857 was only $67,000), 
the community gradually grew in numbers and prospered as a 
business concern. Its relations with the surrounding population, 
after the first few years, became very friendly. The members 
won the reputation of being good, industrious citizens, whose word 
was always " as good as their bond "; against whom no charge 
of intemperance, profanity or crime was ever brought. But the 
communists claimed that among true Christians " mine and 
thine " in property matters should cease to exist, as among the 
early pentecostal helievers; and, moreover, that the same 
unselfish spirit should pervade and control all human relations. 
And notwithstanding these very radical principles, which were 
freely propounded and discussed in their weekly paper, the 
communists were not seriously disturbed for a quarter of a 
century. But from 1S73 to 1879 active measures favouring 
legislative action against the community, specially instigated 
by Prof. John W. Mears (1825-1881), were taken by several 
ecclesiastical bodies of Central New York. These measures 
culminated in a conference held at Syracuse University on the 
14th of February 1879, when denunciatory resolutions against 
the community were passed and legal measures advised. 

Mr Noyes, the founder and leader of the community, had 
repeatedly said to his followers that the time might come when 
it would be necessary, in deference to public opinion, to recede 
from the practical assertion of their social principles; and on 
the 20th of August of this year (1879) ne sa 'd definitely to them 
that in his judgment that time had come, and he thereupon 
proposed that the community " give up the practice of Complex 
Marriage, not as renouncing belief in the principles and pro- 
spective finality of that institution, but in deference to public 
sentiment." This proposition was considered and accepted in 
full assembly of the community on the 26th of the same month. 

This great change was followed by other changes of vital 
importance, finally resulting in the transformation of the Oneida 
Community into the incorporated Oneida Community, Limited, 
a co-operative joint-stock company, in which each person's 
interest was represented by the shares of stock standing in his 
name on the books of the company. 

In the reorganization the adult members fared alike in the 
matter of remuneration for past services — those who by reason 
of ill-health had been unable to contribute to the common fund 
receiving the same as those who by reason of strength and ability 
had contributed most thereto; besides, the old and infirm had 
the option of accepting a life-guaranty in lieu of work; and 
hence there were no cases of suffering and want at the time 
the transformation from a common-property interest to an 
individual stock interest was made; and in the new company 
all were guaranteed remunerative labour. 



O'NEILL (FAMILY)* 



107 



This occurred on the 1st of January 1881, at which time the 
business and property of the community were transferred to 
the incorporated stock company, and stock issued therefor to 
the amount of $600,000. In the subsequent twenty-eight years 
this capital stock was doubled, and dividends averaging more 
than 6% per annum were paid. Aside from the home buildings 
and the large acreage devoted to agriculture and fruit raising, 
the present capital of the company is invested, first, in its hard- 
ware department at Kenwood, N.Y., manufacturing steel game- 
traps, and weldless chains of every description; second, the silk 
department at Kenwood, N.Y., manufacturing sewing silk, 
machine twist and embroidery silks; third, the fruit department 
at Kenwood, N.Y., whose reputation for putting up pure, whole- 
some fruits and vegetables is probably the highest in the country; 
fourth, the tableware department, at Niagara Falls, N.Y., which 
manufactures the now celebrated Community Silver; fifth, the 
Canadian department, with factory at Niagara Falls, Ontario, 
Canada, where the hardware lines are manufactured for Canadian 
trade. The annual sales of all departments aggregate over 
$2,000,000. The officers of the company consist of a president, 
secretary, treasurer and assistant treasurer, and there were in 
1909 eleven directors. Each of the five leading departments is 
managed by a superintendent, and all are under the supervision 
of the general manager. Nearly all the superintendents and the 
general manager were in 1909 young men who were born in the 
community, and have devoted their life-work to the interests of 
the company. Selling offices are maintained in New York City. 
Chicago, St Louis, Cleveland, O., Richmond, Va., Atlanta, Ga., 
and San Francisco. 

In addition to the members of the society the company employs 
between 1500 and 2000 workmen. The policy has been to avoid 
trade-unions, but to pay higher wages and give better conditions 
than other employers in similar lines, and by so doing to obtain 
a better selection of workmen. The conditions of work as well 
as of living have been studied and developed with the idea of 
making both healthful and attractive. With this in view the 
company has laid out small villages, in many ways making them 
attractive and sanitary, and has encouraged the building of 
houses by its employes. Much has been accomplished in this 
direction by providing desirable building-sites at moderate 
expense, and paying a bonus of from $100 to $200 in cash to 
every employe who builds his own home. The company has also 
taken an interest in the schools in the vicinity of its factories, 
with the idea of offering to the children of its employes facilities 
for a good education. 

The communism of John H. Noyes was based on his inter- 
pretation of the New Testament. In his pamphlet, Bible 
Communism (1848), he affirmed that the second coming of Christ 
occurred at the close of the apostolic age, immediately after 
the destruction of Jerusalem, and he argued from many New 
Testament passages, especially 1 John r, 7, that after the second 
coming and the beginning of Christ's reign upon the earth, the 
true standard of Christian character was sinlessness, which was 
possible through vital union with Christ, that all selfishness 
was to be done away with, both in property in things and in 
persons, or, in other words, that communism was to be finally 
established in all the relations of life. But, while affirming that 
the same spirit which on the day of Pentecost abolished ex- 
elusiveness in regard to money tends to obliterate all other 
property distinctions, he had no affiliation with those commonly 
termed Free Lovers, because their principles and practices seemed 
to him to tend toward anarchy. " Our Communities," he said, 
" are families as distinctly bounded and separated from promiscu- 
ous soeiety as ordinary households. The tie that binds us 
together is as permanent and sacred, to say the least, as that of 
common marriage, for it is our religion. We receive no new 
members (except by deception and mistake) who do not give 
heart and hand to the family interest for life and for ever. Com- 
munity of property extends just as far as freedom of love. 
Every man's care and every dollar of the common property are 
pledged for the maintenance and protection of the women and 
the education of the children of the Community." 



The community was much interested in the question of raee im- 
provement by scientific means, and maintained with much force 
of argument that at least as mueh scientific attention should be 
given to the physical improvement of human beings as is given 
to the improvement of domestic animals; and they referred 
to the results of their own incomplete stirpicultural experiments 
as indicative of what may be expected in the far future, when 
the conditions of human reproduction are no longer controlled 
by chance, social position, wealth, impulse or lust. 

The community claimed to have solved among themselves 
the labour question, all kinds of service heing regarded as equally 
honourable, and every person being respected according to his 
real character. 

The members had some peculiarities of dress, mostly eonfined, 
however, to the women, whose costumes included a short dress 
and pantalets, which were appreciated for their convenience, if 
not for their beauty. The women also adopted the practice of 
wearing short hair, which it was claimed saved time and vanity. 
Tobacco, intoxicants, profanity, obscenity found no place in 
the community. The community diet consisted largely of 
vegetables and fruits; meat, tea and coffee being served only 
occasionally. 

For securing good order and the improvement of the members, 
the community placed mueh reliance upon a very peculiar system 
of plain speaking they termed mutual criticism, which originated 
in a secret soeiety of missionary brethren with whieh Mr Noyes 
was connected while pursuing his theological studies at Andover 
Seminary, and whose members submitted themselves in turn to 
the sineerest comment of one another as a means of personal 
improvement. Under Mr Noyes's supervision it became in the 
Oneida Community a principal means of discipline and govern- 
ment. There was a standing committee of criticism, selected by 
the community, and changed from time to time, thus giving all 
an opportunity to serve both as critics and subjects, and justi- 
fying the term " mutual " whieh they gave to the system. 
The subject was free to have others besides the committee present, 
or to have crities only of his own choice, or to invite an expression 
from the whole community. 

Noyes edited The Perfectionist (New Haven, Connecticut, 1834, 
and Putney, Vermont, 1843-1846); The Witness (Ithaca, New 
York, and Putney, 1838-1843); The Spiritual Magazine (Putney, 
1846-1847; Oneida, 1848-1850); The Free Church Ciicular (Oneida, 
1850-1851); and virtually, though not always nominally, The 
Circular and The Oneida Circular (Brooklyn, 1851-1854; Oneida, 
N.Y., and Wallingford, Conn., 1S54-1876); and The American 
Socialist (Oneida, 1876-1880). He was the author of The Way of 
Holiness (Putney, 1838); The Berean (Putney, 1847), containing 
an exposition of his doctrines of Salvation from Sin; the Second 
Coming of Christ; the Origin of Evil; the Atonement; the Second 
Birth; the Millennium; Our Relations to the Primitive Church, 
&e. &e. ; History of American Socialism (Philadelphia, 1870); 
Home Talks (Oneida, 1876); and numerous pamphlets. 

See a series of articles in the Manufacturer and Builder (New York, 
1891-1894), by " C. R. Edson " {i.e. C. E. Robinson); The Oneida 
Community, by Allan Estlake (a member of the community) (1900); 
Morris Hillquit's History of Socialism in the United States (New York, 
1903), and especially William A. Hinds' American Communities and 
Co-operative Colonies (3rd ed., Chicago, 1908). (W. A. H.) 

O'NEILL, the name of an Irish family tracing descent from 
Niall, king of Ireland early in the 5th century, and known in 
Irish history and legend as Niall of the Nine Hostages. He is said 
to have made war not only against lesser rulers in Ireland, but 
also in Britain and Gaul, stories of his exploits being related in 
the Book of Leinster and the Book of Ballymote, both of whieh, 
however, are many centuries later than the time of Niall. This 
king had fourteen sons, one of whom was Eoghan (Owen), from 
whom the O'Neills of the later history were descended. The 
descendants of Niall spread over Ireland and became divided 
into two main branches, the northern and the southern Hy 
Neill, to one or other of whieh nearly all the high-kings (ard-ri) 
of Ireland from the 5th to the 12th century belonged; the 
descendants of Eoghan being the chief of the northern Hy Neill. 1 
Eoghan was grandfather of Murkertagh (Muircheartach) (d. 533), 

1 A list of these kings will be found in P. W. Joyce's A Social 
History of Ancient Ireland (London, 1903), vol. i. pp. 76, 71. 



io8 



O'NEILL (FAMILY) 



said to have been the first Christian king of Ireland, whose mother, 
Eire or Erca, became by a subsequent marriage the grandmother of 
St Columha. Of this monarch, known as Murkertagh MacNeill 
(Niall), and sometimes by reference to his mother as Murkertagh 
Mac Erca, the story is told, illustrating an ancient Celtic custom, 
that in making a league with a tribe in Meath he emphasized 
the inviolability of the treaty by having it written with the blood 
of both clans mixed in one vessel. Murkertagh was chief of the 
great north Irish clan, the Cinel Eoghain, 1 and after becoming 
king of Ireland about the year 517, he wrested from a neighbour- 
ing clan a tract of country in the modern County Derry, which 
remained till the 17th century in the possession of the Cinel 
Eoghain. The inauguration stone of the Irish kings, the Lia 
Fail, or Stone of Destiny, fabled to have heen the pillow 
of the patriarch Jacob on the occasion of his dream of the 
heavenly ladder, was said to have been presented by Murkertagh 
to the king of Dalriada,by whom it was conveyed toDunstaffnage 
Castle in Scotland (see Scone). A lineal descendent of Murker- 
tagh was Niall Frassach (i.e. of the showers), who became king 
of Ireland in 763; his surname, of which several fanciful ex- 
planations have been suggested, probably commemorating 
merely weather of exceptional severity at his birth. His grand- 
son, Niall (791-845), drove back the Vikings who in his time 
began to infest the coast of Donegal. Niall's son, Aedh (Hugh) 
Finnlaith, was father of Niall Glundubh (i.e. Niall of the black 
knee), one of the most famous of the early Irish kings, from 
whom the family surname of the O'Neills was derived. His 
brother Domhnall (Donnell) was king of Ailech, a district in 
Donegal and Derry; the royal palace, the ruined masonry of 
which is still to he seen, being on the summit of a hill 800 ft. 
high overlooking loughs Foyle and Swilly. On the death of 
Domhnall in 911 Niall Glundubh became king of Ailech, and he 
then attacked and defeated the king of Dalriada at Glarryford, 
in County Antrim, and the king of Ulidia near Ballymena. 
Having thus extended his dominion he became king of Ireland 
in 915. To him is attributed the revival of the ancient meeting 
of Irish clans known as the Fair of Telltown (see Ireland: Early 
History). He fought many battles against the Norsemen, in 
one of which he was killed in 919 at Kilmashoge, where his place 
of burial is still to be seen. 

His son Murkertagh, who gained a great victory over the Norse 
in 926, is celebrated for his triumphant march round Ireland, the 
M oirthimchell Eiream, in which, starting from Portglenone on 
the Bann, he completed a circuit of the island at the head of 
his armed clan, returning with many captive kings and chieftains. 
From the dress of his followers in this expedition he was called 
'' Murkertagh of the Leather Cloaks." The exploit was cele- 
brated by Cormacan, the king's bard, in a poem that has been 
printed by the Irish Archaeological Society; and a number of 
Murkertagh's other deeds are related in the Book of Leinster. 
He was killed in battle against the Norse in 943, and was suc- 
ceeded as king of Ailech by his son, Donnell Ua Niall (i.e. O'Neill, 
grandson of Neill, or Niall, the name O'Neill becoming about 
this time an hereditary family surname 2 ), whose grandson, 
Flaherty, became renowned for piety by going on a pilgrimage 
to Rome in 1030. 

Aedh (Hugh) O'Neill, chief of the Cinel Eoghain, or lord of 
Tir-Eoghain (Tir-Owen, Tyrone) at the end of the 12th century, 
was the first of the family to be brought prominently into 
conflict with the Anglo-Norman monarchy, whose pretensions 
he took the lead in disputing in Ulster. It was probably his son 
or nephew (for the relationship is uncertain, the genealogies of 
the O'Neills being rendered obscure by the contemporaneous 
occurrence of the same name in different branches of the family) 
Hugh O'Neill, lord of Tyrone, who was styled " Head of the 
liberality and valour of the Irish." Hugh's son, Brian, by gaining 

1 The Cinel, or Kinel, was a group of related clans occupying an 
extensive district. See Joyce, op. cit. i. 166. 

2 The adoption of hereditary names became general in Ireland, 
in obedience, it is said, to an ordinance of Brian Boru, about the end 
of the 10th century. For the method of their formation see Joyce, 
op. cit. ii. 19. 



the support of the earl of Ulster, was inaugurated 3 prince, or 
lord, of Tyrone in 1291; and his son Henry became lord of the 
Clann Aodha Buidhe (Clanaboy or Clandeboye), early in the 
14th century. Henry's son Murkertagh the Strongminded, and 
his great-grandson Hugh, described as " the most renowned, 
hospitable and valorous of the princes of Ireland in his time," 
greatly consolidated the power of the O'Neills. Niall Og O'Neill, 
one of the four kings of Ireland, accepted knighthood from 
Richard II. of England; and his son Eoghan formally acknow- 
ledged the supremacy of the English crown, though he after- 
wards ravaged the Pale, and was inaugurated " the O'Neill " 
(i.e. chief of the clan) on the death of his kinsman Domhnall Boy 
O'Neill; a dignity from which he was deposed in 1455 by his son 
Henry, who in 1463 was acknowledged as chief of the Irish kings 
by Henry VII. of England. Contemporary with him was Neill 
Mor O'Neill (see below), lord of Clanaboy, from whose son Brian 
was descended the branch of the O'Neills who, settling in Portugal 
in the 18th century, became prominent among the Portuguese 
nobility, and who at the present day are the representatives in 
the male line of the ancient Irish kings of the house of O'Neill. 

Conn O'Neill (c. 14S0-1559), 1st earl of Tyrone, surnamed 
Bacach (the Lame), grandson of Henry O'Neill mentioned above, 
was the first of the O'Neills whom the attempts of the English 
in the 16th century to subjugate Ireland brought to the front 
as leaders of the native Irish. Conn, who was related through 
his mother with the earl of Kildare (Fitzgerald), became chief 
of the Tyrone branch of the O'Neills (Cinel Eoghain) about 1520. 
When Kildare became viceroy in 1524, O'Neill consented to act 
as his swordbearer in ceremonies of state; but his allegiance 
was not to be reckoned upon, and while ready enough to give 
verbal assurances of loyalty, he could not be persuaded to give 
hostages as security for his conduct; but Tyrone having been 
invaded in 1541 by Sir Anthony St Leger, the lord deputy, Conn 
delivered up his son as a hostage, attended a parliament held at 
Trim, and, crossing to England, made his submission at Green- 
wich to Henry VIII., who created him earl of Tyrone for life, 
and made him a present of money and a valuable gold chain. 
He was also made a privy councillor in Ireland, and received a 
grant of lands within the Pale. This event created a deep im- 
pression in Ireland, where O'Neill's submission to the English 
king, and his acceptance of an English title, were resented by 
his clansmen and dependents. The rest of the earl's life was 
mainly occupied by endeavours to maintain his influence, and 
by an undying feud with his son Shane (John), arising out of his 
transaction with Henry VIII. For not only did the nomination 
of O'Neill's reputed son Matthew as his heir with the title of 
baron of Dungannon by the English king conflict with the Irish 
custom of tanistry (q.v.) which regulated the chieftainship of the 
Irish clans, but Matthew, if indeed he was O'Neill's son at all, 
was illegitimate; while Shane, Conn's eldest legitimate son, 
was not the man to submit tamely to any invasion of his rights. 
The fierce family feud only terminated when Matthew was 
murdered by agents of Shane in 1558; Conn dying about a year 
later. Conn was twice married, Shane being the son of his first 
wife, a daughter of Hugh Boy O'Neill of Clanaboy. An ille- 
gitimate daughter of Conn married the celebrated Sorley Boy 
MacDonnell (q.v.). 

Shane O'Neill (c. 1530-1567) was a chieftain whose support 
was worth gaining by the English even during his father's life- 
time; but rejecting overtures from the earl of Sussex, the lord 
deputy, Shane refused to help the English against the Scottish 
settlers on the coast of Antrim, allying himself instead with the 
MacDonnells, the most powerful of these immigrants. Neverthe- 
less Queen Elizabeth, on succeeding to the English throne, was 
disposed to come to terms with Shane, who after his father's 
death was de facto chief of the formidable O'Neill clan. She 
accordingly agreed to recognize his claims to the chieftainship, 
thus throwing over Brian O'Neill, son of the murdered Matthew, 

3 The ceremony of " inauguration " among the ancient Irish clans 
was an elaborate and important one. A stone inauguration chair of 
the O'Neills is preserved in the Belfast Museum. See Joyce, op. 
cit. i. 46. 



O'NEILL (FAMILY) 



baron of Dungannon, if Shane would submit to her authority 
and that of her deputy. O'Neill, however, refused to put himself 
in the power of Sussex without a guarantee for his safety; 
and his claims in other respects were so exacting that Elizabeth 
consented to measures being taken to subdue him and to restore 
Brian. An attempt to foment the enmity of the O'Donnells 
against him was frustrated by Shane's capture of Calvagh 
O'Donnell, whom he kept a close prisoner for nearly three years. 
Elizabeth, whose prudence and parsimony were averse to so 
formidable an undertaking as the complete subjugation of the 
powerful Irish chieftain, desired peace with him at almost any 
price; especially when the devastation of his territory by 
Sussex brought him no nearer to submission. Sussex, indignant 
at Shane's request for his sister's hand in marriage, and his 
demand for the withdrawal of the English garrison from Armagh, 
was not supported by the queen, who sent the earl of Kildare to 
arrange terms with O'Neill. The latter, making some trifling 
concessions, consented to present himself before Elizabeth. 
Accompanied by Ormonde and Kildare he reached London on 
the 4th of January 1562. Camden describes the wonder with 
which O'Neill's wild gallowglasses were seen in the English 
capital, with their heads bare, their long hair falling over their 
shoulders and clipped short in front above the eyes, and clothed 
in rough yellow shirts. Elizabeth was less concerned with the 
respective claims of Brian and Shane, the one resting on an 
English patent and the other on the Celtic custom, than with 
the question of policy involved in supporting or rejecting the 
demands of her proud suppliant. Characteristically, she tem- 
porized; but finding that O'Neill was in danger of becoming a 
tool in the hands of Spanish intriguers, she permitted him to 
return to Ireland, recognizing him as " the O'Neill," and chieftain 
of Tyrone; though a reservation was made of the rights of Hugh 
O'Neill, who had meantime succeeded his brother Brian as baron 
of Dungannon, Brian having been murdered in April 1562 by 
his kinsman Turlough Luineach O'Neill. 

There were at this time three powerful contemporary members 
of the O'Neill family in Ireland — Shane, Turlough and Hugh, 
2nd earl of Tyrone. Turlough had been elected tanist (see 
Tanistry) when his cousin Shane was inaugurated the O'Neill, 
and he schemed to supplant him in the higher dignity during 
Shane's absence in London. The feud did not long survive 
Shane's return to Ireland, where he quickly re-established his 
authority, and in spite of Sussex renewed his turbulent tribal 
warfare against the O'Donnells and others. Elizabeth at last 
authorized Sussex to take the field against Shane, but two 
several expeditions failed to accomplish anything except some 
depredation in O'Neill's country. Sussex had tried in 1561 
to procure Shane's assassination, and Shane now laid the whole 
blame for his lawless conduct on the lord deputy's repeated 
alleged attempts on his life. Force having ignominiously failed, 
Elizabeth consented to treat, and hostilities were stopped on 
terms that gave O'Neill practically the whole of his demands. 
O'Neill now turned his hand against the MacDonnells, claiming 
that he was serving the queen of England in harrying the Scots. 
He fought an indecisive battle with Sorley Boy MacDonnell near 
Coleraine in 1564, and the following year marched from Antrim 
through the mountains by Clogh to the neighbourhood of 
Ballycastle, where he routed the MacDonnells and took Sorley 
Boy prisoner. This victory greatly strengthened Shane O'Neill's 
position, and Sir Henry Sidney, who became lord deputy in 
1566, declared to the earl of Leicester that Lucifer himself 
was not more puffed up with pride and ambition than O'Neill. 
Preparations were made in earnest for his subjugation. O'Neill 
ravaged the Pale, failed in an attempt on Dundalk, made a 
truce with the MacDonnells, and sought help from the earl of 
Desmond. The English, on the other hand, invaded Donegal 
and restored O'Donnell. Failing in an attempt to arrange 
terms, and also in obtaining the help which he solicited from 
France, O'Neill was utterly routed by the O'Donnells at Letter- 
kenny; and seeking safety in flight, he threw himself on the 
mercy of his enemies, the MacDonnells. Attended by a small 
body of gallowglasses, and taking his prisoner Sorley Boy with 



IO9 

him, he presented himself among the MacDonnells near Cushen- 
dun, on the Antrim coast. Here, on the 2nd of June 1567, 
whether by premeditated treachery or in a sudden brawl is 
uncertain, he was slain by the MacDonnells, and was buried 
at Glenarm. In his private character Shane O'Neill was a brutal, 
uneducated savage. He divorced his first wife, a daughter of 
James MacDonnell, and treated his second, a sister of Calvagh 
O'Donnell, with gross cruelty in revenge for her brother's 
hostility; Calvagh himself, when Shane's prisoner, he subjected 
to continual torture; and Calvagh's wife, whom he made his 
mistress, and by whom he had several children, endured ill-usage 
at the hands of her drunken captor, who is said to have married 
her in 1565. 

Turlough Luineach O'Neill (c. 1530-1595), earl of Clan- 
connell, was inaugurated chief of Tyrone on Shane's death. 
Making professions of loyalty to the queen of England, he sought 
to strengthen his position by alliance with the O'Donnells, 
MacDonnells and MacQuillans. But his conduct giving rise 
to suspicions, an expedition under the earl of Essex was sent 
against him, which met with such doubtful success that in 1575 
a treaty was arranged by which O'Neill received extensive grants 
of lands and permission to employ three hundred Scottish mercen- 
aries. In 1578 he was created baron of Clogher and earl of 
Clanconnell for life; but on the outbreak of rebellion in Munster 
his attitude again became menacing, and for the next few years 
he continued to intrigue against the English authorities. The 
latter, as a counterpoise to Turlough, supported his cousin 
Hugh, brother of Brian, whom Turlough had murdered. After 
several years of rivalry and much fighting between the two 
relatives, Turlough resigned the headship of the clan in favour 
of Hugh, who was inaugurated O'Neill in 1593. Turlough died 
in 1595- 

Hugh O'Neill (c. 1540-1616), 2nd earl (known as the great 
earl) of Tyrone, was the second son of Matthew, reputed 
illegitimate son of Conn, 1st earl of Tyrone. 1 He succeeded 
his brother, Brian, when the latter was murdered by Turlough 
in 1562, as baron of Dungannon. He was brought up in London, 
but returned to Ireland in 1567 after the death of Shane, under 
the protection of Sir Henry Sidney. He served with the English 
against Desmond in Munster in 1580, and assisted Sir John 
Perrot against the Scots of Ulster in 1584. In the following 
year he was allowed to attend parliament as earl of Tyrone, 
though Conn's title had been for life only, and had not been 
assumed by Brian. Hugh's constant disputes with Turlough 
were fomented by the English with a view to weakening the power 
of the O'Neills, but after Hugh's inauguration as the O'Neill on 
Turlough's resignation in 1593, he was left without a rival in 
the north. His career was marked by unceasing duplicity, at 
one time giving evidence of submission to the English authorities, 
at another intriguing against them in conjunction with lesser 
Irish chieftains. Having roused the ire of Sir Henry Bagnal 
(or Bagenal) by eloping with his sister in 1591, he afterwards 
assisted him in defeating Hugh Maguire at Belleek in 1593; 
and then again went into opposition and sought aid from Spain 
and Scotland. Sir John Norris was accordingly ordered to Ireland 
with a considerable force to subdue him in 1595, but Tyrone 
succeeded in taking the Blackwater Fort and Sligo Castle 
before Norris was prepared; and he was thereupon proclaimed 
a traitor of Dundalk. In spite of the traditional enmity between 
the O'Neills and the O'Donnells, Tyrone alh'ed himself with 
Hugh Roe O'Donnell, nephew of Shane's former enemy Calvagh 
O'Donnell, and the two chieftains opened communications 
with Philip II. of Spain, their letters to whom were intercepted 
by the viceroy, Sir William Russell. They put themselves 
forward as the champions of the Catholic religion, claiming 
liberty of conscience as well as political liberty for the native 
inhabitants of Ireland. In April 1596 Tyrone received promises 
of help from Spain. This increased his anxiety to temporize, 
which he did with signal success for more than two years, making 

1 The grave doubt as to the paternity of Matthew involved a doubt 
whether the great earl of Tyrone and his equally famous nephew 
Owen Roe had in fact any O'Neill blood in their veins. 



I IO 



O'NEILL (FAMILY) 



from time to time as circumstances required, professions of 
loyalty which deceived Sir John Norris and the earl of Ormonde. 
In 1598 a cessation of hostilities was arranged, and a formal 
pardon granted to Tyrone by Elizabeth. Within two months 
he was again in the field, and on the 14th of August he destroyed 
an English force under Bagnal at the Yellow Ford on the Black- 
water. If the earl had known how to profit by this victory, 
he might now have successfully withstood the English power 
in Ireland; for in every part of Ireland — and especially in the 
south, where James Fitzthomas Fitzgerald with O'Neill's support 
was asserting his claim to the earldom of Desmond at the head 
of a formidable army of Geraldine clansmen — discontent broke 
into flame. But Tyrone, who possessed but little generalship, 
procrastinated until the golden opportunity was lost. Eight 
months after the battle of the Yellow Ford, the earl of Essex 
landed in Ireland to find that Tyrone had done nothing in 
the interval to improve his position. Acting on the queen's 
explicit instructions, Essex, after some ill-managed operations, 
had a meeting with Tyrone at a ford on the Lagan on th 7th 
of September 1599, when a truce was arranged; but Elizabeth 
was displeased by the favourable conditions allowed to the 
O'Neill and by Essex's treatment of him as an equal. Tyrone 
continued to concert measures with the Irish leaders in Munster, 
and issued a manifesto to the Catholics of Ireland summoning 
them to join his standard; protesting that the interests of religion 
were his first care. After an inconclusive campaign in Munster 
in January 1600, he returned in haste to Donegal, where he 
received supplies from Spain and a token of encouragement 
from Pope Clement VIII. In May of the same year Sir Henry 
Docwra, at the head of a considerable army, took up a position 
at Derry, while Mountjoy marched from Westmeath to Newry 
to support him, compelling O'Neill to retire to Armagh, a large 
reward having been offered for his capture alive or dead. 

The appearance of a Spanish force at Kinsale drew Mountjoy 
to Munster in 1601; Tyrone followed him, and at Bandon joined 
forces with O'Donnell and with the Spaniards under Don John 
D'Aquila. The attack of these allies on the English completely 
failed. O'Donnell went to Spain, where he died soon afterwards, 
and Tyrone with a shattered force made his way once more to 
the north, where he renewed his policy of ostensibly seeking 
pardon while warily evading his enemies. Early in 1603 Elizabeth 
instructed Mountjoy to open negotiations with the rebellious 
chieftains ; and in April, Tyrone, in ignorance of Elizabeth's death, 
made his submission to Mountjoy. In Dublin, whither he 
proceeded with Mountjoy, he heard of the accession of King 
James, at whose court he presented himself in June accompanied 
by Rory O'Donnell, who had become chief of the O'Donnells 
after the departure of his brother Hugh Roe. The English 
courtiers were greatly incensed at the gracious reception accorded 
to these notable rebels by King James; but although Tyrone 
was confirmed in his title and estates, he had no sooner returned 
to Ireland than he again engaged in dispute with the government 
concerning his rights over certain of his feudatories, of whom 
Donnal O'Cahan was the most important. This dispute dragged 
on till 1607, when Tyrone arranged to go to London to submit 
the matter to the king. Warned, however, that his arrest was 
imminent, and possibly persuaded by Rory O'Donnell (created 
earl of Tyrconnel in 1603), whose relations with Spain had en- 
dangered his own safety, Tyrone resolved to fly from the country. 

" The flight of the earls," one of the most celebrated episodes 
in Irish history, occurred on the 14th of September 1607, when 
Tyrone and Tyrconnel embarked at midnight at Rathmullen 
on Lough Swilly, with their wives, families and retainers, 
numbering ninety-nine persons, and sailed for Spain. Driven by 
contrary winds to take shelter in the Seine, the refugees passed 
the winter in the Netherlands, and in April 1608 proceeded to 
Rome, where they were welcomed and hospitably entertained by 
Pope Paul V., and where Tyrconnel died the same year. In 1613 
Tyrone was outlawed and attainted by the Irish parliament, and 
he died in Rome on the 20th of July 1616. He was four times 
married, and had a large number both of legitimate and illegi- 
timate children. 



Sir Phelim O'Neill (c. 1603-1653), a kinsman and younger 
contemporary of the earl of Tyrone, took a prominent part in the 
rebellion of 1641. In that year he was elected member of the 
Irish parliament for Dungannon, and joined the earl of Antrim 
and other lords in concerting measures for supporting Charles I. 
in his struggle with the parliament. On the 22nd of October 
1641 he surprised and captured Charlemont Castle; and having 
been chosen commander-in-chief of the Irish forces in the north, 
he forged and issued a pretended commission from Charles I. 
sanctioning his proceedings. Phelim and his followers com- 
mitted much depredation in Ulster on the pretext of reducing 
the Scots; and he attempted without success to take Drogheda, 
being compelled by Ormonde to raise the siege in April 1642. 
He was responsible for many of the barbarities committed by the 
Catholics during the rebellion. 1 During the summer his fortunes 
ebbed, and he was soon superseded by his kinsman Owen Roe 
O'Neill, who returned from military service abroad at the end 
of July. 

Owen Roe O'Neill (c. 1590-1649), one of the most celebrated 
of the O'Neills, the subject of the well-known ballad " The 
Lament for Owen Roe," was the son of Art O'Neill, a younger 
brother of Hugh, 2nd earl of Tyrone. Having served with 
distinction for many years in the Spanish army, he was im- 
mediately recognized on his return to Ireland as the leading 
representative of the O'Neills. Phelim resigned the northern 
command in his favour, and escorted him from Lough Swilly to 
Charlemont. But jealousy between the kinsmen was com- 
plicated by differences between Owen Roe and the Catholic 
council which met at Kilkenny in October 1642. Owen Roe 
professed to be acting in the interest of Charles I.; but his real 
aim was the complete independence of Ireland, while the Anglo- 
Norman Catholics represented by the council desired to secure 
religious liberty and an Irish constitution under the crown of 
England. Although Owen Roe O'Neill possessed the qualities 
of a general, the struggle dragged on inconclusively for three or 
four years. In March 1646 a cessation of hostilities was arranged 
between Ormonde and the Catholics; and O'Neill, furnished 
with supplies by the papal nuncio, Rinuccini, turned against the 
Scottish parliamentary army under General Monro, who had been 
operating with fluctuating success in Ireland since April 1642. On 
the 5th of June 1646 O'Neill utterly routed Monro at Benburb, on 
the Blackwater; but, being summoned to the south by Rinuccini, 
he failed to take advantage of the victory, and suffered Monro 
to remain unmolested at Carrickfergus. For the next two years 
confusion reigned supreme among the numerous factions in 
Ireland, O'Neill supporting the party led by Rinuccini, though 
continuing to profess loyalty to Ormonde as the king of England's 
representative. Isolated by the departure of the papal nuncio 
from Ireland in February 1649, he made overtures for alliance to 
Ormonde, and afterwards with success to Monck, who had 
superseded Monro in command of the parliamentarians in the 
north. O'Neill's chief need was supplies for his forces, and failing 
to obtain them from Monck he turned once more to Ormonde 
and the Catholic confederates, with whom he prepared to 
co-operate more earnestly when Cromwell's arrival in Ireland 
in August 1649 brought the Catholic party face to face with 
serious danger. Before, however, anything was accomplished 
by this combination, Owen Roe died on the 6th of November 
1649. 

The alliance between Owen Roe and Ormonde had been opposed 
by Phelim O'Neill, who after his kinsman's death expected to be 
restored to his former position of command. In this he was 
disappointed; but he continued to fight against the parliamen- 
tarians till August 1652, when a reward was offered for his 
apprehension. Betrayed by a kinsman while hiding in Tyrone, 
he was tried for high treason in Dublin, and executed on the 
10th of March 1653. Phelim married a daughter of the marquis 
of Huntly, by whom he had a son Gordon O'Neill, who was 
member of parliament for Tyrone in 1689; fought for the king 
at the siege of Derry and at the battles of Aughrim and the 

1 See W. E. H. Lecky, Hist, of Ireland in the Eighteenth Century, i. 
66-68 (Cabinet edition, 5 vols., London, 1892). 



O'NEILL, E.— ONEONTA 



iii 



Boyne; and afterwards commanded an Irish regiment in the 
French service, and died in 1704. 

Daniel O'Neill (c. 1612-1664), son of Conn MacNeill 
MacFagartach O'Neill, a member of the Clanaboy branch of 
the family, whose wife was a sister of Owen Roe, was prominent 
in the Civil Wars. He spent much of his early life at the court 
of Charles I.,- and became a Protestant. He commanded a troop 
of horse in Scotland in 1639; was involved in army plots in 1641, 
for which be was committed to the Tower, but escaped abroad; 
and on the outbreak of the Civil War returned to England and 
served with Prince Rupert, being present at Marston Moor, the 
second battle of Newbury and Naseby. He then went to 
Ireland to negotiate between Ormonde and his uncle, Owen 
Roe O'Neill. He was made a major-general in 1649, and but for 
his Protestantism would have succeeded Owen Roe as chief of 
the O'Neills. He joined Charles II. at the Hague, and took part 
in the expedition to Scotland and the Scotch invasion of England 
in 1652. At the Restoration he received many marks of favour 
from the king, including grants of land and lucrative monopolies. 
He died in 1664. 

Hugh O'Neill (d. c. 1660), son of Owen Roe's brother Art 
Oge, and therefore known as Hugh Mac Art, had served with 
some distinction in Spain before he accompanied his uncle, 
Owen Roe, to Ireland in 1642. In 1646 he was made a major- 
general of the forces commanded by Owen Roe; and after the 
death of the latter he successfully defended Clonmel in 1650 
against Cromwell, on whom he inflicted the latter's most severe 
defeat in Ireland. In the following year he so stubbornly 
resisted Ireton's attack on Limerick that he was excepted from 
the benefit of the capitulation, and, after being condemned to 
death and reprieved, was sent as a prisoner to the Tower of 
London. Released in 1652 on the representation of the Spanish 
ambassador that O'Neill was a Spanish subject, he repaired to 
Spain, whence he wrote to Charles II. in 1660 claiming the 
earldom of Tyrone. He probably died in Spain, but the date of 
his death is unknown. 

The Clanaboy (or Clandeboye) branch of the O'Neills descended 
from the ancient kings through Neill Mor O'Neill, lord of 
Clanaboy in the time of Henry VIII., ancestor (as mentioned 
above) of the Portuguese O'Neills. Neill Mor's great-great- 
grandson, Henry O'Neill, was created baronet of Killeleagh in 
1666. His son, Sir Neill O'Neill fought for James II. in Ireland, 
and died of wounds received at the battle of the Boyne. Through 
an elder line from Neill Mor was descended Brian Mac Phelim 
O'Neill, who was treacherously seized in 1573 by the earl of 
Essex, whom he was hospitably entertaining, and executed 
together with his wife and brother, some two hundred of his clan 
being at the same time massacred by the orders of Essex. (See 
Essex, Walter Devereux, 1st earl of.) Sir Brian Mac Phelim's 
son, Shane Mae Brian O'Neill, was the last lord of Clanaboy, and 
from him the family castle of Edenduffcarriek, on the shore of 
Lough Neagh in Co. Antrim, was named Shane's Castle. He 
joined the rebellion of his kinsman Hugh, earl of Tyrone, but 
submitted in 1586. 

In the 18th century the commanding importance of the 
O'Neills in Irish history had come to an end. But John O'Neill 
(1740-1798), who represented Randalstown in the Irish parlia- 
ment 1761-1783, and the county of Antrim from the latter year 
till his death, took an active part in debate on the popular side, 
being a strong supporter of Catholic emancipation. He was 
one of the delegates in 1789 from the Irish parliament to George, 
prince of Wales, requesting him to assume the regency as a 
matter of right. In 1793 he was raised to the peerage of Ireland 
as Baron O'Neill of Shane's Castle, and in 1795 was created a 
viscount. In defending the town of Antrim against the rebels 
in 1798 O'Neill received wounds from which he died on the 18th 
of June, being succeeded as Viscount O'Neill by his son Charles 
Henry St John (1 779-1841), who in 1S00 was created Earl 
O'Neill. Dying unmarried, when the earldom therefore became 
extinct, Charles was succeeded as Viscount O'Neill by his brother 
John Bruce Richard (1780-1855), a general in the British arm}'; 
on whose death without issue in 1855 tne ma l e line in the United 



Kingdom became extinct. The estates then devolved on 
William Chichester, great-grandson of Arthur Chichester and 
his wife Mary, only child and heiress of Henry (d. 1721), eldest 
son of John O'Neill of Shane's Castle. 

William Chichester (1813-1883), 1st Baron O'Neill, a 
clergyman, on succeeding to the estates as heir-general, assumed 
by royal licence the surname and arms of O'Neill; and in 1868 
was created Baron O'Neill of Shane's Castle. On his death in 
1883 he was succeeded by his son Edward, 2nd Baron O'Neill 
(b. 1839), who was member of parliament for Co. Antrim 
1863-1880, and who married in 1873 Louisa, daughter of the 
nth earl of Dundonald. 

For the history of the ancient Irish kings of the Hy Neill see: 
The Book of Leinster, edited with introduction by R. Atkinson 
(Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, 1880); The Annals of Ulster, edited 
by W. M. Henncssy and B. MacCarthy (4 vols., Dublin, 1887-1901) ; 
The Annals of Loch Ce, edited by w. M. Hennessy (Rolls Series, 
London, 1871). For the later period see: P. W. Joyce, A Short 
History of Ireland (London, 1893), and A Social History of Ancient 
Ireland (2 vols., London, 1903); Tiie Annals of Ireland by the Four 
Masters, edited by J. O'Donovan (7 vols., Dublin, 1851); Sir J. T. 
Gilbert, History of the Viceroys of Ireland (Dublin, 1865), and, especi- 
ally for Owen Roc O'Neill, Contemporary History of Affairs in Ireland, 
1641-1652 (Irish Archaeol. Soc, 3 vols., Dublin, 1879); also History 
of the Irish Confederation and the War in Ireland (Dublin, 1882); 
John O'Hart, Irish Pedigrees (Dublin, 1881) ; The Montgomery MSS., 
" The Flight of the Earls, 1607 " (p. 767), edited by George Hill 
(Belfast, 1878) ; Thomas Carte, History of the Life of James, Duke of 
Ormonde (3 vols., London, 1735); C. P. Meehan, Fate and Fortunes 
of Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone, and Rory O'Donel, Earl of Tyrconnel 
(Dublin, 1886) ; Richard Bagwell, Ireland under the Tudors, with an 
Account of the Earlier History (3 vols., London, 1885-1890); J. F. 
Taylor, Owen Roe O'Neill (London, 1896); John Mitchell, Life and 
Times of Hugh, Earl of Tyrone, with an Account of his Predecessors, 
Con, Shane, Turlough (Dublin, 1846); L. O'Clery, Life of Hugh Roe 
O'Donnell (Dublin, 1893). For the O'Neills of the 18th century, 
and especially the 1st Viscount O'Neill, see The Charlemont Papers, 
and F. Hardy, Memoirs of J. Caulfield, Earl of Charlemont (2 vols., 
London, 1812). The O'Neills of Ulster: Their History and Genealogy, 
by Thomas Mathews (3 vols., Dublin, 1907), an ill-arranged and un- 
critical work, has little historical value, but contains a mass of 
traditional and legendary lore, and a number of translations of ancient 
poems, and genealogical tables of doubtful authority. (R.J. M.) 

O'NEILL, ELIZA (1791-1872), Irish actress, was the daughter 
of an actor and stage manager. Her first appearance on the 
stage was made at the Crow Street theatre in 1S11 as the Widow 
Cheerly in The Soldier's Daughter, and after several years in 
Ireland she came to London and made an immediate success 
as Juliet at Covent Garden in 18 14. For five years she was 
the favourite of the town in comedy as well as tragedy, but in 
the latter she particularly excelled, being frequently compared, 
not to her disadvantage, with Mrs Siddons. In 1819 she married 
William Wrixon Becher, an Irish M.P. who was created a 
baronet in 1831. She never returned to the stage, and died on 
the 29th of October 1872. 

ONEONTA, a city in the township of the same name, in the 
south-central part of Otsego county, New York, U.S.A., on the 
N. side of the Susquehanna river, about 82 m. S.W. of Albany. 
Pop. (1880) 3002, (1890) 6272, (1900) 7147, of whom 456 were 
foreign-born, (1910, U.S. census) 9491. The city lies about 
1 100 ft. above sea-level. It is served by the Ulster & Delaware, 
by the Susquehanna division of the Delaware & Hudson, and by 
the Oneonta & Mohawk Valley (electric) railways. In Oneonta 
are a state normal school (1889), a state armoury, and the 
Aurelia Fox Memorial Hospital. The city is situated in a good 
agricultural region. The principal manufactures are machine- 
shop products (the Delaware & Hudson has repair and machine 
shops at Oneonta), knit goods, silk goods, lumber and planing 
mill products, &e. The first settlement was made about 17S0. 
The township was erected in 1830 from parts of Milford and 
Otego. Oneonta was known as Milfordville until 1S30, when 
it received its present name. It was first incorporated as a 
village in 1848, and was chartered as a city in 1908, the charter 
coming into effect on the 1st of January 1909. The name 
" Oneonta " is derived from Onahrenton or Onarenta, the 
Indian name of a creek flowing through the city. 

See Edwin F. Bacon, Otsego County, N.Y. (Oneonta, 1902); and 
Dudley M. Campbell, A History of Oneonta (Oneonta, 1906). 



112 



ONESICRITUS— ONONDAGA 



ONESICRITUS, or Onesicrates, of Aegina or Astypaleia 
(probably simply the " old city " of Aegina), one of the writers 
on Alexander the Great. At an advanced age he became a 
pupil of Diogenes the Cynic, and gained such repute as a student 
of philosophy that he was selected by Alexander to hold a 
conference with the Indian Gymnosophists. When the fleet 
was constructed on the Hydaspes, Onesicritus was appointed 
chief pilot (in his vanity he calls himself commander), and in 
this capacity accompanied Nearchus on the voyage from the 
mouth of the Indus to the Persian gulf. He wrote a diffuse 
biography of Alexander, which in addition to historical details 
contained descriptions of the countries visited, especially India. 
After the king's death, Onesicritus appears to have completed 
bis work at the court of Lysimachus, king of Thrace. Its 
historical value was considered small, it being avowedly a 
panegyric, and contemporaries (including even Alexander 
himself) regarded it as untrustworthy. Strabo especially takes 
Onesicritus to task for his • exaggeration and love of the 
marvellous. His Paraplus (or description of the coasts of India) 
probably formed part of the work, and, incorporated by Juba II. 
of Mauretania with the accounts of coasting voyages by Nearchus 
and other geographers, and circulated by him under the name 
of Onesicritus, was largely used by Pliny. 

See Arrian, Anabasis, vi. 2; Indica, 32; Diogenes Laertius vi. 
75; Plutarch, Alexander, 46, 65; Strabo xv. 698; Pliny, Nat. 
Hist. vi. 26; Aulus Gellius ix. 4; fragments and life in C. W. Miiller, 
appendix to F. Diibner's Arrian (1846); monograph by F. Lilie 
(Bonn, 1864); E. H. Bunbury, Hist, of Ancient Geography, i. (1879); 
Meier in Ersch and Gruber's Allgemeine Encyclopddie. 

ONION (Fr. oignon, Lat. unio, liberally unity, oneness, applied 
to a large pearl and to a species of onion), Allium Cepa (nat. 
ord. Liliaceae), a hardy bulbous biennial, which has been culti- 
vated in Britain from time immemorial, and is one of the earliest 
of cultivated species; it is represented on Egyptian monuments, 
and one variety cultivated in Egypt was accorded divine honours. 
It is commonly cultivated in India, China and Japan. A. de 
Candolle, arguing from its ancient cultivation and the antiquity 
of the Sanskrit and Hebrew names, regards it as a native of 
western Asia. 

The onion should be grown in an open situation, and on a 
light, rich, well-worked soil, which has not been recently manured. 
In England the principal crop may be sown at any time from 
the middle of February to the middle of March, if the weather 
is fine and the ground sufficiently dry. The seed should be sown 
in shallow drills, 10 in. apart, the ground being made as level 
and firm as possible, and the plants should be regularly thinned, 
hoed and kept free from weeds. At the final thinning they 
should be set from 3 to 6 in. apart, the latter distance in 
very rich soil. About the beginning of September the crop is 
ripe, which is known by the withering of the leaves; the bulbs 
are then to be pulled, and exposed on the ground till well dried, 
and they are then to be put away in a store-room, or loft, where 
they may be perfectly secured from frost and damp. 

About the end of August a crop is sown to afford a supply of 
young onions in the spring months. Those which are not 
required for the kitchen, if allowed to stand, and if the flower-bud 
is picked out on its first appearance, and the earth stirred 
about them, frequently produce bulbs equal in size and quality 
to the large ones that are imported from the Continent. A crop 
of very large bulbs may also be secured by sowing about the 
beginning of September, and transplanting early in spring to 
very rich soil. Another plan is to sow in May on dry poor soil, 
when a crop of small bulbs will be produced; these are to be 
stored in the usual way, and planted in rich soil about February, 
on ground made firm by treading, in rows about 1 ft. apart, 
the bulbs being set near the surface, and about 6 in. asunder. 
The White Spanish and Tripoli are good sorts for this purpose. 
To obtain a crop of bulbs for pickling, seed should be sown 
thickly in March, in rather poor soil, the seeds being very thinly 
covered, and the surface well rolled; these are not to be thinned, 
but should be pulled and harvested when ripe. The best sorts 
for this crop are the Silver-skinned, Early Silver-skinned, Nocera 
and Queen. 



Onions may be forced like mustard and cress if required for 
winter salads, the seeds being sown thickly in boxes which are 
to be placed in a warm house or frame. The young onions are 
of course pulled while quite small. 

The Potato Onion, Allium Cepa var. aggregatum, is propagated by 
the lateral bulbs, which it throws out, under ground, in considerable 
numbers. This variety is very prolific, and is useful when other 
sorts do not keep well. It is sometimes planted about midwinter, 
and then ripens in summer, but for use during the spring and early 
summer it is best planted in spring. It is also known as the under- 
ground onion, from its habit of producing its bulbs beneath the 
surface. 

The Tree Onion or Egyptian Onion, Allitim Cepa var. proliferum, 
produces small bulbs instead of flowers, and a few offsets also 
underground. These small stem bulbs are excellent for pickling. 

The Welsh Onion or Ciboule, Allitim fistulosum, is a hardy perennial, 
native of Siberia. It was unknown to the ancients, and must have 
come into Europe through Russia in the middle ages or later. It 
forms no bulbs, but, on account of its extreme hardiness, is sown in 
July or early in August, to furnish a reliable supply of young onions 
for use in salads during the early spring. These bulbless onions are 
sometimes called Scallions, a name which is also applied to old onions 
which have stem and leaves but no bulbs. 

The following are among the best varieties of onions for various 
purposes: — 

For Summer and Autumn. — Queen; Early White Naples: these 
two sorts also excellent for sowing in autumn for spring salading. 
Silver-skinned; Tripoli, including Giant Rocca. 

For Winter. — Brown Globe, including Magnum Bonum; White 
Globe; Yellow Danvers; White Spanish, in its several forms; 
Trebons, the finest variety for autumn sowing, attaining a large size 
early, ripening well, and keeping good till after Christmas; Ailsa 
Craig; Ronsham Park Hero; James's Keeping; Cranston's 
Excelsior; Blood Red, strong-flavoured. 

For Pickling. — Queen, Early Silver-skinned, White Nocera, 
Egyptian. 

ONOMACRITUS (c. 530-480 B.C.), seer, priest and poet of 
Attica. His importance lies in his connexion with the religious 
movements in Attica during the 6th century B.C. He had great 
influence on the development of the Orphic religion and mysteries, 
and was said to have composed a poem on initiatory rites. 
The works of Musaeus, the legendary founder of Orphism in 
Attica, are said to have been reduced to order (if not actually 
written) by him (Clem. Alex. Slromata, i. p. 143 [397]; 
Pausanias i. 22, 7). He was in high favour at the court of the 
Peisistratidae till he was banished by Hipparchus for making 
additions of his own in an oracle of Musaeus. When the 
Peisistratidae were themselves expelled and were living in 
Persia, he furnished them with oracles encouraging Xerxes to 
invade Greece and restore the tyrants in Athens (Herodotus 
vii. 6). He is also said to have been employed by Peisistratus 
in editing the Homeric poems, and to have introduced interpola- 
tions of his own {e.g. a passage in the episode of the visit of 
Odysseus to the world below). According to Pausanias (viii. 
3 1 , 3i 37, S! ix. 35, 5) he was also the author of poems on mytho- 
logical subjects. 

See F. W. Ritschl, " Onomakritos von Athen," in his Opuscula, i. 
(1866), and p. 35 of the same volume; U. von Wilamowitz-Mollen- 
dorff, " Homerische Untersuchungen" (pp. 199-226 on the Orphic 
interpolation in Odyssey, X 566-631), in Kiessling-Mollendorff, 
Philologisclie Untersiichungen, Heft 7 (1884). 

ONOMATOPOEIA, literally the making or formation of words 
(Gr. ovo^aTowoda, from ovofxa, name, word,7roiap, to make), hence 
a term used in philology for the formation of words by imitation 
of natural sounds, e.g. " hiss," " hush," " click." Modern philo- 
logists prefer the term " echoism," " echoic " for this process, 
as suggesting the imitative repetition of the sounds heard. 
At one time there was an exaggerated tendency to find in echoism 
a principal source in the origin and growth of language, ridiculed 
as the " bow-wow " theory of language; it is now recognized 
that it has played only a limited part. 

ONONDAGA, a tribe of North American Indians of Iroquoian 
stock, forming one of the Six Nations. The tribal headquarters 
was about the lake and creek of the same name in New York 
state. Their territory extended northward to Lake Ontario 
and southward to the Susquehanna river. They were the 
official guardians of the council-fire of the Iroquois. Their chief 
town, near the site of the present Onondsga, consisted of some 
140 houses in the middle of the 17th century, when the tribe 



ONOSANDER— ONTARIO 



H3 



was estimated as numbering between 1500 and 1700. During 
the 18th century the tribe divided, part loyally supporting the 
Iroquois league, while part, having come under the influence of 
French missionaries, migrated to the Catholic Iroquois settle- 
ments in Canada. Of those who supported the league, the 
majority, after the War of Independence, settled on a reservation 
on Grand river, Ontario, where their descendants still are. 
About 500 are upon the Onondaga reservation in New York state. 

For Onondaga cosmology see 21st Ann. Report Bureau Amer. 
Ethnol. (1899-1 goo). 

ONOSANDER, or Onasander, Greek philosopher, lived during 
the 1st century a.d. He was the author of a commentary on 
the Republic of Plato, which is lost, but we still possess by him 
a short but comprehensive work (XrpaTriyiKos) on the duties of a 
general. It is dedicated to Quintus Veranius Nepos, consul 49, 
and legate of Britain. It was the chief authority for the military 
writings of the emperors Maurice and Leo, and Maurice of Saxony, 
who consulted it in a French translation, expressed a high opinion 
of it. 

Edition by H. Kochly (i860); see also G. Rathgcber in Ersch and 
Gruber's Allgemeine Encyclopadie. 

ONSLOW, EARL OF, a title borne by an English family 
claiming descent from Roger, lord of Ondeslowe in the liberty of 
Shrewsbury in the 13th century. Richard Onslow (1528-1571), 
solicitor-general and then Speaker of the House of Commons 
in the reign of Elizabeth, was grandfather of Sir Richard Onslow 
(1601-1664), who inherited the family estate on the death of his 
brother, Sir Thomas Onslow, in 1616. Sir Richard was a member 
of the Long Parliament, and during the great Rebellion was a 
colonel in the parliamentary army. He was a member of Crom- 
well's parliament in 1654 and again in 1656, and was also a 
member of his House of Lords. His son, Sir Arthur Onslow (1621- 
1688), succeeded in 16S7 by special remainder to the baronetcy 
of his father-in-law, Sir Thomas Foot, lord mayor of London. 
Sir Arthur's son, Sir Richard (1654—171 7), was Speaker of the 
House of Commons from 1708 to 1710, and chancellor of the 
exchequer in 17 15. In 17 16 he was created Baron Onslow of 
Onslow and of Clandon. He was uncle of Arthur Onslow, the 
famous Speaker (see below), whose only son George became 
4th Baron Onslow on the death of his kinsman Richard in October 
1776. The 4th baron (1731-1S14) had entered parliament 
in 1754, and was very active in the House of Commons; and in 
May 1776, just before he succeeded to the family barony, he was 
created Baron Cranley of Imbercourt. He was comptroller 
and then treasurer of the royal household, and was present at 
the marriage of the prince of Wales, afterwards George IV., 
with Mrs Fitzherbert in 17S5. In 1801 he was created Viscount 
Cranley and earl of Onslow, and he died at his Surrey residence, 
Clandon Park, on the 17th of May 1814. The second earl was his 
eldest son Thomas (1754-1827), whose son Arthur George 
(1777-1870), the 3rd earl, died without surviving male issue 
in October 1870. He was succeeded by his grand-nephew, 
William Hillier, 4th earl of Onslow (b. 1833), who was governor 
of New Zealand from 1888 to 1892; under-secretary for India 
from 1895 to 1900; and under-secretary for the Colonies from 
1900 to 1903. From 1903 to 1905 he was a member of the Con- 
servative cabinet as president of the board of agriculture. 

ONSLOW, ARTHUR (1691-1768), English politician, elder son 
of Foot Onslow (d. 1710), was born at Chelsea on the 1st of October 
1691. Educated at Winchester and at Wadham College, Oxford, 
he became a barrister and in 1 720 entered parliament as a member 
for the borough of Guildford. Seven years later he became one of 
the members for Surrey, and he retained this seat until 1761. In 
1728 he was elected Speaker of the House of Commons, being 
the third member of his family to hold this office; he was also 
chancellor to George II. 's queen, Caroline, and from 1734 to 
1742 he was treasurer of the navy. He retired from the position 
of Speaker and from parliament in 1761, and enjoyed an annuity 
of £3000 until his death on the 17th of February 1768. As 
Speaker, Onslow was a conspicuous success, displaying know- 
ledge, tact and firmness in his office; in his leisure hours he was 
a collector of books. 



Speaker Onslow's nephew, George Onslow (1731-1792), a 
son of his brother Richard, was a lieutenant-colonel and member 
of parliament for Guildford from 1 760 to 1 784. He had a younger 
brother Richard (1741-1817), who entered the navy and was 
made an admiral in 1799. 

ONTARIO, a province of Canada, having the province of 
Quebec to the E., the states of New York, Ohio, Michigan, 
Wisconsin, and Minnesota to the S., Manitoba to the W., and 
the district of Keewatin with James Bay to the N. In most 
cases the actual boundary consists of rivers or lakes, the Ottawa 
to the north-east, the St Lawrence and its chain of lakes and 
rivers to the south as far as Pigeon river, which separates Ontario 
from Minnesota. From this a canoe route over small rivers and 
lakes leads to the Lake-of-the-Woods, which lies between 
Ontario, Minnesota and Manitoba; and English and Albany 
rivers with various lakes carry the boundary to James Bay. 
From Lake Temiscaming northwards the boundary is the 
meridian of 79° 30'. 

Physical Geography. — Ontario extends 1000 m. from E. to W. 
and more than 700 m. from'N. to S., between latitudes 55° and 
42°, including the most southerly point in Canada. Its area is 
260,862 sq. m. (40,354 water), and it is the most populous of the 
provinces, nine-tenths of its inhabitants living, however, in one- 
tenth of its area, between the Great Lakes, the Ottawa and the 
St Lawrence. This forms part of the plain of the St Lawrence, 
underlain by Palaeozoic limestones and shales, with some sand- 
stone, all furnishing useful building material and working up 
into a good soil. The lowest part of the plain, including an area 
of 4500 sq. m. lying between elevations of 100 and 400 ft., was 
covered by the sea at the close of the Ice Age, which left behind 
broad deposits of clay and sand with marine shells. 

The south-western part is naturally divided into two tracts by 
the Niagara escarpment, a line of cliffs capped by. hard Silurian 
limestones, running from Queenston Heights near the falls of Niagara 
west to the head of Lake Ontario near Hamilton, and then north- 
west to the Bruce Peninsula on Georgian Bay. The tract north-east 
of the escarpment has an area of 9000 sq. m. and an altitude of 400 
to 1000 ft., and the south-western tract includes 15,000 sq. m. 
with an elevation of 600 to 1700 ft. In the last petroleum, natural 
gas, salt and gypsum are obtained, but elsewhere in southern Ontario 
no economic minerals except building materials are obtained. 
Covering the higher parts of the south-western Palaeozoic area in 
most places are rolling hills of boulder clay or stony moraines; 
while the lower levels are plains gently sloping toward the nearest 
of the Great Lakes and sheeted with silt deposited in more ancient 
lakes when the St Lawrence outlet was blocked with ice at the end 
of the glacial period. The old shore cliffs and gravel bars of these 
glacial lakes are still well-marked topographical features, and provide 
favourite sites for towns and cities. London, for example, is built 
on the old shore of Lake Warren, the highest of the extinct lakes; 
and St Catharines, Hamilton and Toronto are on the old shore of 
Lake Iroquois, the lowest. The Niagara escarpment mentioned 
above, generally called " the mountain " in Ontario, is the cause of 
waterfalls on all the rivers which plunge over it, Niagara Falls 
being, of course, the most important; and in most eases these falls 
have eaten their way back into the tableland, forming deep gorges 
or canyons like that below Niagara itself, through which the water 
pours as violent rapids. Between the Palaeozoic area near Ottawa, 
and Georgian Bay to the north of the region just referred to, there 
is a southward projection of the Archaean protaxis consisting of 
granite and gneiss of the Laurentian, enclosing bands of crystalline 
limestone and schists, which are of interest as furnishing the only 
mines of " Old Ontario." From these rocks in the Ottawa valley 
are quarried or mined granite, marble, magnificent blue sodalite, 
felspar, talc, actinolite, mica, apatite, graphite and corundum; 
the latter mineral, which occurs on a larger scale here than else- 
where, is rapidly replacing emery as an abrasive. Several metals 
have been mined also, including gold, copper, lead, iron and arsenic; 
but the amounts produced have not been great, and many of the 
mines are no longer working. 

While all the larger cities and most of the manufacturing and 
farming districts of the province belong to old Ontario, there is 
now in process of development a " New Ontario," stretching for 
hundreds of miles to the north and north-west of the region just 
described and covering a far larger area, chiefly made up of Lauren- 
tian and Huronian rocks of the Archaean protaxis. The rocky hills 
of the tableland to the north long repelled settlement, the region 
being looked on by the thrifty farmers of the south as a wilderness 
useless except for its forests and its furs; and unfortunate settlers 
who ventured into it usually failed and went west or south in search 
of better land. Gradually, however, areas of good soil were opened 



ii4 



ONTARIO 



up, in the Rainy river valley, near Lake Temiscaming and elsewhere, 
and mines of various kinds were discovered, as the Canadian Pacific 
railway and its branches extended through the region, and at length 
the finding of very rich silver mines attracted world-wide attention 
to northern Ontario. In the better explored parts along the great 
lakes and the railways, ores of gold, silver, nickel, cobalt, antimony, 
arsenic, bismuth and molybdenum have been obtained, and several 
important mines have been opened up. Gold has been found at 
many points across the whole province, from the mines of the Lake- 
of-the-Woods on the west to the discoveries at Larder Lake on the 
east; but in most cases the returns have been unsatisfactory, and 
only a few of the gold mines are working. Silver mines have proved 
of far greater importance, in early days near Thunder Bay on Lake 
Superior, more recently in the cobalt region near Lake Temiscaming 
on the east side of the province. Silver Islet mine in Lake Superior 
produced in all §3,250,000 worth of silver, buL this record will no 
doubt be surpassed by some of the mines in the extraordinarily rich 
cobalt district. The veins are small, but contain native silver and 
other rich silver ores running sometimes several thousand ounces 
per ton, the output being 5,500,000 oz. in 1906. Associated with 
the silver minerals are rich ores of cobalt and nickel, combined 
with arsenic, antimony and sulphur, which would be considered 
valuable if occurring alone, but are not paid for under present 
conditions, since they are difficult to separate and refine. The 
cobalt silver ores are found mainly in Huronian conglomerate, but 
also in older Keewatin rocks and younger diabase, and the silver- 
bearing region, which at first included only a few square miles, is 
found to extend 25 m. to the west and as much to the north. Up 
to the present the most important mineral product of Ontario is 
nickel, which is mined only in the neighbourhood of Sudbury, 
where the ores occur in very large deposits, which in 1905 produced 
9503 tons, more than half of the world's supply of the metal. With 
the nickel copper is always found, and copper ores are worked on 
their own account in a few localities, such as Bruce mines. Iron 
ores have been discovered in many places in connexion with the 
" iron formation " of the Keewatin, but nowhere in amounts com- 
parable with those of the same formation in Michigan and Minnesota. 
The total mineral output of Ontario, including building materials 
and cement, is larger than that of any other province of the dominion, 
and as more careful exploration is carried on in the northern parts, 
no doubt many more deposits of value will be discovered. It has 
been found that northern Ontario beyond the divide between the 
Great Lakes and Hudson Bay possesses many millions of acres of 
arable land, clay deposits in a post-glacial lake, like those in the 
southern part of the province, running from east to west from Lake 
Abitibbi to a point north of Lake Nipigon. Railways are opening 
up this tract. The clay belt is in latitudes south of Winnipeg, 
with a good summer climate but cold winters. The spruce timber 
covering much of the area is of great value, compensating for the 
labour of clearing the land. 

Lakes and Rivers. — All parts of Ontario are well provided with 
lakes and rivers, the most important chain being that of the St 
Lawrence and the Great Lakes with their tributaries, which drain 
the more populous southern districts, and, with the aid of canals, 
furnish communication by fairly large vessels between the lower St 
Lawrence and the Lake Superior. Lake Nipigon, a beautiful body 
of water 852 ft. above the sea, 70 m. long and 50 m. wide, may be 
looked upon as the headwaters of the St Lawrence, since Nipigon 
river is the largest tributary of Lake Superior, though several other 
important rivers, such as the Kaministiquia, the Pic and the Michi- 
picoten, enter it from the north. All these rivers have high falls 
not far from Lake Superior, and Kakebeka Falls on the Kamin- 
istiquia supplies power to the twin cities of Fort William and Port 
Arthur, while the deep water of its mouth makes the great shipping 
port for western wheat during the summer. The north shore of 
Lake Superior is bold and rugged with many islands, such as Ignace 
and Michipicoten, but with very few settlements, except fishing 
stations, owing to its rocky character. At the south-eastern end St 
Mary's river carries its waters to Lake Huron, with a fall of 602 to 
581 ft., most of which takes place at Sault Sainte Marie, where the 
largest locks in the world permit vessels of 10,000 tons to pass from 
one lake to the other, and where water-power has been greatly 
developed for use in the rolling mills and wood pulp industry. The 
north-east shores of Lake Huron and its large expansion Georgian 
Bay are fringed with thousands of islands, mostly small, but one 01 
them, Manitoulin Island, is 80 m. long and 30 m. broad. _ French 
river, the outlet of Lake Nipissing, and Severn river, draining Lake 
Simcoe, come into Georgian Bay from the east, and canals have 
been projected to connect Lake Huron with the St Lawrence by 
each of these routes, the northern one to make use of the Ottawa 
and the southern one of Trent river. The Trent Valley canal is 
partly in operation. Georgian Bay is cut off from the main lake by 
Manitoulin Island and the long promontory of Bruce Peninsula. 
Lakes Superior and Huron both reach depths hundreds of feet 
below sea-level, but the next lake in the series, St Clair, towards 
which Lake Huron drains southward through St Clair river, is very 
shallow and marshy. Detroit river connects Lake St Clair with 
Lake Erie at an elevation of 570 ft. ; and this comparatively shallow 
lake, running for 240 m. east and west, empties northwards by 
Niagara ri^er into Lake Ontario, which is only 247 ft. above the sea. 



Niagara Falls, with rapids above and below, carry the waters of 
the upper lakes over the Niagara escarpment. Power from the 
falls is put to use in New York state and Ontario, a large amount 
being sent to Toronto 80 m. away. Welland canal, between Port 
Colborne on Lake Erie and Dalhousie on Lake Ontario, carries 
vessels of 14 ft. draught from one lake to the other. From Lake 
Ontario the St Lawrence emerges through the meshes of the Thousand 
Islands, where it crosses Archaean rocks, after which follow several 
rapids separated by quieter stretches before Montreal is reached at 
the head of ocean navigation. Steamers not of too great draught 
can run the rapids going down, but vessels must come up through 
the canals. All the other rivers in southern Ontario are tributaries 
of the lakes or of the St Lawrence, the Ottawa, navigable in many 
parts, being the largest, and the Trent next in importance. In 
northern Ontario lakes are innumerable and often very picturesque, 
forming favourite summer resorts, such as Lake Temagami, the 
Muskoka Lakes and Lake-of-the-Woods. The latter lake with 
Rainy Lake and other connected bodies of water belong to the 
Hudson Bay system of waters, their outlet being by Winnipeg river 
to Lake Winnipeg, from which flows Nelson river. In Ontario the 
Albany, Moose, Missanabi and Abitibbi flow into Hudson Bay, but 
none of these rivers is navigable except for canoes. 

Climate. — The climate of Ontario varies greatly, as might be 
expected from its wide range in latitude and the relationships of the 
Great Lakes to the southern peninsula of the province. The northern 
parts as far south as the north shore of Lake Superior have long and 
cold but bright winters, sometimes with temperatures reaching 50 F. 
below zero; while their summers are delightful, with much sunshine 
and some hot days but pleasantly cool nights. Between Georgian 
Bay and Ottawa the winters are less cold, but usually with a plentiful 
snowfall; while the summers are warm and sometimes even hot. 
The south-west peninsula of Ontario has its climate greatly modified 
by the lakes which almost enclose it. As the lakes never freeze, 
the prevalent cold north-west winds of North America are warmed 
in their passage over them, and often much of the winter precipita- 
tion is in the form of rain, so that the weather has much less certainty 
than in the north. The summers are often sultry, though the 
presence of the lakes prevents the intense heat experienced in the 
states to the west and south. Owing to the mildness of its winters, 
the south-west peninsula is a famous fruit country with many vine- 
yards and orchards of apples, plums and peaches. Indian corn 
(maize) is an important field crop, and tobacco is cultivated on a 
large scale. Small fruits and tomatoes are widely grown for the city 
markets and for canning, giving rise to an important industry. 
The normal temperatures (Fahr.) for three points in the south- 
western, eastern and north-western portions are given below: — 





Toronto. 


Ottawa. 


Port. 
Arthur. 


December, January and February . 
March, April and May 
June, July and August 
September, October and November 

Average annual precipitation . 


23-7 
40-6 

65-4 

47-o 

in. 

33-944 


13-3 

38-5 

67-4 

44-8 

in. 

32-650 


7-3 

3i-i 

58-9 

3.8-5 

in. 

23-580 



(A. P. C.) 
Population. — The following table shows the population of the 
province: — 





1881. 


1891. 


1901. 


1 Townships. 

- Towns and villages . 


1,346,623 
323,188 
257,111 


1,283,281 
432,912 
398,128 


1,247,190 
\ 935,757 


1,926,922 


2,114,321 


2,182,947 



1 The name given to the rural municipalities. 

2 Any town in Canada can become incorporated as a city on 
attaining a population of 10,000. J 

Ontario is thus pre-eminently an agricultural province, though 
the growth of manufactures has increased the importance of the 
towns and cities, and many of the farmers are seeking new homes 
in the provinces of Manitoba, Alberta and Saskatchewan. This 
emigration accounts in large measure for the slow increase of the 
population, though there has also been a slight decrease in the 
birth-rate. The population was long entirely confined to the 
southern and eastern sections of the province, which comprise 
an area of about 33,000 sq. m.; but in these districts it is now 
stationary or decreasing, whereas the northern and western 
portions are filling up rapidly. Toronto, the provincial capital, 
has grown from 59,000 in 1871 to about 300,000, partly through 
the absorption of neighbouring towns and villages. Other 




V S"-i~— -. lu % 

— 5 o xft 

.it*"* 



ONTARIO 



JI 5 



important cities are Ottawa (the capital of the Dominion) 
(59,928 in 1901), Hamilton (52,634), London (37,981), Kingston 
(17,961). The number of males slightly exceeds that of females. 
The population is chiefly of British descent, though in the 
eastern counties numerous French Canadians are flocking in 
from Quebec and in some instances by purchase of farms replacing 
the British. There are also about 20,000 Indians, many of 
whom are civilized, enjoy the franchise and are enrolled in the 
Dominion militia. There is no state Church, though buildings 
devoted to religious purposes are almost wholly exempt from 
municipal taxation. The Methodists are, numerically, the 
strongest religious body, then come Presbyterians, Roman 
Catholics and Anglicans, in the order named. 

A dministration. — The executive power is vested in a lieutenant- 
governor appointed for five years by the federal government, 
and assisted by an executive council, who have seats in and are 
responsible to the local legislature. This consists of one house only, 
of 106 members, elected by what is practically manhood suffrage. 

The municipal system still embodies the spirit and purpose of 
the Baldwin Municipal Act which originated it in 1849. Though 
based rather on the simple English model than on the more 
complicated municipal governments of the United States, it 
has certain features of its own, and is revised from year to year. 
On it have been modelled the municipal systems of the other 
provinces. Municipal ownership docs not prevail to any extent, 
and in the larger cities the powers of certain great corporations 
have tended to cause friction, but such matters as the provision 
of electric power and light are gradually being taken in hand both 
by the municipalities and by the province, and a railway and 
municipal board appointed by the local legislature has certain 
powers over the railways and electric tramlines. 

Finance. — By the British North America Act, which formed in 
1867 the Dominion of Canada, the provinces have the right of direct 
taxation only. Against this, however, a strong prejudice exists, 
and in Ontario the only direct taxation takes the form of taxes on 
corporations (insurance, loan and railway companies), succession 
duties, liquor licences, &c. These, together with returns from 
various investments, earnings of provincial buildings, &c, yield about 
one-third of the revenue. Another third comes from the Dominion 
subsidy, granted in lieu of the power of indirect taxation, and the 
remainder from the sale or lease of crown lands, timber and minerals. 
Owing to the excellence oi the municipal system there has been a 
tendency to devolve thereoij, in whole or in part, certain financial 
burdens on the plea of decentralization. The finances of the province 
have been well administered, and only in recent years has a debt 
been incurred, chiefly owing to the construction of a provincial railway 
to aid in the development of the northern districts. 

Education. — As early as 1797 500,000 acres of crown lands were 
set apart for educational purposes, and a well-organized system of 
education now exists, which, since 1876, has constituted a department 
of the provincial government. A laudable attempt has been made 
to keep the education department free from the vagaries and the 
strife of party politics, and the advantages of political control have 
been as much felt as its drawbacks. Since 1906 a superintendent has 
been appointed with large powers, independent of political control 
and with the assistance of an advisory council ; attention is also 
paid to the advice of the provincial Educational Association, which 
meets yearly at Toronto. 

School attendance is compulsory between the ages of eight and 
fourteen, and is enforced by truant officers. The primary or public 
schools are free and undenominational. They cannot, however, be 
called secular, as they are opened and closed with the Lord's Prayer 
and closed with the reading of the Bible. From these religious 
exercises any children may absent themselves whose parents profess 
conscientious objections. After a long and bitter struggle the Roman 
Catholics won in 1863 the right to separate schools. These may be 
set up in any district upon the request of not less than five heads of 
families. The rates levied on their supporters are devoted exclusively 
to the separate schools, which also share pro rata in the government 
grant. Although many Roman Catholic children attend the public 
schools, the number of separate schools is, under the influence of the 
priesthood, steadily increasing. Under certain conditions, Protest- 
ants and coloured persons may also claim separate schools, but of 
these only four or five exist. Numerous kindergartens have been 
established in the cities. 

Secondary education is imparted in high schools and collegiate 1 
institutes. These may exact fees or give free education at the 



1 A high school is raised to the rank of collegiate institute on 
complying with certain provisions, chief among which are the em- 
ployment of at least four teachers with Degrees in Honours from a 
recognized Canadian university.- Such an institution receives a 
slightly larger government grant. 



option of the local trustees. There are also numerous private schools. 
Of these such as are incorporated are aided by exemption from 
municipal taxation. In and around Toronto are numerous boarding 
schools and colleges, of which those for boys arc on the model of 
the great public schools of England. Of these the most celebrated 
is Upper Canada College, founded in 1829, and long part of the edu- 
cational system of the province, but now under private control. 

The provincial university is situated in Toronto, and since 1906 
has been governed by an independent board, over which a power of 
veto is retained by the lieutenant-governor in council. With the 
affiliated colleges, it had in 1908 a staff of 356, and 3545 students. 
There are also numerous universities throughout the province, 
founded in early days by the various religious bodies. Of these 
Victoria (Methodist) and Trinity (Anglican) are in Toronto, and 
have become federated with the provincial university, in which 
they have merged their degree-conferring powers. MacMaster 
(Baptist) is also in Toronto, and retains its independence. The 
others arc Queen's University, Kingston (Presbyterian); the 
Western University, London (Anglican); and the university of 
Ottawa (Roman Cathclic). Women students are admitted to all the 
universities save Ottawa on the same terms as men, and form nearly 
one-third of the whole number of students. Theological colleges are 
supported by the various religious bodies, and are in affiliation with 
one or other of the universities. 

The public and high schools tend rather to follow American 
than British methods, though less freedom is allowed to the local 
authorities than in most of the American states. Only those text 
books authorized by the central department may be used. Free 
text books may be issued at the discretion of the local authorities, 
but in most cases are provided by parents. Every school, public, 
separate or high, shares in the provincial grant, but the chief financial 
burden falls on the local authorities. 

Owing to the low rate of salaries, the percentage of women teachers, 
especially in the public schools, is steadily increasing, and now 
amounts in these to almost 83%. The same cause has also reduced 
their age, and the teachers are in many cases exceedingly immature. 
The institution of a minimum salary by the provincial department 
led to such resistance that it was withdrawn, but a distinct advance 
in salaries has taken place since 1906. In the rural districts an 
attempt is being made to increase efficiency by the consolidation of 
several small schools and the conveyance of the children to one central 
building. 

The curriculum, originally modelled on that of England, is being 
gradually modified by the necessities of a new country. In addition 
to the ordinary literary and scientific subjects, manual training, 
domestic science, agriculture and kindred subjects are taught in 
the public and high schools, and in the larger towns technical 
institutes are being founded. Many of the rural schools have gardens, 
in which the elements of agriculture, botany and kindred subjects 
are taught in a practical manner. Travelling libraries are sent 
through the country districts, and an attempt is being made to 
extend similar aid to the lumber-camps. 

The training of teachers is carefully supervised. Numerous model 
and normal schools exist, and a well-equipped normal college at 
Toronto. The smaller county model schools have, since 1906-1907, 
been consolidated and centralized in the larger towns. 

At Guelph is the Ontario Agricultural College, founded and en- 
dowed by the provincial government, and greatly enlarged and 
improved by the generosity of Sir William Macdonald (b. 1832). 
Its services in placing provincial agriculture on a scientific basis 
cannot be over-estimated. The government also maintains an 
institute for the deaf and dumb at Belleville and for the blind at 
Brantford. At Kingston it supports a dairy school and a large 
school of mining. 

Agricidture. — About three-fifths of the inhabitants areengaged 
in agricultural pursuits, and in 1910 the amount invested in lands, 
buildings, implements and stock was double that invested in the 
manufactures of the whole Dominion. Nearly all the farms are 
worked by their owners, and a simple and efficient system of land- 
transfer is in use. The farming population in the older parts of the 
province tends to decline in numbers, owing to emigration, partly to 
the towns, but especially to the newer lands of Manitoba and the west. 
Yet, owing to the increasing use of scientific implements and methods 
promoted by the federal and provincial governments, the total value 
of agricultural products increased by over 50% between 1881 and 
1910. In general, the soil is fertile and the climate favourable. 
The district north of the Height of Land, long supposed to be a 
barren wilderness, has proved in part suitable for agriculture, and 
is steadily increasing in population. Mixed farming and the raising 
of live stock is becoming more and more the rule, so that the failure 
of any one crop becomes of less vital importance. The average farm 
varies in size from 100 to 200 acres. Wheat, barley, oats, peas, 
potatoes and other roots are staple crops, the average yield of wheat 
being about 20 bushels an acre; cattle are increasing in number and 
improving in quality, and all branches of dairy farming prosper. 
Owing to tariff restrictions, the United States' market is being 
more and more abandoned, and improvements in cold storageare 
making it possible to export to Great Britain increasing quantities 
of butter and cheese. The collection of milk by the creameries and 
cheese-factories is carried on with great efficiency. The number of 



n6 



ONTARIO 



horses and sheep is stationary or declining, but the raising of hogs, 
formerly abandoned in great part to the western states, is becoming 
an increasing industry. Large quantities of peas, corn, tomatoes 
and other vegetables are canned, chiefly for home consumption. 
Three-quarters of the orchard lands of Canada are in Ontario, the 
chief crops being apples and peaches. The cultivation of the latter 
centres in the Niagara peninsula, but apples flourish along the great 
lakes and the St Lawrence from Goderieh to Cornwall. In Essex 
and Kent, and along the shore of Lake Erie, tobacco and grapes 
form a staple crop, and wine of fair quality is produced. 

Lumber. — Slightly less than half remains of the forest which once 
covered the whole province. The lumber industry exceeds that of 
any other part of the Dominion, though Quebec possesses greater 
timber areas untouched. The numerous lakes and rivers greatly 
facilitate the bringing of the timber to market. All trees were long 
little thought of in comparison with the pine, but of late years 
poplar and spruce have proved of great value in the making of 
paper pulp, and hard-wood (oak, beech, ash, elm, certain varieties 
of maple) is becoming increasingly valuable for use in flooring and 
the making of furniture. In the spring the making of syrup and 
sugar from the sap of the sugar-maple is a typical industry. 

Much splendid timber has been needlessly destroyed, chiefly by 
forest-fires, but also by improvident farmers in their haste to clear 
the land. Increased attention is now being paid by both provincial 
and federal governments to preservation and to reforestation. 
Special areas have been set apart on which no timber may be cut, 
and on which the problems of scientific forestry may be studied. 
Of these, the earliest was the Algonquin National Park, which also 
forms a haven of refuge for the wild creatures. 

Northern Ontario is still a valuable fur-bearing and hunting 
country, moose, caribou, fox, bear, otter, mink and skunk being 
found in large quantities. Wolves, once numerous, have now been 
almost extirpated, though a bounty on each head is still paid. 

Minerals. — The geographical distribution of the great mineral 
wealth of Ontario has already been indicated (see Physical Geography, 
above). Save for beds of lignite, said to exist in the extreme north, 
coal is not found, and has to be imported, chiefly from the states of 
Ohio and Pennsylvania, though Nova Scotia furnishes an increasing 
quantity. The production of iron is stimulated by federal and 
provincial bounties. The province supplies over two-thirds of the 
iron ore mined in the Dominion, but much is still imported. The 
output of gold is decreasing. The nickel mines in the neighbourhood 
of Sudbury are the largest in the world, outrivalling those of New 
Caledonia. In the same district, and chiefly in connexion with the 
nickel mines, large quantities of copper are produced. When in 
1905 the rich silver area was found in northern Ontario, a rush was 
made to it, comparable to those to the Australian and Californian 
goldfields. Cobalt, the centre of this area, is 103 m. from North Bay 
by the provincial railway (Temiscaming & North Ontario railway). 
In the same neighbourhood are found cobalt, arsenic and bismuth. 
In the older districts of the province are found petroleum and salt. 
The district around Petrolea produces about 30,000,000 gallons of 
petroleum yearly, practically the whole output of the dominion. 
Salt is worked in the vicinity of Lake Huron, but the production is 
less than half that imported. Natural gas is produced in the counties 
of Welland and Essex, and exported in pipes to Buffalo and Detroit. 
Among the less important metals and minerals which are also mined, 
is corundum of especial purity. 

Manufactures and Commerce. — Manufactures are becoming of 
increasing importance. The obstacle due to lack of coal is offset by 
the splendid water powers afforded by the rapid streams in all parts 
of the province. Save for the flour and grist mills, few do more than 
supply the markets of the Dominion, of which they control an in- 
creasing portion. Woollen mills, distilleries and breweries and 
manufactures of leather, locomotives and iron-work, furniture, 
agricultural implements, cloth and paper are the chief. The great 
agricultural development of the western provinces, in which manu- 
factures are little advanced, has given a great impetus to the in- 
dustries of the older provinces, especially Ontario. 

Communications. — Numerous lakes and rivers afford means of 
communication, and obstacles thereon have been largely overcome 
by canals (see Canada). Railways gridiron the province, which 
contains over one-third the total mileage of the dominion; their 
construction is aided by provincial and municipal subsidies, in 
addition to that paid by the federal government. The provincial 
government owns a line running north from North Bay, operated by 
a board of commissioners. The other railways are owned by private 
companies, but are subject to the decisions of a federal railway 
commission. The provincial railway and municipal board also 
exercises control, especially over the city and suburban electric lines. 

History. — The first white man known to have set foot in what 
is now Ontario was Champlain. In 1613 he explored the Ottawa 
river as far as Allumette Island; in 1615, starting from Montreal, 
he reached the Georgian Bay by way of the Ottawa river, Lake 
Nipissing and French river, and then by way of Lakes Couchiching 
and Simcoe and the Trent river system of lakes and streams made 
his way to Lake Ontario, called by him Entouhoronon. The 



winter of 1615-1616 he spent among the Huron Indians, near the 
Georgian Bay. In 1615 a mission among these Indians was 
founded by the Recollet friars, and carried on with great success 
and devotion by the Jesuits, but in 1648-1650 the Huron nation 
was almost utterly destroyed by an invasion of their hereditary 
foes, the Iroquois. From its centre at Quebec French civilization 
extended along the Mississippi and the Great Lakes, and also 
northwards to Hudson's Bay. In the western country numerous 
posts were founded, wherein fur-trader and missionary were often 
at variance, the trader finding brandy his best medium of ex- 
change, while the missionary tried in vain to stay its ravages 
among his flock. On the frontiers of what is now Ontario the 
chief points were at the strategic centres of Fort Frontenac 
(now Kingston), Niagara, Michilimackinac and Sault-Ste-Marie. 
Farther north, in what is now New Ontario, their English rivals, 
the Hudson's Bay Company, had more or less permanent rjpsts, 
especially at Fort Albany and Moose Factory. 

With the cession of French North America to Great Britain in 
1763, the Indian lords of the soil rose under Pontiac in a last 
attempt to shake off the white man, and in 1763-1765 there was 
hard fighting along the western frontier from Sault-Ste-Marie 
to Detroit. Thereafter for almost twenty years, Ontario was 
traversed only by wandering bands of trappers, chiefly belonging 
to the Hudson's Bay Company; but in 1782 bands of American 
loyalists began to occupy the fertile country along the Bay of 
Quinte, and in the Niagara peninsula, the first settlement being 
made in 1782 at Kingston. Between 1782-1784 about 5000 
loyalists entered Ontario, and were given liberal grants of land 
by the British government. 

The oligarchic constitution established in Canada in 1774 by 
the Quebec Act did not suit men trained in the school of local 
self-government which Britain had unwittingly established in 
the American colonies, and the gift of representative institutions 
was soon necessary. In the debates in the British parliament 
Fox urged that the whole territory should remain one province, 
and of this the governor-general, the 1st baron Dorchester (q.v.), 
was on the whole in favour, but in 1791 Pitt introduced and 
carried the Constitutional Act, by which Upper and Lower 
Canada were separated. The Ottawa river was chosen as the 
main boundary between them, but the retention by Lower 
Canada of the seigneuries of New Longueuil and Vaudreuil, on 
the western side of the river, is a curious instance of the triumph 
of social and historical conditions over geographical. To the new 
province were given English civil and criminal law, a legislative 
assembly and council and a lieutenant-governor; in the words of 
its first governor, Colonel John Graves Simcoe, it had, " the 
British Constitution, and all the forms which secure and maintain 
it." Simcoe set to work with great energy to develop the pro- 
vince, but he quarrelled with the governor-general over his pet 
scheme of founding military colonies of retired soldiers in different 
parts of the province, and retired in 1796. Even before his 
retirement political feuds had broken out, which increased in 
bitterness year by year. In so far as these had other causes than 
the Anglo-Saxon love of faction, they were due to the formation 
by the loyalists, their descendants and hangers-on of a clique 
who more and more engrossed political and social power. The 
English church also formed a quasi-official clerical oligarchy, 
and the land reserved by the Constitutional Act for the support 
of " a protestant clergy " formed a fruitful source of bitterness. 

For a time the War of 1812-1814 with the United States put an 
end to the strife. The war gave some heroic traditions to the 
province, and in special cemented that loyalty to Great Britain 
for which Ontario has been conspicuous. On the other hand, the 
natural dislike of the United States felt by the loyalists and their 
descendants was deepened and broadened, and has not yet wholly 
died away, especially among the women of the province. The 
jobbing of land by the official clique, whose frequent inter- 
marriages won for them the name of " The Family Compact," 
the undoubted grievance of the " Clergy Reserves " and the 
well-meaning high-handedness and social exclusiveness of military 
governors, who tried hard but unavailingly to stay the democratic 
wave, soon revived political discord, which found a voice in 



ONTARIO, LAKE 



117 



that born agitator, William Lyon Mackenzie. A wiser but less 
vigorous reformer was Robert Baldwin, who saw that in respons- 
ible government lay the cure for the political green-sickness from 
which Upper Canada was suffering. But though Baldwin and 
Mackenzie were in the right, it is very doubtful whether their 
party could at the time have given the country as cheap and 
efficient a civil service as was given by the Family Compact, 
who had at least education and an honourable tradition. 

In 1837 discontent flared up into a pitiful little rebellion, led 
by Mackenzie. This tragical farce was soon at an end and its 
author a fugitive in the United States, whence he instigated 
bands of hooligans to make piratical attacks upon the Canadian 
frontier. Thus forcibly reminded of the existence of Canada,' 
the British government sent out Lord Durham to investigate, and 
as a result of his report the two Canadas were in 1841 united in a 
legislative union. 

Meanwhile the southern part of the province had been filling 
up. In 1791 the population was probably under 20,000; in 
1824 it was 150,066, and in 1841, 455,688. The eastern counties 
of Stormont and Glengarry, and parts of the western peninsula, 
had been settled by Highlanders; the Canada Company, 
organized in 1825 by the Scottish novelist, John Gait, had 
founded the town of Guelph, had cleared large tracts of land in 
the western peninsula, and settled tbereon hundreds of the best 
class of English and Scotch settlers. 

Once granted responsible government, and the liberty to 
make her own mistakes, Upper Canada went ahead. The popula- 
tion rose to 952,004 in 1851 and to 1,396,091 in 1861. Politically 
she found Lower Canada an uneasy yoke-fellow. The equality 
of representation, granted at the union, at first unfair to Lower 
Canada, became still more unfair to Upper Canada, as her 
population first equalled and then surpassed that of her sister 
province. The Roman Catholic claim to separate state-aided 
schools, at length conceded in 1863, long set the religious 
bodies by the ears. Materially the province prospered. The 
" Clergy Reserves " were secularized in 1854, and in 1851 began 
a railway development, the excitement and extravagance caused 
by which led in 1857 to a financial crisis and the bankruptcy of 
various municipalities, but which on the whole produced great 
and lasting benefit. The Reciprocity Treaty with the United 
States, in operation from 1854 to 1866, and the high prices for 
farm produce due to the American Civil War, brought about an 
almost hectic prosperity. In the discussions from which sprang 
the federation of 1867, Ontario was the one province strongly in 
favour of the union, which was only rendered possible by the 
coalition of her rival leaders, J. A. Macdonald and George Brown. 

Since Federation Upper Canada has been known as the province 
of Ontario. The first provincial government, formed on coalition 
lines by John Sandfield Macdonald, was thrifty and not unpro- 
gressive, but in 1871 was defeated by a reorganized liberal party, 
which held power from 1871 to 1905, and on the whole worthily. 
Under Oliver Mowat, premier from 1873 t° 1896, the govern- 
ment, though strongly partisan, was thrifty and honest. An 
excellent system of primary and secondary schools was organized 
by Egerton Ryerson (1803-1882) and G. W. Ross (q.v.), higher 
education was aided and a school of practical science established 
in Toronto and of mining in Kingston; agriculture was fostered, 
and an excellent agricultural college founded at Guelph in 1874. 

The great struggle of the time was with the federal govern- 
ment on the question of provincial rights. Several questions in 
which Ontario and the Dominion came into conflict were carried 
to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, and in all of 
them Mowat was successful. Connected with this was the 
boundary struggle with Manitoba, the latter province being 
aided by the federal government, partly out of dislike for Mowat, 
partly because the crown lands in the disputed territory would, 
had it been adjudged to Manitoba, have been under federal 
control. Had Manitoba won, the boundary line would have been 
drawn about 6 m. east of Port Arthur, but in 1884 the Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council unanimously decided in favour of 
Ontario; and in 1888 another decision gave her absolute control 
of the crown lands of New Ontario. Under Mowat's successors 



the barnacles which always attach to a party long in power 
became unpleasantly conspicuous, and in January 1905 the 
conscience of Ontario sent the conservatives into power, more 
from disgust at their opponents than from any enthusiasm for 
themselves. The new government displayed unexpected energy, 
ability and strength. The primary and model schools were con- 
solidated and improved; the provincial university was given 
increased aid from the succession duties; various public utilities, 
previously operated by private companies, were taken over by 
the province, and worked with vigour and success. At the 
election of the 8th of June 1908 the conservative government was 
returned by an increased majority. 

Bibliography. — Statistical: The various departments of the 
provincial government publish annual reports, and frequent special 
reports. Among these may be noted those of the Bureau of Alines 
and the archaeological reports by David Boyle (1886-1906). Since 
1889 the university of Toronto has published numerous valuable 
studies on historical, economic and social questions, e.g. Adam 
Shortt, Municipal Government in Ontario. 

Historical: The early history of the province is best given in the 
general histories of Canada by MacMullen and Kingsford (see 
Canada). Ernest Cruikshanks has published numerous excellent 
studies on the Ontario section of the War of 1812. Lord Durham's 
celebrated Report (1839, reprinted 1902) is less trustworthy on Ontario 
than on Quebec. R. and K. M. Lizar's In the Days of the Canada 
Company depicts the life of the early settlers. Biographies exist of 
most of the chief men: C. R. W. Biggar, Sir Oliver Mowat (2 vols., 
1905), is practically a history of Ontario from 1867 to 1896. The 
provincial government has issued an excellent Documentary History 
of Education in Ontario, by J. G. Hodgins (28 vols.). See alsoW. 
Kingsford, Early Bibliography of Ontario. (W. L. G.) 

ONTARIO, LAKE, the smallest and most easterly of the Great 
Lakes of North America. It lies between 43 11' and 44 12' N. 
and 76 12' and 79 49' W., and is bounded on the N. by the 
province of Ontario and on the S. by the state of New York. 
It is roughly elliptical, its major axis, 180 m. long, lying nearly 
east and west, and its greatest breadth is 53 m. The area of its 
water surface is 7260 sq. m. and the total area of its basin 
32,980 sq. m. Its greatest depth is 738 ft., its average depth 
much in excess of that of Lake Erie, and it is as a general rule 
free from outlying shoals or dangers. 

On the north side of the lake the land rises gradually from 
the shore, and spreads out into broad plains, which are thickly 
settled by farmers. A marked featuie of the topography of the 
south shore is what is known as the Lake ridge, or, as it approaches 
the Niagara river, the Mountain ridge. This ridge extends, with 
breaks, from Sodus to the Niagara river, and is distant from the 
lake 3 to 8 m. The low ground between it and the shore, and 
between the Niagara escarpment and the water on the Canadian 
shore, is a celebrated fruit growing district, covered with vine- 
yards, peach, apple and pear orchards and fruit farms. The 
Niagara river is the main feeder of the lake; the other largest 
rivers emptying into the lake are the Genesee, Oswego and Black 
from the south side, and the Trent, which discharges into the 
upper end of the bay of Quinte, a picturesque inlet 70 m. long, 
on the north shore, between the peninsula of Prince Edward, 
near the eastern extremity of the lake, and the mainland. The 
east end of the lake, where it is 30 m. wide, is crossed by a chain of 
five islands, and the lake has its outlet near Kingston, where it 
discharges into the head of the St Lawrence river between a 
group of islands. Elsewhere the lake is practically free from 
islands. There is a general surface current down the lake towards 
the eastward of about 8 m. a day, strongest along the south shore, 
but no noticeable return current. As a result of its relatively 
great depth there are seldom any great fluctuations of level in this 
lake due to wind disturbance, but the lake follows the general 
rule of the Great Lakes (q.v.) of seasonal and annual variation. 
Standard high water (of 1870) is 2-77 ft. below the mean level, 
of 246-18 ft. above mean sea-level, and standard low water 
3-24 ft. below the same plane. The lake never freezes over, 
and is less obstructed by ice than the other lakes, but the harbours 
are closed by ice from about the middle of December to the middle 
of April. 

The commerce of Lake Ontario is limited in comparison with 
that of the lakes above Niagara Falls, and is restricted to vessels 



n8 



ONTENIENTE— OOLITE 



that can pass through the Welland canal locks, which are 270 ft. 
long, 45 ft. wide and 14 ft. deep. Freight consists principally of 
coal shipped from Charlotte, Great and Little Sodus bays and 
Oswego to Canadian ports in the lakes, and to ports on the St 
Lawrence river; of grain shipped through the Welland canal 
to the St Lawrence; and of lumber from Canadian ports. There 
is a large passenger traffic, including pleasure trips, principally 
radiating from Toronto. Ports on the lake are limited in capacity 
to vessels drawing not more than 14 ft. of water. The principal 
Canadian ports are Kingston, at the head of the St Lawrence 
river; Toronto, where the harbour is formed by an island with 
improved entrance channels constructed both east and west of it; 
and Hamilton, at the head of the lake, situated on a landlocked 
lagoon, connected with the main lake by Burlington channel, an 
artificial cut. The principal United States port is Oswego, where 
a breakwater has been built, making an outer harbour. The 
construction of a breakwater was undertaken in 1907 by the 
United States government at Cape Vincent to form a harbour 
where westbound vessels can shelter from storm before crossing 
the lake. 

The difference of 327 ft. in level between Lake Ontario and Lake 
Erie is overcome by the Welland canal, which leads southward 
from Port Dalhousie. It accommodates vessels 255 ft. in length, 
with a draught of 14 ft. The Murray canal, opened for traffic on 
the 14th of April 1890, extends from Presqu'ile bay, on the north 
of the lake, to the head of the bay of Quinte, and enables vessels 
to avoid 70 m. of open navigation. It is 11 ft. deep below the 
lowest lake level, and has no locks. It is proposed to have the 
eastern terminus of the Trent canal system (see Great Lakes) 
at the head of the bay of Quinte, entering through the Trent 
river. At Kingston the Ridcau canal, extending 128 m. to 
Ottawa, enters the St Lawrence river at the foot of the lake. 

Bibliography. — Bulletin No. 17, Survey of Northern and North- 
western Lakes, U.S. Lake Survey Office (Detroit, Mich., 1907); 
Publication No. 108 D., Sailing Directions for Lake Ontario, Hydro- 
graphic Office, U.S. Navy (Washington, D.C., 1902); St Lawrence 
Pilot (7th ed.), Hydrographic Office, Admiralty (London, 1906). 

(W. P. A.) 

ONTENIENTE, a town of eastern Spain, in the province of 
Valencia; on the right bank of the Clariano or Onteniente, 
a sub-tributary of the Jucar, and on the Jativa-Villena railway. 
Pop. (1900) 11,430. Onteniente has a parish church remarkable 
for its lofty square tower, and a palace of the dukes of Almodovar. 
There is a large modern suburb outside the old town, which was 
formerly a walled city; some vestiges of the ramparts still 
remain. Linen and woollen cloth, paper, biandy, furniture and 
earthenware are manufactured; and there is some trade in 
cereals, wine and oil. 

ONTOLOGY (adapted from a modern Latin form ontologia 
used by Jean le Clerc 1692; Gr. &v, ovtos, pres. part, of etrat, 
to be, and Xoyos, science), the name given to that branch of 
philosophy which deals specially with the nature of being {oboia.) 
i.e. reality in the abstract. The idea, denoted in modem philo- 
sophy by the term " ontology " in contrast to the broader 
" metaphysics " and the correlative " epistemology," goes back 
to such phrases as o^rcus ovto., which Plato uses to describe the 
absolute reality of ideas; Plato, however, uses the term "dia- 
lectic " for this particular branch of metaphysics. Aristotle, 
likewise, holding that the separate sciences have each their own 
subject matter, postulates a prior science of existence in general 
which he describes as " first philosophy." So far, therefore, the 
science of being is distinguished not from that of knowing but 
from that of the special forms of being: as to the possibility of 
objective reality there is no question. A new distinction arises 
in the philosophy of Wolff who first made " ontology " a technical 
term. Theoretical philosophy (metaphysics) is by him divided 
into that which deals with being in general whether objective 
or subjective, as contrasted with the particular entities, the soul, 
the world and God. The former is ontology. This intermediate 
stage in the evolution of the science of being gave place to the 
modern view that the first duty of the philosopher is to consider 
knowledge itself (see Epistemology), and that only in the light 
of conclusion as to this primary problem is it possible to consider 



the nature of being. The evolution of metaphysics has thus 
relegated ontology to a secondary place. On the other hand it 
remains true that the science of knowing is inseparable from, 
and in a sense identical with that of being. Epistemological 
conclusions cannot be expressed ultimately without the aid of 
ontological terms-. 

For the wider relations of ontology, see further Philosophy. 

ONYX, a banded chalcedony or striped agate, composed of 
white layers alternating with others of black, brown or red 
colour. A typical onyx consists of two or more black and white 
strata, whilst the term sardonyx is applied to the stone if it 
contains red or brown bands (see Sardonyx). Probably those 
varieties which show red and white zones originally suggested 
the name " onyx," from Gr. ovv$ (a finger nail), since the colours 
of such stones may be not unlike those of the nail. The onyx 
when worked by the lapidary was often designated by the 
diminutive bvbxi-ov; and at the present day the term nicolo, 
a corruption of the Italian diminutive onycolo, is applied to an 
onyx which presents a thin layer of chalcedony deriving a bluish 
tint from the subjacent black ground. The Hebrew soham is 
translated in the authorized version of the Old Testament 
" onyx," but the revised version gives in some of the passages 
an alternative marginal reading of " beryl." The position of the 
land of Havilah, which yielded the onyx-stone, is uncertain. 

India has for ages supplied the finest onyxes, and hence 
jewellers apply the expression " Oriental onyx " to any stone 
remarkable for beauty of colour and regularity of stratification, 
quite regardless of its locality. As far back as the 1st century the 
author of the Peri phis Maris Erythraei mentions the onyx 
among the products of Plythanae, a locality probably identified 
with Paithan on the Godavari; and he further states that the 
stones were taken down to Barygaza, the modern Broach, where 
the agate trade still flourishes. It is probable that the early 
Greeks and Romans derived their prized agate-cups from this 
locality. The Indian onyx is found, with agate and jasper- 
pebbles, in river gravels derived from the disintegration of the 
amygdaloidal volcanic rocks of the Deccan. A great deal of 
onyx now sold is obtained from South American agates, cut in 
Germany. It often happens that the lower deposits in an agate- 
nodule are in horizontal layers, forming onyx, while the other 
deposits have adapted themselves to the curved contours of the 
cavity. The onyxes cut from agate-nodules are usually stained 
artificially, as explained under Agate. 

The onyx is largely used for beads, brooches, pins, ring-stones 
and other small ornamental objects, while the larger pieces are 
occasionally wrought in the form of cups, bowls, vases, &c. 
Onyx is the favourite stone for cameo work, advantage being 
taken of the differently-coloured layers to produce a subject in 
relief on a background of another colour. For fine examples 
of ancient cameo-work in onyx and sardonyx see Gem. 

It should be noted that the term onyx, or onychite, was 
formerly, and is still sometimes, applied to certain kinds of 
banded marble, like the " oriental alabaster " (see Alabaster). 
Such substances are quite distinct from the hard siliceous onyx, 
being much softer and less precious: they are, in fact, usually 
deposits of calcium carbonate like stalagmite and travertine. 
The ornamental stones known as Mexican onyx, or Tecali marble, 
and Algerian onyx are of this character; and in order to avoid 
any confusion with the true onyx it is well to distinguish all 
the calcareous " onyxes " as onyx-marble. The well-known 
" Gibraltar stone " is an onyx-marble, with brown bands, from 
caverns in the limestone of Gibraltar. The Tecali onyx, some- 
times with delicate green shades, takes its name from the district 
of Tecali; one of its localities being La Pedrara, about 21 m. 
from the city of Puebla. 

For onyx-marbles see Dr G. P. Merrill, Rep. U.S. Nat. Mus. for 
1893 (1895), P- 539- (F- W. R.*) 

OOLITE (Gr. dbv, egg, \Ldos, stone), in geology, a term 
having two distinct meanings. In petrology (q.v.) it denotes a 
type of rock structure characterized by the presence of minute 
spherical grains resembling the roe of a fish; if the grains become 
larger, the structure is said to be pisolitic (Gr. iriaos, pea). In 



OOLITE 



iii 



stratigraphical geology, the oolite is a division of the Jurassic 
system (q.v.). The term appears to have been first applied in this 
latter sense hy A. J. M. Brochant de Villiers in 1803, and through 
the labours of W. Smith, W. D. Conybeare, W. Buckland and 
others, it was gradually introduced for the calcareous rocks of 
the British Jurassic until it came to comprehend the whole 
system above the Lias. Custom still sanctions its use in England, 
but it has been objected that the Oolitic (Jurassic) system 
contains many strata that are not oolitic; and since oolitic 
structure occurs in limestones of all ages, it is misleading to 
employ the word in this way. 

The oolites are usually divided into: the Upper or Portland- 
Oolite, comprising the Purbeck, Portland and Kimeridge stages; 
the Middle or Oxford Oolite, including the Corallian, Oxfordian 
and Kellaways beds; and the Lower Oolites, with the Cornbrash, 
Great or Bath Oolite (Bathonian), Fullonian and the Inferior 
Oolite (Bajocian). The Great Oolite and Inferior Oolite are 
treated here. 

The Inferior Oolite, called by William Smith the " Under 
Oolite " from its occurrence beneath the Great or " Upper 
Oolite " in the neighbourhood of Bath, received its present name 
from J. Townsend in 1813. It is an extremely variahle 
assemblage of strata. In the Cotteswold Hills it is a series of 
marine deposits, 264 ft. thick near Cheltenham, but within 25 m. 
the strata thin out to 30 ft. at Fawler in Oxfordshire. A typical 
section N.E. of Dursley contains the following subdivisions: — 



•5:3 2 

ft » 



5- J 

|o 

o 



r c 

ft 
ft 



Zone Fossils. 



White Freestone 
Clypeus Grit . 



. -5 ft. 
6-15 ft. 



taS 



o.a 



Cosmoceras Parkiti- 
soni. 

{Upper Trigonia Grit 2-12 ft. J 
Gryphite Grit . . . 2-12 ft.l c . ^ 
LowerTrigonia Grit .2-12 ft. \Suphanoceras m 
Ilumphnesianum. 
, 6-20 ft. J 

. 5-10 ft." 
45-130 ft. 



("Upper Freestone 
-I Oolite Marl . . 
(_ Lower Freestone 



("Pea Grit . . . 
(_ Lower Limestone 



. 3-20 ft. 
10-25 ft. 



*Harpoceras 
Murchisonae. 



DhCQ 



% J S~B J CephalopodLimestone2-7 ft. \ Lioceras opalimm 
r2 rt ] Cotteswold Sands 10-120 ft. \ Lytoceras jurense. 
gen L 



The hasal sandy series, which is closely related with the 
underlying Lias, is usually descrihed as the Midford Sands 
(from Midford, near Bath), but it is also known locally as the 
Bradford, Yeovil or Cotteswold Sands. The Pea Grit series 
contains pisolitic limestone and coarse, iron-stained oolite 
and sandy limestone. The freestones are compact oolite lime- 
stones. The ragstones are fossiliferous, earthy and iron-stained 
oolitic limestones. The " grits " are really coarse-grained 
limestones or calciferous sandstones. Between Andoversford 
and Bourton-in-the-Water the Inferior Oolite is represented 
by ragstones (Ferruginous beds, Clypeus Grit, Trigonia bed, 
Notgrove Freestone, Gryphite Grit) and freestones (Upper 
Freestones and Harford Sands, Oolite Marl, Lower Freestone). 
Near Chipping Norton in Oxfordshire the " Chipping Norton 
Limestone " lies at the top of a very variable series of rocks. 
In Rutlandshire, Northamptonshire and Lincolnshire the follow- 
ing heds, in descending order, helong to the Inferior Oolite: 
Lincolnshire limestone (shelly, coral-hearing and oolitic), Colly- 
weston slate, Lower Estuarine series and Northampton Sands 
(hard calcareous sandstones, hlue and greenish ironstones and 
sandy limestones). The Colly weston slates are arenaceous 
limestones which have been used for roofing slates since the 
time of Henry VII.; Easton, Dene and Kirkby are important 
localities. The fissility of the rock is developed by exposure 
to frost. Similar beds are the Whittering Pendle and White 
Pendle or Duston slate. 

The Inferior Oolite of Yorkshire differs from that of the 
Cotteswold district; in place of the marine limestones of the 
latter area there is a thick series of sands and sandstones with 



shales and beds of coal; these deposits are mainly estuarine with 
occasional marine beds. The principal subdivisions, in descend- 
ing order, are: the Scarborough or Grey Limestone series, 
the Middle Estuarine series with their coal seams; the Millepore 
series and Whitwell or Cave Oolite; the Lower Estuarine series 
with the Eller Beck bed and Hydraulic Limestone; the Dogger 
and Blea Wyke beds. The last-named beds, like the Midford 
Sands, exhibit a passage between the Inferior Oolite and the Lias. 
In Skye and Raasay the Inferior Oolite is represented by sand- 
stones. 

The fossils of the Inferior Oolite are abundant. Over 200 species 
of Ammonite are known; gasteropods are numerous: Trigonia, 
Lima, Ostrea, Gervillia, Pecten, are common pelecypods; Terebratula, 
Waldheimia and Rhynchonella are the prevailing brachiopods. 
Corals are very numerous in some limestones {Isastrea, Montivaultia). 
Urchins are represented by Cidaris, Acrosalenia, Nuclcolites, Pygaster, 
Pseudodiadema, Hemicidaris; starfish by Solaster, Astropecten, and 
Crinoids by Pentacrinus, Apioerinus. Plant remains, cycads, ferns, 
Ginkgo and coniferous trees are found most abundantly in the 
Yorkshire area. 

The economic products of the Inferior Oolite include many 
well-known building stones, notably those of Ham Hill, Doulting, 
Dundry, Painswick, Cheltenham, Duston, Weldon, Ketton, 
Barnack, Stamford, Casterton, Clipsham, Great Ponton, Ancaster, 
Aislaby (Lower Estuarine series). Several of the stones are 
used for road metal. Iron ores have been worked in the Grey 
Limestone, the Eller Beck bed, the Dogger and the Northampton 
beds, the latter heing the most important. 

The Great or Bath Oolite is typically developed in the neighbour- 
hood of Bath, and except in a modified form it does not extend 
beyond the counties of Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Gloucestershire 
and Oxfordshire. It does not reach so far as Yorkshire, unless 
the Upper Estuarine series of that district is its representative. 
The principal subdivisions of the series are: — • 





Wiltshire, Somersetshire, 
Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire. 


Northamptonshire, 
Buckinghamshire, Bed- 
fordshire, Lincolnshire. 


OJ 

ft. 
ft 

u 

» - 




False - bedded Oolites = 
Kemble beds, " White 
Limestone, " pale, earthy 
Limestones, occasionally 
oolitic, and Marls. 

Upper Ragstones of Bath. 

False - bedded Oolites = the 
principal building stones, 
" Bath Freestone." 

Fissile calcareous Sandstones; 
oolitic Limestones and 
Clays; Lower Ragstones of 
Bath and Stonesfield Slate. 

Thickness, 100-130 ft. 


Great Oolite Clay = Blis- 
worth Clay. 

Great Oolite Limestone 
(generally non-oolitic). 

Upper Estuarine series 
Thickness, 20-100 ft. 



An exact correlation of the Great Oolite strata in the N.E. area 
with those of the S.W. is not possible on account of the great 
variability and impersistence of the beds. Current bedding 
is very prevalent, and minor stratigraphical breaks are common. 
The ahsence of the typical Great Oolite from the N.E. district 
is probably due in part to contemporaneous erosion with overstep 
of the succeeding formation, and in part to local changes in the 
sediment in the shallow waters of this epoch. This may also 
explain the rapid thinning-out of the Great Oolite south of Bath, 
where its place may be taken, to some extent, by the Bradford 
Clay, Forest Marble and Fullonian. 

The Great Oolite is nor readily divisible into palaeontological 
zones, but the ammonite Perisphinctes arbusligerus may be taken 
as the characteristic form along with Belemnites bessinus and Tere- 
bratula maxillata. Corals (Isastraea, Thamnastria) and Polyzoa 
(Stomatopora, Diastopora) are abundant. Hemicidaris, Cidaris, 
Acrosalenia, Clypeus and other urchins are common: Pentacrinus 
and Apioerinus represent the Crinoids. Terebratula, Rhynchonella, 
Waldheimia, Crania are the prevailing brachiopods; the common 
pelecypods, Pecten, Ostrea, Lima, Trigonia, Modiola; Natica, 
Nerinea and other gasteropods are found. Perisphinctes grandes, 
Macrocephalites subcontracts, Oppelia discus and Nautilus dispansus 
are among the more common cephalopods. The remains of fish 
{Mesodan, Hybodus), crocodiles {Teliosaurus), dinosaurs (Cetiosaurus, 



120 



OOSTERZEE— OPAL 



Megalosaurus), pterosaurs (Rham phocephalus) , and in the Stonesfield 
slate the jaws of marsupial mammals (Amphitherium, Amphilestes, 
Phascolotherium) occur. 

The building stones of the Great Oolite are mainly oolitic 
freestones, viz. the varieties of " Bath stone " quarried and mined 
in the neighbourhood of that city (Corsham Down, Monks Park, 
Coombe Down, Odd Down, Box Ground, &c.) and more shelly 
limestones like the Taynton and Milton stone. The Stonesfield 
slate has been largely worked near Woodstock in Oxfordshire 
and in Gloucestershire for roofing, &c. The " slates " are brown 
calcareous sandstone, grey and slightly oolitic calcareous sand- 
stone, and blue and grey oolitic limestone. A curious modifica- 
tion of the Great Oolite — White Limestone division — is character- 
ized by irregular ramifying tubular cavities, usually filled with 
ochreous material; this rock occurs in blocks and layers, and 
is used for rockeries under the name of " Dagham stone " from 
Dagham Down north of Cirencester. (See also Jurassic.) 

(J.A.H.) 

OOSTERZEE, JAN JACOB VAN (1S17-1SS2), Dutch divine, 
was born at Rotterdam on the 1st of April 1S17. After acting 
as pastor at Alkmaar and Rotterdam, in 1863 he was made 
professor of biblical and practical theology at the university 
of Utrecht. Oosterzee earned a reputation as a preacher, was 
editor of the Thcolog. Jahrbiicher from 1S45, wrote a number 
of noteworthy books on religious history, and published poems 
in Dutch (18S2). He died on the 29th of July 1882. 

A collected edition of Oosterzee's works was published in French, 
CEuvres completes, in three volumes (1877-1880). His autobiography 
appeared in 1882. 

OOTACAMUND, or Utakamand, a town of British India, 
headquarters of the Nilgiris district in Madras, approached 
by a rack railway from the Mettapolliem station on the Madras 
railway. Pop. (1901) 18,596. It is the principal sanatorium 
of southern India, and summer headquarters of the Madras 
government. It is placed on a plateau about 7230 ft. above 
the sea, with a fine artificial lake, and mountains rising above 
8000 ft. The mean annual temperature is 58° F., with a minimum 
of 38° in January and a maximum of 76° in May; average 
annual rainfall, 49 in. The houses are scattered on the hillsides 
amid luxuriant gardens, and there are extensive carriage drives. 
In the neighbourhood are plantations of coffee, tea and cinchona. 
There are a brewery and two dairy farms. The Lawrence 
asylum for the children of European soldiers was founded 
in 185S, and there are also the B reeks memorial and Basel 
Mission high schools. 

See Sir F. Price, Ootacamund: A History (Madras, 1908). 

OOZE (0. Eng. wdse, cognate with an obsolete waise, mud; 
cf. O. Nor. vcisa, muddy pool), the slime or mud at the bottom 
of a river, stream, especially of a tidal river or estuary, and so 
particularly used in deep-sea soundings of the deposit of fine 
calcareous mud, in which remains of foramimfera are largely 
present. The word " ooze " is also used as a technical term 
in tanning, of the liquor in a tan vat in which the hides are 
steeped, made of a solution of oak bark or other substances 
which yield tannin. This word is in origin different from " ooze " 
in its first sense. It appears in 0. Eng. as wos, and meant the 
juice of plants, fruits, &c. 

OPAH (Lampris liina), a pelagic fish, the affinities of which are 
still a puzzle to ichthyologists. The body is compressed and 
deep (more so than in the bream) and the scales are minute. 
A long dorsal fin, high and pointed anteriorly, runs along nearly 
the whole length of the back; the caudal is strong and deeply 
cleft. The ventral fin is also elongated, and all the fins are 
destitute of spines. The pelvic fins are abdominal in position, 
long and pointed in shape, and the pelvic bones are connected 
with the caracoids. These fins contain numerous (15-17) rays, 
a feature in which the fish differs from the Acanthopterygians. 

In its gorgeous colours the opah surpasses even the dolphins, 
all the fins being of a bright scarlet. The sides are bluish green 
above, violet in the middle, red beneath, variegated with oval 
spots of brilliant silver. It is only occasionally found near the 
shore; its real home is the Atlantic, especially near Madeira 
and the Azores, but many captures are recorded from Great 



Britain, Ireland and Scandinavia; it strays as far north as 
Iceland and Newfoundland, and probably southwards to the 
latitudes of the coast of Guinea. It is rare in the Mediterranean. 
The name opah, which is now generally used, is derived from 
the statement of a native of the coast of Guinea who happened 
to be in England when the first specimen was exhibited (1750), 
and who thought he recognized in it a fish well known by that 
name in his native country. From its habit of coming to the 
surface in calm weather, showing its high dorsal fin above the 
water, it has also received the name of " sun-fish," which it 
shares with Orthagarisats and the basking shark. It grows to a 
length of 4 to 5 ft. and a weight exceeding 100 lb, and is highly 
esteemed on account of the excellent flavour of its flesh. 

OPAL, an amorphous or non-crystalline mineral consisting 
of hydrated silica, occasionally displaying a beautiful play of 
colour, whence its value as a gem-stone. It is named from 
Lat. opalus, Gr. 67rdX\ioe, with which may be compared Sansk. 
upala, a precious stone. Opal commonly occurs in nodular or 
stalactitic masses, in the cavities of volcanic rocks, having been 
deposited in a gelatinous or colloidal condition. It is inferior to 
quartz in hardness (H. 5-5 to 6-5) and in density (S. G. 1-9 to 
2-3), whilst it differs also by its solubility in caustic alkalis. 
The proportion of water in opal varies usually from 3 to 12%, 
and it is said that occasionally no water can be detected, 
the mineral having apparently suffered dehydration. Though 
normally isotropic, opal is frequently doubly refracting, the 
anomaly being due to tension set up during consolidation. 
The mineral when pure is transparent and colourless, as well 
seen in the variety which, from its vitreous appearance, was 
called by A. G. Werner hyalite (Gr. i!<xXos, glass), or popularly 
" Miiller's glass," a name said to have been taken from its 
discoverer. This pellucid opaline silica occurs as an incrustation 
in small globules, and is by no means a common mineral, being 
chiefly found at certain localities in Bohemia, Mexico and 
Colorado, U.S.A. (Cripple Creek). 

The beautiful variety known as " noble " or " precious opal " 
owes its value to the brilliant flashes of colour which it displays 
by reflected light. The colours are not due to the presence of 
any material pigment, but result from certain structural peculi- 
arities in the stone, perhaps from microscopic fissures or pores 
or from delicate striae, but more probably from very thin 
lamellae of foreign matter, or of opaline silica, having a different 
index of refraction from that of the matrix. The origin of 
the colours in opal has been studied by Sir D. Brewster, Sir W. 
Crookes, Lord Rayleigh and H. Behrens. In the variety known 
to jewellers as " harlequin opal," the rainbow-like tints are 
flashed forth from small angular surfaces, forming a kind of 
polychromatic mosaic, whilst in other varieties the colours are 
disposed in broad bands or irregular patches of comparatively 
large area. By moving the stone, a brilliant succession of 
fiery flashes may sometimes be obtained. The opal is usually 
cut with a convex surface, and, being a soft stone, should be 
protected from friction likely to produce abrasion; nor should 
it be exposed to sudden alternations of temperature. The loss 
of water, sometimes effected by heat, greatly impairs the colour, 
though moderate warmth may improve it. According to Pliny 
the opal ranked next in value to the emerald, and he relates 
that the rich Roman senator Nonius was exiled by Mark Antony 
for sake of his magnificent opal, as large as a hazel nut. The 
opal, on account of its unique characters, has been the subject 
of remarkable superstition, and even in modern times has often 
been regarded as an unlucky stone, but in recent years it has 
regained popular favour and is now when fine, among the most 
highly valued gem-stones. 

Precious opal is a mineral of very limited distribution. Though 
ancient writers state that it was brought from India, and fine 
stones are still called in trade " Oriental opal," its occurrence is 
not known in the East. The finest opals seem to have been 
always obtained from Hungary, where the mineral occurs, 
associated with much common opal, in nests in an altered 
andesitic rock. The fine opals occur only at the Dubnyik mine, 
near the village of Vorosvagas (Czerwenitza). The workings 



OPALINA— OPERA 



121 



have been carried on for centuries in the mountains near Eperjes, 
and some remarkable stones from this locality are preserved 
in the Imperial Natural History Museum in Vienna, including an 
uncut specimen weighing about 3000 carats. Precious opal is 
found also in Honduras, especially in trachyte near Gracias a 
Dios; and in Mexico, where it occurs in a porphyritic rock at 
Esperanza in the state of Queretaro. A remarkable kind of 
opal, of yellow or hyacinth-red colour, occurs in trachytic 
porphyry at Zimapan in Hidalgo, Mexico, and is known as 
" fire-opal." This variety is not only cut en cabochan but is 
also faceted. Fire-opal is sometimes called " girasol." Much 
precious opal is worked in Australia. In Queensland it is found 
lining cracks in nodules of brown ironstone in the Desert Sand- 
stone, a rock of Upper Cretaceous age, and is distributed over 
a wide area near the Barcoo river. Bulla Creek is a well-known 
locality. The layer of opal, when too thin to be cut with a 
convex surface, is used for inlaid work or is carved into cameos 
which show to much advantage against the dark-brown matrix. 
The matrix penetrated by veins and spots of opal, and perhaps 
heightened in colour artificially, has been called " black opal "; 
but true black opal occurs in New South Wales. The " root of 
opal " consists of the mineral disseminated through the matrix. 
In New South Wales precious opal was accidentally discovered 
in 18S9, and is now largely worked at White Cliffs, Yungnulgra 
county, where it is found in nodules and seams in a siliceous rock 
of the Upper Cretaceous series. It is notable that the opal 
sometimes replaces shells and even reptilian bones, whilst curious 
pseudomorphs, known as " pineapple opal," show the opal in 
the form of aggregated crystals, perhaps of gypsum, gaylussite 
or glauberite. 

" Common opal " is the name generally applied to the varieties 
which exhibit no beauty of colour, and may be nearly opaque. 
It is frequently found in the vesicular lavas of the N.E. of Ireland, 
the west of Scotland, the Faroe Isles and Iceland. When of 
milky-white colour it is known as " milk opal "; when of 
resinous and waxy appearance as "resin opal"; if banded 
it is called "agate opal"; a green variety is termed "prase 
opal "; a dark red, ferruginous variety " jaspar opal "; whilst 
'' rose opal " is a beautiful pink mineral, coloured with organic 
matter, found at Quincy, near Mehun-sur-Yevre, in France. 
A brown or grey concretionary opal from Tertiary shales at 
Menilmontant, near Paris, is known as menilite or " liver opal." 
A dull opaque form of opal, with a fracture imperfectly con- 
choidal, is called " semi-opal "; whilst the opal which not 
infrequently forms the mineralizing substance of fossil wood 
passes as ' wood opal." The name hydrophaiie is applied to 
a porous opal, perhaps partially dehydrated, which is almost 
opaque when dry but becomes more or less transparent when 
immersed in water. It has been sometimes sold in America as 
" magic stone." Cacholong is another kind of porous opal with 
a lustre rather like that of mother-of-pearl, said to have been 
named from the Cach river in Bokhara, but the word is probably 
of Tatar origin. 

Opaline silica is frequently deposited from hot siliceous springs, 
often in cauliflower-like masses, and is known as geyserite. This 
occurs in Iceland, New Zealand and the Yellowstone National Park. 
The fionte from the hot springs of Santa Fiora, in Tuscany, is opaline 
silica, with a rather pearly lustre. A variety containing an excep- 
tionally small proportion of water, obtained from the Yellowstone 
Park, was named pealite, after the chemist A. C. Peale. The 
siliceous deposits from springs, often due to organic agencies, arc 
known generally as " siliceous sinter " or, if very loose in texture, as 
" siliceous tuff." Opaline silica forms the material of many organic 
structures, like the frustules of diatoms and the tests of radiolarians, 
which may accumulate as deposits of tripoli, and be used for polishing 
purposes. (F. W. R.*) 

OPALINA (so named by J. E. Purkinje and G. Valentin), 
a genus of Protozoa, without mouth or contractile vacuole, 
covered with nearly equal flagelliform cilia, and possessing 
numerous nuclei, all similar. It has been referred to Aspirotricha 
by Biitschli, but by M. Hartog {Cambridge Natural History, vol. ii., 
1906) has been transferred to the Flagellates (q.v.). All the 
species are parasitic in cold-blooded Vertebrates. 

See Bezzenberger in Archiv.f. Protistenkunde (1903), iii. 138. 



OPATA (" enemies," so called by their neighbours the Pimas), 
a tribe of Mexican Indians of Piman stock. Their country is 
the mountainous district of north-eastern Sonora and north- 
western Chihuahua, Mexico. Though usually loyal to. the 
Mexican government, they rebelled in 1820, but after a gallant 
effort were defeated. They number now about 5000, and still 
largely retain their ancient autonomy. 

OPERA (Italian for " work "), a drama set to music, as 
distinguished from plays in which music is merely incidental. 
Music has been a resource of the drama from the earliest times, 
and doubtless the results of researches in the early history of 
this connexion have been made very interesting, but they arc 
hardly relevant to a history of opera as an art-form. If language 
has meaning, an art-form can hardly be said to exist under 
conditions where the only real connexions between its alleged 
origin* and its modern maturity are such universal means of 
expression as can equally well connect it with almost every- 
thing else. We will therefore pass over the orthodox history 
of opera as traceable from the music of Greek tragedy to that 
of miracle-plays, and will begin with its real beginning, the first 
dramas that were set to music in order to be produced as musical 
works of art, at the beginning of the 17th century. 

There seems no reason to doubt the story, given by Doni, of 
the meetings held byagroup of amateurs at the house of theBardi 
in Florence in the last years of the 16th century, with the object 
of trying experiments in emotional musical expression by the 
use of instruments and solo voices. Before this time there was 
no real opportunity for music-drama. The only high musical 
art of the 16th century was unaccompanied choral music: its 
expression was perfect within its limits, and its limits so abso- 
lutely excluded all but what may be called static or contemplative 
emotion that " dramatic music " was as inconceivable as 
" dramatic architecture." But the literary and musical dilettanti 
who met at the house of the Bardi were not mature musical 
artists; they therefore had no scruples, and their imaginations 
were fired by the dream of restoring the glories of Greek tragedy, 
especially on the side of its musical declamation. The first 
pioneer in the new " monodic " movement seems to have been 
Vincenzo Galilei, the father of Galileo. This enthusiastic 
amateur warbled the story of Ugolino to the accompaniment of 
the lute, much to the amusement of expert musicians; but he 
gained the respect and sympathy of those whose culture was 
literary rather than musical. His efforts must have been not unlike 
a wild caricature of Mr. W. B. Yeats's method of reciting poetry 
to the psaltery. The first public production in the new style 
was Jacopo Peri's Euridice (1600), which was followed by a less 
successful effort of Caccini's on the same subject. To us it is 
astonishing that an art so great as the polyphony of the 16th 
century could ever have become forgotten in a new venture so 
feeble in its first steps. Sir Hubert Parry has happily charac- 
terized the general effect of the new movement on contemporary 
imagination as something like that of laying a foundation- 
stone — the suggestion of a vista of possibilities so inspiriting 
as to exclude all sense of the triviality of the present achievement. 
Meanwhile those composers who retained the mastery of poly- 
phonic music tried to find a purely vocal and polyphonic solution 
of the problem of music-drama; and the Amfiparnasso of Orazio 
Vecchi (written in 1594. the year of Palestrina's death, and pro- 
duced three years later) is not alone, though it is by far the most 
remarkable, among attempts to make a music-drama out of a 
series of madrigals. From the woodcuts which adorn the first 
edition of the Amfiparnasso it has been conjectured that the 
actors sang one voice each, while the rest of the harmony was 
supplied by singers behind the stage '; and this may have been 
the case with other works of this kind. But the words of Vecchi's 
introductory chorus contradict this idea, for they tell the audience 
that " the theatre of this drama is the world " and that the 
spectators must " hear instead of seeing." 

1 The first story in Berlioz's Soirees d 'orchestre is about a young 
16th-century genius who revolts from this practice and becomes a 
pioneer of monody. The picture is brilliant, though the young genius 
evidently learnt all his music in Paris somewhere about 1830. 



122 



OPERA 



With the decadence of the madrigal, Monteverde brought a 
real musical power to bear on the new style. His results are 
now intelligible only to historians, and they seem to us artistically 
nugatory ; but in their day they were so impressive as to render the 
further continuance of 1 6th-century choral art impossible. At the 
beginning of the 17th century no young musician of lively artistic 
receptivity could fail to be profoundly stirred by Monteverde's 
Orfeo (1602), Arianna (1608) and// Combattimcnto di Tancredi e 
Clorinda (1624), works in which the resources of instruments 
were developed with the same archaic boldness, the same grasp 
of immediate emotional effect and the same lack of artistic 
organization as the harmonic resources. The spark of Monte- 
verde's genius produced in musical history a result more like 
an explosion than an enlightenment; and the emotional rhetoric 
of his art was so uncontrollable, and at the same time so much 
more impressive in suggestion than in realization, that we cannot 
be surprised that the next definite step in the history of opera 
took the direction of mere musical form, and was not only un- 
dramatic but anti-dramatic. 

The system of free musical declamation known as recitative is 
said to have been used by Emilio del Cavalieri as early as 1588, 
and it was in the nature of things almost the only means of 
vocal expression conceivable by the pioneers of opera. Formal 
melody, such as that of popular songs, was as much beneath 
their dignity as it had been beneath that of the high art from 
which they revolted; but, in the absence of any harmonic 
system but that of the church modes, which was manifestly 
incapable of assimilating the new " unprepared discords," and 
in the utter chaos of early experiments in instrumentation, 
formal melody proved a godsend as the novelty of recitative faded. 
Tunes were soon legalized at moments of dramatic repose when 
it was, possible for the actors to indulge in either a dance or a 
display of vocalization; it was in the tunes that the strong 
harmonic system of modern tonality took shape; and by the 
early days of Alessandro Scarlatti, before the end of the 17th 
century, the art of tune-making had perennially blossomed 
into the musically safe and effective form of the aria (g.v.). 
From this time until the death of Handel the history of opera 
is simply the history of the aria; except in so far as in France, 
under Lully, it is also the history of ballet-music, the other main 
theatrical occasion for the art of tune-making. With opera 
before Gluck there is little interest in tracing schools and develop- 
ments, for the musical art had as mechanical a connexion with 
drama as it had with the art of scene-painting, and neither it 
nor the drama which was attached to it showed any real develop- 
ment at all, though the librettist Metastasio presented as imposing 
a figure in 18th-century Italian literature as Handel presented in 
Italian opera. Before this period of stagnation we find an almost 
solitary and provincial outburst of life in the wonderful patch- 
work of Purcell's art (1658-1695). Whether he is producing 
genuine opera (as in the unique case of Dido and Aeneas) or 
merely incidental music to plays (as in the so-called opera King 
Arthur), his deeply inspired essays in dramatic music are no less 
interesting in their historic isolation from everything except the 
influence of Lully than they are admirable as evidences of a 
genius which, with the opportunities of 50 years later or 150 
years earlier, might assuredly have proved one of the greatest 
in all music. Another sign of life has been appreciated hy 
recent research in the interesting farcical operas (mostly Nea- 
politan) of certain early 18th-century Italian composers (see 
Leo, Pergolese, Logroscino), which have some bearing on 
the antecedents of Mozart. 

The real reason for the stagnation of high opera before Gluck 
is (as explained in the articles Music and Sonata Forms) that 
the forms of music known before r75o could not express dramatic 
change without losing artistic organization. The " spirit of 
the age " can have had little to do with the difficulty, or why 
should Shakespeare not have had a contemporary operatic 
brother-artist during the " Golden Age " of music? The 
opportunity for reform came with the rise of the sonata style. 
It was fortunate for Gluck that the music of his time was too 
vigorously organized to be upset by new discoveries. Gluck was 



a much greater artist than Monteverde, but he too was not over- 
loaded with academic mastery; indeed, though historians have 
denied it, Monteverde was by far the hetter contrapuntist, and 
seems rather to have renounced his musical powers than to have 
struggled for need of them. But instead of memories of a 
Golden Age, Gluck had behind him 150 years of harmonic and 
orchestral knowledge of good and evil. He also had almost as 
clear a sense of symphonic form as could find scope in opera at 
all; and his melodic power was generally of the highest order. 
It is often said that his work was too far in advance of his time 
to establish his intended reform; and, if this means that un- 
dramatic Italian operas continued to outnumber those dramatic 
masterpieces which no smaller man could achieve, the statement 
is as true as it is of every great artist. If, however, it is taken 
to mean that because Mozart's triumphs do not lie in serious opera 
he owes nothing to Gluck, then the. statement is misleading 
(see Gluck). The influence of Gluck on Mozart was profound, 
not only where it is relevant to the particular type of lihretto, 
as in Idomeneo, but also on the broad dramatic basis which 
includes Greek tragedy and the 18th-century comedy of manners. 
Mozart, whose first impulse was always to make his music coherent 
in itself, for some time continued to cultivate side by side with his 
growing polyphony and freedom of movement certain Italian 
formalities which, though musically effective and flattering to 
singers, were dramatically vicious. But these features, though 
they spoil Idomeneo, correspond to much that in Gluck's operas 
shows mere helplessness; and in comic opera they may even 
become dramatically appropriate. Thus in Cosi fan tutli the 
florid arias in which the two heroines protest their fidelity are 
the arias of ladies who do protest too much ; and in Die Zauber- 
flote the extravagant vocal fireworks of the Queen of Night are 
the displays of one who, in the words of the high priest Sarastro, 
" hopes to cajole the people with illusions and superstition." 
In the article Mozart we have discussed other evidences of his 
stagecraft and insight into character, talents for which his comic 
subjects gave him far more scope than those of classical tragedy 
had given to Gluck. Mozart always extracts the utmost musical 
effect from every situation in his absurd and often tiresome 
libretti (especially in vocal ensemble), while his musical effects 
are always such as give dramatic life to what in other hands are 
conventional musical forms. These merits would never have 
been gainsaid but for the violence of Wagner's earlier partisans 
in their revolt from the uncritical classicism of his denser and 
noisier opponents. Wagner himself stands as far aloof from 
Wagnerian Philistinism as from uncritical classicism. He was 
a fierce critic of social conditions and by no means incapable 
of hasty iconoclastic judgments; but he would have treated 
with scant respect the criticism that censures Mozart for super- 
ficiality in rejecting the radically unmusical element of mordant 
social satire which distinguishes the Figaro of Beaumarchais 
from the most perfect opera in all classical music. 

It cannot be said that in any high artistic sense Italian comic 
opera has developed continuously since Mozart. The vocal 
athleticism of singers; the acceptance and great development by 
Mozart of what we may call symphonic (as distinguished from 
Handelian) forms of aria and ensctnble; and the enlargement of 
the orchestra; these processes gave the Italian composers of 
Mozart's and later times prosaically golden opportunities for 
lifting spectators and singers to the seventh heaven of flattered 
vanity, while the music, in itself no less than in its relation to the 
drama, was steadily degraded. The decline begins with Mozart's 
contemporary and survivor, D. Cimarosa, whose ideas are genuine 
and, in the main, refined, but who lacks power and resource. 
His style was by no means debased, but it was just so slight that 
contemporaries found it fairly easy. His most famous work, 
// Matrimonio Scgreto, is an opera bnjfa which is still occasionally 
revived, and it is very like the sort of thing that people who 
despise Mozart imagine Figaro to be. Unless it is approached 
with sympathy, its effect alter Figaro is hardly more exhilarating 
than that of the once pilloried spurious " Second Part " to the 
Pickivick Papers. But this is harsh judgment; for it proves to 
be a good semi-classic as soon as we take it on its own merits. 



OPERA 



123 



It is far more musical, if less vivacious, than Rossini's Barbiere; 
and the decline of Italian opera is more significantly foreshadowed 
in Cimarosa's other chef-d'oeuvre, the remarkable opera seria, 
Gli Orazzi ed i Curiazzi. Here the arias and ensembles are serious 
art, showing a pale reflection of Mozart, and not wholly without 
Mozart's spirit; the choruses, notably the first of all, have fine 
moments; and the treatment of conflicting emotions at one 
crisis, where military music is heard behind the scenes, is masterly. 
Lastly, the abrupt conclusion at the moment ot the catastrophe 
is good and was novel at the time, though it foreshadows that 
sacrifice of true dramatic and musical breadth to the desire for an 
"effective curtain," and that mortal fear of anti-climax which in 
classical French opera rendered a great musical finale almost 
impossible. But the interesting and dramatic features in Gli 
Orazzi are unfortunately less significant historically than the 
vulgarity of its overture, and the impossibility, after the beautiful 
opening chorus, of tracing any unmistakably tragic style in the 
whole work except by the negative sign of dullness. 

Before Cimarosa's overwhelming successor Rossini had retired 
from his indolent career, these tendencies had already reduced 
both composers and spectators to a supreme indifference to the 
mood of the libretto, an indifference far more fatal than mere 
inattention to the plot. Nobody cares to follow the plot of 
Mozart's Figaro; but then no spectator of Beaumarchais's 
Mariage de Figaro is prevented by the intricacy of its plot from 
enjoying it as a play. In both cases we are interested in the 
character-drawing and in each situation as it arises; and we do 
no justice to Mozart's music when we forget this interest, even 
in cases where the libretto has none of the literary merit that 
survives in the transformation of Beaumarchais's comedy into an 
Italian h'bretto. But with the Rossinian decline all charitable 
scruples of criticism are misplaced, for Italian opera once more 
became as purely a pantomimic concert as in the Handelian 
period; and we must not ignore the difference that it was now a 
concert of very vulgar music, the vileness of which was only 
aggravated by the growing range and interest of dramatic 
subjects. The best that can be said in defence of it was that 
the vulgarity was not pretentious and unhealthy, like Meyerbeer's; 
indeed, if the famous " Mad Scene " in Donizetti's Lucia di 
Lammermoor had only been meant to be funny it would not 
have been vulgar at all. Occasionally the drama pierced through 
the empty breeziness of the music; and so the spirit of Shake- 
speare, even when smothered in an Italian h'bretto unsuccessfully 
set to music by Rossini, proved so powerful that one spectator 
of Rossini's Otello is recorded to have started out of his seat 
at the catastrophe, exclaiming "Good Heavens! the tenor is 
murdering the soprano!" And in times of political unrest 
more than one opera became as dangerous as an over-censored 
theatre could make it. An historical case in point is brilliantly 
described in George Meredith's Vittoria. But what has this 
to do with the progress of music? The history of Italian opera 
from after its culmination in Mozart to its subsidence on the 
big drum amd cymbals of the Rossinians is the history of a 
protected industry. Verdi's art, both in its burly youth and in 
its shrewd old age, is far more the crown of his native genius 
than of his native traditions; and, though opinions differ as 
to the spontaneity and depth of the change, the paradox is true 
that the Wagnerization of Verdi was the musical emancipation 
of Italy. 

After Mozart the next step in the development of true operatic 
art was neither Italian nor German, but French. The French 
sense of dramatic fitness had a wonderfully stimulating effect 
upon every foreign composer who came to France. Rossini 
himself, in Guillaume Tell, was electrified into a dramatic and 
orchestral life of an incomparably higher order than the rollicking 
rattle of serious and comic Italian opera in its decline. He was 
in the prime of life when he wrote it, but it exhausted him and 
was practically his last important work, though he lived to a 
cheerful old age. The defects of its libretto were grave, but he 
made unprecedented efforts to remedy them, and finally suc- 
ceeded, at the cost of an entire act. The experience was very 
significant; for, from the time of Gluck onwards, while it 



cannot be denied that native, and naturalized French operatic 
art has suffered from many forms of musical and dramatic 
debasement, we may safely say that no opera has met with 
success in France that is without theatrical merit. And- the 
French contribution to musical history between Gluck and 
Rossini is of great nobility. If Cherubini and Mehul had had 
Gluck's melodic power, the classics of French opera would have 
been the greatest achievements in semi-tragic music-drama 
before Wagner. As it is, their austerity is not that of the highest 
classics. It is negative, and tends to exclude outward attractive- 
ness rather because it cannot achieve it than because it contains 
all things in due proportion. Be this as it may, Cherubini had 
a real influence on Beethoven; not to mention that the libretti 
of Fidelio and Les Deux joitrnees were originally by the same 
author, though Fidelio underwent great changes in translation 
and revision. It is impossible to say what French opera might 
have done for music through Beethoven if Fidelio had not 
remained his solitary (because very nearly unsuccessful) operatic 
monument; but there is no doubt as to its effect on Weber, 
whose two greatest works, Der Frcischiitz and Eiiryanthe, are 
two giant strides from Cherubini to Wagner. Euryanthe is in 
respect of Leit-motif (see below) almost more Wagnerian than 
Lohengrin, Wagner's fourth published opera. It failed to make 
an epoch in history because of its dreary libretto, to which, 
however, the highly dramatic libretto of Lohengrin owes a 
surprising number of points. 

The libretti of classical opera set too low a literary standard 
to induce critics to give sufficient attention to their aesthetic 
bearings; and perhaps the great scholar Otto Jahn is the only 
writer who has applied a first-rate literary analysis to the subject 
(see his Life of Mozart); a subject which, though of great 
importance to music, has, like the music itself, been generally 
thrust into the background by the countless externals that give 
theatrical works and institutions a national or political import- 
ance independent of artistic merit and historical development. 
Much that finds prominent place in the orthodox history of 
opera is really outside the scope of musical and dramatic discus- 
sion; and it may therefore be safely left to be discovered under 
non-musical headings elsewhere in this Encyclopaedia. Even 
when what passes for operatic history has a more real connexion 
with the art than the history of locomotion has with physical 
science, the importance of the connexion is often overrated. 
For example, much has been said as to the progress in German 
opera from the choice of remote subjects like Mozart's Die 
Entfilhrung aus dem Scrail to the choice of a subject so thoroughly 
German as Der Frcischiitz: but this is only part of the general 
progress made, chiefly in France, towards the choice of romantic 
instead of classical subjects. Whatever the intrinsic interest 
of musical ethnology, and whatever light it may throw upon the 
reasons why an art will develop and decline sooner in one country 
than in another, racial character will not suffice to produce an 
art for which no technique as yet exists. Nor will it suffice in 
any country to check the development or destroy the value of an 
art of which the principles were developed elsewhere. No 
music of Mozart's time could have handled Weber's romantic 
subjects, and all the Teutonism in history could not have pre- 
vented Mozart from adopting and developing those Italian 
methods that gave him scope. Again, in the time of Lully, 
who was the contemporary of Moliere, the French genius of 
stagecraft was devoted to reducing opera to an effective series 
of ballets; yet so little did this hamper composers of real 
dramatic power that Quinault's libretto to Lully's very successful 
Armide served Gluck unaltered for one of his greatest works 
90 years later. If Lully owes so little to Cambert as to be rightly 
entitled the founder of French opera, if Gluck is a greater 
reformer than his predecessor Rameau, if Cherubini is a more 
powerful artist than Mehul, and if, lastly, Meyerbeer developed 
the vices of the French histrionic machinery with a plausibility 
which has never been surpassed, then we must reconcile our 
racial theories with the historic process by which the French 
Grand Opera, one of the most pronounced national types in all 
music, was founded by an Italian Jew, reformed by an Austrian, 



124 



OPERA 



classicized by another Italian, and debased by a German Jew. 
This only enhances the significance of that French dramatic 
sense which stimulated foreign composers and widened their 
choice of subjects, as it also preserved all except the Italian 
forms of opera from falling into that elsewhere prevalent early 
19th-century operatic style in which there was no means of 
guessing by the music whether any situation was tragic or comic. 
From the time of Meyerbeer onwards, trivial and vulgar opera 
has been as common in France as elsewhere; but there is a world 
of difference between, for example, a garish tune naively intended 
for a funeral march, and a similar tune used in a serious situation 
with a dramatic sense of its association with other incidents in 
the opera, and of its contrast with the sympathies of spectators 
and actors. The first case is as typical of 19th-century musical 
Italy as the second case is of musical France and all that has 
come under French influence. 

As Wagner slowly and painfully attained his maturity he 
learned to abhor the influence of Meyerbeer, and indeed it 
accounts for much of the inequality of his earlier work. But 
it can hardly have failed to stimulate his sense of effect; and 
without the help of Meyerheer's outwardly successful novelties 
it is doubtful whether even Wagner's determination could 
have faced the task of his early work, a task so negative and 
destructive in its first stages. We have elsewhere (see Music, 
Sonata Forms ad finem, and Symphonic Poem) described how 
if music of any kind, instrumental or dramatic, was to advance 
beyond the range of the classical symphony, there was need 
to devise a kind of musical motion and proportion as different 
from that of the sonata or symphony as the sonata style is 
different from that of the suite. All the vexed questions of the 
function of vocal ensemble, of the structure of the libretto, and 
of instrumentation, are but aspects and results of this change 
in what is as much a primary category of music as extension 
is a primary category of matter. Wagnerian opera, a generation 
after Wagner's death, was still an unique phenomenon, the 
rational influence of which was not yet sifted from the con- 
comitant confusions of thought prevalent among many composers 
of symphony, oratorio, and other forms of which Wagner's 
principles can be relevant only with incalculable modifications. 
With Wagner the history of classical opera ends and a new 
history begins, for in Wagner's hands opera first became a single 
art-form, a true and indivisible music-drama, instead of a kind 
of dramatic casket for a collection of objets d'art more or less 
aptly arranged in theatrical tableaux. 

Forms and Terminology of Opera. 

The history of pre-Wagnerian opera is not, like that of the 
sonata forms, a history in which the technical terminology has 
a clear relationship to the aesthetic development. In order to 
understand the progress of classical opera we must understand 
the whole progress of classical music; and this not merely for 
the general reason that the development of an art-form is 
inseparable from the development of the whole art, but because 
in the case of opera only the most external terminology and the 
most unreal and incoherent history of fashions and factions 
remain for consideration after the general development of 
musical art has been discussed. For completeness, however, the 
terminology must be included; and a commentary on it will 
complete our sketch in better historical perspective than any 
attempt to amplify details on the lines of a continuous history. 

1. Secco-recitative is the delivery of ordinary operatic dialogue 
in prosaic recitative-formulas, accompanied by nothing but a 
harpsichord or pianoforte. In comic operas it was not so had 
a method as some critics imagine; for the conductor (who sat 
at the harpsichord or pianoforte) would, if he had the wits 
expected of him by the composer, extemporize his accompani- 
ments in an unobtrusively amusing manner, while the actors 
delivered their recitative rapidly in a conversational style known 
as parlanie. In serious operas, however, the conductor dare 
not be frivolous; and accordingly secco-recitative outside 
comic opera is the dreariest of makeshifts, and is not tolerated 
by Gluck in his mature works. He accompanies his recitatives 



with the string band, introducing other instruments freely as 
the situation suggests. 

2. Accompanied recitative was used in all kinds of opera, as 
introductory to important arias and other movements, and also 
in the course of finales. Magnificent examples abound in 
Idomeneo, Figaro and Don Giovanni; and one of the longest 
recitatives before Wagner is that near the beginning of the 
finale of the first act of Die Zauberflole. Beethoven's two 
examples in Fidclio are short but of overwhelming pathos. 

3. Melodrama is the use of an orchestral accompaniment to 
spoken dialogue (see Benda). It is wonderfully promising in 
theory, but generally disappointing in effect, unless the actors 
are successfully trained to speak without being dragged by the 
music into an out-of-tune sing-song. Classical examples are 
generally short and cautious, but very impressive; there is one 
in Fidelio in which the orchestra quotes two points from earlier 
movements in a thoroughly Wagnerian way (see Leitmotif 
below). But the device is more prominent in incidental music 
to plays, as in Beethoven's music for Goethe's Egmont. Mendels- 
sohn's music for A Midsummer Night's Dream contains the most 
brilliant and resourceful examples yet achieved in this art; 
but they are beyond the musical capacity of the English stage, 
which, however, has practised the worst forms of the method 
until it has become a disease, many modern performances of 
Shakespeare attaining an almost operatic continuity of bad 
music. 

4. Opera b-uffa is classical Italian comic opera with secco- 
recitative. Its central classics are, of course, Figaro and Don 
Giovanni, while Cimarosa's Malrimonio Segreto and Rossini's 
Barbicre are the most important steps from the culmination 
to the fall. '" > :" 

5. Opera seria is classical Italian opera with secco-recitative; 
almost always (like the Handelian opera from which it is derived) 
on a Greek or Roman subject, and, at whatever cost to dramatic 
or historic propriety, with a happy ending. Gluck purposely 
avoids the term in his mature works. The only great classic 
in opera seria is Mozart's Idomeneo, and even that is dramatically 
too unequal to be more than occasionally revived, though it. 
contains much of Mozart's finest music. 

6. The Singspiel is German opera with spoken dialogue. In 
early stages it advanced from the farcical to the comic. With 
Beethoven it came under French influence and adopted 
" thrilling " stories with happy endings; and from this stage 
it passed to specifically " Romantic " subjects. Its greatest 
classics are Mozart's Entfiihrung and Zauberflole, Beethoven's 
Fidelio, and Weber's Freischiitz. 

7. Opera comiquc is the Singspiel of France, being French opera 
with spoken dialogue. It did not originate in farce but in 
the refusal of the Academie de Musique to allow rival companies 
to infringe its monopoly of Grand Opera; and it is so far from 
being essentially comic that one of its most famous classics, 
Mehul's Joseph, is on a Biblical subject; while its highest 
achievement, Cherubini's Les Deuxjournecs, is on a story almost 
as serious as that of Fidelio. All Cherubini's mature operas 
(except the ballet Anacreon, which is uninterrupted music 
from beginning to end) are operas comiques in the sense of having 
spoken dialogue; though Medee, being, perhaps, the first 
genuine tragedy in the history of music-drama, 1 is simply 
called " opera " on the title-page. In the smaller French 
works, especially those in one act, there is so much spoken 
dialogue that they are almost like plays with incidental music. 
But they never sink to the condition of the so-called operas of 
the English composers since Handel. When Weber accepted 
the commission to write Obcron for the English stage in 1825, he 
found that he was compelled to set the musical numbers one by 
one as they were sent to him, without the slightest information 
as to the plot, the situation, or even the order of the pieces! 
And, to crown his disgust, he found that this really did not 
matter. 

1 Even Gluck never contemplated any alternative to the absurd 
happy ending of Orfeo; and all his other operatic subjects include a 
deus ex machina. 



OPERA 



J 25 



8. Grand opera is French opera in which every word is sung, 
and generally all recitative accompanied by the orchestra. 
It originated in the Academie de Musiquc, which, from its founda- 
tion in 1669 to the proclamation of the liberie des theatres in 
1791, claimed the monopoly of operas on the lines laid down 
by Lully, Rameau,and Gluck. Rossini's Guillaume Tell, Spontini's 
Vestala and the works of Meyerbeer crown this theoretically 
promising art-form with what Sir Hubert Parry has justly 
if severely called a crown of no very precious metal. Weber's 
Euryanthe, Spohr's Jessonda, and others of his operas, are German 
parallel developments; and Wagner's first published work, 
Rienzi, is like an attempt to beat Meyerbeer on his own ground. 

9. Opera boujfe is not an equivalent of opera bujfa, but is 
French light opera with a prominent strain of persiflage. Its 
chief representative is Offenbach. It seems to be as native to 
France as the austere Optra eomiqae which it eclipsed. Sullivan 
assimilated its adroit orchestration as Gilbert purified its literary 
wit, and the result became a peculiarly English possession. 

10. The finale is that part of a classical opera where, some 
way before the end of an act, the music gathers itself together and 
flows in an unbroken chain of concerted movements. The 
" invention " has been ascribed to this or that composer before 
Mozart, and it certainly must have taken some time in the 
growing; but Mozart is the first classic whose finales are famous. 
The finales to the second act of Figaro, the first act of Don 
Giovanni and the second of the Zanberflote remained unequalled 
in scale and in dramatic and symphonic continuity, until Wagner, 
as it were, extended the finale backwards until it met the intro- 
duetion (see below) so that the whole act became musically con- 
tinuous. This step was foreshadowed by Weber, in whose 
Euryanlhe the numbering of the later movements of each act is 
quite arbitrary. Great finales are less frequent in Singspiel than 
in opera bujfa. They can hardly be said to exist in opera seria, 
climax at the end of an act being there (even in Gluck) attained 
only by a collection of ballet movements, whereas the essence 
of Mozart's finale is its capacity to deal with real turning-points 
of the action. A few finales of the first and second acts of 
operas eomiqucs (which are almost always in three acts) are on 
the great classical lines, e.g. that to the first act of Les Deux 
journees; but a French finale to a last act is, except in Cherubini's 
works, hardly ever more than a short chorus, often so per- 
functory that, for instance, when Mehul's Joseph was first 
produced by Weber at Dresden in 181 7, a three-movement finale 
by Franzl of Munich was added; and Weber publicly explained 
the difference between French and German notions of finality, 
in excuse for a course so repugnant to his principles in the 
performance of other works. 

11. The introduction is sometimes merely an instrumental 
entr'acte in classical opera; but it is more especially an extension 
of continuous dramatic music at the beginning of an act, like 
the extension of the finale backwards towards the middle of the 
act, but much smaller. Beethoven, in his last version of Fidelio, 
used the term for the perfectly normal duet that begins the first 
act, and for the instrumental entr'acte which leads to the rise of 
the curtain on Florestan's great scene in the second act. The 
classical instances of the special meaning of " introduction " are 
the first number in Don Giovanni and, more typically, that in the 
Zanberflote. 

12. Leit-motif, or the association of musical themes with 
dramatic ideas and persons, is not only a natural means of 
progress in music drama, but is an absolute musical necessity as 
soon as the lines dividing an opera into separate formal pieces 
are broken down, unless the music is to become exclusively 
" atmospheric " and inarticulate. Without recurrence of themes 
a large piece of music could no more show coherent development 
than a drama in which the characters were never twice addressed 
by the same name nor twice allowed to appear in the same guise. 
Now the classical operatic forms, being mainly limited by the 
sonata style, were not such as could, when once worked out in 
appropriate designs of aria and ensemble, be worked out again 
in recognizable transformations without poverty and monotony 
of effect. And hence a system of Leit-motif was not appropriate 



to that ingenious compromise which classical opera made 
between music that completed from 12 to 30 independent 
designs and the drama that meanwhile completed one. 
But when the music became as continuous as the drama 
the case was different. There are plenty of classical instances of 
a theme superficially marking some cardinal incident or personal 
characteristic, without affecting the independence of the musical 
forms; the commonest case being, of course, the allusion some- 
where in the overture to salient points in the body of the opera; 
as, for instance, the allusion to the words " cosi fan tatti " in the 
overture to Mozart's opera of that name, and the Masonic three- 
fold chord in that to the Zaubcrjlole. Weber's overtures are 
sonata-form fantasias on themes to come: and in later and 
lighter operas such allusiveness, being childishly easy, is a 
meaningless matter of course. Within the opera itself, songs, 
such as would be sung in an ordinary non-musical play, will 
probably recur, as in Les Deux journics; and so will all phrases 
that have the character of a call or a signal, a remarkable and 
pathetic instance of which may be found in Mehul's Melidore et 
Phrosinc, where the orchestra makes a true Leit-motif of the 
music of the heroine's name. But it is a long way from this to the 
system already clearly marked by Weber in Der Freischiitz and 
developed in Euryanthe to an extent which Wagner did not 
surpass in any earlier work than Tristan, though in respect of the 
obliteration of sections his earliest works are in advance of Weber. 
Yet not only are there some thirteen recurrent musical incidents 
in the Freischiitz and over twenty in Euryanthe, but in the latter 
the serpentine theme associated with the treacherous Eglantine 
actually stands the Wagnerian test of being recognizable when 
its character is transformed. This can hardly be claimed even for 
the organization of themes in Lohengrin. 

Mature Wagnerian Leit-motif is a very different thing from the 
crude system of musical labels to which some of Wagner's 
disciples have reduced it, and Wagner himself had no patience 
with the catalogue methods of modern operatic analysis. The 
Leit-motif system of Tristan, the Mcistcr singer, the Ring and 
Parsifal is a profoundly natural and subtle cross-current of musical 
thought, often sharply contrasted with the externals of a 
dramatic situation, since it is free to reflect not only these 
externals, not only the things which the audience know and the 
persons of the drama do not know, not only those workings of 
the dramatic character's mind which he is trying to conceal from 
the other characters, hut even those which he conceals from 
himself. There was nothing new in any one of these possibilities 
taken singly (see, for example, Gluck's ironic treatment of " le 
calmc rentre dans mon caur "), but polyphonic Leit-motif made 
them all possible simultaneously. Wagner's mind was not con- 
centrated on the merely literary and theatrical aspects of music- 
drama; he fought his way to the topmost heights of the peculiar 
musical mastery necessary to his ideals; and so he realized that 
principle in which none but the very greatest musicians find 
freedom; the principle that, however constantly necessary and 
powerful homophonic music may be in passages of artificial 
simplicity, all harmonic music is by nature and origin polyphonic; 
and that in polyphony lies the normal and natural means of 
expressing a dramatic blending of emotions. 

Wagnerian Leit-motif has proved rather a giant's robe for later 
composers; and the most successful of recent operas have, while aim- 
ing less at the sublime, cultivated Wagner's musical and dramatic 
continuity more than his principles of musical texture. Certainly 
Wagnerian continuity is a permanent postulate in modern opera; 
but it shows itself to be a thing attainable quite independently 
of any purely musical style or merit, so long as the dramatic 
movement of the play is good. This condition was always 
necessary, even where opera was most symphonic. Mozart was 
incessantly disputing with his librettists; and all his criticisms 
and changes, though apparently of purely musical purport, had a 
brilliant effect on the movement of the play. In one desperate 
case, where the librettist was obstinate, Mozart abandoned a 
work (L'Oca del Cairo) to the first act of which he had already 
sketched a great finale embodying a grandiose farcical figure that 
promised to be unique in classical opera. 



126 



OPHICLEIDE 



Mozart's lesson of dramatic movement has been better learnt 
than anything peculiar to either music or literature; for, while 
his libretti show how little that quality has to do with poetic 
merit, the whole history of Italian opera from Rossini to Mascagni 
shows how little it has to do with good music. On the other hand, 
the musical coherence of the individual classical forms used in 
opera has caused many critics to miss the real dramatic ground 
of some of the most important operatic conventions. The chief 
instance of this is the repetition of words in arias and at climaxes, 
a convention which we are over-ready to explain as a device which 
prolongs situations and delays action for the sake of musical 
design. But in the best classical examples the case is almost the 
reverse, for the aria does not, as we are apt to suppose, represent 
a few words repeated so as to serve for a long piece of music. 
Without the music the drama would have required a long speech 
in its place; but the classical composer cannot fit intelligible 
music to a long string of different sentences, and so the librettist 
reduces the speech to mere headlines and the composer supplies 
the eloquence. Herein lies the meaning of Mozart's rapid progress 
from vocal concertos like " Fuor del mar " in Idomeueo and 
" Marteru aller Arten " in Die Entfilhrung to genuine musical 
speeches like " Non pill andrai " in Figaro, in which the obvious 
capacity to deal with a greater number of words is far less 
important than the naturalness and freedom with which the 
pace of the declamation is varied — a freedom unsurpassed even 
in the Elcktra of Richard Strauss. 

With Wagnerian polyphony and continuity music became 
capable of treating words as they occur in ordinary speech, and 
repetitions have accordingly become out of place except where 
they would be natural without music. But it is not here that the 
real gain in freedom of movement lies. That gain has been won, 
not by Wagner's negative reforms alone, but by his combination 
of negative reform with new depths of musical thought; and 
modern opera is not more exempt than classical opera from the 
dangers of artistic methods that have become facile and secure. 
If the libretto has the right dramatic movement, the modern 
composer need have no care beyond what is wanted to avoid 
interference with that movement. So long as the music arouses 
no obviously incompatible emotion and has no breach of con- 
tinuity, it may find perfect safety in being meaningless. 
The necessary stagecraft is indeed not common, but neither 
is it musical. Critics and public will cheerfully agree in 
ascribing to the composer all the qualities of the dramatist; 
and three allusions in the music of one scene to that of another 
will suffice to pass for a marvellous development of Wagnerian 
Leit-motif. 

Modern opera of genuine artistic significance ranges from the 
light song-play type admirably represented by Bizet's Carmen 
to the exclusively " atmospheric " impressionism of Debussy's 
Pelleas el Melisande. Both these extremes are equally natural in 
effect, though diametrically opposite in method; for both types 
eliminate everything that would be inadmissible in ordinary 
drama. If we examine the libretto of Carmen as an ordinary play 
we shall find it to consist mainly of actual songs and dances, so 
that more than half of the music would be necessary even if it 
were not an opera at all. Debussy's opera differs from Maeter- 
linck's play only in a few omissions such as would probably 
be made in ordinary non-musical performances. His musical 
method comhines perfect Wagnerian continuity with so entire 
an absence of Leit-motif that there are hardly three musical 
phrases in the whole opera that could be recognized if they 
recurred in fresh contexts. The highest conceivable development 
of Wagnerian continuity has been attained by Strauss in Salome 
and Elcktra; these operas being actually more perfect in dra- 
matic movement than the original plays of Wilde and Hof- 
mannsthal. But their use of Leit-motif, though obvious and 
impressive, is far less developed than in Wagner; and the poly- 
phony, as distinguished from the brilliant instrumental technique, 
is, like that technique, devoted mainly to realistic and physically 
exciting effects that crown the impression in much the same way 
as skilful lighting of the stage. Certainly Strauss does not in 
his whole time-limit of an hour and three-quarters use as many 



definite themes (even in the shortest of figures) as Wagner uses 
in ten minutes. 

It remains to be seen whether a further development of 
Wagnerian opera, in the sense of addition to Wagner's resources 
in musical architecture, is possible. The uncompromising realism 
of Strauss does not at first sight seem encouraging in this direc- 
tion; yet his treatment of Elektra's first invocation of Agamem- 
non produces a powerful effect of musical form, dimly perceived, 
but on a larger scale than even the huge sequences of Wagner. 
In any case, the best thing that can happen in a period of musical 
transition is that the leading revolutionaries should make a mark 
in opera. Musical revolutions are too easy to mean much by 
themselves; there is no purely musical means of testing the 
sanity of the revolutionaries or of the critics. But the stage, 
while boundlessly tolerant of bad music, will stand no nonsense 
in dramatic movement. (The case of Handelian opera is no excep- 
tion, for in it the stage was a mere topographical term.) In every 
period of musical fermentation the art of opera has instantly 
sifted the men of real ideas from the aesthetes and doctrinaires; 
Monteverde from the prince of Venosa, Gluck from Gossec, and 
Wagner from Liszt. As the ferment subsides, opera tends to a 
complacent decadence; but it will always revive to put to the 
first and most crucial test every revolutionary principle that 
enters into music to destroy and expand. 

See also Aria; .Overture; Cherubini; Gluck; Mozart; 
Verdi; Wagner; Weber. (D. F. T.) 

OPHICLEIDE (Fr. ophicleide, basse d'harmonic; Gcr. Ophik- 
leid; Ital. oficleidc), a brass wind instrument having a cup-shaped 
mouthpiece and keys, in fact a bass keyed-bugle. The name 
(from Gr. 6<£is, serpent, and kXcTScs, keys), applied to it by 
Halary, the patentee of the instrument, is hardly a happy one, 
for there is nothing of the serpent about the ophicleide, which 
has the bore of the bugle and also owes the chromatic arrange- 
ment of the keys to a principle evolved by Halliday for the bugle, 
to be explained later on. 

The ophicleide is almost perfect theoretically, for it combines 
the natural harmonic scale of the brass wind instruments having 
cup-shaped mouthpieces, such as the trumpet, with a system 
of keys, twelve in number, one for each chromatic semitone of 
the scale; it is capable of absolutely accurate intonation. It 
consists of a wooden, or oftener brass, tube with a conical bore 
having the same proportions as that of the bugle but not wide 
enough in proportion to its length to make the fundamental or 
first note of the harmonic series of much practical use. The 
tube, theoretically * 8 ft. long, is doubled upon itself once, ter- 
minating at the narrow end in a tight coil, from which protrudes 
the straight piece known as the crook, which bears the cup- 
shaped mouthpiece; the wide end of the tube terminates in a 
funnel-shaped bell pointing upwards. 

The production of sound is effected in the ophicleide as in other 
instruments with cup- or funnel-shaped mouthpieces (see Horn). 
The lips stretched across the mouthpiece act as vibrating reeds 
or as the vocal chords in the larynx. The breath of the performer, 
compressed by being forced through the narrow opening between 
the lips, sets the latter in vibration. The stream of air, instead 
of proceeding into the cup in an even flow — in which case there 
would be no sound — is converted into a series of pulsations by 
the trembling of the lips. On being thrown into communication 
with the main stationary column of air at the bottom of the cup, 
the pulsating stream generates " sound waves," each consisting 
of a half wave of expansion and of a half wave of compression. 
On the frequency per second of the sound waves as they strike 
the drum of the ear depends the pitch of the note, the acuteness 
of the sound varying in direct proportion to the frequency. To 
ensure a higher frequency in the sound waves, their length must 
be decreased. Two things are necessary to bring this about 
without shortening the length of the tube: (i) the opening 
between the lips, fixed at each end by contact with the edges of 

1 For an explanation of the difference between theory and practice 
in the length of the tubes of wind instruments, see Victor Mahillon, 
" Le cor " {Les instruments de musique aic musee du conservatoire 
royal de musique de Brttxelles, pt. ii. Brussels and London, 1907), 
pp. 27-29. 



OPHICLEIDE 



127 



the mouthpiece, must be made narrower by greater tension; 
(2) the breath must be sent through the reduced aperture in a 
more compressed form and with greater force, so that the exciting 
current of air becomes more incisive. An exact proportion, 
not yet scientifically determined, evidently exists between the 
amount of pressure and the degree of tension, which is uncon- 
sciously regulated by the performer, excess of pressure in pro- 
portion to the tension of the lips producing a crescendo by causing 
amplitude of vibration instead of increased speed. 

When the fundamental note of a pipe is produced, the tension 
of the lips and pressure of breath proportionally combined are 
at their minimum for that instrument. If both be doubled, 
a node is formed half way up the pipe, and the column of air 
no longer vibrates as a whole, but as two separate parts, each 
half the length of the tube, and the frequency of the sound 
waves is doubled in consequence. The practical result is the 
production of the second harmonic of the series an octave above 
the fundamental. The formation of three nodes and therefore 
of three separate sound waves produces a note a twelfth above 
the fundamental, known as the third harmonic, and so on in 
mathematical ratio. This harmonic series forms the natural 
scale of the instrument, and is for the ophicleide the following: 

('*) 23 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 

Fundamental. 

In some cases the fundamental is difficult to obtain, and the 
harmonics above the eighth are not used. 

The ophicleide has in addition to its natural scale eleven or 
twelve lateral holes covered by keys, each of which, when succes- 
sively opened, raises the pitch of the harmonic series a semitone, 
with the exception of the first, an open key, which on being 
closed lowers the pitch a semitone. There were ophicleides 
in C and in Bb, the former being the more common; contrabass 
ophicleides were also occasionally made in F and Eb. The 
keys of the ophicleide, being placed in the lowest register, were 
intended to bind together by chromatic degrees the first and 
second harmonics. The compass is a little over three octaves, 

"- vfr-f — with chromatic semitones throughout. 



from 



3-* 

The unsatisfactory timbre of the ophicleide led to its being 
superseded by the bass tuba; but it seems a pity that an 
instrument so powerful, so easy to learn and understand, and 
capable of such accurate intonation, should have to be discarded. 
The lower register is rough, but so powerful that it can easily 
sustain above it masses of brass harmonics; the medium is 
coarse in tone, and the upper wild and unmusical. 

Although a bass keyed-bugle, the ophicleide owes something of 
its origin to the application of keys to the serpent (q.v.), a wind 
instrument, the invention of which is generally attributed to Edme 
Guillaume, canon of Auxerre, about 1590. The serpent remained 
in its primitive form for nearly two centuries, and then only it was 
attempted to improve it by adding keys. It was a musician named 
Regibo, 1 belonging to the orchestra of the church of St Pierre at 
Lille, who, about 1780, first thought of giving it the shape of a 
bassoon. The merit of this innovation was rapidly recognized in 
England and Germany. Still, to follow Gerber, 2 one Frichot, who 
was established in London, published in 1800 a description of an 
instrument, entirely of brass, manufactured by J. Astor, which he 
claimed as his invention, calling it the basshorn, but which was no 
other in principle than the new serpent of Regibo. It only made 
its way to France and Belgium after the passage of the allied armies 
in 1815. The English brass basshorn was designated on the Continent 
the English or the Russian basshorn, the " serpent anglais " or the 
" basson russe." Under this last name all instruments of the form, 
whether of wood or brass, were later on confounded in France and 
Belgium. The " basson russe " remained in great vogue until the 
appearance of the ophicleide, to disappear with it in the complete 
revolution brought about by the invention of pistons. 

The invention of the ophicleide is generally but falsely attributed 
to Alexandre Frichot, a professor of music at Lisieux, department of 
Calvados, France. The instrument, which the inventor called 
" basse-trompette," was approved of as early as 13th November 
1806 by a commission composed of professors of the Paris Con- 

1 Gerber, Lexicon der Tonkiinstler (Leipzig, 1790). 

2 Lexikon, edition of 1812. 



servatoire, but the patent bears the date 31st December 1810. The 
" basse-trompette," which Frichot in his specification had at first, 
in imitation of the English basshorn, called " basse cor," was, like 
the English instrument, entirely of brass, and had, like it, six holes; 
it only differed in a more favourable disposition brought about by 
the curvings of the tube, and by the application of four crooks 
which permitted the instrument to be tuned " in C low pitch and 
C high pitch for military bands, in C# for churches, and in D for 
concert use." The close relationship between the two instruments 
suggests the question whether this was the Frichot who worked with 
Astor in London in 1800. 

The first idea of adding keys to instruments with cupped mouth- 
pieces, unprovided with lateral holes, with the aim of filling up some 
of the gaps between the notes of the harmonic scale, goes back, 
according to Gerber (Lexicon of 1790), to Kolbel, a hornplayer in 
the Russian imperial band, about 1760. Anton Weidinger, 3 trumpeter 
in the Austrian imperial band, improved upon this first attempt, 
and applied it in 1800 to the trumpet. But the honour belongs to 
Joseph Halliday, bandmaster of the Cavan militia, of being the first 
to conceive, in 1810, the disposition of a certain number of keys 
along the tube, setting out from its lower extremity, with the idea 
of producing by their successive or simultaneous opening a chromatic 
scale throughout the extent of the instrument. The bugle-horn 
was the object of his reform; the scale of which, he says, in the 
preamble of his patent, " until my invention contained but five 

tones, viz. (S ,- = — — I. My improvements on that 

instrument are five keys, to be used by the performer according 
to the annexed scale, which, with its five original notes, render it 
capable of producing twenty-five separate tones in 
regular progression." Fig. 1 represents the keyed 
bugle of Joseph Halliday. 

It was not until 1815 that the use of the new 
instrument spread upon the Continent. We find 
in the account-books of a Belgian maker, Tuer- 
linckx of Mechlin, that his first supply of a bugle- 
horn bears the date of 25th March 1815, and it was 
made " aen den Heer Muldener, lieutenant in 
het regiment due d'York." 

The acoustic principle inaugurated by Halliday 
consisted in binding together by chromatic degrees 



the second and third harmonics 



% 



to 




He attained it, as we have just seen 



Fig. 1. — Keyed 
Bugle. 



by the help of five keys. The principle once discovered, it became 
easy to extend it to instruments of the largest size, of which the 
compass, as in the " basson russe," began with the fundamental 
sound. It was simply necessary to bind this fundamental 



m 



to the next harmonic sound 



(3— ==: - by a larger number of keys. This 



was done in 1817 by Jean Hilaire Aste, known 
as Halary, a professor of music and instru- 
ment-maker at Paris. We find the description 
of the instruments for which he sought a 
patent in the Rapport de VAcademie Royale 
des Beaux-Arts de I'lnstitut de France, meeting 
of the 19th of July 1817. These instruments were 
three in number: (1) the clavi-tube, a keyed 
trumpet; (2) the quinti-tube, or quinti-clave; 
(3) the ophicleide, a keyed serpent. The clavi- 
tube was no other than the bugle-horn slightly 
modified in some details of construction, and 
reproduced in the different tonalities Ab, F, Eb, 
D, C, Bb, A and Ab. The quinti-tube had 
nearly the form of-a bassoon, and was, in the 
first instance, armed with eight keys and 
constructed in two tonalities, F and Eb. This 
was the instrument afterwards named " alto 
ophicleide." The ophicleide (fig. 2) had the 
same form as the quinti-tube. It was at first 
adjusted with nine or ten keys, and the 
number was carried on to twelve — each key 
to give a semitone (additional patent of 16th 
August 1822). The ophicleide or bass of the 
harmony was made in C and in Bb, the contra-bass in F and in Eb- 4 

3 The announcement of Weidinger's invention of a Klappen- 
trompete, or trumpet with keys, appears in the Allg. musik. Ztg. 
(Leipzig, November 1802), p. 158; and further accounts are given in 
January 1803, p. 245, and 1815, p. 844. 

4 The report of the Academie des Beaux-Arts on the subject of this 
invention shows a strange misconception of it, which it is interesting 
to recall. " As to the two instruments which M. Halary designs 




Fig.2. — Ophicleide 
of Halary. 



128 



OPHIR— OPHTHALMOLOGY 



It is certain that from the point of view of invention _ Halary's 
labours had only secondary importance; but, if the principle of 
keyed chromatic instruments with cupped mouthpiece 1 goes back 
to Halliday, it was Halary's merit to know how to take advantage 
of the principle in extending it to instruments of diverse tonalities, 
in grouping them in one single family, that of the bugles, in so com- 
plete a manner that the improvements of modern manufacture have 
not widened its limits either in the grave or the acute direction. 
Keyed chromatic wind instruments made their way rapidly; to their 
introduction into military full or brass bands we can date the 
regeneration of military music. After pistons had been invented 
some forty years, instruments with keys could still reckon their 
partisans. Now these have utterly disappeared, and pistons or 
rotary cylinders remain absolute masters of the situation. 

(V. M.; K. S.) 

OPHIR, a region celebrated in antiquity for its gold, which 
was proverbially fine (Job xxii. 24, xxviii. 16; Psalms xlv. 9; 
Isa. xiii. 1 2). Thence Solomon's Phoenician sailors brought gold 
for their master (1 Kings ix. 28, x. 11; 2 Chron. viii. iS, ix. 10); 
Ophir gold was stored up among the materials for the Temple (1 
Chron. xxix. 4) . Jehoshaphat, attempting to follow his ancestors' 
example, was foiled by the shipwreck of his navy (1 Kings xxii. 
48). The situation of the place has been the subject of much 
controversy. 

The only indications whereby it can be identified are its 
connexion, in the geographical table (Gen. x. 29), with Sheba 
and Havilah, the latter also an auriferous country (Gen. ii. 11), 
and the fact that ships sailing thither started from Ezion-Geber 
at the head of the Red Sea. It must, therefore, have been 
somewhere south or east of Suez; and must be known to be a 
gold-bearing region. The suggested identification with the 
Egyptian Punt is in itself disputable, and it would be more 
helpful if we knew exactly where Punt was (see Egypt). 

(1) East Africa. — This has, perhaps, been the favourite theory 
in recent years, and it has been widely popularized by the 
sensational works of Theodore Bent and others, to say nothing 
of one of Rider Haggard's novels. The centre of speculation 
is a group of extensive ruins at Zimbabwe, in Mashonaland, 
about 200 m. inland from Sofala. Many and wild words have 
been written on these imposing remains. But the results 
of the saner researches of Randall Maclver, announced first 
at the South Africa meeting of the British Association (1905) 
and later communicated to the Royal Geographical Society, 
have robbed these structures of much of their glamour; from 
being the centres of Phoenician and Hebrew industry they have 
sunk to be mere magnified kraals, not more than three or four 
hundred years old. 

(2) The Far East. — Various writers, following Josephus and 
the Greek version, have placed Ophir in different parts of the 
Far East. A chief argument in favour of this view is the length 
of the voyages of Solomon's vessels (three years were occupied 
in the double voyage, going and returning, 1 Kings x. 22) and 
the nature of the other imports that they brought — " almug- 
trees " {i.e. probably sandal-wood), ivory, apes and peacocks. 
This, however, proves nothing. It is nowhere said that these 
various imports all came from one place; and the voyages must 
have been somewhat analogous to those of modern " coasting 
tramps," which would necessarily consume a considerable time 
over comparatively short journeys. It has been sought at 

under the names of ' quinti-clave ' and ' ophicleide, ' they bear a great 
resemblance to those submitted to the Academy in the sitting of the 
11th of March 1811 by M. Dumas, which he designed under the 
names of ' basse et contrebasse guerrieres.' . . . The opinion of our 
commission on the quinti-clave and ophicleide is that M. Halary can 
only claim the merit of an improvement and not that of an entire 
invention; still, for an equitable judgment on this point, we should 
compare the one with the other, and this our commission cannot do, 
not having the instruments of M. Dumas at our disposal." This is 
what the commission ought to have had, but it would have sufficed 
had they referred to the report of the sittings of 6th and 8th April, 
in which it is clearly explained that the instruments presented by 
M. Dumas were bass clarinets (Monikur Universel of 19th April 
181 1). 

1 We designedly omit the use of the word " brass " to qualify 
these instruments. The substance which determines the form of a 
column of air is demonstrably indifferent for the timbre or quality of 
tone so long as the sides of the tubes are equally elastic and rigid. 



Ab/iira, at the mouth of the Indus (where, however, there is no 
gold); at Supara, in Goa; and at a certain Mount Ophir in 
Johore. 

(3) Arabia. — On the whole the most satisfactory theory is 
that Ophir was in some part of Arabia — whether south or east 
is disputed, and (with the indications at our disposal) probably 
cannot be settled. Arabia was known as a gold-producing 
country to the Phoenicians (Ezek. xxvii. 22); Sheba certainly, 
and Havilah probably, are regions of Arabia, and these are 
coupled with Ophir in Genesis x.; and the account of the arrival 
of the navy in 1 Kings x. 11, is strangely interpolated into the 
story of the visit of the queen of Sheba, perhaps because there 
is a closer connexion between the two events than appears at 
first sight. 

Historians have been at a loss to know what Solomon could 
give in exchange lor the gold of Ophir and the costly gifts of 
the queen of Sheba. Mr K. T. Frost (Expos. Times, Jan. 1905) 
shows that by his command of the trade routes Solomon was able 
to balance Phoenicians and Sabaeans against each other, and 
that his Ophir gold would be paid for by trade facilities and 
protection of caravans. (R. A. S. M.) 

OPHITES, or Ophians (Gr. 6<£«, Heb. »$, " snake "), known 
also as Naasenes, an early sect of Gnostics described by 
Hippolytus (Philosoph. v.), Irenaeus (adv. Haer. i. 11), Origen 
(Contra Cclsum, vi. 25 seq. and Epiphanius (Haer. xxvi.). The 
account given by Irenaeus may be taken as representative 
of these descriptions which vary partly as referring to different 
groups, partly to different dates. The honour paid by them 
to the serpent is connected with the old mythologies of Babylon 
and Egypt as well as with the popular cults of Greece and the 
Orient. It was particularly offensive to Christians as tending 
to dishonour the Creator who is set over against the serpent 
as bad against good. The Ophite system had its Trinity: (1) the 
Universal God, the First Man, (2) his conception (ewota), the 
Second Man, (3) a female Holy Spirit. From her the Third Man 
(Christ) was begotten by the First and Second. Christ flew 
upward with his mother, and in their ascent a spark of light 
fell on the waters as Sophia. From this contact came Ialdabaoth 
the Demiurgos, who in turn produced six powers and with them 
created the seven heavens and from the dregs of matter the 
Nous of serpent form, from whom are spirit and soul, evil and 
death. Ialdabaoth then announced himself as the Supreme, 
and when man (created by the six powers) gave thanks for 
life not to Ialdabaoth but to the First Man, Ialdabaoth created 
a woman (Eve) to destroy him. Then Sophia or Prunikos sent 
the serpent (as a benefactor) to persuade Adam and Eve to eat 
the tree of knowledge and so break the commandment of Ialda- 
baoth, who banished them from paradise to earth. After a long 
war between mankind aided by Prunikos against Ialdabaoth 
(this is the inner story of the Old Testament), the Holy Spirit 
sends Christ to the earth to enter (united with his sister Prunikos) 
the pure vessel, the virgin-born Jesus. Jesus Christ worked 
miracles and declared himself the Son of the First Man. Ialda- 
baoth instigated the Jews to kill him, but only Jesus died on 
the cross, for Christ and Prunikos had departed from him. 
Christ then raised the spiritual body of Jesus which remained 
on earth for eighteen months, initiating a small circle of elect 
disciples. Christ, received into heaven, sits at the right hand 
of Ialdabaoth, whom he deprives of glory and receives the souls 
that are his own. In some circles the serpent was identified 
with Prunikos. There are some resemblances to the Valentinian 
system, but whereas the great Archon sins in ignorance, 
Ialdabaoth sins against knowledge; there is also less of Greek 
philosophy in the Ophite system. 

See King, The Gnostics and their Remains (London, 1887); G. 
Salmon, art. " Ophites " in Diet. Chr.Biog. 

OPHTHALMOLOGY (Gr. 64>0aXjuos, e Y e ). tne science of the 
anatomy, physiology and pathology of the eye (see Eye and 
Vision). From the same Greek word come numerous other 
derivatives: e.g. ophthalmia, the general name for conjunctival 
inflammations (see Eye diseases, under Eye) ; and the instruments 
ophthalmometer and ophthalmoscope (see Vision). 



OPIE, A.— OPITZ VON BOBERFELD 



129 



OPIE, AMELIA (1769-1853), English author, daughter of 
James Alderson, a physician in Norwich, and was born there 
on the 1 2th of November 1769. Miss Alderson had inherited 
radical principles and was an ardent admirer of Home Tookc. 
She was intimate with the Kembles and with Mrs Siddons, 
with Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft. In 1798 she married 
John Opie, the painter. The nine years of her married life 
were very happy, although her husband did not share her love 
of society. He encouraged her to write, and in 1801 she produced 
a novel entitled Father and Daughter, which showed genuine 
fancy and pathos. She published a volume of graceful verse 
in 1802; Adeline Mowbray followed in 1804, Simple Tales in 
1806, Temper in 1S12, Tales of Real Life in 1813, Valentine's 
Eve in 1816, Talcs of the Heart in 1818, and Madeline in 1822. 
At length, in 1825, through the influence of Joseph John Gurney, 
she joined the Society of Friends, and beyond a volume entitled 
Detraction Displayed, and contributions to periodicals, she 
wrote nothing more. The rest of her life was spent in travelling 
and in the exercise of charity. Mrs Opie retained her vivacity 
to the last, dying at Norwich on the 2nd of December 1853. 

A Life, by Miss C. L. Brightwell, was published in 1854. 

OPIE, JOHN (1761-1807), English historical and portrait 
painter, was born at St Agnes near Truro in May 1761. He 
early showed a taste for drawing, besides having at the age 
of twelve mastered Euclid and opened an evening school for 
arithmetic and writing. Before long he won some local reputation 
by portrait-painting; and in 1780 he started for London, under 
the patronage of Dr Wolcot (Peter Pindar) . Opie was introduced 
to the town as " The Cornish Wonder," a self-taught genius. 
The world of fashion, ever eager for a new sensation, was 
attracted; the carriages of the wealthy blocked the street 
in which the painter resided, and for a time he reaped a rich 
harvest by his portraits. But soon the fickle tide of popularity 
flowed past him, and the painter was left neglected. He now 
applied himself with redoubled diligence to correcting the 
defects which marred his art, meriting the praise of his rival 
Northcote — " Other artists paint to live; Opie lives to paint." 
At the same time he sought to supplement his early education 
by the study of Latin and French and of the best English classics, 
and to polish the rudeness of his provincial manners by mixing 
in cultivated and learned circles. In 1786 he exhibited his first 
important historical subject, the" Assassination of James I., "and 
in the following year the " Murder of Rizzio," a work whose merit 
was recognized by the artist's immediate election as associate 
of the Academy, of which he became a full member in 1 788. He 
was employed on five subjects for Boydell's " Shakespeare 
Gallery"; and until his death, on the gth of April 1807, his 
practice alternated between portraiture and historical work. 
His productions are distinguished by breadth of handling and 
a certain rude vigour, individuality and freshness. They are 
wanting in grace, elegance and poetic feeling. Opie is also 
favourably known as a writer on art by his Life of Reynolds in 
Wolcot's edition of Pilkington, his Letter on the Cultivation 
of the Fine Arts in England, in which he advocated the formation 
of a national gallery, and his Lectures as professor of painting 
to the Royal Academy, which were published in 1809, with a 
memoir of the artist by his widow (see above). 

OPINION (Lat. opinio, from opinari, to think), a term used 
loosely in ordinary speech for an idea or an explanation of 
facts which is regarded as being based on evidence which is 
good but not conclusive. In logic it is used as a translation 
of Gr. 56£a, which plays a prominent part in Greek philosophy 
as the opposite of knowledge {i-KLaTT)ixt] or aXqdeia). The 
distinction is drawn by Parmenides, who contrasts the sphere of 
truth or knowledge with that of opinion, which deals with mere 
appearance, error, not-being. So Plato places 56£a between 
ai'(707](7is and hiavoia, as dealing with phenomena contrasted 
with non-being and being respectively. Thus Plato confines 
opinion to that which is subject to change. Aristotle, retaining 
the same idea, assigns to opinion (especially in the Ethics) the 
sphere of things contingent, i.e. the future: hence opinion 
deals with that which is probable. More generally he uses 



popular opinion — that which is generally held to be true (doKelv) 
— as the starting-point of an inquiry. In modern philosophy 
the term has been used for various conceptions all having 
much the same connotation. The absence of any universally 
acknowledged definition, especially such as would contrast 
" opinion " with " belief," " faith " and the like, deprives it 
of any status as a philosophic term. 

OPITZ VON BOEERFELD, MARTIN (1 597-1639), German 
poet, was born at Bunzlau in Silesia on the 23rd of December 
1597, the son of a prosperous citizen. He received his early 
education at the Gymnasium of his native town, of which 
his uncle was rector, and in 1617 attended the high school — 
" Schonaichianum " — at Bcuthcn, where he made a special 
study of French, Dutch and Italian poetry. In 1618 he entered 
the university of Frankfort-on-Oder as a student of literae 
humaniorcs, and in the same year published his first essay, 
Arislarchus, sive Dc content pin linguae Tcutonicac, a plea for 
the purification of the German language from foreign adultera- 
tion. In 1619 he went to Heidelberg, where he became the leader 
of the school of young poets which at that time made that 
university town remarkable. Visiting Leiden in the following 
year he sat at the feet of the famous Dutch lyric poet Daniel 
Heinsius (1580-1655), whose Lobgcsang Jcsu Christi and 
Lobgesang Bacchi he had already translated into alexandrines. 
After being for a short year (1622) professor of philosophy at 
the Gymnasium of Weissenburg (now Karlsburg) in Transylvania, 
he led a wandering life in the service of various territorial 
nobles. In 1624 he was appointed councillor to Duke George 
Rudolf of Liegnitz and Brieg in Silesia, and in 1625, as reward 
for a requiem poem composed on the death of Archduke Charles 
of Austria, was crowned laureate by the emperor Ferdinand 
II. who a few years later ennobled him under the title " von 
Boberfeld." He was elected a member of the Fruchtbringcnde 
Gcsellschaft in 1629, and in 1630 went to Paris, where he, made 
the acquaintance of Hugo Grotius. He settled in 1635 at 
Danzig, where Ladislaus IV. of Poland made him his historio- 
grapher and secretary. Here he died of the plague on the 20th 
of August 1639. 

Opitz was the head of the so-called First Silesian School 
of poets(see Germany -.Literature) , and was during his life regarded 
as the greatest German poet. Although he would not to-day 
be considered a poetical genius, he may justly claim to have 
been the " father of German poetry " in respect at least of its 
form; his Buch von dcr deutschen Poelerey (1624) put an end 
to the hybridism that had until then prevailed, and established 
rules for the "purity" of language; style, verse and rhyme. 
Opitz's own poems are in accordance with the rigorous rules 
which he laid down. They are mostly a formal and sober 
elaboration of carefully considered themes, and contain little 
beauty and less feeling. To this didactic and descriptive category 
belong his best poems, Trosl-Gcdichte in Widerwdrtigkeit des 
Kriegcs (written 1621, but not published till 1633); Zlalna, 
oder von Ruhe des Gemtits (1622); Lob des Feldlebens (1623); 
Viclgut, oder vom wahren Gluck (1629), and Vesuvius (1633). 
These contain some vivid poetical descriptions, but are in the 
main treatises in poetical form. In 1624 Opitz published a 
collected edition of his poetry under the title Acht Biichcr 
deutscher Poematum (though, owing to a mistake on the part 
of the printer, there are only five books); his Dafnc (1627), 
to which Heinrich Schiitz composed the music, is the earliest 
German opera. Besides numerous translations, Opitz edited 
(1639) Das Annolied, a Middle High German poem of the end 
of the nth century, and thus preserved it from oblivion. 

Collected editions of Opitz's works appeared in 1625, 1629, 1637, 
1641, 1690 and 1746. His Ausgewahtte Dichtungen have been edited 
by J. Tittmann (1869) and by H. Oesterlcy (Kiirschner's Deutsche 
Nationalliteratur, vol. xxvii. 1889). There are modern reprints of 
the Buch von der deutschen Poeterey by W. Braunc (2nd ed., 1S82), 
and, together with Aristarchus, by G. Witkowski (18S8), and also of 
the Teutsche Poemata, of 1624, by G. Witkowski (1902). See H. 
Palm, Beitrdge zur Geschichte der deutschen Literatur des l6ten und iyten 
Jahrkunderts (1877); K. Borinski, Die Poetik der Renaissance (18S6); 
R. Beckherrn, Opitz, Ronsard und Heinsius (1888). Bibliography by 
H. Oesterley in the Zentralblatt fur Bibliothekswesen for 1S85. 

xx. 5 



i3° 



OPIUM 



OPIUM (Gr. ottlov, dim. from ottos, juice), a narcotic drug 
prepared from the juice of the opium poppy, Papaver somniferum, 
a plant probably indigenous in the south of Europe and western 
Asia, but now so widely cultivated that its original habitat is 
uncertain. The medicinal properties of the juice have been 
recognized from a very early period. It was known to Theo- 
phrastus by the name of faiK&viov, and appears in his time to 
have consisted of an extract of the whole plant, since Dioscorides, 
about a.d. 77, draws a distinction between (irjKccvaov, which he 
describes as an extract of the entire herb, and the more active 
ottos, derived from the capsules alone. From the ist to the 12th 
century the opium of Asia Minor appears to have been the only 
kind known in commerce. In the 13th century opium thebaicum 
is mentioned by Simon Januensis, physician to Pope Nicholas IV., 
while meconium was still in use. In the 16th century opium is 
mentioned by Pyres (1516) as a production of the kingdom of 
Cous (Kuch Behar, south-west of Bhutan) in Bengal, and of 
Malwa. 1 Its introduction into India appears to have been 
connected with the spread of Islam. The opium monopoly was 

the property of the Great 
Mogul and was regularly 
sold. In the 17th century 
Kaempfer describes the 
various kinds of opium 
prepared in Persia, and 
states that the best sorts 
were flavoured with spices 
and called " theriaka." 
These preparations were 
held in great estimation 
during the middle ages, 
and probably supplied to 
a large extent the place 
of the pure drug. Opium 
is said to have been intro- 
duced into China by the 
Arabs probably in the 
13th century, and it was 
originally used there as a 
medicine, the introduc- 
tion of opium-smoking 
being assigned to the 
17th century. In a 
1700 both the plant and 




Fig. 1. 



-Opium Poppy {Papaver 
somniferum). 



Chinese Herbal compiled before 
its inspissated juice are described, together with the mode 
of collecting it, and in the General History of the Southern 
Provinces of Yunnan, revised and republished in 1736, opium 
is noticed as a common product. The first edict prohibiting 
opium-smoking was issued by the emperor Yung Cheng in 1729. 
Up to that date the amount imported did not exceed 200 chests, 
and was usually brought from India by junks as a return cargo. 
In the year 1757 the monopoly of opium cultivation in India 
passed into the hands of the East India Company through the 
victory of Clive at Plassey. Up to 1773 the trade with China 
had been in the hands of the Portuguese, but in that year the 
East India Company took the trade under their own charge, 
and in 1776 the annual export reached 1000 chests, and 5054 
chests in 1790. Although the importation was forbidden by 
the Chinese imperial authorities in 1796, and opium-smoking 
punished with severe penalties (ultimately increased to trans- 
portation and death), the trade continued and had increased 
during 1820-1830 to 16,877 chests per annum. The trade was 
contraband, and the opium was bought by the Chinese from 
depot ships at the ports. Up to 1839 no effort was made to stop 
the trade, but in that year the emperor Tao-Kwang sent a com- 
missioner, Lin Tsze-sii, to Canton to put down the traffic. Lin 
issued a proclamation threatening hostile measures if the British 
opium ships serving as depots were not sent away. The demand 
for removal not being complied with, 20,291 chests of opium 
(of 149^ lb each), valued at £2,000,000, were destroyed by the 
Chinese commissioner Lin; but still the British sought to 
1 Aromatum Historia (ed. Clusius, Ant., 1574). 



smuggle cargoes on shore, and some outrages committed on both 
sides led to an open war, which was ended by the treaty of 
Nanking in 1842. The importation of opium continued and was 
legalized in 1858. From that time, in spite of the remonstrances 
of the Chinese government, the exportation of opium from India 
to China continued, increasing from 52,925 piculs (of 133I lb) 
in 1850 to 96,839 piculs in 1880. While, however, the court 
of Peking was honestly endeavouring to suppress the foreign 
trade in opium from 1S39 to 1858 several of the provincial viceroys 
encouraged the trade, nor could the central government put a 
stop to the home cultivation of the drug. The cultivation 
increased so rapidly that at the beginning of the 20th century 
opium was produced in every province of China. The western 
provinces of Sze-ch'uen, Yun-nan and Kwei-chow yielded re- 
spectively 200,000, 30,000 and 15,000 piculs (of 133! lb); 
Manchuria 15,000; Shcn-si, Chih-li and Shan-tung 10,000 each; 
and the other provinces from 5000 to 500 piculs each, the whole 
amount produced in China in 1906 being estimated at 330,000 
piculs, of which the province of Sze-cb'uen produced nearly two- 
thirds. Of this amount China required for home consumption 
325,270 piculs, the remainder being chiefly exported to Indo- 
China, whilst 54,225 piculs of foreign opium were imported into 
China. Of the whole amount of opium used in China, equal to 
22,588 tons, only about one-seventh came from India. 

The Chinese government regarding the use of opium as one of 
the most acute moral and economic questions which as a nation 
they have to face, representing an annual loss to the country of 
856,250,000 taels, decided in 1906 to put an end to the use of the 
drug within ten years, and issued an edict on the 20th of 
September 1906, forbidding the consumption of opium and the 
cultivation of the poppy. As an indication of their earnestness of 
purpose the government allowed officials a period of six months 
in which to break off the use of opium, under heavy penalties 
if they failed to do so. In October of the same year the American 
government in the Philippines, having to deal with the opium 
trade, raised the question of the taking of joint measures for its 
suppression by the powers interested, and as a result a conference 
met at Shanghai on the ist of February 1909 to which China, 
the United States of America, Great Britain, Austria-Hungary, 
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Persia, Portugal 
and Russia sent delegates. At this meeting it was resolved that 
it was the duty of the respective governments to prevent the 
export of opium to any countries prohibiting its importation; 
that drastic measures should be taken against the use of morphine ; 
that anti-opium remedies should be investigated; and that all 
countries having concessions in China should close the opium 
divans in their possessions. The British government made an 
offer in 1907 to reduce the export of Indian opium to countries 
beyond the seas by 5100 chests, i.e. T^th of the amount annually 
taken by China, each year until the year 1910, and that if during 
these three years the Chinese government had carried out its 
arrangements for proportionally diminishing the production and 
consumption of opium in China, the British government were 
prepared to continue the same rate of reduction, so that the 
export of Indian opium to China would cease in ten years; the 
restrictions of the imports of Turkish, Persian and other opiums 
being separately arranged for by the Chinese government, and 
carried out simultaneously. The above proposal was gratefully 
received by the Chinese government. A non-official report by 
Mr E. S. Little, after travelling through western China, which 
appeared in the newspapers in May 1910, stated that all over the 
province of Sze-ch'uen opium had almost ceased to be produced, 
except only in a few remote districts on the frontier (see further 
China: § History). 

The average annual import of Persian and Turkish opium 
into China is estimated at n 25 piculs, and if this quantity were 
to be reduced every year by one-ninth, beginning in 1909, in nine 
years the import into China would entirely cease, and the 
Indian, Persian and Turkish opiums no longer be articles of 
commerce in that country. One result of these regulations was 
that the price of foreign opium in China rose, a circumstance 
which was calculated to reduce the loss to the Indian revenue. 






OPIUM 



1 3 1 



Thus in i 909-1910, with only 350,000 acres under cultivation and 
40,000 chests of opium in stock, the revenue was £4,420,600 as 
against £3,572,944 in 1905-1906 with 613,996 acres under 
cultivation and a stock of 76,063 chests. No opium dens have 
been allowed since 1907 in their possessions or leased territories 
in China by Great Britain, France, Germany, Russia or Japan. 

The difficulties of the task undertaken by the Chinese govern- 
ment to eradicate a national and popular vice, in a country 
whose population is generally estimated at 400,000,000, are 
increased by the fact that the opium habit has been indulged 
in by all classes of society, that opium has been practically the 
principal if not the only national stimulant; that it must involve 
a considerable loss of revenue, which will have to be made up 
by other taxes, and by the fact that its cultivation is more 
profitable than that of cereals, for an English acre will on the 
average produce raw dry opium of the value of £5, 16s. Sd. 
while it will yield grain valued only at £4, 5s. 6d. 

Various remedies for the opium habit have been experimented 
with in China, but with doubtful success. Under the name of 
anti-opium cure various remedies containing morphine in the 
form of powder, or of little pills, have been introduced, as well 
as the subcutaneous injection of the alkaloid, so that the use 
of morphine is increasing in China to an alarming extent, and 
considerable difficulty is experienced in controlling the illicit 
traffic in it, especially that sent through the post. Its com- 
parative cheapness, one dollar's worth being equal to three 
dollars' worth of opium in the effect produced, its portability 
and the facilities offered in obtaining it, are all in its favour. 
A good deal of morphine is exported to Japan from Europe, 
and generally passes into China by way of Manchuria, where 
Japanese products have a virtual monopoly. The effects of 
morphine are much more deleterious than those of opium- 
smoking. The smoke of opium, as shown by H. Moissan, contains 
only a trifling amount of morphia, and the effect produced by 
it is apparently due, not to that alkaloid, but to such decom- 
position products as pyrrol, acetone and pyridine and hydro- 
pyridine bases. F. Browne finds that after smoking " chandoo," 
containing 8-98 % of morphine, 7-63 % was left in the dross, 
so that only 1-35% of morphia was carried over in the smoke 
or decomposed by the heat. 

For many years two Scotch firms, Messrs J. D. Macfarlan 
and T. and H. Smith of Edinburgh, and T. Whiffen of London 
manufactured practically the world's supply of this alkaloid, 
but it is now made in the United States and Germany, although 
the largest amount is still probably made in Great Britain. A 
small amount of morphine and codeine is also manufactured in 
India for medicinal use. The prohibition of the general importa- 
tion of morphia into China except on certain conditions was 
agreed to by the British government in Act XI. of the Mackay 
treaty, but only came into force on the 1st of January 1909. 
Unless the indirect importation of morphine into China from 
Europe and the United States is stopped, a worse habit and 
more difficult to cure than any other (except perhaps that of 
cocaine) may replace that of opium-smoking in China. It is 
worse even than opium-eating, in proportion as morphine is 
more active than opium. The sale and use of morphine in India 
and Burma is now restricted. The quantity of morphine that 
any one may legally possess, and then only for medicinal purposes, 
is in India 10 grams, and in Burma five. The possession of 
morphine by medical practitioners is also safeguarded by 
well-defined limitations: 

Production and Commerce. — Although the collection of opium 
is possible in all places where there is not an excessive rainfall 
and the climate is temperate or subtropical, the yield is smaller 
in temperate than in tropical regions and the industry can 
only be profitably carried on where labour and land are sufficiently 
cheap and abundant; hence production on a large scale is 
limited to comparatively few countries. The varieties of poppy 
grown, the mode of cultivation adopted and the character 
of the opium produced differ so greatly that it will be convenient 
to consider the opiums of each country separately. 
, Turkey. — The poppy cultivated in Asia Minor is the variety 
glabrum, distinguished by the sub-globular shape of the capsule 



and by the stigmata or rays at the top of the fruit being ten or 
twelve in number. The Mowers are usually of a purplish colour, 
but are sometimes white, and the seeds, like the petals, vary in tint 
from dark violet to white. The cultivation is carried on, both on the 
more elevated and lower lands, chiefly by peasant proprietors. A 
naturally light and rich soil, further improved by manure, is neces- 
sary, and moisture is indispensable, although injurious in excess, 
so that after a wet winter the best crops are obtained on hilly ground, 
and in a dry season on the plains. The land is ploughed twice, the 
second time crosswise, so that it may be thoroughly pulverized; 
and the seed, mixed with four times its quantity of sand, to prevent 
its being sown too thickly, is scattered broadcast, about J to 1 II) 
being used for every toloom (1600 sq. yds.). The crop is very 
uncertain owing to droughts, spring frosts and locusts, and, in 
order to avoid a total failure and to allow time for collecting the 
produce, there are three sowings at intervals from October to March 
— the crops thus coming to perfection in succession. But notwith- 
standing these precautions quantities of the drug are wasted when 
the crop is a full one, owing to the difficulty of gathering the whole 
in the short time during which collection is possible. The first 
sowing produces the hardiest plants, the yield of the other two 
depending almost entirely on favourable weather. In localities 
where there is hoar frost in autumn and spring the seed is sown in 
September or at latest in the beginning of October, and the yield 
of opium and seed is then greater than if sown later. After sowing, 
the land is harrowed, and the young plants are hoed and weeded, 
chiefly by women and children, from early spring until the time of 
flowering, fn the plains the flowers expand at the end of May, on 
the uplands in July. At this period gentle showers are of great 
value, as they cause an increase in the subsequent yield of opium. 
The petals fall in a few hours, and the capsules grow so rapidly that 
in a short time — generally from nine to fifteen days — the opium is 
fit for collection. This period is known by the capsules yielding to 
pressure with the fingers, assuming a lighter green tint and 
exhibiting a kind of bloom called " cougak," easily rubbed off with the 
fingers; they are then about lj in. in diameter. The incisions are 
made by holding the capsule in the left hand and drawing a knife 
two-thirds round it, or spirally beyond the starting-point (see fig. 2, a), 
great care being taken not to let the incisions penetrate to the 
interior lest the juice should flow inside and be lost. (In this case 
also it is said that the seeds will not ripen, and that no oil can be 
obtained from them.) The operation is usually performed after 
the heat of the day, commencing early in the afternoon and con- 
tinuing to nightfall, and the exuded juice is collected the next 
morning. This is done by scraping the capsule with a knife and 
transferring the concreted juice to a poppy-leaf held in the left hand, 
the edges of the leaf being turned in to avoid spilling the juice, and 
the knife-blade moistened with saliva by drawing it through the 
mouth after every alternate scraping to prevent the juice from 
adhering to it. When as much opium has been collected as the size 
of the leaf will allow, another leaf is wrapped over the top of the 
lump, which is then placed in the shade to dry for several days. 
The pieces vary in size from about 2 oz. to over 2 lb, being made 
larger in some districts than in others. The capsules are generally 
incised only once, but the fields are visited a second or third time 
to collect the opium from the poppy-heads subsequently developed 
by the branching of the stem. The yield of opium varies, even on 
the same piece of land, from j to 7! chequis (of 1-62 lb) per toloom 
(1600 sq. yds.), the average being 15 chequis of opium and 4 
bushels (of 50 ft) of seed. The seed, which yields 35 to 42 % of oil, 
is worth about two-thirds of the value of the opium. The whole 
of the operation must, of course, be completed in the few days — 
five to ten — during which the capsules arc capable of yielding the 
drug. A cold wind or a chilly atmosphere at the time of collection 
lessens the yield, and rain washes the opium off the capsules. Before 
the crop is all gathered in a meeting of buyers and sellers takes 
place in each district, at which the price to be asked is discussed 
and settled, and the opium handed to the buyers, who in many 
instances have advanced money on the standing crop. When 
sufficiently solid the pieces of opium are packed in cotton bags, a 
quantity of the fruits of a species of Rumex being thrown in to pre- 
vent the cakes from adhering together. The bags are then scaled 
up, packed in oblong or circular baskets and sent to Smyrna or 
other ports on mules. On the arrival of the opium at its destination, 
in the end of July or beginning of August, it is placed in cool ware- 
houses to avoid loss of weight until sold. The opium is then of a 
mixed character and is known as talequale. When transferred to 
the buyer's warehouses the bags are opened and each piece is 
examined by a public inspector in the presence of both buyer and 
seller, the quality of the opium being judged by appearance, odour, 
colour and weight. It is then sorted into three qualities: (1) 
finest quality; (2) current or second; (3) chicanti or rejected 
pieces. A fourth sort consists of the very bad or wholly factitious 
pieces. The substances used to adulterate opium are grape-juice 
thickened with flour, fig-paste, liquorice, half-dried apricots, inferior 
gum tragacanth and sometimes clay or pieces of lead or other 
metals. The chicanti is returned to the seller, who disposes of it 
at 20 to 30% discount to French and German merchants. After 
inspection the opium is hermetically sealed in tin-lined boxes con- 
taining about 150 ft. Turkey opium is principally used in medicine 



132 



OPIUM 



on account of its purity and the large percentage of morphia that 
it contains, a comparatively small quantity being exported for 
smoking purposes. 

About three-quarters of the opium prepared in Turkey is pro- 
duced in Anatolia, and is exported by way of Smyrna, and the 
remainder is produced in the hilly districts of the provinces near 
the southern coast of the Black Sea, and finds its way into Con- 
stantinople, the commercial varieties bearing the name of the 
district where they are produced. The Smyrna varieties include 
the produce of Ahum Karahissar, Uschak, Akhissar, Taoushanli, 
Isbarta, Konia, Bulvadan, Hamid, Magnesia and Yerli, the last 
name being applied to opium collected in the immediate neighbour- 
hood of Smvrna. The opium exported by way of Constantinople 
includes that of Hadjikeuy and Malatia; the Tokat kind, of good 
quality, including that produced in Yosgad, Sile and Niksar, and 
the current or second quality derived from Amasia and Oerek; the 
Karahissar kind including the produce of Mykalitch, Carabazar, 
Sivrahissar, Eskichehir and Nachlihan; the Balukesri sort, in- 
cluding that of Balukhissar and Bogaditch ; also the produce of 
Beybazar and Angora. The average amount of Turkish opium 
exported is 7000 chests, but in rare seasons amounts to 12,000 
chests, but the yield depends upon fine weather in harvest time, 
heavy rains washing the opium off the capsules, and lessening the 
yield to a considerable extent. 

These commercial varieties differ in appearance and quality, and 
are roughly classified as Soft or Shipping opium, Druggists' and 
Manufacturers' opium. Shipping opium is distinguished by its 
soft character and clean paste, containing very little d6bris, or 
chaff, as it is technically called. The Hadjikeuy variety is at 
present the best in the market. The PJalatia, including that of 
Kharput, second, and the Sile, third in quality. The chief markets 
for the soft or shipping varieties of opium are, China, Korea, the 
West Indian Islands, Cuba, British Guiana, Japan and Java; 
the United States also purchase for re-exportation as well as for 
home consumption. Druggists' opium includes the kinds purchased 
for use in medicine, which for Great Britain should, when dried and 
powdered, contain 9j-ioJ% of morphine. That generally sold in 
this country for the purpose includes the Karahissar and Adet, 
Balukhissar, Amasia and Akhissar kinds, and for making the tincture 
and extract, that of Tokat. But the produce of GheVe, Biledjik, 
Mondourlan, Konia, Tauschanli, Kutahlia and Karaman is often 
mixed with the kinds first mentioned. The softer varieties of opium 
are preferred in the American market, as being richer in morphine. 
In all Turkey opium the pieces vary much in size. On the 
continent of Europe, especially in Belgium, Germany and Italy, 
where pieces of small size are preferred, the Gheve, 1 and the Yog- 
hourma, i.e. opium remade into cakes, at the port of shipment, to 
contain 7, 8, 9, or 10 % of morphine, are chiefly sold. Manufacturers' 
opium includes any grade yielding not less than io|% of morphine, 
but the Yoghourma or " pudding " opium, on account of its paste 
being more difficult to work, is not used for the extraction of the 
active principles. For the extraction of codeine, the Persian opium 
is preferred when Turkey opium is dear, as it contains on the average 
2\°/ of that alkaloid, whilst Turkey opium yields only i-%%- 
But codeine can also be made from morphine. 

The ordinary varieties of Turkish opium are recognized in com- 
merce by the following characteristics: Hadjikeuy opium occurs 
in pieces of about \ lb-ii lb; it has an unusually pale-coloured paste 
of soft consistence, and is very rich in morphia. Malatia opium is 
in pieces of irregular size usually of a broadly conical shape, weighing 
from 1-2 lb. It has a soft paste with irregular layers of light and 
dark colour and is covered with unusually green poppy leaves. 
Tokat opium resembles that of Malatia, but the cakes are flatter, 
and the paste is similar in character, though the leaves covering it 
are of a yellower tint of green. Bogaditz opium occurs in smaller 
pieces, about 3 or 4 oz. in weight, but sometimes larger pieces of 
i-ij lb in weight are met with, approaching more nearly to the 
Kurgagatsch and Balukissar varieties. The surface is covered with 
a yellowish green leaf and many Rumex fruits. Karahissar opium, 
which usually includes the produce of Adet, Akhissar and Amasia, 
occurs in rather large shortly conical or more or less irregular lumps. 
Angora opium is met with in small smooth pieces, has generally a 
pale paste and is rich in morphia. Yerli opium is of good quality, 
variable in size and shape; the surface is usually rough with Rumex 
capsules. Gheve opium formerly came over as a distinct kind, but 
is now mixed with other varieties; the pieces form small rounded 
cakes, smooth and shining like those of Angora, about 3-6 oz. in 
weight, with the midrib of the leaf they are wrapped in forming a 
median line on the surface. The interior often shows layers of 
light and dark colour. 

In Macedonia opium culture was begun in 1865 at Istip with 
seed obtained from Karahissar in Asia Minor, and extended subse- 
quently to the adjacent districts of Kotchava, Stroumnitza, Tikvish 
and Kinprulu-veles, most of the produce being exported under 
the name of Salonica opium. Macedonian opium, especially that 

1 GheVe is the commercial name for opium from Geiveh on the 
river Sakaria, running into the Black Sea. It appears to find its 
way to Constantinople via the port of Ismid, and hence is known 
also by the latter name. 



produced at Istip, is very pure, and is considered equal to the 
Malatia opium, containing about 1 1 % of morphine. The pieces vary 
from f lb to 1 j lb in weight. For some years past, however, it has 
been occasionally mixed with pieces of inferior opium, like that of 
Yoghourma, recognizable on cutting by their solidity and heavy 
character. The Turkish government encourage the development of 
the industry by remitting the tithes on opium and poppy-seed for 
one year on lands sown for the first time, and by distributing printed 
instructions for cultivating the poppy and preparing the opium. 
In these directions it is pointed out that the opium crop is ten 
times as profitable as that of wheat. Four varieties of poppy are 
distinguished — two with white flowers, large oval capsules without 
holes under their " combs " (stigmas) and bearing respectively 
yellow and white seed, and the other two having red or purple 
flowers and seeds of the same colour, one bearing small capsules 
perforated at the top, and the other larger oval capsules not 
perforated. The white varieties are recommended as yielding a 
more abundant opium of superior quality. The yellow seed is said 
to yield the best oil; that obtained by hot pressure is used for 
lamps and for paint, and the cold-pressed oil for culinary purposes. 

Opium is also grown in Bulgaria, but almost entirely for home 
consumption; any surplus produce is, however, bought by Jews 
and Turks at low prices and sent to Constantinople, where it is sold 
as Turkish opium. It is produced in the districts of Kustendil, 
Lowtscha and Halitz, and is made into lumps weighing about 4 oz., 
of a light-brown colour internally and containing a few seeds; it 
is covered with leaves which have not been identified. Samples 
have yielded from 7 to 19% of morphia, and only 2 to 3 % of ash, 
and are therefore of excellent quality. 

India.— The poppy grown in India is usually the white-flowered 
variety, but in the Himalayas a red-flowered poppy with dark 
seeds is cultivated. The opium industry in Bengal is a government 
monopoly, under the control of officials residing respectively at 
Patna and Ghazipore. Any one may undertake the industry, 
but cultivators are obliged to sell the opium exclusively to the 
government agent at a price fixed beforehand by the latter, which, 
although small, is said to fully remunerate the grower. It is con- 
sidered that with greater freedom the cultivator would produce too 
great a quantity, and loss to the government would soon result. 
Advances of money are often made by the government to enable 
the ryots to grow the poppy. The chief centres of production are 
Bihar in Bengal, and the district of the United Provinces of Agra 
and Oudh lying along the Gangetic valley, and north of it, of which 
the produce is known as Bengal opium. The opium manufactured 
at Patna is of two classes, viz. Provision opium manufactured for 
export, and Excise or Akbari opium intended for local consumption 
in India. These differ in consistence: Excise opium is prepared to 
contain 90% of non-volatile solid matter and made up into cubes 
weighing one seer or 2 5 2 5 ib, and wrapped in oiled paper, whilst 
Provision opium is made up into balls, protected by a leafy covering, 
made of poppy petals, opium and " pussewah," or liquid drainings 
of the crude opium; that of Patna is made to contain 75% of solid 
matter, and that of Ghazipore, which is known as Benares opium, 
71 % only. Each ball consists of a little over 35- lb of fine opium, 
in addition to other poppy products. The Benares ball opium has 
about 1 j oz. less of the external covering than the Patna sort: 
Forty of these balls are packed in each chest. The Excise opium 
not having a covering of poppy petals lacks the aroma of Provision 
opium. Malwa opium is produced in a large number of states in 
the Central India and Rajputana Agencies, chiefly Gwalior, Indore 
and Bhopal, in the former, and Mewar in the latter. It is also 
produced in the native state of Baroda, and in the small British 
territory of Ajmer Merwara. The cultivation of Malwa opium is 
free and extremely profitable, the crop realizing usually from three 
to seven times the value of wheat or other cereals, and in excep- 
tionally advantageous situations, from twelve to twenty times as 
much. On its entering British territory a heavy duty is imposed 
on Malwa opium, so as to raise its price to an equality with the 
government article. It is shipped from Bombay to northern 
China, where nearly the whole of the exported Malwa opium is 
consumed. The poppy is grown for opium in the Punjab to a 
limited extent, but it has been decided to entirely abolish the 
cultivation there within a short time. In Nepal, Bashahrand 
Rampur, and at Doda Kashtwar in the Jammu territory, opium is 
produced and exported to Yarkand, Khotan and Aksu. The 
cultivation of the poppy is also carried on in Afghanistan, Kashmir, 
Nepal and the Shan states of Burma, but the areas and production 
are not known. 

A small amount of opium alkaloids only is manufactured in India. 
The surplus above that issued to government medical institutions 
in India is sold in London. The amount manufactured in 1906- 
1907 was 346 lb of morphine hydrochlorate, 12 lb of the acetate 
and 61 lb of codeia. 

The land intended for poppy culture is usually selected near 
villages, in order that it may be more easily manured and irrigated. 
On a rich soil a crop of maize or vegetables is grown during the 
rainy season, and after its removal in September the ground is 
prepared for the poppy-culture. Under less favourable circum- 
stances the land is prepared from July till October by ploughing, 
weeding and manuring. The seed is sown between the 1st and 






OPIUM 



15th of November,, and germinates in ten or fifteen days. The fields 
a.re divided for purposes of irrigation into beds about 10 ft. square, 
which usually are irrigated twice between November and February, 
but if the season be cold, with hardly any rain, the operation is 
repeated five or six times. When the seedlings are 2 or 3 in. high 
they are thinned out and weeded. The plants during growth are 
liable to injury by severe frost, excessive rain, insects, fungi and 
the growth of a root-parasite (Orobanche indica). The poppy 
blossoms about the middle of February, and the petals when about 
to fall arc collected for the purpose of making " leaves " for the 
spherical coverings of the balls of opium. These arc made by heat- 
ing a circular-ridged earthen plate over a slow fire, and spreading 
the petals, a few at a time, over its surface. As the juice exudes, 
more petals are pressed on to them with a cloth until a layer of 
sufficient thickness is obtained. The leaves are forwarded to the 
opium-factories, where they are sorted into three classes, according 
to size and colour, the smaller and dark-coloured being reserved 
for the inside of the shells of the opium-balls, and the larger and 
least coloured for the outside. These are valued respectively at 
10 to 7 and 5 rupees per maund of 82^ lb. The collection of opium 
commences in Behar about 25th February, and continues to about 
25th March, but in Malwa is performed in March and April. The 
capsules are scarified vertically (fig. 2, b) in most districts (although 
in some the incisions are made horizontally, as in Asia Minor), the 
" nushtur" or cutting instrument being drawn twice upwards for 
each incision, and repeated two to six times at intervals of two or 
three days. The nushtur (fig. 2, c) consists of three to five flattened 





Fig. 2. — Opium Poppy Capsules, &c, f natural size, a, capsule 
showing mode of incision practised in Turkey; b, capsule as incised 
in India; c, nushtur, or instrument used in India for making the 
incisions. Drawn from specimens in the Museum of the Pharma- 
ceutical Society of Great Britain. 

blades forked at the larger end, and separated about one-sixteenth 
of an inch from each other by winding cotton thread between them, 
the whole being also bound together by thread, and the protrusion 
of the points being restricted to one-twelfth of an inch, by which the 
depth of the incision is limited. The operation is usually performed 
about three or four o'clock in the afternoon, and the opium collected 
the next morning. In Bengal a small sheet-iron scoop or " seetoah " 
is used for scraping off the dried juice, and_, as it becomes filled, the 
opium .is emptied into an earthen pot carried for the purpose. In 
Malwa' a flat scraper is employed, a small piece of cotton soaked in 
linseed oil being attached to the upper part of the blade, and used 
for smearing the thumb and edge of the scraper to prevent adhesion 
of the juice; sometimes water is used instead of oil, but both 
practices injure the quality of the product. Sometimes .the opium 
is in a fluid state by reason of dew, and in some places it is rendered 
still more so by the practice adopted by collectors of washing their 
scrapers, and adding the washings to the morning's collection. 
Thejuice, when brought home, isi consequently a wet granular mass 
of pinkish colour, from which a dark fluid drains to thebottom of the 
vessel. In order to get rid of this fluid, called " pasewa. " or " pusse- 
wah," the opium is placed in a shallow earthen vessel tilted on one 
side, and the pussewah drained off. The residual mass is then 
exposed to the air in the shade, and regularly turned over every few 
days, until it has reached the proper consistence, which takes place 
in about three or four weeks. The drug is then taken to the govern- 
ment factory to be sold. It is turned out of the pots into wide tin 
vessels or ' tagars," in which it is weighed in quantities not ex- 
ceeding 21 lb. _ It is then examined by a native expert (purkhea) 
as to impurities, colour, fracture, aroma and consistence. • To 
determine the amount of moisture, which should not exceed 30%,' 
a weighed sample is evaporated and dried in a plate on a metallic 
surface heated by steam. Adulterations such as mud, sand, powdered 
charcoal, soot,' cow-dung, powdered poppy petals and powdered 
seeds of various kinds are easily detected by breaking up the drug 
in cold water. Flour, potato-flour, ghee and ghoor (crude date- 
sugar) are revealed by their odour and the consistence they impart. 



!33 

Various other adulterants are sometimes used, such as the inspissated 
juice of the prickly pear, extracts from tobacco, stramonium and 
hemp, pulp of the tamarind and bael fruit, mahwah flowers and 
gums of different kinds. The price paid to the cultivator is regulated 
chiefly by the amount of water contained in the drug. When 
received into the government stores the opium is kept in large 
wooden boxes holding about 50 maunds and occasionally stirred 
up, if only a little below the standard. If containing much water 
it is placed in shallow wooden drawers and constantly turned over. 
During the process it deepens in colour. From the store about 250 
maunds are taken daily to be manufactured into cakes. 

Various portions, each weighing 10 seers (of 2^ lb), are selected 
by test assay so as to ensure the mass being of standard consist- 
ence (70% of the pure dry drug and 30% of water), and are thrown 
into shallow drawers and kneaded together. The mass is then 
packed into boxes all of one size, and a specimen of each again 
assayed, the mean of the whole being taken as the average. Before 
evening these boxes are emptied into wooden vats 20 ft. long, 3^ ft. 
wide and ij ft. deep, and the opium further kneaded and mixed 
by men wading through it from end to end until it appears to be of 
a uniform consistence. Next morning the manufacture of the 
opium into balls commences. The workman sits on a wooden stand, 
with a brass cup before him, which he lineswith the leaves of poppy 
petals before-mentioned until the thickness of half an inch is reached, 
a few being allowed to hang over the cup; the leaves are agglutin- 
ated by means of " lewa," a pasty fluid which consists of a mixture 
of inferior opium, 8% of " pussewah " and the" dhoc " or washings of 
the vessels that have contained opium, and the whole is made of 
such consistence that 100 grains evaporated to dryness over a 
water-bath leave 53 grains of solid residue. All the ingredients for 
the opium-ball arc furnished to the workmen by measure. When 
the inside of the brass cup is ready a ball of opium previously weighed 
is placed on the leafy case in it, and the upper half of it covered with 
leaves in the same way that the casing for the lower half was made, 
the overhanging leaves of the lower half being pressed upwards 
and the sphere completed by one large leaf which is placed over 
the upper half. The ball, which resembles a Dutch cheese in size 
and shape, is now rolled in " poppy trash " made from the coarsely- 
powdered leaves, capsules and stalks of the poppy plant, and is 
placed in an earthen cup of the same size as the brass one; the 
cups are then placed in dishes and the opium exposed to the sun to 
dry for three days, being constantly turned and examined. If it 
becomes distended the ball is pierced to liberate the gas and again 
lightly closed. On the third evening the cups are placed in open 
frames which allow free circulation of the air. This operation is 
usually completed by the end of July. The balls thus made consist 
on the average of : — 

Standard opium 1 seer 7-50 chittacks. 

Lewa . . . . ; . o „ 3-75 

Leaves (poppy petals) . . o ,, 5-43 ,, 

Poppy trash . . . . . o ,, 0-50 ,, 

2 seers 1-18 chittacks. 

The average number of cakes that can be made daily by one man 
is about 70, although 90 to 100 are sometimes turned out by clever 
workmen. The cakes are liable to become mildewed, and require 
constant turning and occasional rubbing in dry " poppy trash " to 
remove the mildew, > and strengthening in weak places with fresh 
poppy leaves. By October the cakes are dry and fairly solid, and 
arc then packed in chests, which are divided into two tiers of twenty 
square compartments for the reception of as many cakes, which 
are steadied by a packing of loose poppy trash. 1 Each case con- 
tains about 120 catties (about 160 lb). The chests need to be kept 
in a dry warehouse for a length of time, but ultimately the opium 
ceases to lose moisture to the shell, and the latter becomes extremely 
solid. 

The care bestowed on the selection and preparation of the drug in 
the Bengal opium-factories is such that the merchants who purchase 
it rarely require to examine it, although permission is given to open 
at each sale any number of chests or cakes that they may desire. 

In Malwa the opium is manufactured by private enterprise, the 
government levying an export duty of 600 rupees (£60) per chest. 
It is not made into balls but into rectangular or rounded masses, 
and is not cased in poppy petals. It contains as much as 95% of 
dry opium, but is of much less uniform quality than the Bengal 
drug, and, having no guarantee as to purity, is not considered so 
valuable. The cultivation in Malwa does not differ in any 
important particular from that in Bengal. The opium is collected in 
March and April, and the crude drug or " chick " is thrown into 
an earthen vessel and covered with linseed oil to prevent evaporation. 
In this state it is sold to itinerant dealers. It is afterwards tied up 
in quantities of 25 lb and 50 lb in double bags of sheeting, which are 
suspended to a ceiling out of the light and draught to allow the 
excess of oil to drain off. This takes place in seven to ten days, 
but the bags are left for four to six weeks until the oil remaining 
on the opium has become oxidized and hardened. In June and 
July, when the rains begin, the bags are taken down and emptied 



1 This is purchased from the ryots at 12 annas per maund. 



J 34 



OPIUM 



into shallow vats 10 to 15 ft. across, and 6 to 8 in. deep, in which 
the opium is kneaded until uniform in colour and consistence and 
tough enough to be formed into cakes of 8 or 10 oz. in weight. 
These are thrown into a basket containing chaff made from the 
capsules. They are then rolled in broken leaves and stalks of 
the poppy and left, with occasional turning, for a week or so, 
when they become hard enough to bear packing. In October and 
November they are weighed and sent to market, packed in chests 
containing as nearly as possible 1 picul = 13311b, the petals and 
leaves of the poppy being used as packing materials. The production 
is said to amount to about 20,000 chests annually. 

The amount of opium revenue collected in India was £10,480,051 
in 1881, but in 1907-1908 was only £5,244,986. It is a remarkable 
fact that the only Indian opium ever seen in England is an occasional 
sample of the Malwa sort, whilst the government monopoly opium 
is quite unknown; indeed, the whole of the opium used in medicine 
in Europe and the United States is obtained from Turkey. This is 
in some measure due to the fact that Indian opium contains less 
morphia. It has recently been shown, however, that opium grown 
in the hilly districts of the Himalayas yields 50% more morphia 
than that of the plains, and that the deficiency of morphia in the 
Indian drug is due, in some measure, to the long exposure to the air 
in a semi-liquid state which it undergoes. In view, therefore, of 
the probable decline in the Chinese demand, the cultivation of the 
drug for the European market in the hilly districts of India, and its 
preparation after the mode adopted in Turkey, viz., by drying the 
concrete juice as quickly as possible, might be worthy of the con- 
sideration of the British government. 

Persia. — The variety of poppy grown in Persia appears to be P. 
somniferum, var. album, having roundish ovate capsules. It is most 
largely produced in the districts of Ispahan, Shiraz, Yczd and 
Khonsar, and to a less extent in those of Khorasan, Kcrmanshah 
and Fars. The Yezd opium is considered better than that of 
Ispahan, but the strongest or Theriak-e-Arabistani is produced in 
the neighbourhood of Dizful and Shuster, east of the river Tigris. 
Good opium is also produced about Sari and Balfarush in the pro- 
vince of Mazanderan. The capsules are incised vertically, or in 
some districts vertical cuts with diagonal branches are made. The 
crop is collected in May and June and reaches the ports for ex- 
portation between August and January. Although the cultivation 
of opium in Persia was probably carried on at an earlier date than 
in India, Persian opium was almost unknown in England until 
about the year 1870, except in the form of the inferior quality 
known as " Trebizond," which usually contains only 0-2 to 3% of 
morphia. This opium is in the form of cylindrical sticks about 
6 in. long and half an inch in diameter, wrapped in white waxed 
or red paper. Since 1870 Persian opium has been largely exported 
from Bushire and Bandar-Abbas in the Persian Gulf to London, 
the Straits Settlements and China. At that date the annual yield 
is said not to have exceeded 2600 cases; but, the profits on opium 
having about that time attracted attention, all available ground 
was utilized for this to the exclusion of cereals, cotton and other 
produce. The result was a severe famine in 1871-1872, which was 
further aggravated by drought and other circumstances. Notwith- 
standing the lesson thus taught, the cultivation is being extended 
every year, especially in Ispahan, which abounds in streams and 
rivers, an advantage in which Yczd is deficient. About Shiraz, 
Behbehan and Kermanshah it now occupies much of the land, 
and has consequently affected the price and growth of cereals. 
The trade — only 300 chests in 1859 — gradually increased until 
1877, when the Persian opium was much adulterated with glucose. 
The heavy losses on this inferior opium and the higher prices 
obtained for the genuine article led to a great improvement in its 
preparation, and in 1907 the production had increased to 10,000 
piculs. About half of the total produce finds its way to the Chinese 
market, chiefly by sea to Hongkong and the Federated Malay States, 
although some is carried overland through Bokhara, Khokand and 
Kashgar; a small quantity is exported by way of Trebizond and 
Samsun to Constantinople, and about 2000 piculs to Great Britain. 
The produce of Ispahan and Fars is carried for exportation to 
Bushire, and that of Khorasan and Kirman and Yezd partly to 
Bushire and partly to Bandar-Abbas. The Shuster opium is sent 
partly via Bushire to Muscat for transhipment to Zanzibar, and 
part is believed to be smuggled into India by way of Baluchistan 
and Mekran. Smaller quantities grown in Teheran, Tabriz and 
Kermanshah find their way to Smyrna, where it is said to be mixed 
with the local drug for the European market, the same practice 
being carried on at Constantinople with the Persian opium that 
arrives there from Samsun and Trebizond. For the Chinese market 
the opium is usually packed in chests containing ioi shahmans 
(of I3f ft), so that on arrival it may weigh 1 Chinese picul ( = 133! lb), 
5 to 10% being allowed for loss by drying. At Ispahan, Shiraz 
and Yezd the drug, after being dried in the sun, is mixed with oil 
in the proportion of 6 or 7 lb to 141 ft of opium, with the object, 
it is said, of suiting the taste of the Chinese — that intended for the 
London market being now always free from oil. 

Persian opium, as met with in the London market, occurs in 
several forms, the most common being that of brick-shaped pieces. 
These occur wrapped separately in paper, and weighing 1 ft each ; 
of these 140-160 are packed in a case. Ispahan opium also occurs 



in the form of parallelopipeds weighing about 16-20 oz. ; sometimes 
flat circular pieces weighing about 20 -oz. are met with. The opium 
is usually of much firmer and smoother consistence than that of 
Turkey, of a chocolate-brown colour and cheesy appearance, the 
pieces bearing evidence of having been beaten into a uniform mass 
previously to being made into lumps, probably with the addition 
of Sarcocoll, as it is always harder when dry than Turkey opium. 
The odour differs but slightly, except in oily specimens, from that 
of Turkey opium. Great care is now taken to prevent adulteration, 
and consequently Persian opium can be obtained nearly as rich 
in morphia as the Turkish drug — on the average from 9-12%. 
The greater proportion of the Persian opium imported into London 
is again exported, a comparatively small quantity being used, 
chiefly for the manufacture of codeine when Turkey opium is dear, 
and a little in veterinary practice. According to Dr Reveil, Persian 
opium usually contains 75 to 84% of matter soluble in water, 
and some samples contain from 13 to 30% of glucose, probably 
due to an extract or syrup of raisins added to the paste in the 
pots in which it is collected, and to which the shining fracture of 
hard Persian opium is attributed. 

Europe. — Experiments made in England, France, Italy, Switzer- 
land, Greece, Spain, Germany, and even in Sweden, prove that 
opium as rich in morphia as that of Eastern countries can be pro- 
duced in Europe. In 1830 Young, a surgeon at Edinburgh, suc- 
ceeded in obtaining 56 lb of opium from an acre of poppies, and 
sold it at 36s. per ft. In France the cultivation has been carried 
on since 1844 at Clermont-Ferrand by Aubcrgier. The juice, of 
which a workman is able to collect about 9-64 troy oz. in a day, 
is evaporated by artificial heat immediately after collection. The 
juice yields about one-fourth of its weight of opium, and the percent- 
age of morphia varies according to the variety of poppy used, the 
purple one giving the best results. By mixing assayed samples he 
is able to produce an opium containing uniformly 10% of morphia. 
It is made up in cakes of 50 grammes, but is not produced in sufficient 
quantity to become an article of wholesale commerce. Some 
specimens of French opium have been found by Guibourt to yield 
22-8% of morphia, being the highest percentage observed as yet 
in any opium. Experiments made in Germany by Karsten, Jobst 
and Vulpius have shown that it is possible to obtain in that country 
opium of excellent quality, containing from 8 to 13% 'of morphia. 
It was found that the method yielding the best results was to make 
incisions in the poppy-heads soon after sunrise, to collect the juice 
with the finger immediately after incision and evaporate it as 
speedily as possible, the colour of the opium being lighter and the 
percentage of morphia greater than when the juice was allowed 
to dry on the plant. Cutting through the poppy-head caused the 
shrivelling up of the young fruit, but the heads which had been 
carefully incised yielded more seed than those which had not been 
cut at all. Newly-manured soil was found to act prejudicially on 
the poppy. The giant variety of poppy yielded most morphia. 

The difficulty of obtaining the requisite amount of cheap labour 
at the exact time it is needed and the uncertainty of the weather 
render the cultivation of opium too much a matter of speculation 
for it ever to become a regular crop in most European countries. 

North America. — In 1865 the cultivation of opium was attempted 
in Virginia by A. Robertson, and a product was obtained which 
yielded 4% of morphia. In 1867 H. Black grew opium in Tennessee 
which contained 10% of morphia. Opium produced in California 
by H. Flint in 1873 yielded 7f% of morphia, equal to 10% in 
perfectly-dried opium. The expense of cultivation exceeded the 
returns obtained by its sale. As in Europe, therefore, the high price 
of labour militates against its production on a large scale. 

(E. M. H.) 

Chemistry of the Opium Alkaloids. — The chemical Investigation 
of opium dates from 1803 when C. Derosne isolated a crystalline 
compound which he named " opium salt." In 1803 F. W. 
Sertiirner, a German apothecary, independently obtained 
this same substance, naming it " morphium," and recognized 
its basic nature; he also isolated an acid, meconic acid. A second 
paper, published in 1817, was followed in the same year by 
the identification of a new base, narcotinc, by P. J. Robiquet. 
Thebaine, another alkaloid, was discovered by Thiboumery 
in 1835; whilst, in 1848, Merck isolated papaverine from com- 
mercial narcotine. Subsequent investigations have revealed 
some twenty or more alkaloids, the more important of which 
are given in the following table (from A. Pictet, Vegetable 
A Ikaloids) : — 



Morphine 


. 9-0% 


Laudanine 


. . 0-01% 


Narcotine 


• 5-o% 


Lanthopine 


. 0-006% 


Papaverine . 


. o-8% 


Protopine . 


. . 0-003% 


Thebaine 


. 0-4% 


Codamine , 


. 0-002 % 


Codeine 


■ 0-3% 


Iritopine . 


. . 0-0015% 


Narceine 


• 0-2% 


Laudanosine . 


. 0-0008 % 


Cryptopinc . 


. 0-08% 


Meconine . 


. • 0-3% 


Pseudomorphine 


. 0-02% 







OPIUM 



''35 



MeO 

MeO 



-~y 



N I I 

-chA' 

I. Papaverine 



Opium also contains a gum, pectin, a wax, sugar and similar 
substances, in addition to meconic and lactic acids. 

The alkaloids fall into two chemical groups: (r) derivatives 
of isoquinoline, including papaverine, narcotine, gnoscopine 
(racemic narcotine), narceine, laudanosine, laudanine, cotarnine, 
hydrocotarnine (the last two do not occur in opium), and (2) 
derivatives of phenanthrene, including morphine, codeine, 
thebaine. The constitutions of the first series have been deter- 
mined; of the second they are still uncertain. 

Papaverine, C20H21NO1, was investigated by G. Goldschmiedt 
(Monats., 1883-1889), who determined its constitution (formula 1., 
below) by a study of its oxidation products, showing that papaver- 
aldine, which it gives with potassium permanganate, is a tetra- 
methoxybenzoylisoquinoline. Its synthesis, and also that of 
laudanosine, C21H27NO4, which is N-methyitctrahydropapaverine, 
was effected in 1909 by F. L. Pyman (Jour. Client. Soc, 95, p. 1610) 
and by A. Pictet and Mile M. Finkelstein (Compt. rend., 1909, 148, 
p. 925). Laudanine, C20H26NO4, is very similar to laudanosine, 
differing in having three methoxy groups and one hydroxy instead 
of four methoxy. 

Narcotine, C22H23NO7, has been principally investigated by 
A. Matthiessen and G. C. Foster, and by W. Roser (Ann., 1888, 249, 
p. 156; 1889, 254, p. 334.) By hydrolysis it yields opianic acid, 
CioHioOe, and hydrocotarnine, C12H15NO3; reduction gives meco- 
nine, CioHioO*, and hydrocotarnine; whilst oxidation gives opianic 
acid and cotarnine, C12H15NCV Narcotine was shown to be methoxy- 
hydrastine (II.) (hydrastine, the alkaloid of Golden seal, Hydrastis 
canadensis, was solved by E. Schmidt, M. Freund, and P. Fritsch) 
and cotarnine to be 111.; the latter has been synthesized by A. H. 
Salway (Jour. Chem. Soc, 1910, 97, p. 1208). Narceine, C23H27NO8, 
obtained by the action of potash on the methyl iodide of narcotine, 
is probably IV. (see Pyman, loc. cit. pp. 1266, 1738; M. Freund and 
P. Oppenheim, Ber., 1909, 42, p. 1084). 

The proprietary drug " stypticin " is cotarnine hydrochloride, 
and " styptol " cotarnine phthalate; " antispasmin " is a, sodium 
narceine combined with sodium salicylate, and " narcyl " narceine 
ethyl hydrochloride. 

OMe CH 2 OMe 

AOMe A/>CH 2 MeO A 

CH ' <0 UjNMeCVcU - 

MeO CH CH ' 

II.Narcotine 
CH 2 

CH,< °Un NHMe 
MeO CH0 
III. Cotarnine 

The chemistry of morphine, codeine and thebaine is exceedingly 
complicated, and the literature enormous. That these alkaloids 
are closely related may be suspected from their empirical 
formulae, viz. morphine = CnHuNOs, codeine = Ci8H2iN03, thebaine = 
C19H21NO3. As a matter of facf, Grimaux, in i88r, showed codeine 
to be a methylmorphine, and in 1903 Ach and L. Knorr (Ber., 36, 
p. 3067) obtained identical substances, viz. thebenine and morpho- 
thebaine, from both codeine and thebaine, thereby establishing 
their connexion. Our knowledge of the constitution of these alkaloids 
largely depends on the researches of M. Freund, E. Vongerichten, 
L. Knorr and R. Pschorr. The presence of the phenanthrene 
nucleus and the chain system CH 3 N-C-0 follows from the fact that 
these alkaloids, by appropriate treatment, yield a substituted 
phenanthrene and also dimethylaminoethanol (CH 3 ) 2 N-CH2-CH 2 OH. 
Formulae have been proposed by Pschorr and Knorr explaining 
this and other decompositions (in Pschorr's formula the morphine 
ring system is a fusion of a phenanthrene and pyridine nucleus) ; 
another formula, containing a fusion of a phenanthrene with a pyrrol 
ring, was proposed by Bucherer in 1907. The problem is discussed 
by Pschorr "and Einbeck (Ber., 1907, 40, p. 1980), and by Knorr 
and Horlein (ibid. p. 2042); see also Ann. Reps. Chem. Soc. 
' Morphine, or morphia, crystallizes in prisms with one molecule 
of water; it is soluble in 1000 parts of cold water and in 160 of 
boiling water, and may be crystallized from alcohol; it is almost 
insoluble in ether and chloroform. It has an alkaline reaction' and 
behaves as' a tertiary, monacid base; its salts are soluble in water 
and alcohol. The official hydrochloride; Ci7H 19 N0 3 -HCl+3H 2 0, 
forms delicate needles. Distilled with zinc dust morphine yields 
phenanthrene, pyridine and quinoline; dehydration r gives, under 
certain conditions, apomorphine, Ci7H n N0 2 , a white' amorphous 
substance, readily soluble in alcohol, either and chloroform. The 
drug " heroin " is a dlacetylmorphine hydrochloride. Codeine, or 
codeia, crystallizes in orthorhombic prisms with one molecule of 
water: it is readily soluble in alcohol, ether and chloroform. 
Thebaine forms silvery plates, melting at 193 . (C. E.*) 

Medicine. — Of the opium alkaloids only morphine and codeine 
are used to any, extent in. medicine. Thebaine is, not so used, 
but is an important and sometimes very dangerous constituent 
of the various opium preparations, which " are still largely 



CH,<g 



CH 2 OMe 

^CHj MeOA 
' s NMe 2 H0 2 cij 

MeO CH-;— CO-^ ' 

IV.Narceine 



employed, despite the complexity and inconstant composition 
of the drug. Of the other alkaloids narceine is hypnotic, like 
morphine and codeine, whilst thebaine, papaverine and narco- 
tine have an action which resembles that of strychnine, and is, 
generally speaking, undesirable or dangerous if at all well 
marked. A drug of so complex a composition as opium is 
necessarily incompatible with a large number of substances. 
Tannic acid, for instance, precipitates codeine as a tannate, 
salts of many of the heavy metals form precipitates of meconatcs 
and sulphates, whilst the various alkalis, alkaline carbonates 
and ammonia precipitate the important alkaloids. 

The pharmacology of opium differs from that or morphine (g.v.) 
in a few particulars. The chief difference between the action of 
opium and morphine is due to the presence in the former of the- 
baine, which readily affects the more irritable spinal cord of very 
young children. In infants especially opium acts markedly upon 
the spinal cord, and, just as strychnine is dangerous when given to 
young children, so opium, because of the strychnine-like alkaloid 
it contains, should never be administered, under any circumstances 
or in any dose, to children under one year of age. 

When given by the mouth, opium has a somewhat different 
action from that of morphine. It often relieves hunger, by arresting 
the secretion of gastric juice and the movements of the stomach and 
bowel, and it frequently upsets digestion from the same cause. 
Often it relieves vomiting, though in a few persons it may cause- 
vomiting, but in far less degree than apomorphine, which is a 
powerful emetic. Opium has a more marked diaphoretic action 
than morphine, and is much less certain as a hypnotic and analgesic. 

There are a few therapeutic indications for the use of opium rather 
than morphine, but they are far less important than those which 
make the opposite demand. In some abdominal conditions, for 
instance, opium is still preferred by the majority of practitioners, 
though certainly not in gastric cases, where morphine gives the 
relief for which opium often increases the need, owing to the irritant 
action of some of its constituents. Opium is often preferred to 
morphine in cases of diabetes, where prolonged administration is 
required. In such cases the soporific action is not that which is 
sought, and so opium is preferable. A Dover's powder, also, is 
hardly to be surpassed in the early stages of a bad cold in the head 
or bronchitis. Ten grains taken at bedtime will often give sleep, 
cause free diaphoresis and quieten the entire nervous system in such 
cases. The tincture often known as " paregoric " is also largely 
used in bronchial conditions, and morphine shows no sign of dis- 
placing it in favour. Opium rather than morphine is also usually 
employed to relieve the pain of haemorrhoids or fissure of the 
rectum. This practice is, however, obsolescent. 

The alkaloid thebaine may here be referred to, as it is not used 
separately in medicine. Crum Brown and Fraser of Edinburgh 
showed that, whilst thebaine acts like strychnine, methyl and ethyl 
thebaine act like curara, paralysing the terminals of motor nerves. 
At present we say of such a substance as thebaine, " it acts on the 
anterior eornua of grey matter in the spinal cord," but why on them 
and not elsewhere we do not know. 

Toxicology. — Under this heading must be considered acute 
poisoning by opium, and the chronic poisoning seen in those who 
eat or smoke the drug. Chronic opium poisoning by the taking of 
laudanum— as in the familiar case of De Quincey — need not be 
considered here, as the hypodermic injection of morphine has almost 
entirely supplanted it. 

The acute poisoning presents a series of symptoms which are only 
with difficulty to be distinguished from those produced by alcohol, 
by cerebral haemorrhage and by several other morbid conditions. 
The differential diagnosis is of the highest importance, but very 
frequently time alone will furnish a sufficient criterion. The patient 
who has swallowed a toxic or lethal dose of laudanum, for instance, 
usually passes at once into the narcotic state, without any prior 
excitement. Intense drowsiness yields to sleep and coma which 
ends in death from failure of the respiration. This last is the 
cardinal fact in determining treatment. The comatose patient has 
a cold and clammy skin, livid lips and ear-tips — a grave sign — and 
" pin-point pupils." The heart's action is feeble, the pulse being 
small, irregular and often abnormally slow. The action on the 
circulation is largely secondary, however, to the all-important 
action of opium on the respiratory centre in the medulla oblongata. 
The. centre is directly poisoned by the circulation through it of 
opium-containing blood, and the patient's breathing becomes 
progressively slower, shallower and more irregular until finally it 
ceases altogether. 

In treating acute opium poisoning the first proceeding is to empty 
the stomach. For this purpose the best emetic is apomorphine, 
which may be injected subcutaneously in a dose of about one-tenth 
of a grain. But apomorphine is not always to be obtained, and even 
if it be administered it may fail, since the gastric wall is often 
paralysed in opium poisoning,' so that no emetic can act. It is 
therefore better to wash out the stomach, and this should be done, 
if possible, with a solution containing about ten grains of salt to 
each ounce of water. This must be repeated at 'intervals of about 



136 



OPIUM 



half an hour, since some of the opium is excreted into the stomach 
after its absorption into the blood. If apomorphine is obtainable, 
both of these measures may be employed. Potassium permanganate 
decomposes morphine by oxidation, the action being facilitated by 
the addition of a small quantity of mineral acid to the solution. 
The physiological as well as the chemical antidotes must be em- 
ployed. The chief of these are coffee or caffeine and atropine. A 
pint of hot strong coffee may be introduced into the rectum, and 
caffeine in large doses — ten or twenty grains of the carbonate — 
may be given by the mouth. A twentieth, even a tenth of a grain of 
atropine sulphate should be injected subcutaneously, the drug 
being a direct stimulant of the respiratory centre. Every means 
must be taken to keep the patient awake. He must be walked 
about, have smelling salts constantly applied to the nose, or be 
stimulated by the Faradic battery. But the final resort in cases of 
opium poisoning is artificial respiration, which should be persevered 
with as long as the heart continues to beat. It has, indeed, been 
asserted that, if relays of trained assistants are at hand, no one 
need die of opium poisoning, even if artificial respiration has to be 
continued for hours or days. (X.) 

Opium-eating. — Opium, like many other poisons, produces 
after a time a less effect if frequently administered as a medicine, 
so that the dose has to be constantly increased to produce the 
same result on those who take it habitually. When it is used 
to relieve pain or diarrhoea, if the dose be not taken at the usual 
time the symptoms of the disease recur with such violence that 
the remedy is speedily resorted to as the only means of relief, 
and thus the habit is rxceedingly difficult to break off. Opium- 
eating is chiefly practised in Asia Minor, Persia and India. 
Opinions differ widely as to the injurious effect of the habit; 
the weight of evidence appears, however, to indicate that it is 
much more deleterious than opium-smoking. 

The following statistics collected by Vincent Richards regarding 
Balasor in Orissa throw some light on the influence of this practice 
on the health. He estimates that 1 in every 12 or 14 of the 
population uses the drug, and that the habit is increasing. Of the 
613 opium-eaters examined by him he found that the average age 
at which the habit was commenced was 20 to 26 years for men and 
24 to 30 years for women. Of this number 143 had taken the drug 
for from 10 to 20 years, 62 for from 20 to 30 years and 38 for more 
than 30 years. The majority took their opium twice daily, morning 
and evening, the quantity taken varying from 2 to 46 grains daily, 
large doses being the exception, and the average 5 to 7 grains daily. 
The dose, when large, had been increased from the beginning ; when 
small, there had usually been no increase at all. The causes which 
first led to the increase of the drug were disease, example and a 
belief in its aphrodisiac powers. The diseases for which it was 
chiefly taken were malarial fever, dysentery, diarrhoea, spitting of 
blood, rheumatism and elephantiasis. A number began to take it in 
the famine year, 1866, as it enabled them to exist on less food and 
mitigated their sufferings; others used it to enable them to undergo 
fatigue and to make long journeys. Richards concludes that the 
excessive use of opium by the agricultural classes, who are the 
chief consumers in Orissa, is very rare indeed. Its moderate use 
may be and is indulged in for years without producing any decided 
or appreciable ill effect except weakening the reproductive powers, 
the average number of the children of opium-eaters being I - 1 1 after 
11 years of married life. It compares favourably as regards crime 
and insanity with intoxicating drinks, the inhabitants of Balasor 
being a particularly law-abiding race, and the insane forming only 
0-0069% of the population. Dr W. Dymock of Bombay, speaking 
of western India, concurs in Richards's opinion regarding the 
moderate use of the drug. He believes that excessive indulgence 
in it is confined to a comparatively small number of the wealthier 
classes of the community. Dr Moore's experience of Rajputana 
strongly supports the same views. It seems probable that violent 
physical exercise may counteract in great measure the deleterious 
effect of opium and prevent it from retarding the respiration, and 
that in such cases the beneficial effects are obtained without the 
noxious results which would accrue from its use to those engaged 
in sedentary pursuits. There is no doubt that the spread of the 
practice is connected with the ban imposed in M ohammedan countries 
on the use of alcoholic beverages, and to some extent with the long 
religious fasts of the Buddhists, Hindus and Moslems, in which 
opium is used to allay hunger. 

To break off the habit of opium-eating is exceedingly difficult, and 
can be effected only by actual external restraint, or the strongest 
effort of a powerful will, especially if the dose has been gradually 
increased. 

Opium-smoking. — This is chiefly practised by the inhabitants 
of China and the islands of the Indian Archipelago, and in 
countries where Chinese are largely erhployed. Opium-smoking 
began in China in the 17th century. Foreign opium was first 
imported by the Portuguese (early 18th century).. In 1906 it was 



estimated that 13,455,699 of Chinese smoked opium, or 27% 
of adult males; but during 1 908-1 910 the consumption of opium 
is believed to have diminished by about one-third. 

For smoking the Chinese use an extract of opium known 
as prepared opium or chandoo, and a cheaper preparation is 
made from 60% used opium known as " opium dross " and 40% 
native opium. This latter is chiefly used by the poorer classes. 

The process of preparation is thus described by Hugh M'Callum, 
government analyst at Hong-Kong: — 

" The opium is removed from its covering of leaves, &c, moistened 
with a little water, and allowed to stand for about fourteen hours; 
it is then divided into pans, 2J balls of opium and about 10 pints 
of water going to each pan ; it is now boiled and stirred occasionally 
until a uniform mixture having the consistence of a thin paste is 
obtained. This operation takes from five to six hours. The paste 
is at once transferred to a larger pan and cold water added to about 
3 gallons, covered and allowed to stand for from fourteen to fifteen 
hours. A bunch of ' tang sani ' (lamp-wick, the pith of Eriocaidon 
or Scirpus) is then inserted well into the mass, and the pan slightly 
canted, when a rich, clear, brown fluid is thus drawn off, and filtered 
through ' chi mui ' (paper made from bamboo fibre). The residue 
is removed to a calico filter and thoroughly washed with boiling 
water, the wash water being reboiled and used time after time. 
The last washing is done with pure water; these washings are used 
in the next day's boiling. 

" The residues on the calico filters are transferred to a large one 
of the same material and well pressed. This insoluble residue, called 
' nai chai ' (opium dirt), is the perquisite of the head boiling coolie, 
who finds a ready market for it in Canton, where it is used for 
adulterating.^ or rather in manufacturing, the moist inferior kinds' of 
prepared opjum. The filtrate or opium solution is concentrated 
by evaporation at the boiling point, with occasional stirring until 
of a proper consistence, the time required being from three to four 
hours; it is then removed from the fire and stirred with great 
vigour till cold, the cooling being accelerated by coolies with large 
fans. When quite cold it is taken to the hong and kept there for 
some months before it is considered in prime condition for smoking, 
As thus prepared it has the consistence of a thin treacly extract, 
and is called boiled or prepared opium. In this state it is largely 
exported from China to America, Australia, &c, being carefully 
sealed up in small pots having the name of the maker {i.e. hong) 
on each. 

"The Chinese recognize the following grades of opium: (1) 
'raw opium,' as imported from India; (2) 'prepared opium,' 
opium made as _ above; (3) ' opium dross,' the scrapings from the 
opium" pipe; this is reboiled and manufactured as a second-class 
prepared opium; a Chinese doctor stated lately at a coroner's 
inquest on a case of poisoning that it was more poisonous than the 
ordinary prepared opium; (4) ' nai chai_' (opium dirt), the insoluble 
residue left on exhausting the raw opium thoroughly with water. 
The opium is sent every day from the hong {i.e. shop or firm) to the 
boiling-house, the previous day's boiling being then returned to the 
hong. The average quantity boiled each day is from six to eight 
chests of Patna opium, this being the only kind used." 

By this process of preparation a considerable portion of the nar- 
cotine, caoutchouc, resin, oil or fatty and insoluble matters are 
removed, and the prolonged boiling, evaporating and baking over 
a naked fire tend to lessen the amount of alkaloids present in the 
extract. The only alkaloids likely to remain in the prepared opium, 
and capable of producing well-marked physiological results, are 
morphine, codeine and narceine. Morphine, in the pure state, can 
be sublimed, but codeine and narceine are said not to give a sub- 
limate. Even if sublimed in smoking opium, morphine would, iii 
M'Callum's opinion, probably be deposited in the pipe before it 
reached the mouth of the smoker. The bitter taste of morphine is 
not noticeable when smoking opium, and it is therefore possible 
that the pleasure derived from smoking the drug is due to some 
product formed during combustion. This supposition is rendered 
probable by the fact that the opiums most prized by smokers are not 
those containing most morphine, and that the quality is judged by 
the amount of soluble matter in the opium, by its tenacity or 
" touch," and by peculiarities of aroma — the Indian opium, especi- 
ally the Patna kind, bearing much the same relation to the Chinese 
and Persian drug that champagne does to vin ordinaire. Opium- 
smoking is thus described by Theo. Sampson of Canton : — 

" The smoker, lying on his side, with his face towards the tray 
and his head resting on a high hard pillow (sometimes made of 
earthenware, but more frequently of bamboo covered with leather), 
takes the pipe in his hand; with the other hand he takes a dipper 
and puts the sharp end of it into the opium, which is of a treacly 
consistency. Twisting it round and round he gets a large drop of 
the fluid to adhere to the dipper; still twisting it round to prevent 
it falling he, brings the drop over the flame of the lamp, and twirling 
it round and round he roasts it; all this is done with acquired 
dexterity. The opium must not be burnt or made too dry, but 
roasted gently till it looks like burnt worsted ;_ every now and then 
he takes it away from the flame and rolls it (still on the end of the 



OPLADEN— OPORTO 



137 



dipper) on the flat surface of the bowl. When it is roasted and 
rolled to his satisfaction he gently heats the centre of the bowl, 
where there is a small orifice; then he quickly thrusts the end of the 
dipper into the orifice, twirls it round smartly and withdraws it; 
if this is properly done, the opium (now about the size of a grain of' 
hemp-seed or a little larger) is left adhering to the bowl immediately, 
over the orifice. It is now ready for smoking. 

" The smoker assumes a comfortable attitude (lying down of 
course) at a proper distance from the lamp. He now puts the stem 
to his lips, and holds the bowl over the lamp. The heat causes the 
opium to frizzle, and the smoker takes three or four long inhalations, 
all the time using the dipper to bring every particle of the opium 
to the orifice as it burns away, but not taking his lips from the end 
of the stem, or the opium pellet from the lamp till all is finished. 
Then he uses the flattened end of the dipper to scrape away any little 
residue there may be left around the orifice, and proceeds to prepare 
another pipe. The preparations occupy from five to ten minutes, 
and the actual smoking about thirty seconds. The smoke is 
swallowed, and is exhaled through both the mouth and the nose." 



Q, 




Fig. 3. — Opium-smoking Apparatus, a, pipe; 5, dipper; c, lamp. 

So far as can be gathered from the conflicting statements published 
on the subject, opium-smoking may be regarded much in the same 
light as the use of alcoholic stimulants. To the great majority of 
smokers who use it moderately it appears to act as a stimulant, 
and to enable them to undergo great fatigue and to ' go for a con- 
siderable time with little or no food. According to the reports on 
the subject, when the smoker has plenty of active work it appears 
to be no more injurious than smoking tobacco. When carried to 
excess it becomes an inveterate habit; but this happens chiefly in 
individuals of weak will-power, who would just as easily become 
the victims of intoxicating drinks, and who are practically moral 
imbeciles, often addicted also to other forms of depravity. The 
effect in bad cases is to cause loss of appetite, a leaden pallor of 
the skin, and a degree of leanness so excessive as to make its victims 
appear like living skeletons. All inclination for exertion becomes 
gradually lost, business is neglected, and certain ruin to the smoker 
follows. There can be no doubt that the use of the drug is opposed 
by all thinking Chinese who are not pecuniarily interested in the 
opium trade or cultivation, for several reasons, among which may 
be mentioned the drain of bullion from the country, the decrease of 
population, the liability to famine through the cultivation of opium 
where cereals should be grown, and the corruption of state officials. 

See Pharmaceutical Journ. [1] xi. p. 269, xiv. p. 395; [2] x. p. 434; 
Impey, Report on Malwa Opium (Bombay, 1848); Report on Trade 
of Hankow (1869); New Remedies (1876), p. 229; Pharmacographia 
(1879), p. 42; Journal of the Society of Arts (1882); The Friend of 
China (1883), &c. Report of the Straits Settlements, Federated 
Malay States Opium Commission (1908), App. xxiii. and xxiv.; 
Allen, Commercial Organic Analysis, vol. iii. pt. iv. p. 355; Frank 
Browne, Report on Opium (Hong-Kong, 1908); G. Watt, Dictionary 
of tlie Economic Products of India (1892); H. Moissan, Comptes 
rendus, of the 5th of December 1892, iv. p. 33; Lalande, Archives 
de medicine navale, t. 1. (1890); International Opium Commission 
(1909), vol. ii. " Report of the Delegations "; Squire, Companion 
to the British Plmrmacopeia (1908) (18th edition). (E. M. H.) 

OPLADEN, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine Province, 
10 m. N.E. from Cologne by the railway to Elberfeld and at the 
junction of lines to Speldorf and Bonn. Pop. (1905) 6338. It 
has an Evangelical and a Roman Catholic church. It has dyeing 
works, and manufactures of dynamite, indigo products and 
railway plant. Before passing to Prussia, Opladen belonged 
to the duchy of Berg. 

OPON, a town of the province of Cebu, Philippine Islands, 
on the small island of Mactan (area about 45 sq. m.), which 
is separated from the island of Cebu by a channel only about 
1 m. wide. Pop (1903), after the annexation of Cordova and 
Santa Rosa, 20,166. There are forty-four barrios, or villages, 
in the town, and three of these had in 1903 more than 1000 
inhabitants each. The language is Visayan. Opon is a shipping 
and commercial suburb of Cebu city, the harbour of which is 
sheltered by Mactan Island. The town has large groves of 
coco-nut trees, and its principal industries are the cultivation of 
Indian corn and maguey and fishing. In the N.E. part of the 



town is a monument to Magellan, who discovered the Philippines 
in March 1521, and was slain here by the natives late in the 
following month. 

OPORTO (i.e. porto, " the port "), the second city of the 
kingdom of Portugal, the capital of the district of Oporto and 
formerly of Entre-Douro-e-Minho; on both banks of the river 
Douro, about 3 m. from its mouth, in 41 8' N. and 8° 37' W. 
Pop. (1900) 167,955. In Portuguese the definite article is 
uncompounded in the name of the city, which in strict accuracy 
should always be written Porlo; the form Oporto has, however, 
been stereotyped by long usage in English and in some other 
European languages. The part of the city south of the Douro 
is known as Villa Nova de Gaia. Oporto is the see of a bishop, 
in the archiepiscopal province of Braga. It is the true capital 
of northern Portugal, and the commercial and political rival of 
Lisbon, in much the same way as Barcelona (q.v.) is the rival 
of Madrid. Three main railway lines meet here — from Lisbon, 
from Valenga do Minho on the northern frontier, and from 
Barca d'Alva on the north-western frontier. The Valenca 
line has branches to Guimaraes and Braga, and affords access 
to Corunna and other cities of north-western Spain; the Barca 
d'Alva line has a branch to Mirandella and communicates with 
Madrid via Salamanca. Oporto is built chiefly on the north 
or right bank of the Douro; its principal suburbs are Bomfim 
on the E., Monte Pedral and Paranhos on the N., Villar Bicalho, 
Lordello and Sao Joao da Foz on the W., Ramalde, Villarinha, 
Matozinhos, Lega da Palmeira and the port of Leixoes on the 
N.W. The mouth of the river is obstructed by a sandy spit 
of land which has been enlarged by the deposits of silt constantly 
washed down by the swift current; on the north side of this 
bar is a narrow channel varying in depth from 16 ft. to 19 ft. 
A fort in Sao Joao da Foz protects the entrance, and there is 
a lighthouse on a rock outside the bar. As large vessels cannot 
enter the river, a harbour of refuge has been constructed at 
Leixoes {q.v.). 

The approach to Oporto up the winding and fjord-like estuary 
is one of singular beauty. On the north the streets rise in 
terraces up the steep bank, built in many cases of granite over- 
laid with plaster, so that white is the prevailing colour of the 
city; on the south are the hamlets of Gaia and Furada, and the 
red-tiled wine lodges of Villa Nova de Gaia, in which vast 
quantities of " port " are manufactured and stored. The archi- 
tecture of the houses and public buildings is often rather Oriental 
than European in appearance. There are numerous parks and 
gardens, especially on the outskirts of the city, in which palms, 
oranges and aloes grow side by side with the flowers and fruits 
of northern Europe, for the climate is mild and very equable, the 
mean temperatures for January and July — -the coldest and the 
hottest months — being respectively about 50° and 70 . The 
Douro is at all seasons crowded with shipping, chiefly small 
steamers and large sailing vessels. The design of some of the 
native craft is peculiar — among them may be mentioned the high- 
prowed canoe-like fishing boats, the rascas with their three lateen 
sails, and the barcos rabello, flat-bottomed barges with huge 
rudders, used for the conveyance of wine down stream. Two 
remarkable iron bridges, the Maria Pia and the Dom Luiz I., 
span the river. The first was built by Messrs Eiffel & Company 
of Paris in 1876-1877; it rests on a granite substructure and 
carries the Lisbon railway line across the Douro ravine at a 
height of 200 ft. The second, constructed in 1881-1S85 by a 
Belgian firm, has two decks or roadways, one 33 ft., the other 
200 ft. above the usual water-level; its arch, one of the largest 
in Europe, has a span of 560 ft. and is supported by two massive 
granite towers. The Douro is liable in winter to sudden and 
violent floods; in 1909-1910 the water rose 40 ft. at Oporto, where 
it is confined in a deep and narrow bed. 

Though parts of the city are modern or have been modernized, 
the older quarters in the east are extremely picturesque, with 
their steep and narrow lanes overshadowed by lofty balconied 
houses. Overcrowding and dirt are common, for the density o f 
population is nearly 13,000 per sq. m., or greater than in any other 
city of Portugal. Until the early years of the 20th century, when 

xx. 5 a 



138 



OPORTO 



a proper system of sewerage was installed, the condition of 
Oporto was most insanitary. Electric lighting and tramways 
were introduced a little before this, but the completion of the 
tramway system was long delayed, and in the hilly districts cars 
drawn by ten mules were not an uncommon sight. Ox-carts are. 
used for the conveyance of heavy goods, and until late in the 
19th century sedan-chairs were still occasionally used. A painful 
feature of the street-life of Oporto is the great number of the 
diseased and mutilated beggars who frequent the busiest 
thoroughfares. As a rule, however, the natives of Oporto are 
strong and of fine physique; they also show fewer signs of 
negro descent than the people of Lisbon. Their numbers tend 
to increase very rapidly; in 1864 the population of Oporto was 
86,751, but in 1S7S it rose to 105,838, in 1890 to 138,860, and in 
1900 to 167,955. Many of the men emigrate to South America, 
where their industry usually enables them to prosper, and 
ultimately to return with considerable savings. The local 
dialect is broader than the Portuguese of the educated classes, 
from which it differs more in pronunciation than in idiom. 
The poverty of the people is very great. Out of the 597,935 
inhabitants of the district of Oporto (893 sq. m.), 422,320 were 
returned at the census of 1900 as unable to read or write. Much 
had been done, however, to remedy this defect, and besides 
numerous primary schools there are in the city two schools for 
teachers, a medical academy, polytechnic, art, trade and naval 
schools, and industrial institute, a commercial athenaeum, a 
lyceum for secondary education, an ecclesiastical seminary, and a 
meteorological observatory. 

The cathedral, which stands at the highest point of eastern 
Oporto, on the site of the Visigothic citadel, was originally a 
Romanesque building of the 12th century; its cloisters are 
Gothic of the 14th century, but the greater part of the fabric 
was modernized in the 17th and 18th centuries. The interior of 
the cloisters is adorned with blue and white tiles, painted to 
represent scenes from the Song of Solomon. The bishop's palace 
is a large and lofty building conspicuously placed on a high rock ; 
the interior contains a fine marble staircase. The Romanesque 
and early Gothic church of Sao Martinho de Cedo Feita is the 
most interesting ecclesiastical building in Oporto, especially 
noteworthy being the curiously carved capitals of its pillars. 
Though the present structure is not older, except in details, than 
the 1 2th century, the church is said to have been " hastily built " 
(cedo feita, cito facta) by Theodomir, king of the Visigoths, in 559, 
to receive the relics of St Martin of Tours, which were then on their 
way hither from France. The Torre dos Clerigos is a granite 
tower 246 ft. high, built in the middle of the iSth century at the 
expense of the local clergy (clerigos) ; it stands on a hill and forms 
a conspicuous landmark for sailors. Nossa Senhora da Lapa is a 
fine iSth-century church, Corinthian in style; Sao Francisco is 
a Gothic basilica dating from 1410; Nossa Senhora da Serra do 
Pilar is a secularized Augustinian convent used as artillery 
barracks, and marks the spot at which Wellington forced the 
passage of the Douro in 1S09. The exchange (lonja) is another 
secularized convent, decorated with coloured marbles. Parts of 
the interior are floored and panelled with polished native-coloured 
woods from Brazil, which are inlaid in elaborate patterns; there 
is a very handsome staircase, and the fittings of one large room 
are an excellent modern copy of Moorish ornamentation. 

Other noteworthy public buildings are the museum, library, 
opera-house, bull-ring, hospital and quarantine station. The 
crystal palace is a large glass and iron structure built for the 
industrial exhibition of 1865; its garden commands a fine view 
of the city and river, and contains a small menagerie. The 
English factory, built in 1790, has been converted into a club 
for the British residents — a large and important community 
whose members are chiefly connected with the wine and shipping 
trades. Lawn tennis, cricket, boat-racing on the Douro, and 
other British sports have been successfully introduced, and there 
is keen competition between the Oporto clubs and those of 
Lisbon and Carcavellos. The English club gave its name to 
the Rua Nova dos Inglezes, one of the busiest streets, which 
contains many banks, warehouses and steamship offices. The 



Rua da Alfandega, skirting the right bank of the Douro and 
passing the custom house (alfandega), is of similar character; 
here may be seen characteristic types of the fishermen and 
peasants of northern Portugal. The Rua das Flores contains, 
on its eastern side, the shops of the cloth-dealers; on the west 
are the jewellers' shops, with a remarkable display of gold and 
silver filigree-work and enamelled gold. Oporto is famous 
for these ornaments, which are . often very artistic, and are 
largely worn on holidays by women of the poorer classes, 
whose savings or dowries are often kept in this readily 
marketable form. ' 

Oporto is chiefly famous for the export of the wine which bears 
its name. An act passed on the 29th of January 1906 defined 
" port " as a wine grown in the Douro district, exported from 
Oporto, and containing more than 16-5% of alcoholic strength. 
The vines from which it is made grow in the Paiz do Vinho, a 
hilly region about 60 m. up the river, and having an area of 27 m. 
in length by 5 or 6 in breadth, cut off from the sea, and shut in 
from the north-east by mountains. The trade was established 
in 167S, but the shipments for some years did not exceed 600 
pipes (of 115 gallons each). In 1703 the British government 
concluded the Methuen treaty with Portugal, under which 
Portuguese wines were admitted on easier terms than French or 
German, and henceforward " port " began to be drunk (see 
Portugal: History). In 1747 the export reached 17,000 pipes. 
In 1754 the great wine monopoly company of Oporto originated, 
under which the shipments rose to 33,000 pipes. At the begin- 
ning of the 19th century the policy of the government more and 
more favoured port wine, besides which the vintages from 1802 
to 1815 were splendid both in Portugal and in Madeira — that 
of 181 5 has, in fact, never been excelled. For the next few years 
the grape crop was not at all good, but the 1S20 vintage was the 
most remarkable of any. It was singularly sweet and black, 
besides being equal in quality to that of 1815. This was long 
regarded as the standard in taste and colour for true port, and 
to keep up the vintage of following years to this exceptional 
standard adulteration by elder berries, &c, was resorted to. 
This practice did not long continue, for it was cheaper to adul- 
terate the best wines with inferior sorts of port wine itself. In 
1852 the Oidium which spread over Europe destroyed many of 
the Portuguese vineyards. In 1S65 Phylloxera did much damage, 
and in 1867 the second monopoly company was abolished. 
From this time the exports again increased. (See Wine.) 

A third of the population is engaged in the manufacture of 
cottons, woollens, leather, silk, gloves, hats, pottery, corks, 
tobacco, spirits, beer, aerated waters, preserved foods, soap or 
jewelry. Oporto gloves and hats are highly esteemed in Portugal.' 
Cotton piece goods are sent to the African colonies, and, in small 
quantities, to Brazil; their value in 1905 was £120,360, but a 
larger quantity was retained for the home market. The fisheries 
— chiefly of hake, bream and sardines — are extensive. Steam- 
trawling, though unsuccessful in the 19th century, was resumed 
in 1904, and in 1906 there were 136 British, 10 Dutch and 3 
Portuguese steamers thus engaged. The innovation was much 
resented by the owners of more than 350 small sailing boats, 
and protective legislation was demanded. In 1905 the combined 
port of Oporto and Leixoes was entered by 1734 vessels of 
1,562,724 tons, but in this total some vessels were counted twice 
over — i.e. once at each port. Nearly three-fourths of the tonnage 
was entered at Leixoes. About the close of the 19th century 
there was an important development of tourist traffic from 
Liverpool and Southampton via Havre. Reduced railway 
rates and improved hotel accommodation have facilitated the 
growth of this traffic. Many tourists land at Oporto and visit 
Braga (q.v.), Bussaco (q.v.) and other places of interest, on their 
way to Lisbon. There is also a large tourist traffic from Ger- 
many. The exports of Oporto include wine, cottons, wood, 
pitwood, stone, cork, salt, sumach, onions, oranges, olives and 
beans. American competition has destroyed the export trade 
in live cattle for which Great Britain was the principal market. 
Dried codfish (bacalhdo) is imported in great quantities from 
Newfoundland and Norway, other noteworthy imports are 



OPOSSUM— OPPEL 



*39 



coal, iron, steel, machinery and textiles. The total yearly value 
of the foreign trade exceeds £5,000,000. 

The history of Oporto dates from an early period. Before the 
Roman invasion, under the name of Tortus Cale, Gaia or Cago, 
it was a town on the south bank of the Douro with a good trade; 
the Alani subsequently founded a city on the north bank, calling 
it Caslrum Novum. About a.d. 540 the Visigoths under Leovigild 
obtained possession, but yielded place in 716 to the Moors. The 
Christians, however, recaptured Oporto in 997, and it became the 
capital of the counts of Portucalia for part of the period during 
which the Moors ruled in the southern provinces of Portugal. 
(See Portugal: History.) The Moors once more became its 
masters for a short period, till in 1092 it was brought finally 
under Christian domination. The citizens rebelled in 162,8 
against an unpopular tax, in 1661 for a similar reason, in 1757 
against the wine monopoly, and in 1808 against the French. 
The town is renowned in British military annals from the duke 
of Wellington's passage of the Douro, by which he surprised and 
put to flight the French army under Marshal Soult, capturing 
the city on the 12th of May 1809. Oporto sustained a severe 
siege in ^32-1833, being bravely defended against the Miguelites 
by Dom Pedro with 7000 soldiers; 16,000 of its inhabitants 
perished. In the constitutional crises of 1820, 1826, 1S36, 1842, 
1846-1847, 1891 and 1907-190S the action of Oporto, as the 
capital of northern Portugal, was always of the utmost 
importance. 

OPOSSUM, an American Indian name properly belonging to 
the American marsupials (other than Caenolestes), but in Australia 
applied to the phalangers (see Phalanger). True opossums 
are found throughout the greater part of America from the 
United States to Patagonia, the number of species being largest 
in the more tropical parts (see Marsupialia). They form the 
family Didclphyidae, distinguished from other marsupial families 
by the equally developed hind-toes, the nailless but fully oppos- 
able first hind-toe, and by the dentition, of which the formula 
is i. -f, c. \-, p. -|-, m. |; total 50. The peculiarity in the mode 
of succession of these teeth is explained in the article referred 
to. Opossums are small animals, varying from the size of a 
mouse to that of a large cat, with long noses, ears and tails, the 
latter being as a rule naked and prehensile, and with the first 
toe in the hind-foot so fully opposable to the other digits as 
to constitute a functionally perfect posterior " hand." These 
opposable first toes are without nail or claw, but their tips are 
expanded into broad flat pads, which are of great use to these 
climbing animals. On the anterior limbs all the five digits are 
provided with long sharp claws, and the first toe is but little 
opposable. The numerous cheek-teeth are crowned with minute 
sharply-pointed cusps, with which to crush the insects on which 
these creatures feed, for the opossums seem to take in South 
America the place in the economy of nature filled in other 
countries by hedgehogs, moles, shrews, &c. The true opossums 
are typically represented by Didelphys marsupialis, a species, 
with several local races, ranging over the greater part of North 
America (except the extreme north). It is of large size, and 
extremely common, being even, found living in towns, where 
it acts as a scavenger by night, retiring for shelter by day upon 
the roofs or into the sewers. It produces in the spring from 
six to sixteen young ones, which are placed by the mother in her 
pouch immediately after birth, and remain there until able to 
take care of themselves; the period of gestation being from 
fourteen to seventeen days. A local race found in Central and 
tropical South America is known as the crab-eating opossum 
(D. marsupialis cancrivora). The second sub-genus, or genus, 
Melachirus contains a considerable number of species found 
all over the tropical parts of the New World. They are of 
medium size, with short, close fur, very long, scaly and naked 
tails, and have less developed ridges on their skulls. They have, 
as a rule, no pouch in which to carry' their young, and the latter 
therefore commonly ride on their mother's back, holding on by 
winding their prehensile tails round hers, as in the figure of the 
woolly opossum. The latter belongs to the sub-genus Philander, 
which is nearly allied to the last; its full title being Didelphy 



{Philander) lauigera. The philander (D. [P.] philander) is closely 
related. 

The fourth sub-genus (or genus) is Marmosa (Micourctts, or 
Grymacomys), differing from the two last by the smaller size 
of its members and by certain slight differences in the shape 
of their teeth. lis best-known species is the murine opossum 
(D. murina), no larger than a mouse, of a bright-red colour, 
found as far north as central Mexico, and extending thence to 
the south of Brazil. A second well-known species is D. cincrea, 
which ranges from Central America to western Brazil, Peru and 
Bolivia. Yet another group (Pcramys) is represented by 
numerous shrew-like species, of very small size, with short, 
hairy and non-prehensile tails, not half the length of the trunk, 
and unridged skulls. The most striking member of the group 




The Woolly Opossum (Didelphys lanigera) and young. 
is the Three-striped Opossum (D. americana) from Brazil, which 
is of a reddish grey colour, with three clearly-defined deep-black 
bands down its back, as in some of the striped mice of Africa. 
D. dimidiata, D. nudicaudala, D. domestica, D. unistriata and 
several other South American species belong to this group. 
Lastly we have the Chiloe Island opossum (D. gliroides), alone 
representing the sub-genus Dromiciops, which is most nearly 
allied to Marmosa, but differs from all other opossums by the 
short furry ears, thick hairy tail, doubly swollen auditory bulla, 
short canines and peculiarly formed and situated incisors. 

Whatever difference of opinion there may be as to the right 
of the above-mentioned groups to generic separation from the 
typical Didelphys, there can be none as to the distinctness of the 
water-opossum (Chironecies minimus), which differs from all 
the other members of the family by its fully webbed feet, and 
the dark-brown transverse bands across the body (see Water- 
Opossum). 

See O. Thomas, Catalogue of Marsupialia and Monotremata 
(British Museum, 1888); " On Micoureus griseus, with the Descrip- 
tion of a New Genus and Species of Didelphyidae," Ann. Mag. Nat. 
Hist. ser. 6, vol. xiv. p. 184, and later papers in the same and other 
serials. (R. L.*) 

OPPEL, CARL ALBERT (1831-1S65), German palaeontologist, 
was born at Hohenheim in Wiirttemberg, on the 10th of December 
1831. After studying mineralogy and geology at Stuttgart, he 
entered the university of Tubingen, where he graduated Ph.D. 
in 1853. Here he came under the influence of Quenstedt and 
devoted his special attention to the fossils of the Jurassic system. 
With this object he examined in detail during 1854 and the 
following year the succession of strata in England, France and 
Germany and determined the various palaeontological stages 
or zones characterized by special guide-fossils, in most cases 
ammonites. The results of his researches were published in his 
great work Die Jurajormalion Englands, Frankreichs und des 
sildwestlichcn Dculschlands (1S56-185S). In 1858 he became 
an assistant in the Palaeontological Museum at Munich. In 
1S60 he became professor of palaeontology in the university at 
Munich, and in 1861 director of the Palaeontological Collection. 
There he continued his labours on the Jurassic fauna, describing 
new species of Crustacea, ammonites, &c. To him also we owe 



140 



OPPELN^OPPIUS 



the establishment of the Tithonian stage, for strata (mainly 
equivalent to the English Portland and Purbeck Beds) that 
occur on the borders of Jurassic and Cretaceous. Of his later 
works the most important was Palaontologische Mittheilungen 
aus dcm Museum des Konigl. Bayer. Siaats. (1862-1865). He 
died at Munich on the 23rd of December 1865. 

OPPELN (Polish, Oppolie), a town of Germany, in the Prussian 
province of Silesia, lies on the right bank of the Oder, 51 m. 
S.E. of Breslau, on the railway to Kattowitz, and at the junction 
of lines to Beuthen, Neisse and Tarnowitz. Pop. (1905) 30,769. 
It is the seat of the provincial administration of Upper Silesia, 
and contains the oldest Chri^Han church in the district, that of 
St Adalbert, founded at the dose of the 10th century. It has 
two other churches and a ducal 15th-century palace on an island 
in the Oder. The most prominent among the other buildings 
are the offices of the district authorities, the town hall, the 
normal seminary and the hospital of St Adalbert. The Roman 
Catholic gymnasium is established in an old Jesuit college. 
The industries of Oppeln include the manufacture of Portland 
cement, machinery, beer, soap, cigars and lime; trade is carried 
on by rail and river in cattle, grain and the vast mineral output 
of the district, of which Oppeln is the chief centre. The upper 
classes speak German, the lower Polish. 

Oppeln was a flourishing place at the beginning of the nth 
century, and became a town in 1228. It was the capital of the 
duchy of Oppeln and the residence of the duke from n 63 to 
1532, when the Tuling family became extinct. Then it passed 
to Austria, and with the rest of Silesia was ceded to Prussia 
in 1742. 

See Idzikowski, Gesehiehle der Stadt Oppeln (Oppeln, 1863); and 
Vogt, Oppeln beim EinlrM in das Jahr 1900 (Oppeln, 1900). 

OPPENHEIM, a town of Germany, in the grand duchy of 
Hesse, picturesquely situated on the slope of vine-clad hills, on 
the left bank of the Rhine, 20 m. S. of JVIainz, on the railway to 
Worms. Pop. (1905) 3696. The only relic of its former import- 
ance is the Evangelical church of St Catherine, one of the most 
beautiful Gothic edifices of the 13th and 14th centuries in 
Germany, and recently restored at the public expense. The 
town has a Roman Catholic church, several schools and a 
memorial of the War of 1S70-71. Its industries and commerce 
are principally concerned with the manufacture and export of 
wine. Above the town are the ruins of the fortress of Landskron, 
built in the nth century and destroyed in 1689. 

Oppenheim, which occupies the site of the Roman Bauconica, 
was formerly much larger than at present. In 1226 it appears as 
a free town of the Empire and later as one of the most important 
members of the Rhenish League. It lost its independence in 
1375, when it was given in pledge to the elector palatine of the 
Rhine. During the Thirty Years' War it was alternately occupied 
by the Swedes and the Imperialists, and in 1689 it was entirely 
destroyed by the French. 

See W. Franck, Gesehiehle der ehemaligen Reichsstadt Oppenheim 
(Darmstadt, 1859). 

OPPERT, JULIUS (1825-1905), German Assyriologist, was 
born at Hamburg, of Jewish parents, on the 9th of July 1825. 
After studying at Heidelberg, Bonn and Berlin, he graduated at 
Kiel in 1847, and in the following year went to France, where he 
was teacher of German at Laval and at Reims. His leisure was 
given to Oriental studies, in which he had made great progress 
in Germany, and in 1852 he joined FresneFs archaeological 
expedition to Mesopotamia. On his return in 1854 he occupied 
himself in digesting the results of the expedition in so far as they 
concerned cuneiform inscriptions, and published an important 
work upon them (Deckriffremenl des inscriptions cuneiformes, 
1861). In 1857 he was appointed professor of Sanscrit in the 
school of languages connected with the National Library in 
Paris, and in this capacity he produced a Sanscrit grammar; 
but his attention was chiefly given to Assyrian and cognate 
subjects, and he was especially prominent in establishing the 
Turanian character of the language originally spoken in Assyria. 
In i86g Oppert was appointed professor of Assyrian philology 
and archaeology at. the College de France'., In 1865 he published 



a history of Assyria and Chaldaea in the light of the results of 
the different exploring expeditions. At a later period he devoted 
much attention to the language and antiquities of ancient Media, 
writing Le Peuple el la langue des Medes (1879). He, died in Paris 
on.the 21st of August 1905. Oppert was a voluminous writer 
upon Assyrian mythology and jurisprudence, and other subjects 
connected with the ancient civilizations of the East. Among 
his other works may be mentioned: Elements de la grammaire 
assyrieniie (1S68); L'Immortalile de I'dmc chez les Ckaldeens, 
(1875); Salomon el ses succcsseurs (1877); and, with J. Menant, 
Doctrines juridiques de VAssyrie el de la Chaldee (1877). 

OPPIAN (Gr. 'Ovinavos), the name of the authors of two (or 
three) didactic poems in Greek hexameters, formerly identified, 
but now generally regarded as two different persons. ■ (1) Oppian 
of Corycus (or Anabarzus) in Cilicia, who flourished in the reign 
of Marcus Aurelius (emperor a.d. 161-1S0). According to an 
anonymous biographer, his father, having incurred the dis- 
pleasure of Lucius Verus, the colleague of Aurelius, by neglecting 
to pay his respects to him when he visited the town, was banished 
to Malta. Oppian, who had accompanied his father into exile, 
returned after the death of Verus (169) and went on a visit to 
Rome. Here he presented his poems to Aurelius, who was so 
pleased with them that he gave the author a piece of gold for each 
line, took him into favour and pardoned his father. Oppian 
subsequently returned to his native country, but died of the 
plague shortly afterwards, at the early age of thirty. His 
contemporaries erected a statue in his honour, with an inscription 
which is still extant, containing a lament for his premature death 
and a eulogy of his precocious genius. His poem on fishing 
(Halieutica), of about 3500 lines, dedicated to Aurelius and his 
son Commodus, is still extant. (2) Oppian of Apamea (or Pella) 
in Syria. His extant poem on hunting (Cynegelica) is dedicated 
to the emperor Caracalla, so that it must have been written after 
211. It consists of about 2150 lines, and is divided into four 
books, the last of which seems incomplete. The author evidently 
knew the Halieutica, and perhaps intended his poem as a supple- 
ment. Like his namesake, he shows considerable knowledge of 
his subject and close observation of nature; but in style and 
poetical merit he is inferior to him. His versification also is less 
correct. The improbability of there having been two poets of 
the same name, writing on subjects so closely akin and such near 
contemporaries, may perhaps be explained by assuming that 
the real name of the author of the Cynegelica was not Oppian, 
but that he has been confounded with his predecessor. In any 
case, it seems clear that the two were not identical. 

A third poem on bird-catching (Ixcutica, from i£6s, bird-lime), 
also formerly attributed to an Oppian, is lost; a paraphrase, in 
Greek prose by a certain Eutecnius is extant. The author is 
probably one Dionysius, who is mentioned by Suldas as the 
author of a treatise on stones (Lilhiaca). 

The chief modern editions are J. G. Schneider (1776); F. S. 
Lehrs (1846); U. C. Bussemaker (Scholia,. 1849); (Cynegelica) 
P. Boudreaux (1908). The anonymous biography referred to above 
will be found in A. Westermann's Biographi Graeci (1845). On the 
subject generally see A. Martin, Eludes stir la vie el les ceuvres 
d'Oppien de Cilicie (1863); A. Ausfeld, De Oppiano et scriptis sub 
ejus nomine traditis (1S76). There are translations of the Halieulica, 
in English by Diaper and Jones (1722), and in French by E. J. 
Bourquin (1877). 

OPPIUS, GAIUS, an intimate friend of Julius Caesar. He 
managed the dictator's private affairs during his absence from 
Rome, and, together with L. Cornelius Balbus, exercised con- 
siderable influence in the city. According to Suetonius (Caesar; 
56), many authorities considered Oppius to have written the 
histories of the Spanish, African and Alexandrian wars which are 
printed among the works of Caesar. It is now generally held 
that he may possibly be the author of the last (although the 
claims of Hirtius are considered stronger), but certainly not .of 
the two first, although Niebuhr confidently assigned the Bcllum 
Africanum to him; the writer of these took an actual part 
in the wars they described, whereas Oppius was in; Rome 
at the time. He also wrote a life of Caesar and the elder 
Scipio. \ . . '• ,;: .t ,-A 









OPTICS— ORACLE 



141 



For a discussion of the whole question, see M. Schanz, Ceschichte 
der romischen Literatur, pt. i. p. 210 (2nd ed., 1898); Teuffel- 
Schwabe, Hist, of Roman Literature (Eng. trans.), § 197; see also 
Cicero, Letters, ed. Tyrrell and Purser, iv. introd. p. 69. 

OPTICS, the science of light, regarded as the medium of sight 
(Gr. 61/as). Generally the noun is qualified by an adjective so 
as to delimitate the principal groups of optical phenomena, 
e.g. geometrical optics, physical optics, meteorological optics, &c. 
Greek terminology included two adjectival forms — ret otttlkcl, 
for all optical phenomena, including vision and the nature of 
light, and 17 otttuti (sc. debipia), for the objective study of light, 
i.e. the nature of light itself and the theory of vision. See Ligiit 
and Vision. 

OPTION (Lat. optio, choice, choosing, oplare, to choose), the 
action of choosing or thing chosen, choice or power or opportunity 
of making a choice. The word had a particular meaning in 
ecclesiastical law, where it was used of a right claimed by an 
archbishop to select one benefice from the diocese of a newly 
appointed bishop, the next presentation to which would fall to 
his, the archbishop's, patronage. This right was abolished by 
various statutes in the early part of the 19th century. As a term 
in stock-exchange operations, " option " is used to express the 
privilege given to conclude a bargain at some future time at 
an agreed-upon price (see Call and Stock Exchange). The 
phrase " local option " has been specifically used in politics of 
the power given to the electorate of a particular district to choose 
whether licences for the sale of intoxicating liquor should be 
granted or not. This form of "local option" has been also and 
more rightly termed " local veto " (see Liquor Laws). 

OPUS ('07roDs), in ancient Greece, the chief city of the Opuntian 
Locrians; the walls of the town may still be seen on a hill about 
6 m. S.E. of the modern Atalante, and about 1 m. from the 
channel which separates the mainland from Euboea. It is men- 
tioned in the Homeric catalogue among the towns of the Locrians, 
who were led by Ajax Oileus; and there were games called 
Aiantea and an altar at Opus in honour of Ajax. Opus was also 
the birthplace of Patroclus. Pindar's Ninth Olympian Ode is 
mainly devoted to the glory and traditions of Opus. Its founder 
was Opus the son of Zeus and Protogeneia, the daughter of an 
Elian Opus, or, according to another version, of Deucalion and 
Pyrrha, and the wife of Locros. The Locrians deserted the 
Greek side in the Persian Wars; they were among the allies of 
Sparta in the Peloponnesian War. In the struggle between 
Philip V. of Macedon and the Romans the town went over to the 
latter in 197 B.C., but the Acropolis held out for Philip until his 
defeat at Cynoscephalae (Livy xxxii. 32). The town suffered 
from earthquakes, such as that which destroyed the neighbouring 
Atalante in 1894. 

ORACH, or Mountain Spinach, known botanicallyas^4/ri>Zca; 
hortensis, a tall-growing hardy annual, whose leaves, though 
coarsely flavoured, are used as a substitute for spinach, and 
to correct the acidity of sorrel. The white and the green are 
the most desirable varieties. The plant should be grown quickly 
in rich soil. It may be sown in rows 2 ft. apart, and about the 
same distance in the row, about March, and for succession again 
in June. If needful, water must be freely given, so as to maintain 
a rapid growth. A variety, A. hortensis var. rubra, commonly 
called red mountain spinach, is a hardy annual 3 to 4 ft. high 
with fine ornamental foliage. 

ORACLE (Lat. oraculum, from orare, to pray; the correspond- 
ing Greek word is iiavruov or xpV^tVP'-ov), a special place where 
a deity is supposed to give a response, by the mouth of an inspired 
priest, to the inquiries of his votaries; or the actual response. 
The whole question of oracles — whether in the sense of the 
response or the sacred place — is bound up with that of magic, 
divination and omens, to the articles on which the reader is 
referred. They are commonly found in the earlier stages of 
religious culture among different nations. But it is as an ancient 
Greek institution that they are most interesting historically. 

A characteristic feature of Greek religion which distinguishes 
it from many other systems of advanced cult was the wide 
prevalence of a ritual of divination and the prominence of certain 



oracular centres which were supposed to give voice to the will 
of Providence. An account of the oracles of Greece is concerned 
with the historical question about their growth, influence and 
career. But it is convenient to consider first the anthropologic 
question, as to the methods of divination practised in ancient 
Greece, their significance and the original ideas that inspired 
them. Only the slightest theoretical construction is possible 
here; and the true psychologic explanation of the mantic facts 
is of very recent discovery. In the Greek world these were of 
great variety, but nearly all the methods of divination found 
there can be traced among other communities, primitive and 
advanced, ancient and modern. The most obvious and useful 
classification of them is that of which Plato 1 was the author, 
who distinguishes between (a) the " sane " form of divination 
and (b) the ecstatic, enthusiastic or "insane" form. The first 
method appears to be cool and scientific, the diviner (navris) 
interpreting certain signs according to fixed principles of inter- 
pretation. The second is worked by the prophet, shaman or 
Pythoness, who is possessed and overpowered by the deity, and 
in temporary frenzy utters mystic speech under divine suggestion. 
To these we may add a third form (c), divination by communion 
with the spiritual world in dreams or through intercourse with 
the departed spirit: this resembles class (a) in that it does 
not necessarily involve ecstasy, and class (6) in that it assumes 
immediate rapport with some spiritual power. 

It will be convenient first to give typical examples of these 
various processes of discovering the divine will, and then to 
sketch the history of Delphi, the leading centre of divination. 
We may subdivide the methods that fall under class (a), those 
that conform to the " omen "-system, according as they deal 
with the phenomena of the animate or the inanimate world; 
although this distinction would not be relevant in the period 
of primitive animistic thought. The Homeric poems attest 
that auguries from the flight and actions of birds were commonly 
observed in the earliest Hellenic period as they occasionally 
were in the later, but we have little evidence that this method 
was ever organized as it was at Rome into a regular system of 
state-divination, still less of state-craft. We can only quote the 
passage in the Antigone where Sophocles describes the method 
of Teiresias, who keeps an aviary where he studies and interprets 
the flight and the cries of the birds; it is probable that the 
poet was aware of some such practice actually in vogue. But the 
usual examples of Greek augury do not suggest deliberate and 
systematic observation; for instance, the phenomenon in the 
Iliad of the eagle seizing the snake and dropping it, or, in the 
Agamemnon of Aeschylus, of the eagles swooping on the pregnant 
hare. Other animals besides birds could furnish omens; we 
have an interesting story of the omen derived from the contest 
between a wolf and a bull which decided the question of the 
sovereignty of Argos when Danaus arrived and claimed the 
kingdom; 2 and the private superstitious man might be en- 
couraged or depressed by any ominous sign derived from any 
part of the animal world. But it is very rare to find such omens 
habitually consulted in any public system of divination sanctioned 
by the state. We hear of a shrine of Apollo at Sura in Lycia, 3 
where omens were taken from the movements of the sacred 
fish that were kept there in a tank; and again of a grove conse- 
crated to this god in Epirus, where tame serpents were kept and 
fed by a priestess, who could predict a good or bad harvest 
according as they ate heartily or came willingly to her or not. 4 

But the method of animal divination that was most in vogue 
was the inspection of the inward parts of the victim offered upon 
the altar, and the inteipretation of certain marks found there 
according to a conventional code. Sophocles in the passage 
referred to above gives us a glimpse of the prophet's procedure. 
A conspicuous example of an oracle organized on this principle 
was that of Zeus at Olympia, where soothsayers of the family 
of the Iamidai prophesied partly by the inspection of entrails, 

1 Phaedrus, p. 244. 

2 Serv. Verg. Aen. iv. 377; Paus. ii. 19. 3. 

3 Steph. Byz. s.v. SoDpa. Plut. De sollert. anim. p. 976 c. 
Ael. Nat. anim. xii. I. 4 Ael. Nat. anim. xi. 2. ' 



142 



ORACLE 



partly by the observation of certain signs in the skin when it was 
cut or burned. 1 Another less familiar procedure that belongs 
to this subdivision is that which was known as divination 5id 
kXtjSovuv, which might sometimes have been the cries of birds, 
but in an oracle of Hermes at the Achaean city of Pharae were 
the casual utterances of men. Pausanias tells us 2 how this was 
worked. The consultant came in the evening to the statue of 
Hermes in the market-place that stood by the side of a hearth- 
altar to which bronze lamps were attached; having kindled 
the lamps and put a piece of money on the altar, he whispered 
into the ear of the statue what he wished to know; he then 
departed, closing his ears with his hands, and whatever human 
speech he first heard after withdrawing his hands he took for a 
sign. The same custom seems to have prevailed at Thebes in a 
shrine of Apollo, and in the Olympian oracle of Zeus. 3 

Of omens taken from what we call the inanimate world 
salient examples are those derived from trees and water, a 
divination to be explained by an animistic feeling that may 
be regarded as at one time universal. Both were in vogue at 
Dodona, where the ecstatic method of prophecy was never 
used; we hear of divination there from the bubbling stream, 
and still more often of the "talking oak "; under its branches 
may once have slept the Selloi, who interpreted the sounds of 
the boughs, and who may be regarded as the depositories of the 
Aryan tradition ot Zeus, the oak god who spoke in the tree. 4 
At Korope in Thessaly we hear vaguely of an Apolline divination 
by means of a branch of the tamarisk tree, 5 a method akin no 
doubt to that of the divining rod which was used in Greece as 
elsewhere; and there is a late record that at Daphne near 
Antioch oracles were obtained by dipping a laurel leaf or branch 
in a sacred stream. 6 Water divination must have been as 
familiar at one time to the Greeks as it was to the ancient 
Germans; for we hear of the fountain at Daphne revealing 
things to come by the varying murmur of its flow; 7 and 
marvellous reflections of a mantic import might be seen in a 
spring on Taenaron in Laconia; 8 from another at Patrae omens 
were drawn concerning the chances of recovery from disease. 9 
Thunder magic, which was practised in Arcadia, is usually 
associated with thunder divination; but of this, which was 
so much in vogue in Etruria and was adopted as a state-craft 
by Rome, the evidence in Greece is singularly slight. Once 
a year watchers took their stand on the wall at Athens and 
waited till they saw the lightning flash from Harma, which 
was accepted as an auspicious omen for the setting out of the 
sacred procession to Apollo Pythius at Delphi; and the altar 
of Zeus 2?j/mXeos, the sender of omens, on Mount Parnes, may 
have been a religious observatory of meteorological phenomena. 10 
No doubt such a rare and portentous event as the fall of a 
meteor-stone would be regarded as ominous, and the state 
would be inclined to consult Delphi or Dodona as to its divine 
import. 

We may conclude the examples of this main department of 
liavTinri by mentioning a method that seems to have been much 
in vogue in the earlier times, that which was called 17 Sid i/t^gjp 
y.a.VTiK-q, or divination by the drawing or throwing of lots; 
these must have been objects, such as small pieces of wood or 
dice, with certain marks inscribed upon them, drawn casually or 
thrown down and interpreted according to a certain code. This 
simple process of immemorial antiquity, for other Aryan peoples 
such as the Teutonic possessed it, was practised at Delphi and 
Dodona by the side of the more solemn procedure; we hear of it 
also in the oracle of Heracles at Bura in Achaea." It is this 
method of " scraping " or " notching " (xpo-eiv) signs on wood 

1 Schol. Pind. 01. 6. 11 1. 2 vii. 22. 2. 

3 Farnell, Cults of the Creek States, iv., p. 221. 

I Horn. //. xvi. 233, Od. xiv. 327; Hesiod, ap. Schol. Soph. 
Track. 1169; Aesch. Prom. Vine. 829. 

5 Nikander, Theriaka, 612; Schol. ibid. 

c See Robertson-Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 128, quoting 
Sozomen v. 19. 

7 Ammian. Marcell. xxii. 12; cf. Plut. Vita Caes. c. 19. 

8 Paus. iii. 25. 8. 3 Paus. vii. 21. II, _ 10 Paus. i. 32. 2. 

II Cic. De div. i. 76. Suid. s.v. vvOoi. Paus. vii. 25. 10. 



that explains probably the origin of the words xp^Mos, XPV a d a h 
avaipeiv for oracular consultation and deliverance. 

The processes described above are part of a world-wide system 
of popular divination. And most of them were taken up by 
the oracular shrines in Greece, Apollo himself having no special 
and characteristic mantic method, but generally adopting that 
which was of local currency. But much that is adopted by the 
higher personal religions descends from a more primitive and lower 
stage of religious feeling. And all this divination was originally 
independent of any personal divinity. The primitive diviner 
appealed directly to that mysterious potency which was sup- 
posed to inhere in the tree and spring, in the bird or beast, or 
even in a notched piece of wood. At a later stage, it may be, 
this power is interpreted in accordance with the animistic, and 
finally with the theistic, belief; and now it is the god who sends 
the sign, and the bird or animal is merely his organ. Hence the 
omen-seeker comes to prefer the sacrificed animal, as likely to be 
filled with the divine spirit through contact with the altar. And, 
again, if we are to understand the most primitive thought, we 
probably ought to conceive of it as regarding the omen not as a 
mere sign, but in some confused sense as a cause of that which is 
to happen. By sympathetic magic the flight of the bird, or the 
appearance of the entrails, is mysteriously connected, as cause 
with effect, with the event which is desired or dreaded. Thus in 
the Aztec sacrifice of children to procure rain, the victims 
were encouraged to shed tears copiously; and this was not a 
mere sign of an abundant rainfall, but was sympathetically 
connected with it. And in the same way, when of the three 
beasts over which three kings swore an oath of alliance, one 
died prematurely and was supposed thereby to portend the death 
of one of the kings, 12 or when in the Lacedaemonian sacrifice the 
head of the victim mysteriously vanished, and this portended the 
death of their naval commander," these omens would be merely 
signs of the future for the comparatively advanced Hellene; but 
we may discern at the back of this belief one more primitive 
still, that these things were somehow casually or sympathetically 
connected with the kindred events that followed. We can observe 
the logical nexus here, which in most instances escapes us. This 
form of divination, then, we may regard as a special branch of 
sympathetic magic, which nature herself performs for early man, 
and which it concerns him to watch. 

The other branch of the mantic art, the ecstatic or inspired, 
has had . the greater career among the peoples of the higher 
religions; and morphologically we may call it the more ad- 
vanced, as Shamanism or demoniac or divine possession implies 
the belief in spirits or divinities. But actually it is no doubt of 
great antiquity, and it is found still existing at a rather low 
grade of savagery. Therefore it is unsafe to infer from Homer's 
silence about it that it only became prevalent in Greece in the 
post-Homeric period. It did not altogether supersede the simpler 
method of divination by omens; but being far more impressive 
and awe-inspiring, it was adopted by some of the chief Apolline 
oracles, though never by Dodona. 

The most salient example of it is afforded by Delphi. In the 
historic period, and perhaps from the earliest times, a woman 
known as the Pythoness was the organ of inspiration, and it was 
generally believed that she delivered her oracles under the direct 
afflatus of the god. The divine possession worked like an 
epileptic seizure, and was exhausting and might be dangerous; 
nor is there any reason to suppose that it was simulated. This 
communion with the divinity needed careful preparation. 
Originally, as it seems, virginity was a condition of the tenure of 
the office; for the virgin has been often supposed to be the purer 
vehicle for divine communication ; but later the rule was established 
that a married woman over fifty years of age should be chosen, 
with the proviso that she should be attired as a maiden. As a 
preliminary to the divine possession, she appears to bave chewed 
leaves of the sacred laurel, and then to have drunk water from 
the prophetic stream called Kassotis which flowed underground. 
But the culminating point of the afflatus was reached when she 
seated herself upon the tripod; and here, according to the belief 
12 Plut. Vita Pyrrh. c. 6. » Diod. Sic. xiii. 97. 



ORACLE 



H3 



of at least the later ages of paganism, she was supposed to be 
inspired by a mystic' vapour that arose from a fissure in the 
ground. Against the ordinary explanation of this as a real 
mephitic gas producing convulsions, there seem to be geological 
and chemical objections; 1 nor have the recent French excava- 
tions revealed any chasm or gap in the floor of the temple. But 
the strong testimony of the later writers, especially Plutarch, 2 
cannot wholly be set aside; and we can sufficiently reconcile it 
with the facts if we suppose a small crack in the floor through 
which a draught of air was felt to ascend. This, combining with 
the other mantic stimulants used, would be enough to throw a 
believing medium into a condition of mental seizure; and the 
difficulty felt by the older generation of scholars, who had to 
resort to the hypothesis of charlatanism or diabolic agency, no 
longer exists in the light of modern anthropology and the modern 
science of psychic phenomena. The Pythoness was no ambitious 
pretender, but ordinarily a virtuous woman of the lower class. 
It is probable that what she uttered were only unintelligible 
murmurs, and that these were interpreted into relevance and 
set in metric or prose sentences by the " prophet " and the " Holy 
Ones " or "0<7ioi as they were called, members of leading Delphic 
families, who sat round the tripod, who received the questions of 
the consultant beforehand, probably in writing, and usually had 
considered the answers that should be given. 

Examples of the same enthusiastic method can be found in 
other oracles of Apollo. At Argos, the prophetess of the Apollo 
Pythius attained to the divine afflatus by drinking the blood of 
the lamb that was sacrificed in the night to him; 3 this is obviously 
a mantic communion, for the sacrificial victim is full of the spirit 
of the divinity. And we find the same process at the prophetic 
shrine of Ge at Aegae in Achaea, where the prophetess drank a 
draught of bull's blood for the same purpose. 4 In the famous 
oracle shrines of Apollo across the sea, at Klaros and Branchidae 5 
near Miletus, the divination was of the same ecstatic type, but 
produced by a simple draught of holy water. The Clarian prophet 
fasted several days and nights in retirement and stimulated his 
ecstasy by drinking from a subterranean spring which is said 
by Pliny to have shortened the lives of those who used it. 6 
Then, " on certain fixed nights after many sacrifices had been 
offered, he delivered his oracles, shrouded from the eyes of the 
consultants." 7 

The divination by " incubation " was allied to this type, 
because though lacking the ecstatic character, the consultant 
received direct communion with the god or departed spirit. 
He attained it by laying himself down to sleep or to await a 
vision, usually by night, in some holy place, having prepared 
himself by a course of ritualistic purification. Such consultation 
was naturally confined to the underworld divinities or to the 
departed heroes. It appears to have prevailed at Delphi when 
Ge gave oracles there before the coming of Apollo, and among 
the heroes Amphiaraus, Calchas and Trophonius are recorded 
to have communicated with their worshippers in this fashion. 
And it was by incubation that the sick and diseased who repaired 
to the temple of Epidaurus received their prescriptions from 
Asclepius, originally a god of the lower world. 

After this brief account of the prevalent forms of prophetic 
consultation, it remains to consider the part played by the Greek 
oracles in the history of Greek civilization. It will be sufficient 
to confine our attention to Delphi, about which our information 
is immeasurably fuller than it is about the other shrines. In the 
earliest period Dodona may have had the higher prestige, but 
after the Homeric age it was eclipsed by Delphi, being consulted 
chiefly by the western Greeks, and occasionally in the 4th century 
by Athens. 

The gorge of Delphi was a seat of prophecy from the earliest 

1 See Oppe on " The Chasm at Delphi," Journ. of Hellenic Studies 
(1904). 

2 De defect. Orac. c. 43. 3 Paus. ii, 24, I. 
4 Farnell, op. cit. iii. 11. 

6 The prophetic fountain at Branchidae is attested by Strabo, 
p. 814, and in a confused mystic passage of Iamblichus, De Myst. 

3. ii- 

6 Nat. Hist. ii. 232. ' Iambi, loc. cit. 



days of Greek tradition. Ge, Themis and perhaps Poseidon had 
given oracles here before Apollo. Hut it is clear that he had won 
it in the days before Homer, who attests the prestige and wealth 
of his Pythian shrine; and it seems clear that before the Dorian 
conquest of the Peloponnese a Dryopian migration had already 
carried the cult of Apollo Pythius to Asine in Argolis. Also the 
constitution of the Amphictyones, " the dwellers around the 
temple," reflects the early age when the tribe rather than the city 
was the political unit, and the Dorians were a small tribe of north 
Greece. The original function of these Amphictyones was to 
preserve the sanctity and property of the temple; but this 
common interest early developed a certain rule of intertribal 
morality. By the formula of the Amphictyonic oath preserved 
by Aeschines, which may be of great antiquity, the members 
bound themselves " not to destroy any city of the league, not 
to cut any one of them off from spring-water, either in war or 
peace, and to war against any who violated these rules." We 
discern here that Greek religion offered the ideal of a federal 
national union that Greek politics refused to realize. 

The next stage in the history of the oracle is presented by the 
legend of the Dorian migration. For we have no right to reject 
the strong tradition of the Delphic encouragement of this move- 
ment, which well accounts for the devotion shown by Sparta 
to the Pythian god from the earliest days; and accounts also 
for the higher position that Delphi occupied at the time when 
Greek history is supposed to begin. 

We have next to consider a valuable record that belongs to 
the end of the 8th century or beginning of the 7th, the Homeric 
hymn to Apollo, which describes the coming of the Dolphin-God 
— AeK^ivLos — to Pytho, and the organization of the oracle by 
Cretan ministers. Of this Cretan settlement at Delphi there 
is no other literary evidence, and the "Omoi who administered 
the oracle in the historic period claimed to be of aboriginal 
descent. Yet recent excavation has proved a connexion between 
Crete and Delphi in the Minoan period; and there is reason to 
believe that in the 8th century some ritual of purification, 
momentous for the religious career of the oracle, was brought 
from Crete to Delphi, and that the adoption of this latter name 
for the place which had formerly been called Uvda synchronized 
with the coming of Apollo Delphinius. 

The influence of Delphi was great in various ways, though no 
scholar would now maintain the exaggerated dogma of Curtius, 
who imputed to the oracle a lofty religious enthusiasm and the 
consciousness of a religious political mission. 

We may first consider its political influence upon the other 
states. The practice of a community consulting an oracle on 
important occasions undoubtedly puts a powerful weapon into 
the hands of the priesthood, and might lead to something like 
a t theocracy. And there are one or two ominous hints in the 
Odyssey that the ruler of the oracle might overthrow the ruler 
of the land. Yet owing to the healthy temperament of the early 
Greek, the civic character of the priesthood, the strength of the 
autonomous feeling, Greece might flock to Delphi without 
exposing itself to the perils of sacerdotal control. The Delphic 
priesthood, content with their rich revenues, were probably never 
tempted to enter upon schemes of far-reaching political ambition, 
nor were they in any way fitted to be the leaders of a national 
policy. Once only, when the Spartan state applied to Delphi 
to sanction their attack on Arcadia, did the oracle speak as if, 
like the older papacy, it claimed to dispose of territory 8 — "Thou 
askest of me Arcadia; I will not give it thee." But here the 
oracle is on the side of righteousness, and it is the Spartan that 
is the aggressor. In the various oracles that have come down to 
us, many of which must have been genuine and preserved in the 
archives of the state that received them, we cannot discover any 
marked political policy consistently pursued by the " Holy Ones " 
of Delphi. As conservative aristocrats they would probably 
dislike tyranny; their action against the Peisistratidae was 
interested, but one oracle contains a spirited rebuke to 
Cleisthenes, while one or two others, perhaps not genuine, express 
the spirit cf temperate constitutionalism. As exponents of an 
8 Herod, i. 66. 



144 



ORAKZAI 



Amphictyonic system they would be sufficiently sensitive of the 
moral conscience of Greece to utter nothing in flagrant violation 
of the " jus gentium." In one department of politics, the 
legislative sphere, it has been supposed that the influence of 
Delphi was direct and inspiring. Plato and later writers imagined 
that the Pythoness had dictated the Lycurgean system, and 
even modern scholars like Bergk have regarded the prjTpaL of 
Sparta as of Delphic origin. But a severer criticism dispels 
these suppositions. The Delphic priesthood had neither the 
capacity nor probably the desire to undertake so delicate a task 
as the drafting of a code. They might make now and again a 
general suggestion when consulted, and, availing themselves of 
their unique opportunities of collecting foreign intelligence, they 
might often recommend a skilful legislator or arbitrator to 
a state that consulted them at a time of intestine trouble. 
Finally, a legislator with a code would be well advised, especially 
at Sparta, in endeavouring to obtain the sanction and the 
blessing of the Delphic god, that he might appear before his own 
people as one possessed of a religious mandate. In this sense we 
can understand the stories about Lycurgus. 

There is only one department of the secular history of Greece 
where Delphi played a predominant and most effective part, 
the colonial department. The great colonial expansion of Greece, 
which has left so deep an imprint on the culture of Europe, 
was in part inspired and directed by the oracle. For the proof 
of this we have not only the evidence of the xPV^^ol preserved 
by Herodotus and others, such as those concerning the foundation 
of Cyrene, but also the worship of Apollo 'Apx')7«"/s, " the 
Founder," prevalent in Sicily and Magna Graecia, and the 
early custom of the sending of tithes or thanksgiving offerings 
by the flourishing western states to the oracle that had encouraged 
their settlements. 

Apollo was already a god of ways — 'Ayvitvs — who led the 
migration of tribes before he came to Delphi. And those legends 
are of some value that explain the prehistoric origin of cities 
such as Magnesia on the Maeander, the Dryopian Asine in the 
Peloponnese, as due to the colonization of temple-slaves, acquired 
by the Pythian god as the tithe of conquests, and planted out 
by him in distant settlements. The success of the oracle in this 
activity led at last to the establishment of the rule that Herodotus 
declares to be almost universal in Greece, namely, that no 
leader of a colony would start without consulting Delphi. Doubt- 
less in many cases the priesthood only gave encouragement 
to a pre-conceived project. But they were in a unique position 
for giving direct advice also, and they appear to have used their 
opportunities with great intelligence. 

Their influence on the state cults can be briefly indicated, 
for it was not by any means far-reaching. They could have 
felt conscious of no mission to preach Apollo, for his cult was 
an ancient heritage of the Hellenic stocks. Only the narrower 
duty devolved upon them of impressing upon the consultants 
the religious obligation of sending tithes or other offerings. 
Nevertheless their opportunity of directing the religious ritual 
and organization of the public worships was great; for Plato's 
view 1 that all questions of detail in religion should be left to 
the decision of the god " who sits on the omphalos " was on the 
whole in accord with the usual practice of Greece. Such con- 
sultations would occur when the state was in some trouble, 
which would be likely to be imputed to some neglect of religion, 
and the question to the oracle would commonly be put in this 
way — "to what god or goddess or hero shall we sacrifice ? " 
The oracle would then be inclined to suggest the name of some 
divine personage hitherto neglected, or of one whose rites had 
fallen into decay. Again, Apollo would know the wishes of the 
other divinities, who were not in the habit of directly communicat- 
ing with their worshippers; therefore questions about the sacred 
land of the goddesses at Eleusis would be naturally referred to 
him. From both these points of view we can understand why 
Delphi appears to have encouraged the tendency towards 
hero-worship which was becoming rife in Greece from the 7th 
century onwards. But the only high cult for which we can 
1 Republ. 427 A. 



discover a definite enthusiasm in the Delphic priesthood was that 
of Dionysus. And his position at Delphi, where he became 
the brother-deity of Apollo, sufficiently explains this. 

As regards the development of religious morality in Greece, 
we must reckon seriously with the part played by the oracle. 
The larger number of deliverances that have come down to us 
bearing on this point are probably spurious, in the sense that 
the Pythia did not actually utter them, but they have a certain 
value as showing the ideas entertained by the cultivated Hellene 
concerning the oracular god. On the whole, we discern that the 
moral influence of Delphi was beneficent and on the side of 
righteousness. It did nothing, indeed, to abolish, it may even 
have encouraged at times, the barbarous practice of human 
sacrifice, which was becoming abhorrent to the Greek of the 
6th and 5th centuries; but a conservative priesthood is always 
liable to lag behind the moral progress of an age in respect of 
certain rites, and in other respects it appears that the " Holy 
Ones" of Delphi kept well abreast of the Hellenic advance in 
ethical thought. An oracle attributed to the Pythoness by 
Theopompus (Porph. De obstinentia, 2, 16 and 17) expresses 
the idea contained in the story of " the widow's mite," that the 
deity prefers the humble offering of the righteous poor to the 
costly and pompous sacrifice of the rich. Another, of which 
the authenticity is vouched for by Herodotus (vi. 86), denounces 
the contemplated perjury and fraud of a certain Glaucus, and 
declares to the terrified sinner that to tempt God was no less a 
sin than to commit the actual crime. A later xW'A'os, f° r 
which Plutarch (de Pyth. Or. p. 404 B) is the authority, embodies 
the charitable conception of forgivenness for venial faults 
committed under excessive stress of temptation: " God pardons 
what man's nature is too weak to resist." And in one most 
important branch of morality, with which progressive ancient 
law was intimately concerned, namely, the concept of the sin 
of homicide, we have reason for believing that the Apolline 
oracle played a leading part. Perhaps so early as the 8th century, 
it came to lay stress on the impurity of bloodshed and to organize 
and impose a ritual of purification; and thus to assist the 
development and the clearer definition of the concept of murder 
as a sin and the growth of a theory of equity which recognizes 
extenuating or justifying circumstances. 2 Gradually, as Greek 
ethics escaped the bondage of ritual and evolved the idea of 
spiritual purity of conscience, this found eloquent expression 
in the utterances imputed to the Pythoness. 3 Many of these 
are no doubt literary fictions; but even these are of value 
as showing the popular view about the oracular god, whose 
temple and tripod were regarded as the shrine and organ 
of the best wisdom and morality of Greece. The downfall of 
Greek liberty before Macedon destroyed the political influence of 
the Delphic oracle; but for some centuries after it still retained 
a certain value for the individual as a counsellor and director 
of private conscience. But in the latter days of paganism it 
was eclipsed by the oracles of Claros and Branchidae. 

Authorities. — A. Bouch^-Leclercq, Histoire de la divination dans 
I'antiquite, in 4 vols., is still the chief work: cf. L. R. Farnell, Cults 
of the Greek States, vol. iv. pp. 179-233; Buresch, Apollo Klarios; 
Bernard Haussoullier, Etudes sur Vhistoire de Milet et du Didymeion; 
Legrand, " Questions oraculaires " in Revue des etudes grecques, 
vol. xiv. ; Pomtow's article on " Delphoi " in Pauly-Wissowa 
Rea len cyclopadie. 

Ancient Authorities. — -Plutarch, De Pythio Oraculo and De 
defectu oraculorum; Cicero, De divinatione ; Euseb. Praep. Ev. 
4. 2, 14. (L- R -F.) 

ORAKZAI, a Pathan tribe on the Kohat border of the North- 
West Frontier Province of India. The Orakzais inhabit the 
mountains to the north-west of Kohat district, bounded on the 
N. and E. by the Afridis, on the S. by the Miranzai valley and on 
the \V. by the Zaimukht country and the SafedKoh mountains. 
Their name means " lost tribes," and their origin is buried in 
obscurity; though they resemble the Afghans in language, 
features and many of their customs, they are rejected by them 
as brethren. One branch, the Ali Khel, has been traced to 
Swat, whence they were expelled by the other inhabitants, 

2 Farnell, Cults, vol. iv. p. 300, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 139-152. 

3 Aelian, Var. Hist. iii. 44: Anth. Pal. xiv. 71 and 74. 



ORAN 



H5 



and it is not improbable that the whole tribe consists of refugee 
clans of the surrounding races. They are very wiry-looking 
mountaineers, but they are not as fine men or as brave fighters 
as their neighbours the Afridis. They cultivate a good deal of 
the Khanki and Kurmana valleys in the winter, but in the hot 
months retire to the heights of Tirah, of which they occupy 
the southern half called the Mastura valley. They have been 
estimated at 28,000 fighting men, but this estimate must be 
largely exaggerated, as the country could not possibly support 
the consequent population of over 100,000. They have been 
the object of various British military expeditions, notably in 
1855, 1868, 1869, 1891, and the Tirah campaign of 1897. 

ORAN (Arabic Wahran, i.e. ravine), a city of Algeria, capital 
of the department and military division of the same name. It 
stands at the head of the Gulf of Oran, on the Mediterranean in 
35 44' N., o° 41' W. The city is 261 m. by rail W.S.W. of 
Algiers, 220 m. E. of Gibraltar and 130 m. S. of Cartagena, 
Spain. It is built on the steep slopes of the Jebel Murjajo, 
which rises to a height of 1900 ft. The city was originally cut 
in two by the ravine of Wad Rekhi, now for the most part 
covered by boulevards and buildings. West of the ravine lies 
the old port, and above this rises what was the Spanish town 
with the ancient citadel looking down on it; but few traces of 
Spanish occupation remain. The modern quarter rises, like an 
amphitheatre, to the east of the ravine. The place d'Armes, 
built on the plateau above the ravine, is the centre of the modern 
quarter. It contains' a fine column commemorative of the 
battle of Sidi Brahim (1845), between the French and Abd-el- 
Kader. The Chateau Neuf, built in 1563 by the Spaniards, 
overlooks the old port. Formerly the seat of the beys of Oran, 
it is occupied by the general in command of the military division 
and also serves as barracks. The kasbah (citadel) or Chateau 
Vieux, used for military purposes, lies S. W. of the Chateau Neuf. 
It was partly destroyed by the earthquake of the 8th and 9th 
of October 1790. On the hills behind the kasbah are Fort St 
Gregoire, a votive chapel commemorative of the cholera of 1849, 
and Fort Santa Cruz, crowning at a height of 1312 ft. the summit 
of the Aidur. Fort de la Moune (so called from the monkeys 
said to have haunted the neighbourhood) is at the western end 
of the harbour, and commands the road from Oran to Mers-el- 
Kebir (see below). Fort St Philippe, south of the kasbah, 
replaces the old Castle of the Saints of the Spaniards. There 
is subterranean communication between all the ancient forts. 
The cathedral, dedicated to St Louis, and built in 1839, occupies 
the site of a chapel belonging in the days of Spanish dominion 
to a convent of monks of St Bernard. The Grand Mosque (in 
rue Philippe) was erected at the end of the 18th century to 
commemorate the expulsion of the Spaniards, and with money 
paid as ransom for Christian slaves. Other mosques have been 
turned into churches or utilized for military purposes. The 
military hospital, a large building adjoining the cathedral, 
contains 1400 beds. A house in the place de l'hopital, now used 
by the military, was once the home of the Inquisition; it was 
built at the expense of Spain in 1772. The museum formed by 
the Oran Society of Geography and Archaeology (founded in 
1878) has a fine collection of antiquities. 

Oran is the seat of a large trade. There is regular communica- 
tion with Marseilles, Cette, Barcelona, Valencia, Cartagena, 
Malaga, Gibraltar, and the various ports on the Barbary coast. 
The railway to Algiers is joined at Perregaux (47 m. E. of Oran) 
by the line from Arzeu to Saida and Ain Sefra which serves 
the high plateau whence esparto is obtained. There is also a 
railway to Sidi-Bel-Abbes and Tlemcen. The export trade is 
chiefly in esparto grass, cereals, wines, olive oil, marbles, cattle 
and hides. The imports include manufactured goods, coal and 
other commodities. The inner harbour, or old port, contains 
two basins, one of 10 acres and another of 60 acres, formed by 
the construction of a pier eastward from Fort de la Moune, with 
two cross piers. In consequence of the growing importance of 
the port and the decision of the French government to make 
Oran the chief naval station in Algeria, it was decided to build 
an eastern harbour. This outer harbour, on which work was 



begun in 1905, lies east of the old port and is about double its 
size. The least depth of water in the old harbour is 18 ft., the 
average depth in the new harbour is 30 ft., the depth at the 
entrance being 40 ft. 

The population of the city in 1906 was 100,499, of whom 21,906 
were French, and 23,071 Spanish. There were also 27,570 
naturalized Frenchmen, mostly of Spanish origin. There is a 
negro colony in the city, numbering about 3000, included in the 
census in the native population of 16,296. Including the garrison 
and naval forces the total population of the commune was 106,517. 

Four miles west of Oran a small promontory forms the harbour 
of Mers-el-Kebir, formerly a stronghold of tbe Barbary pirates. 
The promontory is strongly fortified and crosses fire with a 
battery erected to the east of Oran. A road along the east coast, 
cut for the most part out of the solid rock, connects Oran and 
Mers-el-Kebir. 

Attempts have been made to identify Oran with the Quiza, 
and Mers-el-Kebir with the Portus Magnus, of the Romans. 
There are, however, no Roman ruins at Oran or at Mers-el-Kebir. 
The foundation of Oran is more properly ascribed to Andalusian 
Arabs, who settled there in the beginning of the 10th century, 
and gave it its name. Rapidly rising into importance as a sea- 
port, Oran was taken and retaken, pillaged and rebuilt, by the 
various conquerors of northern Africa. Almoravides, Almohades 
and Marinides succeeded each other, and in the space of half a 
century the city changed hands nine times. In the latter half 
of the 15th century it became subject to the sultans of Tlemcen, 
and reached the height of its prosperity. Active commerce was 
maintained with the Venetians, the Pisans, the Genoese, the 
Marseillais and the Catalans, who imported the produce of their 
looms, glass-wares, tin-wares, and iron, and received in return 
ivory, ostrich feathers, gold-dust, tanned hides, grain and negro 
slaves. Admirable woollen cloth and splendid arms were 
manufactured. The magnificence of its mosques and other 
public buildings, the number of its schools, and the extent of its 
warehouses shed lustre on the city; but wealth and luxury began 
to undermine its prosperity, and its ruin was hastened by the 
conduct of the Moslem refugees from Spain. Under the influence 
of these refugees the legitimate trade of the town gave place to 
piracy, Mers-el-Kebir becoming the stronghold of the pirates. 

Animated by the patriotic enthusiasm of Cardinal Ximenes, 
the Spaniards determined to put a stop to these expeditions 
which were carrying off their countrymen, destroying their 
commerce, and even ravaging their country. Mers-el-Kebir 
fell into their hands on the 23rd of October 1505, and Oran in 
May 1509. The latter victory, obtained with but trifling loss, 
was stained by the massacre of a third of the Mahommedan 
population. From 6000 to 8000 prisoners, 60 cannon, engines 
of war and a considerable booty from the wealth accumulated 
by piracy fell into the hands of the conquerors. Cardinal 
Ximenes introduced the Inquisition, &c, and also restored and 
extended the fortifications. Oran became the penal settlement 
of Spain, but neither the convicts nor the noblemen in disgrace 
who were also banished thither seem to have been under rigorous 
surveillance; contemporary accounts speak of constant fetes, 
games and bull-fights. Meanwhile the Turks had become masters 
of Algeria, and expelled the Spaniards from all their possessions 
except Oran. The bey of Mascara watched his opportunity, 
and at length, in 1708, the weakness of Spain and the treason of 
the count of Vera Cruz obliged the city to capitulate. The 
Spaniards recovered possession in 1732, but found the main- 
tenance of the place a burden rather than a benefit, the neighbour- 
ing tribes having ceased to deal with the Christians. The 
earthquake of 1790 furnished an excuse for withdrawing their 
forces. Commencing by twenty-two separate shocks at brief 
intervals, the oscillations continued from the 8th of October to 
the 22nd of November. Houses and fortifications were over- 
thrown and a third of the garrison and a great number of the 
inhabitants perished. Famine and sickness had begun to 
aggravate the situation when the bey of Mascara appeared 
before the town with 30,000 men. By prodigies of energy the 
Spanish commander held out till August r79i, when theSpanish 



146 



ORANGE, HOUSE OF— ORANGE 



government having made terms with the bey of Algiers, he was 
allowed to set sail for Spain with his guns and ammunition. The 
bey Mahommed took possession of Oran in March 1792, and 
made it his residence instead of Mascara. On the fall of Algiers 
the bey (Hassan) placed himself under the protection of the 
conquerors, and shortly afterwards removed to the Levant. 
The French army entered the city on the 4th of January 1831, 
and took formal possession on the 17th of August. In 1S32 a 
census of the town showed that it had but 3800 inhabitants, of 
whom more than two-thirds were Jews. Under French rule 
Oran has regained its ancient commercial activity and has 
become the second city in Algeria. 

ORANGE, HOUSE OF. The small principality of Orange, 
a district now included in the French department of Vaucluse, 
traces back its history as an independent sovereignty to the time 
of Charlemagne. William, surnamed le Comet, who lived 
towards the end of the Sth century, is said to have been the first 
prince of Orange, but the succession is only certainly known 
after the time of Gerald Adhemar (fl. 10S6). In 1174 the 
principality passed by marriage to Bertrand de Baux, and there 
were nine princes of this line. By the marriage of John of 
Chalons with Marie de Baux, the house of Chalons succeeded to 
the sovereignty in 1393. The princes of Orange-Chalons were 
(1) John I., 1393-141S, (2) Louis I., 1418-1463, (3) William VIII., 
1463-1475, (4) John II., (1475-1502, (5) Philibert, 1502-1530. 
Philibert was a great warrior and statesman, who was held in 
great esteem by the emperor Charles V. For his services in his 
campaigns the emperor gave him considerable possessions in the 
Netherlands in 1522, and Francisl.of France, who had occupied 
Orange, was compelled, when a prisoner in Madrid, to restore 
it to him. Philibert had no children, and he was succeeded by 
his nephew Rene of Nassau-Chalons, son of Philibert's sister 
Claudia and Henry, count of Nassau, the confidential friend 
and counsellor of Charles V. He too died without an heir 
in 1544 at the siege of St Dizier, having devised all his titles 
and possessions to his first cousin William, the eldest son of 
William, count of Nassau-Dillenburg, who was the younger 
brother of Rene's father, and had inherited the German 
possessions of the family. 

William of Orange-Nassau was but eleven years old when he 
succeeded to the principality. He was brought up at the court of 
Charles V. and became famous in history as William the Silent, the 
founder of the Dutch Republic. On his assassination in 15S4 
he was succeeded by his eldest son Philip William, who had been 
kidnapped by Philip II. of Spain in his boyhood and brought up 
at Madrid. This prince never married, and on his death in 1618 
his next brother, Maurice, stadtholder in the United Netherlands 
and one of the greatest generals of his time, became prince 
of Orange. Maurice died in 1625, also unmarried. Frederick 
Henry, the son of Louise de Coligny, William's fourth wife, born 
just before his father's murder, now succeeded to the princedom 
of Orange and to all his brothers' dignities, posts and property 
in the Netherlands. Frederick Henry was both a great general 
and statesman. His only son, William, was married in 1641 to 
Mary, princess royal of England, he being fifteen and the princess 
nine years old at that date, and he succeeded to the title of prince 
of Orange on his lather's death in 1647. At the very outset of 
a promising career he suddenly succumbed to an attack of 
smallpox on the 6th of November 1650, his son William III. 
being born a week after his father's death. 

A revolution now took place in the system of government in the 
United Provinces, and the offices of stadtholder and captain-and 
admiral-general, held by four successsive princes of Orange, were 
abolished. However, the counter revolution of 1672 called 
William III. to the head of affairs. At this time Louis XIV. 
conquered the principality of Orange and the territory was in- 
corporated in France, the title alone being recognized by the 
treaty of Ryswick. William married his cousin Mary, the eldest 
daughter of James, duke of York, in 1677. In 16S8 he landed in 
England, expelled his father-in-law, James II., from his throne, 
and reigned as king of Great Britain and Ireland until his death 
in 1702. He left no children, and a dispute arose among various 



claimants to the title of prince of Orange. The king of Prussia 
claimed it as the descendant of the eldest daughter of Frederick 
Henry; John William Friso of Nassau-Dietz claimed it as the 
descendant of John, the brother of William the Silent, and also 
of the second daughter of Frederick Henry. The result was that 
at the peace of Utrecht in 17 13, the king of Prussia abandoned the 
principality to the king of France in exchange for compensation 
elsewhere, and John William Friso gained the barren title and 
became William IV. prince of Orange. His sons William V. and 
William VI. succeeded him. William VI. in 1815 became 
William I. king of the Netherlands. 

See Bastet, Hisloire de la ville et de la principaule a" Orange (Orange 
1856). (G. E.) 

ORANGE, a town of Wellington and Bathurst counties, New 
South Wales, Australia, 192 m. by rail W.N.W. of Sydney. 
It lies in a fruit and wheat-growing district, in which gold, copper 
and silver also abound. It is the centre of trade with the western 
interior and has a number of flourishing industries. Orange also 
has a great reputation as a health resort. Its suburb, East 
Orange, in the county of Bathurst, is a separate municipality. 
Pop., including East Orange (1901), 6331. 

ORANGE, a town of south-eastern France, capital of an 
arrondissement in the department of Vaucluse, 18 m. N. of 
Avignon on the railway from Lyons to Marseilles. Pop. (1906) 
of the town, 6412; of the commune, 10,303. Orange is situated 
at some distance from the left bank of the Rhone, in the midst of 
meadows, orchards and mulberry plantations, watered by a 
stream called the Meyne, and overlooked by the majestic summit 
of Mount Ventoux, which lies 22 m. to the east. The district is 
highly fertile, and the town deals largely in fruit, and millet- 
stalks for brooms, as well as in wool, silk, honey and truffles. 

Orange is interesting mainly from its Roman remains. The 
triumphal arch is not only far finer than any other in France, but 
ranks third in size and importance among those still extant in 
Europe. Measuring 72 ft. in height, 69 ft. in width, and 26 ft. 
in depth, it is composed of three arches supported by Corinthian 
columns. On three sides it is well preserved, and displays 
remarkable variety and elegance in its sculptured decorations. 
To judge from the traces of an inscription, the arch seems to have 
been erected in honour of Tiberius, perhaps to commemorate 
his victory over the Gallic chieftain Sacrovir in a.d. 21. It 
suffered from being used as a donjon in the middle ages. 
Another most imposing structure is the theatre, dating from 
the time of the emperor Hadrian and built against a hill from 
the summit of which a colossal figure of the Virgin commands 
the town. The facade, which is 121 ft. high, 340 ft. long and 
13 ft. thick, is pierced by three square gates surmounted by a 
range of blind arches and a double row of projecting corbels, 
with holes in which the poles of the awning were placed. Of the 
seats occupied by the spectators, only the lower tiers remain. 
It was used as an out-work to the fortress built on the hill by 
Maurice of Nassau in 1 62 2 , and destroyed fifty years later by order 
of Louis XIV., whose troops in 1660 captured the town. Up to 
the beginning of the 19th century it was filled with hovels and 
stables; these were subsequently cleared out, and at the end of 
the century the building was restored, and now serves as a 
national theatre. In the neighbourhood of the theatre traces 
have been found of a hippodrome; and statues, bas-reliefs and 
ruins of an amphitheatre also serve to show the importance of 
the Roman town. Notre Dame, the old cathedral, originally 
erected by the prefect of Gaul, was ruined by the Barbarians, 
rebuilt in the nth and 12th centuries, and damaged by the 
Protestants. 

The town has a sub-prefecture, a tribunal of first instance, 
and a communal college among its institutions; and it has 
tile and mosaic works and flour-mills, and manufactories of 
boots and shoes and brooms. There is trade in truffles, fruit, 
wine, &c. 

Orange (Arausio), capital of the Cavari, was in 105 B.C. the 
scene of the defeat of a Roman army by the Cimbri and Teutones. 
It became after Caosar an important Roman colony. Its 
ramparts and fine buildings were partly destroyed by the 



ORANGE 



H7 



Alamanni and Visigoths, and partly ruined by the erections 
of the middle ages. Orange was included in the kingdom of 
Austrasia,fell into the hands of the Saracens and was recovered 
by Charlemagne. It became the seat of an independent count- 
ship in the nth century. From the 14th century till the Revolu- 
tion the town had a university. At the latter period the town 
suffered severely from the excesses of a popular commission. 

See R. Peyre, Nimes, Aries et Orange (Paris, 1903); A. de Pont- 
briant, Hisloire de la principaute d'Orange (Avignon and Paris, 1891). 

Councils of Orange. — In 441 a synod of sixteen bishops was 
held at Orange under the presidency of St Hilary of Aries, which 
adopted thirty canons touching the reconciliation of penitents 
and heretics; the ecclesiastical right of asylum, diocesan pre- 
rogatives of bishops, spiritual privileges of the defective or 
demoniac, the deportment of catechumens at worship, and 
clerical celibacy (forbidding married men to be ordained as 
deacons, and digamists to be advanced beyond the sub-diaconate). 
In 529 a synod of fifteen bishops, under the presidency of 
Caesarius of Aries, assembled primarily to dedicate a church, 
the gift of Liberius, the lieutenant of Theodoric, in Gaul, but 
proved to be one of the most important councils of the 6th 
century. Caesarius had sought the aid of Rome against semi- 
Pelagianism, and in response Pope Felix IV. had sent certain 
capilula concerning grace and free-will, drawn chiefly from the 
writings of Augustine and Prosper. These to the number of 
twenty-five the synod subscribed, and adopted a supplementary 
statement, reaffirming the Augustinian doctrines of corruption, 
human inability, prevenient grace and baptismal regeneration. 
Its acts were confirmed by Boniface II. on the " 25th of January 
530," a date which is open to question. 

See F. H. Woods, Canons of the Second Council of Orange (Oxford, 
1882). (T. F. C.) 

ORANGE, a city of Essex county, New Jersey, U.S.A., in 
the N.E. part of the state, about 14 m. W. of New York City. 
Pop. (1890) 18,844, (1900) 24,141, of whom 6598 were foreign- 
born and 1903 were negroes, (1910 census) 29,630. It is 
served by the Morris & Essex Division of the Delaware, Lacka- 
wanna & Western railroad and by the Orange branch (of which 
it is a terminus) of the Erie railroad, and is connected with 
Newark, South Orange and Bloomfield by electric lines. The 
city lies at the base of the eastern slope of the first Watchung, 
or Orange, Mountain, and is primarily a'residential suburb of 
New York and Newark; with East Orange, West Orange 
and South Orange it constitutes virtually a single community, 
popularly known as " the Oranges." The city has a good public 
school system and various private schools, including theDearborn- 
Morgan School (for girls) and the Carteret Academy (for boys). 
Of historical interest is the First Presbyterian Church, erected 
in 1813, the third structure used by this church organization, 
whose history dates back to 17 18. The value of the factory 
products of Orange increased from $2,995,688 in 1900 to 
$6,150,635 in 1905, or 105-3%, an d the capital invested in 
manufacturing from $1,359,523 in 1900 to $3,441,183 in 1905, 
or 1 S3' I %- Of the total product-value in 1905, $2,311,614 
was the value of felt hats manufactured. Among other manu- 
factures are beer, pharmaceutical supplies and lawn mowers. 
The city owns and operates its water-works andelectriclighting 
plant. Settlements were made in or near the limits of the 
present city soon after the founding of Newark, in 1666, and, 
on account of the mountainous ridge in this region, they were 
generally referred to collectively as " Newark Mountain." As a 
disagreement soon arose between the people of Newark and 
those of " the mountain " on questions.of church administration, 
the latter in 1718 severed their connexion with the church at 
Newark and formed an independent congregation, the " Mountain 
Society." The church, which was known also as " The Church 
of the New Ark Mountains," was at first Congregational, but in 
1748 became Presbyterian. In 1782 occurs the earliest reference 
to the neighbourhood as " Orange Dale," and two years later it 
is sometimes referred to as " Orange." In 1806' the legislature 
incorporated the township of Orange. Parts of its territory were 
included in South Orange and Fairmount (now West Orange) 



in 1861 and 1862 respectively, and in 1863 East Orange was 
created out of part of Orange. Orange was incorporated as a 
town in i860 and was chartered as a city in 1872. 

See H. Whittemore, The Founders and Builders of the Oranges 
(Newark, 1896); J. H. Condit, Early Records of the Township of 
Orange (1807-1845) (Orange, 1897); and S. Wickes, History of the 
Oranges (1666-1806), (Newark, 1892). 

ORANGE, the longest river of South Africa, almost traversing 
the continent from ocean to ocean. It rises in Basutoland, less 
than 200 m. from the Indian Ocean, and flows west, with wide 
sweeps south and north, to the Atlantic. It drains, with its 
tributaries, an area estimated at over 400,000 sq. m., passing 
through more than twelve degrees of longitude or 750 m. in a 
straight line from source to mouth. The valley of the river 
exceeds 1000 m., and the stream has a length of not less than 
1300 m. Its headstreams are in the highest part of the Drakens- 
berg range, the principal source, the Senku, rising, at an elevation 
of more than 10,000 ft., on the south face of the Mont aux 
Sources in 28° 48' E., 28° 50' S. The other headstreams are S.E. 
of the Senku source, in Champagne Castle, Giant's Castle and 
other heights of the Drakensberg. The Giant's Castle source 
is not more than 130 m. west of the Indian ocean in a direct line. 

Rising on the inner slopes of the hills these rivulets all join the 
Senku, which receives from the north several streams which rise in 
the Maluti Mountains. Of these the largest are the Semene and 
Senkunyane (little Senku) and the best known the Maletsunyane, 
by reason of its magnificent waterfall — an unbroken leap of 630 ft. 
Increased by the perennial waters of these numerous torrents the 
Senku makes its way S.W. across the upland valleys between the 
Maluti and Drakensberg ranges. After a course of some 200 m., 
passing the S.W. corner of the Maluti Mountains, the Senku, already 
known as the Orange, receives the Makhaleng or Kornet Spruit 
(90 m.), which rises in Machacha Mountain. The Orange here enters 
the great inner plateau of South Africa, which at Aliwal North, the 
first town of any size on the banks of the river, 80 m. below the 
Kornet Spruit confluence, has an elevation of 4300 ft. Forty miles 
lower down the Orange is joined by the first of its large tributaries, 
the Caledon (230 m.), which, rising on the western side of the Mont 
aux Sources, flows, first west and then south, through a broad and 
fertile valley north of the Maluti Mountains. At the confluence 
the united stream has a width of 350 yards. Thirty miles lower 
down the Orange reaches, in 25 40' E., its southernmost point — 
30 40' S., approaching within 20 m. of the Zuurberg range. In 
this part of its course the river receives from the south the streams, 
often intermittent, which rise on the northern slopes of the Storm- 
berg, Zuurberg and Sneeuwberg ranges— the mountain chain which 
forms the water-parting between the coast and inland drainage 
systems of South Africa. Of these southern rivers the chief are the 
Kraai, which joins the Orange near Aliwal North, the Stormberg 
and the Zeekoe (Sea Cow), the last named having a length of 120 m. 

From its most southern point the Orange turns sharply N.W. for 
200 m., when having reached 29 3' S., 23° 36' E. it is joined by its 
second great affluent, the Vaal (q.v.). Here it bends south again, and 
with many a zigzag continues its general westerlydirection, crossing 
the arid plains of Bechuana, Bushman and Namaqualands. Flowing 
between steep banks, considerably below the general level of the 
country, here about 3000 ft., it receives, between the Vaal con- 
fluence and the Atlantic, a distance of more than 400 m. in a direct 
line, no perennial tributary but on the contrary loses a great deal 
of its water by evaporation. In this region,' nevertheless, skeleton 
river systems cover the country north and south. These usually 
dry sandy beds, which on many maps appear rivers of imposing 
length, for a few hours or days following rare but violent thunder- 
storms, are deep and turbulent streams. The northern system 
consists of the Nosob and its tributaries, the Molopo and the 
Kuruman. These unite their waters in about 20 40' E. ayid 27 3., 
whence a channel known as the Molopo or Hygap runs south to the 
Orange. The southern system, which at one time rendered fertile 
the great plains of western Cape Colony, is represented by the 
Brak and Ongers rivers, and, farther west, by the Zak and Olifants 
rivers, which, united as the Hartebeest, reach the Orange about 
25 m. above the mouth of the Molopo. These rivers, in the wet 
season and in places, have plenty of water, generally dissipated in 
vleis, pans and vloers (marshy and lake land). 

Between the mouths of the Hartebeest and Molopo, in 28 35' S., 
20 20' E., are the great waterfalls of the Orange, where in a series 
of cataracts and cascades the river drops 400 ft. in 16 m. The 
Aughrabies or Hundred Falls, as they are called, are divided by 
ledges, reefs and islets, the last named often assuming fantastic 
shapes. Below the falls the river rushes through a rocky gorge, and 
openings in the cliffs to the water are rare. These openings are 
usually the sandy beds of dried-up or intermittent affluents, such as 
the Bak, Ham, Houm, Aub (or Great Fish) rivers of Great Nama- 
qualand. As it approaches the Atlantic, the Orange, in its efforts 
to pierce the mountain barrier which guards the coast, is deflected 



148 



ORANGE 



north and then south, making a loop of fully 90 m., of which the two 
ends are but 38 m. apart. Crossing the narrow coast plain the 
river, with a south-westerly sweep, enters the ocean by a single 
mouth, studded with small islands, in 28 37' S., 16 30' E. A large 
sand bar obstructs the entrance to the river, which is not quite 
1 m. wide. The river when in flood, at which time it has a depth 
of 40 ft., scours a channel through the bar, but the Orange is at all 
times inaccessible to sea-going vessels. Above the bar it is navigable 
by small vessels for 30 or 40 m. In the neighbourhood of the Vaal 
confluence, where the river passes through alluvial land, and at some 
other places, the waters of the Orange are used, and are capable 
of being much more largely used, for irrigation purposes. 

The Hottentots call the Orange the Garib (great water), 
corrupted ty the Dutch into Gariep. The early Dutch settlers 
called it simply Groote-Rivier. It was first visited by Europeans 
about the beginning of the iSth century. In 16S5 Simon van 
der Stell, then governor of the Cape, led an expedition into 
Little Namaqualand and discovered the Koper Berg. In 1704 
and 1705 other expeditions to Namaqualand were made. 
Attempts to mine the copper followed, and the prospectors and 
hunters who penetrated northward sent to the Cape reports of 
the existence of a great river whose waters always flowed. The 
first scientific expedition to reach the Orange was that under 
Captain Henry Hop sent by Governor Tulbagh in 1761, partly 
to investigate the reports concerning a semi-civilized yellow 
race living north of the great river. Hop crossed the Orange 
in September 1761, but shortly afterwards returned. Andrew 
Sparrman, the Swedish naturalist, when exploring in the Sneeuw- 
berg in 1776, learned from the Hottentots that eight or ten 
days' journey north there was a large perennial stream, which 
he rightly concluded was the groote-rivier of Hop. The next 
year Captain (afterwards Colonel) R. J. Gordon, a Dutch officer 
of Scottish extraction, who commanded the garrison at Cape 
Town, reached the river in its middle course at the spot indicated 
by Sparrman and named it the Orange in honour of the prince 
of Orange. In 1778 Lieut. W. Paterson, an English traveller, 
reached the river in its lower course, and in 1779 Paterson and 
Gordon journeyed along the west coast of the colony and ex- 
plored the mouth of the river. F. Le Vaillant also visited the 
Orange near its mouth in 17S4. Mission stations north of the 
Orange were established a few years later, and in 1813 the Rev. 
John Campbell, after visiting Griqualand West for the London 
Missionary Society, traced the Harts river, and from its junction 
with the Vaal followed the latter stream to its confluence with 
the Orange, journeying thence by the banks of the Orange as 
far as Pella, in Little Namaqualand, discovering the great 
falls. These falls were in 1SS5 visited and described by 
G. A. Farini, from whom they received the name of the 
Hundred Falls. The source of the Orange was first reached 
by the French Protestant missionaries T. Arbousset and 
F. Daumas in 1S36. 

The story of Hop's expedition is told in the Nouvelle description 
du Cap de Bonne Esperance (Amsterdam, 1778). Lieut. Paterson 
gave his experiences in A Narrative of Four Journeys into the 
Country of the Hottentots and Caffraria in the Years ijjj-ijj8-ijjq 
(London, 1789). See also Campbell's Travels in South Africa 
(London, 1S15), Arbousset and Daumas ' Relation d'un voyage 
d 'exploration au nord-est de la colonie du Cap de Bonne Esperance en 
1836 (Paris, 1842), and Farini's Through the Kalahari Desert (London, 
1886). 

ORANGrE {Citrus Aiiranlhim) . The plant that produces the 
familiar fruit of commerce is closely allied to the citron, lemon 
and lime, all the cultivated forms of the genus Citrus being so 
nearly related that their specific demarcation must be regarded 
as somewhat doubtful and indefinite. The numerous kinds of 
orange chiefly differing in the external shape, size and flavour of 
the fruit may all probably be traced to two well-marked varieties 
or sub-species — the sweet or China orange, var. sinensis, and the 
bitter orange or bigarade, var. amara. 

The Bitter Seville or Bigarade Orange, C. Aurantium, 
var. amara (C. vulgaris of Risso), is a rather small tree, rarely 
exceeding 30 ft. in height. The green shoots bear sharp axillary 
spines, and alternate evergreen oblong leaves, pointed at the 
extremity, and with the margins entire or very slightly serrated; 
they are of a bright glossy green tint, the stalks distinctly winged 
and, as in the other species, articulated with the leaf., The fragrant 



white or pale pinkish flowers appear in the summer months, and 
the fruit, usually round or spheroidal, does not perfectly ripen 
until the following spring, so that flowers and both green and 
mature fruit are often found on the plant at the same time. 
The bitter aromatic rind of the bigarade is rough, and dotted 
closely over with concave oil-cells; the pulp is acid and more 
or less bitter in flavour. 

The Sweet or China Orange, including the Malta or Portugal 
orange, has the petioles less distinctly winged, and the leaves 
more ovate in shape, but chiefly differs in the fruit, the pulp of 
which is agreeably acidulous and sweet, the rind comparatively 
smooth, and the oil-cells convex. The ordinary round shape of 
the sweet orange fruit is varied greatly in certain varieties, in 
some being greatly elongated, in others much flattened; while 
several kinds have a conical protuberance at the apex, others are 
deeply ribbed or furrowed, and a few are distinctly " horned " 
or lobed, by the partial separation of the carpels. The two sub- 
species of orange are said to reproduce themselves infallibly by 
seed; and, where hybridizing is prevented, the seedlings of the 
sweet and bitter orange appear to retain respectively the more 
distinctive features of the parent plant. 

Though now cultivated widely in most of the warmer parts of 
the world, and apparently in many completely naturalized, the 




Orange (Citrus Aurantium, var. amara), from nature, about one- 
third natural size, a, diagram of flower. 

diffusion of the orange has taken place in comparatively recent 
historical periods. To ancient Mediterranean agriculture it was 
unknown; and, though the later Greeks and Romans were 
familiar with the citron as an exotic fruit, their " median apple " 
appears to have been the only form of the citrine genus with 
which they were acquainted. The careful researches of Gallesio 
have proved that India was the country from which the orange 
spread to western Asia and eventually to Europe. Oranges are 
at present found wild in the jungles along the lower mountain 
slopes of Sylhet, Kumaon, Sikkim and other parts of northern 
India, and, according to Royle, even in the Nilgiri Hills; the 
plants are generally thorny, and present the other characters 
of the bitter variety, but occasionally wild oranges occur with 
sweet fruit; it is, however, doubtful whether either sub-species 
is really indigenous to Hindustan, and De Candolle is probably 
correct in regarding the Burmese peninsula and southern China 
as the original home of the orange. Cultivated from a remote 
period in Hindustan, it was carried to south-western Asia by the 
Arabs, probably before the 9th century, towards the close of 
which the bitter orange seems to have been well known to that 
people; though, according toMas'udi, it was not cultivated in 
Arabia itself until the beginning of the roth century, when it was 
first planted in 'Oman, and afterwards carried to Mesopotamia and 
Syria. It spread ultimately, through the agency of the same 
race, to Africa and Spain, and perhaps to Sicily, following 



ORANGE 



1.49 



everywhere the tide of Mohammedan conquest and civilization. 
In the 1 2th century the bigarade was abundantly cultivated in 
all the Levant countries, 'and the returning soldiers of the Cross 
brought it from Palestine to Italy and Provence. An orange 
tree of this variety is said to have been planted by St Dominic 
in the year 1200, though the identity of the one still standing in 
the garden of the monastery of iSt Sabina at Rome, and now 
attributed to the energetic friar, may be somewhat doubtful. 
No allusion to the sweet orange occurs in contemporary literature 
at this early date, and its introduction to Europe took place at a 
considerably later period, though the exact time is unknown. 
It was commonly cultivated in Italy early in the 16th century, 
and seems to have been known there previously to the expedition 
of Da Gama! (1497), as a Florentine narrator of that voyage 
appears to have been familiar with the fruit. The importation 
of this tree into Europe,- though often attributed to the Portu- 
guese, is with more probability referred to the enterprise of the 
Genoese merchants of the 15th century, who must have found 
it growing abundantly then in the Levant. The prevailing 
European name of the orange is sufficient evidence of its origin 
and of the line taken in its migration westward. The Sanskrit 
designation nagrungo, becoming narungec in Hindustani, and 
corrupted by the Arabs into naranj (Spanish naranja), passed by 
easy transitions into the Italian avancia (Latinized atirantium), 
the Romance arangi, and the later Provencal orange. The true 
Chinese variety, however, was undoubtedly brought by the 
Portuguese navigators direct from the East both to their own 
country and to the Azores, where now luxuriant groves of the 
golden-fruited tree give a modern realization to the old myth 
of the gardens of the Hesperides. 1 Throughout China and in 
Japan the orange has been grown from very ancient times, and it 
was found diffused widely when the Indian Archipelago was first 
visited by Europeans. In more recent days its cultivation has 
extended over most of the warmer regions of the globe, the tree 
growing freely and producing fruit abundantly wherever heat 
is sufficient and enough moisture can be supplied to the roots; 
where night-frosts occur in winter or spring the culture becomes 
more difficult and the crop precarious. 

1 The orange flourishes in any moderately fertile soil, if it is well 
drained and sufficiently moist; but a rather stiff loam or cal- 
careous marl, intermingled with some vegetable humus, is most 
favourable to its growth. Grafting or budding on stocks raised 
from the seed of some vigorous variety is the plan usually adopted 
by the cultivator.* The seeds, carefully selected, are sown in 
well-prepared ground, and the seedlings removed to a nursery-bed 
in the fourth or fifth year, and, sometimes after a second trans- 
plantation, grafted in the seventh or eighth year with the desired 
variety. 'When the grafts have acquired sufficient vigour, 
the trees are placed in rows in the permanent orangery. Pro- 
pagation by layers is occasionally adopted; cuttings do not 
readily root, and multiplication directly by seed is always 
doubtful in -result, though recommended by some authorities. 
The distance left between the trees in the permanent plantation 
orgrove varies according to the size of the plants and subsequent 
culture adopted. In France, when the trunks are from 5 to 6^ ft. 
in height, a space of from 16 to 26 ft. is left between; but the 
dwarfer trees admit of much closer planting. In the West Indies 
and Azores an interval of 24 or even of 30 ft. is often allowed. 
The ground is kept well stirred between the trunks, and the 
roots manured with well-rotted dung, guano or other highly 
nitrogenous matter; shallow pits are sometimes formed above 
the roots for the reception of liquid or other manures; in dry 
climates water must be abundantly and frequently supplied. 
The trees require regular and careful pruning, the heads being 
trained as nearly as possible to a spherical form. Between 
the rows melons, pumpkins and other annual vegetables are 
frequently raised. In garden culture the orange is often trained 
as an espalier,- and with careful attention yields fruit in great 
profusion when thus grown. In favourable seasons the oranges 
are produced in great abundance, from . 400 to 1000 being 

1 The ^modern Arabic name, Bortukan -' (that is, Portuguese), 
shows that the China apple reached the Levant from the West. 



commonly borne on a single plant in full bearing, while on large 
trees the latter number is often vastly exceeded. The trees will 
continue to bear, abundantly from fifty to eighty years, or even 
more; and some old orange trees, whose age must be reckoned 
by centuries, still produce their golden crop; these very ancient 
trees are, however, generally of the bitter variety. Oranges 
intended for export to colder climates are gathered long before 
the deep tint that indicates maturity is attained, the fruit 
ripening rapidly after picking; but the delicious taste of the 
mature China orange is never, thus acquired, and those who 
have not eaten the fruit in a perfectly ripe state have little idea 
of its flavour when in that condition. Carefully gathered, the 
oranges are packed in boxes, each orange being wrapped in 
paper, or with dry maize husks or leaves placed between them. 
The immense quantities of this valuable fruit imported into 
Britain are derived from various sources, the Azores (" St 
Michael's" oranges), Sicily, Portugal, Spain and other Mediter- 
ranean countries, Jamaica, the Bahamas and Florida, California, 
&c. In Florida the bitter orange has grown, from an unknown 
period, in a wild condition, and some of the earlier botanical 
explorers regarded it as an indigenous tree; but it was un- 
doubtedly brought by the Spanish colonists to the West India 
Islands, and was probably soon afterwards transplanted to 
Florida by them or their buccaneering enemies; its chief use in 
America is for stocks on which to graft sweet orange and other 
species of Citrus. 

Orange cultivation has been attempted with success in several 
parts of Australia, especially in New South Wales, where the 
orange groves near Paramatta yield an abundant colonial supply. 
The orangeries of Queensland and South Australia likewise 
produce well. In many of the Pacific Islands the plant has been 
long established. There are numerous varieties of the sweet 
orange, a few of which deserve mention on account of some 
striking peculiarity. Maltese or Blood oranges are characterized 
by the deep-red tint of the pulp, and comprise some of the best 
varieties. Gallesio refers to the blood orange as cultivated 
extensively in Malta and Provence; they are largely grown 
in the Mediterranean region in the present day, and have been 
introduced into America. So-called navel oranges have an 
umbilical mark on the apex of the fruit due to the production 
of an incipient second whorl of carpels. Baptiste Ferrari, 
a Jesuit monk, in his work Hesperides, siveDe malorvm aureorum 
cuUnra et usus Libri Quatuor, published at Rome in 1646, figures 
and describes (pp. 403, 405) such an orange. The mandarin 
orange of China, sometimes regarded as a distinct species, C. 
twbilis, is remarkable for its very flat spheroidal fruit, the rind 
of which readily separates with the slightest pressure; the 
pulp has a peculiarly luscious flavour when ripe. The small 
Tangerine oranges, valued for their fine fragrance, are derived 
from the mandarin. 

Diseases. — Several are caused by fungi, others by insects. 
Of the fungus diseases that known as foot-rot in Florida and 
mal-di-gomma in Italy is very widely distributed. It occurs 
on the lower part of the trunk and the main roots of the tree, 
and is indicated by exudation of gum on the bark covering the 
diseased spot. The diseased patches spread into the wood, 
killing the tissues, which emit a foetid odour; the general 
appearance of the tree is unhealthy, the leaves become yellow 
and the twigs and young branches die. A fungus, Fiisarium 
limonis is found associated with the disease, which is also fostered 
by faulty drainage, a shaded condition of the soil, the use of 
rank manures and other conditions. For treatment the soil 
should be removed from the base of the trunk, the diseased 
patches cut away and the wound treated with a fungicide. 
Decay of oranges in transit often causes serious losses; this 
has been shown to be due to a species of Penicilliiim, of which 
the germinating spores penetrate the skin of damaged fruits. 
Careful picking, handling and packing have much reduced the 
amount of loss from this cause. Another fungus disease, scab, 
has been very injurious to the lemon and bitter orange in Florida. 
It is caused by a species of Cladosporium, which forms numerous 
.small warts on the leaves and fruits; spraying with a weak 



r 5o 



ORANGE 



solution of Bordeaux mixture or with ammoniacal solution 
of carbonate of copper is recommended. The sooty mould of 
orange, which forms a black incrustation on the leaves and also 
the fruit, probably occurs wherever the orange is cultivated. 
It is caused by species of Meliola; in Europe and the United 
States, by M. Pcnzigii and M. Camelliae. The fruit is often 
rendered unsaleable and the plant is also injured as the leaves 
are unable properly to perform their functions. The fungus is not 
a parasite, but lives apparently upon the honey-dew secreted 
by aphides, &c, and is therefore dependent on the presence 
of these insects. Spraying with resin-wash is an effective 
preventive, as it destroys the insects. Several insect enemies 
attack the plant, of which the scale insect Aspidiotus is the most 
injurious in Europe and the Azores. In Florida another species, 
Mytilaspis citricola (purple scale), sometimes disfigures the 
fruit to such an extent as to make it unfit for market. Several 
species of Aleyrodes are insect pests on leaves of the orange; 
A. citri, the white fly of Florida, is described as the most im- 
portant of all the insect pests of the crop in Florida at the 
present time, and another species, A. Howardi, is a very serious 
pest in Cuba. Cold weather in winter has sometimes proved 
destructive in Provence, and many plantations were destroyed 
by the hard frosts of 1789 and 1820. 

Besides the widespread use of the fruit as an agreeable and 
wholesome article of diet, that of the sweet orange, abounding 
in citric acid, possesses in a high degree the antiscorbutic pro- 
perties that render the lemon and lime so valuable in medicine; 
and the free consumption of this fruit in the large towns of 
England during the winter months has doubtless a very beneficial 
effect on the health of the people. The juice is sometimes em- 
ployed as a cooling drink in fevers, as well as for making a pleasant 
beverage in hot weather. 

The bitter orange is chiefly cultivated for the aromatic and 
tonic qualities of the rind, which render it a valuable stomachic. 
Planted long ago in Andalusia by the Moorish conquerors, it is 
still extensively grown in southern Spain — deriving its common 
English name of " Seville " orange from the abundant groves 
that still exist around that city, though the plant is now largely 
cultivated elsewhere. The fruit is imported into Great Britain 
and, the United States in considerable quantities for the manu- 
facture of orange marmalade, which is prepared from the pulp 
and rind, usually more or less mingled with the pulp of the 
China orange. In medicine the fresh peel is largely employed 
as an aromatic tonic, and often, in tincture and syrup and 
" orange wine," as a mere vehicle to disguise the flavour of 
more nauseous remedies. The chief constituents are three 
glucosides, hesperidin, isohesperidin and aurantiamarin, the 
latter being the bitter principle; and an oil which mainly 
consists of a terpene known as limonene. The essential oil of 
the rind is collected for the use of the perfumer, being obtained 
either by the pressure of the fresh peel against a piece of sponge, 
or by the process known as ecuclle, in which the skin of the ripe 
fruit is scraped against a series of points or ridges arranged 
upon the surface of a peculiarly-shaped dish or broad funnel, 
when the oil flows freely from the broken cells. Another fragrant 
oil, called in France essence de petit grain, is procured by the 
distillation of the leaves, from which also an aromatic water is 
prepared. The flowers of both sweet and bitter orange yield, 
when distilled with water, the "oil of Neroli" of the druggist 
and perfumer, and likewise the fragrant liquid known as " orange- 
flower water," which is a saturated solution of the volatile oil 
of the fresh flowers. The candied peel is much in request by 
cook and confectioner; the favourite liqueur sold as "curacoa " 
derives its aromatic flavour from the rind of the bigarade. The 
minute immature oranges that drop from the trees are manu- 
factured into "issue-peas"; from those of the sweet orange 
in a fresh state a sweetmeat is sometimes prepared in France. 
Orange trees occasionally acquire a considerable diameter; 
the trunk of one near Nice, still standing in 1789, was so large 
that two men could scarcely embrace it; the tree was killed 
by the intense cold of the winter of that year. The wood of the 
orange is of a fine yellow tint, and, being hard and close-grained, 



is valued by the turner and cabinetmaker for the manufacture 
of small articles; it takes a good polish. 

Although the bitter " Poma de Orenge " were brought in 
small quantities from Spain to England as early as the year 
1290, no attempt appears to have been made to cultivate the tree 
in Britain until about 1595, when some plants were introduced 
by the Carews of Beddington in Surrey, and placed in their 
garden, where, trained against a wall, and sheltered in winter, 
they remained until destroyed by the great frost of 1 730-1 740. 
In the 18th century the tree became a favourite object of con- 
servatory growth; in the open air, planted against a wall, 
and covered with mats in winter, it has often stood the cold 
of many seasons in the southern counties, in such situations 
the trees occasionally bearing abundant fruit. The trees are 
usually imported from Italy, where, especially near Nervi, such 
plants are raised in great numbers for exportation; they are 
generally budded on the stocks of some free-growing variety, often 
on the lemon or citron. . 1 

The orange has been usually cultivated in England for the 
beauty of the plant and the fragrance of its blossoms, rather 
than for the purpose of affording a supply of edible fruit. The 
latter can, however, be easily grown in a hot-house, some of the 
fruits thus grown, especially those of the pretty little Tangerine 
variety, being superior in quality to the imported fruit. The best 
form of orange house is the span-roofed, with glass on both sides, 
the height and other conditions being similar to those recom- 
mended for stove plants. The trees may be planted out, a row on 
each side a central path, in a house of moderate width. They 
will flourish in a compost of good, light, turfy loam and well- 
decayed leaf-mould in equal proportions, to which a little 
broken charcoal may be added. Each year the trees should be 
top-dressed with a similar compost, removing some of the old soil 
beforehand. The trees, if intended to be permanent, should be 
placed 10 to 12 ft. apart. It will often be found more convenient 
to grow the plants in pots or tubs, and then bottom heat can be 
secured by placing them on or over a series of hot-water pipes 
kept near to or above the ground level. The pots or tubs should 
be thoroughly well drained, and should not be too large for the 
plants; and repotting should take place about every third year, 
the soil being top-dressed in intervening years. The temperature 
may be kept at about 50° or 55° in winter, under which treatment 
the trees will come into bloom in February; the heat must then 
be increased to 60° or 65° in the day time, and later on to 8o° 
or 85°. Throughout the growing season the trees should be 
liberally watered, and thoroughly syringed everyday; this will 
materially assist in keeping down insects. When the trees are 
in bloom, however, they must not be syringed, but the house 
must be kept moist by throwing water on the pathways a few 
times during the day. When the flowers have fallen the syringe 
may be used again daily in the early morning and late afternoon. 
The fruit may be expected to ripen from about the middle of 
October to January, and if the sorts are good will be of excellent 
quality. When the trees are at rest the soil must not be kept 
too wet, since this will produce a sickly condition, through the 
loss of the small feeding roots. The trees require little pruning 
or training. The tips of the stronger shoots are just pinched 
out when they have made about 6 in. of growth, but when a 
branch appears to be robbing the rest, or growing ahead of them, 
it should be shortened back or tied down. 

When grown for the production of flowers, which are always in 
great request, the plants must be treated in a similar manner to 
that already described, but may do without bottom heat. 

For details of orange varieties, cultivation, &e., see Risso and 
Poiteau, Histoire et culture des ora?tgers (edited by A. Du Breuil, 
Paris, 1872); for early history and diffusion, G. Gallesio, Traite. du 
citrus (Paris, 1811). A useful modern handbook is Citrus Fruits 
and their Culture, by Harold Hume (New York, 1907). 

There are many varieties of the sweet orange that ma) "be 
grown under glass in the British Isles. Amongst the best for 
dessert is the St Michaels, a heavy cropper with large juicy 
fruits; and closely related are Bittencourt, Egg, Dom Louise, 
Sustain, Excelsior and Brown's Orange. The White Orange, 



ORANGEBURG— ORANGE FREE STATE 



J5* 



so called from its pale skin, is excellent. Stiver or Plata is a 
sweet, pale-coloured variety with a curious weal-like orange 
stripe, the fruit being rather small but heavy. Embiguo, or the 
Washington -Navel Orange, produces splendid fruit under glass. 
The Jaffa, with large oblong fruits and large wavy crinkled 
leaves, although a shy bearer, makes up for this, in the size of its 
fruits. The Maltese Blood Orange is remarkable for the blood-like 
stains in the pulp, although these are not, present in every fruit 
even on the same tree. 

Other kinds of oranges are the Tangerine with small aromatic 
fruits and willow-like leaves. The Seville orange is a handsome 
free-flowering tree, but its fruits are bitter and used only for 
preserving and marmalade. 

ORANGEBURG, a city and the county-seat of Orangeburg 
county, South Carolina, U.S.A., on the North Edisto river, 
50 m. S. by E. of Columbia. Pop. (1890) 2064; (1900) 4455, 
of whom 2518 were negroes. Orangeburg is served by the Atlantic 
Coast Line and the Southern railways. It is the seat, of Claflin 
University for negroes, and of the State Colored Normal, In- 
dustrial, Agricultural and Mechanical College. Claflin University, 
incorporated in 1869, was named in honour of Lee Claflin (1791- 
1871) of -Massachusetts, and is under the control of the Freed- 
men's Aid and Education Society of the Methodist Episcopal 
Church., In 190S it had 25 instructors and 538 students (241 men 
and 297 women). The State Colored Normal, Industrial, Agri- 
cultural and Mechanical College was established here by the state 
in 1872 as the College of Agriculture and Mechanics' Institute 
(for. negroes), on property immediately adjoining the campus of 
Claflin 'University, and the two schools were under one manage- 
ment (although otherwise distinct and separate) until 1S96, 
when the present name of the state college was adopted. Among 
the city's manufactures are cotton-seed oil, cotton (yarn and 
cloth), lumber, bricks, concrete and turpentine. The munici- 
pality owns the water-works and the electric-lighting plant. A 
trader and trapper settled on the site of what is now Orangeburg 
in. 1704.. In 1735 a company of Germans and Swiss established 
the first real settlement and named it Orangeburg, in honour of 
the prince of Orange. Orangeburg was incorporated as a town 
in 1851, and was first chartered as a city in 1883. 

ORANGE FREE STATE, an inland province of British South 
Africa; formerly — from 1854 to 1900 — an independent republic. 
From May 1900 to June 1910 it was known as the Orange River 
Colony, since when under the style of Orange Free State it has 
formed a province of the Union of South Africa. It lies north of 
the Orange and south of the Vaal rivers, between 26 30' and 
30 40' S. and 24 20' and 29 40' E., and has an area of 50,392 
sq. r .m., being nearly the size of England. It is surrounded by 
other British possessions, being bounded N. by the Transvaal, 
E. by Natal, S.E. by Basutoland, S. and W. by the Cape province. 
Its greatest length is 356 m., its greatest breadth 304 m. 

Physical Features. — The country forms part of the inner 
tableland of South Africa and has an elevation of between 4000 
and 5000 ft, On the N.E. or Natal border the crest of the 
Drakensberg forms the frontier. The northern slopes of Mont 
aux Sources (11,000 ft.), the highest land in South Africa, are 
within the province, as are also the Draken's Berg (5682 ft.), 
the mountain from which the range takes its name, Melanies 
Kop (7500 ft.) and Platberg (about 8000 ft.), near Harrismith. 
Though rugged in places, with outlying spurs and secondary 
chains, the Westward slopes of the Drakensberg are much 
gentler than the eastern or Natal versant of the chain. Several 
passes exist through the mountains, that of Van Reenen, 5500 ft., 
being traversed by a railway. From the mountainous eastern 
district the tountry dips gradually westward. No natural 
boundary marks the western frontier, a line across the veld 
(separating it from the Griqualand West district of the Cape) 
from the Orange to the Vaal rivers. 

The aspect of the greater part of the country is that of vast 
undulating treeless plains, diversified by low rands and isolated 
tafelbergs and spitzkops, indicating the former level of the country. 
These' hills are either of sandstone or ironstone and in altitude vary 
from about 4800 ft. to 5300 ft. Ironstone hills are numerous in 
the south-west districts. The whole country . forms part of the 



drainage basin of the Orange river, its streams, with insignificant 
exceptions, being tributaries of the Vaal or Caledon affluents of that 
river. The watershed between the Vaal and Caledon is formed by 
chains of hills, which, leaving the main range of the Drakensberg at 
Mont aux Sources, sweep in semicircles west and south. These 
hills are known as the Roodebergen, Wittebergen, Korannabcrg, 
Viervoet, &c, and rise to nearly 7000 ft. The well-known Thaba 
Nchu (Black Mountain) is an isolated peak between this range and 
Bloemfontein. Three-fourths of the country lies north of these 
hills and is typical veld; the valley of the Caledon, sheltered east- 
ward by the Maluti Mountains in Basutoland, is well watered and 
extremely fertile. The Caledon, from its source in Mont aux Sources 
to Jammerberg Drift near Wcpener, forms the boundary of the 
province, the southern bank being in Basutoland; below Wepener 
the land on both sides of the Caledon is in the province. Here, 
between the Caledon and the Orange, is the fertile district of Roux- 
villc. The north bank of the Orange, from the Kornet Spruit con- 
fluence to a point a little east of the spot where the railway from 
Cape Town to Kimberley crosses the river, forms the southern 
frontier of the province. The chief tributaries of the Vaal (q.v.) 
wholly or partly within the province are, going from east to west, 
the Klip (this stream from near its source to its confluence with the 
Vaal divides the Free State from the Transvaal), the Wilge, Rhe- 
noster, Vet, Moddcr and Reit. The Sand river, on whose banks 
the convention recognizing the independence of the Transvaal Boers 
was signed in 1852, is a tributary of the Vet and passes through the 
centre of the country. All the affluents of the Vaal mentioned flow 
north or west. The Vaal itself for the greater part of its course 
forms the boundary between the province and the Transvaal. 
From the Klip river confluence it flows west and south-west, entering 
Griqualand West above Kimberley. The river beds are generally 
40 to 80 ft. below the level of the surrounding land. Most of the 
rivers have a considerable slope and none is navigable. Except 
the Caledon, Vaal and Orange, they are dry or nearly dry for three 
or four months in the year, but in the rainy season they are often 
raging torrents. The valleys of the Modder, Reit and the lower 
Caledon contain rich alluvial deposits. Besides the rivers water is 
obtained from numerous springs. A remarkable feature of the 
western plains is the large number of salt pans and salt springs 
grouped together in extensive areas, especially in the Boshof 
district. 

Geology. — Except a small area around Vredefort in the north, the 
whole of the province is occupied by rocks of Karroo age. At 
Vredefort there is a granitic boss, belonging to the Swaziland series, 
regarded as being an intrusive in the overlying Witwatersrand series 
by G. A. F. Molengraaff, but to be of older date by F. A. Hatch. 
This boss is bounded, except on the south, by the Witwatersrand 
series, the lower portion of which consists of quartzites and slates 
and the upper portion of quartzites and conglomerates. [At Hoopstad 
and at Stinkhoutboom the Witwatersrand series is unconformably 
overlain by 500 ft. of boulder beds and amygdaloidal lavas belonging 
to the Vaal River System. The Black Reef series of quartzites and 
conglomerates and dolomite form a narrow outcrop resting uncon- 
formably upon the last-mentioned system. Of the Karroo System 
all the groups from the basal Dwyka Conglomerate to the Cave 
Sandstone of the Stormberg series (see Cape Colony) are repre- 
sented; but these rocks have not been so minutely subdivided as 
in the Cape. The Dwyka Conglomerate forms a narrow outcrop in 
the north-west, and is known from boreholes to extend over large 
areas beneath the Ecca Shales and to rest directly on rocks of older 
age. At Vierfontein a seam of coal is worked above it. The Ecca 
series extends over the major portion of the province. It consists 
mainly of sandstones, but these are often thin-bedded and pass into 
shales. Impressions of plants and silicified stems are frequently 
found. The Beaufort series occupies a portion of the area formerly 
regarded -as being composed of the Stormberg beds. The pre- 
vailing rocks are sandstones, mudstones and shales. Reptilian 
remains abound; plants are also plentiful. The Stormberg series is 
confined to the north-cast.' 

Climate. — Cut off from the warm, rain-bearing winds of the 
Indian Ocean by the Drakensberg, the country is swept by the 
winds from the dry desert regions to the west. It is also occasionally 
subject to hot, dry winds, from the north. The westerly wind is 
almost constant and, in conjunction with the elevation of the land, 
greatly modifies the climatic conditions. The heat usual in sub- 
tropical countries is tempered by the cool breezes, and the atmosphere 
is dry and bracing. The climate indeed is noted for its healthiness, 
the chief drawback being dust-storms. The average temperature 
for the four winter months — May-August— is 49° F. ; hard frosts 
at night are then common. For the other eight months the average 
temperature is 66°, December-February being the hottest months. 
The average daily range of the thermometer is from 25 to 30 , 

"■See for geology, A. H. Green, " A Contribution to the Geology 
and Physical Geography of the Cape Colony," Quart. Journ. Geo). 
Soc. vol. xliv., 1888; E. J. Dunn, Geological Sketch Map of S. 
Africa (Melbourne, 1SS7); D. Draper,'" Notes on the Geology of 
South-Eastern Africa," Quart. Journ. Geo!. Soc. vol. I., 1894; 
F. H. Hatch and G. S. Corstorphine, The Geology of Soutli Africa 
(2nd ed. London, J 909). • ,< 



152 



ORANGE FREE STATE 



the highest recorded range in one day being 74° (from 20° to 94°). 
Rain falls on from sixty to seventy days during the year, chiefly 
in the summer (December-April). Rain is generally preceded by 
thunder and lightning and falls heavily for a short period. Most 
of the water runs off the surface into the spruits and in a little while 
the veld is again dry. The western part of the province is driest, as 
the rain clouds often pass over the lower levels but are caught by 
the eastern hills. The average annual rainfall varies from 18 in. 
or less in the west to 24 in. in the central regions and 30 in the eastern 
highlands. 

Flora and Fauna. — The flora is typical of a region of scanty rain- 
fall. Over the greater part of the plains little now grows save veld, 
the coarse long grass of South Africa. Formerly, much of the 
country was covered with mimosa bush, but the trees were to a 
large extent cut down by the early white immigrants. Thorny 
acacias, euphorbias and aloes are still, however, found in patches 
on the plains. Timber trees are almost confined to the river valleys, 
where willows, yellow wood, iron wood, red wood, mimosas and, in 
deep gorges, the wild fig are found. The tobacco plant also grows 
wild. In moist regions ferns and mosses, the arum and other broad 
flat-leaved plants are found. The characteristic plants are thorny 
and small leaved, or else bulbous. Among veld plants the elands- 
boontje provides tanning material equal to oak bark. European 
fruit trees and vines flourish in certain localities, while in the 
drier regions the Australian wattle, gum trees and pepper trees 
have been introduced with success. 

The fauna has undergone a great alteration since the first white 
settlers entered the country. Big game was then abundant. The 
elephant, giraffe, lion, leopard, hyena, zebra, buffalo, gnu, quagga, 
kudu, eland and many other kinds of antelope roamed the plains; 
the rhinoceros, hippopotamus and crocodile lived in or frequented 
the rivers, and ostriches and baboons were numerous. The immigrant 
farmers ruthlessly shot down game of all kinds and most of the 
animals named were exterminated, so far as the province was 
concerned. Of animals still found may be mentioned baboons and 
monkeys, the leopard, red lynx (Felis caracal), spotted hyena, aard 
wolf, wild cat, long-eared fox, jackals of various kinds, the dassie 
or rock rabbit, the scaly anteater, the ant bear (aardvaark), the 
mongoose and the spring haas, a rodent of the jerboa family. 
Antelope of any kind are now scarce; a few white-tailed gnu are 
preserved. None of the dangerous wild beasts is common, but 
there are several varieties of poisonous snakes. Scorpions and 
tarantulas are numerous, and lizards, frogs, beetles, ants, butterflies, 
moths and flies are abundant. Locusts are an intermittent plague. 
There are few earthworms or snails. The birds_ include eagles — 
some are called lammervangers from their occasional attacks on 
young lambs — vultures, hawks, kites, owls, crows, ravens, the 
secretary bird, cranes, a small white heron, quails, partridges, 
korhaans, wild geese, duck, and guineafowl, swallows, finches, 
starlings, the mossie or Cape sparrow, and the widow bird, noted for 
the length of its tail in summer. Barbel and yellow mudfish are 
found in the rivers. 

Inhabitants. — The Bushmen (q.v.) are, presumably, the oldest 
inhabitants of this, as of many other parts of South Africa. 
Next came the Hottenots (q.v.), and in the 16th century Bantu 
negroes of the Bechuana tribes appear to have established 
themselves in the country. The Barolong, one of the oldest 
Bechuana tribes, are believed to have entered the country sub- 
sequently to the Bakuena, the particular tribe from which the 
general name of the race is derived (seeBECHUANA; andTRANSVAAL: 
Inhabitants). Clans representing the southern Bakuena were 
welded together into one tribe in the 19th century, and are now 
known as Basuto (see Basutoland). The Basuto were already 
a strong force when the first white settlers, Dutch farmers from 
the Cape, entered the country in 1824; the white element has 
since been reinforced by a considerable strain of British, particu- 
larly Scottish, blood. Since the advent of the whites there has 
also been a considerable immigration of Zulus. The majority of 
the inhabitants live in the eastern part of the country; the arid 
regions west of the main railway line containing a scanty pastoral 
population and no towns of any size. The first census, taken 
in 1880, showed a total population of 133,518; in 1890 there 
were 207,503 inhabitants — an increase in ten years of 55-41% — 
and at the census of 1904 there were 387,315 inhabitants, a 
further increase of 85-56%. The density in 1904 was under S 
persons per sq. m. The inhabitants are officially divided into 
" Europeans or white," " aboriginal natives" and " mixed and 
other coloured races." Between 1880 and 1904 the proportion 
of whites dropped from 45-70% to 36-84%. Of the 142,679 
white inhabitants in 1904, 85,036 were born in the province; 
29,727 in the Cape; 3116 in the Transvaal; 1835 in Natal; 
and 18,487 in the United Kingdom. Of the 2726 European 



immigrants born in non-British states 1025 came from Russian 
Poland. 

According to the 1904 census classification the " aboriginal 
inhabitants" numbered in that year 229,149. In this term 
are included, however, Zulu-Kaffir immigrants. The tribe 
most largely represented was the Basuto (130,213 persons), 
former owners of considerable tracts in the eastern part of the 
country, now known as " The Conquered Territory." In the 
eastern districts of Harrismith, Bethlehem, Ficksburg and 
Ladybrand the Basutos are largely concentrated. Barolong 
numbered 37,998 and other Bechuana 5115. Of the Zulu- 
Kaffir tribes Zulus proper numbered 35,275, Fingoes 6275, and 
Ama Xosa 5376 (see Kaffirs; and Zululand: Inhabitants). 
The Bushmen numbered 4048 persons. Of these 1 131 were in the 
Bloemfontein district. The Bushmen have left in drawings on 
caves and in rocks traces of their habitation in regions where 
they are no longer to be found. In Thaba'nchu a petty Barolong 
state enjoyed autonomy up to 1884, and the majority of the 
Barolong are found in that district and the adjoining district 
of Bloemfontein. The Zulus are mostly found in that part of 
the country nearest Zululand. In 1904 the number of persons 
belonging to "mixed and other coloured races" was 15,487. 
The proportion between the sexes was, for all races, 84-35 
females to 100 males; for white inhabitants only 74-91 females to 
100 males; for aboriginal inhabitants only 90-86 females to 100 
males. Of the population above fifteen years old 55-87% 
of the men and 33-69% of the women were unmarried. Among 
whites for every 100 unmarried men there were, 65-33 unmarried 
women; there were 93-04 married women for every 100 married 
men, and 173-81 widows for every 100 widowers. 

Classified by occupations the census of 1904 gave the following 
results: dependants, mainly young children, 28-53%; agri- 
culture, 39-51 %; commercial and industrial pursuits, 7-62%; 
professional, 3-18%; domestic (including women living at home 
other than those helping in farm work), 15-75%. Divided by 
races 8-19% of the whites were engaged in professional work 
and only 0-26% of the coloured classes. 

Chief Towns. — The capital, Bloemfontein (pop. in 1904, 33,883), 
is fairly centrally situated on the trunk railway to Johannesburg. 
Kroonstad (pop. 7191) lies 127 m. N.N.E. of Bloemfontein on the 
same railway line. Harrismith, 8300, is in the N.E. of the colony, 
60 m. by rail from Ladysmith, Natal. Jagersfontein, 5657, is in 
the S.W. of the province and owes its importance to the existence 
there of a diamond mine. Ladybrand, 3862, Ficksburg, 1954, and 
Wepener, 1366, lie in the valley of the Caledon near the Basutoland 
frontier. Winburg, 2762, lies between Bloemfontein and Kroonstad. 
All these towns are separately noticed. Other towns on the trunk 
railway, going from south to north, are Springfontein, 1000, an 
important railway junction; Trompsburg, 1378; Edenburg, 1562, 
and Brandfort, 1977. In the S.E. Thaba'nchu, 1134, Zastron, 1157, 
Dewetsdorp, 971 (named after the father of Christian De Wet), 
Reddersburg, 750, Smithfield, 999, and Rouxville, 990. These 
are all centres of fine agricultural regions. Bethulie, 1686, on the 
Orange river, in the " Conquered Territory," has been the scene of 
the labours of French Protestant missionaries since 1832, and 
possesses a fine park. Through it passes the main line from East 
London. In the N.E. are: Bethlehem, 1777, on the railway, 57 m. 
W. of Harrismith, an agricultural and coal-mining centre; Senekal, 
1039; Heilbron, 1544; Vrede, 1543; Frankfort, 747; Lindley, 
646; and Reitz, 526. In the north-west of the trunk railway are: 
Parijs, 1732, finely situated on the Vaal, and Vredefort, 759. Farther 
west and south are: Hoopstad, 452, on the Vet river; Boshof, 1308, 
a fruit and vegetable centre, 30 m. N.E. of Kimberley; and Jacobs- 
dal, 764. In the S.W. are: Philippolis, 809, at one time capital of 
the Griqua chief Adam Kok and named after the Rev. John Philip 
(q.v.). Fauresmith, 1363, a mining centre, 6 m. W. of Jagers- 
fontein, and Koffyfontein, 1657, where is a diamond mine. Many 
of the towns were the scenes of encounters between the Boers and 
British, March 1900-May 1902. At Boshof fell the leader of the 
Boers' European Legion, Colonel de Villebois Mareuil, on the 5th of 
April 1900. At the census of 1904 Harrismith and Kroonstad were 
the only towns where the white inhabitants outnumbered the 
coloured populprion. Nine towns contained more than 1000 white 
inhabitants, the total white population of these towns being 31,505, 
of whom 15,501 lived in Bloemfontein. 

Communications. — Largely owing to its situation — being on the 
direct route between the Cape ports and the Transvaal, and between 
Durban and Kimberley — the province possesses an extensive net- 
work of railways. The railways are state owned and of the standard 
South African gauge — 3 ft. 6 in. They may be divided into two 



ORANGE FREE STATE 



J 53 



systems, (i) those connecting the province with the Cape and the 
Transvaal, and (2) those linking it with Natal. 

The first system consists of a trunk line, formed by the junction 
of lines from Cape Town and Port Elizabeth, which crosses the 
Orange at Norvals Pont, traverses the province from south to north, 
passing through Blocmfontein and Kroonstad, and enters tha 
Transvaal at Viljocns Drift (331 m. from Norvals Pont), being con- 
tinued thence to Johannesburg. This line is joined at Springfontein 
by a railway from East London which crosses the Orange near 
Bcthulic. From Blocmfontein a line (102 m. long) runs west to 
Kimberley, on the main line from Cape Town to Rhodesia, and from 
Springfontein a branch (56 m. long goes past Jagcrsfontein to 
Faurcsmith. 

The second system is formed by a line leaving the Natal trunk 
railway at Ladysmith which crosses the Drakensberg at Van Rccnen's 
Pass and is continued thence through Harrismith to Bethlehem. 
At Bethlehem it divides, one branch going N.W. to Kroonstad (178 m. 
from the Natal border and 393 m. from Durban), the other S.W. 
along the Caledon valley to Modderpoort near Ladybrand, and 
thence directly west to Bloemfontein. The distance from Van 
Reencn's Pass to Bloemfontein by this route is 278 m. The two 
systems, it will be seen, are doubly connected, namely at Blocm- 
fontein and at Kroonstad, and the lines running cast from those 
towns afford the quickest connexion between Cape Town nnd 
Durban. Besides the lines enumerated there are various local lines, 
one branching at Sannah's Post station from the Bloemfontcin- 
Bethlehem.line running south-cast to Wcpener. Another branch 
from the same line crosses the Caledon to Maseru, Basutoland. In 
1910 there were in all 1060 m. of railway open in the province. 
There are well-kept high-roads connecting all the towns.and a govern- 
ment service of mail carts to places not on the railway. The light 
Cape cart is largely used, and the wagon, drawn by a team of oxen, 
is still employed by farmers to bring their produce to ' market. 
There is an extensive telegraphic system and a well-organized postal 
service. 

Agriculture. — The chief industry is agriculture, including sheep 
farming and stock raising. The dry western plains are best adapted 
for sheep rearing, while the well-watered eastern regions are specially 
suitable for the growing of cereals andlalso for horse breeding. The 
land under cultivation in 1904 was 371,515 morgen (a morgen is 
2- 1 1 acres) or about 1230 sq. m. The chief crop is mealies, the staple 
food of the; natives; wheat, oathay, Kaffir corn and oats coming 
next. Little barley is cultivated. The " Conquered Territory," 
that is the valley of the Caledon, is the most fertile region and is 
styled the granary of South Africa. Here, in the districts of Lady- 
brand, Ficksburg, Bethlehem and Rouxville, most wheat is grown. 
The same regions, together with the adjacent regions of Harrismith 
and Thaba'nchu, produce the most oats and oathay. Besides 
grains the chief crops are those of pumpkins, potatoes and other 
table vegetables, and' tobacco. The cultivation of potatoes and 
tobacco largely increased between the, census years 1890 and 1904. 
The principal tobacco-growing regions are Vredefort, which produced 
258,645 lb in 1904, and Kroonstad (80,385 lb), the districts of 
Bethlehem, Ladybrand and Winburg also producing considerable 
quantities. Fruit farming engages attention, about 8000 morgen 
being devoted to orchards in 1904. The fruit trees commonly 
cultivated are the peach, apricot, apple, orange, lemon, pear, fig 
and plum. 

The rearing of live stock, the chief pursuit of the first Dutch 
settlers, is an important industry. Rinderpest and other epidemic 
diseases swept over the country in 1895-1896, and during the war 
of 1899-1902 the province was practically denuded of live stock. 
There was a rapid increase of stock after the close of hostilities. 
Sheep numbered over 5,000,000 in 1910, cattle over 600,000, horses 
over ' 1 00,000, goats (chiefly owned by natives) over 1,000,000. 
Large numbers of pigs are reared. Ostrich farming is growing in 
favour. The eastern and south-eastern districts have the greatest 
amount of stock per square mile, Ficksburg leading in cattle, horses 
and mules. Sheep are most abundant in the Rouxville, Wepener 
and Smithfield districts, goats in Philippolis. The dairying industry 
is increasing. The Afrikander cattle, powerful draught animals, 
large horned, bony and giving little milk, are being crossed with 
other stock. A government Department of Agriculture, created in 
1904, affords help to the farmers in various ways, notably in com- 
batting insect plagues, in experimental farms, and in improving the 
breed of horses, sheep and cattle. 

Land Settlement.-. — Under the provisions of a Land Settlements 
Ordinance of 1902 over 1,500,000 acres of crown land had been by 
1907 allotted, and in September 1909 there were 642 families, of whom 
over 570 were British, settled on the land. In 1907 a Land Settle- 
ment Board was created to deal with the affairs of these settlers. 
At the end of five years the Board was to hand over its duties to 
the government. 

Diamond Mining and other Industries. — Next to agriculture the 
most important industry is that of diamond mining. The chief 
diamond mines are at Jagersfontein (q.v.) and Koffyfontein. There 
are also diamond mines in the Winburg and Kroonstad districts, 
and near Ficksburg, where old workings have been found 40 ft. deep. 
The alluvial deposits on the banks of the Vaal, N.E. of Kimberley, 
yield occasional diamonds of great purity. The value of the output 



from the diamond mines rose from £224,000 in 1890 to £1,508,000 
in 1898. The war hindered operations, but the output was valued 
at £648,000 in 1904 and at £1,048,000 in 1909. 

Coal-mines are worked in various districts in the north near the 
Vaal, notably at Vierfontein, and at Clydesdale, which lies a few 
miles south of Vereeniging. Before 1905 the mines were little 
worked; in that year the output was 118,000 tons, while in 1907 over 
500,000 tons were raised. It dropped to 470,000 in 1909 owing to 
loss of railway contracts. 

Of other minerals gold has been found, but up to 1909 was not 
worked; iron ore exists near Kroonstad and Vredefort, but it 
also is not worked. Petroleum has been found in the Ficksburg, 
Ladybrand and Harrismith districts, and is pumped to a limited 
extent. Good building stone is obtained near Blocmfontein, Lady- 
brand and other places, and excellent pottery clay near Blocmfontein. 

Besides the industries mentioned flour-milling, soap-making, and 
the manulacturc of jam and salt arc carried on. During 1905 over 
12,300,000 lb of salt were obtained from the salt springs at Zoutpan, 
near Jacobsdal, and Haagenstad, to the west of Brandfort. In 
1907 the output had increased to nearly 23,000,000 lb. 

Trade. — The bulk of the direct trade of the country is with the 
Cape and thejTransvaal, Natal, however, taking an increasing share. 
Basutoland comes fourth. Its chief exports are diamonds, live 
stock (cattle, horses and mules, sheep and goats), wool, mohair, 
coal, wheat and eggs. Except the diamonds, which go to London 
via Cape Town, all the exports arc taken by the neighbouring 
territories. The principal imports, over 90 % being of British 
origin, are cotton goods, clothing and haberdashery, leather, boots, 
&c, hardware, sugar, coffee, tea and furniture. 

The volume of trade in 1898, as represented by imports and 
exports, was £3,114,000 (imports £1,190,000; exports £1,923,000). 
For the four years beginning on June 30, 1902, that is immediately 
after the close of hostilities, the imports increased from £2,460,000 
t0 £4>°53>ooo, the exports from £285,000 to £3,045,000. For the 
fiscal year 1908-1909 the imports were valued at £2,945,000, the 
exports at £3,558,000. About a third of the imports are the produce 
or manufactures of other South African countries. Imported goods 
re-exported are of comparatively slight value — some £381,000 in 
1908-1909. 

Constitution. — From July 1907 to June 1910 the province was 
a self-governing colony. It is now represented in the Union 
parliament by sixteen senators and seventeen members of the 
house of assembly. For parliamentary purposes the province 
is divided into single-member constituencies. The franchise is 
given to all adult white male British subjects. There is no 
property qualification, but six months' residence in the 
province is essential. There is a biennial registration of voters, 
and every five years the electoral areas are to be redivided, with 
the object of giving to each constituency an approximately 
equal number of voters. The qualifications for membership of 
the assembly are the same as those for voters. 

At the head of the provincial government is an administrator 
(who holds office for five years) appointed by the Union ministry. 
This official is assisted by an executive committee of four members 
elected by the provincial council. The provincial council con- 
sists of 25 members (each representing a separate constituency) 
elected by the parliamentary voters and has a statutory 
existence of three years. Its powers are strictly local and 
delegated. The control of elementary education was guaranteed 
to the council for a period of five years following the establish- 
ment of the Union. 

Justice. — The law of the province is the Roman-Dutch law, in so 
far as it has been introduced into and is applicable to South Africa, 
and as amended by local acts. Bloemfontein is the seat of the 
Supreme Court of the Union of South Africa and also of a provincial 
division of the same court. For judicial purposes the province is 
divided into twenty-four divisions, in each of which is a resident 
magistrate, who has limited civil and criminal jurisdiction. There 
are also special justices of the peace, having criminal jurisdiction in 
minor cases. The provincial court has jurisdiction in all civil and 
criminal matters, and is a court of appeal from all inferior courts. 
From it appeals can be made to the Appellate Division of the Supreme 
Court. Criminal cases are tried before one judge and a jury of nine, 
who must give a unanimous opinion. Circuit courts are also held 
by judges of the provincial court. 

Finance. — The bulk of the revenue, e.g. that derived from customs 
and railways, is now paid to the Union government, but the pro- 
vincial council has power to levy taxes and (with the consent of the 
Union ministry) to raise loans for strictly provincial purposes. 
In 1S70-1871, when the province was an independent state and 
possessed neither railways nor diamond mines, the revenue was 
£78,000 and the expenditure £71,000; in 1 884-1 885 the revenue 
had risen to £228,000 and the expenditure to £229,000; in 1898, 
the last full year of the republican administration, the figures 



*5+ 



ORANGE FREE STATE 



were: revenue, including railway profits, £799,000; expenditure, 
including outlay on new railways, £956,000. Omitting the figures 
during the war period, the figures for the year ending June 1903 
were: revenue, £956,000; expenditure, £839,000. The depression 
in trade which followed caused a reduction in revenue, the average 
for the years 1904-1909 being: revenue, £820,000; expenditure, 
£819,000. These figures are exclusive of railway receipts and ex- 
penditure (see Transvaal: Finance). 

Religion. — The vast majority (over 95 %) of the white inhabitants 
are Protestants, and over 70 % belong to the Dutch Reformed 
Church, while another 3 % are adherents of the very similar organi- 
zation, the Gereformeerdc Kerk. Anglicans are the next numerous 
body, forming 12-53 % of the white population. The Wesleyans 
number nearly 4% of the inhabitants. The Roman Catholics 
number 2 -30% of the whites, the head of their church in the province 
being a vicar apostolic. At the head of the Anglican community, 
which is in full communion with the Church of England, is the 
bishop of Bloemfontein, whose diocese, founded in 1863, includes 
not only the Orange Free State, but Basutoland, Griqualand West 
and British Bechuanaland. All the churches named have missions 
to the natives, and in 1904, 104,389 aboriginals and 10,909 persons 
of mixed race were returned as Protestants, and 1093 aboriginals 
and 117 of mixed race as Roman Catholics. The total number of 
persons in the country professing Christianity was 251,904 or 65%. 
The Dutch Reformed Church had the largest number (21,272) of 
converts among the natives, the Wesleyans coming next. The 
African Methodist Episcopal (Ethiopian) Church had 41 10 members, 
of whom only two were whites. The Jewish community numbered 
1616. Nearly 33% of the population, 127,637 persons, were re- 
turned officially at the census of 1904 as of " no religion," under 
which head are classed the natives who retain their primitive forms 
of belief, for which see Kaffirs, Bechuanas, &c. 

Education. — At the census of 1904, 32-57 % of the total population 
could read and write; of the whites over fifteen years old 82-63% 
could read and write. Of the aboriginals, 8-15% could read and 
write; of the mixed and other races, 12-28%. In the urban 
areas the proportion of persons, of all races, able to read and 
write was 50-67%; in the rural areas the proportion was 
26-43%. By sexes, 35% of males and 29-63 % of females could 
read and write. 

Elementary education is administered by the provincial council, 
assisted by a permanent director of education. From 1900 to 1905 
the schools were managed, teachers selected and appointed and all ex- 
penses borne by the government. They were of an undenominational 
character and English was the medium of instruction. The teaching 
of Dutch was optional. In 1904 the Dutch Reformed Church started 
Christian National (i.e. Denominational) Schools, but in March 1905 
an agreement was come to whereby these schools were amalgamated 
with the government schools, and in June 1905 a further agreement 
was arrived at between the government and the leading religious 
denominations. By this arrangement " religious instruction of a 
purely historical character " was given in all government schools 
for two hours every week, and might be given in Dutch. Further, 
ministers of the various denominations might give, on the special 
request of the parents, instruction to the children of their own 
congregations for one hour on one day in each week. The attendance 
at government schools reached in 1908 a total of nearly 20,000, as 
against 8000 in 1898, the highest attendance recorded under re- 
publican government. On the attainment of self-government the 
colonial legislature passed an act (1908) which in respect to primary 
and secondary education made attendance compulsory on all white 
children, the fee system being maintained. English and Dutch 
were, nominally, placed on an equal footing as media of instruction. 
Every school was under the supervision of a committee elected by 
the parents of the children. Schools were grouped in districts, and 
for each district there was a controlling board of nine members, of 
whom five were elected by the committees of the separate schools 
and four appointed by the government. Religious instruction 
could only be given by members of the school staff. Dogmatic 
teaching was prohibited during school hours, except in rural schools 
when parents^ required such teaching to be given. The application 
of the provision as_ to the media of instruction gave rise to much 
friction, the English-speaking community complaining that in- 
struction in Dutch was forced upon their children (see further, 
§ History). Primary education for natives is provided in private 
schools, many of which receive government grants. In 1908 over 
10,000 natives were in attendance at schools. 

Provision is made for secondary education in all the leading 
town_ schools,_ which prepare pupils for matriculation. At Bloem- 
fontein is a high school for girls, the Grey College school for bovs, 
and a normal school for the training of teachers. The Grey Uni- 
versity College is a state institution providing university education 
for the whole province. It is affiliated to the university of the Cape 
of Good Hope. 

History. 

, The country north of the Orange river was first visited by 
Europeans towards the close of the rSth century. At that time 



it was somewhat thinly peopled. The majority of the in- 
habitants appear to have been members of the Bechuana 
division of .the Bantus, but in the valleys of the Establish- 
Orange and Vaal were Korannas and other Hottentots, meat of 
and in the Drakensberg and on the western border lived a Boer 
numbers of Bushmen. Early in the 19th century re P ubl!c - 
Griquas established themselves north of the Orange. Between 
1 8 1 7 and 1 83 1 the count ry was devastated by the chief Mosilikatze 
and his Zulus, and large areas were depopulated. Up to this 
time the few white men who had crossed the Orange had been 
chiefly hunters or missionaries. In 1824 Dutch farmers from 
Cape Colony seeking pasture for their flocks settled in the country. 
They were followed in 1836 by the first parties of the Great Trek. 
These emigrants left Cape Colony from various motives, 'but 
all were animated by the desire to escape from British sovereignty. 
(See South Africa, History; and Cape Colony, History.) 
The leader of the first large party of emigrants was A. H. Potgieter, 
who concluded an agreement with Makwana, the chief of the 
Bataung tribe of Bechuanas, ceding to the farmers the country 
between the Vet and Vaal rivers. The emigrants soon came 
into collision with Mosilikatze, raiding parties of Zulus attack- 
ing Boer hunters who had crossed the Vaal without seeking 
permission from that chieftain. Reprisals followed, and in 
November 1837 Mosilikatze was decisively defeated by the Boers 
and thereupon fled northward. In the meantime another 
party of emigrants had settled at Thaba'nchu, where the 
Wesleyans had a mission station for the Barolong. The emigrants 
were treated with great kindness by Moroko, the chief of that 
tribe, and with the Barolong the Boers maintained uniformly 
friendly relations. In December 1836 the emigrants beyond 
the Orange drew up in general assembly an elementary republican 
form of government. After the defeat of Mosilikatze the town 
of Winburg (so named by the Boers in commemoration of their 
victory) was founded, a volksraad elected, and Piet Retief, 
one of the ablest of the voortrckkers, chosen " governor and 
commandant-general." The emigrants already numbered some 
500 men, besides women and children and many coloured servants. 
Dissensions speedily arose among the emigrants, whose numbers 
were constantly added to, and Retief, Potgieter and other 
leaders crossed the Drakensberg and entered Natal. Those that 
remained were divided into several parties intensely jealous 
of one another. 

Meantime a new power had arisen along the upper Orange 
and in the valley of the Caledon. Moshesh, a Bechuana chief of 
high descent , had welded together a number of scattered 
and broken clans which had sought refuge in that Ea ^ 3 !, 
mountainous region, and had formed of them the wltn 
Basuto nation. In 1833 he had welcomed as workers British, 
among his people a band of French Protestant mission- Basutos 
aries, and as the Boer immigrants began to settle ariquas. 
in his neighbourhood he decided to seek support 
from the British at the Cape. At that time the British govern- 
ment was not prepared to exercise effective control over the 
emigrants. Acting upon the advice of Dr John Philip', the 
superintendent of the London Missionary Society's stations 
in South Africa, a treaty was concluded in 1843 with Moshesh, 
placing him under British protection. A similar treaty was 
made with the Griqua chief, Adam Kok III. . (See Basutoland 
and Griqualand.) By these treaties, which recognized native 
sovereignty over large areas on which Boer farmers were settled, 
it was sought to keep a check on the emigrants and to protect 
both the natives and Cape Colony. Their effect was to precipitate 
collisions between all three parties. The year in which the 
treaty with Moshesh was made several large parties of -Boers 
recrossed the Drakensberg into the country north of the Orange, 
refusing to remain in Natal when it became a British colony. 
During their stay there they had inflicted a severe defeat on the 
Zulus under Dingaan (December 1838), an event which, following 
on the flight of Mosilikatze, greatly strengthened the position 
of Moshesh, whose power became a menace to that of the emigrant 
farmers. Trouble first arose, however, between the Boers and 
the Griquas in the Philippolis district. Many of the white 



ORANGE FREE STATE 



*SS 



farmers in this district, unlike their fellows dwelling farther 
north, were willing to accept British rule, and this fact induced 

Mr Justice Menzies, one of the judges of Cape Colony then on 
circuit at Colesberg, to cross the Orange and proclaim (October 

1842) the country British territory, a proclamation disallowed 
by the governor, Sir George Napier, who, nevertheless, maintained 
that the emigrant farmers were still British subjects. It was 
after this episode that the treaties with Adam Kok and Moshcsh 
were negotiated. The treaties gave great offence to the Boers, 
who refused to acknowledge the sovereignty of the native chiefs. 
The majority of the white farmers in Kok's territory sent a 
deputation to the British commissioner in Natal, Henry Cloctc, 
asking for equal treatment with the Griquas, and expressing the 
desire to come on such terms, under British protection. Shortly 
afterwards hostilities between the farmers and the Griquas 
broke out. British troops were moved up to support the Griquas, 
and after a skirmish at Zwartkopjes (May 2, 1845) a new arrange- 
ment was made between Kok and Sir Peregrine Maitland, then 
governor of Cape Colony, virtually placing the administration 
of his territory in the hands of a British resident, a post filled 
in 1846 by Captain H. D. Warden. The place chosen by Captain 
(afterwards Major) Warden as the seat of his court was known 
as Bloemfontein, and it subsequently became the capital of the 
whole country. 

The volksraad at Winburg during this period continued to 
claim jurisdiction over the Boers living between the Orange 
Aaaexa- an( ^ tne Vaal an< ^ was ln federation with the volksraad 
Hon by at Potchefstroonv which made a similar claim upon the 
Great Boers living north of the Vaal. In 1846 Major Warden 

rta "' occupied Winburg for a short time, and the relations 
between the Boers and the British were in a continual state of 
tension. Many of the farmers deserted Winburg for the Transvaal. 
Sir Harry Smith became governor of the Cape at the end of 1847. 
He recognized the failure of the attempt to govern on the lines 
of the treaties with the Griquas and Basutos, and on the 3rd 
of February 1848 he issued a proclamation declaring British 
sovereignty over the country between the Orange and the 
Vaal eastward to the Drakensberg. The justness of Sir Harry 
Smith's measures and his popularity among the Boers gained 
for his policy considerable support, but the republican party, 
at whose head was Andries Pretorius (q.v.), did not submit 
without a struggle. They were, however, defeated by Sir Harry 
Smith in an engagement at Boomplaats (August 29, 1848). 
Thereupon Pretorius, with those most bitterly opposed to British 
rule, retreated across the Vaal. In March 1849 Major Warden 
was succeeded at Bloemfontein as civil commissioner by Mr 
C. U. Stuart, but he remained British resident until July 1852. 
A nominated legislative council was created, a high court estab- 
lished and other steps taken for the orderly government of the 
country, which wasomcially styled the Orange River Sovereignty. 
In October 1849 Moshesh was induced to sign a new arrangement 
considerably curtailing the boundaries of the Basuto reserve. 
The frontier towards the Sovereignty was thereafter known as the 
Warden line. A little later the reserves of other chieftains were 
precisely defined. The British Resident had, however, no force 
sufficient to maintain his authority, and Moshesh and all the 
neighbouring clans became involved in hostilities with one 
another and with the whites. In 1851 Moshesh joined the 
republican party in the Sovereignty in an invitation to Pretorius 
to recross the Vaal. The intervention of Pretorius resulted 
in the Sand River Convention of 1852, which acknowledged 
the independence, of the Transvaal but left the status of the 
Sovereignty untouched. The British government (the first 
Russell administration), which had. reluctantly agreed to the 
annexation of the country, had, however, already repented its 
decision and had resolved to abandon the Sovereignty. Lord 
Grey (the '3rd earl), secretary of state for the colonies, in a 
despatch to Sir Harry Smith dated the 21st of October 1851, 
declared, " The ultimate abandonment of the Orange Sovereignty 
should be a settled point in our policy." ■ A meeting of representa- 
tives of all European inhabitants; of the Sovereignty, elected 
on manhood suffrage, held at Bloemfontein in June 1852, never- 



theless declared in favour of the retention of British rule. At 
the close of that year a settlement was at length concluded 
with Moshesh, which left, perhaps, thatchiefina strongerposition 
than he had hitherto been. (See Basutoland: History.) There 
had been ministerial changes in England and the ministry then 
in power — that of Lord Aberdeen — adhered to the determina- 
tion to withdraw from the Sovereignty. Sir George Russell 
Clerk was sent out in 1853 as special commissioner "for the 
settling and adjusting of the affairs" of the Sovereignty, and in 
August of that year he summoned a meeting of delegates to 
determine upon a form of self-government. At that time there 
were some 15,000 whites in the country, many of them recent 
emigrants from Cape Colony. There were among them numbers 
of farmers and tradesmen of British blood. The majority of 
the whites still wished for the continuance of British rule provided 
that it was effective and the country guarded against its enemies. 
The representations of their delegates, who drew up a proposed 
constitution retaining British control, were unavailing. Sir 
George Clerk announced that, as the elected delegates were 
unwilling to take steps to form an independent govern- /d d , 
ment, he would enter into negotiations with other ence 
persons. "And then, " writes Dr Theal, "was seen forced on 
the strange spectacle of an English commissioner ihe Boers - 
addressing men who wished to be free of British control 
as the friendly and well-disposed inhabitants, while for 
those who desired to remain British subjects and who claimed 
that protection to which they believed themselves entitled 
he had no sympathizing word." While the elected delegates 
sent two members to England to try and induce the government 
to alter their decision Sir George Clerk speedily came to terms 
with a committee formed by the republican party and presided 
over by Mr J. H. Hoffman. Even before this committee met 
a royal proclamation had been signed (January 30, 1854) 
"abandoning and renouncing all dominion" in the Sovereignty. 
A convention recognizing the independence of the country 
was signed at Bloemfontein on the 23rd of February by Sir 
George Clerk and the republican committee, and on the nth 
of March the Boer government assumed office and the republican 
flag was hoisted. Five days later the representatives of the 
elected delegates had an interview in London with the colonial 
secretary, the duke of Newcastle, who informed them that it 
was now too late to discuss the. question of the retention of 
British rule. The colonial secretary added that it was impossible 
for England to supply troops to constantly advancing outposts, 
"especially as Cape Town and the port of Table Bay were all 
she really required in South Africa." In withdrawing from the 
Sovereignty the British government declared that it had "no 
alliance with any native chief or tribes to the northward of the 
Orange River with the exception of the Griqua chief Captain 
Adam Kok." Kok was not formidable in a military sense, 
nor could he prevent individual Griquas from alienating their 
lands. Eventually, in 1861, he sold his sovereign rights to the 
Free State for £4000 and removed with his followers to the 
district now known as Griqualand East. (F. R. C.) 

On the abandonment of British rule representatives of the 
people were elected and met at Bloemfontein on the 28th of 
March 1854, and between that date and the 18th 
of April were engaged in framing a constitution. The caoruie. 
country was declared a republic and named the Orange 
Free State. All 'persons of European blood possessing a six 
months' residential qualification were to be granted full burgher 
rights. The sole legislative authority was vested in a single 
popularly elected chamber - styled the volksraad. Executive 
authority was entrusted to a president elected by the burghers 
from a list submitted by the volksraad. The president was to 
be assisted by an executive council, was to hold office for five 
years and was eligible for re-election. The constitution was 
subsequently modified but remained of a liberal character. A 
residence of five years in the country was required before aliens 
could become naturalized. The first president was Mr Hoffman, 
but he was accused of being too complaisant towards Moshesh and 
resigned, being succeeded in iSss.by Mr J. N. Boshof, one of 



i 5 6 



ORANGE FREE STATE 



the voortrekkers, who had previously taken an active part 
in the affairs of Natal. 

Distracted among themselves, with the formidable Basuto 
power on their southern and eastern flank, the troubles of the 
A Traas- infant state were speedily added to by the action of 
vaalrald the Transvaal Boers. Marthinus Pretorius, who had 
into the succeeded to his father's position as commandant- 
free State. genera j f Potchefstroom, wished to bring about a 
confederation between the two Boer states. Peaceful overtures 
from Pretorius were declined, and some of his partisans in the 
Free State were accused of treason (February 1857). Thereupon 
Pretorius, aided by Paul Kruger, conducted a raid into the Free 
State territory. On learning of the invasion President Boshof 
proclaimed martial law throughout the country. The majority 
of the burghers rallied to his support, and on the 25th of May 
the two opposing forces faced one another on the banks of the 
Rhenoster. President Boshof not only got together some 
eight hundred men within the Free State, but he received offers 
of support from Commandant Schoeman, the Transvaal leader 
in the Zoutpansberg district and from Commandant Joubert of 
Lydenburg. Pretorius and Kruger, realizing that they would have 
to sustain attack from both north and south, abandoned their 
enterprise. Their force, too, only amounted to some three 
hundred. Kruger came to Boshof's camp with a flag of truce, 
the " army " of Pretorius returned north and on the 2nd of June 
a treaty of peace was signed, each state acknowledging the 
absolute independence of the other. The conduct of Pretorius 
was stigmatized as " blameworthy. " Several of the malcontents 
in the Free State who had joined Pretorius permanently settled 
in the Transvaal, and other Free Staters who had been guilty 
of high treason were arrested and punished. This experience 
did not, however, heal the party strife within the Free State. 
In consequence of the dissensions among the burghers President 
Boshof tendered his resignation in February 1858, but was for 
a time induced to remain in office. The difficulties of the state 
were at that time (1858) so great that the volksraad in December 
of that year passed a resolution in favour of confederation with 
the Cape Colony. This proposition received the strong support 
of Sir George Grey, then governor of Cape Colony, but his view 
did not commend itself to the British government, and was not 
adopted (see South Africa: History). In the same year the 
disputes between the Basutos and the Boers culminated in open 
war. Both parties laid claims to land beyond the Warden line, 
and each party had taken possession of what it could, the 
Basutos being also expert cattle-lifters. In the war the advantage 
rested with the Basutos; thereupon the Free State appealed to 
Sir George Grey, who induced Moshesh to come to terms. On 
the 15th of October 185S a treaty was signed defining anew the 
boundary. The peace was nominal only, while the burghers 
were also involved in disputes with other tribes. Mr. Boshof 
again tendered his resignation (February 1859) and retired to 
Natal. Many of the burghers would have at this time welcomed 
union with the Transvaal, but learning from Sir George Grey 
that such a union would nullify the conventions of 1852 and 1854 
and necessitate the reconsideration of Great Britain's policy 
towards the native tribes north of the Orange and Vaal rivers, 
the project dropped. Commandant Pretorius was, however, 
elected president in place of Mr Boshof. Though unable to 
effect a durable peace with the Basutos, or to realize his ambition 
for the creation of one powerful Boer republic, Pretorius saw 
the Free State begin to grow in strength. The fertile district of 
Bethulie as well as Adam Kok's territory was acquired, and there 
was a considerable increase in the white population. The 
burghers generally, however, had not learned the need of dis- 
cipline, of confidence in their elected rulers, or that to carry on 
a government taxes must be levied. Wearied like Mr Boshof of 
a thankless task, and more interested in affairs in the Transvaal 
than in those of the Free State, Pretorius resigned the presidency 
in 1S63, and after an interval of seven months Mr (afterwards Sir) 
John Henry Brand (q.v.), an advocate at the Cape bar, was 
elected president. He assumed office in February 1864. His 
election proved a turning-point in the history of the country, 



which, under his beneficent and tactful guidance, became peaceful 
and prosperous and, in some respects, a model state. But 
before peace could be established an end had to be made > 
of the difficulties with the Basutos. Moshesh continued • ," d ^ 

,i a elected 

to menace the Free State border. Attempts at accom- President. 
modation made by the governor of Cape Colony (Sir 
Philip Wodehouse) failed, and war between the Free State and 
Moshesh was renewed in 1865. The Boers gained considerable 
successes, and this induced Moshesh to sue for peace. The terms 
exacted were, however, too harsh for a nation yet unbroken 
to accept permanently. A treaty was signed at Thaba Bosigo in 
April 1866, but war again broke out in 1867, and the Free State 
attracted to its side a large number of adventurers from all parts 
of South Africa. The burghers thus reinforced gained at length 
a decisive victory over their great antagonist, every stronghold 
in Basutoland save Thaba Bosigo being stormed. Moshesh now 
turned in earnest to Sir Philip Wodehouse for preservation. His 
prayer was heeded, and in 1868 he and his country were taken 
under British protection. Thus the thirty years' strife between 
the Basutos and the Boers came to an end. The settlement 
intervention of the governor of Cape Colony led to the of the 
conclusion of the treaty of AH wal North (Feb. 12,1869), Basuto 
which defined the borders between the Orange Free troubles - 
State and Basutoland. The country lying to the north of the 
Orange river and west of the Caledon, formerly apart of Basuto- 
land, was ceded to the Free State (see Basutoland). This 
country, some hundred miles long and nearly thirty wide, is a 
fertile stretch of agricultural land on the lower slopes of the 
Maluti mountains. It lies at an altitude of nearly 6000 ft., and 
is well watered by the Caledon and its tributaries. It has ever 
since been known as the Conquered Territory, and it forms to-day 
one of the richest corn-growing districts in South Africa. A year 
after the addition of the Conquered Territory to the state another 
boundary dispute was settled by the arbitration of Mr Keate, 
lieutenant-governor of Natal. By the Sand River Convention 
independence had been granted to the Boers living " north of the 
Vaal," and the dispute turned on the question as to what stream 
constituted the true upper course of that river.' Mr Keate 
decided (Feb. 19, 1870) against the Free State view and fixed the 
Klip river as the dividing line, the Transvaal thus securing the 
Wakkerstroom and adjacent districts. 

The Basutoland difficulties were no sooner arranged than the 
Free Staters found themselves confronted with a serious difficulty 
on their western border. In the years 1870-1871 a D i scovery 
large number of diggers had settled on the diamond ofthe 
fields near the junction of the Vaal and Orange rivers, fcimberley 
which were situated in part on land claimed by the p.' 3 .^*""* 
Griqua chief Nicholas Waterboer and by the Free State. 
The Free State established a temporary government over the 
diamond fields, but the administration of this body was satis- 
factory neither to the Free State nor to the diggers. At this' 
juncture Waterboer offered to place the territory under the 
administration of Queen Victoria. The offer was accepted, and 
on the 27th of October 1871 the district, together with some 
adjacent territory to which the Transvaal had laid claim, was 
proclaimed, under the name of Griqualand West, British territory. 
Waterboer's claims were based on the treaty concluded by his 
father with the British in 1834, and on various arrangements with 
the Kok chiefs; the Free State based its claim on its purchase 
of Adam Kok's sovereign rights and on long occupation. The 
difference between proprietorship and sovereignty was confused 
or ignored. That Waterboer exercised no authority in the dis- 
puted district was admitted. When the British annexation took 
place a party in the volksraad wished to go to war with Britain, 
but the wiser counsels of President Brand prevailed. The Free 
State, however, did not abandon its claims. The matter involved 
no little irritation between the parties concerned until July 1876. 
It was then disposed of by the 4th earl of Carnarvon, at that time 
secretary of state for the colonies, who granted to the Free State 
£90,000 " in full satisfaction of all claims which it considers it 
may possess to Griqualand West." Lord Carnarvon declined 
to entertain the proposal made by Mr Brand that the territory 



ORANGE FREE STATE 



*57 



should be given up by Great Britain. One thing at least is 
certain with regard to the diamond fields — they were the means 
of restoring the credit and prosperity of the Free State. In the 
opinion, moreover, of Dr Theal, who has written the history of the 
Boer Republics and has been a consistent supporter of the Boers, 
the annexation of Griqualand West was probably in the best 
interests of the Free State. " There was," he states, " no 
alternative from British sovereignty other than an independent 
diamond field republic." 

At this time, largely owing to the exhausting struggle with the 
Basutos, the Free State Boers, like their Transvaal neighbours, 
had drifted into financial straits. A paper currency had been 
instituted, and the notes — currently known as " bluebacks " — • 
soon dropped to less than half their nominal value. Commerce 
was largely carried on by barter, and many cases of bankruptcy 
occurred in the state. But as British annexation in 1877 saved 
the Transvaal from bankruptcy, so did the influx of British and 
other immigrants to the diamond fields, in the early 'seventies, 
restore public credit and individual prosperity to the Boers of 
the Free State. The diamond fields offered a ready market for 
stock and other agricultural produce. Money flowed into the 
pockets of the farmers. Public credit was restored. " Blue- 
backs " recovered par value, and were called in and redeemed by 
the government. Valuable diamond mines were also discovered 
within the Free State, of which the one at Jagersfontein is the 
richest. Capital from Kimberley and London was soon provided 
with which to work them. 

The relations between the British and the Free State, after 
the question of the boundary was once settled, remained perfectly 
Cordial amicable down to the outbreak of the Boer War in 
relations 1899. From 1 870 onward the history of the state 
with Great was onc f quiet, steady progress. At the time of the 
Britain. ^ I5 ^ annexation of the Transvaal the Free State 
declined Lord Carnarvon's invitation to federate with the other 
South African communities. In 18S0, when a rising of the 
Boers in the Transvaal was threatening, President Brand showed 
every desire to avert the conflict. He suggested that Sir Henry 
deVilliers, Chief Justice. of Cape Colony, should be sent into the 
Transvaal to endeavour to gauge the true state of affairs in that 
country. This suggestion was not acted upon, but when war 
broke out in the Transvaal Brand declined to take any part in 
the struggle. In spite of the neutral attitude taken by their 
government a number of the Free State Boers, living in the 
northern part of the country, went to the Transvaal and joined 
their brethren then in arms against the British. This fact was 
not allowed to influence the friendly relations between the Free 
State and Great Britain. In 1888 Sir John Brand died. In him 
the Boers, not only in the Free State but in the whole of South 
Africa, lost one of the most enlightened and most upright rulers 
and leaders they have ever had. He realized the. disinterested 
aims pursued by the British government, without always 
approving its methods. Though he had thrown the weight of his 
influence against Lord Carnarvon's federation scheme Brand 
disapproved racial rivalries. 

During the period of Brand's presidency a great change, both 
political and economic, had come over South Africa. The re- 
newal of the policy of British expansion had been answered by 
the formation of the Afrikander Bond, which represented the 
racial aspirations of the Dutch-speaking people, and had active 
branches in the Free State. This alteration in the political 
outlook was accompanied, and in part occasioned, by economic 
changes of great significance. The development of the diamond 
mines and of the gold and coal industries — of which Brand saw 
the beginning — had far-reaching consequences, bringing the Boer 
republics into vital contact with the new industrial era. The 
Free Staters, under Brand's rule, had shown considerable ability 
to adapt their policy to meet the altered situation. In 18S9 an 
agreement was come to between the Free State and the Cape 
Colony government, whereby the latter were empowered to 
extend, at their own cost, their railway system to Bloemfontein. 
The Free State retained the right to purchase this extension 
at cost -price, a right they exercised after the Jameson Raid. 



Having accepted the assistance of the Cape government in con- 
structing its railway, the state also in 1889 entered into a Customs 
Union Convention with them. The convention was the outcome 
of a conference held at Cape Town in 1888, at which delegates 
from Natal, the Free State and the Colony attended. Natal at 
this time had not seen its way to entering the Customs Union, 
but did so at a later date. 

In January 1889 Mr F. W. Reitz was elected president of the 
Free State. His accession to the presidency marked the begin- 
ning of a new and disastrous line of policy in the 
external affairs of the country. Mr Reitz had no All . la h " c f 
sooner got into office than a meeting was arranged with Transvaal. 
Mr Kruger, president of the Transvaal, at which various 
terms of an agreement dealing with the railways, terms of a 
treaty of amity and commerce and what was called a political 
treaty, were discussed and decided upon. The political treaty 
referred in general terms to a federal union between the Transvaal 
and the Free State, and bound each of them to help the other, 
whenever the independence of cither should be assailed or 
threatened from without, unless the state so called upon for 
assistance should be able to show the injustice of the cause of 
quarrel in which the other state had engaged. While thus 
committed to a dangerous alliance with its northern neighbour 
no change was made in internal administration. The Free State, 
in fact, from its geographical position reaped the benefits without 
incurring the anxieties consequent on the settlement of a large 
uillander population on the Rand. The state, however, became 
increasingly identified with the reactionary party in the Trans- 
vaal. In 1895 the volksraad passed a resolution, in which they 
declared their readiness to entertain a proposition from the 
Transvaal in favour of some form of federal union. In the same 
year Mr Reitz retired from the presidency of the Free State, and 
was succeeded in February 1896 by M. T. Steyn (q.v.), a judge 
of the High Court. In 1896 President Steyn visited Pretoria, 
where he received an ovation as the probable future president 
of the two Republics. A further offensive and defensive alliance 
between the two Republics was then entered into, under which 
tbe Free State took up arms on the outbreak of hostilities with 
the Transvaal in 1899. 

In 1897 President Kruger, bent on still further cementing the 
union with the Free State, visited Bloemfontein. It was on this 
occasion that President Kruger, referring to the London Conven- 
tion, spoke of Queen Victoria as a kwaaje Vroitw, an expression 
which caused a good deal of offence in England at the time, hut 
which, to any one familiar with the homely phraseology of the 
Boers, obviously was not meant by President Kruger as insulting. 

In order to understand the attitude which the Free State took 
at this time in relation to the Transvaal, it is necessary to review 
the history of Mr Reitz from an earlier date. Pre- 
viously to his becoming president of the Free State T Jl*.. 
he had acted as its Chief Justice, and still earlier in laeal% 
life had practised as an advocate in Cape Colony. In 
1 881 Mr Reitz had, in conjunction with Mr Steyn, come under 
the influence of a clever German named Borckenhagen, the 
editor of the Bloemfontein Express. These three men were 
principally responsible for the formation of the Afrikander Bond 
(see Cape Colony: History). From 1881 onwards they cherished 
the idea of an independent South Africa. Brand had been far 
too sagacious to be led away by this pseudo-nationalist dream, 
and did his utmost to discountenance the Bond. At the same 
time his policy was guided by a sincere patriotism, which looked 
to the true prosperity of the Free State as well as to that of the 
whole of South Africa. From his death may be dated the dis- 
astrous line of policy which led to the extinction of the state as 
a republic. The one prominent member of the volksraad who 
inherited the traditions and enlightened views of President 
Brand was Mr (Afterwards Sir) John G. Fraser. Mr Fraser, 
who was an unsuccessful candidate for the presidency in 1896, 
was the son of a Presbyterian minister, who had acted as a 
minister in the Dutch Reformed Church since the middle of the 
century. He grew up in the country of his father's adoption, 
and he consistently warned the Free State of the inevitable 



i 5 8 



ORANGE FREE STATE 



result — the loss of independence — which must follow their 
mischievous policy in being led by the Transvaal. The mass of 
Boers in the Free State, deluded by a belief in Great Britain's 
weakness, paid no heed to his remonstrances. Mr Fraser lived 
to see the fulfilment of these prophecies. After the British 
occupation of Bloemfontein he cast in his lot with the Imperial 
Government, realizing that it had fought for those very principles 
which President Brand and he had laboured for in bygone years. 
On entering Bloemfontein in 1900 the British obtained posses- 
sion of certain state papers which contained records of negotiations 
between the Transvaal and the Orange Free State. The evidence 
contained in these state records so clearly marks the difference 
between the policy of Mr Kruger and the pacific, commercial 
policy of President Brand and his followers, that the documents 
call for careful consideration. From these papers it was found 
that, in 1S87, two secret conferences had taken place between 
representatives of the Republics, dealing with various political 
and economical questions. At the first of these conferences, 
held in Pretoria, the object of the Free State deputies were to 
arrange a general treaty of amity and commerce which would 
knit the states more closely together, and to come to some agree- 
ment with reference to the scheme for building a railway across 
the Free State from the Cape, to connect with a farther extension 
in the Transvaal to Pretoria. The deputation also urged the 
Transvaal to join the South African Customs Union. Both of 
these suggestions were strongly disapproved by Mr Kruger, 
inasmuch as they meant knitting together the Boer republics and 
the British possessions, instead of merely bringing the Free 
State into completer dependence on the Transvaal. From the 
minutes of this conference it is clear that the two deputations 
were practically at cross purposes. In the minds of President 
Kruger and his immediate followers one idea was dominant, 
that of ousting and keeping out at all costs British influence and 
interests. On the part of the Free State there was obviously 
a genuine desire to further the best interests of the state, to- 
gether with the general prosperity of the whole of South Africa. 
In President Kruger's eyes British trade meant ruin; he desired 
to keep it out of the Republic at all costs, and he begged the 
Free State to delay the construction of their railway until the 
Delagoa Bay line was completed. He said, " Delagoa is a life 
or death question for us. Help us: if you hook on to the Colony 
you cut our throat. . . . How can our state exist without the 
Delagoa railway ? Keep free." With regard to the Customs 
Union, President Kruger was equally emphatic; he begged the 
Free State to steer clear of it. " Customs Unions," he said, " are 
made between equal states with equal access to harbours. We 
are striving to settle the question of our own harbour peacefully. 
The English will only use their position to swindle the Transvaal 
of its proper receipts." In response, Mr Fraser, one of the 
Free State delegates, remarked that a harbour requires forts, 
soldiers, ships and sailors to man them, or else it would be at the 
mercy of the first gunboat that happened to assail it. President 
Kruger replied that once the Transvaal had a harbour foreign 
powers would intervene. Mr Wolmarans was as emphatic as 
President Kruger. <• " Wait a few years. . . . You know our 
secret policy. We cannot treat the [Cape] Colony as we would 
treat you. The Colony would destroy us. It is not the Dutch 
there we are fighting against. Time shall show what we mean to 
do with them; for the present we must keep them off." 

The result of this conference was a secret session of the 
Transvaal volksraad and the proposition of a secret treaty 
with the Free State, by which each state should bind 
itself not to build railways to its frontier without the 
consent of the other, the eastern and northern frontiers 
of the Transvaal being excepted. The railway from 
Pretoria to Bloemfontein was to be proceeded with; neither 
party was to enter the Customs Union without the consent 
of the other. The Transvaal was to pay £20,000 annually 
to the Free State for loss incurred for not having the railway 
to Cape Colony. Such a treaty as the one proposed would 
simply have enslaved the Free State to the Transvaal, and it 
was rejected by the Free State volksraad. President Kruger 



Anti- 
British 
designs. 



determined on a still more active measure, and proceeded with 
Dr Leyds to interview President Brand at Bloemfontein. A 
series of meetings took place in October of the same year 
(1887). President Brand opened the proceedings by proposing 
a treaty of friendship and free trade between the two 
Republics, in which a number of useful and thoroughly prac- 
tical provisions were set forth. President Kruger, however, soon 
brushed these propositions aside, and responded by stating that, 
in consideration of the common enemy and the dangers which 
threatened the Republic, an offensive and defensive alliance 
must be preliminary to any closer union. To this Brand rejoined 
that, as far as the offensive was concerned, he did not desire to 
be a party to attacking any one, and as for the defensive, where 
was the pressing danger of the enemy which Kruger feared ? 
The Free State was on terms of friendship with its neighbours, 
nor (added Brand) would the Transvaal have need for such an 
alliance as the one proposed if its policy would only remain peace- 
ful and conciliatory. At a later date in the conference (see 
Transvaal) President Brand apparently changed his policy, 
and himself drafted a constitution resembling that of the United 
States. This constitution appears to have been modelled on 
terms a great deal too liberal and enlightened to please Mr Kruger, 
whose one idea was to have at his command the armed forces 
of the Free State when he should require them, and who pressed 
for an offensive and defensive alliance. Brand refused to allow 
the Free State to be committed to a suicidal treaty, or dragged 
into any wild policy which the Transvaal might deem it ex- 
pedient to adopt. The result of the whole conference was that 
Kruger returned to Pretoria completely baffled, and for a time 
the Free State was saved from being a party to the fatal policy 
into which others subsequently drew it. Independent power 
of action was retained by Erand for the Free State in both 
the railway and Customs Union questions. 

After Sir John Brand's death, as already stated, a series of 
agreements and measures gradually subordinated Free State 
interests to the mistaken ambition and narrow views of the 
Transvaal. The influence which the Kruger party had obtained 
in the Free State was evidenced by the presidential election in 
1896, when Mr Steyn received forty-one votes against nineteen 
cast for Mr Fraser. That this election should have taken place 
immediately after the Jameson Raid probably increased Mr 
Steyn's majority. Underlying the new policy adopted by the Free 
State was the belief held, if not by President Steyn himself, at 
least by his followers, that the two republics combined would 
be more than a match for the power of Great Britain should 
hostilities occur. 

In December 1897 the Free State revised its constitution in 
reference to the franchise law, and the period of residence 
necessary to obtain naturalization was reduced from five to three 
years. The oath of allegiance to tbe state was alone required, and 
no renunciation of nationality was insisted upon. In 1898 the 
Free State also acquiesced in the new convention arranged with 
regard to the Customs Union between tbe Cape Colony, Natal, 
Basutoland and the Bechuanaland Protectorate. These measures 
suggest that a slight reaction against the extreme policy of 
President Kruger had set in. But events were moving rapidly 
in the Transvaal, and matters bad proceeded too far for the 
Free State to turn back. In May 1S99 President Steyn suggested 
the conference at Bloemfontein between Presidtnt Kruger and 
Sir Alfred Milner, but this act, if it expressed a genuine desire 
for reconciliation, was too late. President Kruger had got the 
Free State ensnared in his meshes. The Free Staters were 
practically bound, under the offensive and defensive alliance, in 
case hostilities arose with Great Britain, either to denounce the 
policy to which they had so unwisely been secretly party, or to 
throw in their lot with the Transvaal. War occurred, and they 
accepted the inevitable consequence. For President 
Steyn and the Free State of 1S99, in the light of the 
negotiations we have recorded, neutrality was impossible. A 
resolution was passed by the volksraad on the 27th of September 
declaring that the state would observe its obligations to the 
Transvaal whatever might happen. Before war had actually 



ORANGE FREE STATE 



*59 



broken out the Free State began to expel British subjects, and 
the very first act of war was committed by Free State Boers, 
who, on the nth of October, seized a train upon the border 
belonging to Natal. The events of the war are given elsewhere 
(see Transvaal: History). 

After the surrender of Cronje at Paardcberg on the 27th of 
February 1900 Bloemfontein was occupied by the British troops 

under Lord Roberts (March 13,) and on the 

11 28th of May a proclamation was issued annexing the 

tration. Free State to the British dominions under the title 

of Orange River Colony. For nearly two years longer 
the burghers kept the field under Christian de Wet (q.v.), and 
other leaders, but by the articles of peace signed on the 31st 
of May 1902 British sovereignty was acknowledged. A civil 
administration of the colony was established early in igor with 
Sir Alfred Milner as governor. Major (afterwards Sir) H. J. 
Goold-Adams was appointed lieutenant-governor, Milner being 
governor also of the Transvaal, which country claimed most 
of his attention. A nominated legislative council was established 
in June 1902 of wbich Sir John Fraser and a number of other 
prominent ex-burghers became unofficial members. The railways 
and constabulary of the two colonies were (1903) placed under 
an inter-colonial council; active measures were taken for the 
repatriation of the prisoners of war and the residents in the 
concentration camps, and in every direction vigorous and 
successful efforts were made to repair the ravages of the war. 
Over £4,000,000 was spent by the British government in Orange 
Colony alone on these objects. At the same time efforts were 
made, with a fair measure of success, to strengthen the British 
element in the country by means of land settlements. Special 
attention was also devoted to the development of the resources 
of the country by building new lines of railway traversing the 
fertile south-eastern districts and connecting Bloemfontein 
with Natal and with Kimberley. The educational system was 
reorganized and greatly improved. 

To a certain extent the leading ex-burghers co-operated with 
the administration in the work of reconstruction. The loss 

of their independence was, however, felt bitterly by the 
Oranje Boers, and the attitude assumed by the majority was 
formed. highly critical of the work of the government. Having 

recovered from the worst effects of the war the Boers, 
both in the Transvaal and Orange Colony, began in 1904 to make 
organized efforts to regain their political ascendancy, and to 
bring pressure on the government in respect to compensation, 
repatriation, the position of the Dutch language, education and 
other subjects on which they alleged unfair treatment. This 
agitation, as far as the Orange River Colony was concerned, 
coincided with the return to South Africa of ex-President Steyn. 
Mr Steyn had gone to Europe at the close of the war and did 
not take the oath of allegiance to the British Crown until the 
autumn of 1904. A congress of ex-burghers was held at Brand- 
fort in December 1904, when among other resolutions passed 
was one demanding the grant of self-government to the colony. 
This was followed in July 1905 by a conference at Bloemfontein, 
when it was resolved to form a national union. This organization, 
known as the Oranjie Unie, was formally constituted in May 
1906, but had been in existence for some months previously. 
A similar organization, called Het Volk, had been formed by the 
Transvaal Boers in January 1905. Both unions had constitutions 
almost identical with that of the Afrikander Bond, and their 
aims were similar — to secure the triumph of Boer ideals in state 
and society. Of the Oranjie Unie Mr Abraham Fischer became 
chairman, other prominent members being Messrs Hertzog, 
C. de Wet and Steyn. Mr Fischer, the leader of the party, was 
one of the ablest statesmen on the Boer side in the pre-war 
period. He was originally an attorney in Cape Colony and had 
joined the Free State bar in 1875. He became vice-president 
of the volksraad in 1893 and a member of the executive council 
of the state in 1896. He was one of the most trusted counsellors 
of Presidents Steyn and Kruger, and the ultimatum sent to the 
British on the eve of hostilities was recast by him. While the 
war was in progress he went to Europe to seek support for 



the Boer cause. He returned to South Africa early in 1903 
and was admitted to the bar of the Orange Colony. 

A counter-organization was formed by the ex-burghers who 
had whole-heartedly accepted the new order of things. They 
took the title of the Constitutional party, and Sir John Fraser 
was chosen as chairman. In Bloemfontein the Constitutionalists 
had a strong following; elsewhere their supporters were numeri- 
cally weak. It was noteworthy that the programmes of the two 
parties were very similar, the real difference between them being 
the attitude with which they regarded the British connexion. 
While the ideal of the Unie was an Afrikander state, the Con- 
stitutionalists desired the perfect equality of both white races. 

The advent of a Liberal administration under Sir Henry 
Campbell-Banncrman in Great Britain in December 1905 
completely altered the political situation in the late Rem 
Boer states. The previous (Conservative) government sponsible 
had in March 1905 made public a form of representative govem- 
government, intended to lead up to self-government meaU 
for the Transvaal, and had intimated that a similar constitution 
would be subsequently conferred on the Orange Colony. The 
Campbell-Bannerman administration decided to do without 
this intermediary step in both colonies. In April 1906 a com- 
mittee, under the chairmanship of Sir J. West-Ridgeway, was 
sent to South Africa to inquire into and report upon various 
questions regarding the basis of the franchise, single-member 
constituencies and kindred matters. There was in the Orange 
Colony a considerable body of opinion that the party system of 
government should be avoided, and that the executive should 
consist of three members elected by the single representative 
chamber it was desired to obtain, and three members nominated 
by the governor — in short, what was desired was a restoration 
as far as possible of the old Free State constitution. These views 
were laid before the committee on their visit to Bloemfontein 
in June 1906. When, however, the outline of the new constitu- 
tion was made public in December 1906 it was found that the 
British government had decided on a party government plan 
which would have the inevitable and fully foreseen effect of 
placing the country in the power of the Boer majority. It was 
not until the 1st of July 1907 that the letters-patent conferring 
self-government on the colony were promulgated, the election 
for the legislative assembly taking place in November following. 
They resulted in the return of 29 members of the Oranjie Unie, 
S Constitutionalists and 4 Independents. The Constitutionalists 
won four of the five scats allotted to Bloemfontein, Sir John 
Fraser being among those returned. Following the elections 
the governor, Sir Hamilton Goold-Adams, sent for Mr Fischer, 
who formed a ministry, his colleagues being ex-General J.B.M. 
Hertzog, attorney-general and director of education; Dr A. E. W. 
Ramsbottom, treasurer; Christian de Wet, minister of agri- 
culture, and Mr C. H. Wessels, minister of pubh'c works, &c. 
Mr Fischer, besides the premiership, held the portfolio of colonial 
secretary. The new ministry took office on the 27th of Novemher. 
Of the members of the first legislative council five were supporters 
of the Oranjie Unie and five were regarded as Constitutionalists, 
the eleventh member holding the balance. 

The responsible government entered upon its task in favourable 
conditions.. Despite the many obstacles it had to meet, including 
drought, commercial depression and the hostility of many of 
the ex-burghers, the crown colony administration had achieved 
remarkable results. During each of its seven years of existence 
there had been a surplus of revenue over expenditure, despite 
the fact that taxation had not materially increased, save in 
respect to mining, which did not affect the general population. 
Custom duties were about the same as in 189S, but railway 
rates were materially lower and many new lines had been opened. 
The educational system had been placed on a sound basis. 
Departments of agriculture, mining, health and native affairs 
had been organized, and the civil service rendered thoroughly 
efficient. A substantial cash balance was left in the treasury 
for the use of the new government. Over 700 families had been 
settled on the land and thus an additional source of strength 
provided for the state. The first parliament under the new 



i6o 



ORANGEMEN— ORANIENBAUM 



constitution met on the iSth of December 1907, when it was 
announced that the Transvaal and Orange Colony had each 
given notice of the termination of the intercolonial council 
with the intention of each colony to gain individual control 
of its railways and constabulary. 

After a two days' session the legislature was prorogued until 
May 1008, when the chief measure submitted by the government 

was an education bill designed to foster the knowledge 
unities- of the Dutch language. This measure became law 
tioa (see above § Education). Parliament also passed a 

move- measure granting ex-President Steyn a pension of 

£1000 a year and ex-President Reitz a pension of 
£500. In view of the dissolution of the intercolonial council 
a convention was signed at Pretoria on the 29th of May which 
made provision for the division of the common property, rights 
and liabilities of the Orange Colony and the Transvaal in respect 
to the railways and constabulary, and established for four 
years a joint board to continue the administration of the railway 
systems of the two colonies. The Orange Colony assumed 
responsibility for £7,700,000 of the guaranteed loan of £35,000,000 
of 1903 (see Transvaal: Finance). The colony took part 
during this month in an inter-state conference which met at 
Pretoria and Cape Town, and determined to renew the existing 
customs convention and to make no alteration in railway rates. 
These decisions were the result of an agreement to bring before 
the parliaments of the various colonies a resolution advocating 
the closer union of the South African states and the appointment 
of delegates to a national convention to frame a draft constitution. 
In this convention Mr Steyn took a leading and conciliatory 
part, and subsequently the Orange River legislature agreed to 
the terms drawn up by the convention for the unification of the 
four self-governing colonies. Under the imperial act by which 
unification was established (May 31, 1910) the colony entered 
the union under the style of the Free State Province. (For the 
union movement see South Africa: History.) Mr Fischer and 
General Hertzog became members of the first union ministry 
while Dr A. E. W. Ramsbottom, formerly colonial treasurer, 
became the first administrator of the Free State as a province 
of the union. 

The period during which the province had been a self-governing 
colony had been one of steady progress in most directions, 

but was greatly embittered by the educational policy 
™"<™" ° Pursued by General Hertzog. From the date of the 

passing of the education act in the middle of 1908 

until the absorption of the colony into the union, 
General Hertzog so administered the provisions of the act 
regarding the media of instruction as to compel every Euro- 
pean child to receive instruction in every subject partly in the 
medium of Dutch. This policy of compulsory bilingualism was 
persisted in despite the vehement protests of the English-speaking 
community, and of the desire of many Dutch burghers that the 
medium of instruction for their children should be English. 
Attempts to adjust the difficulty were made and a conference 
on the subject was held at Bloemfontein in November 1909. 
It was fruitless, and in March 1910 Mr Hugh Gunn (director of 
education since 1904) resigned. 1 The action of General Hertzog 
had the support of his colleagues and of Mr Steyn and kept 
alive the racial spirit. Failing to obtain redress the English- 
speaking section of the community proceeded to open separate 
schools, the terms of the act of union leaving the manage- 
ment of elementary education to the provincial council. 

Authorities. — A. H. Keane, The Boer States: Land and People 
(1900) ; The Report on the 1904 census (Bloemfontein, 1906) ;_ The 
Statistical Year Book (Bloemfontein) and other official publications ; 
VV. S. Johnson, Orangia (1906), a good elementary geography; 
Precis of Information. Orange Free State and Griqualand West 
(War Office, 1878); D. Aitton, " De Oranje Vrijstaat," Tijds. K. 
Ned. Aard. Genoots. Amsterdam, vol. xvii. (1900); H. Kloessel, Die 
Siidafrikanischen Republiken (Leipzig, 1888). For a good early 
account of the country see Sir W. Cornwallis Harris, Narrative of 
an Expedition into Southern Africa during 1836-37 (Bombay, 
1838). For history see, in addition to the British, Cape and Orange 

1 See Mr Gunn's pamphlet, The Language Question in the Orange 
River Colony, iqo2-iqio. 



cootrQ' 
vecsy. 



Free State parliamentary papers, H. Deherain, L'Expansion des 
Boers au xix' siecle (Paris, 1905) ; G. McCall Theal, History of 
South Africa since 1JQ5 [up to 1872], vols, ii., iii. and iv. (1908 ed:), 
and A. Wilmot's Life and Times of Sir R. Southey (1904). G. B: 
Beak's The Aftermath a} War (1906) is an account of the repatriation 
work in the Orange River Colony. A. C. Murray and R. Cannon, 
Map of the Orange River Colony (6 sheets: 4 m. to I in., 1908). The 
place of publication, unless otherwise stated, is London. Consult also 
the bibliographies under Griqualand, Transvaal and South 
Africa. (A. P. H.; F. R. C.) 

ORANGEMEN, members of the Orange Society, an association 
of Irish Protestants, originating and chiefly flourishing in 
Ulster, but with ramifications in other parts of the United 
Kingdom, and in the British colonies. Orangemen derive their 
name from King William III. (Prince of Orange). They are 
enrolled in lodges in the ordinary form of a secret society. Their 
toasts, about which there is no concealment, indicate the 
spirit of the Orangemen. The commonest form is " the glorious, 
pious and immortal memory of the great and good King William, 
who saved us from popery, slavery, knavery, brass money 
and wooden shoes," with grotesque or truculent additions 
according to the orator's taste. The brass money refers to James 
11. 's finance, and the wooden shoes to his French allies. The 
final words are often " a fig for the bishop of Cork," in allusion 
to Dr Peter Browne, who, in 1715, wrote cogently against 
the practice of toasting the dead. Orangemen are fond of 
beating drums and flaunting flags with the legend " no surrender," 
in allusion to Londonderry. Orangeism is essentially political. 
Its original object was the maintenance of Protestant ascendancy, 
and that spirit still survives. The first regular lodges were 
founded in 1795, but the system existed earlier. The Brunswick 
clubs, founded to oppose Catholic emancipation, were sprigs 
from the original Orange tree. The orange flowers of the Lilhim 
bulbiferum are worn in Ulster on the 1st and 12th July, the 
anniversaries of the Boyne and Aughrim. Another great day 
is the 5th of November, when William III. landed in Torbay. 

ORANG-UTAN (" man of the woods "), the Malay name of 
the giant red man-like ape of Borneo and Sumatra, known to 
the Dyaks as the viias, and to most naturalists as Simla sotyrus. 
The red, or brownisb-red, colour of the long and coarse hair 
at once distinguishes the orang-utan from the African apes; 
a further point of distinction being the excessive length of the 
arms, which are of such proportions that the animal when in 
the upright posture (which it seldom voluntarily assumes) can 
rest on its bent knuckles. Very characteristic of the old males, 
which may stand as much as 55 ft. in height, is the lateral 
expansion of the cheeks, owing to a kind of warty growth, thus 
producing an extraordinarily broad and flattened type of face. 
Such an expansion is however by no means characteristic 
of all the males of the species, and is apparently a feature of 
racial value. Another peculiarity of the males is the presence 
of a huge throat-sac or pouch on the front of the throat and 
chest, which may extend even to the arm-pits; although 
present in females, it does not reach nearly the same dimensions 
in that sex. More than half-a-dozen separate races of orang- 
utan are recognized in Borneo, where, however, they do not 
appear to be restricted to separate localities. In Sumatra the 
Deli and Langkat district is inhabited by S. satyrus deliensis 
and Abong by 5. 5. abongensis. 

In Borneo the red ape inhabits the swampy forest-tract at 
the foot of the mountains. In confinement these apes (of 
which adult specimens have been exhibited in Calcutta) appear 
very slow and deliberate in their movements; but in their 
native forests they swing themselves from bough to bough and 
from tree to tree as fast as a man can walk on the ground beneath. 
They construct platforms of boughs in the trees, which are used 
as sleeping-places, and apparently' occupied for several nights 
in succession. Jack-fruit or durian, the tough spiny hide of 
which is torn open with their strong fingers, forms the chief 
food of orang-utans, which also consume the luscious mangustin 
and other fruits. (See Primates.) 

ORANIENBAUM, a town of European Russia, in the govern- 
ment of St Petersburg, lying 100 ft. above the sea on the south 



ORAONS— ORATORIO 



161 



coast of the Gulf of Finland, opposite Kronstadt. Pop. (1897) 
5333- It is well known for its imperial palace and as a summer 
resort for the inhabitants of St Petersburg, from which it is 
25 m. W. by rail. In 1714 Menshikov, to whom the site was 
presented by Peter the Great, erected for himself the country-seat 
of Oranienbaum; but confiscated, like the rest of his estates, 
in 1727, it became an imperial residence. In 1743 the empress 
Elizabeth assigned the place to Peter III., who built there a 
castle, Peterstadt (now destroyed), for his Holstein soldiers. 

ORAONS, an aboriginal people of Bengal. They call themselves 
Kurukh, and are sometimes also known as Dhangars. Their 
home is in Ranchi district and there are communities in the 
Chota Nagpur states and Palamau, while elsewhere they have 
scattered settlements, e.g. in Jalpaiguri and the Darjeeling Terai, 
whither they have gone to work in the tea-gardens. They number 
upwards of three quarters of a million. According to their 
traditions the tribe migrated from the west coast of India. The 
Oraons are a small race (average 5 ft. 2 in.); the usual colour 
is dark brown, but some are as light as Hindus. They are 
heavy-jawed, with large mouths, thick lips and projecting teeth. 
They reverence the sun, and acknowledge a supreme god, 
Dharmi or Dharmest, the holy one, who is perfectly pure, but 
whose beneficent designs are thwarted by evil spirits. They 
burn their dead, and the urn with the ashes is suspended outside 
the deceased's hut to await the period of the year especially set 
apart for burials. The language is harsh and guttural, having 
much connexion with Tamil. In 1901 the total number of 
speakers of Kurukh or Oraon in all India was nearly 600,000. 

See E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal (Calcutta, 1872), 
and his article " The Kols of Chota-Nagpore," in Supplement to 
Joum. of Asiatic Soc. of Bengal, vol. xxxv. (1887), part ii. p. 154; 
Batsch, " Notes on the Oraon Language " in Joum. Roy. Asiatic 
Soc. of Bengal for 1866; F. B. Bradley Birt, The Story of an Indian 
Upland (1905). 

ORATORIO, the name given to a form of religious music with 
chorus, solo voices and instruments, independent or at least 
separable from the liturgy, and on a larger scale than the cantata 
(q.v.). Its early history is involved in that of opera (see Aria and 
Opera), though there is a more definite interest in its antecedents. 
The term is supposed, with good reason, to be derived from the 
fact that St Filippo Neri's Oratory was the place for which 
Animuccia's setting of the Laudi Spirituali were written; and 
the custom of interspersing these hymns among liturgical or 
other forms of the recitation of a Biblical story is certainly one 
of several sources to which the idea of modern oratorio may be 
traced. Further claim to the " invention " of the oratorio cannot 
be given to Animuccia. A more ancient source is the use of 
incidental music in miracle-plays and in such medieval dramatic 
processions as the 12th-century Prose dc L'Ane, which on the 
1 st of January celebrated at Beauvais the Flight into Egypt. 
But the most ancient origin of all has hardly been duly brought 
into line, although it is the only form that led to classically 
artistic results before the time of Bach. This is the Roman 
Catholic rite of reciting, during Holy Week, the story of the 
Passion according to the Four Gospels, in such a manner that the 
words of the Evangelist are sung in Gregorian tones by a tenor, 
all directly quoted utterances are sung by voices appropriate 
to the speakers, and the responsa turbae or utterances of the 
whole body of disciples (e.g. " Lord, is it I ?") and of crowds, 
are sung by a chorus. The only portion of this scheme that 
concerned composers was the responsa turbae, to which it was 
optional to add polyphonic settings of the Seven Last Words or 
other special utterances of the Saviour. The narrative and the 
parts of single speakers were sung in the Gregorian tones 
appointed in the liturgy. Thus the settings of the Passion by 
Victoria and Soriano represent, in a very simple form, a perfect 
solution of the art-problem of oratorio, as that problem presented 
itself to an age in which " dramatic music," or even " epic music," 
would have been a contradiction in terms. It has been aptly 
said that the object of the composer in setting such words as 
" Crucify Him " was not to express the feelings of an infuriated 
crowd, but rather to express the contrition of devout Christians 
telling the story; though this view must be admitted to be, 



like the 16th-century music itself, decidedly more modern than 
the quaintly dramatic traditional methods of performance. Asi 
an art-form this early Passion-music owes its perfection primarily', 
to the church. The liturgy gives body to all the art-forms of 
16th-century church music, and it is for the composer to spirit- 
ualize or debase them by his style. 

With the monodic revolution at the beginning of the 17th 
century the history of oratorio as an art-form controlled by 
composers has its real beginning. There is nothing but its 
religious subject to distinguish the first oratorio from the first 
opera; and so Emilio del Cavalicre's Rappresentazione di 
anima e di corpo (1600) is in no respect outside the line of 
early attempts at dramatic music. In the course of the 17th 
century the differentiation between opera and oratorio increased, 
but not systematically. The gradual revival of choral art found 
its best opportunity in the treatment of sacred subjects; not 
only because it was with such subjects that the greatest 16th- 
century choral art was associated, but also because these subjects 
tended to discourage such vestiges of dramatic realism as had 
not been already suppressed by the aria form. This form arose 
as a concession to dire musical necessity and to the growing 
vanity of singers, and it speedily became almost the only 
possibility of keeping music alive, or at least embalmed, until the 
advent of Bach and Handel. The efforts of Carissimi (d. 1674) 
in oratorio clearly show the limited rise from the musical 
standards of opera that was then possible where music was 
emancipated from the stage. Yet in his art the corruption of 
church music by secular ideas is far more evident than any 
tendency to elevate Biblical music-drama to the dignity of church 
music. Normal Italian oratorio remains indistinguishable from 
serious Italian opera until as late as the boyhood of Mozart. 
Handel's La Resurrezzione and II Trionfo del Tempo contain many 
pieces almost simultaneously used in his operas, and they show 
not the slightest tendency to indulge in choral writing. Nor did 
// Trionfo del Tempo 1 become radically different from the musical 
masques of Acts and Galatea and Semele, when Handel at the 
close of his life dictated an adaptation of it to an English transla- 
tion with several choral and other numbers interpolated from 
other works. Yet between these two versions of the same work 
lies more than half the history of classical oratorio. The rest lies 
in that specialized German art of which the text centres round 
the Passion and the music culminates in Bach; after which there 
is no very dignified connected history of the form, until the two 
streams, sadly silted up, and never afterwards quite pure, united 
in Mendelssohn. 

One feature of the Reformation in Germany was that Luther 
was very musical. This had the curious result that, though the 
German Reformation was far from conservative in its attitude 
towards ancient liturgy, it retained almost everything which 
makes for musical coherence in a church service; while the 
English church, with all its insistence on historic continuity, 
so rearranged the liturgy that no possible music for an English 
church service can ever form a coherent whole. We are 
accustomed to think of German Passion-music as typically Pro- 
testant; yet the four Passions and the Historia der Aufcrstehung 
Christi of H. Schiitz (who was born in 1585, exactly a century 
before Bach) are as truly the descendants of Victoria's Passions 
as they are the ancestors of Bach's. The difference between 
them and the Roman Catholic Passions is, of course, eminently 
characteristic of the Reformation: the language is German 
(so that it may be " understanded of the people"), and the 
narrative and dialogue is set to free composition instead of to 
forms of Gregorian chant, though it is written in a sort of 
Gregorian notation. Schtitz's preface to the Historia der 
A uferstehung Christi shows that he writes his recitative for solo 
voices, though he calls it Chor des Evangclistcn and Chor der 
Pcrsonen Colloqucnten. The Marcus Passion is, on internal 
evidence, of doubtful authenticity, being later in style and 
quite stereotyped in its recitative. But in the other Passions, 
and most of all in the Aufcrstehung, the recitative is wonderfully 
expressive. It was probably accompanied by the organ, though 
the Passions contain no hint of accompaniment at all. In the 

xx. 6 



162 



ORATORIO 



Aufcrstehung the Evangelist is accompanied by four viole da 
gamba in preference to the organ. In any case, Schiitz tells 
us, the players are to " execute appropriate runs or passages " 
during the sustained chords. Apart from their remarkable 
dramatic force, Schiitz's oratorios show another approximation 
to the Passion oratorio of Bach's time in ending with a non- 
scriptural hymn-chorus, more or less clearly based on a chorale- 
tune. But in the course of the work the Scriptural narrative 
is as uninterrupted as it is in the Roman Catholic Passions. 
And there is one respect in which the Aiiferstchung, although 
perhaps the richest and most advanced of all Schiitz's works, 
is less realistic than either the Roman Passions or those of later 
times; namely, that single persons, other than the Evangelist, 
are frequently represented by more than one voice. In the case 
of the part of the Saviour, this might, to modern minds, seem 
natural as showing a reverent avoidance of impersonation; and 
it was not without an occasional analogy in Roman Catholic 
Passion-music (in the polyphonic settings of special words). 
But Schiitz's Passions show no such convention; this feature 
is peculiar to the Auferstehung; and, while the three holy women 
and the two angels in the scene at the tomb are represented 
realistically by three and two imitative voices, it is curious to 
see Mary Magdalene elsewhere always represented by two 
sopranos, even though Schiitz remarks in his preface that " one 
of the two voices may be sung and the other done instrumentaliter, 
or, si placet, simply left out." 

Shortly before Bach, Passion oratorios, not always so entitled, 
were represented by several remarkable and mature works of art, 
most notably by R. Reiser (1673-1739). Chorale-tunes, mostly 
in plain harmony, were freely interspersed in order that the 
congregation might take part in what was, after all, a musical 
church service for Holy Week. The feelings of devout contem- 
plative Christians on each incident of the story were expressed 
in accompanied recitatives (arioso) leading to arias; and the 
Scriptural narrative was sung to dramatic recitative and ejacu- 
latory chorus on the ancient Roman plan, exactly followed, 
even in the detail that the Evangelist was a tenor. 

The difference between Bach's Passions and those of his 
predecessors and contemporaries is simply the difference between 
his music and theirs. Where his chorus represents the whole 
body of Christendom it has as peculiar an epic power as it is 
dramatic where it represents with brevity and rapid climax 
the responsa turbae of the Scriptural narrative. Take, for 
example, the double chorus at the beginning of the Passion 
according to St Matthew, where one chorus calls to the other to 
" come and behold " what has come to pass, and the other 
chorus asks "whom?" "what?" "whither?" to each exhor- 
tation, until at last the two choruses join, while above all 
is heard, phrase by phrase, the hymn " Lamm Gottes 
unschuldig." Still more powerful, indeed unapproached even 
in external effect by anything else in classical or modern oratorio, 
is the duet with chorus that follows the narrative of the betrayal. 
Its tremendous final outbreak in the brief indignant appeal to 
heaven for the vengeance of damnation on the traitor is met by 
the calm conclusion of the Evangelist's interrupted narrative 
and the overpowering tenderness of the great figured chorale 
(" Mensch bewein' dein' Siinde gross "), which ends the first 
part with a call to repentance. Such contrasts might seem to 
be but the natural use of fine opportunities furnished by the 
librettist; but the composer appears to owe less to the librettist 
when we find that this chorale originally belonged to the Passion 
according to St John, where it was to follow Peter's denial of 
Christ. To modern cars the most striking device in the Matthew 
Passion is that by which the part of Christ is separated from 
all the rest by being accompanied with the string band, generally 
at a high pitch, though deepening at the most solemn moments 
with an effect of sublime euphony and tenderness. And a 
peculiarly profound and startling thought, which has not always 
met with the attention it deserves, is the omission of this musical 
halo at the words " Eli, Eli, lama sabacthani." These points 
are aesthetically parallel with Wagnerian Leit-motif, though 
entirely different in method. (See Opera.) 



In his amazing power of declamation Bach was not altogether 
unanticipated by Reiser; but no one before or since approached 
him in sustained elevation and variety of oratorio style. Analogies 
to the forms of Passion music may be found in many of Bach's 
church-cantatas; a very favourite form being the Dialogus; 
as, for instance, a dispute between a fearing and a trusting 
soul, with, perhaps, the voice of the Saviour heard from a distance; 
or a dialogue between Christ and the Church, on the lines of 
the Song of Solomon. The Christmas Oratorio, a set of six 
closely connected church-cantatas for performance on separate 
days, is treated in exactly the same way as the Passions, with a 
larger proportion of non-dramatic choruses expressive of the 
triumphant gratitude of Christendom. Many of the single church- 
cantatas are called oratorios. If it were not that Bach's idea 
of oratorio seems to be definitely connected with that of dialogue, 1 
there is really no reason in musical terminology why the B minor 
Mass should not be so called, for it can never have been liturgical 
either in a Roman Catholic or in a Protestant church. But 
in all respects it stands alone ; and we must now return to Handel's 
far more heterogeneous work, which forms the staple of almost 
everything else that has been understood by oratorio until the 
most recent times. 

Handel discovered and matured every possibility of oratorio 
as an art-form, except such as may now be brought to light by 
those composers with whom the influence of Wagner is not too 
overwhelming for them to consider how far his principles are 
applicable to an art unconnected with the stage. Handel shows 
us that a definite oratorio style may exist in many different 
degrees. He was evidently impressed by the German forms 
of Passion-music as combining the utmost dramatic interest 
with the most intense contemplative devotion; and it is signifi- 
cant that it was after he came to England, and before his first 
English oratorio, that he set to music the famous poetic version 
of the Passion by Brockes, a version which had been adopted by 
all the German composers of the time, and which, with very 
necessary and interesting improvements of taste, was largely 
drawn upon by Bach for the text of his Johannes-Passion. 
Handel's Brockes-Passion does not appear ever to have been 
performed, though Bach found access to it and made a careful 
copy; and it is difficult to see what motive, except interest in the 
form, Handel had for composing it. At all events it furnishes an 
important connecting-link between Bach's solution of the problem 
of oratorio and the various other solutions which Handel after- 
wards produced so successfully. He soon discovered how many 
kinds of oratorio were possible. The freedom from stage 
restrictions admitted of subjects ranging from semi-dramatic 
histories, like those of Saul, Esther and Belshazzar, to cosmic 
schemes based exclusively on the words of the Bible, such as 
Israel in Egypt and the Messiah. Between these types there is 
every gradation of organization; and it may be added, every 
gradation between sacred and secular subjects and treatment. 
The very name of Handel's first English oratorio, Esther, with 
the facts of its production as a masque and the origin of its 
libretto in Racine, show the transition from the stage to the 
church; and a really scandalous example of the converse transi- 
tion may be found by any one rash enough to look for the source 
of some of Haman's music in the Brockes-Passion. Roughly 
speaking we may reduce the types of Handelian oratorio to a 
convenient three; not divisible among works as wholes, but 
always evident here and there. Firstly, there is the semi- 
operatic method, in which the arias are the utterances of char- 
acters in the story, while the conception of the chorus rarely 
diverges from that of multitudes of actors (e.g. Athalia, Bel- 
shazzar,Saul, &c). The second method is a more or less recogniz- 
able application of the forms of the Passion-music to other 
subjects, without, however, the conception of a special r&le of 
narrator, but (as, for instance, in " Envy, eldest born of Hell " 
in Said) with the definite conception of the choruses as descriptive 
of the feelings of spectators rather than of actors. Handel's 

_ 1 It is possible that a false etymology may by Bach's time have 
given this colour to the word oratorio. Schiitz inscribes a monodic 
sacred piece " in stilo Oratorio," meaning " in the style of recitative." 









ORATORIO 



163 



audience demanded an inconvenient number of arias, most of 
which are clumsily accounted for by a conventional assignment 
to dramatic roles with a futile attempt at love-interest; which 
makes many of the best solos in Saul and Joshua rather absurd. 
The third Handelian method is that which has since become 
embodied in the modern type of sacred or secular cantata; a 
series of choruses and numbers on a subject altogether beyond 
the scope of dramatic narrative (as, for instance, the greater part 
of Solomon), and, in the case of the Messiah and Israel in Egypt, 
treated entirely in the words of Scripture. 

After Bach and Handel the history of oratorio becomes dis- 
jointed. The rise of the sonata style, which brought life to the 
opera, was almost wholly bad for the oratorio; since not only 
did it cause a serious decline in choral art by distracting attention 
from that organization of texture which is essential even to mere 
euphony in choral writing (see Counterpoint and Contra- 
puntal Forms), but its dramatic power became more and more 
disturbing to the essentially epic treatment demanded by the 
conditions of oratorio. Bach and Handel (especially Handel) 
were as dramatic in characterization as the greatest epic poets, 
and were just as far removed from the theatre. Any doubt on 
this point is removed by the history of Handelian opera and the 
reforms of Gluck. But the power of later composers to rise 
above the growing swarms of 18th-century and 19th-century 
oratorio-mongers depended largely on the balance between their 
theatrical and contemplative sensibilities. Academicism natur- 
ally mistrusted the theatre, but, in the absence of any con- 
templative depth beyond that of a tactful asceticism, it has 
then and ever since made spasmodic concessions to theatrical 
effect, with the intention of avoiding pedantry, and with the effect 
of encouraging vulgarity. Philipp Emanuel Bach's oratorios, 
though not permanently convincing works of art, achieved a 
remarkably true balance of style in the earlier days of the conflict ; 
indeed, with judicious reduction to the size of a large cantata, 
Die Isracliten in dcr Wilsle (1769) would perhaps bear revival 
almost better than Haydn's Tobias (1774), in spite of the supe- 
rior musical value of that ambitious forerunner of The Creation 
and The Seasons. These two great products of Haydn's old age 
owe their vitality not only to Haydn's combination of contra- 
puntal and choral mastery with his unsurpassable freedom of 
movement in the sonata style, but also to his priceless redis- 
covery of the fact (well known to Bach, the composer of " Mein 
glaiibiges Herze," but since forgotten) that, in Haydn's own 
words, " God will not be angry with me for worshipping him in a 
cheerful manner." This is the very spirit, of St Francis of Assisi, 
and it brings the naively realistic birds and beasts of The 
Creation into line with even the Bacchanalian parts of the mainly 
secular Seasons, and so removes Haydn from the dangers of a 
definitely bad taste, which began to beset Roman Catholic 
oratorio on the one hand, and those of no taste at all, which 
engulfed Protestant oratorio on the other. 

From the moment when music became independent of the 
church, Roman Catholic religious music, liturgical or other, lost 
its high artistic position. Some of the technical hindrances to 
greatness in liturgical music after the Golden Age are mentioned 
in the article Mass; but the status of Roman Catholic non- 
liturgical religious music was from the outset lowered by the use 
of the vulgar tongue, since that implied a condescension to the 
laity, and composers could not but be affected by the assumption 
that oratorio belonged to a lower sphere than Latin church 
music. With this element of condescension came a reluctance 
to foster the fault of intellectual pride by criticizing pious verse 
on grounds of taste. Even in Protestant England this reluctance 
still causes educated people to strain tolerance of bad hymns 
to an extent which apostles of culture denounce as positively 
immoral: but the initial impossibility of basing a non-Latin 
Roman Catholic oratorio directly on the Bible would already 
have been detrimental to good taste in religious musical texts 
even if criticism were not disarmed. It must be confessed that 
Protestant taste (as shown in the texts of many of Bach's 
cantatas) was often unsurpassably bad; but in its most morbid 
phases its badness was mainly barbarian, and could either be 



ignored by composers and listeners, or easily improved away, as 
Bach showed in his alterations of Brockes's vile verses in the 
Passion according to St John. But the bad taste of the text of 
Beethoven's Chrislus am Oelbcrge (The Mount of Olives, c. 1800) 
is ineradicable, for it represents the standpoint of writers who 
may be very devout and innocent, but whose purest source of 
sacred art has been the pictures of Guido Reni. It was one thing 
for Sir Joshua Reynolds to admire the wrong period of Italian 
art: he had his own access to great ideas; but for Beethoven's 
librettist, who had no such access, it was very different. The real 
sacred subject has no chance of penetrating through a tradition 
which is neither naive nor ecclesiastical, but is simply that of a 
long-tolerated comfortable vulgarity. An operatic tenor repre- 
sents the Saviour; an operatic soprano represents the ministering 
angel; and in the garden of Gethsemane the two sing an operatic 
duet. The music is brilliant and well worthy of Beethoven's 
early powers, but he afterwards greatly regretted it; and indeed 
its circumstances are intolerable, and the English attempt at 
a new libretto (Engedi, or David in the Wilderness) only sub- 
stituted ineptitude for irreverence. 

Schubert's wonderful fragment Lazarus (1820) suffers less 
from the sickliness of its text; for the music seizes on a certain 
genuine quality aimed at by all typical Roman Catholic religious 
verse-writers, and embodies it in a kind of romantic mysticism 
unexampled in Protestant oratorio. Modern literature shows 
this peculiar strain in Cardinal Newman's Dream of Gerontius, 
just as Sir Edward Elgar's setting of that poem to music of 
Wagnerian continuity and texture presents the only parallel 
discoverable later or earlier to the slightly oppressive aroma of 
Schubert's unique experiment. 1 Lazarus also surprises us by 
a rather invertebrate continuity of flow, anticipating early 
Wagnerian opera; indeed, in almost every respect it is two 
generations ahead of its time; and, if only Schubert had finished 
it and allowed it to see publicity, the history of 19th-century 
oratorio might have become a more interesting subject than it is. 

The ascendancy of Mendelssohn, as things happened, is really 
its main redeeming feature. Mendelssohn applied an unpre- 
cedented care and a wide general culture to the structure and 
criticism of his libretto (see his correspondence with Schubring, 
his principal helper with the texts of St Paid and Elijah), and 
was able to bear witness of his new-found gospel according to 
Bach by introducing chorales into St Paul as well as by dis- 
interring and performing Bach's works. But he had not the 
strength to rescue oratorio from the slough into which it had 
now fallen, no less in Protestant than in Roman Catholic forms. 

As the interest in Biblical themes becomes more independent 
of church and dogma, oratorio once more tends to become con- 
fused with Biblical opera. The singular fragrance and tenderness 
of the best parts of Berlioz's little masterpiece L'Enfancc du 
Christ (put together from sections composed between 1847 and 
1854) give it high artistic value; but if " oratorio " means 
" sacred music " Berlioz was incapable of anything of the sort; 
for the Christianity of his Grande Mcsse des morts and his Te 
Deum is the Christianity of Napoleon; and, if oratorio means a 
consistent treatment of a legend or subject in terms of musical 
epic, Berlioz can never fix his attention long enough to remember 
how he began by the time he has got half way through. Though 
Berlioz's essay in oratorio is not quite so irresponsible a vocal- 
symphonic-dramatic medley as his Romeo el Juliette and Damna- 
tion de Faust, it unmistakably marks a transition towards the 
complete secularizing of the Bible for musical purposes. But 
the long-continued prejudice in England against the representa- 
tion of religious subjects on the stage has wrought peculiar 
confusion in the theory of their romantic treatment in music. 
It may be noted as a curiosity that Saint-Saens's Biblical opera, 
Samson el Dalila (written in 1S77), after being known in England 
for many quiet years as an oratorio, suddenly, in 1910, was 
permitted by the censor of plays, under royal command, to be 
produced at Covent Garden for what it was intended. It may 

1 Schubert's well-known cantata, Miriam's Siegesgesang, has 
been discussed as a small oratorio; but it is of slight artistic and 
no historic importance. 



164 



ORATORY— ORBIT 



even be suggested that this occurred just early enough to 
prevent Strauss's Salome from being regarded by the British 
public as an oratorio. 

The earnest efforts of Cesar Franck prevented French oratorio 
from drifting entirely towards the stage; and meanwhile year by 
year Brahms's Deittsches Requiem (completed, except for one 
movement, in 1868) towers ever higher above all choral music 
since Beethoven's Mass in D, and draws us away from the 
semi-dramatic oratorio towards the musically perfectible form 
of an enlarged cantata in which a group of choral movements 
is concentrated on a set of religious ideas differing from liturgical 
forms only in free choice of text. Within the essentially 
non-theatrical limitations of dramatic or epic oratorio, we may 
note the spirited new departures of Sir Charles Stanford in Eden 
(1891), and of Sir Hubert Parry in Judith (1888), Job (1892) 
and King Saul (1894), which showed that Wagnerian Leitmotif 
and continuity might well avail to produce an oratorio style 
standing to Mendelssohn as Wagner stands to Mozart, if 
musical interest be retained in the foreground. Freedom 
from the restrictions of the stage also means absence of the 
resources of the stage, so that Wagnerian Leitmotif is no 
sufficient substitute for formal musical coherence when the 
audience has no action before its eyes. Accordingly these leaders 
of the English musical renascence are by no means exclusively 
Wagnerian in their oratorios. A fine and typical example 
of their peculiar non-theatrical resources may be seen in the 
end of King Saul, where Parry (who, like Wagner, is his own 
librettist) makes the Witch of Endor foresee the battle of Gilboa, 
and allows her tale to become real in the telling: so that it is 
followed immediately by the final dirge. (D. F. T.) 

ORATORY (Lat. oratoria, sc. ars; from orare, to speak or 
pray), the art of speaking eloquently or in accordance with the 
rules of rhetoric (q.v.). From Lat. oratorium, sc. templum, a 
place of prayer, comes the use of the word for a small chapel or 
place of prayer for the use of private individuals, generally 
attached to a mansion and sometimes to a church. The name 
is also given to small chapels built to commemorate some special 
deliverance. 

ORATORY OF ST PHILIP NERI, CONGREGATION OF THE, 
or Oratorians, a religious order consisting of a number of 
independent houses. The first congregation was formally 
organized in 1575 by the Florentine priest, Philip Neri. (See 
Neri, Philip.) 

ORB, a circle or ring (Lat. orbis), hence a globe or disk or other 
spherical object. It is thus used, chiefly poetically, of any of 
the heavenly bodies, including the earth itself (Lat. orbis ter- 
rarum), or of the eye-ball or eye. The " orb," also known as the 
"mound" (Lat. mundus, "world"), consisting of a globe 
surmounted by a cross, forms part of many regalia, being a 
symbol of sovereignty (see Regalia). In architecture the 
meaning to be attached to the word " orb " is doubtful. It is 
usually now taken to mean properly a blank or blind window, 
and thence a blank panel. If so the word represents Lat. orbus, 
" bereft of," " orphaned," fenestra orba luminis. It is also 
identified with a circular boss concealing the intersection of 
arches in a vault. 

ORBETELLO, a town of Tuscany, Italy, in the province of 
Grosseto, 24 m. S. by E. of Grosseto by rail, 13 ft. above sea- 
level. Pop. (1901) 4188 (town), 5335 (commune). It is situated 
on a tongue of land projecting westward into a lagoon which is 
enclosed on the W. and S. by two long narrow sandy spits, and 
on the seaward (S.W.) side by the peninsula of Monte Argentario. 
A causeway connecting the town with this peninsula was built 
across the lagoon in 1842. On every side except the landward 
(E.) side the town is enclosed by an ancient terrace wall of poly- 
gonal work, and tombs have been discovered in the vicinity 
and even within the town itself. On the N. side of the promon- 
tory are the remains of a Roman- villa partly below sea-level. 
The town must thus occupy an ancient site, the name of which 
is unknown. The town still has the bastions which the Spaniards 
built during the period (1557-1713) when they were masters of 
this corner of Italy. There is a large convict prison with which 



is connected another at Porto Ercole, on the east side of the 
peninsula. The mother house of the Passionist order crowns 
an eminence of Monte Argentario, now strongly fortified. The 
salt-water lagoon (11 sq. m. in extent), in the middle of which 
the town stands, abounds in white fish, soles and eels. On the 
eastern edge of the Monte Argentario is an active manganese 
iron ore mine, yielding some 30,000 tons per annum. 

After the fall of the Republic of Siena, when the territory of 
Siena passed to Tuscany, Philip II. of Spain retained Orbetello, 
Talamone, Monte Argentario and the island of Giannutri until 
1713, under the name of the Reali Stati dei Presidii. There are 
still many Spanish names among the inhabitants of Orbetello. 
In 1 713 this district passed by treaty to the emperor, in 1736 to 
the king of the two Sicilies, in 1801 to the kingdom of Etruria, 
and in 1814 to the grand-duchy of Tuscany. 

See G. Dennis, Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria (London, 1883), 
ii. 240; M. Carmichael, In Tuscany (London, 1901), 283, sqq. 

(T. As.) 

ORBIGNY, ALCIDE DESSALINES D' (1802-1857), French 
palaeontologist, was born at Couerzon, Loire Inferieure, on the 
6th of September 1802. He was educated at La Rochelle, 
where he became interested in the study of natural history, 
and in particular of zoology and palaeontology. His first 
appointment was that of travelling naturalist for the Museum 
of Natural History at Paris. In the course of his duties he 
proceeded in 1826 to South America, and gathered much 
information on the natural history and ethnology, the results 
being embodied in his great work Voyage dans I'Amerique 
Meridionale (1839-1842). Meanwhile he had decided to devote 
his time and energies to palaeontology, and he dealt in course of 
time with various invertebrata from foraminifera to crinoids and 
mollusca. In 1840 he commenced the publication of Paleonto- 
logie Franqaisc, ou description des fossiles de la France, a monu- 
mental work, accompanied by figures of the species. Eight 
volumes were published by him dealing with Jurassic and 
Cretaceous invertebrata, and since his death many later volumes 
have been issued. (See notes by C. D. Sherborn, " On the Dates 
of the Paleontologie Franqaise of D'Orbigny," Geol. Mag., 1899, 
p. 223.) Among his other works were Covrs elementaire de 
paleontologie et de geologie siratigraphiques (3 vols., 1849-1852), 
and Prodrome de paleontologie stratigraphique (3 vols., 1850-1852). 
D'Orbigny introduced (1852) a methodical system of nomen- 
clature for geological formations based partly on the English 
terms — thus Bathonian for the Great or Bath Oolite, Bajocian 
from Bajocea or Bayeux in Calvados for the Inferior Oolite. 
Many of these names have been widely adopted, but some are of 
too local application to be generally used. In 1853 he was 
appointed professor of palaeontology at the Museum of Natural 
History in Paris, but died four years later, on the 30th of June 
1857, at Pierresitte, near St Denis. 

ORBILIUS, PUPILLUS, a Latin grammarian of the 1st century 
a.d., who had a school at Rome, where the poet Horace was 
one of his pupils. Horace (Epistles, ii.) criticizes his old school- 
master and describes him as plagosus (a flogger), and Orbilius 
has become proverbial as a disciplinarian pedagogue. 

ORBIT (from Lat. orbita, a track, orbis, a wheel), in astronomy, 
the path of any body, and especially of a heavenly body, revolving 
round an attracting centre. If the law of attraction is that of 
gravitation, the orbit is a conic section — ellipse, parabola or 
hyperbola — having the centre of attraction in one of its foci; 
and the motion takes place in accordance with Kepler's laws 
(see Astronomy). But unless the orbit is an ellipse the body 
will never complete a revolution, but will recede indefinitely 
from the centre of motion. Elliptic orbits, and a parabolic 
orbit considered as the special case when the eccentricity of the 
ellipse is r, are almost the only ones the astronomer has to 
consider, and our attention will therefore be confined to them in 
the present article. If the attraction of a central body is not 
the only force acting on the moving body, the orbit will deviate 
from the form of a conic section in a degree depending on the 
amount of the extraneous force; and the curve described may 
not be a re-entering curve at all, but one winding around so as 






ORCAGNA 




--'D 



to form an indefinite succession of spires. In all the cases which 
have yet arisen in astronomy the extraneous forces are so small 
compared with the gravitation of the central body that the orbit 
is approximately an ellipse, and the preliminary computations, 
as well as all determinations in which a high degree of precision 
is not necessary, are made on the hypothesis of elliptic orbits. 
Below are set forth the methods of determining and dealing with 
such orbits. 

We begin by considering the laws of motion in the orbit itself, 
regardless of the position of the latter. 

Let the curve represent an elliptic orbit ; AB being the major 
axis, DE the minor axis, and F the focus in which the centre of 
attraction is situated, which centre we shall call the sun. From the 

properties of the 
ellipse, A is the 
pericentre or 
nearest point of 
the orbit to the 
centre of attrac- 
tion and B the 
apocentre or most 
distant point. The 
semi-major axis, 
CA or CB, is called 
the mean distance, 
and is represented 
by the symbol a. 
We put e for the 
eccentricity of the 
ellipse, represented 
by the ratio 
CF : CA. P is the 
position of the 
planet at any 
time, and we call r the radius vector FP. The angle AFP between 
the pericentre and the position P of the planet is the anomaly 
called v. By Kepler's second law the radius vector, FP, sweeps 
over equal areas in equal times. To do this the actual speed 
in the orbit, and in a yet higher degree the angular speed 
around F, must be greatest at pericentre, and continually diminish 
till the apocentre is reached. Let P, P' be two consecutive positions 
of the radius vector. Since the area of the triangle FPP' is one 
half the product of FP into the perpendicular p from P on FP', 
it follows that if these perpendiculars were equal all round the 
orbit, the areas described during the infinitesimal time would be 
smallest at the pericentre and continually increase during the 
passage of the body to B. It follows that p must be greatest at 
pericentre,_ where its distance from F is least. By geometrical 
consideration it can be shown that the angle subtended by p, as 
seen from F, must be inversely as the square of its distance r. We 
therefore have the fundamental theorem that the angular velocity 
of the body around the centre of attraction varies inversely as the 
square of its distance, and is therefore at every point proportional 
to the gravitation of the sun. Another curious theorem proposed 
by Bouilland in 1625 as a substitute for Kepler's second law is that 
the angular motion of the body as measured around the empty focus 
F' is (approximately) uniform. That is to an eye at F', the planet 
would seem to move around the sky with a nearly uniform speed. 

The true anomaly, AFP, is commonly determined through the 
mean anomaly conceived thus: Describe a circle of radius <z = CA 
around F, and let a fictitious planet start from K at the same 
moment that the actual planet passes A, and let it move with a 
uniform speed such that it shall complete its revolution in the 
same time T as the actual planet. From the law of angular motion 
of the latter its radius vector will run ahead of PQ near A, PQ will 
overtake and pass it at apocentre, and the two will again coincide 
at pericentre when the revolution is completed. The anomaly 
AFQ of Q at any moment is called the mean anomaly, and the angle 
QFP by which the true anomaly exceeds it at that moment is the 
equation of the centre. 

Two elements define the position of the plane passing through 
theattracting centre in which the orbit lies. One of these is the 
position of the line MN through the sun at F in which the plane 
of the orbit cuts some fundamental plane of reference, commonly 
the ecliptic. This is called the line of nodes, and its position is 
specified by the angle which it makes with some fixed line FX in 
the fundamental plane. At one of the nodes, say N, the body 
passes from the south to the north side of the fundamental plane; 
this is called the ascending node. The other element is the inclina- 
tion of the plane of the orbit to the fundamental plane, called the 
inclination simply. A fifth element is the position of the pericentre, 
which may be expressed by its angular distance XFN from the 
ascending node. A sixth is the position of the planet in the orbit 
at a given moment, for which may be substituted the moment at 
which it passed the pericentre. Another element is the time of 
revolution of the body in its orbit, called its period. Instead of the 
period it is common in astronomical practice to use the mean angular 



165 



speed, called the mean motion of the body. This is defined as the 
speed of revolution of the fictitious body already described, revolv- 
ing with a uniform angular motion and the same periodic time as 
the planet. It follows that putting n for the mean motion and f 
for the period of revolution we shall have in degrees «T = 36o° 

It is shown in the article Astronomy {Celestial Mechanics) that 
the mean distance and mean motion or time of revolution of a 
planet are so related by Kepler's third law that, when one of these 
elements is given, the other can be found. Hence the number of 
independent elements assigned to a planet or other body moving 
around the sun is commonly six. But the same relation docs not 
hold of a satellite the mass of whose primary is not regarded as an 
absolutely known quantity, or of a binary star. In these cases 
therefore the mean distance and mean motion are regarded as 
different elements, and the whole number of the latter is seven. 

The process by which the position of a planet at any time is 
determined from its elements may now be conceived as follows- — 
The epoch of passage through pericentre being given, let / be the 
interval of time between this epoch and that for which the position 
of the body is required. Representing by P this position, it follows 
that the area of that portion of the ellipse contained between the 
radii vectorcs FB and FP will bear the same ratio to the whole area 
of the ellipse that I does to T, the time of revolution. The problem 
of finding a radius vector satisfying this condition is one which can 
be solved only by successive approximations, or tentatively. Its 
discussion_ may be found in any work on theoretical astronomy. 
The solution may be worked out directly or through the deter- 
mination of the equation of the centre which, being added to the 
mean anomaly, gives the true anomaly. The angle from the peri- 
centre to the actual radius vector, and the length of the latter being 
found, the angular distance of the planet from the node in the plane 
of the orbit is found by adding to the true anomaly the distance 
from the node to the pericentre. This, and the inclination of the 
orbit being given, we have all the geometrical data necessary to 
compute the coordinates of the planet itself. The coordinates thus 
found will in the case of a body moving around the sun be helio- 
centric. The reduction to the earth's centre is a problem of pure 
geometry. 

When a new celestial body, say a planet or a comet is discovered, 
the astronomer meets with the problem of determining the orbit 
from several observed positions of the body. To form a conception 
of this problem it is to be noted that since the position of the body 
in space can be computed from the six elements of the orbit at any 
time we may ideally conceive the coordinates of the body to be 
algebraically expressed as functions of the six elements and of the 
time. Since the distance of a body from the observer cannot be 
observed directly, but only the right ascension and declination, 
calling these a and S we conceive ideal equations of the form 

a=f(a, b, c, e,f, g, t) and 8=<j> (a, b, c, e,f, g, I), 
the symbols a, b, . . . t, representing the six elements and the 
time. If the values of£a and 5, defining the position of the body on 
the celestial sphere, are observed at three different times, we may 
conceive six equations like the above, one for each of the three 
observed values of a and 5. Then by solving these equations, 
regarding the six elements as unknown quantities, the values of the 
latter may be computed. The actual process of solution is vastly 
more complex than is indicated by this description of it. Instead 
of the six ideal equations just described we have to combine a 
number of equations of various forms containing other quantities 
than the elements. But the logical framework of the process is 
that which we have set forth. 

The problem of determining an orbit may be regarded as coeval 
with Hipparchus, who, it is supposed, found the moving positions 
of the apogee and perigee of the moon's orbit. The problem of 
determining a heliocentric orbit first presented itself to Kepler, who 
actually determined that of Mars. The modern method of deter- 
mining orbits from three or four observations was first developed 
by C. F. Gauss in his celebrated work Theoria Motus Corporum 
Coelestium. This classical work is still a favourite among students, 
the improvements on its methods made since its publication being 
rather in details than in general principles. 

Authorities. — Among recent works on the determination of 
orbits, J. C._ Watson's Theoretical Astronomy is the most complete 
in the English language. The most complete existing work, an 
encyclopaedia of the subject in fact, is T. von Oppolzer's Lehrbuch 
zur Bahnbestimmung der Kometen und Planeten (2 vols.), which 
contains voluminous tables, formulae, and instructions for the 
computation of orbits in the many special cases that arise. More 
recent and better adapted to study is Bauschinger's Bahnbestimmung 
der Himmelskorper (1 vol., Leipzig, 1906), which, alone of the three, 
treats orbits of satellites and double stars. (S. N.) 

ORCAGNA (c. 1308-c. I368,, 1 ), Italian painter, sculptor and 
architect, whose full name was Andrea di Cione, called 

1 The dates of Orcagna's birth and death are not exactly known. 
According to Vasari, he died in 1389 at the age of sixty; but a docu- 
ment dated 1376 provides a guardian for Tessa and Romola, daughters 
of Orcagna's widow Francesca (see Bonaini, Mem. Ined. pp. 105- 
106). In that case 1376 was perhaps the year of his death; and if 



i66 



ORCAGNA 



Arcagnuolo, 1 was the son of a very able Florentine goldsmith, 
Maestro Cione, said to have been one of the principal artists who 
worked on the magnificent silver frontal of the high altar of San 
Giovanni, the Florentine Baptistery. The result of Orcagna's early 
training in the use of the precious metals may be traced in the 
extreme delicacy and refined detail of his principal works in 
sculpture. He had at least three brothers who all practised some 
branch of the fine arts: Lionardo or Nardo, the eldest, a painter; 
Matteo, a sculptor and mosaicist ; and Jacopo, also a painter. They 
were frequently associated with Orcagna in his varied labours. 

From the time of Giotto to the end of the 14th century Orcagna 
stands quite pre-eminent even among the many excellent artists 
of that time. In sculpture he was a pupil of Andrea Pisano; 
in painting, though indirectly, he was a disciple of Giotto. Few 
artists have practised with such success so many branches of the 
arts. Orcagna was not only a painter and sculptor, but also a 
worker in mosaic, an architect and a poet. His importance 
in the history of Italian art rests not merely on his numerous 
and beautiful productions, but also on his widespread influence, 
transmitted to his successors through a large and carefully-trained 
school of pupils. In style as a painter Orcagna comes midway 
between Giotto and Fra Angelico: he combined the dramatic 
force and realistic vigour of the earlier painter with the pure 
brilliant colour and refined unearthly beauty of Fra Angelico. 
His large fresco paintings are works of extreme decorative 
beauty and splendour — composed with careful reference to their 
architectural surroundings, arranged for the most part on one 
plane, without the strong foreshortening or effects of perspective 
with which the mural paintings of later masters are so often 
marred. 

1. Orcagna as a Painter. — His chief works in fresco were 
at Florence, in the church of S Maria Novella. He first covered 
the walls of the retro-choir with scenes from the life of the Virgin. 
These, unfortunately, were much injured by damp very soon after 
their completion, and towards the end of the following century 
were replaced by other frescoes of the same subjects by Ghir- 
landaio, who, according to Vasari, made much use of Orcagna's 
motives and invention. Orcagna also painted three walls of 
the Strozzi chapel, at the north-east of the same church, with 
a grand series of frescoes, which still exist, though in a much 
injured and " restored " state. On the northern end wall is the 
Last Judgment, painted above and round the window, the 
light from which makes it difficult to see the picture. In the 
centre is Christ floating among clouds, surrounded by angels; 
below are kneeling figures of the Virgin and St John the Baptist, 
with the twelve apostles. Lower still are patriarchs, prophets 
and saints, with the resurrection of the blessed and the lost. 
The finest composition is that on the west wall, unbroken by any 
window. It represents paradise, with Christ and the Virgin 
enthroned in majesty among rows of brilliantly-coloured cherubim 
and seraphim tinged with rainbow-like rays of light. Below 
are long lines of the heavenly hierarchy mingled with angel 
musicians; and lower still a crowd of saints floating on clouds. 
Many of these figures are of exquisite beauty especially the 
few that have escaped restoration. Faces of the most divine 
tenderness and delicacy occur among the female saints; the 
two central angels below the throne are figures of wonderful 
grace in pose and movement; and the whole picture, lighted 
by a soft luminous atmosphere, seems to glow with an unearthly 
gladness and peace. Opposite to this is the fresco attributed 
by Vasari to Orcagna's brother Bernardo, or rather Nardo 
(i.e. Lionardo) ; it was completely repainted in 1 530, so that 
nothing but the design remains, full of horror and weird imagina- 
tion. To some extent the painter has followed Dante's scheme 
of successive circles. 

These paintings were probably executed soon after 1350, 
and in 1357 Orcagna painted one of his finest panel pictures, 
as a retable for the altar of the same chapel, where it still remains. 

Vasari is right about his age his birth would have been in 1316. 

Milanesi, the editor of Vasari, is, however, inclined to think that 

Orcagna died in 1368, when he is known to have been seriously ill. 

1 Of this form, sometimes spelt Orcagnuolo, Orcagna is a corruption. 



In the centre is Christ in majesty between kneeling figures of 
St Peter and St Thomas Aquinas, attended by angel musicians; 
on each side are standing figures of three other saints. It is a 
work of the greatest beauty both in colour and composition; 
it is painted with extreme miniature-like delicacy, and is 
on the whole very well preserved. This retable is signed, 
" An. dfii. mccclvii Andreas Cionis de Florentia me pinxit." 
Another fine altar-piece on panel by Orcagna, dated 1363, is 
preserved in the Cappella de' Medici, near the sacristy 
Sta Croce; it represents the four doctors of the Latin church. 
According to Vasari, Orcagna also painted some very fine 
frescoes in Sta Croce, similar in subjects to those attributed to 
him in the Campo Santo of Pisa, and full of fine portraits. These 
do not now exist. In the cathedral of Florence, on one of the 
northern piers, there hangs a nobly designed and highly finished 
picture on panel by Orcagna, representing S Zanobio enthroned, 
trampling under his feet Cruelty and Pride; at the sides are 
kneeling figures of SS Eugenius and Crescentius — the whole 
very rich in colour. The retable mentioned by Vasari as 
having been painted for the Florentine church of S Pietro 
Maggiore is now in the National Gallery of London. It is a 
richly decorative composition of the Coronation of the Virgin, 
between rows of saints, together with nine other subjects 
painted in miniature. Other paintings on panel by Orcagna 
were sent by the Pope to Avignon, but cannot now be traced. 
The frescoes also have been destroyed with which, according 
to Vasari, Orcagna decorated the facade of S Apollinare and the 
Cappella de' Cresci in the church of the Servi in Florence. 2 

2. Orcagna as a Sculptor and Architect. 3 — In 1355 Orcagna 
was appointed architect to the chapel of Or San Michele in 
Florence. This curiously-planned building, with a large upper 
room over the vaulting of the lower part, has been begun by 
Taddeo Gaddi as a thank-offering for the cessation of the plague 
of 1348. It took the place of an earlier oratory designed by 
Arnolfo del Cambio, and was the gift of the united trade-gilds 
of Florence. As to the building itself, it is impossible to say 
how much is due to Taddeo Gaddi and how much to Orcagna, 
but the great marble tabernacle was wholly by Orcagna. This, 
in its combined splendour of architectural design, sculptured 
reliefs and statuettes, and mosaic enrichments, is one of the 
most important and beautiful works of art which even rich 
Italy possesses. It combines an altar, a shrine, a reredos and a 
baldacchino. In general form it is perhaps the purest and most 
gracefully designed of all specimens of Italian Gothic. It is a 
tall structure of white marble, with vaulted canopy and richly 
decorated gables and pinnacles, reaching almost to the vaulted 
roof of the chapel. The detail is extremely deh'cate, and brilliant 
gem-like colour is given by lavish enrichments of minute patterns 
in glass mosaic, inlaid in the white marble of the structure. It 
is put together with the greatest care and precision; Vasari 
especially notes the fact that the whole was put together without 
any cement, which might have stained the purity of the marble, 
all the parts being closely fitted together with bronze dowels. 
The spire-like summit of the tabernacle is surmounted by a 
figure of St Michael, and at a lower stage on the roof are statuettes 
of the apostles. The altar has a relief of Hope between panels 
with the Marriage of the Virgin and the Annunciation. On 
the right side, looking east, of the base of the tabernacle are 
reliefs of the Birth of the Virgin and her Presentation in the 
Temple; on the left, the Nativity and the Adoration of the Magi; 
and behind, the Presentation of Christ in the Temple, and the 

2 The magnificent but much injured frescoes of the Last Judgment, 
Hell, and the Triumph of Death in the Pisan Campo Santo, described 
with great minuteness and enthusiasm by Vasari, are attributed by 
him to Orcagna, but internal evidence seems to show that they are 
productions of the Sienese school. Crowe and Cavalcaselle attribute 
them to the two brothers Lorenzetti of Siena, but they have been so 
injured by wet, the settlement of the wall, and repeated retouchings 
that it is difficult to come to any clear decision as to their authorship. 
It appears, however, much more probable that they are the work of 
Bernardo Daddi. 

3 Orcagna was admitted as a member of the Sculptors' Gild in 
1352. His name occurs in the roll as " Andreas Cionis vocatus 
Arcagnolus, pictor." 



ORCHARD— ORCHARDSON 



167 



Angel warning the Virgin to escape into Egypt. Above the last 
two subjects are large reliefs of the Death of the Virgin, sur- 
rounded by the apostles, and higher still her Assumption; 
she stands in a vesica, and is borne by angels to heaven. On 
the base of the Virgin's tomb is inscribed " Andreas Cionis 
pictor Florcntinvs oratorii archimagister extitit hvjvs mccclix." 
Orcagna's own portrait is given as one of the apostles. In 
addition to these richly-composed subject-reliefs the whole 
work is adorned with many other single figures and heads of 
prophets, angels, and the Virtues, all executed with wonderful 
finish and refinement. The shrine, which forms an aumbry in 
the reredos, contains a miraculous picture of the Madonna. A 
fine bronze screen, with open geometrical tracery, encloses the 
whole. No work of sculpture in Italy is more magnificent 
than this wonderful tabernacle, both in general effect and in the 
delicate beauty of the reliefs and statuettes with which it is 
so lavishly enriched. It cost the enormous sum of 96,000 gold 
florins. Unfortunately it is very badly placed and insufficiently 
lighted, so that a minute examination of its beauties is a work 
of difficulty. 

No mention is made by Vasari of Orcagna's residence in 
Orvieto, where he occupied for some time the post of " capo- 
maestro " to the duomo. He accepted this appointment on 
the 14th of June 1358 at the large salary (for that time) of 300 
gold florins a year. His brother Matteo was engaged to work 
under him, receiving 8 florins a month. When Orcagna accepted 
this appointment at Orvieto he had not yet finished his work 
at Or San Michele, and so was obliged to make long visits to 
Florence, which naturally interfered with the satisfactory 
performance of his work for the Orvietans. The result was that 
on the 1 2th of September 1360 Orcagna, having been paid 
for his work up to that time, resigned the post of " capo-maestro " 
of the duomo, though he still remained a little longer in Orvieto 
to finish a large mosaic picture on the west front. When this 
mosaic (made of glass tesserae from Venice) was finished in 1362, 
it was found to be uneven in surface, and not fixed securely into 
its cement bed. An arbitration was therefore held as to the 
price Orcagna was to receive for it, and he was awarded 60 
gold florins. 

Vasari mentions as other architectural works by Orcagna 
the design for the piers in the nave of the Florentine duomo, 
a zecca or mint, which appears not to have been carried out, 
and the Loggia dei Lanzi in the Piazza della Signoria. It is, 
however, more than doubtful whether Orcagna had any hand 
in this last building, a very graceful vaulted structure, with 
three semicircular open arches on the side and one at each end, 
intended to form a sheltered meeting-place for the Priori during 
elections and other public transactions. This loggia was ordered 
by the General Council of Florence in 1356, but was not actually 
begun till the year 1376, after Orcagna's death. The architects 
were Benci di Cione (possibly a brother of Orcagna) and Simone 
di Francesco Talenti, both men of considerable reputation in 
Florence. The sculptured reliefs of the seven Virtues in the 
spandrels of the arches of the loggia, also attributed to Orcagna 
by Vasari, were later still. They were designed by Angelo 
Gaddi (1383-1386), and were carried out by three or four different 
sculptors. 

Pupils of Orcagna named by Vasari are Bernardo Nello, a Pisan, 
Tommaso di Marco, a Florentine, and, chief of all, Francesco Traini, 
whose grand painting on panel of St Thomas Aquinas enthroned 
with the arch-heretics at his feet still hangs in the church for which 
it was painted — Sta Caterina at Pisa. Orcagna had, in addition 
to the two daughters mentioned above, a son named Cione, who 
was a painter of but little eminence. Some sonnets attributed to 
Orcagna exist in MS. in the Strozzi and Magliabecchian libraries 
in Florence. They have been published by Trucchi {Poesie inedite, 
ii. p. 25, Prato, 1846). They are graceful in language, but rather 
artificial and over-elaborated. 

Authorities. — Vasari, ed. Milanesi, i. p. 593 (Florence, 1878); 
Giornale degli Archivi Toscani, iii. p. 282, &c. ; Passerini, Curiositd. 
storico-artistiche; Gaye, Carteggio inedito, i. pp. 500-513, ii. p. 5; 
Rosini, Storia della pittura, vol. ii.; Baldinucci, Professori del disegno, 
vol. i. ; Rumohr, Ricerche Ita/iane, ii., and Antologia di Firenze, iii.; 
Crowe and Cavalcaselle, Painting in Italy, i. p. 425 (London, 1864); 
Perkins, Tuscan Sculptors, p. 77 (London, 1865). (J. H. M.) 



ORCHARD (0. Eng. ort-gcard, later orccard; a combination 
apparently of Lat. horlus, garden, and " yard " or " garth "), a 
piece of ground enclosed for the purposes of horticulture. The 
term was formerly used in a general way for a garden where 
herbs and fruit-trees were cultivated, but is now used exclusively 
for a piece of enclosed ground for fruit-trees only, and particularly 
for apples, pears, plums and cherries. 

ORCHARDSON, SIR WILLIAM QUILLER (1835-1910), 
British painter, was born in Edinburgh, where his father was 
engaged in business, in 1835. " Orchardson " is a variation 
of " Urquhartson," the name of a Highland sept settled on Loch 
Ness, from which the painter is descended. At the age of fifteen 
he was sent to the Trustees' Academy, then under the mastership 
of Robert Scott Lauder, where he had as fellow-students most 
of those who afterwards shed lustre on the Scottish school of the 
second half of the 19th century. As a student he was not especi- 
ally precocious or industrious, but his work was distinguished 
by a peculiar reserve, by an unusual determination that his 
hand should be subdued to his eye, with the result that his early 
things reach their own ideal as surely as those of his maturity. 
By the time he was twenty, Orchardson had mastered the 
essentials of his art, and had produced at least one picture which 
might be accepted as representative, a portrait of Mr John 
Hutchison, the sculptor. For seven years after this he worked 
in Edinburgh, some of his attention being given to " black and 
white," his practice in which had been partly acquired at a sketch 
club, which included among its members Mr Hugh Cameron, 
Mr Peter Graham, Mr George Hay, Mr M'Taggart, Mr John 
Hutchison and others. In 1862 he came to London, and estab- 
lished himself in 37 Fitzroy Square, where he was joined twelve 
months later by his friend John Pettie. The same house was 
afterwards inhabited by Ford Madox Brown. 

The English public was not immediately attracted by Orchard- 
son's work. It was too quiet to compel attention at the Royal 
Academy, and Pettie, Orchardson's junior by four years, stepped 
before him for a time, and became the most readily accepted 
member of the school. Orchardson confined himself to the 
simplest themes and designs, to the most reticent schemes of 
colour. Among his best pictures during the first eighteen years 
after his migration to London were " The Challenge," 
" Christopher Sly," " Queen of the Swords," " Conditional 
Neutrality," " Hard Hit " — perhaps the best of all— -and 
protraits of Mr Charles Moxon, his father-in-law, and of his own 
wife. In all these good judgment and a refined imagination 
were united to a restrained but consummate technical dexterity. 
During these same years he made a few drawings on wood, 
turning to account his early facility in this mode. The period 
between 1862 and 18S0 was one of quiet ambitions, of a character- 
istic insouciance, of life accepted as a thing of many-balanced 
interests rather than as a matter of slurm und drang. In 1865 
Pettie married, and the Fitzroy Square menage was broken up. 
In 1868 Orchardson was elected A.R.A. In 1S70 he spent the 
summer in Venice, travelling home in the early autumn through 
a France overrun by the German armies. In 1S73 he married 
Miss Helen Moxon, and in 1S77 he was elected to the full member- 
ship of the Royal Academy. In this same year he finished 
building a house at Westgate-on-Sea, with an open tennis-court 
and a studio in the garden. He was knighted in June 1907, 
and died in London on the 13th of April 1910. 

Orchardson's wider popularity dates from 1881. To that 
year's Academy he sent the large " On Board the BellcropJion," 
which now hangs in the Tate Gallery. Its success with the public 
was great and instantaneous, and for ten or twelve years Orchard- 
son's work was more eagerly looked for at the Academy than 
that of any one else. He followed up the " Bellerophon " with 
the still finer " Voltaire," now in the Kunsthalle at Hamburg. 
Technically, the " Voltaire " is, perhaps, his high-water mark. 
Fine both in design and colour, it is carried out with a supple 
dexterity of hand which has scarcely been equalled in the 
British school since the death of Gainsborough. The subject 
is not entirely happy, for it does not explain itself, but requires 
a previous knowledge on the part of the spectator of how Voltaire 



i68 



ORCHESTRA 



was beaten hy the servants of the Chevalier de Rohan-Cabot, 
and how the due de Sully failed to avenge his guest. The painter 
was attracted by the opportunity it gave for effective opposition 
of character, line, colour and movement. The " Voltaire " 
was at the Academy of 18S3; it was followed, in 18S4, by the 
" Manage de convenance," perhaps the most popular of all 
Orchardson's pictures; in 1885, by "The Salon of Madame 
Recamier "; in 1886, by " After," the sequel to the " Mariage de 
convenance," and " A Tender Chord," one of his most exquisite 
productions; in 18S7, by "The First Cloud"; in 1888, by 
" Her Mother's Voice "; and in 18S9, by " The Young Duke," 
a canvas on which he returned to much the same pictorial 
scheme as that of the " Voltaire." Subsequently he exhibited 
a series of pictures in which fine pictorial use was made of the 
furniture and costumes of the early years of the 19th century, 
the suhjects, as a rule, being only just enough to suggest a title: 
" An Enigma," " A Social Eddy," " Reflections," " If music be 
the food of love, play on!" "Music, when sweet voices die, 
vibrates on the memory," " Her First Dance," — in these, oppor- 
tunities are made to introduce old harpsichords, spinets, early 
pianofortes, Empire chairs, sofas and tables, Aubusson carpets, 
short-waisted gowns, delicate in material and primitive in 
ornament. Between such things and Orchardson's methods 
as a painter the sympathy is close, so that the best among them, 
" A Tender Chord," for instance, or " Music, when sweet voices 
die," have a rare distinction. 

As a portrait-painter Orchardson must be placed in the first 
class. His portraits are not numerous, but among them are 
a few which rise to the highest level reached by modern art. 
" Master Baby," a picture, connecting subject-painting with 
portraiture, is a masterpiece of design, colour and broad execution. 
" Mrs Joseph," " Mrs Ralli," " Sir Andrew Walker, Bart.," 
" Charles Moxon, Esq.," " Mrs Orchardson," " Conditional 
Neutrality " (a portrait of Orchardson's eldest son as a boy of 
six), "Lord Rookwood," "The Provost of Aberdeen," and, 
ahove all, " Sir Walter Gilbey, Bart.," would all deserve a place 
in any list of the best portraits of the 19th century. In this 
branch of art the " Sir Walter Gilhey " may fairly be called 
the painter's masterpiece, although the sumptuous full-length 
of the Scottish provost, in his robes, runs it closely. The scheme 
of colour is reticent; had the picture been exhibited at the time 
of the Boer War of 1900 the colour would have been called khaki; 
the design is simple, uniting nature to art with a rare felicity; 
and the likeness has been found satisfactory by the sitter's 
friends. The most important commission ever received by 
Orchardson as a portrait-painter was that for a group of Queen 
Victoria, with her son (afterwards King Edward VII.), grandson, 
and great-grandson, to be painted on one canvas for the Royal 
Agricultural Society. The painter hit upon a happy notion for 
the bringing of the four figures together, and as time goes on and 
the picture slowly turns into history, its merit is likely to be 
better appreciated. He continued painting to the end of his 
life, and had three portraits ready for the Royal Academy 
in 1910. 

Orchardson's method was that of one who worked under a 
creative, decorative and subjective impulse, rather than under 
one derived from a wish to observe and record. His affiliation 
is with Watteau and Gainsborough, rather than with those who 
would base all pictorial art on a keen eye for actuality and 
" value." Among French painters his pictures have excited 
particular admiration. (W.Ar.) 

ORCHESTRA (Fr. Orchestre; Ger. Kapelle, Orehester; Ital. 
Orchestra), in its modern acceptation (1) the place in a theatre 
or concert hall set apart for the musicians; (2) a carefully- 
balanced group of performers on stringed, wind and percussion 
instruments adapted for playing in concert and directed hy a 
conductor. In ancient Greece the opxn^Tpa. was the space between 
the auditorium and the proscenium or stage, in which were 
stationed the chorus and the instrumentalists. The second 
sense is that which is dealt with here. 

A modern orchestra is composed of (1) a basis of strings — first 
and second violins, violas, violoncellos and double basses; 



(2) flutes, sometimes including a piccolo; (3) the reed contingent, 
consisting of two complete families, the oboes with their tenors 
and basses (the cor Anglais, the fagotto or bassoon and the 
contrafagotto or double bassoon), the clarinets with their 
tenor and basses (the basset horn and the bass and pedal clarinets) 
with the addition sometimes of saxophones; (4) the brass wind, 
consisting of the horns, a group sometimes completed by the 
tenor and tenor-bass Wagner tubas, the trumpet or cornet, 
the trombones (tenor, bass and contrabass), the tubas (tenor, 
bass and contrabass); (5) the percussion instruments, including 
the kettledrums, bells, Glockenspiel, cymbals, triangle, &c. 
Harps are added when required for special effects. 

Although most of the instruments from the older civilizations 
of Egypt, Chaldea, Persia, Phoenicia and of the Semitic races 
were known to the ancient Greeks, their conception of music 
led them to discourage all imitation of their neighbours' love 
of orchestral effects, obtained by combining harps, lyres, guitars, 
tanhurs, double pipes and long flutes, trumpets, bagpipes, 
cymbals, drums, &c, playing in unison or in octaves. The 
Greeks only cultivated to any extent the various kinds of 
citharas, lyres and auloi, seldom used in concert. To the pre- 
dilection of the Romans for wind instruments of all kinds, 
we owe nearly all the wind instruments of the modern orchestra, 
each of which had its prototype among the instruments of the 
Roman Empire: the flute, oboe and clarinet, in the tibia; 
the trombone and trumpet in the buccina; the tubas in the 
tuha; and the French horn in cornu and buccina. The 4th 
century a.d. witnessed the downfall of the Roman drama and 
the debasement of instrumental music, which was placed 
under a ban hy the Church. During the convulsions which the 
migrations of Goths, Vandals and Huns caused in Europe after 
the fall of Rome, instrumental music was preserved from absolute 
extinction by wandering actors and musicians turned adrift 
after the closing of the theatres by command of the Church. 
Later, as demand arose, reinforcements of instruments, instru- 
mentalists and instrument makers filtered through the Byzantine 
Empire and the Christian East generally on the one side and 
from the Moors on the West. It is towards the dawn of the 
nth century that we find the first definite indications of the 
status of instrumental music in Western and Central Europe. 
Everywhere are the evidences, so conspicuously absent from 
the catacombs and from Romano-Christian monuments, of the 
growing favour in which instrumental music was held, to instance 
only such sculptures as those of the Abbey of Boscherville in 
Normandy, of the portico of the Cathedral of Santiago da 
Compostella (12th century) with its orchestra of 24 musicians, 
and the full-page illuminations of Psalters representing David 
and his musicians and of the 24 elders in the Apocalypses. 

The earliest instrumental compositions extant are certain 
15th-century dances and pieces in contrapuntal style preserved 
in the libraries of Berlin and Munich. The late development 
of notation, which long remained exclusively in the hands of 
monks and troubadours, personally more concerned with vocal 
than with instrumental music, ensured the preservation of the 
former, while the latter was left unrecorded. Instrumental 
music was for centuries dependent on outcasts and outlaws, 
tolerated hy Church and State but beyond the pale. Little 
was known of the construction and technique of the instruments, 
and their possibilities were undreamed. Nevertheless, the innate 
love and yearning of the people for tone-colour asserted itself 
with sufficient strength to overcome all obstacles. It is true 
that the development of the early forms of harmony, the organum, 
diaphony, the discant and the richer forms of polyphony grew 
up round the voice, but indications are not wanting of an 
independent energy and vitality which must surely have existed 
in unrecorded medieval instrumental music, since they can be 
so clearly traced in the instruments themselves. It is, for 
example, significant of the attitude of 10th-century instru- 
mentalists towards musical progress that they at once assimi- 
lated Huchald's innovation of the organum, a parallel succession 
of fourths and fifths, accompanied sometimes by the octave, 
for two or three voices respectively, and they produced in the 



ORCHESTRA 



169 



same century the organislrum, named after Hucbald's organum, 
and specially constructed to reproduce it. 

Shortly after the introduction of polyphony, instruments such 
as flutes-a-bec, or flaiols, cornets, cromornes, shawms, hunting 
horns, bagpipes, as well as lutes and bowed instruments began 
to be made in sizes approximately corresponding in pitch with 
the voice parts. It is probably to the same yearning of instru- 
mentalists after a polyphonic ensemble, possible until the 14th 
century only on organs, hurdy-gurdies and bagpipes, that we 
owe the clavichord and clavicembalo, embodying the application 
of keys, respectively, to the dulcimer and the psaltery. 

There are two reasons which account for the development 
of the brass wind proceeding more slowly. (1) These instru- 
ments, trumpets or busines, tubas and horns, were for many 
centuries mainly used in medieval Europe as military or hunt- 
ing signal instruments, and as such the utmost required of 
them was a fanfare. Specimens of 14th-century tablature and 
16th-century notation for the horn, for instance, show that 
for that instrument rhythm alone was taken into account. 
(2) Whereas in most of the instruments named above the 
notes of the diatonic scale were either fixed or easily obtained, 
the acoustic principles of tubes without lateral holes and blown 
by means of a cup mouthpiece do not allow of a diatonic scale, 
except for the fourth octave from the fundamental, and that 
only in trumpets and horns, the notes of the common chord with 
the addition of the flattened seventh being the utmost that can 
be produced without the help of valves, keys or slides. These 
instruments were, therefore, the last to be added to the orchestra, 
although they were extensively used for special military, civil 
and religious functions and were the most highly favoured of all. 

The earliest improvement in the status of the roving instru- 
mentalists came with the rise of minstrelsy. The courts of the 
counts of Toulouse, Provence and Barcelona were the first to 
foster the art of improvising or composing songs known as trobar 
(or trouver in the north of France), and Count Guillaume of 
Poitiers (1087-1127) is said to have been the first troubadour. 
The noble troubadour seldom sang the songs he composed him- 
self, this duty devolving upon his professional minstrel skilled in 
singing and in playing upon divers instruments who interpreted 
and disseminated his master's verses. In this respect the trouba- 
dour differed from his German contemporary the Minnesinger, 
who frequently sang himself. The professional musicians were 
included under the general term of jongleurs or juglcors, glecmen 
or minstrels, whose function was to entertain and amuse, but there 
were among them many subtle distinctions and ranks, such as 
cliautcors and estrumanteors. Love was the prevailing theme in 
the south, while in the north war and heroic deeds inspired the 
bards. To the former was due the rapid development of bowed 
instruments, which by reason of their singing quality were more 
suitable for accompanying passionate love songs, while instru- 
ments of which the strings were plucked accorded better with the 
declamatory and dramatic style of the north. 

The first assertive move towards independence was made 
by the wandering musicians in the 13th century, when some of 
these, tired of a roving life, settled down in cities, forming gilds 
or brotherhoods for the protection of their mutual interests and 
privileges. In time they came to be recognized by the burgo- 
masters and municipalities, by whom they were engaged to pro- 
vide music at all civic and private festivities, wandering musicians 
being prohibited from playing within the precincts of the cities. 
The oldest of these gilds was the Brotherhood of Nicolai founded 
in Vienna in 1288. In the next century these pioneers chose as 
patron of their brotherhood Peter von Eberstorff, from 1354 
to 1376 known as Vagi der Musikanten, who obtained for the 
members an imperial charter. This example was gradually 
followed in other parts of Germany and elsewhere in Europe. 
In England, John of Gaunt was in 1381 chosen King of the 
Minstrels. In France there was the Confrerie of St Julien des 
Menestriers, incorporated in 1321. Exalted patrons of instru- 
mental music multiplied in the 15th century, to instance only the 
dukes of Burgundy, the emperors of the House of Austria, the 
dukes of Lorraine, of Este, Ferrara and Tuscany, the electors 



of Saxony and the kings of France with their renowned institu- 
tions La Chapelle-Musique du Roi (c. 1440), la Musiquc de la 
Chambre, la Musique de la Grande Ecurie duRoi. 

At the time of the revival of the drama with music, afterwards 
modified and known as opera, at the end of the 16th century, 
there was as yet no orchestra in our sense of the word, but merely 
an abundance of instruments used in concert for special effects, 
without balance or grouping; small positive organs, regals, 
harpsichords, lutes, theorboes, archlutes and chittarone (bass 
and contrabass lutes), guitars, viols, lyras da braeeio and da 
gamba, psalteries, citterns, harps, flutes, recorders, cornets, 
trumpets and trombones, drums and cymbals. 

Monteverde was the first to see that a preponderance of strings 
is necessary to ensure a proper balance of tone. With the per- 
fected models of the Cremona violins at his disposal, a quartett 
of strings was established, and all other stringed instruments 
not played with the bow were ejected from the orchestra with the 
exception of the harp. Under the influence of Monteverde and 
his successors, Cavalli and Cesti, the orchestra won for itself a 
separate existence with music and laws of its own. As instru- 
ments were improved, new ones introduced, and old ones 
abandoned, instrumentation became a new and favourite study 
in Italy and in Germany. Musicians began to find out the 
capabilities of various families of instruments and their individual 
value. 

The proper understanding of the compass and capabilities of 
wind instruments, and more especially of the brass wind, was of 
later date (18th century). At first the scores contained but few 
indications for instruments other than strings; the others played 
as much as they could according to the compass of their instru- 
ments at the direction of the leader. The possibility of using 
instruments for solos, by encouraging virtuosi to acquire great 
skill, raised the standard of excellence of the whole orchestra. 

At first the orchestra was an aristocratic luxury, performing 
privately at the courts of the princes and nobles of Italy; but 
in the 17th century performances were given in theatres, and 
Germany eagerly followed. Dresden, Munich and Hamburg 
successively built opera houses, while in England opera flourished 
under Purcell, and in France under Lully, who with the collabora- 
tion of Moliere also greatly raised the status of the entertainments 
known as ballets, interspersed with instrumental and vocal music. 

The revival of the drama seems to have exhausted the enthusi- 
asm of Italy for instrumental music, and the field of action was 
shifted to Germany, where the perfecting of the orchestra was 
continued. Most German princes had at the beginning of the 
1 8th century good private orchestras or Kapelle, and they 
always endeavoured to secure the services of the best available 
instrumentalists. Kaiser, Telemann, Graun, Mattheson and 
Handel contributed greatly to the development of German 
opera and of the orchestra in Hamburg during the first quarter 
of the century. Bach, Gluck and Mozart, the reformers of 
opera; Haydn, the father of the modern orchestra and the 
first to treat it independently as a power opposed to the solo 
and chorus, by scoring for the instruments in well-defined 
groups; Beethoven, who individualized the instruments, 
writing solo passages for them; Weber, who brought the horn 
and clarinet into prominence; Schuhert, who inaugurated the 
conversations between members of the wood wind — all left their 
mark on the orchestra, leading the way up to Wagner and 
Strauss. 

A sketch of the rise of the modern orchestra would not be 
complete without reference to the invention of the piston or 
valve by Stolzel and Bliimel, both Silesians, in 1813. A satis- 
factory bass for the wind, and more especially for the brass, had 
long been a desideratum. The effect of this invention was felt 
at once: instrument-makers in all countries vied with each other 
in making use of the contrivance and in bringing it to perfection; 
and the orchestra was before long enriched by a new family of 
valved instruments, variously known as tubas, or euphoniums 
and bombardons, having a chromatic scale and a full sonorous 
tone of great beauty and immense volume, forming a magnificent 
bass. (K. S.) 

xx. 6a 



170 



ORCHESTRION— ORCHIDS 



ORCHESTRION, a name applied to three different kinds of 
instruments. (1) A chamber organ, designed by Abt. Vogler 
at the end of the 18th rentury, which in a space of 9 cub. ft. 
contained no less than goo pipes, 3 manuals of 63 keys each and 
39 pedals (see Harmonium). (2) A pianoforte with organ pipes 
attached, invented by Thomas Anton Kunz of Prague in 1791. 
This orchestrion comprised two manuals of 65 keys and 25 
pedals, all of which could be used either independently or coupled. 
There were 21 stops, 230 strings and 360 pipes which produced 
105 different combinations. The bellows were worked either by 
hand or by machinery. (3) A mechanical instrument, auto- 
matically played by means of revolving cylinders, invented in 
1851 by F. T. Kaufmann of Dresden. It comprises a complete 
wind orchestra, with the addition of kettle-drums, side-drums, 
cymbals and triangle. (K. S.) 

ORCKHA, or Urchha (also called Tehri or Tikamgarh), a 
native state of Central India, in the Bundelkhand agency. 
Orchha is the oldest and highest in rank of all the Bundela 
principalities, and was the only one not held in subjection by 
the peshwa. Area, 2080 sq. m.; pop. (1901) 321,634; estimated 
revenue, £47,000; no tribute. The maharaja, Sir Pratap Singh, 
G. S.C.I, (born in 1854, succeeded in 1874), took a great personal 
interest in the development of his state, and himself designed 
most of the engineering and irrigation works that have been 
executed here within recent years. He bears the hereditary 
title of " First of the Princes of Bundelkhand." The state exports 
grain, ghi, and cotton cloth, but trade suffers from imperfect 
communications. The town of Orchha, the former capital, is on 
the river Betwa, not far from Jhansi. It possesses an imposing 
fort, dating mainly from the early 17th century. This contains 
a number of palaces and other buildings connected one with 
another. The most noteworthy are the Rajmandir, a massive 
square erection of which the exterior is almost absolutely plain; 
and the Jahangirmahal, of the same form but far more ornate, 
a singularly beautiful specimen of Hindu domestic architecture. 
Elsewhere about the town are fine temples and tombs, among 
which may be noticed the Chaturbhuj temple on its vast platform 
of stone. The town of Tehri or Tikamgarh, where the chief now 
resides, is about 40 m. S. of Orchha; pop. (1901) 14,050. It 
contains the fort of Tikamgarh, by which name the town is 
generally called, to distinguish it from Tehri in the Himalayas. 
ORCHIDS. The word Orchis is used in a special sense to denote 
a particular genus of the Orchid family {Orchidaceae); very 
frequently, also, it is employed in a more general way to indicate 
any member of that large and very interesting group. It will be 
convenient here to use the word Orchis as applying to that 
particular genus which gives its name to the order or family, and 
to employ the term " orchid " in the less precise sense. 

The flowers of all orchids, though extremely diverse within 
certain limits, and although superficially very different from those 

of other monocotyledons, are 
all formed upon one common 
plan, which is only a modifica- 
tion of that observable in such 
flowers as those of the narcissus 
or snowdrop (Galanthus). The 
conformation of those flowers 
consists essentially in the pres- 
ence of a six-parted perianth, 
the three outer segments of 
which correspond to a calyx, 
the three inner ones to a 
corolla. These segments spring 
apparently from the top of the 
ovary — the real explanation, 
however, being that the end 
of the flower-stalk or " thala- 
mus," as it grows, becomes dilated into a sort of cup or 
tube enclosing and indeed closely adhering to the ovary, so 
that the latter organ appears to be beneath the perianth instead 
of above it as in a lily, an appearance which has given origin to 
the term " inferior ovary." Within the perianth, and springing 




A. Floral diagram of typical 
orchid flower ;_ I, labellum; a, 
anther; s, rudiments of barren 
stamens (staminodes). 

B. Diagram of the symmetrical 
trimerous flower of Fritillary 
(Frilillaria). 



from its sides, or apparently from the top of the ovary, are 
six stamens whose anthers contain pulverulent pollen-grains. 
These stamens encircle a style which is the upward continuation 
of the ovary, and which shows at its free end traces of the three 
originally separate but now blended carpels of which the ovary 
consists. An orchid flower has an inferior ovary like that just 





Fig. 2. — Diagram of the flower 
of Orchis. 

s, si, si. The three divisions of 
the outer perianth. 

pi, pi, The two lateral divisions 
of the inner perianth. 

ps, The superior division or 
the labellum, which may 
become inferior by the 
twisting of the ovary. 

e, The fertile stamen, with 
its two pollen-masses in 
the anther-lobes. 

r, The one-celled ovary cut 
transversely, having three 
parietal placentas. 



Fig. 3. — Flower of Orchis, 
s, s, s, The three outer 
divisions of the 
perianth. 

I, The three inner, 
I being the label- 
lum, here inferior 
by the twisting 
of the ovary. 

Spur of the label- 
lum. 

The twisted ovary. 

The stigma. 

The anther, con- 
taining pollen- 
masses. 



P,P, 



described, but with the ovules on the walls of the cavity ( not in its 
axis or centre), a six-parted perianth, a stamen or stamens and 
stigmas. The main distinguishing features consist in the fact 
that one of the inner pieces of the perianth becomes in course of 
its growth much larger than the rest, and usually different in 
colour, texture and form. So different is it that it receives a dis- 
tinct name, that of the " lip " or " labellum." In place of the 
six stamens we commonly find but one (two in Cypripedium) , and 
that one is raised together with the stigmatic surfaces on an 
elongation of the floral axis known as the "column." Moreover, 
the pollen, instead of consisting of separate cells or grains, 
consists of cells aggregated into "pollen-masses," the number 
varying in different genera, but very generally two, four, or eight, 
and in many of the genera provided at 
the base with a strap-shaped stalk or 
"caudicle " ending in a flattish gland or 
"viscid disk" like a boy's sucker. 
In Cypripedium all three stigmas are 
functional, but in the great majority of 
orchids only the lateral pair form recep- 
tive surfaces (si, fig. 3), the third being 
sterile and forming the rostellum which 
plays an important part in the process 
of pollination, often forming a peculiar 
pouch-like process (fig. 4, r) in which 
the viscid disk of the pollen-masses is 
concealed till released in the manner 
presently to be mentioned. It would 
appear, then, that the orchid flower 
differs from the more general mono- 
cotyledonous type in the irregularity of 
the perianth, in the suppression of five 
out of six stamens, and in the union of 
the one stamen and the stigmas. In addition to these modifica- 
tions, which are common to nearly all orchids, there are others 
generally but not so universally met with; among them is the 
displacement of the flower arising from the twisting of the inferior 
ovary, in consequence of which the flower is so completely turned 
round that the " lip," which originates in that part of the flower, 
conventionally called the posterior or superior part, or that 




Fig. 4. — Diagram illus- 
trating arrangement of 
parts in flower of Orchis, 
s, Sepals. 
p, Petals. 
a, Anther. 

st, Two united stigmas. 
r, Rostellum (barren 
stigma). 



ORCHIDS 



171 




nearest to the supporting stem, becomes in course of growth 
turned to the anterior or lower part of the flower nearest to the 
bract, from whose axil it arises. Other common modifications 
arise from the union of certain parts of the 
perianth to each other, and from the varied 
and often very remarkable outgrowths from 
the lip. These modifications are associated 
with the structure and habits of insects and 
their visits to the flowers. 

Cross fertilization, or the impregnation of 
any given flower by pollen from another 
flower of the same species on the same or on 
another plant, has been proved to be of great 
advantage to the plant by securing a more 
J^> n numerous or a more robust offspring, or one 
masses of an Orchid better able to adapt itself to the varying 
with their caudicles conditions under which it has to live. This 
c and common cr0 ss fertilization is often effected by the 
gland g. agency of insects. They are attracted to the 

flower by its colour or its perfume; they seek, collect or feed on its 
honey, and while so doing they remove the pollen from the anther 
and convey it to another flower, there to germinate on the stigma 
when its tubes travel down the style to the ovary where their 
contents ultimately fuse with the " oosphere " or immature egg, 
which becomes in consequence fertilized, and forms a seed which 
afterwards develops into a new plant (see article Angiosperms). 
To facilitate the operations of such insects, by compelling them 
to move in certain lines so as to secure the due removal of the 
pollen and its subsequent deposit on the right place, the form of 
the flower and the conformation of its several parts are modified in 
ways as varied as they are wonderful. Other insects visit the 
flower with more questionable result. For them the pollen is 
an attraction as food, or some other part of the flower offers an 
inducement to them for a like object. Such visitors are clearly 
prejudicial to the flower, and so we meet with arrangements 
which are calculated to repel the intruders, or at least to force 
them to enter the flower in such a way as not to effect mischief. 
See Darwin's Fertilization of Orchids and similar works. 

In the common orchids of British meadows, Orchis Morio, 
mascula (Shakespeare's long purples), &c, the general structure 
of the flower is as we have described it (figs. 2, 3). In addition 
there is in this particular genus, as indeed in many others, a long 
tubular spur or horn projecting downwards from the back of the 
lip, whose office it is to secrete and store a honeyed juice; the 
forepart of the lip forms an expanded plate, usually larger and 
more brightly coloured than the other parts of the flower, and 
with hairs or ridges and spots of various kinds according to the 
species. The remaining parts of the perianth are very much 
smaller, and commonly are so arranged as to form a hood over- 
arching the " column. " This column stands up from the base 
of the flower, almost at right angles to the lip, and it bears at the 
top an anther, in the two hollow lobes of which are concealed the 
two pollen-masses, each with its caudicle terminating below in a 
roundish gland, concealed at first in the pouch-like rostellum at 
the front of the column. Below the anther the surface of the 
column in front is hollowed out into a greenish depression 
covered with viscid fluid — this is the two united stigmas. The 
other parts of the flower need not detain us. Such being in 
general terms the mechanism of the flower of a common orchis, 
let us now see how it acts. A bee, we will assume, attracted by the 
colour and perfume of the flower, alights on that part of it which 
is the first to attract its attention — the lip. There, guided by the 
hairs or ridges before-mentioned, it is led to the orifice of the 
spur with its store of honeyed juice. The position of this orifice, 
as we have seen, is at the base of the lip and of the column, so 
that the insect, if of sufficient size, while bending its head to 
insert the proboscis into the spur, almost of necessity displaces 
the pollen-masses. Liberated from the anthers, these adhere to 
the head or back of the insect by means of the sticky gland at 
the bottom of the caudicle (fig. 4). Having attained its object 
the insect withdraws, taking the pollen-masses, and visits 
another flower. And now occurs another device or adaptation no 



less marvellous than those of which mention has been made. 
The two anther-cases in an orchis are erect and nearly parallel 
the one to the other; the pollen-masses within them are of course 
in like case, as may be thus represented II, but immediately 
the pollen-masses are removed movements take place at the 
base of the caudicle so as to effect the bending of this stalk and 
the placing the pollen-mass in a more or less horizontal 
position, thus =, or, as in the case of 0. pyramidalis, the two 
pollen-masses originally placed parallel II diverge from the base 
like the letter V. The movements of the pollen-masses may 
readily be seen with the naked eye by thrusting the point of a 
needle into the base of the anther, when the disks adhere to the 
needle as they would do to the antenna of an insect, and may be 
withdrawn. Sometimes the lip is mobile and even sensitive to 
impressions, as are also certain processes of the column. In such 
cases the contact of an insect or other body with those processes 
is sufficient to liberate the pollen often with elastic force, even 
when the anther itself is not touched. In other orchids move- 
ments take place in different ways and in other directions. The 
object of these movements will be appreciated when it is re- 
membered that, if the pollen-masses retained the original 
direction they had in the anther in which they were formed, they 
would, when transported by the insect to another flower, merely 
come in contact with the anther of that flower, where of course 
they would be of no use; but, owing to the divergences and 
flexions above alluded to, the pollen-masses come to be so placed 
that, when transplanted to another flower of the same species, 
they come in contact with the stigma and so effect the fertiliza- 
tion of that flower. These illustrations are comparatively 
simple; it would have been easy to select others of a more com- 
plicated nature, but all evidently connected with the visits of 
insects and the cross fertilization of the flower. In some 
cases, as in Catasctum, male flowers are produced so different 
from the female that before the different flowers had been 
found on the same pike, and before the facts of the case were 
fully known, they were taken to be representatives of distinct 
genera. 

The fruit is a capsule splitting generally by three longitudinal 
slits forming valves which remain united above and below. The 
seeds are minute and innumerable; they contain a small rudi- 
mentary embryo surrounded by a thin loose membraneous coat, 
and are scattered by means of hygroscopic hairs on the inside 
of the valves which by their movements jerk out the seeds. The 
floral structure is so curious that perhaps less attention has 
been paid to the vegetative organs than the peculiarities of 
their organisation demand. We can only allude to some of 
these points. The orchids of British fields 
are all of terrestrial habit, and their roots 
are mostly tuberous (fig. 6), the tubers 
being partly radical partly budlike in their 
character. There is often a marked alter- 
nation in the production of vegetative and 
flowering shoots respectively; and, some- 
times, from various circumstances, the 
flowering shoots are not produced for 
several years in succession. This fact will 
account for the profusion with which some 
orchids, like the common bee orchis for 
instance, are found in some seasons and 
their scarcity in others. Tropical orchids 
are mostly epiphytal — that is, they grow 
upon trees without deriving nourishment 
from them. They are frequently provided 
with " pseudo-bulbs, " large solid swellings 
of the stem, in the tissues of which water 
and nutritive materials are stored. They 
derive this moisture from the air by means of aerial roots, 
developed from the stem and bearing an outer spongy structure, 
or velamen, consisting of empty cells kept open by spiral thicken- 
ings in the wall; this sponge-like tissue absorbs dew and rain 
and condenses the moisture of the air and passes it on to the 
internal tissues. 




Fig. 6. — Tuber- 
cular roots of Orchis 
mascula, a terrestrial 
Orchid. 



IJ2 



ORCHOMENUS 



The number of species of orchids is greater than that of any 
other monocotyledonous order— not even excepting grasses — 
amounting to 6000, contained in 400 genera. This large number 
is partly accounted for by the diligent search in all countries 
that has been made for these plants for purposes of cultivation — 
they being held at present in the greatest esteem by plant- 
lovers, and prices being paid for new or rare varieties which 
recall the days of the tulipomania. 

The economic uses of orchids are not remarkable. When we 
have mentioned vanilla (q.v.), which consists of the fleshy pods 
of an orchid, we have mentioned about the only economic 
product that now comes into market. Salep (q.v.), still used in 
the Levant, consists of the dried tubers of a terrestrial orchid, 
and contains a relatively large amount of nutritious matter. 
The cultivation of orchids is treated under Horticulture. 

The order is divided into two main groups based on the number 
of the stamens and stigmas. The first Diandreae, has two or rarely 
three fertile stamens and three functional stigmas. It contains 
two small genera of tropical Asia and Africa with almost regular 
flowers, and the large genus Cypripedium containing about 80 species 
in the north-temperate zone and tropical Asia and America. In 
Cypripedium two stamens are present, one on each side of the 
column instead of one only at the top, as in the group Monandreae, 
to which belong the remaining genera in which also only two stigmas 
are fertile. What may be considered the normal number of stamens 
is, as has been said, six, arranged in two rows, fn most orchids the 
only stamen developed to maturity is the posterior one of the three 
opposite to the lip (anterior before the twisting of the ovary), the 
other two, as well as all three inner ones, being entirely absent, 
or present only in the form of rudiments. In Cypripedium twoof 
the outer stamens are wanting; the third — the one, that is, which 
corresponds to the single fertile stamen in the Monandreae — forms 
a large sterile structure or staminode; the two lateral ones of the 
inner series are present, the third being undeveloped. This arrange- 
ment may be understood by reference to the following diagram, 
representing the relative position of the stamens in orchids generally 
and in Cypripedium. The letter L indicates the position of the 
labellum; the large figures indicate the developed stamens; the 
italic figures show the position of the suppressed stamens. 



6 

L 



4 5 

6 
L 



Arrangement of stamens Arrangement of stamens 

in Orchis. in Cypripedium. 

The Monandreae have been subdivided into twenty-eight tribes, 
the characters of which are based on the structure of the anther and 
pollinia, the nature of the inflorescence, whether terminal or lateral, 
the vernation of the leaf and the presence or absence of a joint 
between blade and sheath, and the nature of the stem. The most 
important are the following: 

Ophrydineae, with about 45 genera, of terrestrial orchids, mainly 
north temperate, including the British genera Orchis, Aceras, Ophrys, 
Herminium, Gymnadenia and Habenaria. Also some genera mainly 
represented in South and tropical Africa, such as Satyrium, Disa and 
others. 

Neottiineae, including 90 genera, also terrestrial, contains thirteen 
more or less widely distributed tropical or subtropical subtribes, 
some of which extend into temperate zones; one, Cephalanlhereae, 
which includes our British genera Cephalanthera and Epipactis is 
chiefly north temperate. The British genera Spiranthes, Listera and 
Neottia are also included in this tribe, as is also Vanilla, the elongated 
stem of which climbs by means of tendril-like aerial roots — the long 
fleshy pod is the vanilla used for flavouring. 

Coelogyninae, 7 genera, mostly epiphytes, and inhabitants of 
tropical Asia. A single internode of each shoot is swollen to form a 
pseudobulb. 

Liparidinae, 9 genera, terrestrial, two, Malaxis and Corallorhiza, 
are British. Liparis is a large genus widely distributed in the 
tropics. 

Pleurothallidinae, characterized by a thin stem bearing one leaf 
which separates at a distinct joint; the sepals are usually much 
larger than the petals and lip. Includes 10 genera, natives of 
tropical America, one of which, Pleurothallis, contains about 400 
species. Masderallia is common in cultivation and has often 
brilliant scarlet, crimson or orange flowers. 

Laeliinae, with 22 genera, natives of the warmer parts of America, 
including three of those best known in cultivation, Epidendrum, 
Cattleya and Laelia. The jointed leaves are fleshy or leathery; 
the flowers are generally large with a well-developed lip. 

Phajinae, includes 15 genera chiefly tropical Asiatic, some — 
Phajus and Calanthe — spreading northwards into China and 
Japan. 

Cystopodiinae, includes 9 genera tropical, but extending into north 



temperate Asia and South Africa; Eulophia and Lissochilus are 
important African genera. 

Cataselinae, with three tropical American genera, two of which, 
Cataselum and Cycnoches, have di- or tri-morphic flowers. They are 
cultivated for their strange-looking flowers. 

Dendrobiinae, with six genera in the warmer parts of the Old 
World; the chief is Dendrobium, with 300 species, often with showy 
flowers. 

Cymbidiinae, with 8 genera in the tropics of the Old World. The 
leaves are generally long and narrow. Cymbidium is well known in 
cultivation. 

Oncidiinae, with 44 genera in the warmer parts of America. 
Odontoglossum and Oncidium include some of the best-known culti- 
vated orchids. 

Sarcanthinae, with 42 genera in the tropics. Vanda (Asia) and 
Angraecum (Africa and Madagascar) are known in cultivation. The 
flower of Angraecum sesquipedale has a spur 18 in. in length. 

The order is well represented in Britain by 18 genera, which 
include several species of Orchis: — Gymnadenia (fragrant orchis), 
Habenaria (butterfly and frog orchis), Aceras (man orchis), Hermin- 
ium (musk orchis), Ophrys (bee, spider and fly orchis), Epipactis 
(Helleborine), Cephalatithera, Neottia (bird's-nest orchis), one of the 
few saprophytic genera, which have no green leaves, but derive their 
nourishment from decaying organic matter in the soil, Listera 
(Tway blade), Spiranthes (lady's tresses), Malaxis (bog-orchis), 
Liparis (fen-orchis), Corallorhiza (coral root), also a saprophyte, and 
Cypripedium (lady's slipper), represented by a single species now 
very rare in limestone districts in the north of England. 

ORCHOMENUS (local form on coins and inscriptions, Ercho- 
menos), the name borne by two cities of ancient Greece. 

1. A Boeotian city, situated in an angle between the Cephissus 
and its tributary the Melas, on a long narrow hill which projects 
south from Mount Acontium. Its position is exceedingly strong, 
being defended on every side by precipice or marsh or river, 
and it was admirably situated to be the stronghold of an early 
kingdom. The acropolis is at the north end of the hill, on a peak 
which is overhung by Acontium, but at a distance sufficient to 
be safe from an enemy with the weapons of early warfare posted 
on the mountain. At the foot of the acropolis are the springs of 
the Melas. 

In prehistoric times Orchomenus, as is proved alike by archaeo- 
logical finds and by an extensive cycle of legends, was one of 
the most prosperous towns of Greece. It was at once a conti- 
nental and a maritime power. On the mainland it controlled the 
greater part of Bocotia and drew its riches from the fertile low- 
lands of Lake Copai's, upon the drainage of which the early kings 
of Orchomenus bestowed great care. Its maritime connexions 
have not been as yet determined, but it is clear that its original 
inhabitants, the Minyae, were a seafaring nation, and in historical 
times Orchomenus remained a member of the Calaurian League 
of naval states. At the end of the second millennium the 
Minyae were more or less supplanted by the incoming stock 
of Boeotians. Henceforth Orchomenus no longer figures as a 
great commercial state, and its political supremacy in Boeotia 
passed now, if not previously, to the people of Thebes. Never- 
theless, owing perhaps to its strong military position, it long 
continued to exercise some sort of overlordship over other 
towns of northern Boeotia, and maintained an independent 
attitude within the Boeotian League. In 447 it served as the 
headquarters of the oligarchic exiles who freed Boeotia from 
Athenian control. In the 4th century Orchomenus was actuated 
throughout by an anti-Theban policy, which may have been 
nothing more than a recrudescence of old-time rivalry, but 
seems chiefly inspired by aversion to the newly established 
democracy at Thebes. In the Corinthian War the city supported 
Lysander and Agesilaus in their attacks upon Thebes, and when 
war was renewed between the Thebans and Spartans in 379 
Orchomenus again sided with the latter. After the battle of 
Leuctra it was left at the mercy of the Thebans, who first, on 
Epaminondas's advice, readmitted it into the Boeotian League, 
but in 368 destroyed the town and exterminated or enslaved 
its people. By 353 Orchomenus had been rebuilt, probably 
by the Phocians, who used it as a bulwark against Thebes. 
After the subjection of the Phocians in 346 it was again razed by 
the Thebans, but was restored by Philip of Macedon as a check 
upon the latter (338). Orchomenus springs into prominence 
once again in 85 B.C., when it provided the battle-field on which 



ORCIN— ORDEAL 



173 



the Roman general Sulla destroyed an army of Mithradates VI. 
of Pontus. Apart from this event its later history is obscure, 
and its decadence is further attested by the neglectful drainage 
of the plain and the consequent encroachments of Lake Copals. 
Since medieval times the site has been occupied by a village 
named Skripou. Since 1867 drainage operations have been 
resumed, and the land thus reclaimed has been divided into 
small holdings. The most remarkable relic of the early power 
of Orchomenus is the so-called "treasury" (of "Minyas") 
which resembles the buildings of similar style at Mycenae (see 
Mycenae), and is almost exactly the same size as the treasury 
of Atreus. The admiration which Pausanias expresses for it is 
justified by the beautiful ornamentation, especially of the roof, 
which has been brought to light by Schliemann's excavations 
in the inner chamber opening out of the circular vaulted tomb. 
The monument, undoubtedly the tomb of some ancient ruler, 
or of a dynasty, lies outside the city walls. Other remains 
of early date have been found upon this site. 

The worship of the Charites (see Graces) was the great 
cultus of Orchomenus, and the site of the temple is now occupied 
by a chapel, the Kotjuijcw tijs Havayias. The Charites were 
worshipped under the form of rude stones, which had fallen 
from heaven during the reign of Eteocles; and it was not till 
the time of Pausanias that statues of the goddesses were placed 
in the temple. Near this was another temple dedicated to 
Dionysus, in whose festival, the 'Aypi&via, are apparent the 
traces of human sacrifice in early times (see Agrionia). 

See Strabo viii. p. 374, ix. pp. 407, 414-416; Pausanias ix. 34-38; 
Thucydides i. 12, iv. 76; Xenophon, Hetlenica, iii. 5, iv. 3, vi. 4; 
Diodorus xv., xvi.; Plutarch, Sulla, chs. 30-31; K. O. Miiller, 
Orchomenos und die Minyer (Breslau, 1844); B. V. Head, Historia 
numorum (Oxford, 1877), pp. 293-294; Journal of Hellenic Studies, 
vol. ii. pis. xii., xiii. 

2. An Arcadian city, situated in a district of the same name, 
north of Mantineia and west of Stymphalus. The district was 
mountainous, but embraced two valleys — the northern con- 
taining a lake which is drained, like all Arcadian lakes, by a 
katavathron; the southern lying under the city, separated 
from Mantineia by a mountain ridge called Anchisia. The old 
city occupied a strong and lofty situation; in the time of Strabo 
it was a ruin, but Pausanias mentions that a new town was 
built below the old. A primitive wooden image of Artemis 
Cedreatis stood in a large cedar tree outside the city. Orcho- 
menus is mentioned in the Homeric catalogue with the epithet 
ttoXu^Xos. 

In early history Orchomenus figures as a town of some im- 
portance, for its kings until the late 7th century B.C. held some 
sort of sovereignty over all Arcadia. In the 5th century it was 
overshadowed by its southern neighbour Mantineia, with 
whom it is henceforth generally found to be at variance. In 
418 B.C. Orchomenus fell for a time into the hands of the 
Mantineians; in 370 it held aloof from the new Arcadian League 
which the Mantineians were organizing. About this time it 
further declined in importance through the loss of some posses- 
sions on the east Arcadian watershed to the new Arcadian capital 
Megalopolis. In the 3rd century Orchomenus belonged in 
turn to the Aetolian League, to the Lacedaemonians, and, 
since 222, to the Achaean League. Though a fairly extensive 
settlement still existed on the site in the 2nd century a.d., its 
history under the Roman rule is quite obscure. 

See Pausanias, viii. chs. 5, 11-13, 2 7'< B. V. Head, Historia 
numorum (Oxford, 1887), pp. 377-378. 

ORCIN, a dioxytoluene, C 6 H3(CH 3 )(OH) 2 (1:3:5), found 
in many lichens, e.g. Rocclla tinctoria, Lecanora, and formed 
by fusing extract of aloes with potash. It may be synthesized 
from toluene; more interesting is its production when acetone 
dicarboxylic ester is condensed with the aid of sodium. It 
crystallizes in colourless prisms with one molecule of water, 
which redden on exposure. Ferric chloride gives a bluish- 
violet coloration with the aqueous solution. Unlike resorcin 
it does not give a fluorescein with phthalic anhydride. Oxidation 
of the ammoniacal solution gives orcein, C2SH24N2O7, the chief 
constituent of the natural dye archil (q.v.). Homo-pyrocatechin 



is an isomer (CH3:OH:OH=i =3:4), found as its methyl 
ether (creosol) in beech-wood tar. 

ORDEAL (O.Eng. ordal, ordacl, judgment), a term correspond- 
ing to modern Ger. Urtcil, but bearing the special sense of the 
medieval Lat. Dei judicium, a miraculous decision as to the 
truth of an accusation or claim. The word is adopted in the late 
Lat. ordalium, Fr. ordalic. The ordeal had existed for many 
ages before it was thus named in Europe. In principle, and 
often in the very forms used, it belongs to ancient culture, 
thence flourishing up to the medieval European and modern 
Asiatic levels, but dying out before modern civilization. Some 
ordeals, which possibly represent early stages of the practice, 
are simply magical, being processes of divination turned to 
legal purpose. Thus in Burma suits are still determined by 
plaintiff and defendant being each furnished with a candle, 
equal in size and both lighted at once — he whose candle outlasts 
the other being adjudged, amid the acclamations of his friends, 
to have won his cause (Shway Yoe, The Burman, ii. 254). 
Even quainter is a Dyak ordeal in Borneo, where the two 
parties are represented by two shell-fish on a plate, which are 
irritated by pouring on some lime-juice, and the one first moving 
settles the guilt or innocence (as has been before arranged) of 
its owner (St John, Forests of the Far East, i.89). The adminis- 
tration of ordeals has been much in the hands of priests, and 
they are more often than not worked on a theological basis, the 
intervention of a deity being invoked and assumed to take place 
even when the process is in its nature one of symbolic magic. 
For instance, an ancient divining instrument consisted of a sieve 
held suspended by a thread or by a pair of shears with the points 
stuck into its rim, and considered to move at the mention of the 
name to be discovered, &c. Thus girls consulted the " sieve- 
witch " (KoaKLvofiavris) about lovers (Theocr., Idyll, iii. 31). 
This coscinomancy served in the same way to discover a thief, 
when, with prayer to the gods for direction, the names of the 
suspected persons were called over to it (Potter, Greek Antiquities, 
i. 352). When a suspended hatchet was used in the same way 
to turn to the guilty, the process was called axinomancy. The 
sieve-ordeal remained popular in the middle ages (see the de- 
scription and picture in Cornelius Agrippa, Dc Occ. Phil.); it is 
mentioned in Hudibras (ii. 3): 

"... th' oracle of sieve and shears 
That turns as certain as the spheres." 

From this ancient ordeal is evidently derived the modern 
Christian form of the key and Bible, where a Psalter or Bible is 
suspended by a key tied in at Psalm 1. 18: " When thou sawest 
a thief, then thou consentedst with him "; the bow of the key 
being balanced on the fingers, and the names of those suspected 
being called over, he or she at whose name the book turns or 
falls is the culprit (see Brand, Popular Antiquities, ed. Bohn, 

iii- 35*)- 

One of the most remarkable groups of divinations passing 
into ordeals are those which appeal to the corpse itself for 
discovery of its murderer. The idea is rooted in that primitive 
state of mind which has not yet reah'zed the full effect of death, 
but regards the body as still able to hear and act. Thus the 
natives of Australia will ask the dead man carried on his bier of 
boughs, who bewitched him; if he has died by witchcraft he will 
make the bier move round, and if the sorcerer who killed him be 
present a bough will touch him (Eyre, Australia, ii. 344). That 
this is no isolated fancy is shown by its recurrence among the 
negroes of Africa, where, for instance, the corpse causes its bearers 
to dash against some one's house, which accuses the owner of 
the murder (J. L. Wilson, Western Africa, p. 231; Waitz, ii. 
193). This somewhat resembles the well-known ordeal of the 
bier in Europe in the middle ages, which, however, seems founded 
on a different principle, the imagination that a sympathetic 
action of the blood causes it to flow at the touch or neighbourhood 
of the murderer. Apparently the liquefaction of the blood which 
in certain cases takes place after death may have furnished the 
ground for this belief. On Teutonic ground, this ordeal appears 
in the Nibelungcnlicd, where the murdered Siegfried is laid on his 
bier, and Hagen is called on to prove his innocence by going to the 



!74 



ORDEAL 



corpse, but at his approach the dead chief's wounds bleed afresh. 
The typical instance in English history is the passage of Matthew 
Paris, that after Henry II. 's death at Chinon his son Richard 
came to view the body, " Quo snperveniente, confestim erupit 
sanguis ex naribus regis mortui; ac si indignaretur spiritus in 
adventu ejus, qui ejusdem mortis causa esse credebatur, ut 
videretur sanguis clamare ad Deum." In Shakespeare (Rich. 
III., act i, sc. 2): 

" O gentlemen, see, see! dead Henry's wounds 
Open their congeal'd mouths, and bleed afresh! " 

At Hertford assizes (162S) the deposition was taken as to 
certain suspected murderers being required to touch the corpse, 
when the murdered woman thrust out the ring finger three times 
and it dropped blood on the grass (Brand, iii. 231); and there 
was a case in the Scottish High Court of Justiciary as late as 
1 668 (T. F. Thiselton Dyer, Folklore of Shakespeare, p. 487). 
Durham peasants, apparently remembering the old belief, still 
expect those who come to look at a corpse to touch it, in token 
that they bear no ill-will to the departed (W. Henderson, 
Folklore of Northern Counties, p. 57). 

Certain ordeals are closely related to oaths, so that the two 
shade into one another. Let the curse which is to fall on the 
oath-breaker take effect at once, it then becomes a sign con- 
demning the swearer — in fact, an ordeal. Thus the drinking of 
water on which a curse or magical penalty has been laid is a mere 
oath so long as the time of fulfilment is unfixed (see Oath). 
But it becomes an ordeal when, as in Brahmanic India, the 
accused drinks three handfuls of water in which a sacred image 
has been dipped; if he is innocent nothing happens, but if he is 
guilty sickness or misfortune will fall on him within one to three 
weeks (for accounts of these and other Hindu ordeals see Ali 
Ibrahim Khan in Asiatic Researches, i. 389, and Stenzler's sum- 
mary in Z. D. M. G., vol. ix.). The earliest account of such an 
ordeal is in Numbers v., which describes the modeof administering 
to a woman charged with unfaithfulness the bitter water mixed 
with the dust of the tabernacle floor, with the curse laid on it to 
cause her belly to swell and her thigh to fall if guilty. Ewald 
(Antiquities of Israel, 236) regards the draught as in itself harm- 
less, and the operation of this curse on the guilty as due to the 
influence of the mind on the body. But the term " bitter " 
is applied to the water before it has been cursed, which suggests 
that it already contained some drug, as in the poison-water 
ordeal still in constant use over a great part of Africa. Thus the 
red water of Guinea is a decoction made by pounding in a wooden 
mortar and steeping in water the inner bark of one of 1 he mimosas, 
producing a liquor like that of a tan-vat, astringent, narcotic, 
and when taken in sufficient quantity emetic. The accused, 
with solemn ceremony and invocation, drinks freely of it; if it 
nauseates him and he throws it up he is triumphantly acquitted, 
but if he becomes dizzy he is guilty, and the assembly fall on 
him, pelt him with stones and even drag him over the rocks till he 
is dead. Here the result of the ordeal depends partly on the 
patient's constitution, but more on the sorcerer who can prepare 
the proper dose to prove either guilt or innocence. Among the 
various drugs used in different parts of Africa are the mbundu 
root, the Calabar bean, the tangena nut (Tanghinia vencniflua, 
a strong poison and emetic). The sorcerers who administer this 
ordeal have in their hands a power of inflicting or remitting 
judicial murder, giving them boundless influence (details in J. L. 
Wilson, Western Africa, pp. 225, 398; Burton, Lake Regions 
of Central Africa, ii. 357; Bosman, " Guinea," in Pinkerlon's 
Voyages, xvi. 398, &c). The poison-ordeal is also known to 
Brahmanic law, decoction of aconite root being one of the 
poisons given, and the accused if not sickening being declared 
free (Stenzler, I.e.). Theoretically connected with the ordeal by 
cursed drink is that by cursed food, which is, however, distin- 
guished among this black catalogue by being sometimes an 
effectual means of discovering the truth. The ordeal by bread 
and cheese, practised in Alexandria about the 2nd century, 
was practically the same as that known to English law five to 
ten centuries later as the corsnaed or " trial slice " of consecrated 
bread and cheese which was administered from the altar, with 



the curse that if the accused were guilty God would send the 
angel Gabriel to stop his throat, that he might not be able to 
swallow that bread and cheese. In fact, if guilty and not a 
hardened offender he was apt to fail, dry-mouthed and choking 
through terror, to get it down. The remembrance of this ancient 
ordeal still lingers in the popular phrase, " May this bit choke me 
if I lie! " In India the corresponding trial by rice is prescribed 
in the old laws to be done by suspected persons chewing the 
consecrated grains of rice and spitting them out, moist and 
untinged with blood, on a banyan leaf; this or the mere chewing 
and swallowing of a mouthful of rice-grains is often used even by 
the English as a means of detecting a thief. A classical mention 
of the ordeals by carrying hot iron in the hands and by passing 
through the fire is made more interesting by the guards who offer 
to prove their innocence in this way offering further to take oath 
by the gods, which shows the intimate connexion between oaths 
and ordeals (Soph., Ant. 264, see also Aeschyl., fr. 284). 

rjnev 8' eYot^oi kcu fivdpovs aipeiv xtpolv 
/ecu wvp hi'epireiv, kcu 0eous opKUfioTeiv 
to firjre bpaoai fJ.7]Te tw £vvel5evai 
to irpayiia fiovktbaavrt. nip' elpyaanevco. 

The passing through the fire is described in the Hindu 
codes of Yajnavalkya and others, and is an incident in Hindu 
poetry, where in the Rdindyana the virtuous Sita thus proves 
her innocence to her jealous husband Rama (Stenzler, p. 669; 
Pictet, Origincs Indo-Europecnnes, part ii. p. 457). It was not 
less known to European law and chronicle, as where Richardis, 
wife of Charles the Fat, proves her innocence by going into a 
fire clothed in a waxed shift, and is unhurt by the fire (Grimm, 
Deutsche Rcchtsalterthiimer, p. 912). Yet more minutely 
prescribed in the Hindu ordeal-books is the rite of carrying the 
glowing hot iron seven steps, into the seven or nine circles 
traced on the ground, the examination of the hands to see if they 
show traces of burning, and the binding them up in leaves. The 
close historical connexion of the Hindu ordeal laws with the old 
European is shown by the correspondence of minute details, 
as where in a Scandinavian law it is prescribed that the red-hot 
iron shall be carried nine steps (Grimm, op. cit., p. 918). In Anglo- 
Saxon laws the iron to be carried was at first only one pound 
weight, but Athelstan's law (in Ancient Laws and Institutes of 
England, iv. 6) enacts that it be increased to weigh three pounds. 
Another form well known in old Germany and England was the 
walking barefoot over glowing ploughshares, generally nine. 
The law-codes of the early middle ages show this as an ordinary 
criminal procedure (see the two works last referred to), but it 
is perhaps best remembered in two non-historical legends. The 
German queen Kunigunde, " haec dicens stupentibus et flentibus 
universis qui aderant, vomeres candentes nudo vestigio calcavit 
et sineadustionis molestiatransiit " (Vista Hcnrici, ap. Canisium, 
vi. 387). Queen Emma, mother of Edward the Confessor, accused 
of familiarity with Alwyn bishop of Winchester, triumphantly 
purges herself and him by the help of St Swithin — each of the 
two thus acquitted giving nine manors to the church of 
Winchester, in memory of the nine ploughshares, and the king 
being corrected with stripes (John Bromton; see Freeman's 
Norm. Conq., vol. ii. App.). To dip the hand in boiling water 
or oil or melted lead and take out a stone or ring is another 
ordeal of this class. The traveller may find some of these 
fiery trials still in use, or at least in recent memory, in barbaric 
regions of Africa or further Asia — the negro plunging his arm 
into the caldron of boiling oil, the Burman doing feats with 
melted lead, while the Bedouin will settle a conflict of evidence 
by the opposing witnesses licking a glowing hot-iron spoon 
(Burckhardt, Arabia;, pp. 98, 233). This latter feat may be 
done with safety by any one, provided the iron be clean and 
thoroughly white hot, while if only red-hot it would touch and 
burn the tongue. Probably the administerers of the ordeal 
are aware of this, and of the possibility of dipping the hand 
in melted metal; and there are stories of arts of protecting the 
skin (see the recipe in Albertus Magnus, Dc Mirabilibus), though 
it is not known what can be really done beyond making it horny 
like a smith's, which would serve as a defence in stepping on 



ORDER 



J/5 



hot coals, but not in serious trials like that of carrying a heavy 
red-hot iron. The fire-ordeals are still performed by mounte- 
banks, who very likely keep up the same means of trickery 
which were in official use when the accused was to be acquitted. 
The actual practice of the fire-ordeal contrasts shamefully with 
its theory, that the fire rather than harm the innocent restrained 
its natural action. Thus it stands in the Hindu code of Manu 
(viii. 115): " He whom the flame docs not burn, whom the water 
does not cast up, or whom no harm soon bcfals, is to be taken 
as truthful in his oath." The watcr-ordcal here referred to is 
that well known in Europe, where the accused is thrown bound 
into the water, which receives him if innocent, but rejects 
him if guilty. The manner of carrying out this test is well 
explained in the directions given by Archbishop Hincmar in the 
gth century: he who is let down into the water for trial is to be 
fastened by a rope, that he may not be in danger if the water 
receives him as innocent, but may be pulled out. In the later 
middle ages this ordeal by " swimming " or " fleeting " became 
the most approved means of trying a suspected witch: she was 
stripped naked and cross bound, the right thumb to the left 
toe, and the left thumb to the right toe. In this state she was 
cast into a pond or river, in which it was thought impossible 
for her to sink (Brand iii. 21). The cases of " ducking " witches 
which have occurred in England within the last few years arc 
remains of the ancient ordeal. 

If there is one thing that may be predicated of man in a state 
of nature it is that two disputants tend to fight out their quarrel. 
When in the warfare of Greeks and Trojans, of Jews and 
Philistines, of Vandals and Alamans, heroes come out from the 
two sides and their combat is taken to mark the powers of the 
opposing war-gods and decide the victory, then the principle 
of the ordeal by battle has been practically called in. Among 
striking instances of the Teutonic custom which influenced 
the whole of medieval Europe may be cited the custom of the 
Franks that the princes, if they could not quell the strife, had 
to fight it out between themselves, and Wipo's account of the 
quarrel between the Christian Saxons and the Pagan Slavs 
as to which broke the peace, when both sides demanded of the 
emperor that it should be settled by duel, which was done by 
choosing a champion on each side, and the Christian fell. The 
Scandinavian term " holmgang " refers to the habit of fighting 
duels on an island. A passage from old German law shows the 
single combat accepted as a regular legal procedure: " If there be 
dispute concerning fields, vineyards, or money, that they avoid 
perjury let two be chosen to fight, and decide the cause by duel " 
(Grimm, Rcchtsaltert., p. 928). In England, after the Conquest, 
trial by combat superseded other legal ordeals, which were 
abolished in the time of Henry III. Among famous instances 
is that of Henry de Essex, hereditary standard-bearer of England, 
who fled from a battle in Wales, in 1158, threw from him the 
royal standard, and cried out that the king was slain. Robert 
de Montfort afterwards, accusing him of having done this with 
treasonable intent, offered to prove his accusation by combat, 
and they fought in presence of Henry II. and his court, when 
Essex was defeated, but the king spared his life, and, his estate 
being confiscated, he became a monk in Reading Abbey. A 
lord often sent his man in his stead to such combats, and priests 
and women were ordinarily represented by champions. The 
wager of battle died out so quietly in England without being 
legally abolished that in the court of king's bench in 181 S it 
was claimed by a person charged with murder, which led to its 
formal abolition (Ashford v. Thorn/on in Barnewall and Aldcrson 
457; see details in H. C. Lea, Superstition and Force, ii.). A 
distinct connexion may, however, be traced between the legal 
duel and the illegal private duel, which has disappeared from 
England, but still flourishes in France and Germany (sec 
Duel). (E. B. T.) 

ORDER (through Fr. ordre, for earlier ordene, from Lat. or do, 
ordinis, rank, service, arrangement; the ultimate source is 
generally taken to be the root seen in Lat. oriri, rise, arise, 
begin; cf. " origin "), a row or series, hence grade, class or rank, 
succession, sequence or orderly arrangement; from these, the 



original meanings of ordo, have developed the numerous applica- 
tions attached to the word, many, if not most, of which appear 
in classical and medieval Latin. In the sense of a class or body 
of persons or things united by some common status, rank or 
distinguishing characteristics, or as organized and living under 
some common rules and regulations, we find the term applied, 
in such expressions as " lower " or " higher orders," to the class 
divisions of society; to the various grades of persons exercising 
spiritual functions in the Christian church (sec Order, Holy, 
below); to the bodies of persons bound by vows to a religious 
life (sec Monasticism, and separate articles on the chief religious 
orders); to the military and monastic fraternities of the middle 
ages, such as the Templars, Hospitallers, &c, and to those 
institutions, founded by sovereigns or states, in part imitation 
of these fraternities, which arc conveniently divided into orders 
of knighthood, or orders of merit (sec Knighthood). The term 
" order " is thus used, in an easily transferred sense, for the 
various insignia, badge, star, collar, worn by the members of 
the institution. As applied to a group of objects, an " order " 
in zoological, botanical and mineral classification ranks next 
below a " class," and above a " family." The use of the word 
in architecture is treated in a separate article below. 

The word has several technical mathematical usages. In 
number-theory it denotes a relative rank between the elements of 
an aggregate so that the collection becomes an ordered aggregate 
(sec Number). The order of a plane curve is the number of points 
(real or imaginary) in which the curve is intersected by a straight 
line; it is equal to the degree (or coefficient of the highest 
power) of the Cartesian equation expressing the curve. The 
order of a non-plane curve is the number of points (real or 
imaginary) in which the curve intersects a plane (see Curve). 
The order of a surface is the number of points in which the 
surface intersects a straight line. For the order of a congruence 
and complex see Surface. The order of a differential equation is 
the degree of its highest differential coefficient (sec Differential 
Equation). 

Another branch of the sense-development of the word starts 
from the meaning of orderly, systematic or proper arrangement, 
which appears in the simplest form in such adverbial expressions 
as " in order," " out of order " and the like. More particular 
instances are the use of the word for the customary procedure 
observed in the conduct of the business of a public meeting, or 
of parliamentary debates, and for the general maintenance and 
due observance of law and authority, " public order." 

In liturgical use " order " is a special form of divine service 
prescribed by authority, e.g. the " Order of Confirmation," in 
the English Prayer Book. 

The common use of " order " in the sense of a command, in- 
struction or direction is a transference from that of arrangement 
in accordance with intention to the means for attaining it. It 
is a comparatively late sense-development; it does not appear 
in Latin, and the earliest quotations in the New English 
Dictionary are from the 16th century. Particular applications 
of the term are, in commercial usage, to a direction in writing 
to a banker or holder of money or goods, by the person in whom 
the legal right to them lies, to pay or hand over the same to a 
third person named or to his order. A bill or negotiable instrument 
made " payable to order " is one which can be negotiated by the 
payee by endorsement. At common law a negotiable instrument 
must contain words expressly authorizing transfer. By the 
Bills of Exchange Act 1882, §8, "a bill is payable to order 
which is expressed to be so payable, or which is expressed to be 
payable to a particular person, and does not contain words 
prohibiting transfer or indicating an intention that it should 
not be transferable." Other applications are to a direction for 
the supply of goods and to a pass for free admission to a place 
of amusement, a building, &c. 

In law an " order of the court " is a judicial direction on 
matters outside the record; as laid down by Esher, M.R., in 
Onslow v. Inland Revenue, 59, L.J.Q.B. 556, a "judgment" is a 
decision obtained in an action and every other decision is an 
" order." For " Order in Council " see below. 



176 



ORDER 



ORDER, in classic architecture the term employed (Lat. 
genus, Ital. ordine, Sp. order, Ger. Ordnung) to distinguish the 
varieties of column and entablature which were employed by 
the Greeks and Romans in their temples and public buildings. 
The first attempt to classify the architectural orders was made 
by Vitruvius, who, to those found in Greek buildings, viz. the 
Doric, Ionic and Corinthian, added a fourth, the Tuscan. On 
the revival of classic art in Italy, the revivalists translated 
Vitruvius's work De Architectura, and added a fifth example, the 
Composite, so that nominally there are five orders. The Tuscan, 
however, is only an undeveloped and crude modification of the 
Doric order, and the Composite is the same as the Corinthian with 
the exception of the capital, in which the volutes of the Ionic 
order were placed above the acanthus leaves of the Corinthian. 

An order in architecture consists of several parts, constructive 
in their origin, but, as employed afterwards, partly constructive 
and partly decorative; its principal features are the column, 
consisting of base (except in the Greek Doric order), shaft and 
capital, and the entablature, subdivided into the architrave (the 
supporting member), the frieze (the decorative member) and the 
cornice (the crowning and protecting member). Two only of 
the orders were independently evolved, viz. the Doric in Greece 
and Magna Grecia, and the Ionic in Ionia. For the Corinthian 
order, the Greeks borrowed with slight variations the entabla- 
ture for their Ionic order, and the Romans employed this modified 
entablature for their Composite order. Owing to a certain re- 
semblance in form, it was at one time thought that the Greeks owed 
the origin of the Doric order to Egypt , but the Egyptian column has 
no echinus under its abacus, which in the earliest Doric examples is 
an extremely important element in its design, owing to its great 
size and projection; moreover, the Doric column ceased to be 
employed in Egypt after the XlXth Dynasty, some seven or 
eight centuries before the first Greek colony was established 
there. Dr Arthur Evans's discoveries in the palace of Cnossus in 
Crete have shown that the earliest type of the Doric column 
(c. 1500 B.C.) is that painted in a fresco which represents the 
facades of three temples or shrines, the truth of this representation 
being borne out by actual remains in the palace; the columns 
were in timber, tapered from the top downwards, and were 
crowned by a projecting abacus supported by a large torus 
moulding, probably moulded in stucco. The next examples of 
the order are those in stone, which flank the entrance doorway 
of the tomb of Agamemnon at Mycenae (c. 1200 B.C.), the greater 
portions of which are now set up in the British Museum; and 
here both capital and shaft are richly decorated with the chevron 
pattern, probably derived from the metal plates which in Homeric 
times sheathed the wood columns. The columns of the Mycenae 
tombs are semi-detached only, and of very slender proportions, 
averaging 10 to n diameters in height; as isolated columns, 
therefore, they would have been incapable of carrying any weight, 
so that in the next examples known, those of the temple at 
Corinth, where the columns had to carry an entablature in stone 
supporting a stone ceiling over the peristyle, the relation of 
diameter to height is nearly one to four, so diffident were the 
Greek architects as to the bearing power of the stone. In the 
temple of Apollo at Syracuse, also a very archaic example, the 
projection of the capital was so great that the abaci nearly touched 
one another, and the columns are less than one diameter apart. 
The subsequent development which took place was in the 
lightening of the column and the introduction of many refine- 
ments, so that in the most perfected example known, the 
Parthenon, the columns are ij diameters apart and nearly 5! 
diameters high. In a somewhat later example, the temple of the 
Nemaean Zeus (Argos) the columns are 65 diameters high. A 
similar lightening of the structure took place in the entablature, 
which in the earliest temple in Sicily is about half the height of 
the columns, in the Parthenon less than a third, and in the 
Temple of the Nemaean Zeus a little over a fourth. 

The origin of the Ionic order is not so clear, and it cannot be 
traced beyond the remains of the archaic temple of Diana at 
Ephesus (c. 560 B.C.), now in the British Museum, in which the 
capitals and the lower drum of the shaft enriched with sculpture 



in their design and execution suggest many centuries of develop- 
ment. Here again attempts have been made to trace the source 
to Egypt, but the volute capital of the archaic temple of Diana 
at Ephesus and the decorative lotus bud of Egypt are entirely 
different in their form and object. The latter is purely decorative 
and vertical in its tendency, the former is a feature intended to 
carry a superincumbent weight, and is extended horizontally so 
as to perform the function of a bracket-capital, viz. to lessen the 
bearing of the architrave or beam which it carries. A similar 
constructive expedient is found in Persian work at Persepolis, 
which, however, dates about forty years later than the Ephesian 
work. The volutes of the capitals of the Lycian tombs are none 
of them older than the 4th century, being copies of Greek stone 
examples. As with the Doric order, the columns became more 
slender than at first, those of the archaic temple being probably 
between 6 and 7 diameters high, of the temple on the Ilissus 
(c. 450 B.C.) 8^, and of the temple of Athena Polias at Priene 
(c. 345 B.C.) over 10 diameters high. 

The employment of the two orders in Athens simultaneously, 
and sometimes in the same building, led to a reciprocal influence 
one on the other; in the Doric order to an increased refinement 
in the contour of its mouldings, in the Ionic order to greater 
severity in treatment, more particularly in the bedmould, the 
members of which were reduced in number and simplified, the 
dentil course (which in Ionia was a very important feature) 
being dispensed with in the temple on the Ilissus and in that of 
Nike Apteros, and employed only in the caryatide portico of 
the Erechtheum. The capital of the Corinthian order, its only 
original feature, may have been derived from the Egyptian 
bell-capital, which was constantly employed there, even in 
Roman times; its decoration was, however, purely Greek, and 
would seem to have been based on the application to the bell 
of foliage and ornament derived from metallic forms. The 
inventor of the capital is said to have been Callimachus of Corinth, 
who was a craftsman in metal and designed the bronze lamp 
and its cover for the Erechtheum in Corinthian bronze, which 
may account for the origin and title of the capital. The earliest 
example of the Corinthian capital is that found at Bassae by 
Cockerell, dating from about 430 B.C., and the more perfected 
type is that of the Tholos of Epidaurus (400 B.C.). 

Whilst the entablatures of the Doric and Ionic orders suggest 
their origin from timber construction, that of the Corinthian 
was simply borrowed from the Ionic order, and its subsequent 
development by the Romans affords the only instance of their 
improvement of a Greek order (so far as the independent treat- 
ment of it was concerned) by the further enrichment of the 
bedmould of the cornice, where the introduction of the modillion 
gave an increased support to the corona and was a finer crowning 
feature. 

The Greek Doric order was not understood by the Romans, 
and was, with one or two exceptions, utilized by them only 
as a decorative feature in their theatres and amphitheatres, 
where in the form of semi-detached columns they formed 
divisions hetween the arches; the same course was taken 
with the Ionic order, which, however, would seem to have been 
employed largely in porticoes. On the other hand, the Cor- 
inthian order, in consequence of its rich decoration, appealed 
more to the Roman taste; moreover, all its faces were the same, 
and it could be employed in rectangular or in circular buildings 
without any difficulty. The earliest examples are found in the 
temple of Castor and Pollux at Cora, near Rome, which is Greek 
in the style of its carving, and in the portico of the Pantheon 
at Rome erected by Agrippa (27 B.C.), where the Roman order 
is fully developed. The next developments of the orders are 
those which followed the revival of classic architecture in the 
16th century, and these were largely influenced by the discovery 
in 1456 of the manuscript of Vitruvius, an architect who 
flourished in the latter half of the 1st century B.C. In his work 
De Architectura he refers constantly to drawings which he had pre- 
pared to illustrate his descriptions; these, however, have never 
been found, so that the translators of his work put their own 
interpretation on his text and published woodcuts representing 



ORDER 



J 77 



the Roman orders as defined by him. They did not, however, 
confine themselves to the actual remains, which in their day 
were in much better preservation than at present, but attempted 
to complete the orders by the addition of pedestals to the 
columns, which were not employed by the Greeks, and only 
under special conditions by the Romans; as, however, they arc 
included in the two chief authorities on the subject, Palladio 
and Vignola, the text-book of the former being the standard 
in England, and that of the latter in France, the rules and 
proportions set forth in them for pedestals, as also for the em- 
ployment of the superposing of the orders with arches between, 
will follow the analysis of the Greek and Roman orders. 

The Greek Doric Order. — The Doric was the favourite order 
of the Greeks, and the one in which they introduced all their 
principal refinements; these were of so subtle a nature that 
until the site was cleared in 1837 their existence was not known, 
and the earh'er explorers, though recognizing the extreme 
beauty of the proportions and some of the refinements, were 
unable to grasp the extent to which they were carried, and it was 
reserved for Penrose in 1S46 to verify by micromctrical studies 
the theories put forward by Pennethorne and other authors. 
The whole structure of the Doric temple (which consisted of the 
columns, subdivided into shaft and capital, and the entablature, 
subdivided into architrave, frieze and cornice) rested on a 
platform of three steps, of which the upperstep wasthestylobate 
or column base (fig. 1). The tread and rise of the steps varied 

in accordance with the diameter 
of the column; in temples of 
great dimensions, therefore, supple- 
mentary steps were provided for 
access to the stylobate, or, as found 
in many temples, slight inclined 
planes. Resting on the stylobate 
was the shaft of the column, which 
was either monolithic or composed 
of frusta or drums. The shaft 
tapered as it rose, the diminution 
of the upper diameter being more 
pronounced in early examples, as 
in one of the temples at Selinus 
and in the great temple at Paestum. 
In the Parthenon at Athens the 
lower diameter is 6 ft. 3 in. and the 
upper 4 ft. 9 in., which gives a dimi- 
nution slightly over one-quarter 
of the lower diameter. The shaft 
was always fluted, with two or 
three exceptions, where the temples 
were not completed, and there 
were usually twenty flutes. In two 
temples at Syracuse, the most 
ancient temple at Selinus, the 
temple at Assos, and the temple 
at Sunium there are only sixteen 
flutes; the flutes were elliptic in 
section and intersected with an 
arris. In order to correct an optical 
illusion, which arises in a diminish- 
ing shaft, a slight entasis or swell- 
ing in the centre was given, the 
greatest departure from the straight line being about one- 
third up the shaft. The shaft was crowned by the capital, 
the juncture of the two being marked by a groove (one in 
the Parthenon, but up to three in more ancient examples) 
known as the hypotrachelion. Above this the trachelion or 
necking curves over, constructing what is known as the apophyge 
up to the fillets, round the base of the echinus, which forms the 
transition to the square abacus. The varying curve of the 
echinus, from the earliest times down to the later examples, 
is shown in the article on mouldings. The relative proportions 
of the lower diameter and the height of the columns vary accord- 
ing to the date of the example, in the early examples the column 




Fig. 1. — The Greek Doric 
Order. The Parthenon, 
Athens; section through 
front. 




being just on 4 diameters high, in the Parthenon nearly sh 
diameters, and in the Temple of Jupiter Nemaeus 6| diameters 
high. The distance between the columns or intcrcolumniation 
varied also according to the date, that of the earliest examples 
in Sicily being about 1 diameter (that between the angle columns 
being always less), in the Parthenon in the proportion of 1 to 
1-24, and in the temple at Argos as 1 to 1-53. 

Above the columns rested the entablature (fig. 2), of which 
the lower member, the architrave, was plain and crowned by 
a projecting fillet, 
known as the 
regula; under 
which, and below 
the triglyph, was a 
fillet (taenia), with 
six guttae under- 
neath. The propor- 
tional height of the 
architrave, which 
was the chief sup- 
porting member, 
varied according to 
date, in one of the 
earliest examples 
at Syracuse being 
of greater depth 
than the diameter 
of the column, and 
in the Parthenon 
about two-thirds 
of the diameter. 
Above the archi- 
trave was the frieze, 
divided into tri- 
glyphs, so called 
because they are 
divided into three 
bands by two 
vertical grooves, 
and metopes or 
spaces between the 
triglyphs. It is 
supposed that the 
triglyphs repre- 
sented the beams 
in the primitive 
cella before the 
peristyle was 

added, the spaces between being filled with shutters or boards to 
prevent the temple being entered by birds. The face of the 
metopes, which are nearly square, is set back behind that of 
the triglyphs, and is sometimes decorated with sculpture in 
high relief. There is generally one triglyph over each column 
and one between, but at each end of the temple there is a triglyph 
at the angle, so that the intercolumniation of the angle columns 
is less than that of the others, which gives a sense of increased 
strength. Above the frieze is the cornice, which projects forward 
about one-third of the diameter of the column and slopes down- 
wards at an angle generally the same as the slope of the roof. 
On its under surface are mutules, one over each triglyph and 
one between, which are studded with guttae, probably repre- 
senting the wood pins which secured the rafters in their position. 
Generally speaking, in the Doric temples there is no cymatium 
or gutter, and the rain fell directly off the roof; in order to 
prevent it trickling down there was an upper moulding, throated, 
with a bird's beak moulding behind and a second throating near 
the bottom, so that the corona had an upper fillet projecting, 
and a lower fillet receding, from its fascia plane. The roof itself 
was covered with tiles in terra-cotta or marble, which consisted 
of flat slabs with raised edges and covering tiles over the joints; 
the lower ends of the covering tiles were decorated with antefixae, 
and the top of the roof was protected by ridge tiles, on the top of 



Fig. 2. — Greek Doric Order. 
Athens. 



The Parthenon, 



i 7 8 



ORDER 



which were sometimes additional antefixae placed parallel 
with the ridge tile. As the mouldings of the pediment were 
returned foi a short distance along the side, there was a small 
cymatium or gutter with lions' heads, through the mouth of 
which the water ran. In the principal and rear front of the 
temple the lines of the cornice were repeated up the slope of the 
pediment, which coincided with that of the roof, and the tym- 
panum, which they enclosed, was enriched with sculpture. On 
the centre of the pediment and at each end were pedestals 
(acroteria), on which figures, or conventional ornaments, were 
placed. Supplementary to the order at the back of the peristyle 
were antae, slightly projecting pilasters which terminated the 
walls of tbe pronaos; these had a small base, were of the same 
diameter from the top to the bottom, and had a simple moulded 
capital. 

The Greek Ionic Order. — The Ionic order, like the Doric, 
owes its origin to timber prototypes, but varies in its features; 
the columns are more slender, being from 8 to 9 diameters high, 
with an intercolumniation of sometimes as much as 2 diameters; 
the architrave also is subdivided into three fascia, which suggests 
that in its origin it consisted of three beams superposed, in 
contradistinction to that of the Doric architrave, which con- 
sisted of a single beam. As in the Doric order, the Ionic temple 
rested on a stylobate of three steps (fig. 3). The columns con- 
sisted of base, shaft and capital. In the Ionic examples the base 
consisted of a torus moulding, fluted horizontally, beneath 
which were three double astragals divided by the scotia, some- 
times, as in the temple at Priene, resting on a square plinth. 
In the Attic base employed in Athens, under the upper torus, 
which is either plain, fluted or carved with the guilloehe, is a 
fillet and deep scotia, with a second torus underneath. The 
shaft tapers much less than in the Doric order; it has a slighter 

entasis, and is fluted, the flutes 
being elliptical in section 
but subdivided by fillets. The 
number of flutes is generally 
24. The lower and upper 
parts of the shaft have an 
apophyge and a fillet, resting 
on the base in the former case 
and supporting the capital in 
the latter. The capital consists 
of an astragal, sometimes 
carved with the bead and reel, 
and an echinus moulding above 
enriched with the egg-and-dart, 
on which rests the capital with 
spiral volutes at each end, 
and from front to back with 
cushions which vary in design 
and enrichment. In the capitals 
of the angle columns the end 
volute is turned round on the 
diagonal, so as to present the 
same appearance on the front 
and the side; this results in an 
awkward arrangement at the 
back, where two half-volutes 
intersect one another at right 
angles. A small abacus, gener- 
ally carved with ornament, 
crowns the capital. In early 
examples the channels be- 
Fig. 3. — The Greek Ionic tween the fillets of the spiral 
Order. Temple of Nike Apteros, are convex, in later examples 
Athens. -r ^i • , r 

concave. In the capitals of 

the Erechtheum (fig. 4), a greater richness is given by inter- 
mediary fillets. In all great examples the second fillet dips 
down in the centre of the front and a small anthemion ornament 
marks the receding of the echinus moulding, which is circular 
and sometimes nearly merged into the cushion. In the Erech- 
theum the enrichment of the capital is carried further in the 




H 



necking, which is decorated with the anthemion and divided off 
from the upper part of the shaft by a bead and reel. The en- 
tablature is divided, like that of the Doric order, into architrave, 
frieze and cornice. The architrave is subdivided into three 
fasciae, the upper one pro- q 
jecting slightly beyond the 
lower, and crowned by 
small mouldings, the lower 
one sometimes carved 
with the Lesbian leaf. 
Above this is the frieze, 
sometimes plain and at 
other times enriched with 
figure sculpture in low 
relief. In the Ionian ex- 
amples there was no frieze, 
its place being taken by 
dentils of great size and 
projection. The cornice 
consists of bedmould, 
corona and cymatium; in 
the Ionian examples the 
bedmould is of great rich- 
ness, consisting of a lower 
moulding of egg-and-dart 
with bead and reel, a 
dentil course above, and 
another egg-and-dart with 
bead and reel above, sink- 
ing into the soffit of the 
corona, which projects in 
the Ionian examples more 
than half a diameter. The 
corona consists of a plain 
fascia with moulding and 
cymatium above, and as 
the cymatium or gutter is 
carried through from end 
to end of the temple it is 
provided with lions' heads 
to throw off the water, and 
sometimes enriched with 
the anthemion ornament. 




Fig. 



4. — Greek Ionic Order. 
Erechtheum, Athens. 



The 



In the Attic examples much greater 
simplicity, ascribed to Dorian influence, is given to the bedmould, 
in which only the cyma-reversa with the Lesbian leaf carved on 
it and the bead and reel are retained. The mouldings of the 
cornice, including the cymatium, are carried up as a pediment, 
as in the Doric temple, and the roofs are similar. The base and 
capital of the antae are more elaborate than in those of the Doric 
order, and are sometimes, both in Ionic and Attic examples, 
richly carved with the Lesbian leaf and egg-and-dart, in both 
cases with the bead and reel underneath. The chief variation 
from the usual entablature is found in that of the caryatide 
portico of the Erechtheum, where the frieze is omitted, dentils 
are introduced in the bedmould, paterae are carved on the 
upper fascia of the architrave, and the covering was a flat marble 
roof. The caryatide figures, the drapery of which recalls the 
fluting of the columns, stood on a podium which enriched cornice 
and base. 

The Greek Corinthian Order (fig. 5). — As the entablature of this 
order was adapted by the Greeks from that of the Ionic order, 
the capital only need be described, and its evolution from the 
earliest examples known, that in the temple at Bassae, to the 
fully developed type in tbe temple of Zeus Olympius at Athens, 
can be easily traced. It consisted of either a small range of 
leaves at the bottom, or of a bead-and-reel moulding, a bell 
decorated in various ways and a moulded abacus, the latter as a 
rule being concave in plan on each face and generally terminating 
in an arris or point. In the Bassae capital we find the first 
example of the spiral tendrils which rise up to and support the 
abacus with other spirals crossing to the centre and the acanthus 
leaf and flower. In the more perfected example of the Choragic 



ORDER 



179 



monument of Lysicratcs (fig. 6), there is a lower range of small 
leaves of some river plant, between which and the tops of the 
flutes (which here arc turned over as leaves) is a sinking which 
was probably filled with a metal band. From the lower range of 
leaves spring eight acanthus leaves, bending forward at the top, 
with small flowers between, representing the heads of nails 
which in the metal prototype fastened these leaves to the bell; 
from the caulicolae, on the right and left, spring spiral tendrils 
rising to the angles under the abacus, and from the same caulicolae 
double spirals which cross to the centre of the bell, the upper ones 
carrying the anthemion flower, which rises across the abacus. 
The abacus in this capital has a deep scotia with fillet, and an 
echinus above, and is one of the few great examples in which 
the angles arc canted. The architrave, frieze and cornice are 
adaptations from the Ionic order. The corona has in the place 
of the cymatium a cresting of antcfixae, which is purely decora- 
tive as there arc no covering tiles, the roof of the monument being 




£ 



I 



Fig. 5. — Greek 
Corinthian Order 
Choragic monu- 
ment of 
Lysicrates. 



Fig. 6. 



in one block of marble carved with leaves. Set back and on the 
same plane as the architrave and frieze is a second cresting with 
the Greek wave scroll. There are other types of Greek Corinthian 
capital, of which the finest example is in the interior of the 
Tholos at Epidaurus (c. 400 B.C.), with two rows of leaves round 
the lower part, angle and central spirals, and a flower in the centre 
of the abacus. Of other examples the capitals of the interior 
of the temple of Apollo Branchidae in Asia Minor, and of the 
vestibule at Eleusis, and of the two porches of the temple of the 
Winds at Athens, are the best known. Except for the pointed 
ends of the abacus, which are Greek, the capital of the temple of 
Zeus Olympius might almost be classed among the Roman 
examples, and it is thought to have been the model copied by the 
Romans from those which Sulla took to Rome for the temple 
of Jupiter Capitolinus. 

The Roman Doric Order. — The earliest example of this order 
is probably that of the temple at Cora, about 20 m. from Rome, 



~T 



TsnrrcraLr 




attributed to Sulla (80 B.C.), in which the leading features of the 
Greek Doric order are employed, but extremely degraded in 
style. The temple was raised on a podium with a flight of steps 
in front; the shaft has 20 flutes and is carried on a small torus 
base, and the 
echinus of the 
capital is very 
poor. The archi- 
trave and triglyph- 
fricze are cut out 
of the same stone, 
the former being 
much too shallow 
to allow of its 
carrying the fiieze 
and cornice. Two 
other early ex- 
amples are those 
employed in the 
decoration of the 
arcades of the 
Tabularium and of 
the theatre of 
Marcellus (fig. 7); 
they are only semi- 
dctached. The 
Doric order was 
not a favourite 
with the Romans, 
and did not appeal 
to their tastes for 
rich decoration; 
the only other ex- 
amples known arc 
those at Pracnestc, 
at Albano, and in 
the thermae of Dio- 
cletian. At Albano 
the echinus of the 
capital is carved 
with the egg and 
anchor, and in the 




Fig. 7. 



thermae a cyma-rccta carved with a leaf ornament takes the 
place of the echinus. There is no base to any of these examples, 
the Albano base consisting only of an apophyge and fillet, and 
only the Diocletian example is fluted. 

The Roman Ionic Order. — The complete degradation of the 
Ionic order is clearly shown in the so-called temple of Fortuna 
Virilis (ascribed to about 100 B.C.), in the profuse decoration 
of architrave, frieze and cornice with coarse ornament, and, in 
the capital, the raising of the echinus to the same level as the top 
of the second fillet of the volute, so that it is no longer visible 
under the cushion. The shaft has twenty flutes, the fillet being 
much wider than in the Greek examples, and the flute is semi- 
circular. Much more refinement is shown in the order as cm- 
ployed on the upper storey of the theatre of Marcellus (fig. 8), 
where the only part enriched with ornament is in the egg and 
tongue of the bcdmould. In the capital the fillet of the volute 
runs across above the echinus, and the canalis is stopped at each 
end over the volute, an original treatment. The most corrupt 
example of the Romau Ionic capital is that of the temple of 
Saturn on the Forum Romanum, which fortunately does not 
seem to have been copied later. The base of all the Roman Ionic 
columns is that known as the Attic base, viz. a lower and upper 
torus with scotia and fillets between, always raised on a square 
plinth. 

The Roman Corinthian Order.— The great varieties of design 
in the Greek Corinthian capital (fig. 9), and the fact that its 
entablature was copied from Ionic examples, suggests that no 
definite type sufficient to constitute an order had been evolved 
by the Greeks; it remained therefore a problem to be worked 
out by the Romans, who, with the assistance of Greek artists, 



i8o 



ORDER 



employed generally by the Romans, not only in Rome but 
throughout Greece, Asia Minor and Syria, developed an order 

which, though 
wanting in the 
refinement and 
suhtlety found in 
Greek work, is one 
of the most monu- 
mental kind, and 
has in its adoption 
by the Italian re- 
vivalists had more 
influence than any 
other in the raising 
of palatial struc- 
tures. Even in 
Rome itself the 
portico of the Pan- 
theon, erected by 
Agrippa (27 B.C.), 
and the temple of 
Castor (rebuilt by 
Domitian a.d. 86) 
in the Forum, are 
remarkahle in- 
stances of early 
work, which hold 
their own with 
some of the later 
examples even of 
Greek art. 

The develop- 
ment of the 
Roman Corinthian 
order will be best 
understood by a 
description in 
detail similar to 
that given of the 
great Doric and Ionic orders. Tak- 
ing the Pantheon portico as the 
earlier example, the base consists of 
an upper and lower torus separated 
by a double astragal with scotia and 
fillet above and below, and resting 
on a square plinth. The shaft, a 
monolith, is unfluted, tapering up- 
wards, 9 J diameters in height, with 
apophyge and fillet at the bottom, 
and an apophyge, fillet and astragal 
at the top. The capital consisted of 
a square abacus with concave sides 
carried on a circular inverted bell, 
two rows of acanthus leaves, rising 
three-fifths of the bell, heing carved 
round it (fig. 10), the stems of the 
upper range of eight leaves lying in 
the axis of each face and of the dia- 
gonals, and those of the lower range 
between them; the stems of the 
caulicolae from which spring the 
spirals, which rise to support the 
angles of the abacus, and to the 
centre of the capital, carrying the 
central flower, start from between the 
upper range of leaves. The abacus 
has concave sides, canted angles, 
and is moulded, with a quarter 
round, fillet and cavetto. The archi- 
trave, like that of the Greek Ionic 
they are further elaborated by 
the upper fascia and a bead 





Fig. 9. — Roman Corinthian 
Order; Pantheon. 



order, has three fasciae, but 
a small cyma-reversa under 



under the second fascia. The architrave is crowned with a 
moulding, consisting of a fillet with cyma-reversa and bead 
underneath. The frieze is plain, its only decoration being the 
well-known inscription of Agrippa. The bedmould consists of 
a head, cyma-reversa and fillet, under a plain dentil course, in 
which the dentils are not carved; bead-and-reel and egg-and- 
dart above these carried a plain face on which is found the 
new feature introduced by the Romans, viz. the modillion. This, 
though carved out of one solid block with the whole hedmould, 
suggested an appropriate support to the projecting cornice. The 
modillion was a bracket, a horizontal version of the ancones which 
supported the cornice of the Greek doorway cornice, and was 
here crowned hy a small cyma-reversa carved with leaves which 
profiled round the modillion and along the upper part of the 
plain face. The cornice 
is simple, consisting 
of a corona, fillet and 
cymatium, the latter 
omitted across the 
front of the temple, 
hut carried up over 
the cornice of the 
pediment. All the 
columns are equi- 
distant with an in- 
tercolumniation of 2§ 
diameters. The order 
of the interior of the 
rotunda built by 
Hadrian (a.d. 121) is 
similar to that of the 
portico, the lower 
moulding of the bed- 
mould and the bead 
being carved, and the 
tongue or anchor 
taking the place of the 
dart hetween the eggs. 
The order of the 
temple of Castor (fig. 
n) was enriched to a 
far greater extent, and 
parts were carved with 
ornament, which in 
Greek examples was 
probably only painted. 
The base was similar, 
but the columns (10 
diameters high) had 
twenty-four flutes, 
with fillets between. 
The capital was 
further enriched with 
foliage, which rising from the caulicolae was carried along 
the cavetto of the abacus, whose upper moulding was carved 
with the egg-and-dart. The middle fascia of the architrave 
was carved with a version of the Greek anthemion, the cyma- 
reversa under the upper fascia being carved with leaves and 
bead-and-reel under. The lower moulding of the bedmould 
was carved with the egg-and-tongue; the dentil course was 
carved with finely proportioned dentils, the cyma-reversa and 
mouldings above being similar to those of the Pantheon portico. 
In the latter, on the soffit of the corona, square panels are sunk 
with a flower in the centre. In the temple of Castor the panel is 
square, but there is a horder in front and back, which shows 
that the cornice had a greater projection. The corona was 
carved with fluting, departing from the simplicity of the Pantheon 
example, but evidently more to the taste of the Romans, as 
it is found in many subsequent examples. Theintercolumniation 
is only two and one-third of the diameter. Though not quite 
equal to Greek foliage, that of the capitals of the temple of Castor 
is of great beauty, and there is one other feature in the capital 





Fig. 10. 



-The Roman Corinthian Order ; 
Pantheon. 



ORDER 



181 



which is unique; the spirals of the centre are larger than usual 
and interlace one another. A variety of the bedmould of the 
cornice is found in the so-called Temple of the Sun on the Quirinal 
Hill; although of late date, the entablature has the character 
of the Renaissance of the Augustan era, so fine and simple are 




.Plinth 



Fig. ii. — The Roman Corinthian Order; Temple of Castor. 

its proportions and details; there are only two fasciae to the 
architrave, and the upper feature of the bedmould consisted of 
large projecting blocks with two fascia and an upper egg-and- 
tongue moulding, like the Ionic dentil, these blocks projecting 
half-way between the fascia of the frieze and the edge of the 
corona. 

The Roman Composite Order. — As already noted, the Com- 
posite order differs from the Corinthian only in the design of its 
capital, which is a compound of the foliage of the Corinthian and 
the volutes of the Ionic capital. Already, in the Ionic capital 
of the Erechtheum, a further enrichment with the anthemion 
was provided round the necking; this was copied in the capitals 
of the interior of Trajan's basilica; in Asia Minor at Aizani (ist 
century a.d.) a single row of leaves was employed round the 
capitals of the pronaos under the volutes of an Ionic capital; 
the architect of the Arch of Titus (a.d. 8i) went one step farther 
and introduced the double row of leaves; both examples exist 
in the Arch of Septimus Severus (fig. 12), in the tepidarium of 
the thermae of Diocletian; and, to judge by the numerous 
examples still existing in the churches at Rome, it would seem 
to have been the favourite capital. The Byzantine architects 
also based most of their capitals on the Roman Composite 
examples. There are other hybrid Roman capitals, in which 
figures of a winged Victory, rams' heads or cornucopia, take the 
place of the angle spirals of the Corinthian capital. 

The Arcade Order. — This, which was defined by Fergusson 
as the true Roman order, is a compound of two distinct types 
of construction, the arcuated and the trabeated, the former 



derived from the Etruscans, the latter from the Greeks. Whilst, 
however, the arcade was a constructive feature, the employ- 
ment of the semi- or three-quarter detached column with its 
entablature complete, as a decorative screen, was a travesty of 
its original constructive function, without even the excuse of its 
adding in any way to the solidity of the structure, for the whole 
screen could be taken off from the Roman theatres and amphi- 
theatres without in any sense interfering with their stability. 
The employment of the attached column only, as a vertical 
decorative feature subdividing the arches, might have been 
admissible, but to add the entablature was a mistake, on account 
of the intercolumniation, which was far in excess of that em- 
ployed in any order, so that not only was it necessary to cut the 
architrave into voussoirs, thus forming a flat arch, but the stones 
composing it had to be built into the wall to ensure their stability; 
the entablature thus became an element of weakness instead of 
strength (fig. 13). The earliest example of the Arcade order is 
the Tabularium in Rome (80 B.C.) where it was employed to 
light a vaulted corridor running from one end to the other of the 
structure and raised some 50 ft. from the ground. The column is 
semi-detached, 7! diameters high with an intercolumniation 
of nearly 4 diameters, and an entablature with an architrave 
which is less than half a diameter, quite incapable, therefore, of 
carrying itself, much less than the rest of the entablature; 
the impost pier of the arch is half a diameter, and the height 
of the open arcade a little more than half its width. The shaft 




Fig. 12. — The Composite Order; Arch of Septimus Severus. 

had twenty-four flutes with arrises, and rested on a square 
plinth, and in the capital the echinus was only about one-twelfth 
of the diameter, the shallowest known. The frieze was divided 
by triglyphs, there being four between those over the axis of 
each column; the correct number in the Greek Doric order being 
one. In the theatre of Marcellus there were three triglyphs; 
the impost pier was f diameter, thus giving greater solidity 
to the wall, but resulting in a narrower opening. The Tabularium 
had originally a second arcade above that now existing, with 



l82 



ORDER 



semi-detached columns of the Ionic order, and these are found in 
the upper storey of the theatre of Marcellus, the earliest example 
existing of the superposed orders. A certain proportion exists 
between the orders employed; thus the upper diameter of the 
Doric column (which is -j\ diameters high with a diminution of 
between one-fifth and one-sixth of the lower diameter) is the 
same as the lower diameter of the Ionic column, which is Sf 
diameters high and a much slighter diminution. In the Colosseum 




Fig. 13. — The Arcade Order; Theatre of Marcellus. 

there were three storeys pierced with arcades, with the Corinthian 
order on the third storey, and a superstructure (added at a later 
date) without an arcade, and decorated with Corinthian pilasters 
only. Apparently this scheme of decoration was considered 
to be the best for the purpose, and with some slight changes was 
employed for all the amphitheatres throughout the Empire. 
The intercolumniation, on which the design is made, varies 
in the examples of later date. With an intercolumniation of 6 
diameters, the arcades are wider and a lighter effect is obtained, 
and this is the proportion in the Colosseum. 

The Five Orders; Italian. — The two Italian architects whose 
text-books with illustrations of the five orders have been accepted 
generally as the chief authorities on the subject are Vignola 



and Palladio, the former in France and the latter in England, 
the dates of the publication of their works being 1563 and 1570 
respectively. In 1759 Sir William Chambers published a treatise 
on civil architecture, in which he set forth his interpretation 
of the five orders, and his treatise is still consulted by students. 
They all of them based their conjectural restorations on the 
descriptions given by Vitruvius, who, however, avoids using 
the same term throughout, the words genus, ratio, species, mores 
being employed, from which it may be concluded that the Greeks 
themselves had no such term as that which is now defined as 
" order," especially as in his book he invariably quotes the 
Greek name when describing various parts of the temple. In 
the preface to the fourth book he speaks only of the three orders 
(genus), so that the Tuscan described in Book IV. chap. vii. 
would seem to have been an afterthought, and his descrip- 
tion of the entablature shows that it was entirely in wood and 
therefore an incomplete development. The Italian revivalists, 
however, evolved one of their orders out of it and added a fifth, 
the Composite, of which there was no example in Rome before 
a.d. 82. In the description which follows it must be understood 
that it refers only to the Italian version of what the revivalists 
considered the Roman orders to consist of , and as a rule Vignola's 
interpretation will be given, because he seems to have kept 
closer to Vitruvius's descriptions and to have taken as his models 
the finest examples then existing in Rome. 

The Tuscan Order. — The base consists of a torus moulding, 
resting on square plinths; the shaft is terminated below by an 
apophyge and fillet and tapers upwards, the diminution being 
between one-quarter and one-fifth of the lower diameter, with 
an apophyge, fillet and astragal at the top, the capital consists 
of a square abacus with fillet and cavetto, an echinus, fillet and 
a necking; the whole column being 7 diameters high. The 
intercolumniation given by Vignola is 25 diameters, instead 
of the 3! diameters of Vitruvius's areostyle. The architrave, 
frieze and cornice, are simple versions of the Doric, except that 
there are no triglyphs in the frieze. 

The Doric Order. — In his Doric order Vignola has followed 
the Roman Doric order of the theatre of Marcellus, but he 
gives it a base consisting of an astragal and torus resting on a 
square plinth; in his shaft he copies the fluting (24 flutes) with 
the arris of the columns of the thermae of Diocletian; his 
capital, except the flowers decorating the necking and his 
entablature, are entirely taken from the theatre of Marcellus; 
in a second study he introduces an Attic base, carves the echinus 
of the capital with the egg-and-tongue, introduces two fasciae 
in his architrave, and to support the cornice provides shallow 
plain modillions with guttae on the soffits. In both the examples 
given the columns taper upwards and are 8 diameters high. 

The Ionic Order. — For the Ionic order Vignola discards the 
temple of Fortuna Virilis, but enriches the order of the theatre 
of Marcellus, adopting the base of the temple of Castor and the 
fluted columns of the same; in his frieze he introduces that of 
the Corinthian temple of Antoninus and Faustina, and in the 
bedmould and cornice copies that of the thermae of Diocletian. 
Palladio in his entablature introduces the convex friezes and 
adopts a single uncarved modillion under the cornice. In both 
cases the columns are fluted and 9 diameters high. 

The Corinthian Order. — In this order Vignola, for his base, 
returns to the temple of Castor, makes his columns 10 diameters 
high, copies the capital of the portico of the Pantheon, introduces 
a rib frieze with winged female figures and a bull about to be 
sacrificed, and adopts the bedmould of the temple of Castor, 
reversing the carving of two of the mouldings and the cornice, 
and omitting the fluting of the corona of that temple. In 
Palladio's Corinthian order the frieze is too narrow and the 
bedmould, though copied from the temple of Castor, is of smaller 
scale. 

The Composite Order. — As in the Roman Composite order the 
only original feature was the capital, there were no new versions 
to be given of the entablature, but unfortunately they were 
unable to copy the many examples in Rome. In the three best- 
known capitals, those of the arches of Titus and Septimus 



ORDER, HOLY 



r8 3 



& 




Tuscan. 



Doric. 



Fig. 14. 



Ionic. 
-The Italian Orders. 



Corinthian. 




Composite. 



Severus and in the thermae of Diocletian, the upper fillet of the 
volute runs straight across the capital, being partially sunk in 
the cavetto of the abacus; in the canalis of the volutes of all 
these examples is a band of foliage which dips down to carry 
the centre flower, and, on account of its projection, it hides, 
from those looking only from below, the upper fillet of the volute. 
The architects of the Revival, therefore, in their studies of the 
capital, turned the volutes (which they would seem, like Ruskin, 
to have thought were horns) down on to the top of the echinus, 
producing a composition which is not in accordance with ancient 
examples and shows ignorance of the origin and development 
of the Ionic volute; unfortunately their interpretations of the 
Composite capital were followed by Inigo Jones, and are employed 
even in Regent Street, London, at the present day; there are, 
however, two or three Renaissance examples in Paris, in which 
the true Composite capital has been retained. 

The Pedestal. — The architects of the Revival would seem to 
have conceived the idea that no order was complete without 
a pedestal. The only Roman examples of isolated columns 
with pedestals known are those of the columns of Trajan, Marcus 
Aurelius, Antoninus Pius and others of less importance, but 
they carried statues only and had no structural functions as 
supports to an entablature; the pedestals under the columns 
which decorated the arches of triumph were built into and 
formed part of the structure of the arch. The columns of the 
tepidarium of the Roman thermae had pedestals of moderate 
height (about 3 to 4 ft.) which bore no proportional relation to 
the diameter of the column. Vignola, however, gave definite 
proportions for the pedestal, which in the Doric order was to be 
2 diameters in height, in the Ionic 25 diameters, and in the 
Corinthian order 3 diameters, the result being that in the front 
of the church of St John Lateran, where the Corinthian pilasters 
are of great height, the pedestals are 12 to 13 ft. high. In 
conjunction with the arcade there was more reason for pedestals 



to the semi-detached columns on the upper storeys, but none 
was employed on the ground storey, either in the theatre of 
Marcellus or in the Colosseum. (R. P. S.) 

ORDER, HOLY. "Holy Orders" (ordines sacri) may be 
defined as the rank or status of persons empowered by virtue 
of a certain form or ceremony to exercise spiritual functions in 
the Christian church. Thus TertuOian (Idol. 7, Monog. 11) 
mentions the " ecclesiastical order," including therein those 
who held office in the church, and (Exhort. Cast. 71) he dis- 
tinguishes this ordo from the Christian plcbs or laity. We may 
compare the common use of the word ordo in profane writers, 
who refer, e.g., to the ordo senator ins, ordo equester, &c. It is 
true that the evidence of Tertullian does not carry us back 
farther than the close of the 2nd or opening of the 3rd 
century a.d. But a little before Tertullian, Irenaeus, though 
he does not use the word ordo, anticipates in some measure 
Tertullian's abstract term, for he recognizes a magisterii locus, 
" a place of magistracy " or " presidency " in the church. Indeed, 
phrases more or less equivalent occur in the sub-apostolic litera- 
ture, and even in the New Testament itself, such as those who 
are " over you in the Lord " (1 Thess. v. 12), those " that bear 
the rule" (Heb. xiii. 7; cf. 1 Clem. i. 3; Herm. Vis. ii. 2, 6). 
Here we pause to remark that in Tertullian's view the church 
as a whole possesses the power of self-government and administra- 
tion, though in the interest of discipline and convenience it 
delegates that power to special officers. It is, he says, the 
" authority of the church " which has constituted the difference 
between the governing body and the laity, and in an emergency 
a layman may baptize and celebrate (Exhort. Cast. 7), nor can 
this statement be lightly set aside on the plea that Tertullian, 
when he so wrote, had lapsed into Montanism. The fact is that 
the Montanists represented the conservatism of their day, and 
even now the Roman Church admits the right of laymen to baptize 
when a priest cannot be had. The Apostolic Constitutions (viii. 32) 



1 8+ 



ORDER, HOLY 



allow a layman to preach, if he be skilful and reverent, and the 
language of St Ignatius (Ad Smyrn. 8), " Let that be esteemed 
a valid Eucharist which is celebrated in the presence of the 
bishop or of some one commissioned by him," is really incon- 
sistent with any firmly established principle that celebration by 
a layman was in itself absolutely null (see also Eucharist). 

When we go on to inquire what special offices the church 
from the beginning, or almost from the beginning, adopted and 
recognized, two points claim preliminary attention. In the 
first place, much would be done in practical administration by 
persons who held no definite position formally assigned to them, 
although they wielded great influence on account of their age, 
talents and character. Next, it must be carefully remembered 
that the early church was, in a sense bard for us even to under- 
stand, ruled and edified by the direct action of the Holy Spirit. 
St Paul (i Cor. xii. 28) furnishes us with a list of church offices 
very different from those which obtain in any church at the 
present day. 1 " God," he says, " hath set some in the church, 
first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then miracles, 
then gifts of healing, helps, governments, (divers) kinds of 
tongues." Ministry of this sort is not to be confounded with 
" order," of which this article treats. It died out very gradually, 
and the Didache or Teaching of the Apostles, compiled probably 
between a.d. 130 and 160, gives clear information on the nature 
of this prophetic or charismatic ministry. The title of " apostle " 
was not limited to the immediate disciples of our Lord, but was 
given to missionaries or evangelists who went about founding 
new churches; the prophets spoke by revelation; the teachers 
were enabled by supernatural illumination to instruct others. 
All of these men were called to their work by the internal voice 
of the Holy Spirit: none of them was appointed or elected by 
their fellows: none of them, and this is an important feature, 
was necessarily confined to a local church. Nevertheless, side 
by side with this prophetic ministry there was another, mediately 
at least of human appointment, and local in its character. Here 
we have the germ of orders in the technical sense. At first this 
local ministry was twofold, consisting of presbyters or bishops 
and deacons. Christian presbyters first appear (Acts xi. 30) in 
the church of Jerusalem, and most likely the name and office 
were adopted from the Jewish municipalities, perhaps from the 
Jewish synagogues (see Priest). Afterwards St Paid and St 
Barnabas in their first missionary journey "appointed 2 
(Acts xiv. 23) presbyters in every church." Further, we find 
St Paul about a.d. 62 addressing the " saints " at Philippi 
" with the bishops and deacons." The word ewio-KOTros or 
overseer may be of Gentile origin, just as presbyter may 
have been borrowed from the Jews. There is strong proof that 
presbyter and episcopus are two names for the same office. 
It has indeed been maintained by eminent scholars, chiefly by 
Hatch and Harnack, that the word episcopus was given originally 
to the chief officer of a club or a confraternity, so that the 
episcopus was a financial officer, whereas the presbyters regulated 
the discipline. To this it may be objected that presbyters 
and bishops are never mentioned together, and that the names 
were interchangeable (Acts xx. 17 and 28; 1 Pet. v. i, 2; 1 Tim. 
iii. 1-7 and v. 17-19; Tit. i. 5-7). The work of the presbyter 
or bishop was concerned at first with discipline rather than with 
teaching, which was largely in the hands of the charismatic 
ministry; nevertheless, the Pastoral Epistles (1 Tim. iii. 2) 
insist that an episcopus must be " apt to teach," and some 
presbyters (1 Tim. v. 17) not only ruled but also " laboured in the 
word and in teaching." They also " offered the gifts " (1 [Clem. 
44), i.e. to adopt Bishop Lightfoot's interpretation, " they led 
the prayers and thanksgivings of the congregation, presented 
the alms and contributions to God and asked His blessing on 
them in the name of the whole body." Under the bishops or 
presbyters stood the deacons or " helpers " (Philipp. i. i, 1 Tim. 
iii. 8-13). Whether they were the successors, as most of the 
Fathers believed, of the seven chosen by the church of Jerusalem 

1 A partial exception may be made in lavour of the " Catholic 
Apostolic Church " founded by Edward Irving. 

2 Josephus, e.g. Antiq. vi. 4. 2, abundantly justifies this translation. 



to relieve the apostles in the administration of alms (Acts vi.) 
is a question still disputed and uncertain. Be that as it may, 
the deacon was long considered to be the " servant of the widows 
and the poor " (Jerome, Ep. 146), and the archdeacon, who first 
appears towards the end of the 4th century, owes the greatness 
of his position to the fact that he was the chief administrator of 
church funds (see Archdeacon). This ancient idea of the 
diaconate, ignored in the Roman Pontifical, has been restored 
in the English ordinal. The growth of sacerdotal theories, 
which were fully developed in Cyprian's time, fixed attention 
on the bishop as a sacrificing priest, and on the deacon 3 as his 
assistant at the altar. 

Out of the twofold grew the threefold ministry, so that each 
local church was governed by one episcopus surrounded by a 
council of presbyters. James, the Lord's brother, who, partly 
because of his relationship to Christ, stood supreme in the 
church at Jerusalem, as also Timothy and Titus, who acted 
as temporary delegates of St Paul at Ephesus and in Crete, are 
justly considered to have been forerunners of the monarchical 
episcopate. The episcopal rule in this new sense probably arose 
in the lifetime of St John, and may have had his sanction. At 
all events the rights of the monarchical bishop are strongly 
asserted in the Ignatian epistles (about a.d. no), and were already 
recognized in the contemporary churches of Asia Minor. We 
may attribute the origin of the episcopate to the need felt of 
a single official to preside at the Eucharist, to represent the 
church before the heathen state and in the face of rising heresy, 
and to carry on correspondence with sister churches. The change 
of constitution occurred at different times in different places. 
Thus St Ignatius in writing to the Romans never refers to any 
presiding bishop, and somewhat earlier Clement of Rome in 
his epistles to the Corinthians uses the terms presbyter and 
episcopus interchangeably. Hermas (about a.d. 140) confirms 
the impression that the Roman Church of his day was under 
presbyteral rule. Even when introduced, the monarchical 
episcopate was not thought necessary for the ordination of other 
bishops or presbyters. St Jerome (Ep. 146) tells us that as late 
as the middle of the 3rd century the presbyters of Alexandria, 
when the see was vacant, used to elect one of their own number 
and without any further ordination set him in the episcopal 
office. So the canons of Hippolytus (about a.d. 250) decree 
that a confessor who has suffered torment for his adherence to 
the Christian faith should merit and obtain the rank of presbyter 
forthwith — " Immo confessio est ordinatio ejus." Likewise 
in a.d. 314 the thirteenth canon of Ancyra (for the true reading 
see Bishop Wordsworth's Ministry of Grace, p. 140) assumes 
that city presbyters may with the bishop's leave ordain other 
presbyters. Even among the medieval schoolmen, some (Gore, 
Church and Ministry, p. 377) maintained that a priest might be 
empowered by the pope to ordain other priests. 

The threefold 4 ministry was developed in the 2nd, a seven- 
fold ministry in the middle of the 3rd century. There must, 
says Cornelius (a pud Euseb., H.E. vi. 43), be one bishop in the 
Catholic Church; and he then enumerates the church officers 
subject to himself as bishop of Rome. These are 46 presbyters, 
7 deacons, 7 subdeacons, 42 acolytes, 52 exorcists and readers, 
together with doorkeepers. The subdeacons, no doubt, became 
a necessity when the deacons, whose number was limited to seven 
in memory of their original institution, were no longer equal to 
their duties in the " regions " of the imperial city, and left their 
lower work, such as preparation of the sacred vessels, to their 
subordinates. The office of acolyte may have been suggested by 
the attendant assigned to heathen priests. The office of door- 
keeper explains itself, though it must be remembered that it was 
the special duty of the Christian ostiarius to exclude the un- 
baptized and persons undergoing penance from the more solemn 
part of the Eucbaristic service. But readers and exorcists claim 

3 " Fixed attention " on the deacon's ministration, the ministra- 
tion itself being much more ancient. See Justin, Apol. i. 65. 

4 The Nestorians may be said to have a fourfold ministry, for 
they reconsecrated a bishop when he was made catholicos or 
patriarch. Chardon, v. p. 222. 



ORDER, HOLY 



185 



special notice. The reader is the only minor official mentioned 
by Tertullian (Pracscr. 41). An ancient church order which 
belongs to the latter part of the 2nd century (see Harnack's 
Sources of Apostolic Canons, Engl. Transl. p. 54 seq.) mentions 
the reader before the deacon, and speaks of him as filling " the 
place of an evangelist." We are justified in believing that both 
exorcists and readers, whose functions differed essentially from 
the mechanical employments of the other minor clerics, belonged 
originally to the " charismatic " ministry, and sank afterwards 
to a low rank in the " orders" of the church (see Exorcist 
and Lector). There were also other minor orders in the 
ancient church which have fallen into oblivion or lost their 
clerical character. Such were the copialac or grave-diggers, the 
psalmislaeox chaunters, and the parabolani, who at great 
personal risk — whence the name — visited the sick in pestilence. 
The modern Greek Church recognizes only two minor orders, 
viz. those of subdeacons and readers, and this holds good of the 
Oriental churches generally, with the single exception of the 
Armenians. 1 The Anglican Church is content with the threefold 
ministry of bishops, priests and deacons, but in recent times the 
bishops have appointed lay-readers, licensed to read prayers 
and preach in buildings which are not consecrated. The Latins, 
and Armenians who have borrowed from the Latins, have sub- 
deacons, acolytes, exorcists, readers and doorkeepers. Since the 
pontificate of Innocent III., however, the Latin Church has 
placed the subdiaconate among the greater or sacred orders, the 
subdeacon being obliged to the law of celibacy and bound to the 
daily recitation of the breviary offices. The minor orders, and 
even the subdiaconate and diaconate, are now regarded as no 
more than steps to the priesthood. Roman theologians generally 
reckon only seven orders, although, if we count the episcopate 
an order distinct from the presbyterate, the sum is not seven, 
but eight. The explanation given by St Thomas (Supp. xl. 5.) 
is that, whereas all the orders have reference to the body of 
Christ present on the altar, the episcopate, so far forth, is not a 
separate order, since a simple priest no less than a bishop 
celebrates the Eucharist. The Council of Trent takes the same 
view; it enumerates (Sess. xxiii. cap. 2) only seven orders, and 
yet maintains (cap. 4) the ecclesiastical hierarchy of bishops, 
priests and ministers, the bishops as successors of the Apostles 
holding the highest place. The Roman Church forbids ordina- 
tion to higher grades unless the candidate has received all the 
inferior orders. Further, a cleric is bound to exercise the minor 
orders for a year before he can be ordained subdeacon, he must 
be subdeacon for a year before he is ordained deacon, deacon for 
a year before he is made priest. However, instances of men 
elevated at once from the condition of laymen to the priesthood 
were known in the early church, and Chardon {Hist, des sacra- 
ments, vol. v. part 1, ch. v.) shows that in exceptional cases men 
were consecrated bishops without previous ordination to the 
priesthood. 

Passing to the effect of ordination, we meet with two views, 
each of which still finds advocates. According to some, ordina- 
tion simply entitles a man to hold an office and perform its 
functions. It corresponds to the form by which, e.g., a Roman 
official was put in possession of his magistracy. This theory is 
clearly stated by Cranmer: " In the New Testament he that 
is appointed bishop or priest needed no consecration, by the 
Scripture, for election or appointment thereto is sufficient." 2 
This view, widely held among modem scholars, has strong 
support in the fact that the words used for ordination in the 
first three centuries (xet-poroveiv , naBiOTavav, Kh-npovodai, con- 
stituere, ordinare) also expressed appointment to civil office. 
Very different is the medieval theory, which arose from the 
gradual acceptance of the belief that the Jewish was the proto- 
typeofthe Christian priest. According, then, to the Roman view, 

1 The Syrian Jacobites and the Maronites also ordain " singers," 
Denzinger, Rit. Oriental, i. p. 118 seq.; Silbernagl, Kirchen des 
Orients, pp. 254. 315. 

2 Cranmer's works are to be found in Burnet, " Collection of 
Records " appended to his History of the Reformation (ed. Pocock), 
iv. 478. Cranmer also maintained that " bishops and priests are but 
both one office in the beginning of Christ's religion," ib. p. 471. 



holy order is a sacrament, and as such instituted by Christ; 
it confers grace and power, besides setting a mark or character 
upon the soul, in consequence of which ordination to the same 
office cannot be reiterated. Such is the teaching of the Roman 
Church, accepted by the Greeks and with certain modifications 
by Anglicans of the High Church school, who appeal to 1 Tim. 
iv. 14, 2 Tim. i. 6. We may conclude with brief reference to the 
most important aspects of the Roman doctrine. 

The ordinary minister of orders is a bishop. The tonsure and 
minor orders are, however, still sometimes conferred by abbots, 
who, though simple priests, have special faculties for the ordina- 
tion of their monks. Some account has been already given of 
scholastic opinion on presbytcral ordination to the diaconate and 
even to the priesthood. Can a heretical or schismatical bishop 
validly ordain ? Is a simoniacal ordination valid ? All modern 
theologians of the Roman Church answer these questions in 
the affirmative, but from the 8th to the beginning of the 13th 
century they were fiercely agitated with the utmost divergence 
of opinion and practice. Pope Stephen reconsecrated bishops 
consecrated in the usual way by his schismatical predecessor 
Constantine. Pope Nicholas declared orders given by rhotius 
of Constantinople null. St Peter Damian was grievously per- 
plexed about the validity of simoniacal ordinations. Similarly 
William of Paris held that degradation deprived a priest of power 
to consecrate. 3 St Thomas, on the contrary, contends that 
" heretics and persons cut off from the church " (Siantn. Suppl. 
xxxviii. 2) may ordain validly, and that a priest who has been 
degraded can still celebrate the Eucharist (Sianm. iii. 82. 8) 
validly, though of course not lawfully. This opinion, defended 
by Bonaventura, Alexander of Hales, Scotus and others, soon 
became and is now generally accepted. 

The Schoolmen had no historical sense and little historical 
information; hence they fell into one error after another on the 
essentials in the rite of ordination. Some of them believed that 
the essential matter in the consecration of a bishop consisted in 
the placing the book of the gospels on his head and shoulders. 
True, this rite was used both in East and West as early as the 
4th century; it was not, however, universal. According to 
common opinion, the matter and form of ordination to the 
episcopate were the imposition of the consecrating bishop's 
hands with the words, " Receive the Holy Ghost." The words in 
question, and indeed any imperative form of this kind, are still 
unknown to the East and were of very late introduction in the 
West. The final imposition of hands and the bestowal of power 
to forgive sins at the end of the ordination rite for priests in 
the Roman Pontifical is later even than the tradition of instru- 
ments. For like reasons the tradition of the instruments, 
■i.e. the handing over of paten and chalice in ordination to 
the priesthood, are admittedly non-essential, unless we adopt 
the opinion of some Roman theologians that our Lord left the 
determination of matter and form to the church, which has 
insisted on different rites at different times. 

The necessity of reference to sacerdotal power in the ordination 
of priests and bishops will be considered a little farther on in 
connexion with Anglican orders. 

Deaconesses in the East received the imposition of the bishop's 
hands, but could not ascend to the priesthood. The Roman 
theologians regard them as incapable of true ordination, alleging 
1 Tim. ii. 12. An unbaptized person is also incapable of valid 
ordination. On the other hand, St Thomas holds that orders 
may be validly conferred on children who have not come to the 
use of reason. For lawful ordination in the Roman Church, a 
man must be confirmed, tonsured, in possession of all orders 
lower than that which he proposes to receive, of legitimate birth, 
not a slave or notably mutilated, of good life and competent 
knowledge. By the present law (Concil. Trid. Sess. xxiii. de Ref. 
cap. 12) a subdeacon must have begun his twenty-second, a 
deacon his twenty-third, a priest his twenty-fifth year. 4 The 

3 In reality this is a survival of the primitive view that holy 
order is institution for an office which the local church confers and 
can therefore take away. 

4 The canon law fixes the thirtieth year as the lowest age for 
episcopal consecration. 



i86 



ORDER, HOLY 



Council of Trent also requires that any one who receives holy 
orders must have a " title," i.e. means of support. The chief 
titles are poverty, i.e. solemn profession in a religious order, 
patrimony and benefice. Holy orders are to be conferred on the 
Ember Saturdays, on the Saturday before Passion Sunday or on 
Holy Saturday (Easter Eve). The ancient and essential rule 
that a bishop must be " chosen by all the people " (Can. Hipp. 
ii. 7) has fallen into disuse, partly by the right of confirmation 
allowed to the bishops of the province, partly by the influence 
of Christian emperors, who controlled the elections in the capital 
where they resided, most of all by the authority exercised by 
kings after the invasion of the northern tribes and the dissolution 
of the empire (see Church History). 

Such in brief were the doctrine and use of the early churches, 
gradually systematized, developed and transformed in the 
churches of the Roman obedience. The Reformation brought 
in radical changes, which were on the whole a return to the 
primitive type. Calvin states his views clearly in the fourth book 
of his Institutes, cap. iii. Christ, as he holds, has established 
in His church certain offices which are always to be retained. 
First comes the order of presbyters or elders. These are sub- 
divided into pastors, who administer the word and sacraments, 
doctors, who teach and expound the Bible, elders pure and 
simple, who exercise rule and discipline. The special care of the 
poor is committed to deacons. Ordination is to be effected by 
imposition of hands. The monarchical episcopate is rejected. 
This view of order was accepted in the Calvinistic churches, but 
with various modifications. Knox, for example, did away with 
the imposition of hands (M'Crie's Knox, period vii.), though the 
rite was restored by the Scottish Presbyterian Church in the 
Second Book of Discipline. Knox also provided the Church of 
Scotland with superintendents or visitors, as well as readers and 
exhorters, offices which soon fell into disuse. Nor do Scottish 
presbyterians now recognize any special class of doctors, unless 
we suppose that these are represented by professors of theology. 
Independents acknowledge the two orders of presbyters and 
deacons, and differ from the Calvinistic presbyterians chiefly in 
this, that with them the church is complete in each single con- 
gregation, which is subject to no control of presbytery or synod. 

Luther was not, like Calvin, a man of rigid system. He 
refused to look upon any ecclesiastical constitution as binding 
for all time. The keys, as he believed, were entrusted to the 
church as a whole, and from the church as a whole the " ministers 
of the word and sacraments " are to derive their institution and 
authority. The form of government was not essential. Pro- 
vided that the preaching of the gospel was free and full, Luther 
was willing to tolerate episcopacy and even papacy. Hence the 
Lutheran churches exhibit great variety of constitution. In 
Scandinavia they are under episcopal rule. The Lutheran 
Bugenhagen, who was in priest's orders, ordained seven super- 
intendents, afterwards called bishops, for Denmark in 1527, 
and Norway, then under the same crown, derives its present 
episcopate from the same source. Sweden stands in a different 
position. There three bishops were consecrated in 1528 by 
Peter Magnusson, who had himself been consecrated by a cardinal 
with the pope's approval at Rome in 1524, for the see of Westiras, 
to which he had been elected by the chapter. J. A. Nicholson 
(Apostolical Succession in the Church of Sweden, 1880) seems to 
have proved so much from contemporary evidence. A reply 
to Mr Nicholson was made in Swedish by a Roman priest, Bern- 
hard, to whom Mr Nicholson replied in 1887. Unfortunately Mr 
Nicholson gives no detailed account of the form used in con- 
secration, and on this and other points fuller information is 
needed. We may say, however, that Mr Nicholson has presented 
a strong case for the preservation of episcopal succession in the 
Swedish Church. 

If the Swedish Church has preserved the episcopal succession, 
it does not make much of that advantage, for it is in communion 
with the Danish and Norwegian bodies, which can advance no 
such claim. On the other hand, the Church of England adheres 
closely to the episcopal constitution. It is true that in articles 
xix. and xxxvi. she defines the church, without any express 



reference to the episcopate, as a " congregation of faithful men 
in which the pure word of God is preached and the sacraments 
be duly administered according to Christ's ordinance," and 
simply adds that the ordinal of Edward VI. for. the consecration 
of bishops, priests and deacons, contains all that is necessary for 
such ordination and nothing which is of itself superstitious. 
The preface to the ordinal (1550) goes farther. Therein we are 
told that the threefold ministry of bishops, priests and deacons 
may be traced back to apostolic times, and in the final revision 
of 1662 a clause was added to the effect that no one is to be 
accounted " a lawful bishop, priest or deacon in the Church of 
England," unless he has had episcopal consecration or ordination. 
The words " in the Church of England " deserve careful notice. 
Nothing is said to condemn the opinion of Hooker (Eccl. Pol. vii. 
14. 11) that "there may be sometimes very just and sufficient 
reason to allow ordination made without a bishop," or of the 
High Church Thorndike (apud Gibson on the Articles, ii. 74), 
who " neither justifies nor condemns the orders of foreign 
Protestants." The church lays down a rule of domestic policy, 
and neither gives nor pretends to give any absolute criterion for 
the validity of ordination. 

But while the Church of England has declined communion 
with non-episcopal churches, she has been involved in a long 
controversy with the Church of Rome on the validity of her own 
orders. It will be best to give first the leading facts, and then the 
inferences which may be drawn from them. 

The English Church derives its orders through Matthew 
Parker, archbishop of Canterbury, who was consecrated in 1559 
by William Barlow, bishop-elect of Chichester. We 
may assume that the rite employed was serious and orders." 
reverent, and there is no longer any need to refute 
the fable of a ludicrous consecration at the " Nag's Head " 
tavern. We may further take for granted that Barlow was a 
bishop in the Catholic sense of the word. He had been nominated 
bishop of St Asaph in 1536, translated to St David's in the same 
year, and to Bath and Wells in 1547. He also sat in the upper 
house of Convocation and in the House of Peers. Now if Barlow 
all this time was not consecrated — and so far the only form of 
consecration known in England was according to the Roman rite — 
he would have incurred the penalties of praemunire, let alone the 
fact that Henry VIII. would not have tolerated such a defiance 
of Catholic order for a moment. The registers at St David's 
make no mention of his consecration, but this counts for nothing. 
No reference in the registers can be produced for many ordinations 
of undoubted validity. Parker thus was consecrated by a true 
bishop according to the Edwardine ordinal, i.e. he received 
imposition of hands with the words," Take the Holy Ghost and 
remember that thou stir up the grace of God which is in thee by 
imposition of hands." The corresponding form for the ordination 
of a priest was" Receive thou the Holy Ghost: whose sins thou 
dost forgive," &c. These were the sole forms in use from 1552 
to 1562. 

Roman authorities have from the beginning and throughout 
consistently repudiated orders given according to the Edwardine 
ordinal. The case first came under consideration when Cardinal 
Pole returned to England early in Mary's reign with legatine 
authority for reconciling the realm to the Holy See. In his 
instructions to the bishops (Burnet Collect., pt. iii., bk. v., 33; 
see also Dixon, Hist. Ch. of England, v. 238 seq. 1 ) he clearly 
recognizes orders schismatical but valid, i.e. those conferred 
in Henry's reign, and so distinguishes them by implication 
from invalid orders, i.e. those given according to the Edwardine 
book. In the former alone were " the form and intention of tie 
church preserved." He could not douht for a moment the utter 
invalidity of Edwardine ordinations to the priesthood. He 
knew very well that the theologians of his church almost without 
exception held that the handing over of the paten and chalice 
with the words, " Receive power of offering sacrifice," &c, were 
the essential matter and form of ordination to the priesthood; 
indeed he published the decree of Eugenius IV. to that effect 

1 Compare also the article on Anglican orders in the Catholic 
Encyclopedia, vol. i., especially at p. 492. 



ORDER IN COUNCIL 



187 



(Wilkins, Concil. iv. 121). The Anglican priesthood being gone, 
the episcopate also lapses. For according to the Pontifical, the 
episcopate is the " summum saccrdotium "; the. bishop in con- 
secration receives "the sacerdotal grace"; it is "his office 
to consecrate, ordain, offer, baptize, confirm." Thus in the Pon- 
tifical the words " Receive the Holy Ghost " are determined 
and defined by the context. There is nothing in the Anglican 
ordinal to show that the Holy Ghost is given for the consecration 
of a bishop in the Roman sense. In 1704 John Gordon, formerly 
Anglican bishop of Galloway, gave to the Holy Office an account 
of the manner in which he had been consecrated. The Sacred 
Congregation, with the pope's approval, declared his orders to 
be null. The constant practice has been to reordain uncon- 
ditionally Anglican priests and deacons. In i8q6 Leo XIII. 
summoned eight divines of his own communion to examine the 
question anew. Four of those divines were, it is said, decidedly 
opposed to the admission of Anglican orders as valid; four were 
more or less favourably disposed to them. The report of this 
commission was then handed over to a committee of cardinals, who 
pronounced unanimously for the nullity of the orders in question. 
Thereupon the pope published his bull Aposlolicac curac. In it he 
lays the chief stress on the indeterminate nature of the Anglican 
form "Receive the Holy Ghost " at least from 1552 till the 
addition of the specific words, " for the office and work of a 
bishop (or priest) in the church of God," as also on the changes 
made in the Edwardine order " with the manifest intention. . . 
of rejecting what the church does." His conclusion is that 
Anglican orders are " absolutely null and utterly void." More- 
over, in a letter to Cardinal Richard, archbishop of Paris, the 
pope affirms that this his solemn decision is " firm, authoritative 
and irrevocable." 

For Roman Catholics the decision necessarily carries great 
weight, and it may perhaps have its influence on Anglicans 
of the school which approximates most closely to Roman belief. 
It need not affect the opinion of dispassionate students. It 
is not the judgment of experts. The rejection of Anglican orders 
In the 16th and 17th centuries was based on a theory about 
the " tradition of instruments," which has long ceased to be 
tenable in the face of history, and is abandoned by Romanists 
themselves. The opinion of a liturgical scholar like Mgr. Louis 
Duchesne, who was a member of the papal commission, on the 
general question would be interesting in the highest degree. 
Unfortunately we know nothing of his vote or of the reasons 
he gave for it, and outside of the Roman pale the unanimous 
decision of a committee of cardinals counts for very little. We 
may grant the pope's contention that the Edwardine church 
had no belief in priests who offered in sacrifice the body and 
blood of Christ or in bishops capable of ordaining such priests. 
We may grant further that the medieval offices have been 
deliberately altered to exclude this view. But then the liturgy 
of Serapion, the friend of Athanasius, recently discovered, 
contains forms for the ordination of priests and bishops which 
do not say a word about power to sacrifice, much less about 
power to sacrifice Christ's literal body and blood. The canons 
of Hippolytus, which are about 150 years older, and indeed all 
the oldest forms for celebration, absolutely ignore any such 
power of sacrifice. If they speak of sacrifice at all, it is a sacrifice 
of the gifts brought by the faithful and distributed in the con- 
gregation and among the poor, or again they refer to those 
spiritual sacrifices which a bishop is to offer " day and night." 
The Didache and Justin Martyr are no less unsatisfactory 
from the Roman point of view. In short, the English reformers 
knew very well that the ordinal and communion office which 
they drew up could not satisfy the requirements of medieval 
theology. They appealed not to the school divines, but to 
Scripture and primitive antiquity. That is the standard by 
which we are to test their work. 

Authorities. — For holy order in the apostolic and sub-apostolic 
age the reader may consult R. Rothe, Anfdnge der christiichen Kirche 
(1837); A. Ritschl's Entstehung der altkatholischen Kirche (2nd ed., 
1 857) ; J. B. Lightfoot's dissertation on the "Christian Ministry" 
in his commentary on the Philippians (1868). A new era was 
opened by E. Hatch's Organization of the Early Christian Church 



(1880); to this Bishop C. Gore's Church and Ministry (18 
reply. The facts are judicially stated and weighed in Bishop J. 
Wordsworth's Ministry of Grace (1902). Dr T. M. Lindsay's Church 
and Ministry in Early Centuries (1902) on the whole agrees with 
1 latch, but is too eager to find modern Presbyterianism in the early 
church. A. Harnack's edition of the Didache (1884), his Sources of 
the Apostolic Canons (Eng. trans., 1895), the edition of the Canons 
of Hippolytus by H. Achelis, in Texte und Vnlersuchungen, vol. vi. 
(1891), the translation of Scrapion's Prayer-book (translated by 
Bishop J. Wordsworth, 1899), are indispensable for serious study 
of the subject. 

Joann Morinus, De sacris ordinationibus (1655) and A. C. Chardon, 
Histoire des sacraments, vol. v. (1745), are rich in material chiefly 
relating to the patristic and medieval periods. 

For the controversy on Anglican orders sec P. F. Courayer, 
Validite des ordinations anglaises (1732), and two works in reply by 
M. Le Quien, Nullite des ordinations anglicanes (1725), Nullite des 
ordinations anglicanes demonstree de nouveau (1730). In recent 
times Anglican orders have been defended by A. W. Haddan, 
Apostolical Succession in the Church of England; F. \V. Puller, 
The Bull Apostolicae Curae and the Edwardine Ordinal. They have 
been attacked by E. E. Estcourt, Question of Anglican Ordinations 
(1873), and by A. W. Hutton, The Anglican Ministry, with a preface 
by Cardinal J. H. Newman (1879). (W. E. A.*) 

ORDER IN COUNCIL, in Great Britain, an order issued by 
the sovereign on the advice of the privy council, or more usually 
on the advice of a few selected members thereof. It is the modern 
equivalent of the medieval ordinance and of the proclamation 
so frequently used by the Tudor and Stewart sovereigns. It is 
opposed to the statute because it does not require the sanction 
of parliament; it is issued by the sovereign by virtue of the 
royal prerogative. But although theoretically orders in council 
are thus independent of parliamentary authority, in practice they 
are only issued on the advice of ministers of the crown, who are, 
of course, responsible to parliament for their action in the matter. 
Orders in council were first issued during the 18th century, and 
their legality has sometimes been called in question, the fear 
being evidently prevalent that they would be used, like the 
earlier ordinances and proclamations, to alter the law. Con- 
sequently in several cases parliament has subsequently passed 
acts of indemnity to protect the persons responsible for issuing 
them, and incidentally to assert its own authority. At the 
present time the principle seems generally accepted that orders 
in council may be issued on the strength of the royal prerogative, 
but they must not seriously alter the law of the land. 

The most celebrated instance of the use of orders in council 
was in 1807 when Great Britain was at war with France. In 
answer to Napoleon's Berlin decree, the object of which was to 
destroy the British shipping industry, George III. and his 
ministers issued orders in council forbidding all vessels under 
penalty of seizure to trade with ports under the influence of 
France. Supplementary orders were issued later in the same 
year, and also in 1808. Orders in council are used to regulate 
the matters which need immediate attention on the death of 
one sovereign and the accession of another. 

In addition to these and other orders issued by the sovereign 
by virtue of his prerogative, there is another class of orders in 
council, viz. those issued by the authority of an act of parliament, 
many of which provide thus for carrying out their provisions. 
At the present day orders in council are extensively used by the 
various administrative departments of the government, who 
act on the strength of powers conferred upon them by some act 
of parliament. They are largely used for regulating the details 
of local government and matters concerning the navy and the 
army, while a new bishopric is sometimes founded by an order 
in council. They are also employed to regulate the affairs of 
the crown colonies, and the lord-lieutenant of Ireland, the viceroy 
of India, the governor-general of Canada, and other repre- 
sentatives of the sovereign may issue orders in council under 
certain conditions. 

In times of emergency the use of orders in council is indispens- 
able to the executive. In September 1766, a famine being 
feared, the export of wheat was forbidden by an order in council, 
and the Regulation of the Forces Act 1871 empowers the govern- 
ment in a time of emergency to take possession of the railway 
system of the country by the issue of such an order. 



i88 



ORDERIC VITALIS— ORDINARY 



0RDER1C VITALIS (1075-c. 1142), the chronicler, was the 
son of a French priest, Odeler of Orleans, who had entered the 
service of Roger Montgomery, earl of Shrewsbury, and had 
received from his patron a chapel in that city. Orderic was the 
eldest son of his parents. They sent him at the age of five to 
learn his letters from an English priest, Siward by name, who 
kept a school in the church of SS Peter and Paul at Shrewsbury. 
When eleven years old he was entered as a novice in the Norman 
monastery of St Evroul en Ouche, which Earl Roger had formerly 
persecuted but, in his later years, was loading with gifts. The 
parents paid thirty marks for their son's admission; and he 
expresses the conviction that they imposed this exile upon him 
from an earnest desire for his welfare. Odeler's respect for the 
monastic profession is attested by his own retirement, a few years 
later, into a religious house which Earl Roger had founded at his 
persuasion. But the young Orderic felt for some time, as he 
tells us, like Joseph in a strange land. He did not know a word 
of French when he reached Normandy; his book, though written 
many years later, shows that he never lost his English cast of 
mind or his attachment to the country of his birth. His superiors 
rechristened him Vitalis (after a member of the legendary 
Theban legion) because they found a difficulty in pronouncing 
his baptismal name. But, in the title of his Ecclesiastical History 
he prefixes the old to the new name and proudly adds the epithet 
Angligena. His cloistered life was uneventful. He became a 
deacon in 1093, a priest in 1107. He left his cloister on several 
occasions, and speaks of having visited Croyland, Worcester, 
Cambrai (1105) and Cluny (1132). But he turned his attention 
at an early date to literature, and for many years he appears to 
have spent his summers in the scriptorium. His superiors (at 
some time between 1099 and 1122) ordered him to write the 
history of St Evroul. The work grew under his hands until it 
became a general history of his own age. St Evroul was a house 
of wealth and distinction. War-worn knights chose it as a 
resting-place of their last years. It was constantly entertaining 
visitors from southern Italy, where it had planted colonies of 
monks, and from England, where it had extensive possessions. 
Thus Orderic, though he witnessed no great events, was often 
well informed about them. In spite of a cumbrous and affected 
style, he is a vivid narrator; and his character sketches are 
admirable as summaries of current estimates. His narrative 
is badly arranged and full of unexpected digressions. But 
he gives us much invaluable information for which we should 
search the more methodical chroniclers in vain. He throws a 
flood of light upon the manners and ideas of his own age; he 
sometimes comments with surprising shrewdness upon the 
broader aspects and tendencies of history. His narrative breaks 
off in the middle of 1141, though he added some finishing touches 
in 1142. He tells us that he was then old and infirm. Probably 
he did not long survive the completion of his great work. 

The Historia ecclesiastica falls into three sections. (1) Bks. i., ii., 
which are historically valueless, give the history of Christianity 
from the birth of Christ. After 855 this becomes a bare catalogue 
of popes, ending with the name of Innocent I. These books were 
added, as an afterthought, to the original scheme; they were com- 
posed in the years 1136-1141. (2) Bks. iii.-vi. form a history of 
St Evroul, the original nucleus of the work. Planned before 1122, 
they were mainly composed in the years 1123-1 131. The fourth and 
fifth books contain long digressions on the deeds of William the 
Conqueror in Normandy and England. Before 1067 these are of 
little value, being chiefly derived from two extant sources. William 
of Jumieges' Historia Normannortim and William of Poitiers' Gesta 
Guilelmi. For the years 1067-1071 Orderic follows the last portion 
of the Gesta Guilelmi, and is therefore of the first importance. From 
1071 he begins to be an independent authority. But his notices of 
political events in this part of his work are far less copious than in 
(3) Bks. vii.-xiii., where ecclesiastical affairs are relegated to the 
background. In this section, after sketching the history of France 
under the Carolingians and early Capets, Orderic takes up the 
events of his own times, starting from about 1082. He has much 
to say concerning the empire, the papacy, the Normans in Italy and 
Apulia, the First Crusade (for which he follows Fulcher of Chartres 
and Baudri of Bourgueil). But his chief interest is in the histories 
of Duke Robert of Normandy, William Rufus and Henry I. He 
continues his work, in the form of annals, up to the defeat and 
capture of Stephen at Lincoln in 1141. 

The Historia ecclesiastica was edited by Duchesne in his Historiae 



Normannonmi jcriplores (Paris, 1619). This is the edition cited by 
Freeman and in many standard works. It is, however, inferior to 
that of A. le Prevost in five vols. (Soc. de I'histoire de France, Paris, 
1838-1855). The fifth volume contains excellent critical studies by 
M. Leopold Delisle, and is admirably indexed. Migne's edition 
(Palrotogia lalina, clxxxviii.) is merely a reprint of Duchesne. 
There is a French translation (by L. Dubois) in Guizot's Collection 
des memoires relatifs & I'histoire de France (Paris, 1825-1827); and 
one in English by T. Forester in Bohn's Antiquarian Library (4 vols., 
1 853~i856). In addition to the Historia there exists, in the library 
at Rouen, a manuscript edition of William of Jumieges' Historia 
Norniannorum which Leopold Delisle assigns to Orderic (see this 
critic's Lellre d. M Jules Lair (1873). (H. W. C. D.) 

ORDINANCE, or Ordonnance, in architecture, a composition 
of some particular order or style. It need not be restricted to 
columnar composition, but applies to any kind of design which 
is subjected to conventional rules for its arrangement. 

ORDINANCE, in medieval England, a form of legislation. 
The ordinance differed from the statute because it did not 
require the sanction of parliament, but was issued by the sovereign 
by virtue of the royal prerogative, although, especially during 
the reign of Edward I., the king frequently obtained the assent of 
his council to his ordinances. Dr Stubbs (Const. Hist. vol. ii.) 
defines the ordinance as " a regulation made by the king, by 
himself or in his council or with the advice of his council, pro- 
mulgated in letters patent or in charter, and liable to be recalled by 
the same authority." But after remarking that" these generaliza- 
tions do not cover all the instances of the use of ordinance," he 
adds: " The statute is primarily a legislative act, the ordinance is 
primarily an executive one." Legislation by ordinance was very 
common during the reigns of Henry III. and Edward I. when 
laws were issued by the king in council or enacted in parliament 
indifferently. Both were regarded as equally binding. Soon, 
however, legislation by ordinance aroused the jealousy of 
parliament, especially when it was found that acts of parliament 
were altered and their purpose defeated by this means. Con- 
sequently in 13S9 the Commons presented a petition to King 
Richard II. asking that no ordinance should be made contrary 
to the common law, or the ancient customs of the land, or the 
statutes ordained by parliament. For this and other reasons 
this form of legislation fell gradually into disuse, becoming 
obsolete in the 15th century. The modern equivalent of the 
ordinance is the order in council. 

In 13 10, when Edward II. was on the throne and England was 
in a very disturbed condition, a committee of twenty-one bishops, 
earls and barons was chosen to make certain ordinances for the 
better government of the country. These men were called 
ordainers. 

In the 17th century the use of the word ordinance was revived, 
and was applied to some of the measures passed by the Long 
Parliament, among them the famous self-denying ordinance of 
1645. This form was used probably in conformity with the 
opinion of Sir Edward Coke, who says in his Fourth Institute " an 
ordinance in parliament wanteth the threefold consent, and is 
ordained by one or two of them " (i.e. king, lords and commons). 
The ordinances of the Long Parliament did not, of course, obtain 
the assent of the king. At the present time the word ordinance 
is used to describe a body of laws enacted by a body less than 
sovereign. For example, the ordinances of Southern Nigeria 
are issued by the governor of that colony with the assent of his 
council. 

Before 1789 the kings of France frequently issued ordonnances. 
These were acts of legislation, and were similar to the ordinances 
of the English kings in medieval times. 

ORDINARY (med. Lat. ordinariits, Fr. ordinaire), in canon 
law, the name commonly employed to designate a superior 
ecclesiastic exercising " ordinary " jurisdiction (jurisdictionetn 
ordinariam) , i.e. in accordance with the normal organization of the 
church. It is usually applied to the bishop of a diocese and to 
those who exercise jurisdiction in his name or by delegation of 
his functions. Thus, in Germany, the term ordinariat is applied 
to the whole body of officials, including the bishop, through 
whom a diocese is administered. In English law, however, the 
term ordinary is now confined to the bishop and the chancellor 



ORDINATE— ORDNANCE 



189 



of his court. The pope is the ordinarius of the whole Roman 
Catholic Church, and is sometimes described as ordinarius 
ordinariorum. Similarly in the Church of England the king is 
legally the supreme ordinary, as the source of jurisdiction. 

The use of the term ordinary is not confined to ecclesiastical 
jurisdiction. In the civil law the judex ordinarius is a judge 
who has regular jurisdiction as of course and of common right 
as opposed to persons extraordinarily appointed. The term 
survived throughout the middle ages wherever the Roman law 
gained a foothold. In the Byzantine empire it was applied to any 
one filling a regular office (e.g. viraros 6p8tvapios= consul 
ordinarius, apx^v 6p8wapi,os = praefectus ordinarius); but it 
also occasionally implied rank as distinct from office, all those 
who had the title of clarissimus being sometimes described as 
bp8t.va.pioi. In England the only case of the term being 
employed in its civil use was that of the office of judge ordinary 
created by the Divorce Act of 1857, a title which was, however, 
only in existence for the space of about eighteen years owing to 
the incorporation of the Divorce Court with the High Court 
of Justice by the Judicature Act 1875. But in Scotland the 
ordinary judges of the Inner and Outer Houses are called lords 
ordinary, the junior lord ordinary of the Outer House acts as lord 
ordinary of the bills, the second junior as lord ordinary on teinds, 
the third junior as lord ordinary on Exchequer causes. In the 
United States the ordinary possesses, in the states where such an 
officer exists, powers vested in him by the constitution and acts 
of the legislature identical with those usually vested in the 
courts of probate. In South Carolina he was a judicial officer, 
but the office no longer exists, as South Carolina has now a 
probate court. 

In the German universities the Professor ordinarius is the 
occupant of one of the regular and permanent chairs in any 
faculty. 

ORDINATE, in the Cartesian system of co-ordinates, the 
distance of a point from the horizontal 
axis (axis of x) measured parallel to the 
axis of y. Thus PR is the ordinate of P. 
The word appears to have been first 
used by Rene Descartes, and to be derived 
from lincae ordinatae, a term used by 
Roman surveyors for parallel lines. (See Geometry: Ana- 
lytical) 

ORDNANCE (a syncopated form of " ordinance " or " or- 
donnance," so spelt in this sense since the 17th century), a 
general term for great guns for military and naval purposes, 
as opposed to "small arms" and their equipment; hence the 
term also includes miscellaneous stores under the control of the 
ordnance department as organized. In England the Master- 
General of the Ordnance, from Henry VIII. 's time, was head of 
a board, partly military, partly civil, which managed all affairs 
concerning the artillery, engineers and materiel of the army; 
this was abolished in 1855, its duties being distributed. The 
making of surveys and maps (see Map) was, for instance, handed 
over eventually (1SS9) to the Board of Agriculture, though the 
term " ordnance survey " still shows the origin. 

I. History and Construction 

The efficiency of any weapon depends entirely on two factors: 
(1) its power to destroy men and material, (2) the moral effect 
upon the enemy. Even at the present day the moral effect of 
gun fire is of great importance, but when guns were first used 
the noise they made on discharge must have produced a be- 
wildering fear in those without previous experience of them; 
more especially would this be the case with horses and other 
animals. Villani wrote of the battle of Cressy that the " English 
guns made a noise like thunder and caused much loss in men 
and horses" (Hime, Proc. R. A. Institution, vol. 26). Now, 
the moral effect may be considered more or less constant, for, 
as men are educated to the presence of artillery, the range of 
guns, their accuracy, mobility and on shore their invisibility, so 
increase that there is always the ever present fear that the 
stroke will fall without giving any evidence of whence it came. 




On the other hand, the development of the gun has always 
had an upward tendency, which of late years has been very 
marked; the demand for the increase of energy has kept pace 
with — or rather in recent times may be said to have caused — 
improvements in metallurgical science. 

The evolution of ordnance may be divided roughly into three 
epochs. The first includes that period during which stone shot 
were principally employed; the guns during this period (1313 
to 1520) were mostly made of wrought iron, although the art of 
casting bronze was then well known. This was due to the fact 
that guns were made of large size to fire heavy stone shot, and, 
in consequence, bronze guns would be very expensive, besides 
which wrought iron was the stronger material. The second 
epoch was that extending from 1520 to 1854, during which 
cast iron round shot were generally employed. In this epoch, 
both bronze and cast iron ordnance were used, but the progress 
achieved was remarkably small. The increase of power actually 
obtained was due to the use of corn, instead of serpentine, powder, 
but guns were undoubtedly much better proportioned towards 
the middle and end of this period than they were at the begin- 
ning. The third or present epoch may be said to have commenced 
in 1854, when elongated projectiles and rifled guns were be- 
ginning to be adopted. The rapid progress made during this 
period is as remarkable as the unproductiveness of the second 
epoch. Even during recent years the call for greater power 
has produced results which were believed to be impossible in 
1890. 

The actual date of the introduction of cannon, and the country 
in which they first appeared, have been the subject of much 
antiquarian research; but no definite conclusion has been arrived 
at. Some writers suppose (see Brackenbury, "Ancient Cannon 
in Europe " in Proc. Royal Artillery Inst., vol. iv.) that gun- 
powder was the result of a gradual development from incendiary 
compounds, such as Greek and sea fire of far earlier times, and 
that cannon followed in natural sequence. Other writers 
attribute the invention of cannon to the Chinese or Arabs. In 
any case, after their introduction into Europe a comparatively 
rapid progress was made. Early in the 14th century the first 
guns were small and vase shaped; towards the end they had 
become of huge dimensions firing heavy stone shot of from 200 
to 450 lb weight. 

The earliest known representation of a gun in England is 
contained in an illuminated manuscript " De Officiis Regum " 
at Christ Church, Oxford, of the time of Edward II. (1326). 
This clearly shows a knight in armour firing a short primitive 
weapon shaped something like a vase and loaded with an in- 
cendiary arrow. This type of gun was a muzzle loader with a 
vent channel at the breech end. There seems to be undoubted 
evidence that in 1338 there existed breech-loading guns of both 
iron and brass, provided with one or more movable chambers 
to facilitate loading (Proc. R. A. I., vol. iv. p. 291). These fire- 
arms were evidently very small, as only 2 lb of gunpowder 
were provided for firing 48 arrows, or about seven-tenths of an 
ounce for each charge. 

The great Bombarde of Ghent, called " Dulle Griete " (fig. 1) 
is believed to belong to the end of the century, probably about 




Fig. 1. — Dulle Griete, Ghent. 

1382, and, according to the Guide des voyagcurs dans la ville de 
Gand (Voisin) the people of Ghent used it in 141 1. This gun, 



190 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 




which weighs about 13 tons, is formed of an inner lining of 
wrought iron longitudinal bars arranged like the staves of a 
cask and welded together, surrounded by rings of wrought iron 
driven or shrunk on. The chamber portion is of smaller dia- 
meter, and some suppose it to be screwed to the muzzle portion. 
The length of the gun is 197 in., the diameter of the bore 25 in., 
and the chamber 10 in. at the front and tapering to 6 in. dia- 
meter at the breech end. It fired a granite ball weighing about 
700 lb. Two wrought iron guns left by the English in 1423 when 
they had to raise the siege of Mont St Michel in Normandy belong 
to about the same period; the larger of these guns has a bore of 

19 in. diameter. 
' " Mons Meg " 
(fig. 2) in Edin- 
burgh Castle is a 
wrought iron gun 
Fig. 2.— Mods Meg. of a little later 

period; it is built up in the same manner of iron bars and 
external rings. It has a calibre of 20 in. and fired a granite 
shot weighing 330 lb. 

Bronze guns of almost identical dimensions to the " Dulle 
Griete " were cast a little later (1468) at Constantinople (see 
Lefroy, Proc. R. A. I., vol. vi.). One of these is now in the 
Royal Military Repository, Wollwich. It is in two pieces 
screwed together: the front portion has a calibre of 25 in. and 
is for the reception of the stone shot, which weighed 672 lb; and 
a rear portion, forming the powder chamber, of 10 in. diameter. 
The whole gun weighs nearly i8| tons. 

To give some idea of the power of these guns, the damage 
done by them to Sir John Duckworth's squadron in 1807 when 
the Dardanelles were forced may be instanced. In this engage- 
ment six men-of-war were more or less damaged and some 126 
men were killed or wounded. The guns were too unwieldy to lay 
for each round and were consequently placed in a permanent 
position; they were often kept loaded for months. 

The 1 6th century was remarkable from the fact that the large 
bombard type was discarded and smaller wrought iron guns 
were made. This was due to the use of iron projectiles, which 
enabled a blow to be delivered from a comparatively small gun 
as destructive as that from the very weighty bombards throwing 
stone shot. 

Bronze guns also now came into great favour. They were 
first cast in England in 1521 (Henry VIII.), and iron cannon 
about 1540, foreign founders being introduced for the purpose 
of teaching the English the art. The " Mary Rose," which sank 
off Spithead in 1545, had on board both breech-loading wrought- 
iron and muzzle-loading bronze guns. 

The smaller guns cast at this period were of considerable 
length, probably on account of the large charges of meal powder 
which were fired. The long bronze gun in Dover Castle known 
as " Queen Elizabeth's pocket pistol" has a calibre of 4-75 in.; 
its bore is 23 ft. 1 in. long or 58 calibres, but its total length 
including the cascable is 24 ft. 6 in. It was cast at Utrecht in 
1544 and presented by Charles V. to Henry VIII. 

Little or no classification of the various types of guns was 
attempted during the 15th century. The following century saw 
some attempt made at uniformity and the division of the several 
calibres into classes, but it was not until about 1739, when Maritz 
of Geneva introduced the boring of guns from the solid, that 
actual uniformity of calibre was attained, as up to this date 
they were always cast hollow and discrepancies naturally 
occurred. In France organization was attempted in 1732 by 
Valliere, but to Gribeauval (q.v.) is due the credit of having 
simplified artillery and introduced great improvements in the 
equipment. 

It is not possible to compare properly the power of the earlier 
guns; at first small and feeble, they became later large and 
unwieldy, but still feeble. The gunpowder called " serpentine " 
often compounded from separate ingredients on the spot at the 
time of loading, burnt slowly without strength and naturally varied 
from round to round. The more fiercely burning gianulated 
or corned powder, introduced into Germany about 1429, and 



into England shortly after, was too strong for the larger pieces 
of that date, and could be used only for small firearms for more 
than a century after. These small guns were often loaded with 
a lead or lead-coated ball driven down the bore by hammering. 

The bronze and cast iron ordnance which followed in the i6tb 
century were strengthened in the 17th century, and so were 
more adapted to use the corned powder. By this means some 
access of energy and greater effective ranges were obtained. 

In the 18th century and in the first half of the 19th no change 
of importance was made. Greater purity of the ingredients and 
better methods of manufacture had improved gunpowder; the 
windage between the shot and the bore had also been reduced, 
and guns had been strengthened to meet this progress, but the 
principles of construction remained unaltered until the middle 
of the 19th century. Metallurgical science had made great 
progress, but cast iron was still the only metal considered 
suitable for large guns, whilst bronze was used for field guns. 
Many accidents, due to defects developing during practice, had, 
however, occurred, in order to prevent which experimental guns 
constructed of stronger material such as forged iron and steel 
had been made. Some of these weapons were merely massive 
solid blocks, with a hole bored in for the bore, and only with- 
stood a few rounds before bursting. This result was attributed 
to the metal being of an indifferent quality — quite a possible 
reason as the treatment of large masses of steel was then in its 
infancy, and even with the best modern appliances difficulties 
have always existed in the efficient welding of large forgings of 
iron. Forged iron, however, always gave some evidence of its 
impending failure whereas the steel burst in pieces suddenly; 
steel was, therefore, considered too treacherous a material for 
use in ordnance. This view held for many years, and steel was 
only again employed after many trials had been made to demon- 
strate its reliability. It will be seen later that the ill success of 
these experiments was greatly due to a want of knowledge of 
the correct principles of gun construction. 

The progress made since 1854 is dependent on and embraces 
improvements in gun construction, rifling and breech mechan- 
isms. 

Considerable obscurity exists as regards the means adopted 
for mounting the first cannon. From illuminations in con- 
temporary manuscripts it appears that the earliest 
guns, which were trunnionless, were simply laid on ^ 
the ground and supported by a timber framing at meats. 
each side, whilst the fiat breech end rested against a 
strong wood support let into the ground to prevent recoil. This 
arrangement was no doubt inconvenient, and a little later small 
cannon were fastened in a wooden stock by iron bands; larger 
guns were supported in massive timber cradles (fig. 3) and 




Redrawn from Mallet's Construction of Artillery. 

Fig. 3. — Primitive Gun-mounting. 

secured thereto by iron straps or ropes. The ponderous weight 
to be moved and the deficiency of mechanical means prevented 
these large cannon and their cradles from being readily moved 
when once placed in position. Laying was of the most primitive 
kind, and the bombard was packed up in its wood cradle to the 
required elevation once for all. When it was desired to breach 
a wall the bombard with its bed would be laid on the ground at 
about 100 yds. distance, the breech end of the gun or the rear 
end of the bed abutting against a solid baulk of wood fixed to 
the ground. " Mons Meg " was originally provided with a wood 
cradle. 

It is by no means certain when wheeled carriages were 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



91 



introduced. They must have gradually appeared as a means of 
surmounting the difficulties engendered by the recoil of the piece 
and of transport of the early guns and their cradles. Andrea 
Redusio mentions in Chronicon Tarvisinum the use of two 
wheeled bombard carriages at the siege of Quero by the Venetians 
in 1376. It does not follow that these weapons were of large 
dimensions, as the term " bombard " was applied to small guns 
as well as to the more ponderous types. 

The ancient carriages used on land are remarkable from the 
fact that in general design they contain the main principles 
which have been included in field carriages up to the present day. 
Until 1870 the body of all field carriages was made of wood. 
In an early type the trail portion was made of a solid baulk 
of timber supported at the front by a hard wood axletree, on 
the arms of which the wheels were placed (iron axletrees were 
introduced by Gribeauval in 1765). The gun resting in its 
wooden cradle was carried in bearings on the trail immediately 
over the axletree (fig. 4), the cradle being provided with an 




From Clephan, Early Ordnance, 



Fig. 4. — Early Field Gun. 

axle or trunnions for the purpose. For giving elevation a wood 
arc was fixed to the trail towards the rear end, and the breech 
end could be moved up and down along this arc and fixed at 
certain positions by a pin passing through both cradle and arc. 

About the middle of the 15th century the trunnions were 
formed with the gun — the wood cradle therefore became un- 
necessary and was discarded. The carriage was then formed of 
two strong cheeks or sides of wood fastened together by four 
wood transoms. At the front end the cheeks were secured to 
the wooden axletree, which was strengthened by a bar of iron 
let into its under side. Trunnion bearings were cut in the upper 
surface of the cheeks over the axletree, and these were lined 
with iron, while the trunnions were secured in position by iron 
cap-squares. Elevation was given by a wedge or " quoin " 
being placed under the breech and supported by a transom or 
stool bed. For transport the trail end of the carriage was sup- 
ported on a limber, a pintle on the limber body passing through 
a hole in the trail. One set of shafts were fixed to the limber, 
and a single horse was harnessed to them; the remainder of the 
team were attached in pairs in front. A driver was provided for 
every two pairs of horses. In Italy oxen were often yoked to 
the larger guns instead of horses. Tartaglia mentions in his 
Nova scienlia (1562) that 28 oxen were required for a gun 15 ft. 
in length and weighing 13,000 lb; horses were used for small 
guns only. 

For service on board ship the difficulties of the cramped 
situation seem to have been surmounted in an ingenious manner. 
In the " Mary Rose, " sunk in the reign of Henry VIII., the 
brass guns with trunnions were mounted on short wood carriages 
provided with four small wood wheels called " trucks " and 
fastened to the gun ports by rope breechings. The iron breech- 
loading guns were employed in restricted positions where loading 




Fig. 5. — Truck Carriage. 



at the muzzle would be difficult. They had no trunnions and 
were mounted in a wood cradle, the under side of which was 
grooved to enable it to slide on a directing bar. 

At the end of the 17th century not much progress had been 
made. The larger guns were mounted on short wood carriages 
having two or four " trucks. " The guns and carriages recoiled 
along the vessel's deck, and where this endangered the masts 
or other structures the recoil was hindered by soft substances 
being laid down in the path of the recoil. 

The small guns were mounted in iron Y pieces — the upper 
arms being provided with bearings for the gun trunnions — and 
the stalk formed a 
pivot which rested 
in a socket in the 
vessel 's side or 
on a wall, so that 
the gun could be 
turned to any 
quarter. 

Similar carriages 
(fig. 5) existed 
until the advent 
of rifled guns, but a few small improvements, such as screw 
elevating gear in place of the quoin, had been approved. 
Cast iron standing carriages were also, about 1825, used on land 
for hot climates and situations not much exposed. 

The earliest guns were not provided with sights or other 
means for directing them. This was not important, as the range 
seldom exceeded 100 yds. As, however, ranges 
became longer, some means became necessary for s " s ' 
giving the correct line and elevation (see also Sights). The 
direction for line was easily obtained by looking over the gun and 
moving the carriage trail to the right or left as was necessary. 
For elevation an instrument invented by Tartaglia called a 
Gunner's Quadrant (sometimes also called a Gunner's Square) 
was used ; this was a graduated quadrant of a circle (fig. 6) 
connecting a long and 
short arm forming a 
right angle; a line with 
a plummet hung from 
the angle in such a 
manner that on the long 
arm being placed along 
the bore near the muzzle 
the plummet hung down 
against the quadrant 
and indicated the de- 
grees of elevation given to the piece. The quadrant was divided 
into 90 and also into 12 parts; it was continued past the 
short arm for some degrees to enable depression to be given 
to the gun. The instrument was also used for surveying in 
obtaining the heights of buildings, and is still much employed 
for elevating guns in its clinometer form, in which a level takes 
the place of the plummet. 

For short range firing a dispart sight was in use early in the 
17th century. A notch was cut on the top of the breech or base 
ring, and on the muzzle ring a notched fore sight (called the 
dispart sight) was placed in the same vertical plane as the notch, 
and of such a height that a line stretched from the top of the 
breech ring notch to the notch of the foresight was parallel to 
the axis of the bore. These sights were well enough for close, 
horizontal fire and so long as the enemy were within what was 
called "point blank" range; that is the range to the first 
graze, on a horizontal plane, of the shot when fired from a gun 
the axis of which is horizontal. As this range depends entirely, 
other things being equal, on the height of the gun's axis above 
the horizontal plane, it is not very definite. When, however, 
the enemy were at a greater distance, elevation had to be given 
to the gun and, as a quadrant was slow and not easy to use, 
there was introduced an instrument, called a Gunner's Rule 
(see The Art of Gunnery, by Nathanael Nye, 1670), which was 
really a primitive form of tangent sight. This was a flat brass 




Fig. 6. — Gunner's Quadrant. 



192 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



scale 12 or 14 in. long divided on its flat surface into divisions 
proportional to the tangents of angles with a base equal to the 
distance from the notch on the base ring to the dispart notch. A 
slit was made along the rule, and a thread with a head on it was 
mounted on a slider so that it could be moved in the slit to any 
required graduation. By sighting along the bead to the dispart 
the gun could be laid on any object. Later still, the requisite 
elevation was obtained by cutting a series of notches on the side 
of the base ring and" one on the muzzle ring. These were called 
" Quarter Sights v and allowed of elevations up to 3°; the lowest 
notch with the one on the muzzle swell gave a line parallel to the 
axis of the bore but above it so as to clear the cap-squares of the 
trunnions. This system was also used in bronze field guns and 
in all cast iron guns up to the 32-pdr. Difficulties in laying 
occurred unless the direction was ohtained by looking over the 
top or dispart sight and the elevation then given by the quarter 
sights. This was the system of sighting in use during the great 
naval actions of the end of the iSth century and the beginning 
of the 19th century. A pointed dispart sight was often used, 
and for naval purposes it was fixed on the reinforce near the 
trunnions, as the recoil of the gun through the port would 
destroy it if fixed on the muzzle swell. 

The douhle sighting operation was rendered unnecessary by the 
use of " tangent scales " introduced by Gribeauval. Similar scales 
were soon adopted in the English land service artillery, hut they 
were not fully adopted in the English navy until ahout 1854 
(see Naval Gunnery, by Sir Howard Douglas, p. 390), although 
in the United States navy a system of sighting, which enabled 
the guns to he layed at any degree of elevation, had been 
applied as early as 1812. These tangent scales were of brass 
fitting into sockets on the breech end of the gun; they were 
used in conjunction with the dispart fore sight and gave eleva- 
tion up to 4 or 5° over the top of the gun. For greater elevation 
a wooden tangent scale was provided which gave elevation up 
to 8° or io°. 

In the British navy, before tangent sights were used, the plan 
often adopted for rapidly laying the guns was by sighting, with 
the notch on the breech ring and the dispart sight, on some 
part of the masts of the enemy's vessel at a height corresponding 
to the range. 

With sailing ships about the middle of the 19th century the 
angle of heel of the vessel when it was sailing on a wind was 
ascertained from the ship's pendulum, and the lee guns elevated 
or the weather guns depressed to compensate by means of a 
graduated wooden stave called a "heel scale " of which one end 
was placed on the deck or last step of the carriage whilst the 
upper end read in connection with a scale of degrees engraved 
on the flat end of the cascable. 

Subsequently the term " tangent sight " was given to the 
" tangent scales," and they were fitted into holes made in the 
body of the gun — the foresight usually being fitted to a hole 
in the gun near the trunnions. Two pairs of sights — one at 
each side — were generally arranged for, and in rifled guns the 
holes for the tangent sight bars were inclined to compensate 
for the drift of the projectile. As the drift angle varies with 
the muzzle velocity, the tangent sights of howitzers were set 
vertically, so that for the various charges used the deflection 
to compensate for drift had to be given on the head of the sight 
bar. Modern forms of sights are descrihed and illustrated in the 
article Sights. 

Breech-loading ordnance dates from about the end of the 
14th century, or soon after the introduction of cannon into 
England (Brackenbury, Proc. R.A.I, v. 32). The 
loadine & un body, in some cases, was fixed to a wood 
Ordnance, cradle by iron straps and the hreech portion kept in 
position hetween the muzzle portion and a vertical 
block of wood fixed to the end of the cradle, by a wedge. Acci- 
dents must have been common, and improvements were made 
by dropping the breech or chamber of the weapon into a re- 
ceptacle, solidly forged on or fastened by lugs to the rear end 
of the gun (fig. 7). This system was used for small guns only, 
such as wall pieces, &c, which could not he easily loaded at the 



muzzle owing to the position in which they were placed, and in 
order to obtain rapidity each gun was furnished with several 
chamhers. 

Guns of this nature, called Petrieroes a Braza, were used in 
particular positions even at the end of the 17th century. Moretii 
states that they carried a stone hall of from 2 lb to 14 lb, which 




Fig. 7. — Early Breech-loader. 

was placed in the bore of the gun and kept in position by wads. 
The chambers, resembling an ordinary tankard in shape, had a 
spigot formed on their front end which entered into a corre- 
sponding recess at the rear end of the bore and so formed a rude 
joint. Each chamher was nearly filled with powder and the 
mouth closed by a wood stopper driven in; it was then inserted 
into the hreech of the gun and secured by a wedge. Even with 
feeble gunpowder this means of securing the chamber does not 
commend itself, but as powder improved there was a greater 
probability of the hreech end of the gun giving way; besides 
which the escape of the powder gas from the imperfect joint 
between the chamber and gun must have caused great in- 
convenience. To these causes must be attributed the general 
disuse of the breech-loading system during the 18th and first 
half of the 19th centuries. 

Robins mentions {Tracts of Gunnery, p. 337) that experi- 
mental breech-loading rifled pieces had been tried in 1745 in 
England to surmount the difficulty of loading from the muzzle. 
In these there was an opening made in the side of the breech 
which, after the loading had been completed, was closed by a 
screw. The hreech arrangement (fig. 8) of the rifled gun in- 




fection ot. AA 



Sect, ion oc B B ! 





Fig. 8. — Cavalli Gun, 1845. 

vented by Major Cavalli, a Sardinian officer, in 1845, was far 
superior to anything tried previously. After the projectile and 
charge had been loaded into the gun through the breech, a cast 
iron cylindrical plug, cupped on the front face, was introduced 
into the chamber; a copper ring was placed against its rear 
face; finally a strong iron wedge was passed through the body 
of the gun horizontally just in rear of the plug, and prevented 
it heing blown out of the gun. In England the hreech of one 
of the experimental guns was blown off after only a few rounds 
had been fired. In Wahrendorff's gun, invented in 1846, the 
breech arrangement (fig. 9) was very similar in principle to the 
Cavalli gun. In addition to the hreech plug and horizontal 
wedge there was an iron door, hinged to the breech face of the 
gun, which carried a rod attached to the rear of the hreech plug. 
The horizontal wedge had a slot cut from its right side to the 
centre, so that it might freely pass this rod. After loading, 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



J 9 



the hinged door, with the breech plug resting against its front 
face, was swung into the breech opening, and the plug was 
pushed forward to its position in the chamber of the gun; the 




Section nt A A 



_ - ; - zi — i — 



Fig. 9. — Wahrendorff Gun, 1846. 

wedge was then pushed across to prevent the plug being blown 
back, and, finally, a nut screwed to the rear end of the plug 
rod was given a couple of turns so that all was made tight and 
secure. After firing, the breech was opened by reversing these 
operations. 

The Armstrong system of breech-loading introduced in 1854 
was the first to give satisfactory results; its simple design and 
few parts produced a favourable effect in the minds of artillerists, 
which was increased by the excellent accuracy obtained in 
shooting. The gun (fig. 10) had a removable breech block having 




Fig. 10. — Armstrong B.L. Arrangement. 



on its front face a coned copper ring which fitted into a coned 
seating at the breech end of the powder chamber. The breech 
block was secured by means of a powerful breech screw; a hole 
was made through the screw so that, in loading, the shell and 
cartridge could be passed through it after the breech block had 
been removed. After loading, the block was dropped into its 
place and the breech screw turned rapidly so that it might jam 
the block against its seating, and so prevent the escape of powder 
gas when the gun was fired. This gun was most successful, and 
a great number of guns of this type were soon introduced into 
the British army and navy. 

. They were employed in the China campaign of i860, and 
satisfactory reports were made as to their serviceableness; but 
while the breech-loading system had obtained a firm footing on the 
Continent of Europe, there was a strong prejudice against it in 
•England, and about 1864 M.L.R. guns were adopted. Breech- 
loaders did not again find favour until about 1882, when a demand 
was made for more powerful guns than the M.L.R. In conse- 
quence, M.L. guns having enlarged chambers for burning large 

harges of prismatic powder were experimented with by the 
t-Elswick Ordnance Co. and subsequently by the War Office. 
The results were so promising that means were sought for further 

mprovements, and breech-loading guns, having the Elswick 
:up obturation, were reintroduced. 



Up to about 1850 the dimensions of canon had been propor- 
tioned by means of empirical rules, as the real principles under- 
lying the construction cf ordnance had been little 
understood. It was known of course that a gun was Jf,ns" P 
subjected to two fundamental stresses — a circum- 
ferential tension tending to split the gun open longitudinally, and 
a longitudinal tension tending to pull the gun apart lengthwise; 
the longitudinal strength of a gun is usually greatly in excess 
of any requirements. It is easy to demonstrate that any so-called 
homogeneous gun, i.e. a gun made of solid material and not 
built up, soon reaches a limit of thickness beyond which 
additional thickness is practically useless in giving strength 
to resist circumferential stress. This is due to the fact that the 
stress on the metal near the bore is far higher than that* on 
the outer portion and soon reaches its maximum resistance which 
additional thickness of metal docs not materially increase. The 
gun can, however, be arranged to withstand a considerably 
higher working pressure by building it up on the principle of 
initial tensions. The inner layers of the metal arc thereby 
compressed so that the, gas pressure has first to reverse this 
compression and then to extend the metal. The gun barrel 
supported by the contraction of the outer hoops will then be able 
to endure a gas pressure which can be expressed as being pro- 
portional to theinh\a\compression plus the ea:to(«0H,whereasinthe 
old type solid gun it was proportional to the extension only. The 
first to employ successfully this important principle for all parts 
of a gun was Lord Armstrong (q.v.), who in 1855-1856 produced 




Fig. 11. — Armstrong B.L. Construction. 

a breech-loading field gun with a steel barrel strengthened by 
wrought iron hoops. In this system (fig. 11) wrought iron coils 
were shrunk over one another so that the inner tube, or barrel, 
was placed in a state of compression and the outer portions in 
a state of tension — the parts so proportioned that each performs 
its maximum duty in resisting the pressure from within. Further, 
by forming the outer parts of wrought iron bar coiled round a 
mandril and then welding the coil into a solid hoop, the fibre 
of the iron was arranged circumferentially and was thus in 
the best position to resist this stress. These outer coils were 
shrunk over a hollow brcech-piece of forged iron, having the fibre 
running lengthwise to resist the longitudinal stress. The several 
cylinders were shrunk over the steel inner tube or barrel. To 
obtain the necessary compression the exterior diameter of the 
inner portion is turned in a lathe slightly greater than the interior 
diameter of the outer coil. The outer coil is heated and expands; 
it is then slipped over the inner portion and contracts on cooling. 
If the strength of the two parts has been properly adjusted the 
outer will remain in a state of tension and the inner in a state 
of compression. 

Every nation has adopted this fundamental principle which 
governs all systems of modern gun construction. The winding, 
at a high tension, of thin wire or ribbon on the barrel or on one of 
the outer coils may be considered as having an exactly similar 
effect to the shrinking of thin hoops over one another. The 
American, Dr Woodbridge, claims to have originated the system 
of strengthening guns by wire in 1850; Brunei, the great railway 
engineer, also had similar plans; to Longridge, however, belongs 
the credit of pointing out the proper mode of winding on the 
wire with initial tension so adjusted as to make the firing tension 
(i.e. the tension which exists when the gun is fired) of the 
wire uniform for the maximum proof powder pressure. Great 

XX. 7 



i 9 4 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



E 



success attended the early introduction of the coil system. 

Large numbers (about 3500) of breech-loading Armstrong guns 

from 2-5 in. to 7 in. calibre were manufactured for England 

alone; most of these had barrels of coiled iron, but solid forged 

iron barrels were also employed and a few 

were of steel. This manufacture continued 

until 1867, when M.L. guns built up on the coil 

system (fig. 12) with the French form of rifling 

were adopted; but as the knowledge of the 

proper treatment and the quality of the steel 

had improved, steel barrels bored from a solid 

steel 'forging were mostly used; the exterior 

layers were still iron hoops with the fibre of the 

metal disposed as in the original type. In 

order to cheapen manufacture the coils were 

thickened, by Mr Fraser of Woolwich Arsenal, 

so that a few thick coils were used instead of 

a number of thin ones (fig. 13). 

In the Fraser system an attempt was made to 
obtain rigidity of construction and additional 
longitudinal strength by interlocking the various 
coils from breech to muzzle; this feature still 
exists in all designs adopted by the English 
government, but foreign designers do not favour it altogether, and 
many of their guns of the latest type have a number of short 
independent hoops shrunk on, especially over the chase. Their view 
is that movements — such as stretching of the inner parts — are 
bound to take place under the huge forces acting upon the tubes, 
and that it is better to allow freedom for these to take place 
naturally rather than to make any attempt to retard them. On 
the other hand it cannot be denied that the rigid construction is 



A stronger material than ordinary carbon gun steel was conse- 
quently demanded from the steel-makers, in order to keep the weights 
of the heavier natures of guns within reasonable limits. The demand 
was met by the introduction of a gun steel having about 4% of 
nickel in addition to about 0-4% of carbon. This alloy gives great 





Fig. 12. — M.L. Gun Construction, 
conducive to strength and durability, but it is essential that massive 
tubes of the highest quality of steel should be employed. 

The actual building up of a gun entails operations which are 
exactly similar, whether it be of the M.L. or B.L. system; and 
the hardening treatment of the steel is also the same — the coiled 
iron hoops when welded, of course, received no such treatment. 




M.L. Gun Construction (Fraser). 



Fig. 14 shows the various stages of building up a B.L. gun and 
illustrates at the same time the principle of the interlocking 
system. 

The steel barrels of the M.L. guns were forged solid; the material 
was then tested so as to determine the most suitable temperature at 
which the oil hardening treatment should be carried out after the 
barrel had been bored. The bored barrel was simply heated to the 
required temperature and plunged vertically into a tank of oil. 
The subsequent annealing process was not introduced until some 
years after; it is therefore not to be wondered at that steel proved 
untrustworthy and so was used with reluctance. 

Since 1880 the steel industry has made so much progress that this 
material is now regarded as the metal most to be relied on. The long 
high-power guns, however, require to be worked at a greater chamber 
pressure than the older B.L. guns, with which 15 tons or 16 tons per 
square inch was considered the maximum. With the designs now 
produced 18-5 tons to 20 tons per square inch working pressure in the 
chamber is the general rule. 



Fig. 14. — Modern B.L. Construction, 
toughness and endurance under a suitable oil hardening and annealing 
process, the yielding stress being about 26 tons to 28 tons and the 
breaking stress from 45 tons to 55 tons per square inch, with an 
elongation of 16%. The tests for ordinary carbon gun steel are: 
" yield not less than 21 tons, breaking stress between 34 tons and 
44 tons per square inch, and elongation 17%." 

The toughness of nickel steel forgings renders them much more 
difficult to machine, but the advantages have been so great that 
practically all barrels and hoops (except jackets) of modern guns 
are now made of this material. 

The gun steel, whether of the carbon or nickel quality, used in 
England and most foreign countries, is prepared by the open hearth 
method in a regenerative gas furnace of the Siemens- _ 
Martin type (see Iron and Steel). The steel is run from t"° 
the furnace into a large ladle, previously heated by gas, tor S ln S s - 
and from this it is allowed to run into a cast iron ingot mould of 
from 10 to 12 ft. high and 2 ft. or more in diameter. With very 
large ingots two furnaces may have to be employed. The external 
shape of these ingots varies in different steel works, but they are so 
arranged that, as the ingot slowly cools, the contraction of the metal 
shall not set up dangerous internal stresses. The top of the ingot 
is generally porous, and consequently, after cooling, it is usual 
for about one-third of the length of the ingot to be cut from the top 
and remelted; a small part of the bottom is also often discarded. 
The centre of the larger ingots is also inclined to be unsound, and 
a hole is therefore bored through them to remove this part. In the 
Whitworth and Harmet methods of fluid compressed steel, this 
porosity at the top and centre of the ingot does not occur to 
the same extent, and a much greater portion can therefore be 
utilized. 

The sound portion of the ingot is now heated in a reheating gas 
furnace, which is usually built in close proximity to a hydraulic 
forging press_(fig. 15, Plate 1.). This press is now almost exclusively 
used for forging the steel in place of the steam hammers which were 
formerly an important feature in all large works. The largest of 
these steam hammers could not deliver a blow of much more than 
some 500 ft. tons of energy; with the hydraulic press, however, 
the pressure amounts to, for ordinary purposes, from 1000 tons to 
5000 tons, while for the manufacture of armour plates it may amount 
to as much as 10,000 or 12,000 tons. 

For forgings of 8-in. internal diameter and upwards, the bored out 
ingot, just mentioned, is forged hollow on a tubular mandril, kept 
cool by water running through the centre; from two to four hours 
forging work can be performed before the metal has cooled down 
too much. Generally one end of the ingot is forged down to the 
proper size; it is then reheated and the other end similarly treated. 

The forging of the steel and the subsequent operations have a very 
marked influence on the structure of the metal, as will be seen from 
the micro-photographs shown in the article Alloys, where (a) and 
(b) show the structure of the cast steel of the actual ingot; from 
this it will be noticed that the crystals are very large and prominent, 
but, as the metal passes through the various operations, these 
crystals become smaller and less pronounced. Thus (c) and (rf) 
show the metal after forging; (e) shows the pearlite structure with 
a magnification of 1000 diameters, which disappears on the steel 
being oil hardened, and (/) shows the oil hardened and annealed 
crystals. At the Bofors Works in Sweden, gun barrels up to 24' cm. 
(9-5 in.) calibre have been formed of an unforged cast steel tube; 
but this practice, although allowing of the production of an in- 
expensive gun, is not followed by other nations. 

After the forging is completed, it is annealed by reheating and 
cooling slowly, and test pieces are cut from each end tangentially 



ORDNANCE 



Plate I. 




XX. 194. 



Plate II. 



ORDNANCE 




Fig. i 8— SHRINKING-ON PROCESS. 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



*95 



to the circumference of the bore; these are tested to ascertain the 
quality of the steel in the soft state. 

It is found that the quality of the steel is greatly improved by 
forging, so long as this is not carried so far as to set up a laminar 
structure in the metal, which is thereby rendered less suitable for 
gun construction — being weaker across the laminae than in the 
other directions. It is then termed over-forged. 

If the tests are satisfactory the forging is rough-turned and bored, 
then reheated to a temperature of about 1600 F., and hardened by 
plunging it into a vertical tank of rape oil. This process is a some- 
what critical one and great care is observed in uniformly heating, 
to the required temperature, the whole of the forging in a furnace 
in close proximity to the oil tank into which it is plunged and 
completely submerged as rapidly as possible. In some cases the 
oil in the tank is circulated by pumping, so that uniformity of cooling 
is ensured; and, in addition, the oil tank is surrounded by a water 
jacket which also helps to keep it at a uniform heat. The forging is 
subsequently again heated to about 1200 F. and allowed to cool 
slowly by being placed in warm sand, &c. This last operation is 
termed annealing, and is intended to dissipate any internal stress 
which may have been induced in the forging by any of the previous 
processes, especially that of oil-hardening. After this annealing 
process a second set of test pieces, two for tensile and two for bending 
test, are cut from each end of the forging in the positions above 
mentioned; for guns of less than 3-in. calibre only half this number 
of test pieces is taken; and with hoops of less than 48 in. in length 
the test pieces are taken only from the end which formed the upper 
part of the cast ingot. • .i 

1 In all cases of annealed steel the test pieces of 2 in. length and 
°'533 ' n - diameter must give the stipulated tests according to the 
character of the steel. For breech screws the steel is made of a 
harder quality, as it has to resist a crushing stress. These are the 
tests required in England, but they differ in different countries; for 
instance in France a harder class of carbon steel is employed for 
hoops, in which the tensile strength must not be less than 44-5 tons, 
nor the elastic limit less than 28-5 tons per square inch, neither must 
the, elongation fall below 12%. , 

Assuming that the tests of the annealed forging are satisfactory, 
the forging, which we will suppose to be a barrel, is tested for straight- 
ness and if necessary rectified. It is then rough-turned in a lathe 
(fig. 16) " to break the skin " (as it is termed technically) and so 



interior of the covering tube or hoop finished to suit. The covering 
hoop is allowed usually only a small shrinkage, or sometimes none, 
as it is simply intended as a protection to the wire and to give 
longitudinal strength; but in order to place it over the wire it must 
be heated and thus some little contraction always does take place 
on cooling. The heat to which these hoops are brought for shrinking 
never exceeds that used in annealing, otherwise the modifying 
effects of this process would be interfered with. 

In the earliest modern type B.L. guns, the breech screw engaged 
directly with a screw thread cut in the barrel, which thus had to 
resist a large portion, if not all, of the longitudinal stress. This was 
also the system first adopted in France, but there are certain 
objections to it, the principal being that the barrel must be made of 
large diameter to meet the longitudinal stress, and this in consequence 
reduces the circumferential strength of the gun. Again, the diameter 
of the screw is always considerably larger than the breech opening, 
and so an abrupt change of section takes place, which it is always 
best to avoid in structures liable to sudden shocks. The thick 
barrel, however, gives stiffness against bending and, moreover, does 
not materially lengthen with firing; thin barrels on the other hand 
are gradually extended by the drawing out action of the shot as it 
is forced through the gun. In some large guns with excessively thin 
barrels this action was so pronounced as to entail considerable 
inconvenience. In the English system the breech screw is engaged 
either in the breech piece, i.e. the hoop which is shrunk on over 
the breech end of the barrel, or in a special bush screwed into the 
breech piece. This latter method suits the latest system of con- 
struction in which the breech piece is put on the barrel from the 
muzzle, while with the earlier type it was put on from the breech end. 

With the earlier modern guns short hoops were used whenever 
possible, as, for instance, over the chase, principally because the 
steel in short lengths was less likely to contain flaws, but as the 
metallurgical processes of steel making developed the necessity for 
this disappeared, and the hoops became gradually longer. This has 
however, increased correspondingly the difficulties in boring and 
turning, and, to a much greater extent, those encountered in building 
up the gun. In this operation the greatest care has to be taken, or 
warping will occur during heating. The tubes are heated in a vertical 
cylindrical furnace, gas jets playing both on the exterior and interior 
of the tube. When sufficiently hot, known by the diameter of the 
tube expanding to equal previously prepared gauges, the tube is 




Fig. 16^ — Lathe used in Gun" Construction. 



prevent warping during the subsequent operations. It is then 
bored 'out to nearly the finished dimension and afterwards fine 
turned_ on the exterior. In the meantime the other portions of the 
gun are in progress, and as it is far easier to turn down the outside 
of a 'tube than to bore out the interior of the superimposed one to 
the exact measurements required to allow for shrinkage, the interior 
of the jacket and other hoops are bored out and finished before the 
exterior of the internal tubes or of the barrel is fine turned. The 
process of boring is illustrated in fig. 17. The barrel or hoop A, to 
be bored, is passed through the revolving headstock B and firmly 
held by jaws C, the other end being supported on rollers D. A 
head E, mounted on the end of a boring bar F, is drawn gradually 
through the barrel, as it revolves, by the leading screw K actuated 
by the gear G. The 'boring head is provided with two or more 



raised out of the furnace and dropped vertically over the barrel or 
other portion of the gun (fig. 18, Flate II.). In cooling it shrinks 
longitudinally as well as circumfcrentially, and in order to avoid 
gaps between adjoining tubes the tube is, after being placed in 
position, cooled at one end by a ring of water jets to make it grip, 
while the other portions are kept hot by rings of burning gas 
flames, which are successively extinguished to allow the hoop to 
shorten gradually and thus prevent internal longitudinal stress. A 
stream of water is also directed along the interior of the gun 
during the building up process, in order to ensure the hoop cooling 
from the interior. After the building up has been completed, the 
barrel is fine-bored, then chambered and rifled. The breech is then 
screwed either for the bush or breech screw and the breech 
mechanism fitted to the gun. 




i 



rat 






Fig. 17. — Boring. 



■cutting tools, and also with a number of brass pins or pieces of 
hard wood to act as guides, in order to keep the boring head central 
after it has entered the barrel. The revolving headstock B is 
driven by a belt and suitable gearing. 

With wire guns the procedure is somewhat different. The wire 
is wound on to its tube, which has been previously fine turned; the 
exterior diameter of the wire is then carefully measured and the 



In order to obtain additional longitudinal strength the outer 
tubes are so arranged that each hooks on to its neighbour from 
muzzle to breech. Thus, the chase hoop hooks on to the barrel by 
a step, and the succeeding hoops hook on to each other until the 
jacket is reached which is then secured to the breech piece by a 
strong screwed ring. In all the latest patterns of English guns 
there is a single chase hoop covering the forward portion of the 



196 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



gun and a jacket covering the breech portion, an arrangement 
which simplifies the design but increases the difficulties of manu- 
facture. 

Wire guns are now made of almost all calibres, ranging from 3 in. 
to 12 in. Many authorities objected to guns of less calibre than 



W/Rt f*src~tw /?>«g 




Elswick System Woolwich System 

Fig. 19. — Wire Fastening. 

4-7 in. being wound with wire, as they considered that on diameters 
so small the interior surface of each layer of wire is over-compressed, 
while the exterior is too much extended; but by proportioning the 
thickness of the wire to the diameter of the tube on which it is 
wound there is no reason for this to be so. 

The wire is wound on the barrel at a certain tension, ascertained 
by calculation, and varying from about 50 tons per square inch for 
the layers first wound on the gun, to about 35 or 40 for the outer 
layers. To fasten the wire at the beginning and end several methods 
are adopted. In the Woolwich system a narrow annular ring 
(fig. 19), with slots cut into one of its faces, is shrunk on to the 
gun; into these slots one end of the wire is inserted and secured 
in position by a steel screwed plug. The wire is wound on for the 
distance desired and then back again to the ring, where the end is 
fastened off in the same way. At Elswick the wire is fastened by 
bending it into a shunt cut groove in a similar annular ring, but 
the wire is only fastened off in the same way after several layers 
have been wound. 

With each succeeding layer of wire the interior layers are com- 
pressed, and these in turn compress the barrel. It is therefore 



necessary, in order to prevent the fatigue of the material, to make 
the barrel comparatively thick, or, better still, to have an outer 
barrel superimposed on the inner one. This latter arrangement 
is now used in all guns of 4 in. calibre and upwards. It is not so 
important with smaller guns as the barrel is always relatively thick, 
and therefore meets the conditions. 

With many modern guns the interior of the outer barrel, termed 
the " A " tube, is taper bored, the larger end being towards the 
breech; and the exterior of the inner barrel or liner, called the 
" inner A tube," is made tapered to correspond. The latter is, after 
careful fitting, inserted in the outer barrel while both are cold, and 
forced into position by hydraulic pressure or other mechanical 
means. 

The details of the machines for winding on the wire (see fig. 20) 
differ somewhat in different works, but all are arranged so that any 
desired tension can be given to the wire as it is being wound on to 
the gun. The wire is manufactured in much the same way as 
ordinary wire. A red-hot bar of steel, gradually rolled down between 
rollers to a section about double that which it is finally intended to 
have, is annealed and carefully pickled in an acid bath to detach any 
scale. It is then wound on a drum, ready for the next process, 
which consists in drawing it through graduated holes made in a 
hardened steel draw-plate, the wire being often annealed and 
pickled during this process. The drawplate holes vary in size from 
slightly smaller than the rolled bar section to the finished size of the 
wire, and, as a rule, the sharp corners of the wire are only given 
by the last draw. It is found that considerable wear takes place in 
the holes of the draw-plate, and a new plate may be required for 
each hank of 500 or 600 yds. of wire. Great importance is attached 
to the absence of scale from the wire when it is being drawn, and, 
after pickling, the rolled bar and wire are treated with lime or some 
similar substance to facilitate the drawing. The tests for the 
finished wire are as follows: it has to stand a tensile stress of from 
90 to no tons per square inch of section, and a test for ductility 
in which a short length of wire is twisted a considerable number of 
turns in one direction, then unwound and re-twisted in the opposite 
direction, without showing signs of fracture. It will be seen that 
the wire is extremely strong and the moderate stress of from 35 
to 50 tons per square inch, which at most it is called upon to with- 
stand in a gun, is far less than what it could endure with perfect 
safety. 

The wire after being manufactured is made up into hanks for 
storage purposes; but when required for gun construction it is 
thoroughly cleaned and wound on a drum R about 3 ft. 6 in. in 
diameter, which is placed in one portion of the machine in connexion 
with a powerful band friction brake M. The wire is then led to the 
gun A placed between centres or on rollers B.B. parallel to the axis 
of the wire drum. By rotating the gun the wire is drawn off from the 
drum against the resistance of the band brake, which is so designed 
that, by adjusting the weight S suspended from the brake strap, 
any desired resistance can be given in order to produce the necessary 
tension in the wire as it is being wound on the gun. The stress on 




Fig. 20. — Wire-winding Machine. 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



197 



the wire is indicated on a dial, and the headstock, containing the 
drum of wire, is capable of being moved along the bed G by a 
leading screw H, driven by a belt through variable speed cones I; 
the belt is moved along the cones by forks J, traversed by screws K, 
which in their turn are actuated by chain belts from the hand 
wheel L. The traversing speed is regulated to suit the speed of 
winding by moving the belt along the speed cones. 

The wire is rectangular in section, 0-25 in. wide and 0-06 in. thick, 
and after it has been wound on to the gun it presents a very even 
surface which requires little further preparation. The diameter 
over the wire is gauged and the jacket or other covering hoop is 
carefully bored equal to this, if no shrinkage is to be allowed ; or the 
dimension is diminished in accordance with the amount of shrinkage 
to be arranged for. 

The gun is built up, after wiring, in the same manner as a gun 
without wire, the jacket or other hoop being heated in the vertical 
gas furnace and when hot enough dropped into place over the wire, 
cooled by the ring of water jets at the end first required to grip and 
kept hot at the other, exactly as before described. 

The machine arranged for rifling modern guns_ is very similar 
to that employed for the old muzzle-loaders; it is a special tool 
Rlfllntt use< ^ ' n S un construction only (fig. 21), and is in reality 
operation a copying machine. A steel or cast-iron bar J _ which 
forms the copy of the developed rifling curve is first 
made. The copying bar — which is straight if the rifling is to be uni- 
form but curved if it is to be increasing — is fixed, inclined at the 



bullet, from the muzzle. In 1836 Russia made a large number of 
experiments with a rifled gun invented by Monligny, a Belgian; 
this was not a success, but in England the guns invented by 
Major Cavalli, in 1845, and by Baron WahrendorfE in 1846, 
obtained some measure of favour. Both these guns were breech- 
loaders. The Cavalli gun had a bore of 6-5 in. diameter; it was 
rifled in two grooves having a uniform twist of 1 in 25 calibres, 
and the elongated projectile had two rihs cast with it to fit the 
grooves, but no means were taken to prevent windage. The 
WahrendorfE gun had an enlarged chamber and the bore of 
6-37 in. diameter was rifled in 2 grooves; the projectile had ribs 
similar to that for the Cavalli gun; but Wahrendorff had also 
tried lead-coated projectiles, the coating being attached by 
grooves undercut in the outside of the shell. In 1854 Lancaster 
submitted his plan of rifling; in this (fig. 22) the bore was made 
of an oval section which twisted round the axis of the gun from 
the breech to the muzzle; a projectile having an oval section 
was fired. Several old cast-iron guns bored on this system 
burst in the Crimean War from the projectile wedging in the 
gun. In 1855 Armstrong experimented with a breech-loading 
rifled gun, firing a lead-coated projectile. The rifling consisted 




Fig. 21. — Rifling Machine. 



proper angle, to standards K on the machine. The cutting tool is 
carried at one end C of a strong hollow cylindrical rifling bar B, the 
other end of which is fixed to a saddle M. This is moved along the 
bed of the machine by a long screw N, and the rifling bar is conse- 
quently either pushed into the gun or withdrawn by the motion of 
the saddle along the machine. During this motion it is made to 
rotate slowly by being connected to the copying bar by suitable 
gearing I. It will thus be seen that the cutting tool will cut a spiral 
groove along the bore of the gun in strict conformity with the 
copy. In most English machines the cutting tool cuts only as the 
rifting bar is drawn out of the gun; during the reverse motion the 
cutter F is withdrawn out of action by means of a wedge arrange- 
ment actuated by a rod passing through the centre of the rifling bar, 
which also pushes forward the cutter at the proper time for cutting. 
One, two or more grooves may be cut at one time, the full depth 
being attained by slowly feeding the tool after each stroke. After 
each set of grooves is cut the rifling bar or the gun is rotated so as 
to bring the cutters to a new position. In some foreign machines 
the cut is taken as the rifling bar is pushed into the gun. 

' Rifling is the term given to the numerous shallow grooves 
cut spirally .along the bore of a gun; the rib between two 
Rifling. 'grooves is called the " land." Rifling has been known 
for many years; it was supposed to increase the range, 
and no doubt did so, owing to the fact that the bullet having 
to be forced into the gun during the loading operation became 
a mechanical fit and prevented to a great extent the loss of gas 
by windage which occurred with ordinary weapons. Kotter 
(1520) and Danner (1552), both of Nuremberg, are respectively 
credited as being the first to rifle gun barrels; and there is at the 
Rotunda, Woolwich, a muzzle-loading barrel dated 1547 rifled 
with six fine grooves. At this early period, rifling was applied 
only to small arms, usually for sporting purposes. The 
disadvantage of having, during loading, to force a soft lead (or 
lead-covered) ball down a bore of smaller diameter prevented 
its general employment for military use. In 1661 Prussia 
experimented with a gun rifled in thirteen shallow grooves, and 
in 1696 the elliptical bore — similar to the Lancaster — had been 
tried in Germany. In 1745 Robins was experimenting with 
rifled guns and elongated shot in England. During the Peninsular 
War about 1809, the only regiment (the " Rifle Brigade," 
formerly called the 95th) equipped with rifled arms, found con- 
siderable difficulty in loading them with the old spherical lead 



of a large number of shallow grooves having a uniform twist 
of 1 in 38 calibres. When the gun was fired the lead-coated 
projectile, which was slightly larger in diameter than the bore 
of the gun, was forced into the rifling and so gave rotation to 
the elongated projectile. Whitworth in 1857 brought out his 



WHITWQRTN BORE 



LANCASTER OVAL BORE 





EARLY ARMSTRONG GROOVE 



FRENCH GROOVE 

For tlwddid proj(C(.tf» 




POLYGROOVE (Hook Seceion) 



MOOERN GROOVE {Etrij Tjptj 



l 



t 



< 



KRUPP GROOVE 



MOOERN GROOVE (lacest Type) 



t 



t 



Fig. 22. — Sections of Rifling. 

hexagonal bore method of rifling and a projectile which was 
a good mechanical fit to the bore. Good results were obtained, 



i 9 8 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



but although this system bad certain advantages it did not 
fulfil all requirements. 

In 1863, England re-opened the whole question, and after 
exhaustive trials of various inventions decided on the adoption 
of the muzzle-loading type foi all guns, with the French system 
of rifling. This system was invented in 1842 by Colonel Treuille 
de Beaulieu and consisted of a few wide and deep grooves which 
gave rotation to a studded projectile. At the first trials two 
grooves only were tried, but the number was afterwards in- 
creased to three or more, as it was found that two grooves only 
would not correctly centre the projectile. The adoption of the 
muzzle-loading system with studded shot was a distinctly 
retrograde step, as a considerable amount of clearance was 
necessary between the bore and projectile for the purposes of 
loading, and this resulted in the barrel being seriously eroded 
by the rush of gas over the shot, and also led to a considerable 
loss of energy. In the Wahrendorff and Armstrong systems 
however the lead-coated projectiles entirely prevented windage, 
besides which the projectile was perfectly centred and a high 
degree of accuracy was obtained. 

Shunt rifling was a brief attempt to make loading by the 
muzzle easy without forfeiting the centring principle: in this 
the rifling varied in width and in depth, at different portions of 
the bore in such a manner that, during loading, the studs on the 
projectile could move freely in the bore. When the gun was fired 
the studs of the projectile were forced to travel in the shallow 
part of the rifling, thus gripping and centring the projectile as 
it left the muzzle. 

With uniform rifling on the French system, the few studs — 
generally two per groove — had to bear so high a pressure to 
produce rotation that they sometimes gave way. This subject 
was investigated by Captain (Sir Andrew) Noble, who showed 
that by making the rifling an increasing twist, commencing with 
no twist and gradually increasing until the necessary pitch was 
obtained, the maximum pressure due to rotation was much 
reduced. Increasing rifling was consequently adopted, with 
beneficial results. 

In order to prevent the heavy erosion due to windage, a gas 
check was adopted which was attached to the base end of the 
studded projectiles. In some guns the number of grooves of the 
rifling was sufficiently great to admit of rotation being insured 
by means of the gas check alone; in these guns studded pro- 
jectiles were not employed, but the gas check, called " auto- 
matic," to distinguish it from that fitted to studded projectiles 
was usually indented around its circumference to correspond 
with the rifling of the gun. It was found that the studless 
projectile had considerably greater range and accuracy than the 
studded projectile, with the additional advantage that the shell 
was not weakened by the stud holes. 

The introduction of the plain copper driving band for rotating 
projectiles with breech-loading guns included a return to the 
polygroove system with shallow grooves; this still exists, but the 
continuous demand for greater power has had the effect of in- 
creasing the number of grooves from that at first considered 
necessary, in order to keep the rotating pressure on the driving 
band within practical limits. 

Many ingenious devices for giving rotation and preventing the 
escape of gas past the projectile were tried in the early days of 
modern rifling. Experiments of this nature still continue to be 
made with a view to improving the shooting and to prevent the 
erosion of the bore of the gun. Briefly considered, without 
going into any detail of the numerous plans, all rotating devices 
fitted to projectiles can be divided into three classes — the 
"centring, " the " compressing " and the " expansion " systems. 
The two last named almost invariably include the " centring " 
type. Studded (fig. 23) and Whitworth (fig. 24) hexagonal 
projectiles, which can freely slide in the bore, come under the 
first system. 

In the compression class the coating or rings on the projectile 
are larger in diameter than the bore and when fired the coating 
(or rings) is squeezed or engraved by the rifling to fit the bore — 
the projectile is consequently also centred. The old-fashioned 



lead-coated shell (fig. 25), and the modern system of plain copper 
driving bands (fig. 26), come under this class. Most variety 
exists in the expansion type, where the pressure of the powder 
gas acts on the base of the projectile or on the driving ring and 
compresses a lead, copper or asbestos ring into the rifling grooves. 
One of the earliest was the Hotchkiss (1865) shell (fig. 27), in 
which a separate base end B was driven forward by the gas 
pressure and squeezed out the lead ring L into the rifling. The 
automatic gas check (fig. 28), and the gas check driving band 
(fig. 29), belong to this system; in the last the lip L is expanded 
into the rifling groove. In fig. 30 a copper driving band is 



m 



Fig. 23. 



Fig. 24. 



Fig. 25. 



E^ 



<S=^ 




E> 



Fig. 26. 



Fig. 27. 



Fig. 28. 



-3 



^ 






i 


Fig. 


29. 




Fig. 30. 


Figs. 23-30- 


-Projectiles 


for Rifled Ordnance 



associated with an asbestos packing A, contained in a canvas 
bag or copper casing made in the form of a ring on the principle 
of the de Bange obturator; but the results of this have not been 
entirely satisfactory. 

It will be seen that with breech-loading guns the projectile 
is better centred, and the copper driving band forms a definite 
stop for the projectile; and, in consequence, the capacity of 
the gun chamber is practically constant. In addition, the use 
of a copper driving band ensures a uniform resistance while 
this is being engraved and the projectile forced through' the 
gun, and also prevents the escape of gas. These elements 
have a very great influence on the accuracy of the shooting, and 
fully account for the vastly superior results obtained from breech- 
loading ordnance when compared with the muzzle-loading type. 
Driving bands of other materials such as cupro-nickel and 
ferro-nickel have also been tried. 

Many authorities believe that the best results are obtained 
when the projectile is fitted with two bands, one near the head and 
the other near the base, and no doubt it is better centred when 
so arranged, but such shot can only be fired from guns rifled with 
a uniform twist, and it must also not be forgotten that the groove 
formed for the front band in the head of the projectile necessarily 
weakens that part of the projectile which should be strongest. 

Projectiles with a driving band at the base only can be fired 
from guns rifled either uniformly or with increasing twist. 

The introduction of cordite (q.v.) about 1890 again brought 
into special prominence the question of rifling. The erosion 
caused by this explosive soon obliterated the rifling for some 4 
or 5 calibres at the breech end. The driving band of the shell 
consequently started with indifferent engraving, and with the 
increasing twist, then in general use, it was feared that the wear 
would quickly render the gun useless. To remedy this the late 
Commander Younghusband, R.N., proposed straight rifling; 
which was adopted in 1895, for that portion of the rifling mostly 
affected by the erosion, with a gradual increase of the twist 
thence to the required pitch at the muzzle. Thus, any erosion 
of the straight part of the rifling would not affect that portion 
giving rotation, and it was argued that the gun would remain 
efficient for a longer period. The defect in this system is that 
when the projectile arrives at the end of the straight rifling it 
has a considerable forward velocity and no rotation. Rotation 
is then imparted by the increasing twist of rifling, and the 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



99 



resulting pressure on the engraved ribs of the driving band rises 
suddenly to a maximum which, in high velocity guns, the 
driving band is unable to resist. For this reason the straight 
portion at the commencement of the rifling has been discarded, 
and with high power guns firing a slow burning propellant uniform 
rifling has again found favour. 

It is evident that in order that a projectile may have a definite 
amount of spin as it leaves the gun a determinate amount of work 
must be imparted to rotate it during its passage along the rifled 
portion of the bore. Put briefly, this work is the sum of the products 
of the pressure between the engraved ribs on the driving band and 
the lands of the rifling in the gun multiplied by the length of the 
rifling over which this pressure acts. Sir Andrew Noble has proved 
theoretically and experimentally (see Phil. Mag., 1863 and 1873; 
also Proc. Roy. Soc. vol. 50) that the rotating pressure depends on 
the propelling pressure of the powder gas on the base of the projectile 
and on the curve of the rifling. If this curve was so proportioned 
as to make the rotating pressure approximately constant along the 
bore, the result was an increasing or progressive curve partaking 
of the nature of a parabola, in which case it was usual to make the 
last two or three calibres of rifling at the muzzle of uniform twist 
for th'e purpose of steadying the projectile and aiding accuracy. 

In uniform rifling the curve is a straight line and the rotating 
pressure is consequently mainly proportional to the propelling gas 
pressure. The pressure for rotation with uniform rifling therefore 
rises to a maximum with the propelling pressure and falls as it 
becomes less towards the muzzle. 

With increasing rifling, owing to the angle of twist continually 
changing as the projectile travels along the bore, the ribs originally 
engraved by the rifling on the driving band are forced to change their 
direction correspondingly, and this occurs by the front surface of 
the ribs wearing away. They are therefore weakened considerably, 
and it is found that with high velocities the engraved part of the 
band often entirely disappears through this progressive action. 

It will thus be seen that although an increasing twist of rifling 
may be so arranged as to give uniform pressure, it is evident that 
il wear takes place, the engraved rib becomes weaker to resist shearing 
as the shot advances, and the rate of wear also increases owing to 
the increase of heat by friction. With the very narrow driving 
bands used for low velocity guns this action was not so detrimental. 

With the longmodern guns and the high muzzle velocities required, 
the propelling gas pressures along the bore rise comparatively slowly 
to a maximum and gradually fall until the muzzle is reached. The 
pressure of the gas at all points of the bore is now considerably higher 
than with the older patterns of B.L. guns. 

For modern conditions, in order to obtain an increasing curve 
giving an approximately constant driving pressure between the 
rifling and driving band, this pressure becomes comparatively high. 
The maximum rotating pressure, with uniform rifling, is certainly 
somewhat higher, but not to a very great extent, and as it occurs 
when the projectile is still moving slowly, the wear due to friction 
will be correspondingly low; the pressure gradually falls until the 
muzzle is reached, where it is much lower than with increasing 
rifling. The projectile thus leaves the gun without any g.'eat 
disturbance from the rifling pressure. Further, as the band is 
engraved once for all with the angle it will have all along the bore 
the pressure is distributed equally over the driving face of the 
engraved ribs instead of being concentrated at the front of the ribs 
as in progressive or increasing rifling. 

The following formulae showing the driving pressures for increas- 
ing and uniform rifling are calculated from Sir Andrew Noble's for- 
mula, which Sir G. Greenhill has obtained independently by another 
method. 

Let R=total pressure, in tons, between rifling and driving band. 
G = gaseous pressure, in tons, on the base of the projectile. 
r = radius, in feet, of the bore. 
Ixt = coefficient of friction. 
p = radius of gyration of projectile. 
5 = angle between the normal to the driving surface of groove 

and radius. 
fe = the pitch of the rifling, in feet. 
k = cotangent of angle of rifling at any point of rifling. 
M = weight of the projectile in pounds. 
z = the length, in feet, travelled by the projectile. 
Then for parabolic rifling 



R = 



For uniform rifling 



R = 



2 P a (Gs + Mp') 

(rttf+ipV) sin a . 2 m kz(7^W) 
(4Z 2 sin 2 5+yfe J )i + (4z 2 +yfe 2 ) J 



2wp i G 

nx{2Tvp l k-rh) (2wp 2 +rhk)s\nS 
(1 + fe 2 )* + (fe s + sin'8)J 



For parabolic rifling 
R = 



2?(4z*+P)i(C,z + SW) 

kr 2 (k-2/j.,Z) -\-2p' i z{2Z-\-ll l .k)' 

For uniform rifling we can write hk = 2wr and the expression reduces 
to 

pHl+k>)i , r ,. 



R=- 



K9+ 



P 2 +r 2 



Fig. 31 shows graphically the calculated results obtained for a 
4-7-in. 50-calibre gun which has a shot travel of 17-3 ft.; the pressure 



















1 
1 














AT e/rci^li f * 3i 


ATf\ui 








,e**"d 




~~A~ 




1 


















1 


/ / 




2^__ 










1 

| 


// 






^K 










1 


// 














1 


/ 












2C£no 


1 

1 


/ 
















^J, 


/ 
















1 
( 


















1 
1 


















1 


7 


4 


6 


e 


\o (1 


j< 


( 


5 II 



For modern rifling 5 = 90°; therefore sin 5 = 1 ; by which the above 
expressions may be considerably simplified. 



FEET 
«V 7 INCH SO CALIBRE G\)N 

Fig. 31. — Pressure Curves (uniform and increasing twist). 

curve A is for a rifling twist increasing from 1 in 60 calibres at the 
breech to 1 in 30 calibres at the muzzle; curve B is for rilling having 
a uniform twist of 1 in 30 calibres. 

It must be remembered that this comparison is typical lor modern 
conditions; with old-fashioned guns firing black or brown powder 
the maximum rotating pressure for uniform rifling could attain a 
value 50% above that for increasing rifling. 

In this example, with the increasing twist there is a loss of energy 
of about 11% of the total muzzle energy, and for the uniform 
rifling a loss of about 8%. This explains the reason for uniformly 
rifled guns giving a higher muzzle velocity than those with increasing 
rifling, supposing the guns to be otherwise similar. 

The pitch of the rifling or the amount of twist to be given to it 
depends altogether on the length of the projectile; if this is short 
a small amount of twist only is necessary, if long a greater amount 
of twist must be arranged for, in order to spin the shell more rapidly. 
Sir G. Greenhill has shown that the pitch of the rifling necessary to 
keep a projectile in steady motion is independent of the velocity, 
of the calibre, or of the length of the gun, but depends principally 
on the length of the shell and on its description, so that for similar 
projectiles one pitch would do for all guns. 

Table I., on following page, has been calculated from Greenhill's 
formula. 

In most modern guns the projectile varies in length from 3-5 to 
4 calibres, so that the rifling is made to terminate at the muzzle 
with a twist of I turn in 30 calibres, which is found ample to ensure 
a steady flight to the projectile. In the United States a terminal 
twist of I in 25 calibres is often adopted; Krupp also uses this in 
some guns. With howitzers the projectile may be 4-5 calibres long, 
and the rifling has to be made of a quicker twist to suit. 

If the gun has, as is usually the case, a right-hand twist of rifling 
the projectile drifts to the right ; if it has a left-hand twist the 
drift takes place to the left. The drift increases with 
the range but in a greater ratio; further, the greater the Dim. 

twist (i.e. the smaller the pitch of rifling) the greater the drift. On 
the other hand the smooth B.L. projectiles drift less than studded 
M.L. projectiles. 

To find the angle, usually called the permanent angle of deflection, 
at which the sights must be inclined to compensate for the drift, 
a number of shots are fired at various ranges. The results obtained 
are plotted on paper, and a straight line is then drawn from the point 
representing the muzzle through the mean value of the plotted 
curve. 1 

The early guns were fired by inserting a red-hot wire into the 
vent, or by filling the vent with powder and firing it by a red- 
hot iron. Slow match held in a cleft stick afterwards 
took the place of the hot iron, and this again was Flr,a z 
replaced by a port-fire. Filling the vent with loose meats. 
powder was inconvenient and slow, and to improve 
matters the powder was placed in a paper, tin or quill tube 



200 



ORDNANCE 



which was simply pushed into the vent and fired by the slow 
match or port-fire. 

The first attempt to fire guns by mechanical means was made 
in 1 781 by Sir Charles Douglas, who fitted flint locks, similar 
to musket locks, but with the trigger actuated by a lanyard, to the 
guns on board his ship H.M.S. " Duke." A double flint lock 
introduced in 181S by Sir Howard Douglas, R.A., continued to 

Table I. 





Minimum twist at muzzle of gun requisite to give stability of rotation 


Length of 


= one turn in n calibres; or a pitch of n calibres. 










projectile 


Cast-iron common 






Solid lead and tin 


in calibres. 


shell, 


Palliser shell. 


Solid steel bullet 


bullets of similar 




cavity = 37 vol. 


cavity = J vol. 


(s.g.— 8"o). 


composition 




of shell 


(s.g. = 80). 




to M.-H. bullets 




(s.g. of iron = 7"2). 






(s.g =io'g). 




B. 


«. 


n. 


». 


2 





63-87 


71-08 


72-21 


84-29 




1 


59-84 


66-59 


67-66 


78-98 




2 


56-31 


62-67 


63-67 


74-32 




3 


53-'9 


59-19 


60-14 


70-20 




4 


50-41 


56-10 


57-00 


66-53 




5 


47-91 


53-32 


54-17 


63-24 




6 


45- 6 5 


50-81 


51-62 


60-26 




7 


43-6i 


48-53 


49-30 


57-55 




8 


41-74 


46-45 


47-19 


55-09 




9 


40-02 


44-54 


45-25 


52-72 


3 





38-45 


42-79 


43-47 


50-74 




1 


36-99 


41-16 


41-82 


48-82 




2 


35-64 


39-66 


40-30 


47-04 




3 


34-39 


38-27 


38-84 


45-38 




4 


33-22 


36-97 


37-56 


43-84 




5 


32-13 


35-75 


36-33 


42-40 




6 


31-11 


34-62 


35-17 


41-05 




7 


30-15 


33-55 


34-09 


39-79 




8 


29-25 


32-55 


33-07 


38-61 




9 


28-40 


31-61 


32-11 


37-48 


4 





27-60 


30-72 


31-21 


36-43 




1 


26-85 


29-88 


30-36 


35-43 




2 


26-13 


29-08 


29-55 


34-49 




3 


25-45 


28-33 


28-78 


33-59 




4 


24-8r 


27-61 


28-05 


32-74 




5 


24-20 


26-93 


27-36 


31-94 




6 


23-65 


26-32 


26-74 


31-21 




7 


23-06 


25-66 


26-08 


30-44 




8 


22-53 


25-08 


25-48 


29-74 




9 


22-03 


24-51 


24-91 


29-07 


5 





21-56 


23-98 


24-36 


28-44 




1 


21-08 


23-46 


23-84 


27-83 




2 


20-64 


22-97 


23-34 


27-24 




3 


20-22 


22-50 


22-86 


26-68 




4 


I9-8I 


22-05 


22-40 


26-14 




5 


19-42 


21-61 


21-96 


25-63 




6 


19-04 


21-19 


21-53 


25-13 




7 


18-68 


20-79 


21-12 


24-66 




8 


18-33 


20-40 


20-73 


24-20 




9 


18-00 


20-03 


20-35 


23-75 


6 





17-67 


19-67 


19-98 


23-33 


7 





14-99 


16-68 


16-95 


19-78 


8 





13-02 


14-48 


14-72 


17-18 


9 





11-50 


12-80 


13-00 


15-18 


10-0 


10-31 n-47 


11-65 


13-60 



be used until about 1842, when it was replaced by a percussion 
lock invented by an American named Hiddens. In this lock one 
pull on the lanyard caused the hammer to fall and strike a per- 
cussion patch or cap hung on a small hook over the vent, and 
afterwards caused the hammer to be drawn backwards out 
of the way of the blast from the vent. These somewhat 
clumsy contrivances were swept away on the adoption in 1853 
of friction tubes (see Ammunition), which had simply to be 
placed in the vent and the friction bar withdrawn by means of 
a lanyard. 

Friction tubes continued to be used with all muzzle-loading 
ordnance except in one or two natures with which the charge 
was ignited axially at the breech of the gun. In these a vent 
sealing friction tube retained in the vent by a tube holder was 
employed. With breech-loading field guns ordinary friction 
tubes were also used until the introduction of cordite, which 
eroded the vents so quickly by the escape of the gases that vent 
sealing tubes became a necessity. 

In all other breech-loading ordnance and with the latest 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 

pattern field guns the firing gear forms part of the .breech 
mechanism. 

All modern breech mechanisms form two groups (a) the sliding 
type as with the Krupp wedge system, (b) the swinging type as in 
the interrupted screw system. Either type may be „ . 
used with B.L. guns (i.e. those with which the charge is mec hao' 
not contained in a metallic cartridge case) and Q.F. guns . 
(i.e. those with which a metallic cartridge case is used). 

Sliding mechanisms may be divided into two forms: (1) those 
having the block or wedge sliding horizontally, and (2) those in 
which the block works in a vertical direction. (1) is that used 
principally by Krupp; (2) is best illustrated by the Hotchkiss 
system for small Q.F. guns; the Nordenfelt, Skoda and the Driggs- 
Schroedcr mechanisms for small Q.F. guns are an adaptation of the 
same principle. 

The Krupp gear is in reality an improved Cavalli mechanism; 
it is capable of being worked rapidly, is simple, with strong parts 
not liable to derangement, except perhaps the obturator. The 
breech end of the gun, however, occupies valuable space especially 
when these guns are mounted in the restricted turrets or gun houses 
on board ship. 

Later it will be seen that owing to the difficulty of arranging a 
convenient and efficient obturating device for the smokeless nitro- 
powders, which have a peculiarly severe, searching effect, a metal 
cartridge case has to be used with even the heaviest guns; naturally 
this assumes large dimensions for the 305 m/m. gun. 

The wedge (fig. 32) is housed in the breech piece, which covers 
the breech part of the barrel, made very massive and extended to 
the rear of the barrel. A slot, cut transversely through the extended 
portion, forms a seat for the sliding block. The slot is formed so 
that its front is a plane surface perpendicular to the axis of the gun, 
while the rear is rounded and slightly inclined to the axis. One or 
more ribs similarly inclined on the upper and lower surfaces of the 
slot guide the breech block in its movements. For traversing the 
block a quick pitched screw is fitted to its upper surface and works 
in a nut attached to the upper part of the slot (in small guns this 
traversing screw is dispensed with, as the block can be easily moved 
by hand). As the rear seat of the sliding block is inclined, there is 
a tendency for the block to be moved sideways, when the gun is 
fired by the pressure in the chamber acting on the front face of the 
wedge; this is prevented by a locking gear, consisting of a cylinder, 
having a series of interrupted collars, which is mounted on a screw. 
When the breech has been traversed into position, the collars are 
rotated, by a cross handle at the side of the block, into grooves cut 
in the rear surface of the slot; a further movement makes the 
screw jam the collars hard in contact with the gun and secures the 
breech. With small guns having no traversing gear a short strong 
screw takes the place of the collars, and on the handle being turned 
enters a threaded portion at the rear surface of the slot, actuates the 
breech for the last (or first in opening) portion of its movement in 
closing and secures it. To open the gun the movements are reversed. 

The gun is fired by a friction tube, screwed into an axial vent bored 
through the sliding block, or, in field guns, by a copper friction tube 
through an oblique vent drilled through the top of the breech end 
of the gun and through the block. 

There is also fitted in some guns a percussion arrangement for 
firing a percussion tube. , 

The obturation is effected by a Broadwell ring or some modifica- 
tion of it; this is placed in a recess cut in the gun and rests against 
a hard steel plate fitted in the breech block. 

For modern Krupp mechanisms, for use with cartridge cases, the 
arrangement (fig. 33) is very similar to that described above, but 
some improvements have added to its simplicity. The transporting 
screw is fitted with a strong projection which, at the end of the 
movement for closing the breech, locks with a recess cut in the upper 
surface of the slot and secures the breech. The extra locking device 
is consequently dispensed with. The firing gear consists of a striker 
fitted in the sliding block in line with the axis of the gun; the 
striker is pushed back by a lever contained in the block and, on 
release, is driven forward against the primer of the cartridge case by 
a spiral spring. 

In the Hotchkiss gun the mechanism has a vertical breech block 
of a rectangular section. The actuating lever F (fig. 34) is on the 
right side of the gun, and connected to a powerful crank arm C 
working in a groove E cut on the right side of the breech block. 
By pulling the lever towards the rear, the crank arm forces 
down the block A and extracts the fired case by an extractor X, 
which is actuated by a cam groove Y cut on one side or on 
both sides of the block. As the mechanism is opened the hammer H 
is cocked ready for the next round. To close the mechanism 
the lever is pushed over to the front, and by releasing the trigger 
sear by pulling the lanyard the hammer falls and fires the cap of 
the cartridge case. 

Automatic gear is now generally fitted which opens the breech 
as the gun runs up after recoil and extracts the fired case by means 
of a supplementary mechanism and strong spring actuated by the 
recoil of the gun, and on pushing a new cartridge into the gun the 
breech which was retained by the extractor is released and closes 
automatically. •' ;"' 






HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



201 



• The Nordenfelt mechanism consists of a breech block (fig. 35) 
and a wedge to secure it. A hand lever on the shaft is pulled to 
the rear, and this works the action cam, which pulls down the 
wedge; the breech block is then caused to rotate and falls back to 
the rear. This motion of the breech block actuates the extractor 




Fig. 32 — Krupp Breech Action. 

and extracts the case. While the wedge is being withdrawn the 
firing pin is pulled back and cocked for the next round. The 
mechanism is closed by reversing the hand lever; this rotates the 
breech block upwards and pushes home the cartridge case, and the 
wedge is then forced up and secures the breech block. 

These small type Q.F. guns, which were introduced to cope with 
torpedo boats, are now, however, of little account, since experiment 
has proved that nothing smaller than a 12-pounder is sufficient so 
tcf inJlTre* a modern torpedo boat as to stop it. Most of these small 
guns are therefore in the English and in some other Services being 
converted into " sub-calibre " guns for exercise purposes. These 
sub-calibre guns retain their ordinary breech mechanism, but the 
bodies are fitted with a strong steel plug screwed on the outside 
in'a similar manner to the breech screw of the parent gun. The 
sub-calibre gun is placed in the parent gun and the screwed plug 
engages in the threads of the breech opening. 

There has been a gradual development of ideas regarding the 
repelling power required by a vessel against torpedo boat attack. 
The 12-pounder Q.F. 40-calibre guns were replaced by the more 
powerful 12-pounder Q.F. 50-calibre gun; this again by the 4-in. 
high power gun of 50 calibres, and now 6-in. guns are being used. 

One other form of sliding mechanism is of importance owing to 
its adoption for the 75 m/m. French long recoil field gun (see below: 
Field equipments). This mechanism is on. the Nordenfelt eccentric 
screw system and is very similar to that proposed by Clay about 
i860; it has a breech screw (fig. 36) of large diameter mounted in 
the breech opening, which is eccentric to the bore. For loading, the 
breech block has a longitudinal opening cut through it, so that when 
the mechanism is in the open 
position this opening coincides 
with the chamber, while a half 
turn of the breech screw brings 
its solid part opposite the 
chamber and closes the gun. 
The mechanism is very simple 
and strong, but it is only 
suitable for small Q.F. guns 
using cartridge cases; the 
firing gear is similar to that 
applied to other types of 
mechanism, and the fired case 
is extracted by an extractor 
actuated by the face of the 
breech screw as it is opened. 

With the swinging type of 
breech mechanism we are con- 
fronted with numberless pat- 
terns, many of undoubted 
merit and claiming certain 
advantages over others, and 
all showing the vast amount 
of ingenuity expended in so 
designing them that they may 
be as simple, and, at the same 
time, as effective and quick 
acting as possible. It is impossible to deal with all these, and there- 
fore only the more important systems will be described. The special 
feature of this type is that the breech is closed by an interrupted 
breech screw; the screw is either supported in a carrier ring or tray 
hinged near the breech opening, or on a carrier arm which is hinged 
near the outer circumference of the gun. 

The screw may be of the cylindric interrupted, Welin and coned 
types; these, or their modifications, practically embrace the various 
forms used. The cylindric form (fig. 37) is the simplest; it consists 
of a strong screwed plug engaging with a corresponding screw 



thread cut on the interior of the breech opening of the gun. The 
screw surface of the breech plug is cut away in sections equally 
divided and alternating with the threaded portions. The screw 
surface of the breech opening is similarly cut away, so that the 
plug can be pushed nearly home into the breech opening without 

(trouble; by then revolving 
the breech screw through a 
small angle the screwed por- 
tions of the plug and breech 
opening engage. Thus if three 
screwed sections alternate with 
three plain sections the 
angle of revolution necessary 
to ensure a full engagement 
' of the screw surfaces will be 
60°. The Welin screw (fig. 38) 
is an ingenious adaptation 
of the cylindric type; in this 
the surface is divided into 
sections each formed of two 
or three cylindrical screwed 
steps with a single plain por- 
tion; thus if there are three 
sections, each section of which 
has one plain division and 
two screwed divisions, there will be in all six screwed portions and 
three plain. The breech opening is correspondingly formed so 
that the screwed threads would fully engage with 40 of movement. 
There is consequently a greater amount of screwed circumferential 
surface with the Welin screw than with the ordinary cylindric 
interrupted type; the latter form has 50% screw surface while the 
Wclin has 60%. For equal screw surface the Welin can therefore 
be made shorter. 

For medium guns the Elswick type of coned screw (fig. 39) has 
found much favour, and this mechanism has been fitted to guns of 
all calibres from 3-inch to 6-inch, both for the British and numerous 
other governments. The coned breech screw is formed with the 
front part conical and the rear cylindrical, to facilitate its entrance 
into the gun, and also its exit; this form, moreover, is taken ad- 
vantage of by cutting the interruptions in the screwed surface 
alternately on the coned part and on the cylindrical part, so that 
there is a screwed surface all round the circumference of the breech 
screw. By this means the stress is taken all round the circumference, 
both of the breech screw and in the gun, instead of in portions 
alternately, as with other forms. 

The Bofors breech screw is a modification. The surface is formed 
of a truncated ogive instead of a cylinder and cone, and the threaded 
portions are not alternate. 

In the older types of mechanism for heavy B.L. guns the breech 
was opened in from three to four different operations which involved 
considerable loss of time. Fig. 40 shows the general type for 92-in., 
10-in. and 12-in. B.L. guns. To open the breech the cam lever C 
was folded up so that it engaged the pin B in connexion with the 




Fig. 33. — Krupp Breech Action. 




ratchet lever E. This was worked and so disengaged the breech 
screw from the threads cut in the gun; the cam lever was then 
folded down as to to start the breech screw, and the winch handle Q 
rotated and so withdrew the screw and swung it clear of the breech 
opening. During these operations the firing lock was actuated and 
made safe, but the fired tube had to be extracted by hand. To close 
the gun these various operations must be reversed, and to open or close 
the gun would certainly occupy at least half a minute wit h trained men. 
To compare with this a modern 12-in. breech mechanism is shown 
in fig. 41. In order to open this breech it is only necessary to turn 

xx. j a 



202 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



the handwheel continuously in one direction, and to close it again 
the motion of the handwheel is simply reversed; either closing or 
opening the breech by hand occupies about 6 seconds. Supposing 
the breech closed, the handwheel when rotated gives motion to the 
link G through the worm wheel S and crank F. By this means the 




Fig. 34. — Hotchkiss Q.F. Breech Mechanism. 

tooth B is moved from its extreme left position to the right, and 
so disengages the breech screw A from the threads in the gun; the 
rack A 2 on the breech screw then comes into gear with the pinion E 
and draws the breech screw out of the gun into the carrier ring C, 
which finally swings on the axis pin and clears the breech open- 
ing. While the opening is being performed the firing lock L is 
operated by the cam groove A 3 ; this puts the firing mechanism, 
either electric or percussion, to safety by withdrawing the firing 
needle, extracts the fired tube and leaves the primer chamber open 
for a fresh primer. All these operations are performed in the reverse 
order on closing. 

With both these types of mechanism the de Bange system of 
obturation, with the pad only slightly coned, is used. 

With smaller guns the mechanism is simpler, as less power is 



required for opening the breech. Thus, with the 6-in. B.L. gun Mark 
IV., introduced about 1885 (fig. 42) the breech is opened in three 
separate operations — (a) the cam lever, which also locks the breech, 
is raised into the vertical position and pulled over to the left ; this 
disengages the screw threads; (b) the cam lever is folded down so 





Fig. 35. — Nordenfeldt Q.F. Breech Mechanism. 

that the cam acting on the rear face of the gun releases the de Bange 
obturator, and the screw is then pulled by hand through the carrier 
ring out of the breech ; (c) the carrier ring and breech screw are 
revolved together to the right, clear of the breech opening. 

In a modern 6-in. gun fitted with de Bange obturator all these 
operations are combined and the mechanism (fig. 43) worked by a 
horizontal hand lever which is moved from left to right through an 
angle of about 200 °. The hand lever A moves a link B connected to 
a pin C on the breech screw D and disengages the screw from the gun ; 
a small lateral movement is then given to the axis pin of the carrier 
so as to allow the obturator pad E to swing out of its seating; when 





Fig. 36. — Eccentric Screw, Breech Mechanism. 

this is quite free, the whole mechanism revolves on the axis pin and 
thus clears the breech opening. The firing lock F is actuated at the 
same time and ejects the fired tube G. A new tube is inserted while 
the gun is being loaded, so that immediately the breech is closed the 
charge can be fired Without loss of time. In the old mechanisms the 
breech had to be closed first, and the firing tube inserted after. 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



203 



The breech mechanism for Q.F. guns firing metallic cartridge 
cases is worked on similar principles, but is somewhat simpler than 
that for the de Bange obturation, due principally to the fact of the 
firing primer being already contained in the cartridge case when this 
is introduced into the gun. 

In the English service the later patterns of breech mechanism for 
medium'and heavy B.L. guns have a Welin screw, with a "steep 



HAND GEAR 




Fig. 37. — Interrupted Breech Screw- 



SHAFT TO MOTOR 

Cylindrical. 



cone " de Bange obturator, supported on a carrier arm. This 
arrangement allows the mechanism (fig. 44) to swing clear of the 
breech opening immediately the threads of the breech screw are 
disengaged from those in the breech in a similar manner to the 
Q.F. guns fitted with a cone screw. The mechanism is actuated by 
the handwheel L which rotates the hinge pin; this in turn, through 
gearing, moves a crank arm D connected, by a link B, to the pin on 
the breech screw. By continuously moving the handwheel the 
link B is drawn towards the hinge pin until the breech screw threads 
are disengaged; the catch C then drops into a pocket on the breech 
screw and fixes it to the carrier arm. The whole of the mechanism 
then rotates around the hinge pin and leaves the breech open ready 
for loading. As the breech screw threads are being disengaged the 
electric or percussion lock W is operated by a cam groove in a 
similar manner to that already described. In the latest modification 
of this mechanism a roller at the end of the crank arm D -works a 
long lever connected to the breech screw by two pins. This forms 
what is termed a " pure-couple " mechanism and it is claimed that 
greater ease of working is ensured by its use. While the loading is 
going on a new firing tube is 
placed in the vent, so that on 
closing the gun, by turning the 
handwheel in the opposite 
direction, the gun is ready for 
firing. For 9-2-in. guns and 
those of smaller calibre the 
handwheel is replaced by a 
hand lever pivoted on the 
carrier (fig. 45). By giving 
this lever a single motion from 
left to right the mechanism is ' 
opened. 

For 6-in. and 4-in. guns 
a shot support is attached 
to the breech face which 
is operated by the breech 
mechanism so- that when 
the breech is open the shot 

support is in position for loading, and it falls out of the way when 
the breech is being closed. 

In the larger types of all breech mechanisms ball bearings are 
employed in various parts, such as the hinge pin bearings, &c, to 
reduce friction and in most of the modern heavy guns on board 
ship the breech mechanism is arranged to be worked by a hydraulic 
cylinder placed on the breech face, or by a small hydraulic engine 
or electric motor placed in some convenient position on the mounting. 
The hand gear, however, is always retained for emergency and a 
clutch is provided so that it can be put into action at a moment's 
notice. 

The Welin screw is largely used in the United States, but in heavy 
guns the ordinary cone (not " steep cone ") de Bange obturator is 
employed. The screw is mounted either in a carrier ring or on a 
carrier tray. In France the ordinary type of interrupted screw is 
adopted and this rests in a carrier tray. The operations of opening 
and closing are very similar to those already described. 




All the recent patterns of mechanism have an extractor fitted 
to extract the empty cartridge case with Q.F. guns or the fired 
tube with B.L. guns. In Q.F. field guns it generally takes the form 
of a lever working on an axis pin. The longer arm of the lever is 
formed into a jaw which rests on the inner face of the breech opening 
beneath the rim of the cartridge case, and the short arm is so 
arranged that when the breech is opened the carrier, in swinging 
mechanisms, or the breech block itself, in sliding systems, suddenly 
comes in contact with it; the long arm is thus jerked backwards 
and extracts the case. In B.L. mechanisms the tube extractor is 




Fig. 38. — Welin Breech Screw. 

arranged on the same principle but in this case usually forms part 
of the box slide, i.e. that portion of the mechanism attached by 
interrupted collars to the rear end of the vent axial, in which the 
firing lock slides as it is actuated by the opening or closing of the 
breech mechanism. When the breech is being opened the firing pin 
of the lock is drawn back to safety and the lock is moved aside from 
over the tube; a tripper then actuates the extractor and ejects the 
fired tube. The extractor and tripper are so contrived that when a 
new tube is pushed home the extractor is also pushed back into the 
closed position, or, if the tube is somewhat stiff to insert, the action 
of closing the mechanism moves the lock over the primer and forces 
it home. 

The firing lock used in B.L. guns is an important part of the 




Fig. 39. — Elswick Coned Screw. 

mechanism. They are all designed on the same principle, with 
a view to safety and rapidity, and may be regarded as a miniature 
sliding breech mechanism, fn the older types the lock or its sub- 
stitute was manipulated by hand, and with electric firing the wires 
from the tubes were joined up to the loose ends of the firing circuit; 



204 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 




Fig. 41. — 12-in. Gun, Breech Mechanism. 



1, 
j 
1 i 



) TO 
1 II 



safety depended therefore on everything being in order and all 
operations correctly performed. The gun could, however, be 
fired before the breech was properly secured and a serious accident 
caused ; to prevent this all the movements of modern locks are 



arranged to be automatic, and wireless electric tubes are used so 
that immediately the breech mechanism commences to open, the 
lock itself is moved in the box slide so as to uncover the vent 
opening. During the first part of this movement a foot on the 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



205 



striker rides up an incline I (fig. 45) on the box slide and thus 
pushes back the striker from contact with the tube. The ex- 
tractor described above is actuated at the same time. Most locks 





Fig. 40. — Breecrf Mechanisms, Heavy Guns. 

consist of a steel frame with a socket for containing the striker 
and main spring. They arc contrived so as to be capable of firing 
both electric and percussion tubes, but others are arranged for 
firing only electric, separate locks being employed for use with 
percussion tubes. The construction of both is very similar, but 
with the percussion lock, or the combined lock, a trigger is provided 





Fig. 42. — Breech Mechanism, 6-in. B.L. Mark IV. 

which drops into a notch in the striker when this is pulled back by 
the lugs E E (fig. 45) on the outer attachment of the striker. On 
the trigger being pulled by a lanyard the striker is released and 
fires the tube. 

For Q.F. guns with interrupted or coned breech screws the 
striker is contained in the breech screw, but, in order to provide for 
safety, a small lever cam or other contrivance is fitted 
which, when the mechanism commences to open, is 
operated by the hand lever and withdraws the striker 
from contact with the primer inserted in the cartridge 
case. 

The striker consists of a steel needle, with the stem 
insulated by ebonite or some similar material, contained 
in an outer steel sheath. The sheath is formed with 
a foot or' lug which is acted upon by the safety gear; a 
collar is also provided for taking the thrust of the main 
spring. 

Another form of lock now much in favour, especially 
for field-gun mechanisms, is that known as a trip lock. 
It is mainly used for percussion firing but can also be 
combined for use with electric tubes. In this pattern the 
striker is withdrawn, cocked and released by the con- 
tinuous pull of a hand lever attached to the mounting 
or by' a lanyard attached to the lock. Should a miss-fire 
occur the striker may be actuated as' often as necessary 
by releasing the hand lever or lanyard and again giving 
a continuous pull (fig. 46). 

In all modern heavy guns, especially when firing to 
windward, there is a tendency, when the breech is opened 
Back rapidly after firing, for a sheet of flame to issue 

flash from the open breech. It was practically un- 

known with the old black powders, but is of 
frequent occurrence with all smokeless propellants. If 
the gun is loaded immediately after the breech is opened 
the fresh charge may be ignited and an accident caused. 
Several serious accidents have already been traced to this 
cause, notably one on the United States battleship 
" Missouri " on 13th April 1904, when 33 lives were lost. 
The flame is due to the large amount of highly heated 
carbonic oxide remaining in the gun from the explosion of 
the charge; this mixing with the oxygen of the air when 
.the breech is opened burns rapidly as a sheet of flame 
in rear of the gun, and should wind be blowing down the gun the 
action is more intense. By looking into the gun from the muzzle, 
before the breech is opened, the gas can often be seen burning 
with a, pale-blue flame as- it slowly mixes with air and a 



curious singing noise is heard at the same time. It is now usual to 

fit a special apparatus on the gun, so that directly the breech is 

partly opened a blast of compressed air is allowed to enter the 

rear end of the chamber and thus sweep the whole of the 

residual gas out at the muzzle. 

The purpose of the obturator is to render the breech 
end of the gun gas-tight, and to prevent any escape of 
gas past the breech mechanism. In the first obt ( 
Armstrong B.L. gun this object was attained " ra ors ' 
by fitting to the breech block a copper ring coned on 
the exterior; the coned surface was forcibly pressed by 
screwing up the breech screw against a corresponding 
copper ring fitted at the breech opening of the gun 
chamber. It is only possible to use this method when 
the copper surfaces can be jammed together by a power- 
ful screw. 

Except the above, all obturators in use are arranged 
to act automatically, i.e. the pressure set up in the 
gun when it is fired expands the arrangement and seals 
the opening; immediately the projectile leaves the bore 
the pressure is relieved and the obturator, by its elasticity, 
regains its original shape, so that the breech mechan- 
ism can be opened or closed with ease. In the French 
naval service B.L. guns have been in use since 1864, and 
the system of obturation was arranged on the same expansion 
principle as the leather packing ring of the hydraulic press. A steel 
ring A (fig. 47) of cupped form was fastened by a screwed plug to a 
thick steel plate, carried on the face of the breech screw, so that it 
could rotate when the breech screw was rotated in opening or clos- 
ing the gun. The outer lip of the cup fitted against a slightly coned 
seating formed in the breech end of the gun chamber. When the 
gun was fired, the gas pressure expanded the cup ring and forced 
it into close bearing against the seating in the gun and the thick 
steel plate on the breech screw, thus preventing any escape of gas. 
Very similar to this was the Elswick cup obturator (fig. 48) intro- 
duced by the Elswick Ordnance Company in 1881; its rear surface 
was flat and it was held by a central bolt against the front of the 
breech screw which was slightly rounded. The cup yielded to the 
gas_ pressure until it was supported by the breech screw; this 
action expanded the lip against a copper seating, let into the gun, 
which could be renewed when necessary. Many of both types 
are still in use and act perfectly efficiently if carefully treated. 
The use of modern smokeless powder renders them and similar 
devices, such as the Broadwell ring (fig. 49), &c, peculiarly liable to 
damage, as a slight abrasion of the lip of the cup or ring, or of its 
seating, allows gas to escape, and so accentuates the defect with 
each round fired. Unless, therefore, the fault be immediately 
remedied considerable damage may be caused to the gun. The 
Broadwell gas ring is still in use in the French naval service, where 




, Fig. 43. — Breech Mechanism, Modern 6-in. Gun. 



it is made of copper (fig. 50), and also of steel in a modified form 
(Piorkowski) in the German service (fig. 51) ;in the last-named service, 
owing to the defect already named, all the latest guns, both light 
and heavy, use metal cartridge cases. In the French navy, as in 



2o6 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



most other services, cartridge cases are used for the smaller and 
medium guns only. 

One ofthe most efficient obturators not liable to damage is the 
plastic device introduced by Colonel de Bange of the French 
service and adopted by the French army and also by the British 
and other governments. It consists of a pad (fig. 52) made up of 
a strong annular-shaped canvas bag A, containing a mixture of 
asbestos fibre and mutton suet; the bag with its contents is placed 
in a properly formed die and subjected to hydraulic pressure by 
which it becomes hard and firm. The pad so made is then placed on 
the front of the breech screw B, and it is protected on its faces by 
disks C, C, of metallic tin or copper having steel wedge rings on 
the outer edges; the circumference of the complete pad and disks is 



HINGE Pi" 



Carrier 




LOCK W 



Fig. 44. — English modern Breech Mechanism, for heavy and medium guns." 

generally only slightly coned and fits into a corresponding seating 
formed at the breech end of the chamber, the canvas of the circum- 
ference of the pad being in immediate contact with the seat. In 
the English service the steep cone pattern (fig. 53) of de Bange 
obturator is used with mechanisms having the Welin screw. In 
front of the pad is placed a strong steel disk formed with a spindle, 
and called a mushroom head D, the spindle passing through the 
hole in the pad and through the breech screw, being secured in 
rear by a nut. The firing vent is generally drilled through the 
mushroom head and spindle and the part is then termed a " vent 
axial." On the gun being fired the gas exerts a great pressure on 
the mushroom head, which compresses the pad and squeezes it 
out on the circumference into close contact with the seating, thus 
forming a perfect gas seal. It is found that this apparently delicate 
arrangement will stand considerable ill-usage and act perfectly for 
an indefinite time, and, as it is easily replaced, it is regarded as one 
of the best and most reliable forms of obturator. In some countries 
the Freyre obturator is in use; this has a somewhat similar axial 
head to the de Bange, but the asbestos pad is replaced by a single 



steel wedge ring into which the axial head fits. On firing the gun 
the head is forced into the wedge ring and expands it against the 
seating in the gun. 

One other means of obturation has to be considered, viz. 
metallic cartridge cases. These are made of a kind of brass; 
aluminium cases have been experimented with, but have not proved 
satisfactory. The case (fig. 54) acts on the same principle as the 
cup obturation and is extremely efficient for the purpose; more- 
over, they have certain advantages conducive to rapid firing when 
used for small guns. The idea has developed from the use of such 
cartridges in small arms, and larger cartridges of the same type 
were introduced for 3-pounder and 6-pounder guns by Hotchkiss 
and Nordenfelt about the year 1880 for the purpose of rapid 
firing against torpedo boats. Then in 
1886 the Elswick Company produced 
a 36-pounder (soon converted to a 
45-pounder) of 4-7-in. calibre with the 
powder charge contained in metallic 
cases, and about 1888 a 6-in. 100- 
pounder gun using similar -cartridge's. 
A special advantage of the cartridge 
case is that it contains the firing primer 
by which the charge is ignited and con- 
sequently renders the firing gear of the 
gun more simple; on the other hand, 
should a miss-fire occur the gun must 
be opened to replace the primer. This 
is a proceeding liable to produce an 
accident, unless a long enough time is 
allowed to elapse before attempting to 
open the breech ; guns having de Bange 
obturators and firing tubes inserted 
after the breech is closed are therefore 
safer in this respect. 

Some means of extracting the "case 
after firing must be fitted to the gun; 
this is simple enough with small guns, 
but with those of heavy natures the 
extractor becomes a somewhat pon- 
derous piece of gear. 

Metallic cases of a short pattern 
have been tried for large calibre guns; 
although their action is quite efficient, 
they are difficult to handle, and if a case 
must be used it is preferable to employ 
a fairly long one. It was for this reason 
that in England up to 1898 it was 
considered that for guns above 6-in. 
calibre the de Bange obturation was the 
most advantageous. Since then the de 
Bange obturator has been employed in 
guns of 4-in. calibre and above, the cart- 
ridge case being retained only for 3-in. 
and smaller guns. Krupp, however, uses 
cartridge cases with all guns even up 
to 12-in. calibre, but this is undoubtedly 
due to the difficulties, which have already 
been noticed, attending the use of 
smokeless powder with the ordinary 
forms of obturation applicable to the 
wedge breech system. In the most 
modern Krupp 12-in. guns the charge 
is formed in two pieces; the piece 
forming the front portion of the charge 
is contained in a consumable envelope, 
while the rear portion is contained in 
a brass cartridge case, which forms the 
obturator, about 48 in. long. 

It will be seen that such large and 
heavy cases add to the difficulties which 
occur in handling or stowing the am- 
munition of large calibre guns, and although the use of cartridge 
cases with small guns adds to their rapidity of firing this is not 
the case with heavy guns. It seems, therefore, that the balance of 
advantages is certainly in favour of the de Bange system, for all 
guns except those of small calibre. With ordinary field guns cart- 
ridge cases are now considered obligatory owing to their con- 
venience in loading. 

While the ordinary types of plastic obturators last for an inde- 
finite time a cartridge case can be used for a limited number of 
rounds only, depending on the calibre of the gun; with field guns 
from ten to twenty rounds or even more may be fired from one 
case if care is taken to reform it after each round; with large 
guns they will not, of course, fire so many. Cartridge cases are 
an expensive addition to the ammunition, so that there should be 
no doubt about the advantages they offer before they are definitely 
adopted for heavy guns. 

The rapidity with which modern guns can be fired and the 
enormous energy they develop is especially striking when one 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



207 



Range 

and 

power. 



•UCH SUEN 



MUCH XMW ItvCR 



UVt« •HCICH NDWWW 



ITu >*f* 1-Wi. UVtK MUCH MCCH*NjM 



considers the same facts in connexion with the early guns. 
Fave states in his Hisloire el tacliqae des trois amies (p. 23) 
that during the invasion of Italy in 1494 by Charles 
VIII. the guns were so unwieldy and the firing so slow 
that the damage caused by one shot could be repaired 
before the next could be fired. The range, too, about 
100 yds. for battering purposes, now seems absurdly short; 
even at Waterloo 1200 yds. was all that separated the antagonists 
at the commencement of the battle, but they approached to within 
200 or 300 yds. without suffering serious loss from either musketry 
or gun fire. Nelson fought his ships side by side with the enemy's; 
and fifty years after Nelson's day a range of 1000 yds. at sea 
was looked upon as an extreme distance at which to engage an 
enemy. Contrast this with the lange of 12,000 yds. at which the 
opposing Russian and Japanese fleets more than once commenced 
a naval battle in 1904, while 
the critical part of the action 
took place at a distance of 
7000 yds. 

These long ranges naturally 
intensified the requirements 
of the British and other 
navies, and, so that they 
shall not be outclassed and 
beaten by an enemy's long- 
range fire, guns of continu- 
ally increasing power are 
demanded. In 1900 a 12-in. 
gun of 40 calibres was con- 
sidered all that was necessary. 
After the Russo-Japanese 
War the demand rose first for 
a45-calibre gun and then for 
a 50-calibre gun, and muzzle 
velocities from about 2400 f .s. 
to about 3000 f.s. In 1910 
greater shell power was de- 
manded, to meet which new 
type guns of i3-5~in. and 
14-in. calibre were being made. 

In the days of M.L. heavy 
guns one of the most difficult 
problems was that of loading. 
The weight of the shell and 
powder was such that some 
mechanical power had to be 
employed for moving and 
ramming them home, and as 
hydraulic gear had by that 
date been introduced it was 
generally used for all loading 

operations. To load, the guns had to be run back until their 
muzzles werej within the turret, or, in the case of the 16-in. 
80-ton guns of H.M.S. "Inflexible," until they were just outside 
the turret. The guns were then depressed to a fixed angle so as 
to bring the loading gear, which was protected below the gun 
deck, in line with the bore; the charge was first rammed home 
and then the projectile. With this arrangement, and in order to 
keep the turret of manageable dimensions, the guns had to be 
made short. Thus the i2-5-in. 3S-ton M.L. gun had a length of 
bore of but 16 calibres, and the largest English service gun of 
16-in. diameter had a bore of 18 calibres in length; while the 
largest of the type weighing 100 tons, built by Sir W. G. Arm- 
strong & Co., for the Italian navy, had a bore of 17-72 in. and 
a length of 20 calibres. The rate of fire was fairly rapid — 
two rounds could be fired from one turret with the i2-5~in. 
guns in about three minutes, while it took about four minutes 
to fire the same number from the 80-ton and 100-ton gun 
turrets. 

The possibility of double loading M.L. guns was responsible 
for the bursting on the 2nd January 1879 of a 38-ton gun in a 
turret on H.M.S. " Thunderer "; and it was partly due to this 



accident that B.L. guns were subsequently more favourably 
regarded in England, as it was argued that the double loading of 
a B.L. gun was an impossibility. 

With the B.L. system guns gradually grew to be about 30 
calibres in length of bore, and they were not made longer because 
this was considered a disadvantage, not to be compensated for 
by the small additional velocity which the old black and brown 
prismatic powders were capable of imparting with guns of 
greater length. Increase in the striking energy of the projectile 
was consequently sought by increasing the weight of the pro- 
jectile, and, to carry this out with advantage, a gun of larger 
calibre had to be adopted. Thus the 12-in. B.L. gun of about 
25 calibres in length gave place to the i3-5-in. gun of 30 calibres 
and weighing 67 tons, and to the 1625-in. also of 30 calibres and 
weighing in tons. The 10,000- or 12,000-ton battleships 



catu n rxHSNittrntTuiy^Lm 



ACTUM «.LfJCA. 



■UtMMMC. 




•IKXCluKMC 



UNCKUINU 



IMCDiJCRCW. 



■UECH UfllW tOrt* 
CARRIER. 



UVCA onto* SCRCM 



PCRCU&S10M LOCK. 



w 



Fig. 45. — Breech Mechanism for 6-inch B.L. Gun 



carrying these enormous pieces were, judged by our present-day 
standard, far too small to carry such a heavy armament with their 
ponderous armoured machinery, which restricted the coal supply 
and rendered other advantages impossible; even the 24,000-ton 
battleships are none too large to carry the number of heavy guns 
now required to form the main armament. 

The weight and size of the old brown prismatic charges had 
also reached huge dimensions; thus, while with heavy M.L. guns 
the weight of the full charge was about one-fourth that of the 
projectile, it had with heavy B.L. guns become one-half of the 
weight of the shell or even a greater proportion. The intro- 
duction of smokeless powder about 1890, having more than three 
times the amount of energy for the same weight of the older 
powders, allowed longer guns to be used, which fired a much 
smaller weight of charge but gave higher velocities; the muzzle 
or striking energy demanded for piercing hard-faced armour 
could consequently be obtained from guns of more moderate 
calibre. The i3-5-in. and i6-25-in. guns were therefore gradually 
discarded and new ships were armed with 1 2-in. guns of greater 
power. As the ballistic requirements are increased the weight 
of the charge becomes proportionately greater; thus for the 



2o8 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



present high velocity guns it has reached a ratio of about 0-4 
of the weight of the projectile. 



VENT /I XML 



BOX SLIDE 




PERCUSSION 
FIRING LEVER 



Fig. 46. 

The progress of artillery and the improvements made in armour 
have been reciprocal; as the protective value of iron and 




Fig. 47. — French Obturator. 



Fig. 48. — Elswick Cup. 



subsequently of steel plates has increased, so the penetrative 
force or quality of the projectile has advanced. Often, after a 




Fig. 50. 
Figs. 49-51. — Broadwell Ring. 



Fig. 51. 



period of apparent inactivity, fresh ideas or new metallurgical 
processes have enabled further progress to be made; this is 



the case at the present time as regards both projectiles 
and armour. As a matter of fact, armour, at the present-day 

fighting ranges, is 
rather ahead L of 
artillery — hence, 
the demand for 
greater power; but 
even with this the' 
probability of per- 
foration is small, 
and is usually only 
obtained when the 
projectile strikes 
normally ' to the' 
surface of the plate; 
the chance of this 
happening in action' 
is somewhat re- 
mote. During the 
R u s s o-J a p a n e s e 
War no instance of 
perforation of the 
thick belt or turret 
armour is known; 
the chief cause of 
the Russian losses 
was the bursting of 
12-in. and 6-in. shells 
inside the un- 
armoured portions 
of their ships; it 
is stated that no 
ship survived after 
being struck by ten 
12-in. projectiles. 

Some authorities 

have lately sought 

to increase the 

\ ELECTRIC FIRING WIRE muzzle energy — ' 

without adding 
weight or length 
to the gun — by in- 
creasing the weight 
of the projectile. This can be done to a limited extent with 
beneficial results, but it is impossible to carry the idea very far, 
as the projectile becomes very long and difficulties may be 
encountered with the rifling; or, if these are avoided, the 
thickness of the walls of the shell is increased so much that 




Fig. 52. — De Bange Obturator. 



Fig. 53. — Steep Cone de 
Bange Obturator. 



the heavier projectiles is in reality less powerful owing to its in- 
ternal bursting charge being comparatively small. Again, many 
foreign gunmakers claim that their guns are, in comparison 
with English guns of the same power, of less weight. This is 
true in a limited sense, but such guns have nothing like the same 
factor of resistance as English guns, or, in other words, the English 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



209 



guns are much stronger. This is an obvious advantage, but an 
equally solid one is the fact that owing to the greater weight of 
the home-made weapon the recoil energy is less and consequently 




m\\\\\\\\\\\\^^^^ 



^^^^ 



Fig. 54. — Metallic Cartridge Case. 

the mounting can be made of a lighter pattern. Besides, the 
weight of the gun is so disposed as to bring its centre of gravity 

Table II. — Names and Weights of English Cannon, 1574 



Names. 


Weight. 


Diameter 
of Bore. 


Diameter 
of Shot. 


Weight of 
Shot. 


Weight of 

Charge. 
Serpentine. 


Scores of 

faces at 

point-blank. 




ft 


in. 


in. 


tb 


ft 




Robinet 


200 


>i 


I 


I 


2 




Falconet 


500 





l! 


2 


1} 


14 


Falcon 


800 


2? 


2\ 


2l 


2 1 


16 


Minion 


1 100 


3i 


3 


4f 


4§ 


17 


Sacre 


1500 


31 


3i 


5 


5 


18 


Demi-Culverin 


2500 


*i 


4 


9 


9 


20 


Culverin 


4000 


5! 


5 


18 


18 


25 


Demi-Cannon . 


6000 


61 


6J 


30 


28 


28 


Cannon . 


7000 


7f 


7i 


60 


40 


20 


Eliza-Cannon 


8000 


8 


7J 


63 


42 


20 


Basiliske 


9000 


8! 


H 


60 


60 


21 



Table III. 



Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Shot. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


27-pr. 66 cwt. .... 

I3i-P r - 37-5 cwt 

6| pr. 20 cwt. .... 
3f pr. 1 1 cwt. 


Ih. 

13-125 
6-562 
4-922 
2-469 


Ih. 

27 

13-5 
6-75 
3-375 


f.s. 

1517 
1618 
1696 
1720 



Table IV. — British Smooth Bore Guns, i860. 



as near the breech end as possible; by this means the radius 

of the gun house is reduced to the smallest dimension and, in 

consequence, there is a great saving of weight of armour. The 

extra weight of the gun is therefore 

more than compensated for. 

Until late into the 16th century 
the calibres of the guns were not 
regulated with a view to the inter- 
changeability of shot. In the follow- 
ing century ordnance was divided into 
classes, but even then, owing no doubt 
to manufacturing difficulties, there 
was no fixed size for the bore. The 
Tables II.- VII. give some idea of the 
size and weight of these pieces. 

Table II. is taken from Cleveland's 
Notes, but corrected from " An Old 
Table of Ordnance " (Proc. R.A.I., vol. 
xxviii. p. 365); the last column gives 
the range in scores of paces at point- 
blank, a term used in those days to denote the first part of the 
trajectory which was supposed to be a straight line. Later the 
point-blank range was that distance 
from the gun on its carriage to the 
first graze of the shot on the horizontal 
plane when the axis of the gun was 
placed horizontal; this depended on the 
height of the gun above the ground 
plane, but it was the only method of 
determining the relative power of these 
early guns. 

In power, smooth-bore guns in Europe 
did not differ very much from each other, 
and it may be taken for granted that the 
progress made since has been much the 
same in all. 

D'Antoni, in his Treatise of Fire Arms 
(translated by Captain Thomson, R.A.), 
gives particulars of Italian guns of about 
1746, which are shown in Table III. 

It will be seen that the velocities 
given in Table III. are not inferior to 
those obtained from guns actually in 
use in i860 (see Table IV.). They were 
considerably higher than those for 
elongated rifled projectiles (Table V.) 
for many years after their introduction; 
the last-named, however, during flight 
only lost their velocity slowly, while the 
spherical shot lost their velocity so rapidly 
that at 2000 yds. range only about one- 
third of the initial velocity was retained. 



Official Designation of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 




In. 


Tons. 


ft. 


ft. 


Ft. Sees. 


Ft. Tons. 




r 10 in. 87 cwt. 


10 


4-35 


12 


88-31 


1292 


1022 


d 


68 pr. 95 „ 








8 


12 


4-75 


16 


66-25 


1579 


"45 


a 


8 in. 65 „ 








8 


05 


3-22 


10 


49-875 


1464 


742 


s 


32 pr. 58 „ 








6 


375 


2-9 


10 


31-375 


1690 


621 


u 


24 - 50 „ 








5 


823 


2-5 


8 


23-5 


1720 


482 




L18 ,,38 „ 








5 


292 


19 


6 


17-69 


1690 


350 


S 


12 ,, 18 ,, 








4 


623 


0-9 


4 


12-66 


1769 


275 


g^ 


9 .. 13 ., 








4 


20 


0-65 


2-5 


9-36 


1614 


169 


m 


L 6 „ 6 ,, 




3-668 


o-3 


i-5 


6-23 • 


1484 


95 



Table V. — British B.L. Ordnance, 1S60. Armstrong System. 



Official Designation of Gun. 


Calibre. , 


Veight of 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Muzzle 


Muzzle 






Gun. 


Charge. 


Projectile. 


Velocity. 


Energy. 




In. 


Tons. 


ft. 


ft. 


Ft. Sees. 


Ft. Tons. 


100 pr. ..... 


7 


4-1 i 
3-6 \ 
1-75 


* 


12 


l°3-75 


1 166 
( 1 164 


978 
390 


40 „ 


4-75 


1-6 1 

o-8 | 




5 


41-5 


] "34 
\ 1 1 14 


370 
162 


20 „ 


3-75 


0-65 


* 


2-5 


21-22 


} 997 


146 


12 „ 


30 


0-425 


i-5 


11-56 


1184 


112 


9 


3-0 


o-3 


1-125 


9-0 


1 141 


81 


6 


2-5 


0-175 


o-75 


6-o 


946 


37 



At a later date the velocities of these guns were altered. 



' Two patterns were in existence. 



2IO 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



Table VI. — British Rifled Ordnance, 1890. 



Official Designation 


Calibre. 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Muzzle 


Muzzle 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

Firing 

Rounds. 




of Gun. 




Gun. 


Charge. 


Projectile. 


Velocity. 


Energy. 


PropcIIant. 


M.L. Guns — 


In. 


Tons. 


ft. 


ft. 


Ft. Sees. 


Ft. Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




17-72 in. 


17-72 


100 


450 


2000 


1548 


33.233 


24-5 


n 


Prism Black 


16 


16 


80 


45° 


1700 


1540 


29,806 


25-0 




Prism Brown 


12-5 ,. 


12-5 


38 


210 


S18 


1575 


14,140 


19-2 




Prism Black 


12 ,, 


12 


35 


140 


7'4 


1390 


9.563 


'5-2 




p2 


11 


11 


25 


85 


548 


1360 


6,510 


'3-5 




Pebble 


10 


10 


18 


70 


410 


1379 


5.406 


12-5 






9 


9 


12 


50 


256 


1440 


3,695 


no 






8 ,, 


8 


9 


35 


179 


1390 


2,391 


9-2 


2 




7 


7 


7 


30 


114-6 


■525 


i,854 


9-2 


1 




64-pr. 1 


6-3 


3-2 


10 


66-9 


1390 


897 


6-4 


1 


r.l'.'g.* 


B.L. Guns— 




















16-25 in. 


16-25 


no-5 


960 


1800 


20S7 


54,390 


38 


1 

3 


S.B.C. 


'3-5 .. 


13-5 


67 


630 


1250 


2016 


35,230 


33 


1 

2 




12 ,, 


12 


45 


295 


714 


1914 


18,137 


24-5 




PrismBrown 


l° 11 


10 


29 


252 


500 


2100 


15,290 


25-8 


1 




9'2 „ 


9-2 


22 


166 


380 


2036 


10,915 


22-3 


'i 




8 


8 


14 


118 


210 


2200 


7,046 


20-0 


2 




6 


6 


5 


48 


100 


i960 


2,435 


'3-5 


3 


E.X.E. 


5 


5 


2 


16 


50 


1S00 


1,123 


9-2 


3 


S.P. 


4 


4 


i-3 


12 


25 


1900 


626 


7-8 


3 




Q.F. Guns — 




















4-7 in. 


4-72 


2-1 


12 


45 


17S6 


995 


8-8 


8 




6-pr. 


2*2.1 


0-4 


1-94 


6 


1837 


1412 


5-3 


20 


q'.'f. 


3., 


i-8 5 


0-25 


'■5 


3'3 


1S73 


802 


4-0 


20 


• 








•An 


d many sm; 


iller guns. 














1 


ABLE VII 


—British B 


L. Ordnance 


, 1900. 








Official Designation 


Calibre. 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Muzzle 


Muzzle 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

Firing 

Rounds. 




of Gun. 


Gun. 


Charge. 


Projectile. 


Velocity. 


Energy. 


Propellant. 




In. 


Tons. 


ft. 


lb. 


Ft. Sees. 


Ft. Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




16-25 in. 


16-25 


no-5 


960 


1800 


2087 


54,390 


38 


3 


S.B.C. 


'3-5 in- 


13-5 


67 


187 


1250 


2016 


35, 2 30 


33 


1 


Cordite 


12 in. Mark VIII. 


12 


46 


i°7-5 


S50 


2367 


33,000 


36-9 


1 




10 in. 


10 


29 


76 


500 


2040 


'4,391 


24-8 


ij 




9-2 in. Mark X. 


9-2 


28 


103 


380 


2601 


17,826 


3 2 '3 


2s 




S in. 


8 


14 


32-625 


210 


2200 


7,046 


20-0 




" 


6 in. Mark VII. 


6 


7 


20 


100 


2493 


4,335 


19-25 


7 


' t ' 


5 in. 


5 





4-45 


50 


1/50 


1,062 


8-8 


3 




4 in. 


4 


i-3 


3-06 


25 


1900 


626 


-■8 


3 




Q.F. Guns — 
















" 


6 in. 


6 


7 


13-25 


100 


2200 


3,356 


16-0 


6 




4-7 .. 


4-72 


21 


5-43 


45 


2188 


1,494 


12-0 


8 




4 .. 


4 


'■3 


3-75 


25 


2456 


1,046 


n-6 


9 




12-pr. 


3 


0-6 


1-94 


'2-5 


2210 


423 


8-0 


15 




6 ,, 


2-21 


0-4 


0-483 


6 


1818 


137 


4-8 


20 




3 .. 


1-S1 


0-25 


0-396 


3-3 


1S73 


So- 2 


4-0 


20 


:: 1 



_ As regards rapidity of aimed fire — and no shooting is worth con- 
sideration which is not aimed — much depends on the quickness 
with which the gun can be opened, loaded and closed again ready 
for firing, but quite as much depends on the ease and convenience 
of moving to any required direction the gun with its mounting; 
also on the system of recoil adopted and the method of sighting. 
Two identically similar guns may consequently give entirely 
different rates of firing, unless mounted and sighted on the same 
system — without taking into consideration the personal element of 
the gun detachment or crew. The rates of firing shown in many 
tables are therefore not always a trustworthy criterion of the guns' 



capabilities. The advantage of the Q.F. system (i.e. a gun firing 
charges contained in metallic cases), when suitably mounted, over 
the old B.L. guns was exhibited in a very marked manner in 1887, 
when the first 47-in. Q.F. gun fired ten rounds in 47-5 seconds 
and subsequently fifteen rounds in one minute. The 5-in. B.L. gun 
when fired as rapidly as possible only fired ten rounds in 6 minutes 
16 seconds; so that the Q.F. gun fired its tenth round before the 
then service gun fired its second shot. Recent improvements made 
in the mechanism of the B.L. gun enable it to compete with the 
Q.F. system. 

The tabulated armour-piercing value of a gun is based on the 









Table 


VI 1 1.— British Ordnance 


, 1910. 








Official Designation 


Calibre. 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Muzzle 


Muzzle 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 




of Gun. 


Gun. 


Charge. 


Projectile. 


Velocity. 


Energy. 


Firing 
Rounds. 


Propellant. 




In. 


Tons. 


ft. 


ft. 


Ft. Sees. 


Ft. Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




12 in. Mark XI. 


12 


66 




850 


2959 


5i,58o 


51-5 





M.D. Cordite 


12 in. Mark X 


12 


58 


309 


850 


2900 


47,697 


5I*o 


2 




10 in. 


10 


31 


148 


500 


2800 


27,205 


39-5 







9-2 Mark X. 


9-2 


28 


J 03 


380 


2640 


18,400 


33-3 


3 




7-5 m- 


7-5 


16 


6o-5 


200 


2800 


10,883 


29-0 


4 




6 in. Mark VI 1. 


6 


7-4 


20 


100 


2493 


4,308 


19-6 


6 




4 in. 


4 


i-3 


3-75 


25 


2456 


1,046 


u-6 


9 


„ 



Q.F. guns as in 1900. 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



21 I 



results given by various formulas. These often vary considerably, 
so in order that a direct comparison in the tables may be made, 
this value is obtained for wrought iron plate only, using Tresidder's 
formula, which is one of the most trustworthy. The equivalent 
thickness of Krupp cemented steel armour can be obtained 
immediately by dividing the tabulated value for wrought iron by a 
" factor of effect " of 2-3' to 2-4 for uncapped armour piercing 



shot, and about 2-0 for capped armour piercing shell. These 

factors are dependent on the nature of the projectile and must 

therefore be taken as approximate. 

. Tables VII I. -XXI I. are obtained from trustworthy sources, 

but as great secrecy is now observed in many countries there may 

be a few inaccuracies; in some cases the whole of the data are not 

available. 



Table IX. — French Naval Ordnance, 1910. 



Official Designation 
of Gun. 



Calibre. 



Weight of 
Gun. 



Weight of 
Charge. 



Weight of 
Projectile. 



Muzzle 
Velocity. 



Muzzle 
Energy. 



Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 



Rate of 

firing 
Rounds. 



Propcllant. 



305 mn 

274 

240 ,, 

194 

1647 ,, 
Q.F. Guns- 



164' 

140 

100 

75 

65 

47 



7 mm. 



In. 

12-01 

io-8 

9-45 
7-64 
6-46 

6-46 
5-44 
3-94 
2-9 

2-57 
1-85 



Tons. 

34-5 
23-6 

12-5 
8-5 

8-i 
4-13 



lb. 



lb. 
75° 
562 

375 
190 

115 

"5 
66 

3i 
14 

8-8 

3-3 



Ft. -Sees. 
2870 
2650 
2870 
2870 
3000 

2870 
2625 

2395 
3116 

2871 
2871 



Ft.-Tons. 
42,890 
27,186 

21,445 
10,890 

7,185 

6,568 

3,153 
1,232 

943 
503 

188 



In. 
46-0 
38-8 
37-o 
29-0 
26-3 

24-5 

20-0 

12-4 

•4-5 
io-8 

7-9 



Per Minute. 
'■5 
1-5 
2 



5 

6 

6 

12 

12 

15 



Smokeless 
B. Powder 









Table 


X. — German Naval Ordnance. 










Official Designation 
ol Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 
Rounds. 


Propcllant. 


Q.F. Guns — 


In. 


Tons. 


lb. 


lb. 


Ft. -Sees. 


Ft.-Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 


1 Nitro- 


28 cm. 


11-02 


33-3 




529 


2854 


29,878 


40-2 


1 


■j Glycerine 
( powder 


24 


9-45 


25-4 


88-2 


• 309 


2740 


] 6,086 


31-0 


i| 


,, 


21 


8-2 


15-75 


49-5 


242 


2526 


10,707 


26-1 


3 






17 


6-7 


7-8 


43-1 


132 


2887 


7,629 


26-1 


5 




, 


15 


5-9 


473 


19-83 


88 


2461 


3.696 


18-0 


7 






10-5 „ 


4-13 


1-645 


7-27 


38-35 


2297 


1,403 


12-75 


8 




, 


8-8 ,, 


3-42 


i-34 


4-85 


23-6 


2789 


1,273 


14-7 


10 






5 


1-97 


0-236 


0-66 


3-86 


2165 


125 


5-4 


1 1 




- 



Note. — It is stated that the new German 28 cm. 50 calibre naval gun weighing 43-9 tons fires, with a charge of 291 ft, a projectile of 
760 lb with a velocity of 2S71 f.s. 









Table XI 


— Italian Naval Ordnance, 19 10. 








Official Designation 
of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 
Rounds. 


Propellant. 




In. 


Tons. 


lb. 


lb. 


Ft. -Sees. 


Ft.-Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




343 mm. 


•3-5 


67-9 


187-2 


1215 


2067 


36,050 


34-0 




\ Strip 
/ Ballistite 


305 


12 


51 


231-5 


850 


2580 


39,220 


42-0 






254 


10 


3° 


85 


450 


2461 


19,000 


310 




t 


203 


8 


19 


57 


250 


2526 


1 1 ,060 


27-0 






152 


6 


57 


17-6 , 


100 


2296 


3,655 


17-0 




„ 


120 ,, 


472 


2-1 


5-5 


45 


2116 


i,397 


u*4 




M 


76 


3-0 


0-6 


2-17 


12-5 


2296 


457 


8-5 




f) 


57 


2-24 


0-4 


1-05 


6 


2198 


201 


6-3 




|f 


47 


i-8i 


0-25 


0-67 


3-3 


2330 


124 


5-8 




-- 







Table XII 


— Ritssia?i 


Naval Ordnance, 1910. 








Official Designation 
of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 
Rounds. 


Propellant. 




In. 


Tons. 


ft. 


lb. 


Ft.-Secs. 


Ft.-Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




12 in. 


12 


59 




720 


2600 


33,73° 


39-0 




( Nitro- 
( Cellulose 


10 „ 


10 


32 




488 


2550 


22,003 


34-o 




,, 


8 „ 


8 


14 


87 


188 


2950 


11,345 


29-5 






6 „ 


6 


6-28 


50-6 


9i-5 


2118 


2,849 


14-4 






9 pr- 


4-2 


0-87 


4-88 


27-75 


1226 


289 


4-2 




,, 


4 „ 


3-43 


o-45 


3-i 


150 


1451 


219 


4-6 






Q.F. Guns — 




















6 in. 


6 


5-75 


28 


9i-5 


2502 


3,970 


18-5 




,, 


4-7 „ 


4-72 


2-95 


15-4 


45-o 


2502 


i,953 


14-6 




,, 


2-9 „ 




0-87 


3-53 


io-8 


2700 


546 


10-3 




,, 


i-8i ,, 


i-8i 


0-323 




3-3 


2003 


91-8 


4-6 




- 



212 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



Table XIII. — Austrian Naval Ordnance, 1910. 



















Rate of 




Official Designation 


Calibre. 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Muzzle 


Muzzle 


of Wrought 


firing 
Rounds. 


Propellant. 


of Gun. 




Gun. 


Charge. 


Projectile. 


Velocity. 


Energy. 


Iron. 




In. 


Tons. 


lb. 


lb. 


Ft. -Sees. 


Ft.-Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




30-5 cm. 


12-01 






990 


2625 


47,300 


46-0 






24 


9-45 


21-5 


120-6 


474 


2595 


22,121 


34-5 






19 


7-5 


n-6 


56 


198 


2700 


10,025 


27'3 


3 




15 


5-9i 


5-2 


28-8 


112-5 


2608 


5,308 


22-0 


10 




12 ,, 


4-72 


2-0 


9-7 


52-4 


2264 


3,554 


13-7 


10 




7 


2-75 




3-3 


15-2 


2378 




10-4 






4-7 ., 


1-85 


0-253 


0-79 


3-3 


2329 




5-8 






3-7 ,. 


1-46 






1-0 


2346 











Table XIV. — Austrian Coast Artillery, 1910. 



Official Designation 
of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 

Rounds. 


Propellant. 


30-5 cm. 

28 

15 


In. 

12-01 
11-024 
5-906 


Tons. 

38' 
4-28 


lb. 
198-4 
220 
18-28 


lb. 
981 
760 

100 


Ft.-Secs. 
2297 
1722 
2297 


Ft.-Tons. 

35,86o 

15,615 

3,659 


In. 

37-8 

22-5 

17-2 


Per Minute. 
4 


Tubular 
Prism 







Table XV. 


— United States Naval Guns, 1910. 




























Rate of 




Official Desij 


;nation Calibre. 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Muzzle 


Muzzle 


of Wrought 
Iron. 


firing 
Rounds. 


Propellant. 


of Gun 




Gun. 


Charge. 


Projectile. 


Velocity. 


Energy. 




In. 


Tons. 


lb. 


ft. 


Ft.-Secs. 


Ft.-Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 


( Nitro- 
\ Cellulose 


13 in 


13 


61-4 


180 


1 1 30 


2000 


3 ',333 


31-8 




12 , 


, 12 


56-1 


340 


870 


2950 


52,483 


52 










10 


10 


34-6 


207-5 


5io 


2700 


25,772 


38 










8 


8 


18-7 


98-5 


260 


2750 


13,630 


3ii 










7 , 


7 


127 


58 


165 


2700 


8,340 


25-9 










6 


6 


8-6 


37 


105 


2800 


8,710 


23-5 










5 , 


5 


5 


23-8 


50 


3150 


3,439 


2I-I 










47 ■ 


4-72 






45 


2600 


2,1 10 


15-5 










4 , 


4 


2-9 


'2-3 


33 


2800 


i,794 


16-1 










3 ■ 


3 


1-0 


3-85 


13 


2700 


657 


li-o 










6 pi 


2-24 






6 


2240 


209 


6-6 










3 


i-Si 






3 


2200 


100 


5-4 

















Table XVI. — United States Coast Defence Guns. 












Official Designation 
of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 

Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 
Rounds. 


Propellant. 




In. 


Tons. 


lb. 


lb. 


Ft.-Secs. 


Ft.-Tons. 


In. 


Per M 


inute. 


( Nitro- 


16 in. 


16 


127 


612 


2400 


2150 


77,000 


46-4 


' . 




) Cellulose 


14 




14 


50 


280 


1660 


2150 


53,220 


41-0 


1 . 






12 




12 


59 


34° 


1046 


2250 


36,730 


37-6 










10 , 




10 


34-3 


205 


604 


2250 


21,200 


3i-5 










8 




8 


14-4 


80 


316 


2200 


10,600 


24-5 










6 




6 


9-45 


35 


106 


2600 


4,970 


2I-I 










5 




5 


4-96 


20 


58 


2600 


2,718 


I7-2 






' f 




4-72 , 




4-72 


2-75 


10-5 


45 


2600 


2,1 10 


15-5 










4 




4 


I-61 


7-5 


33 


2300 


1,210 


120 










3 




3 


1-2 


6-0 


15 


2600 


704 


11-25 






- 


, 


2-24 , 




2-24 


0-38 


1-35 


6 


2400 


240 


7-3 






- 




12 , 


mortar 


12 


13 


j 54 

?62 


1046 


1 150 


9,590 


















824 


1325 


10,025 

















Table XVII — 


-Japanese Naval Ordnance, 1910. 










Official Designation 
of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 
Rounds.. 


Propellant. 




In. 


Tons. 


lb. 


lb. 


Ft.-Secs. 


Ft.-Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 






12-5 


66 




990 


2308 


36,500 


37-3 


0-2 


MD. Cordite 




12 


59 


305 


850 


2800 


46,200 


47-2 


2-0 






10 


3 + 


166-5 


500 


- 2850 


28,170 


40-9 


3-0 




, 




8 


17-5 


44 


250 


2740 


13,015 


30-3 


2-0 








6 


7 


35 


100 


2800 


5,436 


29-3 


7-0 




| 




4-72 


2-1 


5-5 


45 


2188 


1,494 


12-0 


8 




, 




3 


0-6 


1 -94 


12-5 


2210 


423 


8-0 


1 2 




, 




3 


0-9 




io-8 


2716 


553 


10-2 










2-24 


0-4 


o-5 


6-0 


1818 


138 


4-8 


20 








1-35 


0-25 


0-4 


3-3 


1873 


80 


4-25 


20 




- 



Note. — The Japanese fleet has mainly been armed by Armstrong's Works, but the " Katori " was armed by Vickers', and those 
ships taken from the Russians during the late war are armed with guns from Krupp or Obuchoff. Guns of all sizes are now, 
however, being constructed in Japan, so that the country is no longer dependent on foreign factories. 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



21 







Table XVIII.— Sir XV. G. Armstrong, Whitworth & Co. 


's Guns. /. 


bridged Table. 






Offi< 


•ial Designation 
of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 

Rounds. 


PropcIIant. 






In. 


Tons. 


H). 


lb. 


Ft. -Sees. 


Ft. -Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 






12 in. 


12 


69 


3i8 


850 


2960 


5 1 .640 


5'-5 


2 






10 ,, 


10 


36 


200 


500 


3000 


33,318 


44-0 


3 






9-2.. 


9-2 


28 


'38 


380 


3030 


24,190 


40-8 


4 






8 „ 


8 


21 


yo 


250 


3000 


15,600 


34-9 


5 






7-5., 


7-5 


15-75 


76 


200 


3000 


12,481 


32-1 


6 






6 „ 


e 


8-75 


35-5 


100 


3050 


6,492 


26-0 


9 






4-7.. 


4-7 


3'3 


'5 


45 


3000 


2,808 


19-1 


12 






4 „ 


4 


2 ■ I 


11 


31 


3000 


1.934 


•7-3 


12 






3 .. 


3 


1. 1 


5-75 


'4-3 


3050 


922 


13-9 


30 


( Semi- 
( automatic 




6 pr. 


2-24 


•52 


i-'3 


6 


2400 


240 


7-3 


25 






3 ., 


1-85 


•25 


•625 


3-3 


2300 


121 


5-7 


25 





Note. — The most powerful gun of each calibre has been selected. 





Table XIX. 


— Vickers, Sons and Maxim's Guns 


Abridged 


Table. 






Official Designation 
of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 

Rounds. 


Propellant. 




In. 


Tons. 


lb. 


lb. 


Ft. -Sees. 


Ft. -Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




12 in. 


12 


65-85 


344 


S50 


3010 


53.400 


53 -'J 


2 




10 „ 


10 


27-85 


172 


496-6 


2863 


28,225 


41-0 


3 




9'2 ,, ' 


9-2 


27-8 


184 


380 


3070 


24,835 


41-3 


4 




8 „ 


8 


14-15 


90 


216-7 


3090 


H,350 


33-9 


6 




7-5.. 


7-5 


16-0 


80-03 


200 


3007 


12,540 


32-3 


8 




6 „ 


6 


7-8 


43 


100 


3190 


7,056 


27-9 


10 




4-7., 


4-72 


3-i 


17 


45-14 


3050 


2,910 


i8-5 


1 2 




4 .. 


4 


2-1 


11-25 


3i 


3030 


i,975 


17-6 


15 




3 M 


3 


o-95 


3-625 


12-5 


2700 


632 


io-8 


25 


\ Scmi- 
( automatic 


6 pr. 


2-24 


0-46 


'•55 


6 


2600 


281 


8-2 


28 




3 .. 


1 -85 


0-28 


1-066 


3'3 


2800 


179-4 


7-5 


30 





Note. — The most powerful gun of each calibre has been selected. 



Table XX. — Kr 


ipp's Naval 


and Coast-Defence 


Ordnance. Abridged from Table of Ordna 


?;re, /pod. 




Official Designation 
of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 

Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 
Rounds. 


Propellant. 




In. 


Tons. 


lb. 


lb. 


Ft. -Sees. 


Ft. -Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




30-5 cm. 


I2-OI 


U7 I 

I 52-2) 


357 


\ 771 
/981 


6 



3251 / 
2884 \ 


56,540 


!.,;•«! 


2-3 




28 ' „ 


11-02 


\ 36-4 ( 
? 40-4 \ 


276 


S 595 

( 760 


2 
6 


3255i 
2881 J 


43,754 


ISSS 


2-3 


The explosive 
for the 


24 


9-45 


(22-93 I 
I 25-45 \ 


173 


6 


J 374 
U74 


8 



3255 / 
2894 S 


27,540 


5 44-5 ( 
I 42-0 \ 


3-4 


charges of 
guns of 10-5 




8-27 


\ 15-20 ) 


115 




\ 249 


1 


3251 ( 


18,101 


J 38-6 / 
I 36-5 5 




cm. and up- 


" 


? 16-90 \ 


" 


?308 


6 


2920 ) 


4 5 


wards con- 


19 


7-48 


i II-37 i 

} 12-64 s 


86 


2 


J 187 

?235 


4 
9 


3241 ) 
2890 \ 


13,572 


] 35-0 I 
( 33-i J 


5-6 


tains 25% of 
nitroglycerin 


17 ' „ 


6-7 


1 8 "55 I 
1 9-48) 


64 


6 


J 141 
M76 


4 


3238 / 
2897 s 


10,259 


S 32-o ) 
t 30-3 ) 


6-7 




15 


5-9i 


J 5-5 { 
? 6-1 \ 


41 


7 


1 90 
( 112 


4 
4 


3245 { 

2910 ) 


6,603 


?26-I \ 


6-8 




12 ,, 


4-72 


{ 2-86 { 
I 3-18 


21 


72 


I 46 
I 59 


3 
5 


3274 I 
2887 \ 


3,442 


m\ 


15-20 




10-5 „ 


4-13 


S '-92 
I 2-13 \ 


14 


55 


J 30 

( 39 


9 

7 


3281 1 
2897 \ 


2,306 


) :n 1 


20-25 




9 


3-54 


f 1-28 
( i-45 


7 
7 


72 
94 


\ 19 
I 25 
\ 19 
? 25 


84 
13 
84 
13 


3162 1 
2812 s 

3248 
2887 \ 


i,377 
i,452 




25-30 


The explosive 


1 ■ 


2-95 


( -84 


4 
4 


48 
61 


\ 11 
1 14 
\ 11 

V 14 


46 
55 
46 
55 


3165'" 

2812 \ 

3251 I 
2887 \ 


797 
840 


i 13-3 L 

1 I2-6J 


30-40 


for charges 
of guns up 
to 9-5 cm. 
contains40% 


5-7 „ 


2-24 


{ -325 
\ -367 


2 


96 
03 


\ 5 

( 6 

\ 5 
( 6 


07 
4 
07 
4 


3156 1 

2808 s 

3242 ) 
2884 J 


350 
369 


m 

10-5 / 
1 9-9 \ 


40-50 


nitroglycerin 


5-0 ,, 


1-97 


.. j -220 


1 


32 


\ 3 
> 4 


42 
3 


3156 

2814 s 


236 


\ 8-7 1 
1 8-4 \ 










) -248 


■ 1 


37 


.' 3 
/ 4 


4^ 
3 


3242 I 
2890 ) 


249 


\ 9-0 ; 
? S-75 S 


40-50 





Note. — The above table includes a light, and heavy type of gun, but for each the length of bore is 50 calibres; in the unabridged 
table guns of 40 and 45 calibres are included. The particulars of the shorter pieces can be easily obtained from Table XX., as the 



214 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



construction of Krupp's complete table is based on very simple rules. Thus, for the same relative length of gun, the weight of the 
projectile and of the charge are, with few exceptions, in proportion to the cube of the calibre. Again, the weight of the gun varies as 
the cube of the calibre multiplied by the length. The muzzle velocity is practically identical for guns of the same relative length, 
and varies as the square root of the length; consequently the muzzle energy varies directly as the length. _ Two weightSj of projectile 
are given for every gun, but the muzzle energy of each, for the same charge, is identical; this result is never the case in actual 
practice. Similar arithmetical processes are utilized for the Schneider-Canet, Bofors and Skoda tables, and only the first named is 
therefore given. 





Table XXI. 


— Schneider-Canet Guns 


A bridged 


Table. 








Official Designation 
of Gun. 


Calibre. 


Weight of 
Gun. 


Weight of 
Charge. 


Weight of 
Projectile. 


Muzzle 
Velocity. 


Muzzle 
Energy. 


Perforation 

of Wrought 

Iron. 


Rate of 

firing 

Rounds. 


Propellant. 




In. 


Tons. 


lh. 


lb. 


Ft.-Secs. 


Ft. -Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




305 mm. 


12-01 


57-6 




826 


3116 


55.717 


54-8 






274-4 .. 


10-9 


41-9 




606 


3"6 


40.859 


49-1 






240 ,, 


9-45 


28-0 




407 


3U6 


27.487 


43-2 






200 ,, 


7-S 7 


16-25 




231 


3116 


15,601 


35-9 






175 


6-89 


io-8 




165 


3116 


11,143 


32-1 






150 


5-9i 


6-8 




99 


3116 


6,686 


27-0 






120 ,, 


4-72 


3-5 




48 


3116 


3.268 


21-0 






100 ,, 


3-94 


2-0 




28-6 


3116 


1,931 


17-8 






75 


2-95 


1-2 




14-3 


3116 


917 


14-6 






57 


2-24 


•55 




6-0 


3116 


400 


10-7 






47 


1-85 


•3° 




3-3 


3116 


223 


8-9 







Note. — The unabridged table gives only 45 and 50 calibre guns; the above table gives the particulars for 50 calibre guns. 







Table XXII. — Bethlehem Steel Co.'s Guns. 


Abridged Table. 




















Perforation 


Rate of 




Official Designation 


Calibre. 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Weight of 


Muzzle 


Muzzle 


of Wrought 


firing 


Propellant. 


of Gun. 




Gun. 


Charge. 


Projectile. 


Velocity. 


Energy. 


Iron. 


Rounds. 






In. 


Tons. 


lb. 


lb. 


Ft.-Secs. 


Ft.-Tons. 


In. 


Per Minute. 




18 in. 


18 


60 




2000 


2250 


70,185 


42-7 






12 ,, 


12 


53 




850 


2800 


46,195 


47-4 






10 ,, 


10 


35 




500 


2800 


27.174 


39-8 






8 


8 


18-6 




250 


2800 


13,587 


31-5 






7 


7 


14-5 




165 


2900 


9,619 


28-8 






6 


6 


8-4 




105 


2900 


6,180 


24-9 






5 


5 


4'75 




60 


2900 


3,490 


20-5 






4-724.. 


4-724 


4-2 




45 


2900 


2,623 


18.3 






4 


4 


2-6 




33 


2900 


1,924 


17-0 






3 


3 


■85 




13 


2800 


707 


n-7 






2-24 ,, 


2-24 


•43 




6 


2400 


240 


7-3 






1-85 „ 


1-85 


•245 




3 


2600 


142 


6-4 







Note. — The most powerful gun of each calibre has been selected. 



Modern naval artillery may be looked upon as the high water 
mark of gun construction, and keeps pace with the latest 
scientific improvements. For coast defence the latest pattern 
of ordnance is not of the same importance; in general very 
similar guns are employed, although perhaps of an older type. 
Formerly in the British Service the heaviest guns have been 
used for this purpose; but of late years, where fortifications 
could be erected in suitable situations, the largest gun favoured 
is the 9-2-in. of the latest model. Other governments have, 
however, selected still heavier pieces up to 12-in. calibre, mounted 
in heavily armoured cupolas or gunhouses. 

As regards field material, mobility is still one of the primary 
conditions, and, as high power is seldom required, ordnance of 
medium calibre is all that is necessary. For siege purposes guns 
of 4-in. to 6-in. calibre are generally sufficient, but howitzers up 
to 28 cm. (11 -02 in.) were used at the siege of Port Arthur, 
1904. All authorities seem agreed that for ordinary field guns 
75 mm. or 3-in. calibre is the smallest which can be efficiently 
employed for the purpose, and the muzzle velocity is in nearly 
all equipments about 500 m.s. (1640 f.s.). 

For mountain equipments all foreign governments have selected 
a 75-millimetre gun with a velocity of about 350 m.s. (1148 f.s.) ; 
in England, however, a 2-75-in. has been supplied to mountain 
batteries; this fires a projectile of 10 lb with 1440 f.s. 

Field Howitzer batteries abroad have pieces of from 10 to 12 
centimetres calibre and a low velocity; in England a 5-in. 
howitzer is at present used, but it is intended to adopt a 
4-5-in. howitzer of 17 calibres in length for future manufacture. 

Heavy shell power and long range fighting render the work of 

the gun designer particularly difficult, especially when this is 

combined with conditions restricting length and 

vof weight; and, in addition, other considerations, 

especially for naval guns, may have to be taken into 

account such as the allowable weight of the armament, 

and the size of the gun house or turret. These and other similar 

conditions are important factors in deciding on the type of design 



gun- 
making. 



which embodies most advantages for a heavy gun intended for 
the main armament. For land defence more latitude is allowed 
so long as this is combined with economy. With both heavy and 
medium naval guns the length is often limited to 45 calibres on 
account of peculiarities in the design of the vessel, but usually 
great rapidity of fire, high velocity and large shell power are 
insisted upon. Again for Q.F. field guns, where high velocity 
is not of importance, ease of manipulation, rapidity of working 
and reliability even after months of arduous service are essential. 
Supposing, "however, that the initial conditions, imposed by the 
shipbuilder or by the exigency of the case, can be fulfilled, it 
still remains to so design the gun that, when it is fired, there is 
an ample margin of safety to meet the various stresses to which 
the several portions of the structure are subject. The two 
principal stresses requiring special attention are the circum- 
ferential stress, which tends to burst open the gun longitudinally, 
and the longitudinal stress. The calculation for the last named 
is based on the supposition that the gun is a hollow cylinder, closed 
at one end by the breech screw and at the other by the shot, 
both being firmly fixed to the cylinder. The gas pressure exerts 
its force on the face of the breech screw and on the base of the shot 
thus tending to pull the walls of the cylinder asunder. But 
besides these there is the special stress on the threads of the 
breech screw which must receive very careful consideration. 

Regard must also be had to the fact that in building up the 
gun, the smaller the diameter of the hoop and the longer it is, the 
higher must be the temperature to which it is heated before shrink- 
ing. This is necessary in order that the dilatation may allow 
sufficient clearance to place the hoop correctly in position on the 
gun, without the possibility of its contracting and gripping before 
being so placed. Should it warp while being heated or while 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION] 



ORDNANCE 



215 



being placed in position the hoop may prematurely grip on the 
gun and may consequently have to be sacrificed by cutting it off 
and shrinking on another. 

The dilatation must be so adjusted that the required tempera- 
ture to obtain it is not higher than that used for annealing 
the forging, otherwise the effect of this annealing will be modified. 
There is, therefore, for this reason, considerable risk in shrinking 
up long hoops of small diameter. 

Before heating hoops of large diameter two or three narrow 
reference bands are turned on the exterior and their diameter 
measured; special gauges are prepared to measure these plus 
the dilatation required. After heating the hoop but before 
shrinking it, the diameter of the reference bands when tested by 
these gauges should not be in excess of them. The temperature 
can then be easily ascertained by dividing the dilatation by the 
coefficient of expansion of steel per degree F. or C, taking of 
course the diameter into account. 

For small hoops this method is not convenient, as the hoop 
cools too quickly, the dilatation must then be obtained by 
ascertaining the temperature, and this is best done by the use 
of some form of pyrometer, such as a Siemens water pyrometer, 
before the hoop is withdrawn from the furnace. 

It may also be desired to obtain a given striking energy or 
velocity at some definite range — then, the weight of the pro- 
jectile being decided upon, the muzzle velocity is found from 
the formulas (see Ballistics) given in Exterior Ballistics. From 
this and the length of the gun allowable the designer has, with 
the aid of former experience and the formulas given in Internal 
Ballistics, to decide on the weight and nature of the powder 
charge necessary and the internal dimensions of the powder 
chamber and bore. These data are used to plot what is termed 
a " gunmakers' curve," i.e. the curve of pressures along the bore 
which the powder charge decided upon will give. The factor of 
safety and the maximum allowable stress of the steel forgings 
or steel wire also being known, the necessary strength of each 
section of the gun can be easily found and it remains to so 
proportion each part as to conform to these conditions and to 
meet certain others, such as facilities for manufacture, which 
experience only can determine. 

When the second course consists of a single long tube into 
which a tapered barrel is driven, as in the system adopted by the 
English government, the two tubes are treated as a single tube 
equal in thickness to the two together; but when the second 
course consists of several tubes shrunk on to the barrel the addi- 
tional strength, obtained by the initial tension of the shrunk 
tubes, is sometimes taken account of in the calculation, or the 
two may be treated as one thick tube. 

The gunmakers' formulas for the strength of the gun are ob- 
tained from considering the strength of a thick cylinder exposed 
to unequal internal and external pressures. Supposing 
a transverse section of the gun to cut through n tubes, 
the_ internal radius of the barrel is r in., the external 
radius ri in., the external radius of the second course 
is h and so on; and the external radius of the jacket is r n . 
Then if T = a circumferential stress (tension) in tons per 
square inch, T„ = a circumferential stress at radius r n 
in., P = a radial stress (pressure) in tons per square 
inch, and P„ = a radial stress at radius r„ in., the 
formulas used in the calculation of the strength of built- 
up guns are as follows: — 



consider that the proof tension of the barrel should not exceed 15 
tons and of the outer hoops 18 tons per square inch; with nickel 
gun steel_ these become 20 tons and 24 tons respectively. If the 
n' h hoop is the exterior tube then P„ = o; neglecting the atmospheric 
pressure. 

In all gun calculations for strength three cases must be con- 
sidered : 

(a) When the built-up gun is fired, the stress is called the Firing 

Stress and is obtained by the repeated use of equation (4); 

(b) When the gun, supposed to be a solid homogeneous block of 

metal is fired, the stress is termed the Powder Stress and 
is obtained from the equations (1) and (2); 

(c) When the built-up gun is in repose, the stress is then called 

the Initial Stress or Stress of Repose. 

Between these three cases the following relations hold : — 

Initial Stress + Powder Stress = Firing Stress (5). 

It is best to use different symbols to distinguish each kind of 
stress. We will use for the Firing Stress P, T; for Powder Stress 
p, t; and for the Initial Stress (p), (t). 

The method of working will be illustrated by a practical example. 
Take, for instance, a section across the chamber of a 47-in. Q.F. 
gun, for which the diameter of the chamber is 5 in., that of the 
barrel 8-2 in., and the external diameter of the jacket 15 in. 

Here ^ = 2-5; n = 4-l ; ^ = 7-5 

To=i5; T, = i8; P 2 = o. 

From (4) for the Firing Stress 

l , i = /- 7 . [ -)2_i_e,.jwXl8=9-72 tons per square inch. 

(i.])2_ (2-5)2 
f > o=/,. I %2j_c 2 .r\jX(i5-t-9 - 72)+9'72 = 2i tons per square inch. 

From (3) the tension T'„ of the outer fibres of the hoops is obtained ; 
thus 

T' 2 = P 2 +Ti-Pi = 18 -9-72 = 8-28 tons per square inch. 

T'i = Pi-j-To-Po = 972-f 15-21 =3-72 tons per square inch. 

For any intermediate radius r the stress can be found by using 
equations (1) and (2) or (1) or (2) and (3). 

For the Powder Stress equations (1) and (2) are used by putting 
« = l, and then pi = o (also remembering that, as there are two 
hoops, the outer radius must be written r 2 ) ; the formulas become 



, r<?r 2 * +r\ 

'-,2.„2_.„2P0 



P =W71 



r<f rr — r 



°P° 



(6) 
(7)- 



When r = r = 2-5, t = k, po= Po already found and: 



'/<> = 



(7-5) 2 +(2-5) 2 



(7-5) 2 -(2-5) 



2X21 =26-25 tons. 



For the tension of the fibres at the outer circumference 
/' 2 = 26-25-2i=5-25 tons, 

from (3) and for a radius r 2 = 7-5 inches. 

The stress for any intermediate radius r can be obtained from 
(6) and (7) or, from (6) or (7) and (3). 

Subtracting the Pmvder Stress from the Firing Stress the Initial 
Stress is obtained, and the various results can be tabulated as 
follows : — 



At Radius. 


Tensions. 


Pressures. 


Firing 
Stress. 


Powder 
Stress. 


Initial 
Stress. 


Firing 

Stress. 


Powder 
Stress. 


Initial 
Stress. 


^el \^\ 

Jacket);-^ 


15-0 

3-72 
18-0 

8-28 


26-25 

"•57 

'1-57 

5-25 


-11-25 

- 7-85 
6-43 
3-°3 


21-0 

9-72 
9-72 




21-0 

6-32 

6-32 






3-4 

3-4 





T = 



P„-ir„_ 1 2 -P„r„ 2 , r„_,V„ 2 P 



r„-i'r„- 



-r n -i' 
P„_i-P, 



+ 



-P* 



r- r n ' — r„-\' 
P„_i^i 8 -P„r„ 3 



where r is any intermediate radius in the thickness of a tube 

T„-P„ = T-P 

in the_ same tube; also the pressure between the (n-i)' h and n' h 
hoops' is 



(1) 
(2), 

(3) 



°+r n 



3(T^,-r-P„)+P n 



(4)- 



Equation (4) is usually known as the Gunmakers' formula and 
from it, when P. and T„_!, T„_ 2 ... are known the other pressures 
can be found. The proof tension of the material is kept well below 
the yielding stress. For ordinary carbon gun steel it is usual to 



It is generally stipulated that the initial compression of the 
material at the interior surface of the barrel shall not exceed 
26 tons per square inch, i.e. (/o)=-26 tons; in the example above 
(to) =-11-25 tons only, but in wire-wound guns special attention 
to this condition is necessary. 

It now remains for the designer so to dimension the several 
hoops that they shall, when shrunk together, give the stresses 
found by calculation. To do this the exterior diameter of the 
barrel must be a little larger than the interior diameter of the 
covering hoop; after this hoop is shrunk on to the barrel its 
exterior diameter is turned in a lathe so that it is slightly larger 
than the interior of the next course hoop and so on. It will be 
seen that the fibres of the barrel must be compressed while the 
fibres of the superimposed hoop are extended, and thus produce 
the Initial Stress. The shrinkage S may be defined as the excess 
of the external diameter of the tube over the internal diameter of 
the hoop, when separate and both are in the cold state. Then 



2l6 



ORDNANCE 



[HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



if „S„ + i denotes the shrinkage between the n' k and (h + i)" 1 
hoops 



„s^=^-"i (/,.)- (''«)) 






(8) 
(9)- 



Here M can be taken as 12,500 tons per square inch for 
gun steel. In the example already calculated the shrinkage 



between the jacket and barrel is 0-009 in. 



12,500 1_ 



6-43+11-25+ 



(4-i)'-(2-5) ! 

(4-i) 2 +(2-5) : 



(-11 



•25+3-4)] 



= 0-009 in - 
In that portion 



At Radius. 


Tensions. 


Pressures. 


Firing 
Stress. 


Powder 
Stress. 


Initial 
Stress. 


Firing 
Stress. 


Powder 
Stress. 


Initial 
Stress. 


Barrel j ^^ 

Wire 5 ^=3-75 

('•2 = 5-5 
Jacket j ^ = 5-5 


0-6 

-5-4 

25-0 

25-0 

7-5 

5-25 


26-25 

13-125 

13-125 

7'5 

7-5 

5-25 


-25-65 
-18-525 
11-875 

17-5 




21-0 

15-0 
15-0 
2-25 

2-25 
n 


21-0 

7-S75 
7-875 
2-25 

2-25 




7-125 
7-125 









struction, 

Wire 
guns. 



of the gun in which wire is used in the con- 
exactly the same principles are involved. It may be 
assumed that the tube on which the wire is wound is so 
large, in comparison to the thickness of the wire, that 
the compression of the concave surface of the wire and 
the extension of its convex surface may be neglected without 
sensible error. 

The greatest advantage is obtained from the wire coils when 
in the Firing Stress the tension T is uniform throughout the thick- 
ness of the wiring. The Firing Stress T in the wire may be as low 
as 25 tons per square inch and as high as 50 tons, but as the yielding 
strength of the wire is never less than 80 tons per square inch nor 
its breaking strength less than 90 tons, there is still an ample 
margin especially when it is remembered that the factor of safety 
is included in the calculation. 

If the wire is wound direct on to the barrel and is covered by a 
jacket, r , r t being the radii in inches of the barrel, r t , r 2 the radii 
of the internal and external layers of wire, and r 2 , n the radii of the 
jacket ; then for the Firing Stress in the wire 

Tfo~r)=Pr-P 2 r 2 (9), 

or 

T{r-r l ) = ¥ l r l -Vr (10). 

By combining these the gunmakers' formula for the wire is obtained 

Pi=~ i (T+P»)+P 2 (10a). 

r> 

As T is to be uniform, when the gun is fired, the Initial Tensions 
of the wire are arranged accordingly, and the tensions at which the 
wire must be wound on to the guns have now to be determined. 

Let 8 = the winding tension at radius r in. 
(/) =the initial tension at radius r in. 

(£)=the radial pressure between any two layers of wire at 
radius r in. 

M is uniform for the 



It is assumed 
Then 



where 



that 



gun 



steel and wire. 



»-<o+ifl££ 



(II). 



(/)=T-Pu' 



ro'rl+f 



and 



By means of 
becomes 



where 



r„- r 3 ' 



these 



(*)=P-Po , 
two equations and (9) 



»-?+. 



— r r+r 



(12), 

(13)- 
the expression (11) 

(14). 



E=-(T + P 2 )r 2 

F = (T + P 2 )r 2 -(T+Po)ro 

G = (T+P2)r 2 + (T + Po)r . 

To compare with the previous example, the stress for a '4'7-in. 
Q.F. wire gun will be calculated. This consists of a barrel, inter- 
mediate layer of wire and jacket. 

Here 7-0 = 2-5; ri=375; r 2 = 5-5 ; r 3 = 7"5 inches; the firing tension 
Ti to T' 2 of the wire = 25 tons per square inch, suppose. 

Take Po = 2i tons per square inch and consider that the jacket 
fits tightly over the wire, but has no shrinkage. Then for the 
Firing Stress, from (2), P 2 =2-25 tons, 
and from (9) and (10), Ti(r 2 -ri) =Piri-P 2 r 2 

Pi = 14-97, say 15 tons; 

from (4) we can obtain To and T 2 since Po, Pi and P 2 are known; 
from (3) T = o-6 tons. T 2 = 7-5 tons. 

T' 2 =-5-4 tons (a compression), 
and 

T 3 = 5-25 tons. 

The Powder Stress is obtained in the same way as in the previous 
example, so also is the Initial Stress; therefore we may tabulate as 
follows: — 



As the wire is wound on, the pressure of the external layers will 
compress those on the interior, thus producing an extension in the 
wire which is equivalent to a reduction in the winding tension 6 
of the particular layer at radius r considered. If r represents this 
reduction then 



where 



= (O~r, 

t = — 5 -Ap) 

r- — r U '^ 



At the interior layer of wire r is the initial stress on the exterior 
of the barrel and the winding tension must commence at 
= 11-875 + 18-525 = 30-4 tons per square inch. 

As the jacket is supposed to have no shrinkage T = o and con- 
sequently 

8 = (t) = 17-5 tons per square inch. 

These winding tensions can be found directly from formula (14) 
and then 

E=-i49-875; F=34-875; = 264-875. 

Sir G. Greenhill has put these formulas, both for the built-up and 
wire-wound guns, into an extremely neat and practical geometrical 
form, which can be used instead of the arithmetical processes; for 
these see Text-Book of Gunnery, Treatise of Service Ordnance, 1893, 
and Journal of the United States Artillery, vol. iv. 

The longitudinal strength of the gun is very important especially 
at the breech end; along the forward portion of the gun the thickness 
of the barrel and the interlocking of the covering hoops 
provide ample strength, but at the breech special pro- Loagl- 
vision must be made. It is usual to provide for this by 
means of a strong breech piece or jacket in small guns or 
by both combined in large ones. Its amount is easily calculated on 
the hypothesis that the stress is uniformly distributed throughout 
the thickness of the breech piece, or jacket, or of both. If ro is the 
largest radius of the gun chamber, roi the radius of the obturator 
seating, n the external radius of the barrel, and Po the maximum 
powder pressure, then, with the usual form of chamber adopted with 
guns fitted with obturation other than cartridge cases, there will be 
a longitudinal stress on the barrel at the breech end of the chamber 
due to the action oi the pressure Po on 'the rear slope of the chamber, 
of 

t(V — roi 2 )Po tons 

4 

this is resisted by the barrel of section - (n'-ro 2 ) so that the re- 



tudiaal 
stress. 



sistance 



R = 



r<f — ror 



Po tons. 



rf-r<? 

This portion of the longitudinal stress is not of great importance 
as the breech end of the barrel is supported in all modern designs 
by the breech bush. In Q.F. guns, i.e. those firing cartridge cases, 
the breech end of the chamber has the largest diameter, and rc-roi 
so that there is no longitudinal stress on the chamber part of the barrel. 

For the breech piece or outer tube of radii n and r 2 , the resistance 

r °' 2 '"■"> '— - r — n T guns 



R = 



r 2 — ft 
ro' 



■Po tons for B.L. 



2 Po tons in Q.F. guns. 



r-t — n- 

If the longitudinal stress is taken by a jacket only, the resistance 
is found in the same way. 

Generally for ordinary gun steel, the longitudinal stress on the 
material is always kept below 10 tons per square inch or 13 tons for 
nickel steel; but even with these low figures there is also included a 
factor of safety of 1-5 to 2. In large guns it is best to consider the 
jacket as an auxiliary aid only to longitudinal resistance, as, owing 
to the necessary connexions between it and the breech bush and its 
distance from the centre of pressure, there is a possibility that it 
may not be taking its proportionate share of the stress. 

The thread of the breech screw and of the breech bush (or opening) 
must be so proportioned as to sustain the full pressure on the maxi- 
mum obturator area; V or buttress shaped threads are always used 
as they are stronger than other forms, but V threads have the great 
advantage of centring the breech screw when under pressure. , 

In most modern B.L. guns fitted with de Bange obturation the 



HISTORY AND CONSTRUCTION 



ORDNANCE 



21 



/ 



diameter of the seating is made just large enough to freely admit 
the projectile; this is usually considerably smaller than the maximum 
diameter of the chamber, consequently a less area is exposed to the 
gas pressure and less screw thread section is required. 

The principal features of the various systems of construction of 
modern heavy guns may be briefly described. 




Figs. 55-57. — British, French and American Construction. 



F'g- 55 is that adopted in England. The barrel or " inner A 
tube " is surmounted by a second layer which is either shrunk on 
in two or three pieces, as at Elswick, or is formed of one 
Systems of ]ong p ; ece c ^\ e( ^ t ] le "A tube," as in the Woolwich 
cons me S y Stem This second layer is covered with wire, and 
over this is shrunk the chase hoop or B tube and the 
jacket. The breech bush is screwed into the rear end of the A tube 
so that the principal longitudinal stress is taken by this tube. 

Fig. 56 is the system adopted in the French service. In this the 
barrel is surmounted over the breech end with two layers of short 
thin hoops, which consequently approximate to the wire system. 



Over the muzzle end two or three long tubes are shrunk; the chase 
hoop is also screwed to the barrel near the muzzle. A jacket is 
shrunk over the breech portion of the gun, and the breech bush is 
screwed into it at the rear end. The gun is further strengthened by 
a long tube in front of the jacket to which it is attached by a screwed 
collar. 

Fig. 57 shows the design adopted for the United States navy. 
Here the barrel is surmounted by a second course in two lengths, 
and over the breech a third and fourth layer are shrunk. The 
breech screw is screwed into the rear end of the second course. 

Fig. 58 is the Krupp system, of \vhich,however,it is an old example ; 
it is believed, however, that Krupp still retains the essential pecu- 
liarities of this design, viz. that over the breech end of the barrel is 
shrunk a solid breech piece, made particularly massive in rear 
where the breech wedge is seated. The remainder of the layers 
consist of hoops which are comparatively short but may be covered 
with longer thin tubes. 




32-2 I 

Fig. 58. — Krupp Construction. 

When guns are fired, the interior surface is gradually worn away 
by the action of the powder gases; the breech end of the rifled 
portion of the bore becomes enlarged, and the rifling „ , 
itself partly obliterated. The ballistics suffer in conse- s 0D ' 

quence of the enlarged diameter of the bore, and the rifling may 
be worn so much as not to properly rotate the projectile. 

In all modern gun designs provision has, therefore, to be made 
for repairing or replacing the barrel when it is worn out. There are 
two methods of providing for the repair in the original design — the 
first is by replacing the whole of the barrel by an entirely new one; 
the second is to make the original barrel thick so that when it is 
worn the interior can be bored out, either over a portion of its length 
to cover the eroded part, or the full length for " through lining." 
In large guns it is usual to make the original barrel, if it is intended 
to be removed as a whole, tapered from end to end, so that by warming 
the gun in a vertical position breech downwards to about 300° F. 
and then suddenly cooling the barrel by a jet of water it can be 
knocked out by heavy blows from a falling weight. A new tapered 
barrel can then be inserted by driving it in. When a gun which had 
originally a thick barrel is lined part of the barrel is bored out in a 
machine, and it is usual to make the hole tapered so that a new 
tapered liner can be inserted and driven home. 

The wearing of the barrel owing to erosion is one of the most 
difficult problems the gun constructor has to face. Sir Andrew Noble 
(see "Some Modern Explosives," a paper read at the Royal Institution, 
1900, also " Researches on Explosives," part iii., Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc.) has conclusively proved that the erosion is mainly dependent 
on the very high temperature to which the interior surface of the 
gun is raised and on the quantity of this heat. Both these factors 
are, for any particular explosive, determined by some function of 
the proportion of the weight of the charge to the extent of the 
exposed surface. The passage for the products of combustion 
gradually reduces from the maximum diameter of the chamber t6 
the diameter of the bore. The highly heated gases therefore impinge 
more directly on that part of the bore which forms the seating for 
the shot and acts on it for the longest time, i.e. for the whole time 
the shot is in the gun. Consequently this part suffers most wear. 

It may be assumed that the weights of the charges vary as the 
cube of the diameters of the bore, while the circumference of the 
bore varies directly as the calibre; now as the wear depends princi- 
pally on the weight of the charge in relation to the exposed surface 
at the shot seating it varies as the square of the calibre. It is 
evident too that the allowable wear will vary as the calibre, so that 
the life of the gun or the number of rounds which can be fired is 
inversely proportionate to the calibre. 

The heat of combustion and the time of burning of the explosive 
are factors in determining the amount of heat developed per unit 
of time, and thus influence the proportion of heat conducted away 
from the interior surface of the gun. The time of burning of the 
explosive depends on the size and form of the explosive and on 
the density of loading, while the heat of combustion depends on its 
composition and cannot be treated of here, but it may be stated 
generally that for equal weights Ballistite is more erosive than 
Cordite Mark I., and Cordite Mark I. than Cordite M.D. All of 
these explosives contain a fairly large proportion of nitroglycerine, 
and it is found that as the proportion of this ingredient is reduced 
the erosion also decreases, so that for pure nitro-cellulose powders 
it is less still. Unfortunately pure nitro-cellulose powders are not 
ballistically equal to the same weight of nitroglycerin powder; 
the advantage of the less erosive action is lost owing to the greater 
weight of pure nitro-cellulose explosive required to obtain the same 
ballistics. _ . 

The effect of erosion on large high-power guns is serious, for in a 



2l8 



ORDNANCE 



[FIELD ARTILLERY EQUIPMENTS 



12-in. gun after some 150 or fewer rounds are fired with a full charge 
the barrel is worn so much as to need replacing. In the British 
service it is considered that the wear produced by firing sixteen half 
charges is equivalent to that of one full charge. 

In small high-velocity guns the number of rounds with full charge 
which can be fired without replacing the barrel is considerably greater ; 
while for low-velocity guns the number is higher still. In some guns 
this number appears abnormally high; in others of exactly similar 
type it may be low and for no apparent reason. 

The first effect of the powder gases on the steel is a very charac- 
teristic hardening of the surface of the whole of the bore; so much 
is this the case that it is difficult to carry out any mechanical opera- 
tion, except grinding, after a gun has been fired. When ignited the 
explosive contained in the chamber of the gun burns fiercely, and as 
the projectile travels along the bore the highly heated gases follow. 
The surface of the bore near the chamber is naturally the most 
highly heated and for the longest time; here too the rush of gas is 
greatest. There is in consequence a film of steel swept off from the 
surface, but this becomes less as the distance from the ehamber 
becomes greater, owing to the abstraction of heat by the bore. It 
is a noticeable fact that only where a decided movement of gas 
takes place is there any erosion: thus, towards the breech end of 
the chamber where no rush of gas occurs there is no perceptible 
erosion, even after many rounds have been fired. Again, at the 
muzzle end there is very little erosion, as here the gases are in 
contact with the bore for a minute fraction of time. 

As the firing proceeds, the interior surface of the bore, where the 
erosion is greatest, becomes covered with a network of very fine 
eracks running both longitudinally and circumferentially. The 
sides of these cracks in their turn become eroded and gradually 
fissures are formed. With the old black and brown powders these 
fissures were a feature of the erosion, while with the new type 
smokeless powders the eroded surfaee is usually smooth, and it is 
only after prolonged firing that fissures oceur although fine cracks 
occur after a comparatively few rounds have been fired. 

Bibliography. — English: Nye, The Art of Gunnery (1670); 
Norton, The Gunner, showing the whole Practice of Artillerie (London, 
1628); Sir Jonas Moore, Treatise of Artillery (London, 1683); 
Robins, New Principles of Gunnery (London, 1742); Hutton, Tracts 
(London, 1812) ; Sir Howard Douglas, R.A., Naval Gunnery (London, 
1855); Mallet, Construction of Artillery (London, 1856); Boxer, 
Treatise on Artillery (London, 1856); Owen, Modem Artillery 
(London, 1871); Text-Book Rifled Ordnance (London, 1877); 
Treatise on Construction of Ordnance (London, 1879); Lloyd and 
Hadcock, Artillery; its Progress and Present Position (Portsmouth, 
1893); Treatise on Service Ordnance (London, 1893-1904); Catalogue 
of Museum of Artillery in the Rotunda (Woolwich, 1906); Sir 
Andrew Noble, Artillery and Explosives (1906); Brassey, Naval 
Annual. United States: A. L. Holley, Ordnance and Armour 
(New York, 1865); E. Simpson, Ordnance and Naval Gunnery (New 
York, 1862); Resistance of Guns to Tangential Rupture (Washington, 
1892); Annual Reports of Chief of Ordnance; Fullam and Hart, 
Text-Book of Ordnance and Gunnery (Annapolis, 1905) ; O. M. Lissak, 
Ordnance and Gunnery (New York, 1907). French: Jacob, Resist- 
ance et construction des bouches d feu (Paris, 1909) ; De Lagabbe, 
Materiel d'artillerie (Paris, 1903); Manuel du canonnier (1907); 
Alvin, Lecons sur Vartillerie (Paris, 1908). German and Austrian: 
Kaiser, Konstruktion der gezogenen Geschiitzrbhre (Vienna, 1900) ; 
Indra, Die wahre Gesialt der S pannungskurve (Vienna, 1901). 
Italian: Tartaglia, La Nuova Scienta (Venice, 1562); Bianchi, 
Materiale d' ar Uglier ia (Turin, 1905). (A. G. H.) 

II. Field Artillery Equipments 

General Principles. — A field gun may be considered as a 
machine for delivering shrapnel bullets and high-explosive shell 
at a given distant point. The power of the machine is limited 
by its weight, and this is limited by the load which a team of 
six horses is able to pull at a trot on the road and across open 
country. For under these conditions it is found that six is tbe 
maximum number of horses which can work in one team without 
loss of efficiency. The most suitable load for a gun-team is 
variously estimated by different nations, according to the size 
of the horses available and to the nature of the country in the 
probable theatre of war. Thus in England the field artillery 
load is fixed at 43 cwt. behind the traces; France, 42-5 cwt., 
Germany 41-5 cwt., and Japan (1903) 30 cwt. This load consists 
of the gun with carriage and shield, the limber with ammunition 
and entrenching tools, and the gunners with their kits and 
accoutrements. The weights may be variously distributed, sub- 
ject to the condition that for ease of draught the weight on the 
gun wheels must not greatly exceed that on the limber wheels. 
It is still usual to carry two gunners on seats on the gun axletree, 
and two on the limber. But a Q.F. gun capable of firing 20 
rounds a minute requires to be constantly accompanied by an 



ammunition wagon, and the modern tendency is to take advant- 
age of this to carry some of the gunners on the wagon. Thus in 
the British field artillery two gunners are carried on tbe gun 
limber, two on the wagon limber, one on the wagon body and 
none on the gun. These five gunners, with the sergeant, called 
the No. 1, on his horse, make a full gun-detachment. Three 
wagons for each gun usually are provided, two of which, with the 
spare gunners and non-commissioned officers, are posted under 
cover at some distance behind the battery. Besides lightening 
the weight on the gun, the presence of the wagon allows the 
number of rounds in the limber to be reduced. The result of 
this redistribution of weights is that field artillery may now be 
equipped with a much heavier and more powerful gun than was 
formerly the case. A gun weighing 24 cwt. in action is about as 
heavy as a detachment of six can man-handle. 

The power of a field gun is measured by its muzzle energy, 
which is proportional to the weight of the shell multiplied by the 
square of its velocity. The muzzle energy varies in different 
equipments from 230 to 380 foot-tons. Details of the power, 
weight and dimensions of the guns of the principal military 
nations are given in Table A. 

A gun of given weight and power may fire a heavy shell with 
a low velocity, or a light shell with a high velocity. High velocity 
is the gunner's ideal, for it implies a flat trajectory and a small 
angle of descent. The bullets when blown forward out of the 
shrapnel fly at first almost parallel to the surface of the ground, 
covering at medium ranges a depth of some 350 yards, as against 
half that distance for a low-velocity gun. Under modern 
tactical conditions a deep zone of shrapnel effect is most desirable. 
On the other hand, for a given power of gun, flatness of trajectory 
means a corresponding reduction in the weight of the shell; 
that is, in the number of shrapnel bullets discharged per minute. 
We have accordingly to compromise between high velocity 
and great shell power. Thus the British field gun fires an 185 lb 
shell with muzzle velocity of 1590 ft. per second, while the French 
gun, which is practically of the same power, fires a 16 ft shell with 
M.V. of 1740 f.s. Again, a shell of given weight may be fired 
either from a large-bore gun or from a small-bore gun; in the 
latter case the length of the shell will be proportionately increased. 
The small-bore gun is naturally the lighter of the two. But the 
longer the shell the thicker must its walls be, in order not to 
break up or collapse in the gun. The shorter the shell, the 
higher is the percentage of useful weight, consisting of powder 
and bullets, which it contains. We must, therefore, compromise 
between these antagonistic conditions, and select the calibre 
which gives the maximum useful weight of projectiles for a given 
weight of equipment. In practice it is found that a calibre of 
3 in. is best suited to a shell weighing 15 ft; and that, starting 
with this ratio, the calibre should vary as the cube root of the 
weight of the shell. 

As to rifling, the relative advantages of uniform and increasing 
twist are disputed. The British field guns are rifled with uniform 
twist, but the balance of European opinion is in favour of a 
twist increasing from 1 turn in 50 calibres at the breech to 1 in 25 
at the muzzle. Mathematically, the development of the groove 
is a parabola. 

For field guns the favourite breech actions are the interrupted 
screw and the wedge. The latter is simpler, but affords a less 
powerful extractor for throwing out the empty cartridge case. 
This point is of importance, since cartridge cases hastily manu- 
factured in war time might not all be true to gauge. Modern 
guns have percussion locks, in which a striker impinges upon a 
cap in the base of the metallic cartridge. All Q.F. guns have 
repeating trip-locks. In these, when the firing-lever or lanyard 
is pulled, the striker is first drawn back and then released, allow- 
ing it to fly forward against the cap. The gun is usually fired 
by the gun-layer; it is found that he lays more steadily if he 
knows that the gun cannot go off till he is ready. A field gun 
has to be sighted (see Sights) for laying (a) by direct vision 
(J) by clinometer and aiming-point (see Artillery). The first 
purpose is served by the ordinary 'and telescopic sights; the 
second by the goniometric sight or the panorama sight. The 



' 



FIELD ARTILLERY EQUIPMENTS] 



ORDNANCE 



219 



s 



C 
-a 
'-I 



Kl 






United 

States 

1902. 


CO lO « "Soo? M ^°vO -tO 00 O Cu ? m <"< ■ VO VO O CO t^-tn 


State 

and 

Ehrhardt 


Switzer- 
land 
1903. 




a 
a 

3 


.5 ^o 
a 

O.OS 

in " 


9* " r£ ^S -t-vO-S" -t <-i so co O ^ CJ OO (i* J B » O CO 'Ito 
A, i- g* -t'i so IN V i ■! « IO ^ > , • CO "1. < co CO so |^P3„ 

CN co ~ 


-a 

B 

CJ 
</l 


•a jr> 

If! O 

3 as 


~ T\S <o cj co "co 1^- ^ to "JT '.°V Cu ffl N ■ vo oco n oo co so 


_o 

3 
CU 


s 

E os 
3 " 


9 s "P ',5 nS ° £" CO „ H- ,n "«•> -f"J1 ° OO >'??/>• •+■ ** "tco -f-tn 
" 2" ^ >* « N S n ^ " ■"- ^ H " £ * &< M <N SO CO CO « 


a 
a 

3 


8. a 


* 

OscoO -t^ococo i~- n ,^ com,£ O Oo < "' • so so oco '"ion 
N-t-„so>,'-«soosco-' "\ 55 [ _; f0 jJTCucocosoi-i.^.- 

- CO " «tO -J- t -1 O " CO 


rt S 3 


*vo 
n! O 

£ 


u-> n u> '"Os. "O ^ ■*" In. »i 15 

;, ^. w> >- "g « vo os co - <r>P ^ j_;co ^-Cucocovonco- 


a. 
\4 


Great 

Britain 

H.A. 

1903. 


* 

<*>$$ ^9«^ ^ s "2.°° ^ Wj pq'^.-i-cocovo^oo, 

„"^ H - -co •+ ^ H N t/1 -co 


o7 c c/T >j ■-' 

« .a o 
>u 


Great 

Britain 

F.A. 

1903. 


* 

coco pj ^Z 10 co -t t - 1-. • ^ ^ r / T ^ « n t t^ vo " 
--n -f''r- , l/Jo "co 


c ■ 




Si?§ ^Sr?4S 1 J vo -t-t^ Or 5 -w . vc so n i u,oO 
.CO % > - N "^ " " " 4 - ^ H" N ^T^cocO>OncO 


rt 


France 
1898- 
1902. 


Os^S %OCOcoOs n I-- 1^ coco* £ JVO tfi C ^ -I" ■*• M f, cb-+ra 


cu 
rt 
W 


E 
c 

CJ 1-1 






c 
a 

3 

u 


** 3" 

rt O 
u Os 
CO - 


^"^ ^go-^ £ £ ». co-tN Oco >^„-c,oog, -1-^-CO 




a 

ft 


E . 

'&& 

CJ — 

03 


10 t 

j U.io ioc^^so O -'Oco-^-aj -o > • _■ - 2.^ 


a sg 
ft cj 

^£ o 
O 


.5 

'u 10 

< 


10 

3R+ -gs^,. g -p x ^.^co . >" n . co s OT 

CO^-J rt^" J^ « ^V 21 ^ ^6 ^ « " sD ^S ioa 

"ft 8, 


- i- "O 

rt ocy j3 




s " " ,„ -3 - c >, j: j= - S c ? " — u -o ■ ? ' s " "5 ■ a ■ C« 

•g§^ -|^S d -S -| •' -Z-st -S° -S c -^ -3? -I -3 --S ■§ •§ -|s 

1 1 j-° .w'l ^§ a . 1 .•§ .1 . sii^l a . §|| r 5 - .^ . § . § . ta . g ..s § 

S'S-S'S s-g§^ " B u E *fg§ ^«^°§ ° - £ " - S& 

■ E, o° JS^ S ^^">-ot* u- .c 2i « ° ^° u ° §S 
aJ^aJa; ' « « u u «-a c ■» E »j: w'S S -•sc.e^Sf^u^ u u u.u . . M! s 

£.S?6 S^on a.b ? .B>.2.Sf^-R Si >S|-&. S-^S^^^'S-C^ > x S Eg E g^ g §§? ° ° 

aJ 3 a 1 ^^^^^^ "--i"^ fl M 2 M S'5 =T3ti<n ° g K oiS^ f3 rt 3^3 3^= 3 J3 3 boo 6 d 

U^55>5 ^S<;?:^ ? S H JlJ E75 Jca [-H Z Z 2; ?5 ^ Z>5 


o 
rt 
S 



33 



-r 



220 



ORDNANCE 



[FIELD ARTILLERY EQUIPMENTS 



independent line of sight is an arrangement of sights and elevating 
gear found in many modern field guns, which divides between 
two gunners the work of aiming (called laying) the gun, and of 
giving it the elevation required to hit the target. 

In fig. 50, the gun is shown mounted on an intermediate 
carriage elevated and depressed by the screw A. The telescopic 




From Bethell's Modem Guns and Gunnery. 

Fig. 59. — Diagram illustrating the independent line of sight. 

or ordinary sight is fixed to this carriage. The gun, in its cradle, 
is elevated and depressed by the screw B. To lay the gun, the 
layer works the laying screw A till the telescope points at the 
target; the gun also, if no elevation has been given, is then 
pointing straight at the target. To give the gun the elevation 
necessary for the range, the elevating number on the right of 
the gun now works the elevating screw B till the gun is sufficiently 
elevated, the amount given being shown in yards of range on 
a drum. The motion given to the gun does not disturb the 
intermediate carriage with the telescope attached to it, and the 
telescope still remains layed on the target. Once the sights are 
layed on the target, the elevation of the gun may be changed 
in a moment by a turn of the elevating wheel, without disturbing 
the laying. The layer does not have to concern himself about the 
elevation; he has only to keep his sights on the target while 
the other numbers continue the service of the gun. This device 
is especially valuable when firing at moving targets, when the 
range and the laying have to be altered simultaneously. 

The same result may also be obtained by other mechanical 
devices without the use of the intermediate carriage. Thus the 
British field guns have a long elevating screw with the sight 
connected to its centre, the lower end passing through a nut at the 
side of the upper carriage, the upper end through a nut at the 
side of the cradle. Then, if the lower nut be turned by the 
laying wheel, the screw, the sight and the gun will go up or down 
together; if the upper nut be turned by the elevating wheel, the 
gun will go up or down the screw without moving the sights. 
Colonel Scott's " automatic " line of sight is an improvement 
on the ordinary gear in that the sight can be cross-levelled to 
eliminate the error due to difference of level of wheels. Krupp 
has a similar device in which the sight-socket is on the cradle so 
that it can be cross-levelled. The sight itself is connected to the 
elevating gear, and is screwed out of its socket as the breech 
of the gun is depressed, so that the sight remains in the same 
place. 

Construction of the Gun. — Field guns are made of steel, usually 
containing a small percentage of nickel or chromium, or both, and 
having a tensile breaking strain of about 50 tons per square inch. 
In Austria, for facility of local manufacture, hard-drawn bronze is 
still used, although this is considerably heavier than steel. 

The Carriage (see Artillery, Plate I.). — The first field guns 
used in war were supported by crossed stakes under the muzzle and 
anchored by a spike on the breech which penetrated into the 
ground. The next improvement was to mount the gun on a sleigh. 
This method is still used in Norway and in Canada. The next step 
was to mount the gun on a two-wheeled carriage, connected to a 
second two-wheeled carriage (the limber) by a flexible coupling. 
For centuries the gun-carriage was a rigid construction, recoiling on 
firing, and having to be run up by hand after each round. In 1895 
spring-spade equipments were introduced. In these a spade attached 
to a helical spring- was set under the carriage; on discharge the 
spade dug into the ground, compressing the spring as the carriage 
recoiled. The extension of the spring ran the gun up again without 
assistance from the gunners. 

The British 15 pr. used in the South African War (1899-1902) 
had a spring spade carriage designed by Sir George Clarke. Similar 
equipments were introduced by several continental powers. The 
Japanese gun used in Manchuria (1904) had dragshoes attached by 



wire ropes passing round drums on the wheels to a strong spring in 
the trail. On recoil the wheels revolved backwards, compressing 
the spring; after recoil the pull of the spring on the wire ropes 
revolved the wheels forward and returned the gun to its former 
position. _ The Italian 1902 semi-Q.F. carriage was constructed on a 
very similar principle. All these semi-Q.F. equipments were open 
to the objection that the gunners had to stand clear of the shield 
every time the gun was fired. They have since been superseded 
by Q.F. gun-recoil equipments. 

The gun-carriage must be strong enough to carry the gun across 
country, and it must be so constructed as not to move when the 
gun is fired. If the gun-carriage were allowed to recoil to the rear 
on discharge, the gunners would have to stand clear on firing, 
abandoning the protection of the shield, and, moreover, the loss of 
time entailed by running up and relaying the gun would render the 
fire slow. The requirement of steadiness of the carriage is met by 
allowing the gun itself to recoil on its carriage. Its motion is gradu- 
ally checked by the hydraulic buffer (see below) and the gun is 
returned to the firing position by helical springs, or, in the French, 
Spanish and Portuguese equipments, by compressed air. The 
carriage is held from recoiling by a spade fixed to the point of the 
trail, which digs into the earth on discharge, and (usually) by 
brakes on the wheels. This is known as the gun-recoil system, and 
is now universally adopted. Field guns constructed on this principle 
are styled Q.F., or quick-firing, guns. 

Steadiness of Carriage. — In the gun-recoil equipment the con- 
structional difficulty lies not in preventing the carriage from re- 
coiling but in preventing the wheels from rising off the ground on 
the shock of discharge. The force of recoil of the gun, acting in the 
line of motion of the centre of gravity of the recoiling parts, tends to 
turn the carriage over backwards about the point of the trail, or, 
more correctly, about the centre of the spade. This force is resisted 
by the weight of the gun and carriage, which tends to keep the 
wheels on the ground. The leverage with which the overturning force 
acts is that due to the distance of its line of motion above the centre 
of the spade; the leverage with which the steadying force acts is 
that due to the horizontal distance of the centre of gravity of the 
gun and carriage from the centre of the spade. If the force of recoil 
be 6 ft. -tons, and if it be absorbed during a recoil of 3 ft., the average 
overturning force is 2 tons; since the weight of the gun in action 
may not greatly exceed 1 ton, the trail must be so long as to give a 
leverage of at least two to one in favour of the steadying force. 
It follows from the above that the steadiness of the carriage, for a 
given muzzle energy, may be promoted by four factors, (a) In- 
creasing the weight of the gun and recoiling parts. This reduces the 
recoil-energy, (b) Increasing the length of recoil allowed. This 
reduces the overturning pull, (c) Keeping the gun as low as possible, 
either by reducing the height of the wheels, or by cranking the axle- 
tree downwards. This reduces the leverage of the overturning force. 
(d) Increasing the length of the trail. This increases the leverage of 
the steadying force. 

It will be seen from Table A that the condition of steadiness is 
satisfied in the various Q.F. equipments by not very dissimilar 
combinations of the above factors. 

The cradle^ is the portion of the carriage upon which the gun slides 
when it recoils. It also contains the buffer and running-up springs, 
which are fixed either above or below the gun. The latter method 
gives the stronger and simpler construction, and is favoured by all 
nations except Great Britain. By putting the buffer on top the gun 
can be set lower on the carriage, which is an advantage as regards 
steadiness. A top-buffer cradle is of ring section, surrounding the 
gun ; the gun is formed with ribs or guides extending for its whole 
length, which, on recoil, slide in grooves in the cradle. The cradle 
is pivoted on horizontal trunnions to the intermediate carriage and 
carries the buffer and springs on top. This construction is shown 
in the illustration of the 18 pr. Q.F. gun (fig. 60, Plate III.). 

In carriages having the buffer under the gun the cradle is a trough 
of steel plate, usually closed in at the top. It has guides formed on 
the upper edges fitted to take guide-blocks on the gun. The cradle 
contains the buffer-cylinder, which is fixed to a horn projecting 
downwards from the breech of the gun, and recoils with it; the 
piston-rod is fixed to the front of the cradle. The running-up springs 
are usually coiled round the buffer-cylinder, and, on recoil, are 
compressed between a shoulder on the front end of the cylinder and 
the rear plate of the cradle. 

The cradle is mounted on a vertical pivot set in a saddle pivoted 
on horizontal trunnions between the sides of the trail (Krupp) ; 
or, as in the earlier Ehrhardt equipments, the vertical pivot is set in 
the axletree itself, which has then to turn when the gun is elevated 
or depressed. The Krupp cradle is shown in the drawing of the 
German gun. 

The buffer consists of a steel cylinder nearly filled with oil or 
glycerine. In this cylinder works a piston with piston-rod attached 
to the carriage; the cylinder is attached to the gun. On recoil the 
piston is drawn from one end of the cylinder to the other, so that - 
the liquid is forced to flow past the piston. The friction thus caused 
gradually absorbs the recoil of the gun and brings it gently to a 
standstill. As the gun recoils the centre of gravity of the gun and 
carriage shifts to the rear, reducing the stability. The buffer- 
resistance has to be gradually reduced proportionately to the rediirpd 



ORDNANCE 



Plate III. 




Fig. 60.— BRITISH 18-PR. QUICK-FIRING GUN. 




Fig. 61— BRITISH 18-PR. OUICK-FIRING GUN AND LIMBER. 




XX. 22 



Fig. 62.— FRENCH 75-1MM. QUICK-FIRING GUN AND WAGON BODY IN ACTION. 



Plate IV. 



ORDNANCE 




Fig. 64.— DANISH (KRUPP) 7'5-CM. QUICK-FIRING FIELD GUN AND WAGON BODY IN ACTION. 




Fig. 67.-EHRHARDT 4-7-IN. QUICK-FIRING FIELD HOWITZER (CONTROLLED RECOIL). 







"%;<&; jl , feJrJL-./liiTT.-ft.'- ' 



Fig 68.-KRUPP 7'5-CM. MOUNTAIN GUN. 



FIELD ARTILLERY EQUIPMENTS] 



ORDNANCE 



221 



stability. To allow the liquid to flow past the piston, grooves 
(called ports) are formed in the sides of the cylinder, and by varying 
the depth of the grooves at different points the resistance can be 
adjusted as required. 

Running-up Gear. — In compressed-air equipments a separate 
piston is attached to the gun, working in a cylinder on the carriage 
connected with a reservoir of air at a pressure of about 300 lb to the 
square inch. This gear is much lighter than the springs, but the 
difficulty of keeping the piston and gland tight is a serious objection 
to it, although this difficulty is partly overcome by filling the cylinder 
with glycerine so that the air has no direct access to the piston or 
the gland. In spring equipments the principal difficulty lies in 
providing a sufficient length of recoil without undue compression of 
the column of springs. Thus if the spring column be 6 ft. long 
and the gun recoils 45 ft. the springs are compressed into a space 
of 1 J ft., or a quarter of their working length. This treatment is 
liable to crush the springs. German gun-makers get over this 
difficulty by the use of very high-class springs made of steel haying 
a tenacity of about 140 tons to the square inch with an elastic limit 
of 90 tons. They also use a valve in the buffer piston which relieves 
the springs of resistance in running-up, and so allows slighter springs 
to be used. But in England the telescopic spring-case patented by 
the Elswick Ordnance Company is preferred. Suppose that the 
spring-columns before firing are each 4 ft. long ; then if the telescopic 
gear be pulled out for a distance of 4 ft. on recoil, each spring column 
will be compressed to 2 ft., or only to half its length. Tensile running- 
up springs are used by some firms, as Cockerill of Seraing (Liege). 
They are open to the objection that if a spring breaks the gun is 
for the time being rendered useless, which is not the case with 
compression springs. 

The intermediate carriage is used chiefly in equipments with 
buffer above the gun ; it serves as a means of connecting the cradle 
to the lower carriage. When the spade is fixed in the ground it is 
impossible to shift the carriage laterally in order to correct the 
aim, the intermediate carriage is therefore pivoted so that it can 
traverse laterally about 3 degrees each way. Instead of using an 
intermediate carriage the direction may be given to the gun by 
shifting the whole carriage sideways along the axle in an arc about 
the point of the trail, which is fixed by the spade. This system is 
used in guns of French manufacture and in the 1902 Russian gun. 
It is simple in action, but requires the shield to be cut away on either 
side to clear the wheels at extreme traverse. 

The trail is either a drawn steel tube, of circular section as in the 
18 pr., or of closed U section as in the Ehrhardt carriages, or else a 
box trail built up of sheet steel. In the Krupp equipments the 
trail is bent downwards to give a greater range of elevation to the 

Elevating Gear, in order to save space, is usually of the telescopic 
screw pattern, in which one screw is inside the other so that the 
two pack into half the length of a single screw. The spade is of the 
shape shown in the illustration of the 18 pr. Q.F. gun. For equip- 
ments which may have to be used on rock, such as the Swiss gun, 
the spade is made to fold upwards when desired. The axletree is 
usually a hollow steel forging with the ends tapered to receive the 
wheels. The wheels are of wood, with naves of stamped steel. 
Steel wheels have been tried but are less elastic than wood and have 
been found unsuitable. England and the United States use 4 ft. 8 in. 
wheels; most European nations use wheels 4 ft. 3 \ in. in diameter. 

The shield is made of hard steel, from 0-12 to 0-236 in. thick. 
The size and thickness of the shield are limited by considerations 
of weight. Thus if 150 lb of weight be available this will provide a 
shield about 5 ft. square and 3j mm. or 0-138 in. thick, proof 
against rifle bullets at distances over 600 yds., and against shrapnel 
bullets at all distances. The present tendency, since the introduction 
of the French D bullet and German S bullet (see Ammunition: 
Bullet), is to make shields thicker than this, 5 mm. or 0-2 in. being 
the usual thickness. 

Recent Developments of the Q.F. Gun-Carriage. — The principle of 
" differential " recoil gear is as follows: Suppose an ordinary Q.F. 
field gun held in the recoil position by a catch, loaded, released and 
allowed to fly forward under the action of the running-up springs. A 
valve in the buffer relieves the gun of any resistance to running-up. 
While in rapid motion forward the gun is fired by a tripper which 
catches the firing lever. The gun then returns to the recoil position 
and is again held by the catch. On firing, the recoil-velocity is 
reduced by the amount of the forward velocity previously imparted 
to the gun. Thus if the ordinary recoil-velocity of a Q.F. gun be 
30 fs., and if it be fired while running up at a velocity of 10 fs., the 
recoil-velocity with respect to the carriage will be only 20 fs. And 
since the recoil-energy is proportional to the weight of the gun 
multiplied by the square of the recoil-velocity, the recoil-energy is 
reduced in the proportion of 900 to 400, or roughly by one-half. 
This halves the overturning stress on the carriage, and renders it 
possible to make the gun and carriage lighter for the same power, 
or to obtain greater power for the same weight. This increase of 
efficiency is due to the fact that the whole of the recoil-energy is not, 
as in ordinary Q.F. guns, absorbed by the friction in the buffer, 
but that part of it is stored up and used to counteract the recoil 
of the next round. If the hydraulic buffer be dispensed with, and 
the whole of the recoil taken on the springs or compressed air gear, 



the overturning stress is reduced to one-fourth of its normal amount. 
One practical difficulty in the way of applying the differential 
system to field guns lies in the vibration and slight lateral motion 
of the carriage during running-up. Since this motion takes place after 
laying and before firing, it is liable to cause inaccuracy. The only 
equipment on this principle as yet in use is the French 1907 mountain 
gun referred to below. 

" Semi-automatic " Q.F. field and mountain guns are made by 
the leading firms, but have not been generally introduced. In these 
equipments the breech is thrown open by tripping gear during the 
run-up, and the cartridge case is ejected. When the gun is reloaded 
the action of introducing the cartridge releases the breech-block, 
which is closed by a spring. In the Krupp semi-automatic gun the 
breech-block is set vertically to facilitate loading. This equipment is 
capable of firing thirty rounds per minute. The principal advantage 
of the semi-automatic system lies not in the increased rate of fire 
but in the fact that three gunners are sufficient to carry out the 
service of the gun. This is of importance in mountain equipments, 
where the size of the shield is limited. 

The introduction of airships into military operations has pro- 
duced the auto-airship gun, which differs from the ordinary field 
gun in almost every respect. The attack of airships presents special 
problems. High elevation, higher even than the howitzer's, may 
have to be given, and, unlike the howitzer, the airship gun must be 
a high-velocity weapon, both ranging power and flatness of tra- 
jectory being essential. As regards the shell, to bring down a gas- 
bag, or even to kill a crew, with time shrapnel is difficult, owing to 
the speed of the airship and the difficulty of observing bursts. 
Direct hits with ordinary shell arc equally hard to obtain, unless the 
balloon is stationary and the range known. Even if such a hit were 
got, the ordinary fuse would not act on encountering the slight 
resistance of the balloon envelope. As regards the equipment, the 
absorption of recoil at high elevations presents difficulties, the 
exaggeration of the angle of sight makes the sighting arrangements 
complicated, and rapidity in changing the line of fire is essential. 
The most powerful equipment that, in June I9l0,had been constructed 
to meet these conditions was the Krupp 75 mm., which is mounted 
on a motor lorry, the weight of the equipment and carriage, without 
gunners, being about 4j tons. The equipment is constructed on the 
differential recoil principle, with rear trunnions on the cradle. The 
shell is a 12 lb H.E., fitted with a highly sensitive fuse and con- 
taining, beside the H.E. burster, a quantity of composition which 
gives off a trail of smoke to facilitate ranging. 

The British 18-pr. Q.F. Field Gun {1905) (see Plate 111., figs. 60 
and 61; also Artillery, Plate 11.). — Taking fig. 60 from the top, 
we see the buffer, telescopic spring-case and springs on top of the 
cradle, the buffer being attached to the horn projecting upwards 
from the breech. The cradle, of bronze, surrounds the gun, and is 
pivoted on horizontal trunnions on the upper carriage. The gun 
recoils in the cradle on the guide ribs, which extend for its whole 
length. The upper carriage is pivoted vertically on the trail and is 
traversed by the handle seen below the breech. The long elevating 
screw is formed as a telescopic screw at its lower end to avoid any 
downward projection; the screw does not turn, but the nut at 
bottom raises the gun, screw and sights for laying, while the nut at 
top raises and lowers the gun alone for giving elevation. The 
tubular trail supports the brake-arms, which also carry the seats for 
the layer and elevating number. The spade and traversing hand- 
spike are seen at the end of the trail. The telescopic sight is on the 
left of the gun. The shield is curved well back to give as much 
protection as possible to the detachment. The lower portion of the 
shield is hinged and folds up for travelling. 

The French Q.F. Field Gun {1898) (fig. 62, Plate 111.; see also 
Artillery, Plate II.). — This is a powerful gun, of unusual length, 
namely 36 calibres. The breech mechanism is of the eccentric screw- 
type (see Part 1. of this article). The gun has compressed-air running- 
up gear and traverses along the axletree. The carriage is anchored 
by a trail spade and two brake-blocks which are arranged so as to 
go under the wheels, forming dragshoes, on firing. This method of 
anchoring causes some delay on coming into action and considerable 
delay in changing on to a fresh target. The gun has a goniometric 
sight with independent line of sight. The body of the ammunition 
wagon is tilted alongside the gun, and, with its armoured bottom 
and steel doors, forms a good protection for the gunners supplying 
ammunition. 

The German Q.F. Field Gun (1906) (fig. 63). — This is the 1896 gun 
remounted on a Q.F. carriage. It is not a powerful gun, the ballistics 
being the same as those of the British 15-pr. B.L. of 1893. It has a 
single-motion wedge breech action. The gun is mounted on a cradle 
with buffer and springs under the gun; the cradle traverses on a 
vertical pivot set in a traversing bed which turns about the axletree. 
The gun has an arc sight with prismatic telescope and a clinometer 
mounted on it, and a circular laying-plane for laying on an auxiliary 
mark. It has not the independent line of sight. The shield is in 
three pieces, the top flap folding down for travelling. The carriage 
stands perfectly steady on discharge. 

The Russian Q.F. Field Gun {1903) is intended as an improvement 
on the French gun, being of even greater power. Springs are used 
for running-up instead of compressed air. To ensure steadiness the 
gun is kept very low on the carriage; this is effected by the use of 



222 



ORDNANCE 



[FIELD ARTILLERY EQUIPMENTS 



a cranked axletree. The gun has not the independent line of sight, 
but has a panorama sight. It traverses on the axletree. 

The Danish Q.F. Field Gun (fig. 64, Plate IV.) is a good example 
of the heavier or more powerful type of Krupp field gun. The gun 
may be seen supported on the cradle, which contains the hydraulic 
buffer and running-up springs. The wedge breechblock is open. 



Horse Artillery Guns. — A horse artillery gun must be mobile 
enough to accompany cavalry. This is secured partly by the 
adoption of a light type of gun, partly by carryingthe gunners on 
horseback instead of on the carriage. It is considered that the 
weight behind the team should not exceed 30 cwt. The Germans 
have declined to introduce a special type of light gun, as they 




Redrawn from Bethell's Modern Guns and Gunnery. 



Fig. 63.— The German Q.F. Gun. C. 96. n./A. (1906). 



The arc sight with panorama telescope is seen behind the shield, 
which is curved backwards for better protection. The seats for the 
gunners who lay and attend to the breech are on either side of the 
trail. At the point of the trail are the spade, the traversing lever 
and the trail eye by which the gun is limbered up. 

The American Q.F. Field Gun. — This is an example of the Ehrhardt 
type of gun. It is considerably more powerful than the field guns 
adopted by most European powers. Steadiness is ensured by making 
the trail io| ft. long, or if ft. longer than the Krupp trail. The 
construction is otherwise very similar to that of the Krupp gun 
shown in fig. 64, Plate IV. Four rounds are carried in tubes on the 
carriage. 

Other Q.F. Equipments. — These closely resemble the standard 
types of their makers, as given in the above table of field guns. The 
Swiss and Dutch guns are light Krupps; the Spanish and Portuguese 
guns, by Schneider of Creusot, are improved and lighter models of 
the French gun. 

The new Italian gun is a medium Krupp. The Austrian gun is 
similar to the American (Ehrhardt) but the gun itself is of bronze. 



object to the complication entailed by the supply of two natures 
of ammunition on the battlefield. The H.A. guns of other 
nations are merely lighter and less powerful editions of their field 
guns. 

The Q.F. Field Howitzer. — A field howitzer is a gun capable of 
throwing a shell weighing 35 to 45 lb at high angles of elevation, and 
light enough to manoeuvre at a trot across open country. The 
permissible weight of the equipment is but slightly greater than 
that of a field gun. The object of the howitzer is to throw a heavy, 
shell with an angle of descent of not less than 25 , so as to destroy, 
overhead cover with high-explosive shell, and to search entrench- 
ments and reach gunners behind their gun-shields with shrapnel. 
Effect is obtained, not by the striking velocity of the shell, but by, 
the amount of its high-explosive burster, or, in the case of shrapnel 
fire, by the use of a large driving charge in the base of the shell 
which gives the necessary forward and downward velocity to the 
bullets. _ . 1 

Since the muzzle energy of a howitzer is limited by the weight of 
the equipment, the heavy shell can only be fired with a low velocity, 




Fig. 65. — Rumanian (Krupp) Quick-Firing Field Gun. 



The Rumanian Q.F. field gun (fig. 65) is a recent type of medium 
Krupp gun. The shield is set well back, and has a hood projecting 
forwards and fitting close to the gun. The brake is used for travelling 
only; the brake-wheel is seen in front of the shield. The panorama 
telescope is mounted on top of the arc sight; no foresight is used. 
There are no axletree seats, the gunners being carried on the gun 
limber and wagon limber. The wagon body (fig. 66) is tipped beside 
the gun in action. 



usually not exceeding 1000 ft. per second. And in order to secure 
a steep angle of descent at short ranges this velocity is still further 
reduced by using half and quarter charges. 

The construction of the howitzer is much the same as that of a 
gun. The calibre is usually between 4-3 and 47 in._, and the length 
does not much exceed 12 calibres. Case ammunition is used, and 
the breech action is similar to that of a Q.F. gun. Howitzersare 
usually provided with shields in order to enable them to come into 



HEAVY FIELD AND SIEGE] 



ORDNANCE 



223 



action in the open when necessary. At short ranges, with full 
charge, they make very powerful guns.' 

Construction of the Carriage. — The gun-recoil system is used as in 
a gun equipment. There is however one important difference. If 
the recoil allowed be sufficient to keep the carriage steady at low 
elevations, then when fired at an elevation of 45 the breech will 
strike the ground. This may be to some extent avoided by placing 
the trunnions of the cradle which supports the howitzer at the 
extreme rear end, so that when elevated the breech of the howitzer 
is not brought any nearer the ground (Krupp). One objection to 
this is that the forward preponderance of the howitzer has to be 
balanced by a spring to enable it to be elevated. 

A second method is known as controlled recoil. The buffer-liquid, 
on recoil, has to pass through holes in the piston. The access of the 
buffer-liquid to these holes is controlled by a disk valve rotated by 
rifled grooves in the cylinder. By connecting the piston-rod to the 
carriage so as to rotate the piston when the gun is elevated, the 
area of the holes exposed by the disk valve can be decreased at high 
elevations so as to shorten the recoil. This is known as the Vavasscur- 
Ehrhardt control valve. Messrs Cockcrill use a channel through 
which the liquid is forced on recoil, which is partly closed by a stop- 
cock connected to the left trunnion when the howitzer is elevated. 
The running-up springs require to be strong in order to lift the 
weight of the howitzer at 45° elevation. In most equipments twin 
columns of springs arc used. 

The Eltrliardt Q.F. Field Howitzer, fig. 67 (Plate IV.), may be taken 
as a type of the light field howitzer with controlled recoil, as opposed 




Fig. 66. — Wagon Body, Rumanian (Krupp) Quick-firing Field Gun 



to the Krupp pattern with rear trunnions and constant long recoil. 
The howitzer is represented immediately after firing, before it has 
run up. The recoil is automatically shortened so that when fired at 
this high elevation the buffer, which is seen under the breech, does 
not strike the ground. The sights are on the bar which passes through 
the shield. -The calibre is 4-7 in.: the howitzer fires a 46 lb shell 
with M.V. 985 f.s., and weighs 25 cwt. in action with shield. 

The Q.F. Mountain Gun. — A mountain gun has the same tactical 
duties to fulfil as a field gun. It is merely a field gun sufficiently 
mobile for mountain transport. Its weight and dimensions arc 
restricted by the following considerations: (1) The whole equip- 
ment has to be carried on pack animals. (2) The average load for 
a battery mule is about 280 tb, including 65 lb of saddle and equip- 
ment. A few specially selected gun-mules can carry about 40 lb 
more, or 320 lb. In Spain and Italy, where exceptionally fine mules 
arc available, some of the mountain battery loads amount to 375 lb. 
(3) The loads must be short, the length being limited by that of the 
neck of a mule. If possible no part of the equipment should be more 
than 4' 6" long. (4) The equipment must, therefore, be subdivided 
into component parts such that.no part weighs more than 320 — 65 
or 255 lb, and these parts must be so designed as to be quickly as- 
sembled. (5) The number of parts into which the equipment may 
be subdivided is either four or five. British mountain batteries 
have five gun and carriage mules, and yet they come into action and 
fire the first round within one minute. Other nations mostly divide 
the equipment into four parts only, and use rather heavier loads 
than is in England considered consistent with activity on a hillside. 
(6) Mountain guns are usually provided with shafts to enable them 
to be drawn instead of being carried when travelling along a road. 

On a 5-mule basis the total weight of gun and carriage carried 
amounts to ioJ cwt. or more than half the weight of a field gun. 
But the power obtainable is not commensurate, being in practice 
limited by the weight of the gun itself, which is restricted by the 
carrying power of the transport animals. In B.L. mountain equip- 



ments this difficulty has been got over by carrying the gun in two 
parts, which are screwed together on coming into action. 

In the British service the 7 pr. R.M.L. of 400 lb, the original 
" screw gun," was superseded in 1900 by the 10 pr. B.L., also in 
two pieces. A quick-firing mountain gun has since been introduced 
(1907). 

In modern mountain equipments, such as the Schneider-Danglis 
gun adopted by Russia, the gun is not divided across the bore but is 
lightened for transport by removing the brccch-piece and breech- 
block, which arc carried separately. These guns fire a shell of I4\3 lb 
with M.V. of 1 100 f.s. 

When the gun is in one piece, the equipment naturally divides 
itself into four parts, namely the gun, cradle, trail and axletree and 
wheels. When a long jointed trail is used, as in the Krupp Q.F. 
mountain equipment, the point of the trail is carried with the 
wheels, which form a light load. In addition to this the folding 
shield with ammunition forms a fifth load. The shield need not, 
however, be brought up till after the gun has opened fire. 

Since the length of a mountain gun in one piece may not exceed 
4 ft. 6 in., the calibre has to be comparatively large to get the neces- 
sary cower, and is usually 75 mm. or 3 in. The weight may not 
exceed 255 lb. A short breech action such as the swinging block or 
the eccentric screw is preferred. The sights must be of simple 
pattern; the independent line of sight is too complicated for moun- 
tain work. But it is most desirable that the sight-socket should be 
capable of being cross-levelled to eliminate the error introduced by 
difference of level of wheels. Except in the French gun, the recoil 
gear and running-up springs arc similar to those used 
in Q.F. field guns. In the Krupp mountain equip- 
ment the gun docs not slide directly on the cradle 
guides, but a steel forging called, a sleigh is inter- 
posed. This forms a sliding cover to the cradle, and 
protects the guides. On coming into action the gun 
is dropped into the sleigh and secured by a keyed lug. 
The trail of a Q.F. mountain gun has to be from 6 ft. 
to 7 ft. long to keep the gun steady. It is cither carried 
in two picccs(Krupp)or is hingedand folded (Ehrhardt). 
The spade is similar to that used with field guns. The 
wheels are of wood, about 3 ft. in diameter. The 
elevating gear is a plain screw. The gun and cradle 
traverse on a vertical pivot about 3 degrees each way. 
A shield high enough to protect the gunners kneeling 
weighs up to I cwt., and is carried in two pieces. 

The Krupp mountain gun, fig. 68 (Plate IV.), 
may be taken as an example of ordinary practice. 
The gun is seen mounted on the sleigh, which 
slides to the rear on the cradle when the gun 
recoils. The cradle is pivoted vertically on a saddle 
mounted on horizontal trunnions between the trail 
brackets; the rearward extension of the saddle 
forms the traversing bed and is supported by the 
elevating screw. The foresight and arc sight are 
attached to the cradle. Near the middle of the 
7-ft. trail are seen the scats for the laying and 
loading numbers. The trail is divided immediately 
in rear of the seats. The calibre is 2-95 in., the 
gun fires a shell weighing 11 lb 10 oz. with a muzzle velocity of 
920 f.s. The weight in action is 820 lb, without shield. 

The_ French 1907 mountain gun differs markedly from other 
types in that the carriage is constructed with differential recoil 
gear as described above. There is no hydraulic buffer, and the 
whole of the recoil-energy is absorbed by the springs. The gun is 
held in the recoil position by a catch, and when loaded and released 
it is fired automatically by a tripper on the cradle. The calibre is 
2-65 in., and the shell weighs 11 tb 10 oz. 

Authorities. — H. A. Bethcll, Modern Guns and Gunnery (Wool- 
wich, 1907, 3rd edition, 1910); Kcnyon, F.A. Material on the Con- 
tinent (R.A. Institution, Woolwich, 1905); Grcenhill, " The 
Dynamics of Gun Recoil," The Engineer (23rd August 1907); v. 
Roskoten, Moderne Feldkanonen (Oldenburg, 1906); Rohne, Progres 
de I'artillerie de campagne moderne (Paris, 1906) , Challeat, Thiorie des 
affftts & deformation (Paris, 1906), Siacci, Balistique exterieure; 
Witzleben, Feldgeschutzfrage in Portugal (Dresden, 3906); Castner, 
" Development of Recoil Apparatus," Journal US Artillery (1904); 
and Der Erfolg des stdndigen Rohrn'icklaufs bei Feldhaubitzen 
(Fraucnfcld, 1906); v. Reichcnau, Munitionsausriistung (Berlin, 
!9°5), Shrapnels el boucliers and L'Obusier de campagne moderne 
(Lucerne, 1906), Bahn. Die Entwicklung der Rohrriicklauf-Feld- 
hanbitze (Berlin. 1907). (H. A. B.) 



III. Heavy Field and Siege Equipments 

Heavy Field Batteries. — Since the days of Gujrat and Inker- 
mann the value of heavy metal in the field has been recognized, 
at all events in theory, but it was mainly due to the South African 
war that " heavy " batteries have become a component part of 
modern armies. Guns heavier than field guns have formed 
part of the equipment of the Indian army for many years. 



224 



ORDNANCE 



[HEAVY FIELD AND SIEGE 



but they have existed for a specific purpose, and ordnance 
originally designed for quite other functions has, from the 
exigencies of war, been occasionally utilized in the field, as was 
the case in South Africa and Manchuria, but the heavy field 
battery as we know it to-day is a new military product. Its 
role is an extensive one, as it embraces many of the functions of 
ordinary field guns as well as some of those usually attributed to 
light siege pieces. In the heavy field armaments of the Powers as 
they stand at the present time will be found guns, howitzers and 
mortars, and projectiles that vary from 50 lb to more than five 
times that weight, and no boundary line can be assigned which 
will separate these field equipments from those of the light units 
of a siege train It will be convenient to consider in turn the 
three natures of ordnance (guns, howitzers and mortars) employed 
and to quote some typical instances of each kind 

The United States 60 pr. Gun. — This gun and its equipment are 
of modern type (1904) Its general appearance is shown in figs. 69 
_ and 70, Plate V. The calibre is 4-7"; the charge 5-94 lb 

of smokeless powder and the muzzle velocity developed 
is 1700 f.s. Fixed ammunition is employed, and with an elevation 
of 15° the range is 7600 yds The weight of the equipment limbered 
up is given as 7if cwt.: it is known as a siege gun 

Fn its general aspect the carriage resembles a field carriage, but of 
stronger type, with a special arrangement of cradle. 

In fig. 71 two sections are given; the cradle, it will be seen, 
consists of three cylinders (seen in section in the upper figure) which 




From Lieut. -Colonel Ormond M. Lissak's Ordnance and Gunnery. 

Fig. 71. — Diagram of 4-7-in. Siege Gun, U.S.A. 
b, Traversing bracket, r, Rails. x, Axle. 

p, Pintle bearing. s, Spring cylinders, y, Pintle yoke. 

are bound together by broad steel bands; the two outer cylinders 
carry rails r upon which the gun slides in recoil. The centre cylinder 
contains the hydraulic gear for checking recoil, the two outer contain 
the running-up springs s. These springs are arranged in three con- 
centric columns, the front end of each outer column being con- 
nected to the rear end of the next inner column by a steel tube, 
flanged outwardly at the front end and inwardly at the rear end. 
A rod carrying a head which acts on the inner coil only passes 
through the centre of the cylinder and is fixed to a yoke that is 
connected with a lug at the breech of the gun. The flanged tubes 
thus convey the pressure from the innermost coil to the next outer 
coil and finally to the outermost coil, so that in each cylinder the 
springs work in tandem and have a long stroke with short assembled 
length. It is thus seen the recoil takes place partially on the carriage 
and only a portion of the energy remains to tend to cause movement 
in the mounting. 

The cradle is supported by trunnions in the casting y, which is 
itself seated in the casting p, which forms a bearing for it. This 
bearing is mounted between the front ends of the trail brackets, its 
rear end embracing the hollow axle x. Attached to the lower surface 
of y is the traversing bracket b, which extends to the rear under 
the axle and forms a support for the traversing shaft ( and for the 
elevating mechanism. 

For travelling (Plate V., fig. 69) the gun is withdrawn to the rear 
and the breech is attached to a holding-down arrangement about 
the middle of the trail. A spade is hinged at the point of the trail. 



The British 60 pr. Gun. — This is known as a heavy battery gun; 
its calibre is 5", its length 32 calibres, its weight 39 cwt.; its charge 
is 9 T ' 8 lb of cordite, its muzzle velocity 2080 f.s. and its effective 
shrapnel range 10,000 yds. The weight behind the team is 106 cwts., 
3 qrs. 

The German 10 cm. Gun is called a heavy battery gun; its calibre 
is 4", its effective shrapnel range is 5750 yds., but common shell can 
be used up to 11,000 yds. The organization is a six-gun battery, 
but a platform has always to be used. 

A howitzer is a comparatively light piece that fires a comparatively 
heavy shell with a comparatively low muzzle velocity, and changes 
in range are effected sometimes by alteration of charge „ 
as well as of elevation. On the continent of Europe ow * ers ' 
howitzers are more popular than guns for heavy field batteries 
and light siege units. 

The French IS cm. (Rimailho) Howitzer. — This piece is at the 
present time very popular in France, where, in 1907, some 120 bat- 
teries of the field army were said to be armed with it. It came into 
being from the conversion of an old pattern siege howitzer and its 
adaptation to a new form of carriage, according to the plans of 
Commandant Rimailho. The gun {canon de 755 R) is a short piece, 
made of steel, with a calibre of 6- 1 " ; the shell weighs about 94 lb 
and has an effective range of 7000 yds. The breech opens auto- 
matically after each round and a rapidity of fire of from 4 to 5 
rounds a minute is claimed. The howitzer is supported on two 
trunnions near its rear end so that the weight pivots about a point 
near the breech, with the result that the latter remains nearly 5 ft. 
above the ground level at all angles of elevation; space is thus left 
for recoil, which is checked by a buffer, the construction of which is 
a secret; running-out springs are provided to return the gun to the 
firing position. The piece recoils in a cradle to which is attached 
the elevation scale, but the elevating gear is independent of the 
carriage proper; the line of sight is also independent. The howitzer 
has a special transporting carriage, but it can be placed on its firing 
carriage, it is said, in two minutes. The weight behind the teams is 
in each case about 47 cwt. On a war footing three ammunition 
wagons per howitzer would be provided. 

The German 75 cm. Howitzer. — The Germans also possess a 15 cm. 
howitzer of modern type; its rate of fire is 2 to 3 rounds a minute; 
its shell is 875 lb in weight and the weight behind the team is about 
53 cwt. 

The British 6" B.L. Howitzer. — This piece is made of steel, it 
weighs 30 cwt., its shell weighs 122 lb and has an effective range of 
7000 yds. The weight behind the team is 85 cwt. 

Fig. 72 shows the howitzer and cradle A mounted on the travelling 
carriage, from which it can be fired up to an angle of 35°: in fig. 73 



RECOIL -18 ins 




Fig. 72. — Diagram of British 6-in. B.L. Howitzer. 

the wheels have been removed, the trail B has been lowered on to 
the pivot plate C and secured to a pivot plug screwed into the 
plate: to the trail is fitted the top carriage D, and when the howitzer 
and cradle are thus mounted 70° elevation can be given. The 
howitzer recoils through the cradle, in which are two hydraulic 
buffers side by side, fig. 74, whose piston rods E are attached to the 
howitzer so that the recoil of the latter draws the pistons J to the 
rear. Consider now, in fig. 74, the right buffer only; forged in one 
piece with the piston and piston rod is a tail rod F of larger diameter 
than the piston rod, and in the front of the cylinder is an annular 
bronze casting G, called a floating piston, which bears against the 
rear of the springs. On discharge, the howitzer slides along the 
cradle to the rear, the piston rod E is drawn out of the cylinder 
and the tail rod F is drawn in, and from its larger diameter causes 
a pressure of oil against the floating piston G, which slides forward 
and compresses the springs which are prevented moving by the 
rods H. The action is the same in each buffer. After recoil the 
springs expand and return the howitzer into the firing position. 



HEAVY FIELD AND SIEGE] 



ORDNANCE 



225 



The floating pistons are tapered slightly inside towards the front 
to prevent violence in the running out action. The elevating gear, 
which can be placed on the left side of either the trail or the top 
carriage, actuates the arc K, bolted to the left side of the cradle. 
When the gun is fired on wheels (fig. 72) an anchorage buffer M, 
attached to the platform, checks the recoil, whilst the springs with 
which it is provided cause the carriage to return to its position. 

The United States 6" Howitzer. — This is a more modern equipment, 
its date being 1905. The howitzer is a short piece, 13 calibres long; 
it fires a 120-lb shell with a muzzle velocity of 900 f.s. It has an 



.4T> 




p^V4< J >t^^^^^^l^S.\S^ S ^^ ^^g 




Fig. 73. — Diagram of British 6-in. B.L. Howitzer 
(70 elevation). 

extreme elevation of 45° and an effective range of 7000 yds. The 
weight behind the team is 705 cwt. The carriage is of peculiar 
construction (fig. 75). The howitzer is supported under its cradle, 
which is carried on trunnions seated in the top carriage. The 
cradle consists of three cylinders generally similar in arrangement 
and in functions to those described for the 4-7" 60 pr. gun: the 
howitzer is made in a single forging and carries a lug on its breech 
end for the attachment of the recoil piston rod and the yoke for the 
rods of the spring cylinders; flanged rails are formed on its upper 
surface, which support it on its cradle. The top carriage rests on a 
framework called a " pintle bearing." Flanges in the former engage 
under clips in the latter; the pintle bearing is riveted to the front 
part of the trail brackets, and forms a turn-table upon which the top 
carriage and all supported by it have a movement of 3 traverse on 
either side. 

This movement of traverse is effected by a shaft and worm: the 
former is supported in a fixture attached to the left trail bracket, 
and the latter works in a nut pivoted to the top carriage. 

Elevation is effected by a forging called the rocker. The rear 
part of the latter is U-shaped and passes under the gun, being 




Fig. 74. — Hydraulic buffers of British 6-in. B.L. Howitzer. 
{N.B. — Spiral, instead of volute springs, are now used.) 

attached to the cradle by a pivoted hook k. From either side of the 
U arms extend which embrace the cradle trunnions between the 
cradle and the cheeks of the top carriage so that the rocker can 
rotate about the cradle trunnions. The elevating gear is supported 
in lugs on the under side of the top carriage, while the upper end 
of the elevating screw is attached to the bottom of the rocker. The 
rocker thus moves in elevation in the top carriage and gives elevation 
to the cradle, and therefore to the gun, by means of the pivoted 
hook above referred to. 

The brackets of the trail extend separately to the rear, sufficiently 
providing for free movements of recoil at any elevation; they are 
then joined by transoms and top and bottom plates and terminate 



in a detachable spade which is secured to the top of the trail in 
travelling. The axle is of special shape to admit of the movements 
of the cradle; it is lower in the middle than at the sides and is 
made in three parts, held together by shrinkage in cylinders formed 
in the sides of the pintle bearing. 

A peculiarity of this carriage is that recoil is automatically 
shortened as elevation increases. Thus the length of recoil is 50 
at angles of firing from -5° to 0°, from 0° to 25 the 50" is gradually 
reduced to 28", which is not changed for higher angles. This is 
effected as follows: Four apertures are made in the- piston of the 
recoil cylinder and there are two longitudinal throttling grooves 
in the walls of the cylinder. All apertures being open and deepest 
part of grooves in use would correspond to a 50" recoil; apertures 
closed and grooves alone at work would mean a 28" recoil. A 
rotating disk with apertures similar and similarly placed to those 
on the piston is carried by the piston rod and rests against the 
front of the piston, and is actuated during recoil by two lugs pro- 
jecting into helical guide slots cut in the walls of the recoil cylinder. 
The latter is mounted so as to be capable of rotation in the cradle, 
and its outer surface carries teeth which engage with similar teeth in 
a ring surrounding the right spring cylinder. When the elevation is 
between o° and 25 these latter teeth engage in special gearing which 
is seated in the hollow trunnion of the cradle and is attached to the 
right cheek of the top carriage. The buffer conditions are thus 
made to correspond with the elevation. 

The mortar is a short piece of ordnance that is always fired from 
a bed. Changes in range are usually effected by varying Mortars. 
the charge. 

United States j-6" Mortar. — This equipment is not modern; the 
piece was intended for vertical fire against troops in entrenchment?; 
the mortar weighs 245 lb, and its bed, which is made in a single 
casting of steel, 300 lb. The latter rests in action on a wooden plat- 
form and is held down by ropes and pickets. 

The German 8-4" Mortar.— This equipment is perhaps the heaviest 
field equipment existing. The mortar in action weighs about 4-9 
tons; it has to be transported in a special vehicle and can only be 
fired from a platform; four hours arc required for bringing it into 
action. Two platform wagons are attached to each mortar, weighing 
respectively 2-9 and 4-9 tons. The equipment can be moved at a 
walk on good roads, but two companies of infantry arc always 
attached for hauiage in case of need. A battery consists of 4 mortars, 
and 160 rounds are carried. The shell weighs 250 lb and carries a 
heavy charge of high explosive, with or without delay action fuze. 

A special equipment designed by Messrs Krupp is shown in Plate 
vi., figs. 76 and 77. It is a mobile mounting for an 8-26" mortar 
with constant long recoil, which is fired, like a howitzer, from its 
travelling carriage without a platform. This equipment weighs about 
5 tons in action. 

All the foregoing equipments may be considered mobile; that is 
to say, the batteries in which they are organized are self-contained, 
can move from place to place without external assistance, and may 
be employed on either field or siege duties. Their uses may be 
summed up as follows: The first object of the heavy artillery 
accompanying an army is to demolish the barrier forts or other 
frontier fortifications of a permanent nature in order to enable the 
army to penetrate into the enemy's country. After this has been 
done, a small portion of this artillery will be employed in connexion 
with the siege of fortresses, while another, by far the more con- 
siderable portion, will accompany the advance of the field army. 

Heavy Siege Units. — When a serious siege has to be under- 
taken it is necessary to organize one or more siege trains in 
addition to the troops of the field army. Both heavy and light 
siege units enter into the composition of a siege train. As to 
the armament of the latter, we have said that it is not 
exactly distinguishable from that of heavy field batteries, 
and it has already been described. That of the former is 
less definite. Heavy siege units are seldom mobile in the 
sense that light siege units are: the ordnance comprising 
the former has usually to be transported by some special 
means; thus it might be conveyed by ordinary rail or ship 
to some place from which special siege railways would admit 
of its conveyance to its place in battery, and probably great 
variety of calibre and mounting would exist. For example, 
during the siege of Sevastopol a civil engineer, Robert 
Mallet (1810-1SS1), designed a 36" mortar; it did not, how- 
ever, reach the seat of war; and in 1904 the Japanese made 
use of their ii-i" coast howitzers at Port Arthur. At the siege 
manoeuvres in France in 1906 the heavy siege units were repre- 
sented by their 6-i" gun and their 10-7" howitzer. The official 
British pieces are a 6" gun and a 9-4" howitzer. Generally 
speaking, whereas the most suitable armament of the light units 
can as a rule be foreseen, that of the heavy would depend very 
much on circumstances. 

xx. S 



226 



ORDNANCE 



[GARRISON MOUNTINGS 



The French IO-7" Howitzer. — As a typical piece the lO'7"bowitzer 
may be taken, which the French transported by special horse 
draught, as it was found too heavy for the type of siege railway 
made use of at the mock siege of Langres in 1907. Its total equip- 
ment weighs 22 tons and it is transported in four components, 
namely, the piece, the carriage, the slide and the platform. A 
battery of six pieces would thus require, exclusive of ammunition 





From Lieut.- Colonel Ormond M. Lissak's Ordnance and Gunnery. 

Fig. 75. — Diagram of 6-in. Siege Howitzer, U.S.A. 



b, Hand-wheel actuating wheel 

brakes. 
e. Elevating hand-wheel. 
h, Handle. 



Hook, I, 2, 3, 4 and 5 me- 
chanism for loading position. 
Elevating screw. 
Traversing wheel. 



transport, 24 vehicles that would weigh 130 tons. The howitzer 
was designed originally for coast defence; it weighs about 5! tons 
and its bed weighed 63 tons: to this equipment was added a slide 
and a platform, consisting of a thick plate of iron upon which 
the slide moves. The platform is provided with a pivot upon which 
the front part of the slide fits. The latter consists of an iron frame- 
work, having lateral movement around the aforesaid pivot; its 
rear portion is provided with rollers to facilitate its movement on 
the platform. Its upper portion consists of two inclined rails along 
which the bed or carriage of the howitzer slides. To check recoil a 



hydraulic buffer is attached to the front of the slide and also to the 
bed. 

The fighting units of siege artillery in the British service are 
companies and brigades; each company would be armed with 
from 4 to 6 light siege pieces or from 2 to 4 heavy pieces. A com- 
pany is usually a major's command. Three such companies would 
form a siege brigade under a lieutenant-colonel. If a siege train of 
any magnitude were organized it might 
be necessary to combine two or more 
brigades into a division under a colonel 
or brigadier. In the French service 
each siege train consists of three divi- 
sions. A division is divided into groups 
and comprises some 50 pieces of ord- 
nance, heavy and light. (J. R. J. J.) 

IV. Garrison Mountings 

The armament of modern coast 
fronts consists of (a) heavy B.L. guns, 
9" and upwards; (b) medium guns, 
4" and upwards, and (c) light Q.F. 
guns; all these being for direct fire; 
and {d) guns, howitzers or mortars of 
various calibres for high angle fire. 
Typical guns of type (a) are the Krupp 
12" gun and the British 9-2 B.L. gun. 
The Krupp 12" gun is built up of 
crucible cast nickel steel, not wire 
wound. It is 45 calibres long and 
has the Krupp wedge-shaped breech- 
closing apparatus. It is fitted with 
a repeating trip lock. The cartridge 
is a metallic case containing a charge 
of 290 lb of tubular powder. The projectiles are of two 
weights, 770 lb and 9S0 lb, and the respective muzzle 
velocities are 3025 f.s. and 2700 f.s. The British 9-2 B.L. gun 
is of wire-wound construction and is over 48 calibres long. 
It has the asbestos pad and Welin screw system of obturation, 
and its charge of 103 lb of cordite, contained in a cartridge of 
silk cloth, fixes a 3S0 lb projectile with a muzzle velocity of 
2643 f' s - A typical gun of class (b) is the British 6" mark VII. 
It is similar in construction and breech mechanism to the last- 
named and fires a 100 lb projectile with a charge of 23 lb cordite, 
giving a muzzle velocity of 2493 f.s. A typical gun of class (c) 
is the British 12 pr. Q.F.; its weight is 12 cwt., it is made of 
steel, is 10-3 calibres long, and with a cordite charge of 1 lb 15 oz. 
it fires a projectile I2§ lb in weight with a muzzle velocity of 
2197 f.s. and a possible rate of 15 aimed rounds a minute. A 
typical piece of class id) is the 11" Krupp howitzer. It is 12 
calibres long, has a charge of 2S| fb smokeless powder and fires 
steel shell weighing 470 lb or 760 lb. It is provided with a 
shrapnel shell of the former weight which contains 1880 
bullets. 

The methods of mounting of coast ordnance are many; space 
only permits of referring to certain typical arrangements. 

I. The Moncrieff Principle. — The disappearing carriage originated, 
at all events in England, with Colonel Sir A. Moncrieff, who, about 
1864, proposed to utilize the energy of recoil to bring a 
gun into a protected position and at the same time to ' 
store up sufficient energy to raise it to a firing position when 
loading was completed. To effect this a heavy counter- 
weight was so adjusted that its tendency was to raise the 
gun; when the latter was fired, it raised the counterweight and a 
ratchet and pawl followed the action up: when the pawl was re- 
leased the counterweight brought the gun back to the firing position; 
this application of the principle had many drawbacks, and never 
had any success with guns' over 7 tons in weight. It was not until 
Moncrieff invented the hydropneumatic appliances that any real 
progress was made. In 1888 was introduced into the British service 
the first of a large group of disappearing mountings for guns of types 
(a) and (b), where the energy of recoil was absorbed chiefly by forcing 
a large volume of liquid through a narrow opening or recoil valve, 
and also by further compressing a large volume of already highly 
compressed air; when recoil was completed the recoil valve closed 
and the air was retained at very high pressure : the energy thus 
stored up returned the gun to the firing position. The action will 
be understood from the following example. 

The British 6" B.L. Gun on H.P. Mounting, Mark IV— Fig. 78 
shows a general view of the mounting; fig. 79 is a vertical and 



appearing 

mount* 

logs. 






GARRISON MOUNTINGS] 



ORDNANCE 



227 










FlG. 78.— British 6" B.L. Gun on H.P 

fig. 80 a transverse section through the recoil cylinder. The gun 
trunnions (fig. 78) are supported by the two arms of the elevator A, 
which is pivoted to the front of the lower carriage at B. The breech 
is supported by the two elevating bars C whose lower ends are 
attached to the elevating arcs D. These arcs are worked by the 
elevating gear actuated by the hand-wheel E. The arcs are struck 
with the bars C as radii, their centres being points at the upper 
end of the bars when the gun is in the loading position. Elevation 
can thus be given to the gun whilst it is being loaded. The lower 
carriage rests on a ring of live rollers G, which are free to traverse 
round on a circular racer H, motion being given by traversing gear 
actuated by the hand-wheel I. Supported by vertical stanchions 
attached to the lower carriage is a horizontal circular shield J 
through which the gun rises to the firing position. The manganese 
bronze ram F which is attached to the elevators A by the cross-head 
L is forced on recoil into the central chamber of the recoil cylinder 
(see fig. 79), which is supported by trunnions M resting in the brackets 
of the lower carriage. There are ten chambers N (figs. 79 and 80), 
all of which are connected at the bottom with the recoil valve 
chamber O, and consequently with each other. Nine of these 
contain liquid in their lower portions and highly compressed air 
above, and are connected at the top by a channel P to equalize the 
pressure in each chamber. The tenth chamber N', which is situated 
lowest in the cylinder, contains liquid alone and has at its upper end 
the raising valve Q. On recoil the liquid in the central chamber is 
forced by the ram through the recoil valve R into the outer chambers 
N, thus further compressing the air. As R is a non-return valve the 
air is maintained in this highly compressed state during loading. 
The gun is raised by pushing the lever S (fig. 78) to the front which 
actuates the rack T (fig. 79), thus opening Q, which allows the air 
in the nine chambers to force liquid from the tenth chamber N' 
into the centre ram chamber, lifting the ram. U is a pump (fig. 79) 
by which the gun can be pumped down at drill. The liquid employed 
in the buffer is a mixture of methylated spirits, mineral oil, distilled 
water and carbonate of soda, and its aeration, due to the churning 
it receives on recoil, is a serious drawback to this class of mounting. 
From a 6" B.L. gun mounted in this fashion somewhat more than 
one aimed round a minute can be obtained; from a 9-2" B.L. about 
four such rounds in five minutes. 

The foregoing description is now, however, principally interesting 
as showing an ingenious application of mechanical principles for 
military purposes. Mountings of this type are being gradually 
withdrawn from the British service. 

The Buffington-Crozier Principle. — In the United States a type of 
disappearing carriage known as the Buffington-Crozier (fig. 81) is 
used. Here, as in the earlier types of Moncrieff carriage, a counter- 
weight is employed, but the energy of recoil is partly absorbed by 
a buffer, and the counterweight, which is constrained by guides to 
move vertically up and down, is just able to raise the gun to the 



Mounting, Mark IV. 




firing position. A satisfactory 
rate of fire is claimed for this 
mounting, which has recently 
been improved. 

Balanced Pillar. — Another 
type of disappearing mount- 
ing for guns of type (£) or (c), 
known as the balanced pillar, 
is found on the continent of 
Europe and in the United 
States, where it is used for 5" 
guns and under. A long steel 
cylinder, which supports the 
gun and its carriage, has a 
vertical movement of about 
3i ft. in an outer cylinder. 
The inner cylinder and all 
that it carries is balanced by 
a counterweight. After the 
gun is fired it can be brought 
with its length parallel to the 
parapet. Then by the action 
of the mechanism the inner 
cylinder can be made to sink 




Fig. 79. — Vertical Section through 
Recoil Cylinder of Gun shown in fig. 78. 



Fig. 80. — Transverse Sec- 
tion through Recoil Cylinder 
of Gun shown in fig. 78. 



in the outer cylinder and the gun is brought down to the loading 
position; the release of the counterweight will cause i 
again. The gun has the usual motion 
common axis of the two cylinders. 



of traverse round 



rise 
the 



228 



ORDNANCE 



[GARRISON MOUNTINGS 



The heavy gun cupola is found on the continent of Europe in the 
armaments of various Powers for guns of type (a), the German 




Fig. 8i. — Buffington-Crozier Disappearing Carriage 



practice being occasionally to mount two 1 1 " guns in the same cupola. 
The cast-iron cupola was introduced by Gruson of Magdeburg, 
Cuoo'as k ut n ' c ' ce ' steel is now generally employed by Krupp. 
In Gruson's design the gun and mounting are placed 
upon a turn-table upon which also rest the bases of a scries of cast- 
iron plates; these are very massive, are curvilinear in section, and 
are built up into a shallow dome which completely covers the 
mountings as with a cap: the whole structure turns together, being 
traversed round a central pivot. The chase of the gun emerges 
through a port which admits of the necessary play of elevation. 
A notable example of a cupola was erected at Spezzia containing 
two 120-ton Krupp guns, the structure complete weighing 2050 tons. 
A Krupp cupola of chilled cast-iron for two 28-cm. (11") is shown 
in fig. 82. These are designed principally for coast defence in lew 
sites. The cupola, which is built up like a Gruson cupola of several 
heavy iron masses, is resolved and the guns laid by hydraulic power. 



A heavy chilled cast-iron collar protects the under side of the 
armoured structure and the working mechanism of the guns. Fig. 83, 

Plate VI., represents a 
Krupp mounting for 
an 1 1-2" howitzer, with 
a cupola-like shield. 
This is worked both 
electrically and by 
hand. Vertical fire 
from a weapon of this 
type is sufficiently 
powerful to penetrate 
the protective deck of 
a vessel. Light and 
medium guns, types 
(b) and (e), are some- 
times mounted in 
cupolas, especially on 
land fronts (see below), 
and disappearing 
cupolas have also been 
proposed for them : 
in the latter the whole 
structure is made to 
sink by the action of 
mechanism till the top 
of the cupola is level 
with the ground. 
Types and further de- 
tails will be found in 
the article Fortifi- 
cation and Siege- 
craft. 



B.L. .Gun, U.S.A. 



Barbette 
mount- 
ings. 



Mountings of the barbette type are much favoured in the British 
service for guns of types (a) and (6) ; one of the most 
modern is shown in fig. 21, where a 9-2" B.L. gun, Mark X., 
is placed upon a Mark V. mounting, a combination which 
admits of over five aimed rounds in two minutes. 

The British 9-2" B.L. Gun. — Fig. 84 shows a general view of the 
mounting, fig. 85 a longitudinal section through the cradle on a 
larger scale. The gun, which is trunnionless, carries a cross-head A 
and recoils in the cradle C, being supported by its guides D, which 
slide in longitudinal grooves in the cradle. To this cross-head is 
attached the buffer cylinder B (see fig. 85) which recoils with the 
gun, while the piston rod L is attached to the front of the cradle: 
engaging with the buffer cylinder and in the same axial line is a 
bronze casting containing two air chambers F and G: the casting is 
attached to the rear of the cradle, which is supported by trunnions 
E in the lower carriage. Thus on firing, the gun carries the buffer 




^ rmi . 1 t ^ . t t n t — , — . 1 r t — m t i j? * 



Fig. 82. — Krupp Cupola for two 28-cm. Guns. 



ORDNANCE 



Plate V. 




From Lieut.-Col. Ormond M. Lissak's Ordnance and Gunnery. 

Fig. 69.— 4-7-IN. SIEGE GUN, TRAVELLING POSITION (U.S.A.). 




From Lieut.-Col. Ormond M. Lissak's Ordnance and Gunnery. 

Fig. 70.— 4-7-IN- SIEGE GUN, IN ACTION (U.S.A.). 
X\. 229. ' 



Plate VI. 



ORDNANCE 




Fig. 76.— KRUPP 8-26-IN. MORTAR, TRAVELLING. 



Fig. 77.— KRUPP 8-26-IN. MORTAR, 
FIRING POSITION. 




Fig. 88— KRUPP 3-4-IN. AUTOMATIC GUN. 

From photographs by Frkdrich Krupp A. G., Essen/Ruhr. 



GARRISON MOUNTINGS] 



ORDNANCE 



229 




Fig. 84. — British 9-2" B.L. Gun, Mark X., on Barbette Mounting. 



cylinder backwards with it, draws it off its piston rod L and forces 
it into the air chamber F. The air in the chambers F and G is at a 
high initial tension and, on recoil, the air in F is further compressed 
and forced through the valve H into the chamber G. At the con- 
clusion of recoil the air expands and forces the buffer cylinder to 
the front, which carries with it the gun into its loading position; 
but the valve H closes and the air has to make its way through a 
narrow hole before it can act on the end of the buffer, thus preventing 
violent action, which is further guarded against by the " control 
ram " M which is bolted into the rear end of the buffer. To prevent 
leakage of air between the air chamber and the buffer at the gland 
K the packing employed is a viscous liquid which is in communication 
by means of the pipe J with the intensifier I. The latter consists 
of a cylinder containing a piston and rod free to move: the front 
face of this piston is subject to the pressure of the air in the air 
chamber, the rear face is in communication with the liquid in the 
gland. Now, as the piston head is held in position by the pressures 
on either side of it, and as the effective area of the front face is 
greater than that of the rear — on account of the rod — the liquid 
pressure per square inch of the fluid in the gland, &c, must be greater 
than that of the air in the air chamber, hence the latter cannot 
escape through the former. The pressure in the chambers F and G 
is adjusted on preparing for action by an air pump worked by hand. 
The energy of recoil is further utilized as follows: hydraulic 
cylinders called compressors are held in the cradle, and in them 
work rams connected with the cross-head A (sec fig. 85) : they are 




c ^raT^-.ika ^ g qiF ---------. r — —t& z?: % . s ::: f c 



^^P 



Fig. 85. — Details of Mounting shown in fig. 21 

also connected with a hydraulic accumulator (not shown) which 
can be placed in any convenient position in the work, and the power 
thus stored up be employed for raising the projectiles, for which 
purpose two lifts are provided. One of these (W) is in the floor of 
the emplacement, the other (W) is attached to and moves with the 
mounting. Underneath and suspended from the circular gun plat- 



form RR, which forms a shield, is an overhead railway QQ, on which 
run trollies, each taking a projectile. The projectiles are stored in 
the recess shown in section at O. By means of a shell barrow any 
projectile can be placed on the lift \V and raised to a trolley which 
can be run round over the lift W, which raises the projectile, as 
shown at S, to a point suitable for loading. 

The British 6" B.L. Gun. — A typical mounting for guns of type 
(b) is afforded by the British C.P. (central pivot), Mark II. mounting 
for the 6" B.L. Mark VII. gun, a combination which admits of six 
rounds a minute aimed fire. Fig. 86 shows a side elevation cf the 
mounting with half the shield removed ; fig. 87 a longitudinal 
section of part of the cradle through the axis of the buffer. The 
gun, which is trunnionless, recoils in the cradle A; the latter con- 
tains a buffer B and two cylindrical boxes containing springs S. 
Attached to the breech cf the gun is a piston rod C with piston D, 
the latter having an opening cr " port " E, through which the oil 
passes on recoil, the pressure in the buffer, which would otherwise 
vary with the velocity of the recoil, being kept constant by the 
variaticn in the area of aperture afforded by E. This area is governed 
by the action of the valve key strip F of varying section, which is 
inserted in the buffer in such a way that as the gun recoils the port E 
is constrained to pass over it. On recoil the rods J, which are 
attached to the gun in rear and screwed into the flanged cylinder H 
in front, force back the front cf the springs S, whose rear ends butt 
up against the rear of the spring boxes. After recoil the springs 
return the gun to the firing position. To check the violence or this 
action a control ram G is made use of: the 
piston rod has a cylindrical hole in front 
which, as the gun recoils, becomes filled 
with oil, and before the piston can come 
up against the front of the buffer this oil 
has to be displaced by the thrust of the 
ram G which checks the forward movement 
of the gun. The cradle A rests on its 
trunnions in searings in the lower carriage 
and is elevated or depressed by the gear 
K'. The last-named drives the elevating 
arc L, which is attached to the cradle at 
M, the axis of the gun moving parallel tc 
the axis of the cradle. In fig. 86 the lower 
carriage is almost entirely hidden by the 
gears carried on it, namely, the elevating 
gear K, the traversing gear N, which 
works a spur pinion, gearing into the rack 
O attached to the pedestal P: the 
elevation indicators Q and R for record- 
ing the angle of elevation oF the gun 
and the bracket S' which support the 6" armour plate T. The weight 
of the lower carriage, cradle and gun is taken by a horizontal ring of 
hard steel balls resting on the top of a massive Forged steel " pivot " 
U, the lower portion of which is shown supported in the cast-iron 
pedestal. The elevation indicator consists of a sector Q bolted to 
the cradle trunnions; to its edge is attached a metat tape, the 



230 



ORDNANCE 



[NAVAL GUNS 




Fig. 86. 
Fig. 86. — British Mark II. Barbette Mounting for 6" B.L. Gun. 
Fig. 87. — Longitudinal Section of Part of Cradle of Gun shown in fig. 13, through Axis of Buffer. 



other end of which is fixed to the spindle supporting a pointer, 
reading angles of elevation on the drum R. As the gun elevates 
the tape is paid out, the slack being taken in and the pointer re- 
volved by the action of a clock spring. 1 The mounting carries an 
automatic sight (see Sights, Gun Sights). 

The British 12-pr. Q.F. Gun. — A typical mounting for guns of 
class (c) is the British pedestal mounting for the 12-pr. Q.F. gun. 
This mounting consists of a cradle, a pivot, a pedestal and holdfast. 
The cradle is a gunmetal casting, provided with trunnions that 
rest in bearings on the pivot; the gun recoils in the upper portion 
of the cradle and the lower part of the latter is bored at the rear 
for an hydraulic buffer and at the front for a running-out spring. 
The pivot is of steel, is fork-shaped at the top end, where are the 
trunnion bearings for the cradle; its lower end is conical and fits 
into bushes in the pedestal, where it is free to revolve but is pre- 
vented from lifting by a holding-down screw. 2 The pedestal is 
bolted down to the platform. The gun has a shoulder-piece and it 
can be trained and elevated by the layer. It has also an automatic 
sight. 

Atypical Krupp mounting of this kind is shown in fig. 88, Plate VI., 
which represents an 8-8-cm. (3-4") automatic gun firing, it is stated, 
40 aimed rounds in the minute. 

The United States 12" Mortar. — A typical mounting for pieces of 
class (d) is afforded by the United States mounting, model of 1896, 
for the 12" B.L. mortar. The piece is mounted in a top carriage or 
saddle consisting of two arms connected by a heavy web. This 
saddle is hinged on a heavy bolt and is connected to the front of 
the turntable (fig. 89). The saddle inclines to the rear and upwards 
at an angle of 45 , the upper ends forming trunnion bearings: it is 
supported at a point about one-third of its length from the bolt or 
fulcrum by five columns of double springs arranged in a row, side 
by side. The recoil is checked by two hydraulic cylinders, one on 
each side, the pistons of which are attached to the saddle near the 
trunnions of the piece. When the mortar is fired the saddle revolves 
about its fulcrum to the rear and downwards, carrying the mortar 
and compressing the spring columns until the action is stopped by 
the hydraulic buffers; the springs then assert themselves and return 
the piece to the firing position. The mortar must always be brought 
horizontal for loading. 



1 The elevation indicators are now read on a plate provided with 
a spiral groove, which guides a stud on the reader along the scale of 
graduations. 

2 In a later mark there is no holding-down screw for pivot 



The fighting units of coast artillery in the British service are the 
fire command, the battery command and the group. The limits of 
a fire command are governed by the possibility of efficient surveil- 
lance and control that can be exercised by an individual, and these 
limits vary much from time to time. Usually a number of forts or 
emplacements are included in a fire command. The fire command 
is broken up into battery commands, in every one of which it must 
be possible for its commander actually to take charge of the guns 
therein contained in all phases of action. The battery command is 
divided up into gun groups, each consisting of one or more pieces 
of like calibre, nature and shooting qualities. As a rule a fire 
commander is a field officer, a battery commander a major or a 
captain, a gun group commander a subaltern or senior N.C. officer. 
1 n connexion with coast artillery range-finders (q.v .) and electric 
lights (see Coast Defence) are installed and electric communications 
established for the chain of command. (J. R. J. J.) 

V. Naval Guns and Gunnery 

In dealing with naval guns and gunnery, we shall take the 
British navy as the basis. At the close of the 19th and at the 
beginning of the 20th century it appeared that a type of British 
battleship (see Ship) had been evolved which was stable as 
regards disposition of armament, and that further advance 
would consist merely in greater efficiency of individual guns, 
in improvements of armour rendering possible the protection 
of greater areas, and in changes of engine and boiler design 
resulting in higher speeds. The " Majestic," " Glory," " Ex- 
mouth," " London " and " Bulwark " classes differed from each 
other only in such details, all of them subordinate to the main 
raison d'etre of the battleship, i.e. the number and nature of 
the guns which she carries. 

The strength and disposition of the armaments of the ships of 
these classes were identical except in small details (see fig. 90). 
In every case the main armament consisted of a pair of 12-in. 
guns forward and a pair aft, each pair enclosed in a hooded 
barbette, which was more commonly designated a turret. The 
turrets were on the midship line, and the guns in each com- 
manded an arc of fire of 240 , i.e. from right ahead to 30 abaft 
the heam on either side in the case of the fore turret, and from 



NAVAL GUNS] 



ORDNANCE 



231 



astern to 30 before either beam in the case of the after turret. 
The secondary armament, consisting of twelve 6-in. guns, was 
also symmetrically disposed. Two guns on either side (four in the 
" Majestic " class) were mounted with arcs of fire of from 6o° 



capacity which were to kill and demoralize his personnel, pierce 
his funnels, destroy any navigational or sighting appliances 
which were exposed, set his woodwork on fire and render extinc- 
tion of the fires impossible, and by piercing or bursting on 




Fig. 89.— 12" B.L. Mortar, Model 1896, U.S.A. 



before to 6o° abaft the beam, while two guns each side forward 
and two aft (one forward and one aft in the " Majestic " class) 
fired through similar arcs to the turret guns, but on their own 
sides only. Four of these 6-in. guns were mounted on either 
side of the main deck and two on either side of the upper deck, 
all being enclosed in casemates. 

In the armoured and large protected cruisers built contempor- 
aneously with these classes of battleships, the 9- 2-in. gun had been 
largely mounted, and it was the improvements brought about by 
practical experience in the rate and accuracy of fire of this gun 
that suggested its adoption in battleships to replace the whole 
or a part of the 6-in. armament. During the period in which the 
battleships referred to above were constructed, the idea of the 




jr3= r3= 




u "S, 

London 

Fig. 90. — Diagrams showing Disposition of Armament in 

Typical Ships. 

functions of the respective divisions of the armament was that 
the 1 2-in. guns were to injure the enemy's vitals by piercing 
his armour with armour-piercing shot or shell, while the business 
of the 6-in. guns was to cover him with a hail of shells of large 



unarmoured portions of his side diminish his reserve of buoyancy 
and so impair his sea-going qualities. 

These ideas were gradually losing favour; it was realized 
that the damage done by an armour-piercing shot, whether or 
not it hit and pierced armour, was limited to its own path, 
while that done by an armour-piercing shell striking an un- 
armoured portion of the ship's side was inconsiderable as com- 
pared with that effected by a common shell of the same calibre. 
Further, the area of side, by piercing which an armour-piercing 
projectile would reach any portion of the propelling machinery 
or magazines of an enemy, was so small compared with the whole 
exposed area of his side and upper works that it was scarcely 
advantageous to fire at it projectiles, the effectiveness of which, 
if they struck another portion of the enemy, was small in com- 
parison with that of other projectiles which might equally well 
be fired from the same gun. Again, the lessons of practical 
experience showed that ships might be and were defeated by shell 
fire alone, while their armour remained unpierced, and propelling 
machinery and magazines intact. 

All these considerations led to the conclusion that it was to 
intensity of shell-fire, and especially to the fire of large capacity 
and high explosive shell, that attention should be directed. At 
the same time, while the rate of fire of the 6-in. guns, to which 
great attention had been paid, remained stationary or nearly so, 
the rate of fire of the 9-2 in. and 12-in. guns had considerably 
improved, and their ballistic powers rendered possible more 
accurate firing at long ranges than could be effected with the 
6-in. guns. The explosive effect of a shell is said to vary as the 
square of the weight of its bursting charge. The bursting charge, 
with shell of the same type, bears a constant proportion to the 
weight of the shell. Now the weight of the 1 2-in. shell is 850 lb, 
that of the 9- 2-in. 380 lb, that of the 6-in. 100 lb. Hence it 
would require fourteen 6-in. shells to produce the same effect 
as one 9-2-in., and seventy-two to produce the same effect as 
one 12-in. shell, consequently the 6-in. gun to produce the same 
shell effect as the 12-in. or 9-2-in. gun must fire 72 times, or 14 
times, respectively, faster. The rate of fire of guns in action 
depends upon a variety of conditions, an important one being 
that of smoke interference, which tends to reduce the maximum 
rate of fire of the smaller guns nearer to that practicable with the 
heavier guns, but the rate of fire of the three guns in question, 



232 



ORDNANCE 



[NAVAL GUNS 



under battle conditions, is in the approximate proportions of 
i; 1-5: 4, which would thus produce a shell effect (supposing 
the hits made by each type of gun to bear a fixed proportion to 
the rounds fired), in the proportions of 72: 22: 4, for the 12-in., 
y-2-in. and 6-in. guns respectively. This argument of course 
takes no account of the probably greater effect produced by the 
dispersion of the larger number of hits of the smaller gun over 
the exposed area of the target, nor, on the other hand, does it 
take account of the greater armour-piercing power of the 12-in. 
shell which would have the result that a larger proportion of the 
hits from the smaller gun would be defeated by the enemy's 
armour, and so prove innocuous. 

The shell effect forms a strong argument for the weight avail- 
able for the heavy gun armament of a ship being disposed of in 
the form only of the heaviest gun available. Another strong 
argument is that deduced from the fact already stated, that, as 
the calibre of the gun increases, its ballistic powers enable 
accurate shooting to be made at a longer range. 

The accuracy of a gun at any range depends mainly, for 
practical naval purposes, on what is known as the " dangerous 
space," or the limit within which the range must be known in 
order that a target of a given height may be struck. Again, the 
dangerous space at any range depends upon the remaining 
velocity of the projectile at that range, which, as between guns 
of different calibres but with the same initial muzzle velocity, is 
greater, the greater the calibre of the gun and weight of projectile, 
the advantage possessed by the larger gun in this respect being 
much increased at great ranges. As a practical example, for a 
target 30 ft. high at a range of Sooo yds., the dangerous spaces 
of modern 12-in., 9-2-in. and 6-in. guns, which do not differ 
greatly in muzzle velocity, are 75, 65 and 40 yds. respectively. 
At whatever range a naval action is to be fought, it is evident 
that there must be a period during which the enemy is within 
the practical 12-in. gun range, and outside the practical 6-in. 
gun range, and that during this period the weight allotted to 
6-in. guns will be wasted, and this at the outset of an action, 
when it is more important than at any time during its progress to 
inflict damage on the enemy as a means of preventing him from 
inflicting damage on ourselves. But if all the weight available be 
allotted to 12-in. guns, the whole of the armament which will 
bear on the enemy will come into action at the same time, and 
that the earliest, and consequently most advantageous, time 
possible. This train of argument led to the substitution of 
g-2-in. guns in the 8 " King Edward VII." class (the first of 
which was completed in 1905) for the upper deck 6-in. guns, and 
eventually in the " Lord Nelson " and " Agamemnon " (com- 
pleted in iqo8) to the abolition of the 6-in. armament, which 
was replaced by ten 9-2-in. guns. 

At the beginning of the present century the subject of " fire 
control " began to receive considerable attention, and a short 
statement is necessary of the causes which render essential an 
accurate and reliable system of controlling the fire of a ship 
if hits are to be made at long range. In the first place, even with 
the 12-in. gun, the range must be known with considerable 
nicety for a ship to be hit. At a target 30 ft. high, at 8000 yds., 
for example, the range on the sights must be correct within 
75 yds. or the shot will fall over or short of the target. No range- 
finder has yet proved itself reliable, under service conditions, 
to such a degree, and even if one were found, it could not be 
relied upon to do more than place the first shot in fair proximity 
to the target. The reason for this lies in the distinction which 
must be drawn between the distance of a target and its " gun 
range," or, in other words, the distance to which the sights must 
be adjusted in order that the target may be hit. 

This gun range varies with many conditions, foremost among 
which are the wear of the gun, the temperature of the cordite, 
the force and direction of the wind and other atmospheric 
conditions. It can only be ascertained with certainty by a 
process of " trial and error," using the gun itself. The error, 
or distance which a shot falls short of or beyond the target, can 
be estimated with a greater approach to accuracy the greater the 
height of the observer. It is the process of forming this estimate 



which is termed " spotting," a duty the performance of which 
calls for the exercise of the most accurate judgment on the part of 
the " spotter," and which requires much practice in order that 
efficiency may be secured. In practice, the first shot is fired 
with the sights adjusted for the distance of the target given by the 
range-finder, corrected as far as is practicable for the various con- 
ditions affecting the gun range. The first shot is spotted, and the 
result of the spotting observations governs the adjustment of the 
sights for the next shot, which is spotted in its turn, and the 
sights are readjusted until the target is hit. From this time 
onwards it is (in theory) only necessary to apply the change in 
range, due to the movements of our own ship and of the enemy, 
for the interval between successive shots, in order to continue 
hitting. This change of range, which may be considerable 
(e.g. 1000 yds. per minute in the extreme case of ships approaching 
each other directly, and each steaming at the rate of 15 knots), is 
in practice extremely difficult to estimate correctly, and the 
spotting is consequently continued in order to rectify errors 
in estimating the rate of change in range. For various reasons the 
" gun range " which has been referred to is not the same for 
different natures of guns. This is mainly on account of the 
difference in the height attained by their projectiles in the course 
of their respective trajectories. While it is possible, by careful 
calibration (i.e. the firing from the several guns of carefully 
aimed rounds at a fixed target with known range and under 
favourable conditions for practice), to make the shots from all 
guns of the same nature fall in very close proximity to each other 
when the sights of all are similarly adjusted, it has not been found 
possible in practice to achieve this result with guns of different 
natures. Consequently guns of each nature must be spotted for 
independently, and it is obvious that this adds considerably 
to the elaboration and complication of the fire control system. 

This constitutes one of the reasons for the adoption of the 
uniform armament in the " Dreadnought " and her successors; 
another important reason lies in the fact that with the weight 
available for the heavy gun armament disposed of in a small 
number of very large guns, a greater proportion of these guns 
can be mounted on the midship line, and consequently be avail- 
able for fire on either side of the ship (see fig. 90). Thus in the 
" Dreadnought," eight of her ten 12-in. guns can bear through a 
considerable arc on either beam, while in the " Lord Nelson," 
although all her four 12-in. guns can bear on either beam, half 
at least of her 9-2-in. armament (i.e. that half on the opposite 
side to the enemy) will be at any moment out of bearing, and 
consequently be for the time a useless weight. The same principle 
of a uniform armament of 12-in. guns has been adopted in the 
" Invincible " type, the only large cruisers designed since the 
inception of the "Dreadnought." Thus the 12-in. gun forms 
the sole heavy gun armament of all battleships and large cruisers 
of the " Dreadnought " era. The gun so carried is known 
as the Mark X., it is 45 calibres in length, and fires a projectile 
weighing 850 lb with a charge of cordite of 260 lb, resulting in 
a muzzle velocity of 2700 ft. per second. The Mark XL gun was 
designed to be mounted in the later " Dreadnoughts." Following 
the same line of development as resulted in the Mark X. gun, it is 
longer, heavier, fires an increased charge of cordite, and has a 
higher muzzle velocity, viz. of 2960 ft. per second. This gun 
appears to mark the climax of development along the present 
lines, since the price to be paid in greater weight, length and 
diminished durability of rifling is out of all proportion to the 
small increase in muzzle velocity. Further developments would 
therefore be looked for in some other direction, such as the 
adoption either of a new form of propellant or of a gun of larger 
calibre. A modern gun of 10-in. calibre is found in the battle- 
ships " Triumph " and " Swiftsure." The next gun in importance 
to the 12-in. is the 9-2-in., which forms part of the armament of 
the " Lord Nelson " and " King Edward VII." classes of battle- 
ships, and the principal armament of all armoured cruisers (ex- 
cepting the " County " class) antecedent to the " Invincibles." 
The latest gun of this calibre has developed from earlier types in a 
similar manner to the 12-in., that is to say, it has experienced 
a gradual increase in length, weight, and weight of charge, with 



NAVAL GUNS] 



ORDNANCE 



233 



a consequently increased muzzle velocity. The latest type, 
which is known as the Mark XL, and is mounted in the " Lord 
Nelson " and " Agamemnon," is 50 calibres in length, weighs 28 
tons, and with a charge of cordite of 130 lb gives to a projectile 
of 3S0 lb a muzzle velocity of 2S75 ft. per second. The 7-S-in. 
gun forms the secondary armament of the " Triumph " and 
" Swiftsure," and is mounted in the armoured cruisers of the 
" Minotaur," " Duke of Edinburgh " and " Devonshire " 
classes. The 6-in. gun, of which there are a very large number 
afloat in modern, though not the most recent, battleships, and 
in armoured and first and second class cruisers, is the largest gun 
which is worked by hand power alone. For this reason, and on 
account of its rapidity of fire, it was for many years popular as 
an efficient weapon. It was evolved from the 6-in. 80-pounder 
B.L. gun, constructed at Elswick, which was the first breech- 
loader adopted by the Royal Navy, and whose development has 
culminated in the 6-in. Mark XL gun of the " King Edward 
VII." class and contemporary cruisers, which fires a ioo-lb 
projectile with a muzzle velocity of 2900 ft. per second. It has 
only now passed out of favour on account of its inferior hitting 
power at long range as compared with that of guns of larger 
calibre, and as a secondary armament of 6-in. guns is still being 
included in the latest battleship designs of more than one foreign 
navy — notably that of the Japanese, with their practical experi- 
ence of modern war at sea — its abandonment in the British Navy 
can scarcely be considered final. The 4-in. Q.F. gun is mounted in 
the third-class cruisers of the " P " class as their main armament, 
and an improved gun of this calibre, with muzzle velocity of 
about 2800 ft. per second, is mounted in the later " Dread- 
noughts," as their anti-torpedo-boat armament. 

The increase in size of modern torpedo craft and the increased 
range of modern torpedoes has led to a reconsideration of the 
type of gun suitable for the protection of large ships against 
torpedo attack. The conditions under which the anti-torpedo- 
boat armament comes into play are the most unfavourable 
possible for accurate gun-fire. The target is a comparatively 
small one; it comes into view suddenly and unexpectedly; it 
is moving rapidly, and the interval during which the boat must 
be stopped, i.e. that between her being first sighted and her 
arrival at the distance at which she can expect to fire her torpedo 
with success, is in all probability a very short one. Moreover, 
in the great majority of cases the attack will be made at night, 
when the difficulties of rapid and correct adjustment of sights, 
and of range-finding and spotting, are intensified. Two require- 
ments then are paramount to be satisfied by the ideal anti- 
torpedo-boat gun: (r) it must have a low trajectory, so that 
its shooting will not be seriously affected by a small error in the 
range on the sights; (2) one hit from it must suffice to stop a 
hostile destroyer. 

For many years it was considered that these requirements 
would be met by the 1 2-pounder, which was the anti-torpedo-boat 
gun for battleships from the " Majesties " to the " Dreadnought," 
the 12-pounders mounted in the "King Edwards" and the 
" Dreadnought " being of a longer and heavier type, giving a 
higher muzzle velocity. The introduction of a larger gun has, 
however, been considered desirable, and a 4-in. gun of new type 
is mounted in the later " Dreadnoughts," while in the older 
battleships and large cruisers with secondary armaments it is 
considered by many officers that the 6-in. guns will prove to be 
the most effective weapon against torpedo craft. The gun 
armament of destroyers being required to answer much the same 
purpose as the anti-torpedo-boat armament of large ships, 
namely, to disable hostile torpedo craft, the type of gun used has 
followed a similar line of development. 

Starting with 6-pounders in the first destroyers built, the 
majority of the new destroyers have a fixed armament consisting 
of one 1 2-pounder forward, and four 6-pounders. This armament 
has been changed in the larger destroyers to one of 12-pounders 
only, while the latest ocean-going destroyers have two 4-in. guns. 
Owing, however, to the strength of the decks of such craft being 
insufficient to withstand the stresses set up by the discharge of a 
gun giving very high muzzle velocity, the 4-in. gun for use in 



light craft is one giving 2300 ft. per second muzzle velocity only 
and has a very long recoil. The 6-pounder and 3-pounder Q.F. 
guns are no longer being mounted as part of the armaments of 
modern ships. A very high rate of fire was attained in the 
" semi-automatic " mounting of the 3-pounder, which was last 
fitted in the " Duke of Edinburgh " class, but for reasons already 
given guns of this type are no longer required, and the 3-pounder 
is retained only as a boat gun for sub-calibre practice. 

All double-banked pulling boats and all steam-boats are 
fitted with arrangements for mounting one or two guns, according 
to the size of the boat; the object of the boat armaments being 
for use in river operations, for covering a landing, or in guard- 
boats. Three descriptions of gun are used, the 1 2-pounder 8 cwt. 
and 3-pounder, light Q.F. guns, and the Maxim rifle-calibre 
machine gun. 

Gun-Mountings. — Gun mountings in the British navy may 
be divided broadly into two classes, power-worked and hand- 
worked mountings. The former class includes the mountings 
of guns of all calibres mounted in turrets or barbettes, also of 
o-2-in. guns mounted behind shields; the latter class includes 
mountings of guns of all sizes up to the 7-5-in. which are 
mounted in batteries, casemates or behind shields. 

Hydraulic power has been adopted almost universally in the 
British navy for power-worked mountings, although electricity 
has been experimented with, and has been largely applied in 
some foreign navies. The principal advantages of hydraulic, 
as compared with electric, power are its comparative noiselessness 
and reliability, and the ease with which defects can be diagnosed 
and rectified. On the other hand, electric power is more easily 
transmitted, and is already installed in all ships for working 
electric light and other machinery, whereas hydraulic power, 
when used, is generally installed for the purpose of working the 
guns only. The 12-in. guns in the " Majestic " class, following 
the practice with the earliest heavy B.L. guns, were loaded 
normally at extreme elevation of 135 , and the turret had to be 
trained to the fore and aft line and locked there for each occasion 
of loading. An alternative loading position was also provided, 
in which the guns could be loaded at i° of elevation and with 
the turret trained in any direction. Loading in the alternative 
position could, however, only be continued until the limited 
supply of projectiles which could be stowed in the turret was 
exhausted. Experience showed that a greater rapidity of fire 
could be obtained by the use of this " all round " loading position, 
as it was termed, and in the latest ships of the " Majestic " 
class, and in subsequent battleships, the fixed loading position 
has been abandoned. 

The details of recent 12-in. mountings vary considerably, a 
drawing of one of the most recent being shown in fig. 91, for which 
thanks are due to Messrs Vickers, Sons & Maxim, but in the majority 
of cases there is a " working chamber " revolving with the turret. 
A fixed ammunition hoist brings the shell and cartridges from shell- 
room and magazine respectively into the working chamber, where 
they are transferred to a cage which takes them up, by hydraulic 
power, to the rear of the gun. The gun is strapped by steel bands to 
a cradle (see fig. 91) which moves in and out along a slide on recoil, 
the gun always remaining parallel to the slide. Gun, slide and cradle 
are pivoted for elevation on trunnions carried in trunnion bearings 
fixed to the structure of the turret, and the whole moving weight is 
balanced with the gun in the " run out " position. The recoil of 
the gun on firing is taken up by a hydraulic press placed underneath 
the slide, and the gun is run out again into the firing position by 
hydraulic power. Loading is carried out by means of a hydraulic 
rammer, with the gun in the " run out " position, and at an angle of 
elevation which varies with different mountings. In the most 
recent mountings loading can be carried out with the gun at any 
elevation, thus affording considerably greater facility to the gun- 
layer for keeping his sights on the target during the process of 
loading, and so increasing the rate of fire by enabling the gun to be 
discharged immediately the loading operations are completed. 
Elevating is by hydraulic power, and is effected by cylinders placed 
underneath the slide, the pistons working on an arm projecting 
downwards. Turret turning engines are also hydraulic, and much 
attention has been given of late years to the perfection of elevating 
and turning gear such as will enable the turret or gun to respond 
instantly to the wish of the gun-layer, and to move either with con- 
siderable rapidity, or very slowly and steadily as would be the case 
when following a target at long range and with but little motion on 
the ship. The breech is opened and closed by hand or by hydraulic 



234 



ORDNANCE 




From a drawing supplied by Messrs. Vickers, Sons & Maxim. 



Fig. 91. — Diagram of 12-in. Gun Mounting, " Dreadnought" type. 



A, 


Roller ring. 


K, 


B, 


Gun slide. 


L, 


C, 


Recoil buffer. 


N, 


D, 


Gun cradle. 


Pi, 


G, 


Rammer. 


P* 


H, 


Loading cage. 





Elevating presses. 
Guide rail for loading cage. 
Trunk cage. 

Breech block in open position. 
Breech operating hand 
wheel. 



Ri, Transferring rammer pro- 
jectiles from trunk cage to 
gun-loading cage. 

R2, Transferring rammer for 
powder charges from trunk 
cage to gun-loading cage. 



R3, Transferring chamber. 

R4, Training rack. 

R5, Training engine. 

S, Rotating trunk. 

T, Turntable. 

W, Casing for chain rammer. 



power, and a douche of water or blast of air, or a combination of 
both, removes any smouldering fragments of cordite or cartridge 
material before a fresh round is loaded. 

Although there is little difference in principle between the arrange- 
ments of the mountings in the later " Majesties " and those in the 
" Dreadnought," improvements in detail have enabled the interval 
between successive rounds to be reduced from about 55 seconds in 
the former case to 25 or 30 seconds in the latter. 

In the turrets containing 9-2-in. and 7-5-in, guns, which exist in 
most British armoured and first-class protected cruisers, the moving 
weights are, of course, not so large, and, as might be expected, the 
assistance of hydraulic machinery is not necessary in so many 
operations. A drawing of a typical 9-2-in. gun and mounting is 
shown in fig. 92. 

Training the turret and elevating the guns are, however, in all 
cases performed by hydraulic power, as is the raising of the pro- 
jectiles to their place on the loading tray in rear of the gun, but the 
breech is opened and closed, and the charge and projectile rammed 
home, by hand power only, while the gun, after recoil, is forced out 
again to its firing position by means of springs. A ready supply 
of thirty-two projectiles is stowed in a " shell carrier," which is a 
circular trough running on rollers round the turret, but independently 
of it. When a projectile is required to be loaded into the gun, the 
shell carrier is rotated until the required projectile is under a hatch 
in rear of the gun, when the projectile is raised by a hydraulic press 
on to a swinging loading tray. It is intended that the shell carrier 
shall be replenished direct from the shell-room during the pauses of 
an engagement. A new type of 9-2-in. mounting has been installed 
in the " Lord Nelson " and " Agamemnon," in which greater use is 
made of hydraulic power with a view to improving rapidity of fire. 
In this mounting, each projectile is brought up from the shell- 
room as it is required, and the loading operations are performed 
by hydraulic power instead of by hand. 

The " King Edward VI 1." class of battleships and " Duke of 
Edinburgh " class of cruisers are the last ships in which any 6-in. 
guns have been mounted, and with the exception of the 7-5-in. 
guns in the " Triumph " and " Swiftsure," these are the largest guns 
which are worked entirely by hand. Other hand-worked guns are 



the 4-in. and 12-pounder, which are mounted in small cruisers and 
destroyers. 

The principles of the 6-in., 4-in. and 12-pounder mountings are 
similar. The rear part of the gun is partially enclosed in a metal 
cradle, which carries the recoil cylinder and running out spring box. 
The gun and cradle are balanced for elevation about trunnions on 
the cradle, which fit into trunnion bearings on the carriage. The 
latter carries the elevating and training gear, and the whole moving 
weight is borne by a pivot pin which rotates on a ball bearing. The 
gun recoils in the line of fire, and the energy of recoil is absorbed by 
means of the recoil piston, whose rod is secured to the gun, passing 
over a valve key secured to the cradle, in such a way as to produce 
a channel of varying sectional area through which the liquid in the 
recoil cylinder must pass from one side of the piston to the other. 
Springs run the gun out again after firing into its original position. 
The breech is opened by the single motion of a hand lever. A 
" bare " charge is used in the 6-in. and 4-in. guns, with the de Bange 
type of obturation, while a brass cartridge case has been retained 
with the 12-pounder, as with the earlier Q.F. guns. 

Firing is by electricity, percussion being available as an alternative 
if required, and the current is usually taken off the dynamo mains 
of the ship. 

Sighting. — The great advances recently made in accuracy 
of fire have been rendered possible, to a very great extent, by 
the use of telescopic sighting apparatus. Arrangements are 
made in all modern sights for the bars or disks which carry 
the range graduations to be of considerable length or diameter 
respectively, in order that no difficulty may be found in 
adjusting the sights for every 25 or 50 yds. of range. In the 
larger hand-worked mountings, where the laying of the gun for 
elevation and for direction is effected by two men on opposite 
sides of the gun, the sights used by them are " cross-connected, " 
i.e. connected by rods and gearing to one another in such a way 
that, initial parallelism of the axes of the two telescopes having 



NAVAL GUNS] 



ORDNANCE 



235 




From a drawing supplied by Messrs Vickers, Sons & Maxim. 

Fig. 92. — Diagram of a o,-2-in. Gun and Mounting, 

A, Roller ring. G, Elevating press. 

B, Recoil buffer. H, 

C, Gun cradle slide frame. K, 

D, Loading tray. L, 

E, Shell carrier. M, 

F, Pressure water pivot pipes. Pi, 



Shell-lifting press. 
Fixed armoured trunk. 
Radial shell-lifting crane. 
Axial powder hoist. 
Breech block. 



Hoguc ' 



Hi 
R2 
T, 

U, 



type. 
Breech operating hand- 
wheel. 
Training rack. 
Training engine. 
Turntable. 
Powder door. 



been secured, the adjustments to one sight made by the sight- 
setter are simultaneously effected at the sight on the opposite 
of the gun. 

In practice with the 6-in. and 4-in. guns, one man is responsible 
for the laying of the gun for direction, and has consequently only 
to think about the coincidence of the vertical cross- wire with the 
target, while another man, who also fires, keeps the gun laid 
for elevation, and is responsible only for the coincidence of the 
target with the horizontal cross- wire. The 12-pounder has one 
sight only, one man being considered sufficient to keep the gun 
laid for elevation as well as for direction, and to fire. It is 
essential that the sights shall be unaffected by the recoil of the 
gun, so that they can be adjusted up to the moment of firing 
by the sight-setter, and that it shall not be necessary for the gun- 
layer to remove his eye from the telescope while the gun is 
being fired and reloaded. It is also essential that the sights shall 
move automatically in elevation and direction with the gun. 
These two requirements are easily met in the hand-worked 
mountings by the attachment of the sights to the cradle, which 
does not move on recoil, and remains constantly parallel to the 
gun; but in turret mountings the case is more complicated and 
involves greater complexity of gearing. 

The older turret sighting arrangement consisted of two horizontal 
shafts, one for each gun, running across the turret, which were 
rotated by pinions gearing into racks underneath the gun-slides, 
the latter remaining of course always parallel to the guns. Pinions 
keyed to these shafts geared in their turn into racks formed on 
vertical sighting columns in the sighting positions, these columns, 
which carried the sighting telescopes, accordingly moving up and 
down with the guns. Witlvthis arrangement an appreciable amount 
of backlash was found to be inevitable, owing to the play between 
the teeth of the several racks and pinions, and to the torsion of the 
■shafts, and the arrangement was also open to the objection that the 
telescopes were much exposed to possible injury from an enemy's 
fire. These defects have been very largely obviated by the " rocking 
motion sights," which have been fitted in the turrets of the latest 
British battleships and cruisers. In these sights a sight-bracket is 
secured to and rotates with the trunnion of the mounting; the 
sight-carrier and telescope move along the top of the sight-bracket, 
on a curved arc of which the trunnion is not the centre. When the 
sight is at zero, the telescope is parallel to the axis of the gun, while 
to adjust the sight, the sight-carrier with telescope is moved along 
the curved arc by means of a rack and pinion a distance corresponding 



to the graduations shown on the range dial, which is concentric 
with the pinion. 

Organization. — The organization of a large ship for action is 
necessarily highly elaborate. Among the officers, next to the 
captain, the most important duties are probably those of the 
fire control officer. He is in communication by telephone or 
voice tube with each of the several units composing the ship's 
armament. This office is usually filled by the gunnery lieutenant. 
In the conning tower with the captain is the navigating officer, 
who attends to the course and speed of the ship, assisted by 
petty officers to work the wheel and engine-room telegraphs. The 
torpedo lieutenant, or another officer at the torpedo director, 
is also in the conning tower, prepared to fire the torpedoes if 
opportunity offers. Other officers of the military branch, and 
marine officers, are in charge of various sections of the 
"quarters." 

The rate of advance in naval gunnery has been much accelerated 
since 1902. The construction of the " Dreadnought," which em- 
bodied a new principle both in nature and disposition of armament, 
the rise of the United States and Japanese navies to the first rank, 
and the practical experience of the Russo-Japanese war, were all 
factors which contributed to the increase of the normal rate of 
advance due to progress in metallurgy and engineering science. In 
the British as well as in other navies, notably those of Germany, 
the United States and Japan, ever-increased attention is being 
devoted to the attainment of a rapid and accurate shell-fire, and 
large sums are being expended upon fire control instruments and 
elaborate aiming and sighting appliances. Size of armaments, 
power of guns, resistance of armour, efficiency of projectiles, and, 
above all, rapidity and accuracy of fire, all seem to be advancing 
with giant strides. But there are two important ingredients of 
naval gunnery which are not subject to change: the human factor, 
and the factor of the elements — wind, sea and weather. The 
latter ensures at any rate one datum point to the student of the 
science, that is, that the extreme range in action is limited by 
the maximum distance at which the enemy can be clearly seen, 
which may be considered to be a distance of 8000 to 10,000 yds. 
The permanence of the human factor assures that, however great 
the advance in material, and, provided that no great discrepancies 
exist in this respect between opposing navies, success at sea will be 
the lot of the nation whose officers are the coolest and most in- 
telligent, whose men are the best disciplined and best trained, and 
whose navy is in all respects the most imbued with the habits and 
traditions of the sea. (S. Fr.) 



236 



ORDOVICIAN SYSTEM 



ORDOVICIAN SYSTEM, in geology, the group of strata which 
occur normally between the Cambrian below and the Silurian 
above; it is here regarded as including in ascending order the 
Arenig, Llandeilo, and Caradoc or Bala series (gq.v.). The 
name was introduced by C. Lapworth in 1S79 to embrace those 
rocks — well developed in the region formerly inhabited by the 
Ordovices — which had been classed by Sir R. Murchison as 
Lower Silurian and by A. Sedgwick in his Cambrian system. 
The term is convenient and well established, but Lower Silurian 
is still used by some authors. The line of demarcation between 
the Ordovician and the Cambrian is not sharply defined, and 
beds on the Tremadoc horizon of the Cambrian are placed by 
many writers at the base of the Ordovician, with good palaeonto- 
logical reasons. 

The rocks of this system include all types of sedimentation; 
when they lie flat and undisturbed, as in the Baltic region and 
Russia, the sands and clays are as soft and incoherent as the 
similar rocks of Tertiary age in the south of England; where 
they have been subjected to powerful movements, as in Great 
Britain, they are represented by slates, greywackes, quartzites, 
chlorite-, actinolite- and garnet-schists, amphibolites and other 
products of metamorphism. In Europe the type of rock varies 
rapidly from point to point, limestones, shales, sandstones, 
current-bedded grits and conglomerates or their metamorphosed 
equivalents are all found within limited areas; but in northern 
Europe particularly the paucity of limestones is a noteworthy 
feature in contrast with the rocks of like age in the south, and 
still more with the Ordovician of North America, in which 
limestones are prevalent. In the Highlands of Scotland, in 
north-west England, in Wales and Ireland, there are enormous 
developments of contemporaneous lavas and tuffs and their 
metamorphosed representatives; tuffs occur also in Brittany, 
and lavas on a large scale in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick. 

Distribution. — The Ordovician system is widely distributed. 
The accompanying map indicates roughly the relative positions 
of the principal land-masses and seas, but it must be accepted 
with reserve. 

A study of the fossils appears to point to the existence of 
definite faunal regions or marine basins. The Ordovician rocks 



waters, embracing China, Siberia and the Himalayas; con- 
cerning the last-named marine area not much is known. In 
the opposite direction, the Baltic basin may have communicated, 
through Greenland, with the North American and Arctic seas. 
Over central and eastern North America another large body 
of water probably lay, with open communications with the north 
and west, and with a more constricted connexion with (.he 




Atlantic sea. The lagoonal character of some of the rocks of 
the Tunguska region of Siberia may perhaps be indicative of 
continental border conditions in that quarter. 

Some of the principal subdivisions of the Ordovician rocks 
are enumerated in the table. Owing to the universal distribu- 
tion of the graptolites, the correlation of widely separated 
areas has been rendered possible wherever the muds and shales, 
in which their remains are preserved, are found. Where they 
are absent the correlation of the minor local subdivisions of 
distant deposits is more difficult. In Great Britain, through 



Ordovician System. 
Ordovician Rocks: Generalized Correlation Table. 



England 

and 
Wales. 


Graplolite Zones. 


Scotland. 


Scandinavia. 


Bohemia. 


N.-W. France. 


W. Russia. 


North American Continent. 


New York. 


Quebec. 


Caradoc 

or 

Bala group. 


Dicellngraplus 

anceps. 

D. co?nplanatus. 

Pleurograptus 

linearis. 

Dicranograptus 

clingani. 


Hartfell Shales, 
Ardmillan Series, 

and 
Lowther Shales. 


Brachiopod beds, 
Trinucleus beds, 
and 
Leptacna 
limestone. 
Trinucleus 
limestone. 


D5. 
04. 

D 3 - 


Gres de May. 

Calcaire de 
Rosao. 


Bo rk holm 

and 

Lyckholm beds. 

Wesenberg 
beds. 


Richmond beds 

and g 
Hudson river Shales. *3 
c 
Lorraine beds. -2 u 
a — 
Ulica Shale. a 


Lowest # 

Anticosti -jj 

limestone g 

and -o 

Hudson river '3 

beds. g" 

XI 

o 


Llandeilo 
group. 


Coenograptus 
gracilis. 

Didymograptus 
Murchisoni. 


Glenkiln Shales 

and 

Earr Series. 


Middle 
Graptolite beds 
and 
C has mops 
limestone. 
Cystidean 
limestone. 


D2. 
Diy. 


Schisles des 
Gemblou.t 

and 
ironstone. 


Jewe, Itfer, and 
Kuckers beds. 

Echinosphaerite 
limes tone. 


Trenton beds ^ 
and c 
Galena limestone. .2 "" ' 

% a 

Black river beds. « - 
Lowville limestone. S « 


Trenton S « 
limestone. {^B 

t» s 

Coenograptus -o "^ 
Shales. «*3 

"3 


(Lanvirn) 

and 

Arenig group. 


Didymograptus 
bifid us. 

Tetragraptus 
bryonides. 


Radiolarian 

Cherts 

aod 

Ballantrae 

Series. 


Lower 

Graptolite beds 

and 

Orthocerai 

limestone. 


Di/3. 


Gr£s 

Armoricain 

(part). 


Vaginatus 
limestone 

and 
Glauconite 
limestone. 


Chazy limestone c , , 
(part) M U 
and « 
St Peter's saodstone. § 


Levis Shales ,9 

with t 

Tetragraptus, g 

and o 

Phyllograptus. ^ 



Tremadoc beds, Ceratopyge beds, and beds with Euloma-Niobe fauna here regarded as Cambrian : not invariably present. 



of the British Isles seem to have been deposited in a North 
Atlantic sea which embraced also the north of France and 
Belgium. Confluent with this sea on the east was a rather 
peculiar basin which included Bohemia, southern France, Spain, 
Portugal, the eastern Alps, Thuringia, Fichtelgebirge and the 
Keller Wald. Another European basin, probably separated 
from the Bohemian or Mediterranean sea in early Ordovician 
times, lay over the Baltic region, Scandinavia, the Baltic pro- 
vinces and north Germany, and communicated eastwards by 
way of Russian Poland and central Russia with far eastern 



C. Lapworth and his school, and J. E. Marr and the Cambridge 
school, and in Scandinavia and the Baltic region, through 
W. C. Brogger, S. A. Tulberg, F. Schmidt and others, the most 
elaborate subdivision of the Ordovician rocks has been attained. 

In the Baltic provinces of Russia, F. Schmidt describes the follow- 
ing stages, in descending order: (Stage F) the Lyckholm and 
Borkholm zones, a highly fossiliferous series, equivalent to the 
Middle Bala of Britain; many of the limestones are largely formed of 
Rhabdoporella and other calcareous algae. (E) Wesenberg zone = 
Bala. (D) Jewe and Kegel zone. (C) ltfer beds, Kuckers Shale 
(bituminous limestones and marls = Brandschiefer), Echinosphaerite 



ORDOVICIAN SYSTEM 



237 



li mestone = Upper Orthoceratite limestone of Sweden. (B) Ortho- 
ceratite (Vaginaten) limestone = Orthoceratite limestone of Sweden, 
Glauconitic limestone, Glauconitic sand (Grcensand). The last- 
mentioned reposes on Cambrian Diciyonema shales. While the 
Ordovician rocks in Scania, the Baltic provinces and north-central 
Russia are undisturbed and level-bedded, those on the western side 
of| the Scandinavian axis and in the Urals have suffered movement 
and are metamorphosed into schists, phyllitcs, quartzite, marble, 
Set. ; and, especially in Scandinavia, have been extensively thrust. 
Tljie Bohenlian Ordovician, " stage D " of Barrandc, consists mainly 
of greywackes and shales with some ironstone beds and eruptive rocks 
in the lower parts. In Germany the only large areas are found in the 
Thuringer Wald, Fichtelgebirge, Frankenwald and Vogtland, where 
they consist principally of unfossiliferous greywackes and shales 
with some oolites and glauconitic ironstone (chamosite) in the lower 
part. They are divisible into the Hauptschiefer or Lcderschiefer and 
the Ober-Thuringit beds above, and the Griffelschiefer and Unter- 
Thuringit beds below, which rest upon the Lcitmitzschiefer of 
the Euloma-Niobe (Cambrian) horizon. Across northern Russia 
Ordovician rocks cover a great area; they consist of clays, bitumin- 
ous and calcareous shales, sands and marls, which in the Ural region 
have been metamorphosed ; the Bukowka sandstone of Russian 
Poland is of this age. In north-west France this system is represented 
in Brittany and Normandy by the slates of Riadan, the grts de May, 
the schistes a calymines (with an ironstone bed at the base) and the 
gres armoricain. In the Ardennes are the schistes de Gembloux, 
resting upon graptolitic shales of Arenig age. Sandstones and shales 
occur in Languedoc, and various rocks in the Pyrenees. In the 
Iberian peninsula Ordovician rocks are widely spread, represented 
by sandstones, slates and shales covering the whole of the period ; 
they are well developed in Asturia and Galicia. In the eastern Alps 
about Graz are found calcareous shales with crinoids, the " Schock- 
elkalk " and " Semriacher " shales; the Marthcncr beds of the 
Carnic Alps are of this age. In China (Kiang-su, Kian-chang), in 
Burma (Mandalay) and in the Himalayas (Niti and Spiti) Ordo- 
vician fossil-bearing rocks are known. 

On the North American continent Ordovician rocks cover a very 
large area in the central, eastern and northern parts (north of lat. 30 ). 
As regards the classification and correlation of the strata, which 
change in character from point to point, as is natural over so large an 
area, much remains to be done. In the table the divisions of the 
system that obtain in the New York district are enumerated ; but 
in each state there is a local nomenclature for the beds. Thus in 
Iowa, Wisconsin and Minnesota we find (1) Lower Magnesian lime- 
stone, St Peter's sandstone; (2) Trenton limestone, Galena lime- 
stone; (3) Hudson river shales; in Arkansas, the California or 
Magnesian limestone, Saccaroidal limestone, Izard limestone and 
Polk Bayou limestone; in Oklahoma, the Arbuckle limestone, 
Simpson scries, Viola limestone and Sylvan shales; and in east 
Tennessee, the Chickamauga limestone, Athens shale, Tellia sand- 
stone, Sievier shale and Bays sandstone. In Massachusetts there 
are enormous series of schists which have been assigned to this 
period. In west Virginia are the Martinsburg shales (1000 ft. or 
more). In Canada the Ordovician rocks (Quebecgroup) are thickly 
developed. In the upper division there are the lowest of the Anticosti 
limestones, the Hudson river beds, and Trenton limestone; to the 
middle division belong the Coenograptus shales; and the lower 
division consists of the Levis shales with Sillery beds at the base. 
In Nova Scotia and New Brunswick are the lower and upper divisions 
of the Cobequid group, a series of shales, quartzites and conglomer- 
ates with igneous rocks. In the polar regions Ordovician rocks are 
represented by the Trenton limestone in Boothia and King William's 
Land; by limestones with Caryocystis granetum in east Greenland; 
and in the Barrow Straits by beds with Asaphus and Madurea. 

In North Africa Ordovician rocks are probably present, and in 
New Zealand the Arorere series (Wanaka group), and in Australia 
(Victoria) the graptolitic, gold-bearing shales and slates belong to 
this period. During this period there appears to have been a general 
tendency for the sea to transgress on the land, a tendency which 
increased towards its close, especially in the northern hemisphere 
(Europe and the Appalachian regions). One of the results of this 
movement was the interchange and commingling of many previously 
separated faunal groups. About the beginning of the period the sea 
withdrew from the land in Texas and south of the Rocky Mountains. 
The folding of the Appalachians was in progress early in Ordovician 
times and later in the period the first symptoms of the Scandinavian 
and British folding set in. 

Volcanic Activity. — This period was one of great volcanic 
activity in several widely separated regions. " In Ayrshire 
and the south-western districts (of the southern uplands), where 
the volcanic constituents attain a great development, they 
consist of basic lavas (diabase, &c), with intercalated tuffs 
and agglomerates. A characteristic feature of these lavas is 
the development of ellipsoidal or pillow-structure in them. 
This volcanic platform appears to underlie the Silurian region 
over an area of at least 2000 sq. m., inasmuch as it comes to 
the surface wherever the crests of the anticlines bring up suffi- 



ciently deep parts of the formations. It is thus one of the most 
extensive as well as one of the most ancient volcanic tracts 
of Europe " (Sir A. Geikie, Text-book of Geology, 4th ed. vol. ii. 
p. 951). In the west of England and in Wales there was also 
a very active volcanic centre. In the Snowdon district thousands 
of feet of contemporaneous felsitic lavas and tuffs occur in the 
Bala beds; while in Cader Idris, the Arenig Mountains and 
the Arans there are similar eruptions of felsitic and rhyolitic 
lavas, tuffs and agglomerates — probably many of them sub- 
marine — interstratified in the Arenig formation. In the Lake 
district a great series of lavas and ashes — the Borrowdale 
series — was erupted during the middle of the period; the earlier 
effusions were andesitic, the later ones felsitic and rhyolitic. 
In Ireland the Arenig lavas of Tyrone resemble some of those 
in Scotland. Volcanic rocks (porphyrites, syenites and lavas) 
occur in considerable force in the Ordovician rocks of Nova 
Scotia and New Brunswick and New Zealand. Tuffs of this 
age are found in Brittany, and diabase in Bohemia. 

The economic products obtained from rocks of this period include 
gold in Australia, New Zealand and Wales; iron ore in F ranee; 
lead and zinc from the Galena and Trenton horizons in Wisconsin, 
Iowa and Illinois; manganese in Arkansas; oil and gas from the 
Trenton stage in Ohio and east Indiana; roofing slates and slate 
pencils in Wales and the Lake district; limestone in Great Britain 
and Tennessee; phosphate beds in Wales and Tennessee; marble 
in the Appalachian district; graphite (plumbago) in the Lake 
district ; and jasper in Wales and southern Scotland. 

Ordovician Life. — Compared with the preceding Cambrian 
period, the Ordovician is remarkable for the great expansion 
in numbers and variety of organisms, apart from the fact that 
fossils are better preserved in the younger formations. 

All the great classes of mollusks were represented, the most numer- 
ous being the brachiopods, which, in addition to the simple forms of 
the Cambrian, began at this time to develop spire-bearing genera 
{Chonetes, Orthis, Orthisina, Strophomena, Crania, Schizotrcta, 
Porambonites, Rafinesquina, Leptaena,Zygospira). The gasteropods 
now developed all the leading types of shell (Pleurotomaria, Omphalo- 
trochus); but- both this class and the pelecypods (Lyrodesma, 
Ctenodonta, Modiolopsis) were subordinate in importance to the 
cephalopods. These mollusks were probably the most powerful 
living creatures in the Ordovician seas; straight-shelled, slightly 
curved, and nautiloid forms predominated {Orthoceras, Cyrtoceras, 
Gyroceras, Trocholites, Endoceras, Litoceras, Lituites, Actinoceras). 
Some of the straight shells were of enormous size, 12 to 15 ft. long 
and as much as I ft. in diameter, in the widest part. Trilobites were 
present in great abundance, and in this period they reached the 
climax of their development. In the lower stage we find Agnostus, 
Calymene, Asaphus, Illaenus, Placoparia; on the Llandeilo horizon, 
Calymene, Asaphus, Megalaspis, Dalmanitis; and, at the summit, 
Trinucleus and Homalonotus. In the transition zone between 
Ordovician and Cambrian, Ceratopyge, Euloma, Niobe, flourished. 
Other important genera are Ogygia, Cheirurus, Harpes, Acidaspis. 
Ostracods (Leperditia, Beyrichia), cyprids (Bairdia, Macrocypris), 
phyllocarids {Ceratiocaris, Peltocaris), cirripeds (Lepidocoleus), and, 
later, eurypterids represented other crustacean groups. The 
bryozoans, Stomatopora, Monticulipora, Phylloporina, Fenestclla and 
others, were abundant and frequently formed beds of limestone. 
Among the echinoderms the cystoids were the most prominent 
(Pleurocystis, Aristocystis) and at this period reached their climax; 
crinoids (Archaeocrinus, Dendrocrinus) became more important; 
while ophiuroids, echinoids (Bothriocidaris) and asteroids {Taeniaster, 
Palaeaster) made their appearance. Corals (Streptelasma, Colum- 
naria) were scarce, and sponges (Aulocopium, Caryospongia, Archaeo- 
cyathus) were not particularly important; Receptaculites, Ischadites, 
are well-known fossils doubtfully referred to this group. Radiolaria 
assisted in the formation of certain beds of chert, and foraminifera 
have been observed. The remarkable group, the graptolites, evi- 
dently inhabited the seas in countless numbers and have left their 
remains in the dark shales of this period all over the world. At this 
time the diprionidian forms alone were represented by such genera as 
Tetragraptus, Phyllograptus, Didymograptus, Dicellograptus, Diplo- 
graptus and others. Of great interest are the earliest known indica- 
tions of vertebrate life in the form of dermal plates and teeth of fish- 
like organisms from the Ordovician of Colorado. The terrestrial life 
of the period is very meagrely represented by the remains of land 
plants, mostly poorly preserved in certain sandstones, and byscorpions 
and several orders of insects, Protocimex (Sweden), Palaeoblattina 
(Colorado). 

One of the most striking facts brought out by the study of the 
distribution of Ordovician fossils is the wide range of the northern or 
" periarctic " faunal assemblage. This pcriarctic fauna prevails over 
the whole world — so far as our present knowledge shows — with the 
exception of the peculiar Bohemian or Mediterranean region, which 



2 3 8 



ORDU— ORE-DRESSING 



includes north-west and south-west France, Spain, Italy, the Alps, 
the Fichtelgebirge, east Thuringia, Harz and Rhenish Mountains. 

Authorities. — Sir R. 1. Murchison, Silurian System (1839) and 
Siluria (1854, 1867); A. Sedgwick, Synopsis of the Classification of 
the British Palaeozoic Rocks (1855); J. Barrande, Systeme siluriendit 
centre de la Boheme (1852-1887); J. J. Bigsby, Thesaurtts Siluricus 
(London, 1868); J. E. Marr, The Classification of the Cambrian and 
Silurian Rocks (Cambridge, 1883); Charles Lapworth, "On the 
Geological Distribution of the Rhabdophora," Annals and Mag. Nat. 
Hist. ser. 5, vols. Hi. , iv., v., vi. (1879-1880); B. N. Peach, J. Home, 
J. J. H.Teall, " The Silurian Rocks of Great Britain," vol. i., Scotland, 
Mem. Geol. Survey (1899); F. Freeh and others, " Lethaea geog- 
nostica," Theil i. Band 2 {Lethaea palaeozoica) (Stuttgart, 1897- 
1902); Sir A. Geikie, Text-book of Geology (4th ed., 1903); and for 
recent papers, Geological Literature, Geol. Soc. (London, annual). 
See also Cambrian and Silurian Systems. (J. A. H.) 

ORDU (anc. Cotyora, where the " Ten Thousand " embarked 
for home) , a town on the N. coast of Asia M inor, between Samsun 
and Kerasund, connected with Zara, and so with Sivas, by a 
carriage road, and with Constantinople and Trebizond by 
steamer. Pop. about 6000, more than half Christian. Ordu has 
exceptionally good Greek schools, and a growing trade in filberts. 

ORDUIN - NASHCHOKIN, ATHANASY LAVRENTEVICH 
(?-i68o), Russian statesman, was the son of a poor official at 
Pskov, who saw to it that his son was taught Latin, German and 
mathematics. Athanasy began his public career in 1642 as one 
of the delineators of the new Russo-Swedish frontier after the 
peace of Stolbova. Even then he had a great reputation at 
Moscow as one who thoroughly understood " German ways and 
things." He was one of the first Muscovites who diligently 
collected foreign books, and we hear of as many as sixty-nine 
Latin works being sent to him at one time from abroad. He 
attracted the attention of the young tsar Alexius by his resource- 
fulness during the Pskov rebellion of 1650, which he succeeded in 
localizing by personal influence. At the beginning of the 
Swedish War, Orduin was appointed to a high command, in which 
he displayed striking ability. In 1657 he was appointed minister- 
plenipotentiary to treat with the Swedes on the Narova river. 
He was the only Russian statesman of the day with sufficient fore- 
sight to grasp the fact that the Baltic seaboard, or even a part 
of it, was worth more to Muscovy than ten times the same 
amount of territory in Lithuania, and, despite ignorant jealousy 
of his colleagues, succeeded (Dec. 1658) in concluding a 
three-years' truce whereby the Muscovites were left in possession 
of all their conquests in Livonia. In 1660 he was sent as pleni- 
potentiary to a second congress, to convert the truce of 1658 
into a permanent peace. He advised that the truce with Sweden 
should be prolonged and Charles II. of England invited to 
mediate a northern peace. Finally he laid stress upon the 
immense importance of Livonia for the development of Russian 
trade. On being overruled he retired from the negotiations. 
He was the chief plenipotentiary at the abortive congress of 
Durovicha, which met in 1664, to terminate the Russo-Polish 
War; and it was due in no small measure to his superior 
ability and great tenacity of purpose that Russia succeeded in 
concluding with Poland the advantageous truce of Andrussowo 
(Feb. 11, 1667). On his return to Russia he was created 
a boyar of the first class and entrusted with the direction 
of the foreign office, with the title of " Guardian of the great 
Tsarish Seal and Director of the great Imperial Offices." He 
was, in fact, the first Russian chancellor. It was Orduin who 
first abolished the onerous system of tolls on exports and imports, 
and established a combination of native merchants for promoting 
direct commercial relations between Sweden and Russia. He 
also set on foot a postal system between Muscovy, Courlandand 
Poland, and introduced gazettes and bills of exchange into 
Russia. With his name, too, is associated the building of the 
first Russian merchant-vessels on the Dvina and Volga. But his 
whole official career was a constant struggle with narrow routine 
and personal jealousy on the part of the boyars and clerks of the 
council. He was last employed in the negotiations for con- 
firming the truce of Andrussowo (September 1669; March 1670). 
In January 1671 we hear of him as in attendance upon the tsar 
on the occasion of his second marriage; but in February the 
same year he was dismissed, and withdrew to the Kruipetsky 



monastery near Kiev, where he took the tonsure under the nan;ie 
of Antony, and occupied himself with good works till his death 
in 1680. In many things he anticipated Peter the Great. He 
was absolutely incorruptible, thus standing, morally as well as 
intellectually, far above the level of his age. 

See S. M. Solovev, History of Russia (Rus.), vol. xi. (St Petersburg, 
1895, seq.); V. lkonnikov, " Biography of Orduin-Nashchokin " (in 
Russkaya Starina, Nos. 11-12) (St Petersburg, 1883) ; R. Nisbet Bain, 
The First Romanovs (London, 1905, chaps. 4 and 6). (R. N. B.) 
_ OREBRO, a town of Sweden, capital of the district (Ian) of 
Orebro, lying on both banks of the Svarta a mile above its entrance 
into Lake Hjelmar, 135 m. W. of Stockholm by rail. Pop. (1900), 
22,013. In great part rebuilt since a fire in 1854, it has a modern 
appearance. An ancient castle, however, with four round towers, 
remains on an island in the stream. It is used as a museum. 
There may be mentioned also the church of St Nicholas, of the 
13th century; and the King's House (Kungssluga) , an old 'and 
picturesque timber building. In front of the modern town hall 
stands a statue, by Karl Gustav Qvarnstrom (1810-1867), of the 
patriot Engelbrecht (d. 1436), who was born here. The Swedish 
reformers of the 16th century, Olaus and Laurentius Petri, are 
commemorated by an obelisk. Orebro is in close connexion with 
the iron-mining district of central Sweden; it has mechanical 
works and a technical college. A large trade is carried on, by 
way of the Orebro canal and lakes Hjelmar and Malar, with 
Stockholm. 

Orebro was in existence in the nth century. Its castle, erected 
by Birger Jarl in the 13th century, played an important part in 
the early annals of Sweden; and no fewer than twenty diets 
or important assemblies were held either in the castle or in the 
town. Such were the Orebro concilium of 1537, the diet of 1540 
in which the crown was declared hereditary, and that of 1810 
when Bernadotte was elected crown prince. 

ORE-DRESSING, one of the principal processes in the work 
of mining (q. v.). When the miner hoists his ore ' to the surface, the 
contained metal may be either in the native uncombined state, 
as, for example, native gold, native silver, native copper, 
or combined with other substances forming minerals of more 
or less complex composition, as, for example, telluride of gold, 
sulphide of silver, sulphide of copper. In both cases the 
valuable mineral is always associated with minerals of no value. 
The province of the ore-dresser is to separate the " values " 
from the waste — for example, quartz, felspar, calcite — by mechan- 
ical means, obtaining thereby " concentrates " and " tailings." 
The province of the metallurgist is to extract the pure metal 
from the concentrates by chemical means, with or without the 
aid of heat. There are also a number of non-metallic minerals 
which do not have any value, or at best do not reach their highest 
value until they have been subjected to some form of mechanical 
preparation; among them are diamonds, graphite, corundum, 
garnet, asbestos and coal. Ore-dressing, for the purposes of this 
article, may be divided into three parts: (1) properties of 
minerals which render aid in their separation; (2) simple opera- 
tions; (3) operations combined to form processes or mills. 

1. The specific gravity of minerals varies greatly, some being 
heavy, others light. The rate of settling in water is affected by the 
specific gravity in this way: of two particles of the same pro-ert/es 
size but different specific gravity, the heavier settles more 
rapidly than the lighter, while of two particles of different specific 
gravity which settle at the same rate in water, that of higher specific 
gravity is of smaller diameter than the other. The same state- 
ments are true in regard to settling in air, and in regard to momentum 
in air when the particles are thrown out in a horizontal direction. 
Colour, lustre and fracture are of especial value in hand-picking, to aid 
the eye in selecting the mineral sought. Instances are, of colours, 
the white of quartz, the pale straw colour of felspar, the dull yellow 
of limonite, the brass yellow of chalcopyrite, the pale metallic yellow 
of pyrite; of lustres, the vitreous of quartz, the adamantine of 
diamond and cerussite, the resinous of blende, the earthy of limonite, 
and the metallic of pyrite; and of fractures, the cleavage planes of 
felspar and galena, the conchoidal fracture of quartz and pyrite, the 
granular of some forms of magnetite and blende. Magnetism is a 
most direct and simple method of separating minerals where it is 
available. The discovery that by the use of electro-magnets of great 

1 The O. Eng. word was era. corresponding with Du. oer, the origin 
of which is unknown. The form " ore " represents the O.Eng. dr, 
brass; cf. Lat. aes, Skt. ayas. 



ORE-DRESSING 



239 



prower minerals formerly regarded as non-magnetic are attracted, 
has made it possible to separate several classes of minerals present 
in an ore; for example, the strongly magnetic mineral may first be 
taken out, then the mildly magnetic, and last the weakly magnetic, 
trie non-magnetic being left behind. Adhesion acts when brightly 
burnished particles of gold issuing with the sand from the stamp 
mill come in contact with an amalgamated copper plate, for they are 
infetantly plated with mercury and adhere to the copper, while the 
saVid is carried forward by the water. In this way a very perfect 
separation of the gold from the sand is effected. In the South African 
diamond fields it has been found that if the diamond-bearing sand 
is taken in a stream of water over a smooth surface covered with a 
suitable coating of grease, the diamonds will adhere to the grease 
while the sand docs not. 

2. The concentration of ores always proceeds by steps or stages. 
Thus the ore must be crushed before the minerals can be separated, 
and certain preliminary steps, such as sizing and classify- 
Simple ; ngi must prcce j e t he final operations which produce the 
0pera " 0DS - finished concentrates. The more important of these 
simple operations will now be described. 

The ore as mined contains the valuable minerals attached to and 
enclosed in lumps of waste rock. The province of crushing or dis- 
integrating is to sever or unlock the values from the waste, so that 

the methods of separation 
arc then able to part the 
one from the other. In 
crushing ores it is found 
wise to progress by stages, 
coarse crushing being best 
done by one class of 
machine, medium by 
another, and fine by a 
third. Coarse crushing is 
accomplished by breakers of 
the Blake type (fig. 1) or of 
the Gates Comet type (fig. 
2). All of these machines 
break by direct pressure, 
caused by a movable jaw, 




Fig. 



.* \ acting through piston and cylinder with grc; 

.'•^•M „ y \ ( crushing force in the mortar. Steam stam] 

w\/\ "\Lj have been very successful with the nati\ 

:nl F? copper rock, because they break up the litt 

' \ U 1 — . — ti„i — ~ — a ci~_ — *-„ „r „ 



I. — Blake Breaker. 

a, Movable jaw. 

b, Fixed jaw. 

a (figs. 1, 2), approaching towards and receding from a fixed jaw, b. 
The largest size ever fed to a breaker is 24 in. in diameter, and the 
smallest size to which the finest crushing commonly done by these 
machines brings the ore is about \ in. diameter. The machine is 
generally supplied with ore in lumps not larger than 9 in. in diameter, 
and crushes them to about i\ in. in diameter. Medium-size crushing 
is done mostly by rolls or steam stamps. Rolls 
(fig. 3) crush by direct pressure caused by the 
.ore being drawn between two revolving rolls 
held closely together. They make the least 
fine slimes or fines to be lost in the subsequent 
treatment, and are therefore preferred for all 
brittle minerals. The steam stamp works upon 
the same principle as a steam hammer, the 
pestle being forced down by steam pressure 
acting through piston and cylinder with great 

stamps 
tive 
ittle 
leaves, flakes and filaments of copper, and 
render them susceptible of concentration, 
which rolls do not. Fine crushing is done by 
gravity stamps, pneumatic stamps, by cen- 
trifugal roller mills, by amalgamating pans, 
by ball mills, by Chile edgestone mills, by 
tube mills and by arrastras. The gravity 
stamp (fig. 4) is a pestle of 900- lb weight 
trie hub and with more or less, which is lifted by a revolving 
loose fit on the cam and falls by the force of gravity to 
spindle. strike a heavy blow on the ore resting 

on the die in the mortar and do the work 
of crushing; the frequent revolution of the cam gives a more 
or less rapid succession of blows. Gravity stamps are especially 
adapted to the fine crushing of gold ores, which they reduce to 
s^-in. and sometimes even to A-in. grains. The blow of the stamp 
upon the fragments of quartz not only liberates 
the fine particles of gold, but brightens them 
so that they are quickly caught upon the 
amalgamatedplates. The centrifugal roller mills 
are suited to fine crushing of middle products, 
namely by-products composed of grains con- 
taining both values and waste, since they 
avoid making much fine slimes. They crush 
by the action of a roller, rolling on the inside 
of a steel ring, both having vertical axes. The amalgamating 
pan is suitable for grinding silver ores for amalgamation where the 
finest grinding is sought, together with the chemical action from the 
contact with iron. It crushes by a true grinding action of one surface 
sliding upon another. The Chile edgestone mill is employed for the 
finost grinding ever used preparatory to concentration. The arrastra 
or drag-stone mill grinds still finer for amalgamating. The ball mill 



Fig. 2. — Gates 
Breaker, 
o, Movable jaw. 

b, Fixed jaw. 

c, Gear with eccen 




Fig. 3. — Crushing 
Rolls. 



is a horizontal revolving cylinder with iron balls in it which do the 
grinding; the pulverized ore passes out through screens in the 
cylinder wall. It is a fine grinder, making a small amount of im- 
palpable slimes. It is used for preparation for concentrating. The 
tube mill is of similar construction, but it 
is fed through the hollow shaft at one end 
and discharged through the hollow shaft 
at the other; the finely ground ore is 
floated out by water and contains a large 
proportion of impalpable slimes. It is used 
for preparation for cyaniding of gold. 

A considerable class of workable min- 
erals, among which are surface ores of iron 
and surface phosphates, contain worthless 
clay mixed with the valuable material, 
the removal of which is accomplished by 
the log washer. This is a disintegrator 
consisting of a long narrow cylinder re- 
volving in a trough which is nearly hori- 
zontal. Upon the cylinder arc knives or 
paddles set at an angle, which serve the 
double purpose of bruising and disintegrat- 
ing the clay and of conveying the cleaned 
lump ore to be discharged at the upper end 
of the trough, the water meanwhile washing 
away the clay at the lower end. 

Roasting for Friability. — When two min- 
erals — for example, pyrite and cassiterite 
(tin ore) — one of which is decomposed and 
rendered porous and friable by heat and 
oxygen — are roasted in a furnace, the pyrite 
becomes porous oxide of iron, while the 
cassiterite is not changed. A gentle crush- 
ing and washing operation will then break 
and float away the lighter iron oxide, 
leaving the cleaned cassiterite behind. 

Sizing. — This is the first of the pre- 
liminary operations of separation. It is 
found useful in concentration, for dividing 

an ore into a number of portions graded p IG , Gravity Stamp. 

from coarser sizes down to finer sizes. 

Each portion is made suitable for treatment on its respective machine. 
If crushed ore be sifted upon a screen with holes of definite size, two 
products will result — the oversize, which is unable to pass through the 
screen, and the undersize, which docs pass. If the latter size be sifted 
upon another screen with smaller holes, it will again make oversize 
and undersize. The operation can be repeated with more sieves until 
the desired number of portions is obtained. P. von Rittinger adopted 
for close sizing the following diameters in millimetres for the holes in a 
set of screens: 64, 45-2, 32, 22-6, 16, 11-3, 8, 5-6, 4, 2-8, 2, 1-4, I. 
Each of these holes has an area 
double that of the one next below it ; 
this may be called the screen ratio. 
A process which docs not need such ■ 
close sizing might use every other 
screen of the above set, and in ex- 
treme cases even every fourth screen. 
In mills the screen ratio for coarse sizes 
often differs from that for fine. Sizing 
is done by cylindrical screens revolving upon their inclined axes 
(fig. 5), by flat shaking screens, and by fixed screens with a com- 
paratively steel slope. Either wire cloth with square holes or steel 
plate punched with round holes is used. To remove the largest 
lumps in the preliminary sizing, fixed-bar screens (grizzlies) are 
preferred, on account of their strength and durability. 

Sizes smaller than can be satisfactorily graded by screens arc 
treated by means of hydraulic classifiers and box classifiers. The 
lower limit of screening and therefore the beginning of this work 





Fig. 5. — Trommel or 
Revolving Screen. 




Fig. 6. — Hydraulic Classifier, 
varies from grains of 5 millimetres to grains of 1 millimetre in 
diameter. A hydraulic classifier (rig. 6) is a trough-like washer 
through which the water and sand flow from one end to the other. 
In the bottom, at regular intervals, arc pockets or pits with hydraulic 
devices which hinder the outflowing discharge of sand, b, by an 
inflowing stream of clear water, a. By regulating the speed of these 
water currents, the size of the grains in the several discharges can be 
regulated, the first being the coarsest and the overflow at the end 
the finest. Box classifiers (spitzkasten) are similar, except that the 
pockets are much larger and no inflowing clear water is used; they 
therefore do their work much less perfectly. Classifiers do not truly 
size the ore, but merely class together grains which have equal 
settling power. In any given product, except the first, the grain of 
high specific gravity will always be smaller than that of low. The 



240 



ORE-DRESSING 




Fig. 7. — Uarz Jig. 



box classifiers are suited to treating finer sizes than the hydraulic 
classifiers, and therefore follow them in the mill treatment. 

Picking Floors, the first of the final operations of separation, are 
areas on which men, boys or girls pick out the valuable mineral 
which is rich enough to ship at once to the smelter. The picking is 
often accompanied and aided by breaking with a hammer. Picking 
tables are generally so constructed that the pickers can sit still and 
have the ore pass before them on a moving surface, such as a re- 
volving circular table or travelling belt. Stationary picking tables 
require the ore to be wheeled to and dumped in front of the pickers. 
Picking out the values by hand has the double advantage that it 
saves the power and time of crushing, and prevents the formation of 
a good deal of fine slimes which are difficult to save. 

Jigs treat ores ranging from it in. in diameter down to b^ in. If 
an intermittently pulsating current of water is passed up through a 
horizontal sieve on which is a bed of ore, the heavy mineral and the 
quartz quickly form layers, the former beneath the latter. The 
machine by which this work is done is called a jig, and the operation 
is called jigging. In the hand jig the sieve is moved up and down in 

a tank of water to get 
the desired separation. 
In the power jig (fig. 7) 

-4, .the sieve, a, is stationary 

_ _$- pijjand the pulsating current 

is obtained by placing a 
vertical longitudinal par- 
tition, c, extending part 
of the way down to the 
bottom of the jig box. 
The sieve, o, is firmly 
fastened on one side of 
the partition, and on the other a piston or plunger, d, is moved 
rapidly up and down by an eccentric, causing an up-and-down 
current of water through the sieve, a. The sieve is fed at one end, 
e, with a constant supply of water and ore, and the quartz over- 
flows at the other. Clear water (" hydraulic water") is brought by the 
pipe, i, into the space, g, below called the hutch, to regulate the condi- 
tion of the bed of ore on a. The constantly accumulating bed of con- 
centrates is either discharged through the sieve into the hutch, g, or 
by some special device at the side. On jigs where the concentrates pass 
through the sieve, a bed of heavy mineral grains too large to pass 
holds back the lighter quartz. The quartz overflow from one sieve, 
a, generally carries too much value to be thrown away, and it is 
therefore jigged again upon a second sieve, b. In jigging difficult 
ores, three, four, five and even six sieves are used. A succession of 
sieves gives a set of products graded both in kind and in richness, the 
heavier mineral, as galena, coming first, the lighter, as pyrites and 
blende, coming later. The best jigging is done upon closely sized 
products using a large amount of clear water added beneath the 
sieve. Very good jigging may, however, be done upon the products 
of hydraulic classifiers, where the heavy mineral is in small grains 
and the quartz is large, by using a bed on the sieve and diminished 
hydraulic water, which increases the suction or downward pull by 
the returning plunger. 

Bumping TaWes.— Rittinger's table is a rectangular gently 
sloping plane surface which by a bumping motion throws the heavy 
particles to one side while the current of water washes down the 

quartz to another, a 
wedge-shaped divider 
separating and guiding 
the concentrates and 
tailings into their re- 
spective hoppers. The 
capacity on pulp of fo 
to 5*5 in. size is some 4 
tons in twenty -four 
hours. In the Wilfley 
table (fig. 8) and those 
derived from it a gentler 
vanning motion is substituted for the harsh bump; they have a 
greatly increased width and a set of riffle blocks, b, at right angles to 
the direction of flow, c, tapering in height towards the side where the 
concentrates are discharged, d. This combination has produced a 
table of great efficiency and capacity for treating grains from J in. 
in diameter down to 2 Jtj in. oreven finer. The capacity on ^ in. pulp 
is from 15 to 25 tons in twenty-four hours. 

Vanners are machines which treat ores on endless belts, generally of 
rubber with flanges on the two sides. The belt (fig. 9) travels up a 
gentle slope, a, on horizontal transverse rollers, and is shaken about 
200 times a minute, either sidewise or endwise, to the extent of about 
1 in. The lower 10 ft. is called the concentrating plane, b, and 
slopes 278% more or less from the horizontal; the upper 2 ft. of 
length is called the cleaning plane, c, and slopes 4-45 % more or less. 
The fine ore is fed on with water (technically called pulp) at the 
intersection of the two planes, d. The vibration separates the ore 
into layers, the heavy minerals beneath and the light above. The 
downward flow of the water carries the light waste off and discharges 
it over the tail roller e into the waste launder, while the upward travel 
of the belt carries up the heavy mineral. On the cleaning plane the 
latter passes under a row of jets,/, of clean water, which remove the 




Fig. 8.— Wilfley Table. 




Fig. 9. — Frue Vanner. 



last of the waste rock; it clings to the belt while it passes over t]he 
head roller, and only leaves it when the belt is forced by the dipping 
roller to dip in the water of the concentrates tank, g. The cleaned 
belt then continues its return journey over the guide roller 7; to t.he 
tail roller e, which it passes round, 
and again does concentration 
duty. Experience proves that for 
exceedingly fine ores the end 
shake with steep slope and rapid 
travel does better work than the 
side-shake vanner. For ordinary 
gold stamp-mill pulp, where clean- 
ness of tailings is the most important end, and where to gain it the 
engineer is willing to throw a little quartz into the concentrates, the 
end-shake vanner is again probably a little better than the side- 
shake, but where cleanness of concentrates is sought the side-shake 
vanner is the most satisfactory. The latter is much the most usual 
form. 

Slime-Tables are circular revolving tables (fig. 10) with flattened 
conical surfaces, and a slope of 1 j in. more or less per foot from centre 
to circumference; a common size is 17 ft. in diameter, and a common 
speed one revolution per minute. These tables treat material of 
rJoin. and less in diameter coming from box classifiers. The principle 
on which the table works is that the film of water upon the smooth 
surface rolls the larger grains (quartz) towards the margin of the 
table faster than the smaller grains (heavy mineral) which are in the 
slow-moving bottom current. The revolution of the table then 
discharges the quartz earlier at a, a, a, a, an intermediate middling 
product next at b, and the heavy mineral last at c. Suitable launders 
or troughs and catch-boxes are supplied for the three products. The 
capacity of such a table is 12 tons or more of pulp, dry weight, in 
twenty-four hours. Frames, used in concentrating tin ore in Cornwall, 
are rectangular slime-tables which separate the waste from the 
concentrates on the same principle as the circular tables, though they 




Fig. 10. — Convex Revolving Slime-table. 



run intermittently. They treat very fine pulp, and after being fed 
for a short period (about fifteen minutes) the pulp is shut off, the 
concentrates are flushed off with a douche of water and caught in a 
box, and the feed pulp is again turned on. Canvas tables are rect- 
angular tables with plane surfaces covered with cotton duck (canvas) 
free from seams; they slope about i£ in. to the foot. They are fed 
with stamp-mill pulp, with the tailings of vanners, or, best of all, 
with very fine pulp overflowing from a fine classifier. The rough 
surface of the duck is such an efficient catching surface that they can 
run for an hour before the concentrates are removed — an operation 
which is effected by shutting off the feed pulp, rinsing the surface 
with a little clean water, and hosing or brooming off the concentrates 
into a catch-box. The feed-pulp is then again turned on and the 
work resumed. They have been more successful than any other 
machine in treating the finest pulp, especially when their concen- 
trates are finally cleaned on a steep slope end-shake vanner (the 
G. G. Gates canvas table system of California). 

Buddies act in principle like slime-tables, but they are stationary, 
and they allow the sand to build itself up upon the conical surface, 
which is surrounded by a retaining wall. When charged, the tailings 
are shovelled from the outer part of the circle, the middlings from the 
intervening annular part, and the concentrates from the inner part. 
They treat somewhat coarser sizes than the slime-table. The term 
buddle is sometimes applied to the slime-tables, but the majority 
confine the phrase to the machine on which the sand builds up in a 
deep layer. 

Riffles. — When wooden blocks or cobble-stones of uniform size are 
placed in the bottom of a sluice, the spaces between them are called 
riffles; and when gold-bearing gravel is carried through the sluice by 
a current of water, a great many eddies are produced, in which the 
gold and other heavy minerals settle. 

Kieves— "-The kieve or dolly-tub is a tub as large or larger than an 
ordinary oil-barrel, with sides flaring slightly upwards all the way 
from the bottom. In the centre is a little vertical shaft, with hand- 
crank at the top and stirring blades like those of a propeller at the 
bottom. Fine concentrates from buddies or slime-tables are still 
further enriched by treatment in the kieve. The kieve is filled 
perhaps half full of water, and the paddles set in motion; concen- 
trates are now shovelled in until it is nearly full, the rotation is 
continued a little longer and then the shaft is quickly withdrawn and 



ORE-DRESSING 



241 



thi I side of the kieve steadily thumped by a bumping-bar as long as 
settling continues. When this is completed, the water is siphoned 
off, the top sand skimmed off and sent back to the buddle, and the 
enriched bottom shovelled out and sent to the smelter. 

3. In designing concentration works, the millwright seeks so to 
combine the various methods of coarse and fine crushing and of 
preliminary and final concentration that he will obtain the 
Combined max j mum return from the ore with the minimum cost. 
operations. g ome Q f tn£ more important of these mill schemes will now 
be described. 

The hand-jig process used for the zinc and lead ores of Missouri 
is first to clean the ore from adhering clay by raking it back and 
forth in a sluice with a running stream of water, and then shovel 
it upon a sloping screen with holes of about 1 in., where it yields 
oversize and undersize. The former is hand-picked into lead ore, 
zinc, ore and waste, while the latter is jigged upon a hand-jig and 
yields several layers of minerals removed by a hand-skimmer. The 
top skimmings are waste, the middle skimmings come back with the 
next charge to be jigged over, and the bottom skimmings go to a 
second jig with finer screen. The coarsest of the hutch product, i.e. 
the product which passed through the sieve and settled at the bottom 
of the tank, goes to the second jig, the finest is sold to a sludge mill 
to be finished on buddies. The second jig makes top skimmings which 
are. sent back to the first jig, middle skimmings which are zinc 
concentrates, and bottom skimmings and hutch, which are lead 
concentrates. 

In the Missouri zinc-concentrating mill the ore carrying blende 
and calamine with a little galena is in very large crystallizations 
and contains, when crushed, very little in the way of included 
grains. It is crushed by Blake breaker and rolls, to pass through a 
sieve with holes f in. in diameter, and is then treated on a power jig 
with six consecutive sieves, yielding discharge and hutch products 
from each sieve, and tailings to waste. The earlier discharges are 
finished products, while the later are re-crushed and re-treated on 
the same jig. The hutch products are treated on a finishing-jig with 
five sieves, and yield galena from the first discharge and hutch, and 
zinc ore from the others. The capacity of such jigs is very large, 
even to 75 or 100 tons per day of ten hours. 

In the diamond washing of Kimberley, South Africa, the material 
taken from the mine is weathered by exposure to the air and rain for 
several months, and the softening and disintegration thus well 
started are completed by stirring in vats with water. Breaker and 
rolls were tried in order to hasten the process, but the larger diamonds 
were broken and ruined thereby. The material from the vats is 
screened and jigged, and of the jig concentrates containing about 

2 % of diamonds the coarser are hand-picked and the finer are 
treated on a greased surface. 

Lead and copper ores contain their values in brittle minerals, and 
are concentrated in mills which vary somewhat according to local 
conditions; the one here outlined is typical of the class. The ore is 
crushed by breaker and rolls, and separated into a series of products 
diminishing in size by a set of screens, hydraulic classifier and box 
classifier. All the products of screens and hydraulic classifiers are 
jigged on separate jigs yielding concentrates, middlings and tailings; 
those of the box classifier are treated on the slime-table, vanner or 
Wilfiey table, yielding concentrates and tailings and perhaps midd- 
lings. The coarser middlings contain values attached to grains of 
quartz and are therefore sent back to be re-crushed and re-treated. 
The finer middlings contain values difficult to save from their shape 
only, and are sent back to the same machine or to another to be 
finished. 

The native copper rock of Lake Superior is broken by powerful 
breakers, sometimes preceded by a heavy drop-hammer weighing 
a ton, more or less. The operation is accompanied by hand-picking, 
yielding rich nuggets with perhaps 75% of copper ready for the 
smelter; at some mines a second grade is also picked out which goes 
to a steam finishing-hammer and yields cleaned mass copper for the 
smelter and rich stamp stuff. The run of rock which passes by the 
hand-pickers is of a size that will pass through a bar screen with bars 

3 in. apart, and goes to the steam stamps. The stamp crushes the 
rock and discharges coarse copper through a pipe 4 in. in diameter, 
in which it descends against a rising stream of water which lifts out 
the lighter rock. The copper is let out about once an hour by opening 
a gate at the bottom. The rest of the rock is crushed to pass through 
a screen with round holes J in. in diameter, more or less. This sand 
is treated in hydraulic classifiers with four pockets, the products 
from the pockets being jigged by four roughing-jigs yielding finished 
mineral copper for the smelter, included grains for the grinder, 
partially concentrated products for the finishing-jigs, and tailings 
which go to waste. The overflow of the hydraulic classifier runs to a 
tank ol which the overflow is sent to waste in order to diminish the 
quantity of water, while the discharge from beneath, treated upon 
slime-tahles, yields concentrates, middlings and tailings. The 
middlings are re-treated. All the finished concentrates put together 
will assay from 60 to 80% of copper according to circumstances. 
The extraction from the rock is from 50 to 80% of the copper con- 
tained in it. 

Cornwall Tin. — Tinstone in Cornwall occurs associated with 
sulphides, wolfram, quartz, felspar, slate, &c, and is broken by 
spalling-hammers to 3-in. lumps. Hammers make less slimes than 



the rock-breakers, and they also break the ore more advantageously 
for the hand-picking. The latter rejects waste, removes as far as 
possible the hurtful wolfram, and classes the values into groups 
according to richness. Gravity or pneumatic stamps then crush the 
ore to cV iu., and stripes (a species of long rectangular buddle) yield 
heads, middlings, tailings and fine slimes: the first three are sent 
separately to circular buddies, and the last to frames. The buddies 
yield concentrates, middlings and tailings: the middlings are re- 
treated, the tailings are all waste; the concentrates are still further 
enriched by kieves, which yield tops to the buddle again and bottoms 
shipped to the smelter. The fine slimes are treated on frames, the 
concentrates of which go to buddies; of these the concentrates go to 
kieves. 

The Missouri zinc-lead sludge mill takes the finest part of the 
hutch product of the hand-jigs. The treatment begins on revolving 
screens with two sizes of holes, 25 mm. and 1 mm.: these take out 
two coarser sizes, of which the coarser is waste and the other is jigged, 
yielding concentrates and waste. The main treatment begins with 
the finest size, which is much the largest product. It is fed to a 
convex circular buddle (first buddle), and yields a coarser product at 
the outer part of the circle and a finer product in the inner. The finer 
product is treated by a series of buddlings which vary somewhat, 
but in general are as follows: fed to a second buddle it yields zinc 
and lead ore in the centre, next zinc ore, next middlings which come 
back, and, outside of all, tailings. The zinc-lead ore is set on one side 
until enough has accumulated to make a buddle run, when it is run 
upon a third buddle yielding in the central part pure lead concen- 
trates, next lead ore (which is returned to this treatment), next zinc 
ore, and outside of all a zinc product which is fed to the second 
buddle. The coarse outside product of the first buddle is treated in 
much the same way as the fine, but it yields practically no lead zinc 
product, which simplifies the series of buddlings necessary. 

Gold Mill. — Gold ores usually contain their value in two con- 
ditions — the free gold, which can be taken out by mercury, and 
the combined gold, in which the metal is either coated with or 
combined with compounds of sulphur, tellurium, &c. The usual 
gold-milling scheme is to crush the ore by rock-breaker to about 
Ij in. diameter, and then to crush with water by gravity stamps, a 
little mercury being added to the mortar from time to time to begin 
the amalgamation at the first moment the gold is liberated. The 
pulp leaves the mortar through a screen with holes or slots s'tjto g^in. 
in width, and is then passed over amalgamated plates of copper or 
silver-plated copper. The free gold, amalgamated by the mercury, 
adheres to the mercurial surface on the plate; the rest of the pulp 
flows on through mercury traps to catch any of the mercury, which 
drains off the end of the plate. The plates and mortar are periodic- 
ally cleaned up, the plates being scraped to recover the amalgam and 
leave them in good condition to do their work: if plates are used 
inside the mortar, they are cleaned in the same way. The residue of 
partly crushed ore in the mortar, with amalgam and free mercury 
scattered through it, is ground for a time in a ball mill, panned to 
recover the amalgam, and returned to the mortar. The pulp flowing 
away from the mercury traps flows to a Frue vanner or Wilfiey 
table, on which it yields concentrates for the chlorination plant or 
smelter and tailings: these are waste when the heavy mineral is of 
low grade, but if the vanner concentrates are of high grade, they still 
contain values in very fine sizes which can and should be saved. 
Recent improvements in California for saving this material have been 
made. The vanner tailings are sent to a fine classifier, from which the 
light overflow only is saved ; this is treated upon canvas tables 
yielding concentrates and tailings, and these concentrates, treated 
upon a little end-shake vanner with steep slope and rapid travel, 
give clean, very fine, high-grade concentrates for the chlorination 
works. 

Iron Ores. — The brown ores of iron from surface deposits are 
contaminated with a considerable amount of clay and some quartz. 
The crude ore from surface pits or shallow underground workings 
is treated in a log-washer and yields the fine clay, which runs to 
waste, and the coarse material which is caught upon a screen and 
hand-picked, to free it from the little quartz, or jigged if it contains 
too much quartz. The magnetic oxide of iron occurs associated 
with felspar and quartz, and can often be separated from them by 
the magnet. The ore, after being broken by breaker and rolls to 
a size varying from J to ^r of an inch in diameter, goes to a 
magnetic machine which yields (1) the strongly magnetic, (2) the 
weakly magnetic, and (3) the non-magnetic portions. The second or 
middlings product contains grains of magnetite attached to quartz, 
and is therefore re-crushed and sent back to the magnets; the 
strongly magnetic portion is shipped to the furnace; and the waste 
to the dump heap. In concentrating by water certain zinc sulphides, 
siderite (carbonate of iron) follows the zinc, and would seriously 
injure the furnace work. By a carefully adjusted roasting of the 
product in a furnace the siderite is converted into magnetic oxide 
of iron, and can then be separated by magnet from the zinc ore. A 
special magnet of very high power, known from its inventor as the 
Wetherill magnet, has been designed for treating the franklinite of 
New Jersey, a mineral which is non-magnetic in the usual machines. 
The ore, crushed by breaker and rolls and hand-picked to remove 
garnet, is treated upon a belt with a roughing magnet to take out the 
most magnetic portion, and then very closely sized by screens with 



242 



OREGON 



16, 24, 30 and 50 meshes per linear inch. The several products are 
treated each on its own magnetic machine, yielding the franklinite 
for the zinc oxide grates, and followed by spiegel furnace ; the residue, 
which is jigged, yields the zinc silicate and oxide for the spelter 
furnaces, and waste carrying the ealcite, quartz and mica. 

Asbestos, when of good quality, is in compact masses, which by 
suitable bruising and beating are resolved into fine flexible fibres. 
The Canadian asbestos is associated with serpentine, and is crushed 
by breakers to f in., screened on -rV-in. screens to reject fines. The 
values are removed by hand-picking and are crushed by rolls carefully 
set so as not to break the fibre; this product is then sized by screens 
and the various sizes are sent to the Cyclone pulverizer, which by 
beating liberates the individual fibres. It then goes to a screen with 
eleven holes to the linear inch, and yields a granular undcrsize and 
oversize, and a fibrous oversize which is drawn off by a suction fan 
to a settling-chamber with air outlets covered by fine screen cloth. 
This fibrous product is the clean mineral for the market. A special 
treatment separates the fibres of different lengths. 

The usual method of dressing corundum and emery, after the 
preliminary breaking, is to treat the material in an edge-stone mill 
fitted with light wooden rollers. The action is that of grinding one 
particle against another, whereby the talc, chlorite, mica, &c, are 
worn off from the harder mineral. A constant current of water 
carries off the light impurities. This is called the ".muller " process. 
At Corundum Hill, North Carolina, the first step in removing the im- 
purities from "sand "corundum is to subject it to the scouring action 
of a stream of water while it is being sluiced from the mine to the mill, 
the action being increased by several vertical drops of 5 to 10 ft. 
in the sluice. After reaching the mill all that will not pass 
through a 14-mesh screen is crushed by rolls, and the undersize of 
the screen is treated in a washing trough ; this removes part of 
the light waste, and the " mullers " mentioned above complete the 
cleaning. 

Graphite occurs in schist, but being of less specific gravity than the 
other minerals which enter into the composition of the schist, it 
settles later than they do. It also breaks into thin scales, which 
reduces its settling rate still further. The ore is broken by breakers, 
and by Chile edge-stone mills or by gravity stamps, to a size varying 
with the character of the minerals from perhaps ^ to ^f in. diameter. 
The pulp is then conveyed through a series of settling tanks of which 
the later are larger than the earlier. The quartz and other waste 
minerals settle in the earlier tanks, while the graphite settles later: 
the latest tank gives the best graphite. In the Dixon Company's 
works in New York some forms of concentrators are believed to have 
replaced the slower settling tanks. 

The phosphates of Florida are of four kinds: hard rock, soft rock, 
land pebble and river pebble. The hard rock is crushed by toothed 
rolls, and cleaned in log washers. The washed product is screened; 
the sizes finer than h in. are thrown away because too poor; the 
other sizes are dried and sold, some waste having been picked out of 
the coarsest. The soft rock is simply dried, ground and sold. Land 
pebble is treated by log washers, any clay balls remaining being re- 
moved by a screen, and the phosphate dried and sold. In special 
cases land pebble is treated by hydraulicking, followed by a log 
washer, and this again by a powerful jet washer, to remove the last of 
the clay. River pebble is taken from the river by centrifugal pumps, 
and screened on two screens with i-in. and -rV-in. holes respectively; 
the oversize of the first sieve and the undersize of the second sieve are 
thrown away because of too low grade. (R. H. R.) 

OREGON, a North- Western state of the American Union, 
on the Pacific slope, lying between 42 and 46 18' N. lat. and 
1 1 6° 33' and 124 32' W. long. It is bounded N. by the state 
of Washington, from which it is separated in part by the Columbia 
river, the 46th parallel forming the rest of the boundary; E., 
by Idaho, from which it is separated in part by the Snake river; 
S., by Nevada and California, and W., by the Pacific Ocean. 
It has an extreme length, E. and W., of 375 m., an extreme 
width, N. and S., of 290 m., and a total area of 96,699 sq. m., 
of which 1092 sq. m. are water-surface. 

Topography. — The coast of the state extends in a general N. and S. 
direction for about 300 m., and consists of long stretches of sandy 
beach broken occasionally by lateral spurs of the Coast Range, which 
project boldly into the sea and form high rocky headlands. With the 
exception of the mouth of the Columbia river, the bays and inlets by 
which the shore is indented are small and of very little importance. 
Parallel with the coast and with its main axis about 20 m. inland is 
an irregular chain of hills known as the Coast Range. It does not 
attain a great height, but has numerous lateral spurs, especially 
toward the W. Euchre Peak (Lincoln county), probably thehighest 
point in the range in Oregon, rises 3962 ft. above the sea. In southern 
Oregon the general elevation of this range is greater than in the N., 
but the individual peaks are less prominent, and the range in some 
respects resembles a plateau. Its western slope is generally longer 
and more gentle than the eastern. A number of small streams, 
among them the Nehalem, Coquille and Umpqua rivers, cut their 
way through the Coast Range to reach the ocean. For the greater 
portion of its length in Oregon, in the northern half of the state, the 



Coast Range is bordered on the E. by the Willamette Valley, a 
region about 200 m. long and about 30 m. wide, and the most thic'kly 
populated portion of the state; here, therefore, the range is ea/sily 
defined, but in the S., near the Rogue river, it merges apparently 
with the Cascade and the Sierra Nevada Mountains in a large complex 
group designated as the Klamath Mountains, lying partly in Oreg';on 
and partly in California, and extending from the northern extremity 
of the Sierra Nevada to the sea. The Klamath Mountains separate 
topographically southern Oregon from northern California. A 
number of ridges and peaks bearing special names, such as the Rojgue 
river, Umpqua and Siskiyou Mountains, belong to this group. 
The Cascade Mountains, the most important range in Oregon, extend 
parallel with the coast and lie about 100 m. inland. The peaks; of 
this system are much higher than those of the Coast Range, varying 
from 5000 to 11,000 ft., and the highest of them are cones of extinct 
volcanoes. Mount Hood (11,225 ft.), which is the highest point in 
the state, Mount Jefferson (10,200 ft.), the Three Sister Peaks, Mount 
Adams, Bachelor Mountain, and Diamond Peak (8807 ft.) all have 
one or more glaciers on their sides. The Calapooya Mountains, 
forming the water-parting between the Willamette and the Umpqua 
rivers, are a lateral spur of the Cascades, and extend westward as far 
as the Coast Range. The Cascade Mountains divide the state topo- 
graphically into two sharply contrasted parts. West of this range the 
country exhibits a great variety of surface structure, and is humid 
and densely wooded; east of the range it consists of a broken table- 
land, arid or semiarid, with a general elevation of 5000 ft. This 
eastern tableland, though really very rugged and mountainous, 
seems to have few striking topographic features when compared with 
the more broken area to the W. In the north-eastern part of this 
eastern plateau lie the Blue Mountains, which have an average 
elevation of about 6000 ft. and decline gradually toward the N. A 
south-western spur, about 100 m. in length, and the principal ridge 
together enclose on several sides a wide valley drained by the 
tributaries of the John Day river. South of these mountains lies 
the northern limit of the Great Basin region. In Oregon this area 
extends from the Nevada boundary northward for about 160 m., to 
the head of the Silvies river, and embraces an area of about 16,000 
sq. m. None of its sti earns reaches the sea, but all lose their waters 
by seepage or evaporation. On the E., N., and N.W. the Great 
Basin is bounded by the drainage systems of the tributaries of the 
Columbia river, and on the S.W. by the drainage system of the 
Klamath river. Its boundaries, however, cannot be definitely fixed, 
as they change with the periods of humidity and drought. Goose 
Lake, for example, lies in the Great Basin at some seasons; but at 
other times it overflows and becomes a part of the drainage system of 
the Sacramento river. Many of the mountains within the Basin 
region consist of great faulted crust blocks, with a general N. and S. 
trend. One face of these mountains is usually in the form of a steep 
palisade, while the other has a very gradual slope. Between these 
ridges lie almost level valleys, whose floors consist partly of lava 
flows, partly of volcanic fragmental material, and partly of detritus 
from the bordering mountains. During the wet season the valleys 
often contain ephemeral lakes, whose waters on evaporating leave 
a playa, or mud flat, often covered with an alkaline encrustation of 
snowy whiteness. Some large permanent lakes occupy the troughs 
between faulted blocks in southern Oregon. The greatest level, or 
approximately level, area in the Great Basin region of Oregon is the 
so-called Great Sandy Desert, a tract about 150 m. long and from 
30 to 50 m. wide, lying in parts of Crook, Lake and Harney counties. 
Its surface consists of a thick sheet of pumiceous sand and dust, 
from which arise occasional buttes and mesas. On account of the 
small amount of precipitation, the fissured condition of the under- 
lying lava sheets, and the porous soil, the Great Sandy Desert has 
practically no surface streams even in the wet season, and within its 
limits no potable waters have been found. The most prominent 
mountain range in the Oregon portion of the Great Basin is the 
Steens Mountains in the S.E., which attain an altitude of about 9000 
ft. above the sea and of 5000 ft. above Alvord Valley, which lies 
along the eastern base. This range is a large monoelinal block, with 
a trend almost N.E. and S.W., presenting a steep escarpment toward 
the E., and sloping very gradually toward the W. It exhibits much 
evidence of powerful erosion, having deep canyons in its sides, and it 
bears evidence of previous glaciers. The region adjoining the Great 
Basin on the E. is usually known as the Snake River Plains, and 
embraces an area of about 1200 sq. m. in Malheur county. Here the 
hills are deeply sculptured and the valleys much carved by streams 
which often flow through deep canyons. Where the streams cut 
their way through sheets of basaltic lava their banks are steep, almost 
vertical cliffs, but where they cut through sedimentary rocks the 
sides have a more gentle slope. When several alternate layers of 
hard and soft rock are cut through by a stream its banks some- 
times have the form of steps. The destruction of the grasses on 
the hillsides by overgrazing in recent years has increased the 
flooding by temporary streams, and consequently has tended to 
deepen and increase the gulleys and channels of the mountains 
and valleys. 

The state as a whole has an average elevation of 3300 ft. ; with 
20,300 sq. m. below 1000 ft.; 19,200 sq. m. between 1000 and 3000 
ft.; 33,500 sq. m. between 3000 and 5000 ft.; and 23,030 sq. m. 
between 5000 and 9000 ft. 







< 



OREGON 



243 



The most important stream is the Columbia river, which forms the 
northern boundary for 300 m. and receives directly the waters of all 
the important rivers in the state except a few in the S.W. 
Rivers. a nd a few in the extreme E. About 160 m. from its mouth 
are the Cascades, where the river cuts through the lava beds of the 
Cascade Mountains and makes a descent of about 300 ft. through a 
canyon 6 m. long and nearly I m. deep. The passage of vessels 
through the river at this point is made possible by means of locks 
Fifty-three m. farther up the stream is a second set of rapids 
known as the Dalles, where the stream for about 2 m. is confined 
within a narrow channel from 130 to 200 ft. wide. The largest 
tributary of the Columbia is the Snake river, which for nearly 200 in. 
of its course forms the boundary between Oregon and Idaho. It 
flows through a canyon from 200G to 5000 ft. deep, with steep walls 
of basaltic and kindred rocks. The powerful erosion has often caused 
the columnar black basalt to assume weird and fantastic shapes. 
The chief tributaries of the Snake river in Oregon are the Grand 
Ronde, Powder, Burnt, Malheur and Owyhee rivers. The principal 
tributaries of the Columbia E. of the Cascade Mountains and lying 
wholly within the state are the John Day river, which rises in the 
Blue Mountains and enters the Columbia 29 m. above the Dalles 
after pursuing a winding course of about 250 m.; and the Deschutes 
river, which rises on the eastern slope of the Cascade Mountains, and 
after flowing northward for about 320 m. enters the Columbia 12 m. 
above the Dalles. The Deschutes river drains a region which is less 
arid than the plateau farther E., and which contains a number of 
small lakes. A peculiar feature of the stream is the uniformity of its 
volume throughout the year; the great crevasses in the lava bed 
through which it flows form natural spillways and check any tendency 
of the stream to rise within its banks. The Willamette river, W. of 
the Cascade Mountains, is the most important stream lying wholly 
within the state. It rises on the western slope of the Cascades and 
enters the Columbia river about 100 m. above its mouth, having 
with its branches a length of about 300 m. In the western part of the 
state a number of short streams flow directly into the Pacific Ocean, 
the most important of these being the Rogue and the Umpqua rivers, 
which have their sources in the Cascades. 

In Southern Oregon, especially in the Great Basin region, there are 
numerous lakes. Malheur Lake, in Harney county, during the wet 
season is about 25 m. long and has an average width of 
Lakes. 5 or 6 m. It is not over 10 ft. deep in any part, and is only 
a few inches in depth a mile from the shore. In the summer most of 
its bed is a playa or mud flat. Almost continuous with this body of 
water on the S.W. is Harney Lake, roughly circular in form and 
about 7-8 m. in diameter. The waters of both lakes are alkaline, but 
Malheur Lake is often freshened by overflowing into Harney Lake, 
while the latter, having no outlet, is growing continually more 
alkaline. East of the Steens Mountains there is a chain of very 
small lakes, such as the Juniper, Manns and Alvord lakes, and also a 
playa known as the Alvord Desert, which in the spring is covered with 
a few inches, or perhaps 1 or 2 ft., of water, and becomes a lake 
with an area of 50 or 60 sq. m. In the summer the dry bed is smooth 
and very hard, and when the skies are clear the monotony of the 
landscape is sometimes broken by a mirage. In Lake county, 
occupying fault-made troughs, are several large bodies of water — 
Lake Abert (about 5 m. by 15 m.), Warner Lake (50 m. long, 4-8 m. 
wide), Summer Lake (a little smaller than Abert), and Goose Lake, 
the one last named lying partly in California and draining into the 
Sacramento system. The Upper and the Lower Klamath lakes of 
Klamath county are noted for their scenic beauty. Near the north- 
western boundary of Klamath county is the famous Crater Lake, 
whose surface is 6239 ft. above the sea. This lake lies in a great pit 
or caldera created by the wrecking in prehistoric times of the volcano 
Mount Mazama, which according to geologists once had an altitude 
of about 14,000 ft. above the sea and of 8000 ft. above the surrounding 
tableland; the upper portion of the mountain fell inward, possibly 
owing to the withdrawal of interior lava, and left a crater-like rim, 
or caldera, rising 2000 ft. above the surrounding country. The lake 
is 4 m. wide and 6 m. long, has a depth in some places of nearly 
2000 ft., and is surrounded by walls of rock from 500 to 2000 ft. high. 
In spite of its great elevation the lake has never been known to freeze, 
and though it has no visible outlet its waters are fresh. 

Fauna and Flora. — Large game has disappeared from the settled 
areas, but is still fairly abundant on the plains of the east and among 
the mountains of the west. In the mountain forests of south-western 
Oregon bears, deer, elk, pumas, wolves and foxes are plentiful. 
Among the south-eastern plateaus antelope are found at all seasons, 
and deer and big-horn (mountain sheep), and occasionally a few elk, 
in the winter. Bears, wolves, lynxes and foxes are also numerous in 
the east, and there the coyote is found in disagreeable numbers. 
The pocket-gopher and the jack-rabbit are so numerous as to be 
great pests. The principal varieties of game-birds are ducks, geese, 
grouse and California quail. Sage-hens are occasionally seen on the 
dry plateaus and valleys, especially in Harney county. The Oregon 
robin (Merula naevia) and the Oregon snowbird (Junco Oregonus) are 
common in Oregon and northward. On the rocky headlands and 
islands of the coast nest thousands of gulls, cormorants, puffins, 
guillemots, surf-ducks (Oedemia), dotterels, terns, petrels and 
numerous other birds. There, too, the Steller's sea-lion (Euvtetapias 
stelleri) spends the mating season. The marine fauna is abundant 



and of great economic importance. The river fauna of the coast is of 
two distinct types: the type of the Columbia fauna in rivers north 
of the Rogue; and another type in the Klamath and its tributaries. 
Typical of the Columbia river is Calaslomus macrocheilus and of the 
Klamath, C. rimiculus. Lampreys, sticklebacks, cattoids, sturgeons 
— the white sturgeon (Acipenser Iransmonlanus) is commonly known 
as the " Oregon sturgeon " — trout and salmon are the principal 
anadromous fish, the salmon and trout being the most important 
economically. The best varieties of the salmon for canning are: 
the king, Chinook or quinnat (Oncorhynchus Ischawylscha) , far better 
than any other variety; and the steel-head, blue back or sukkegh 
(0. nerka). 

The total woodland area of the state according to the United States 
census of 1900 was 54,300 sq. m. or 56-8% of the land area. The 
Federal government established in 1907 and 1908 thirteen forest 
reserves in the state, ten of which had an area of more than 1 ,000,000 
acres each; their total area on the 1st of January 1910 was 25,345 
sq. m. From the coast to the eastern base of the Cascade Mountains 
the state is heavily timbered, except in small prairies and clearings 
in the Willamette and other valleys, and the most important tree 
is the great Douglas fir, pine or spruce [Pseudolsuga Douglasii), 
commonly called Oregon pine, which sometimes grows to a height 
of 300 ft., and which was formerly in great demand for masts and 
spars of sailing-vessels and for bridge timbers; the Douglas fir grows 
more commercial timber to the acre than any other American variety, 
and constitutes about five-sevenths of the total stand of the state. 
Timber is also found on the Blue Mountains in the north-east and on 
a number of mountains in the central and south-eastern parts of the 
state. East of the Cascades the valleys are usually treeless, save for 
a few willows and cottonwoods in the vicinity of streams. Over the 
greater part of this region the sage-brush is the most common plant, 
and by its ubiquity it imparts to the landscape the monotonous 
greyish tint so characteristic of the arid regions of the western United 
States. West of the Cascades most of the trees of commercial value 
consist of Douglas fir. Cedar and hemlock also are commercially 
valuable. There are small amounts of sugar pine, yellow pine, red 
fir and silver fir (Abies grandis and A. nobtlis) and spruce;and 
among the broad-leaved varieties the oak, ash, maple, mahogany- 
birch or mountain mahogany (Cercocarpus ledifolia), aspen, cotton- 
wood and balsam are the most common. East of the Cascades the 
forests consist for the most part of yellow pine. In the south-east the 
hills and lower slopes of the mountains are almost bare of trees. At 
higher altitudes, however, the moisture increases and scattered 
junipers begin to appear. Blending with these at their upper limit 
and continuing above them are clumps of mountain mahogany, 
which sometimes attains a height of 20 or 30 ft. Above thisbelt of 
mahogany, pines and firs are sometimes found. In this region the 
mountains have an upper, or cold, timber line, the height of which 
depends upon the severity of the climate, and a lower, or dry, timber 
line, which is determined by the amount of rainfall. These upper and 
lower limits of the timber belt are sometimes very sharply defined, 
so that tall mountains may be marked by a dark girdle of forest, 
above and below which appear walls of bare rock. In a very arid 
region the dry timber line may rise above the cold timber line, and in 
such a case the mountain will contain no forests. Of this phenomenon 
the Steens Mountains furnish a conspicuous example. It was 
estimated that the forests of Oregon contained in 1900 about 
150,000,000,000 ft. of Douglas fir or spruce, 40,000,000,000 ft. of 
yellow pine and 35,000,000,000 ft. of other species — chiefly cedar, 
hemlock and spruce. In the most heavily wooded region along the 
Pacific coast and the lower course of the Columbia river are forests of 
the Douglas fir with stands of 100,000 ft. of timber per acre. The 
value of the lumber and timber products increased from $1,014,211 
in 1870 to 86,530,757 in 1890, to 810,257,169 in 1900, and to 
§12,483,908 in 1905. 

Climate. — Perhaps no state in the union has such great local 
variations in its climate as has Oregon. Along the coast the climate 
is humid, mild and uniform, and, as has often been remarked, very 
like the climate of the British Isles; in the eastern two-thirds of the 
state, from which the moisture-laden winds are excluded by the high 
coastwise mountains, the climate is dry and marked by great daily 
and annual ranges of temperature. The mean annual temperature 
varies with the elevation and the distance from the sea, being highest 
along the western slope of the Coast Range at altitudes below 2000 
ft., and lowest in the elevated regions E. of the Cascade Mountains. 
The temperatures along the coast are never as high as 100° F. or as 
low as zero. I n the valleys between the Coast Range and the Cascade 
Mountains the range of temperature is much greaterthan it is along 
the coast; the absolute maximum and minimum being respectively 
102 and -2° at Portland, in the N.W., and 108 and -4° at Ashland, 
in the S.W. Owing to its greater elevation the southern portion 
of Oregon experiences greater extremes of temperature than the 
northern. In that part of the state E. of the Cascades the climate is 
of a continental type, with much greater ranges of temperature than 
in the W., although in a few low valleys, as at the Dalles, the 
extremes are somewhat modified. While flowers bloom throughout 
the year at Portland, frosts have occurred in every month of the 
year at Lakeview, in the Great Basin. At Astoria, near the mouth of 
the Columbia river, the mean annual temperature is 52° F., with 
extremes recorded of 97° and 10°; but at Silver Lake, in the Great 



244 



OREGON 



Basin region, while the mean annual temperature is 44 , the highest 
and lowest ever recorded are respectively 104° and -32 . These 
records afford a striking illustration of the moderating influence of 
the ocean upon climate. 

As is the case in all the Pacific states, the amount of rainfall de- 
creases from N. to S., and is greatest on the seaward slopes of the hills 
and mountains. As the winds from the ocean are deprived of their 
moisture on reaching the Coast and Cascade ranges, the amount of 
annual precipitation, which in the coast counties varies from 75 to 
13S in., constantly diminishes toward the E. until in the extreme 
south-eastern part of the state it amounts to only about 8 in. No 
other state, except perhaps Washington, has such a great variation 
in the amount of its rainfall. Precipitation on the Coast Range at 
altitudes above 2000 ft. amounts to about 138 in. annually; in the 
valleys E. of this range it varies from 20-2 in. at Ashland to 78-2 in. 
at Portland. On the western slope of the Cascades it varies from 
50 in. in the S. to 100 in. in the N.; in the Columbia Valley the 
amount is from 10 to 15 in.; in the valleys and foothills of the Blue 
Mountains, 12 to 25 in.; and in the plateau region of central and 
south-eastern Oregon, 8 to 22 in. In the region W. of the Cascade 
Mountains there is a so-called wet season, which lasts from October 
to March, and the summers are almost rainless. In the rest of the 
state there is a maximum rainfall in the winter and a secondary wet 
season in May and June, with the rest of the summer very dry. 
During the winter the prevailing winds are from the S. and bring 
moisture; during the summer they are from the N.W. and are 
accompanied by cloudless skies and moderate temperatures. Winds 
from the N.E. bring hot weather in the summer and intense cold in 
the winter. 

Soils. — The state has almost as great a variety of soils as of climate. 
In the Willamette Valley the soils are mostly clay loams, of a basaltic 
nature on the foothills and greatly enriched in the river bottom lands 
by washings from the hills and by deposits of rich black humus. In 
south-western Oregon, in the Rogue and Umpqua valleys, the char- 
acteristic soil is a reddish clay, though other varieties are numerous. 
In eastern Oregon the soils are of an entirely different type, being 
usually of a greyish appearance, lacking in humus, and composed of 
volcanic dust and alluvium from the uplands. They are deep, of 
fine texture, easily worked and contain abundant plant food in the 
form of soluble compounds of calcium, sodium and potassium. At 
times, however, these salts are present in such excess as to render the 
soils too alkaline for plant growing. Where there is no excess of 
alkali and the water supply is sufficient, good crops can be grown 
in this soil without the use of fertilizers. 

Agriculture and Stock-Raising. — Oregon has some of the most 
productive agricultural lands in the United States, but they are 
rather limited in extent, being confined for the most part to the 
valleys west of the Cascade Mountains and the counties bordering 
on the Columbia river east of those mountains. The other parts of 
the state are generally too dry or too mountainous for growing crops, 
but contain considerable areas suitable for grazing. In 1900 only 
about one-sixth of the total land surface was included in farms, and 
a trifle less than one-third of the farm land was improved. There 
were 35,837 farms, and their average size was 281 acres. Of the whole 
number 33-0% (11,827) contained less than 100 acres each, 30-5% 
(n,°55) contained from 100 to 175 acres each, and 10-4% (3727), 
devoted mainly to stock-raising, contained 500 acres or more each. 
Nearly four-fifths of the farms (28,636) were operated by owners or 
part owners, 3729 were operated by share tenants, 2637 by cash 
tenants and 835 by owners and tenants or managers. The principal 
crops are wheat, oats, hay, fruits, hops, potatoes and miscellaneous 
vegetables. Sheep and cattle are raised extensively on ranches in the 
semi-arid regions, large herds of cattle are kept on lands too wet for 
cultivation in the western counties, and stock-raising and dairying 
have become important factors in the operation of many of the best 
farms. The acreage of wheat was 810,000 in 1909 and the crop was 
16,377,000 bushels. The oat crop was 10,886,000 bushels. The barley 
crop was 1,984,000 bushels. The nights are so cool that Indian corn 
is successfully grown only by careful cultivation, and the crop 
amounted to only 552,000 bushels in 1909. The hay crop, 865,000 
tons in 1909, is made quite largely from wild grasses and grains cut 
green; on the irrigated lands alfalfa is grown extensively for the 
cattle and sheep, which are otherwise almost wholly dependent for 
sustenance upon the bunch grass of the semi-arid plains. Both cattle 
and sheep ranches in the region east of the Cascade Mountains have 
been considerably encroached upon by the appropriation of lands 
for agricultural purposes, and the cattle, also, have been forced to the 
south and east by the grazing of sheep on lands formerly reserved 
for them; but the numbers of both cattle and sheep on the farms 
have become much larger. The whole number of sheep in the state 
was 2,581,000 in 1910. The number of cattle other than dairy cows 
was 698,000 and that of dairy cows 174,000. The dairy business is a 
promising industry in the farming regions, especially in the Willam- 
ette Valley. The number of horses in 1910 was 308,000. The small 
number of swine (267,000 in 1910) is partly due to the small crop of 
Indian corn. Fruit-growing has been an increasingly important 
industry in the region between the Cascade and Coast Ranges and 
(to a less degree) east of the Cascade Range; and the cultivation of 
apples is especially important. The cultivation of hops was begun 
in Oregon about 1850; the soil and climate of the Willamette Valley 



were found to be exceedingly favourable to their growth, and the 
product increased to 20,500,000 ft in 1905, when the state ranked 
first in the Union in this industry. 

The agricultural resources of the state may be considerably in- 
creased by irrigation east of the Cascade Mountains. The irrigated 
areas, which are widely distributed, increased from a total of 177,944 
acres in 1889 to 388,310 acres in 1002. In 1894 Congress passed the 
" Carey Act " which authorizes the Secretary of the Interior, with 
the approval of the President, to donate to each of the states in which 
there are Federal desert lands as much of such lands (less than 
1,000,000 acres) as the state may apply for, on condition that the 
state reclaim by irrigation, cultivation and occupancy not less than 
20 acres of each 160-acre tract within ten years, and under the 
operation of this Act the state chose 432,203 acres for reclamation, 
mostly in the basin of the Deschutes river. Furthermore there is 
a state association engaged in irrigation projects, and the United 
States Reclamation Service, established by an Act of Congress in 
1902, has projects for utilizing the flood waters of the Umatilla, 
Malheur, Silvics and Grande Rondc rivers, the waters of the Owyhee 
and Wallowa rivers and Willow Creek, and the waters of some of the 
lakes in the central part of the state. Two of these projects had been 
begun by 1909: the Umatilla project in Umatilla county, to irrigate 
20,440 acres with water diverted from the Umatilla river by a dam 
(98 ft. high, 3500 ft. long) 2 m. above Echo, with a reservoir of 1500 
acres, was authorized in 1905 and was 85?% finished in 1909; the 
Klamath project, to irrigate 181,000 acres in Klamath county, 
Oregon (about 145,000 acres) and Siskiyou and Modoc counties, 
California, by two canals from Upper Klamath Lake and by a storage 
dam {23 ft. high, 940 ft. long) in the Clear Lake reservoir of 25,000 
acres, was authorized in 1905 and was 38% completed in 1909. It 
has been estimated that the irrigated and irrigable area under private 
canals is about 80,000 acres, and that that still undisposed of in 1909, 
irrigated by the state under the Carey Act, amounted to 180,000 
acres. 

Fisheries. — The Columbia river has long been famous for its salmon, 
and as the supply seemed threatened with exhaustion for several 
years following the maximum catch in 1883, the state legislature^ in 
1901 passed an act establishing a close season both early in the spring 
and late in the summer and prohibiting any fishing, except with 
hook and line, at any time, without a licence. In 1908 two laws pro- 
posed by initiative petition were passed, stopping all fishing by night 
and fishing in the navigable channels of the lower river, limiting the 
length of seines to be used in the lower river and abolishing the use 
of gear by fishermen of the upper river — the mouth of the Sandy 
river, in Multnomah county, being the dividing line between the 
upper and lower Columbia. Several hatcheries have been established 
by the state authorities of Oregon and Washington and by the 
Federal government for propagating the best varieties: the Chinooks 
(0. tschawytscha), the bluebacks (0. nerka) and, when the bluebacks 
became scarce, silversides (0. kisutch). The total catch of salmon 
on the Oregon side of the Columbia river in 1 90 1 was 16,725,435 ft; 
from this it rose to 24,575,228 ft in 1903, but fell to 18,151,743 ft in 
1907 and 18,463,546 in 1908. Salmon are caught in smaller quantities 
in the coast streams: 4,371,618 lb in 1901 and 8,043,690 ft in 1906, 
but only 6,738,682 ft in 1907 and 6,422,51 1 ft in 1908. Some catfish, 
shad, smelt, halibut, herring, perch, sturgeon, flounders, oysters, 
clams, crabs and crawfish are also obtained from Oregon waters. 

Minerals. — Gold was discovered in the Rogue and Klamath rivers 
in the S. part of Oregon in 1852, and placer-mining was prosecuted 
here without interruption until i860, when the metal was found in 
larger quantities on the streams in Baker and Grant counties in the 
north-eastern part of the state. Quartz-mining has since very largely 
taken the place of placer-mining, but the two principal gold-producing 
districts are still that traversed by the Blue Mountains in the north- 
eastern quarter and that drained by the Rogue river in the south- 
western corner, a continuation of the California field. The value of 
the total output of the state was $2,113,356 in 1894, but only 
$865,076 in 1908. Silver is obtained almost wholly in the form of 
alloy with gold, and in 1908 the value of the output was only $23,109. 
Lignitic coal was discovered on or near the coast of Coos Bay as_ early 
as 1855, and this is still the only productive coalfield within the 
state, although there are outcroppings of the mineral all along the 
Coast Range N. of the Rogue river, along the W. foothills of the 
Cascade Range and in the Blue Mountains; this coal is suitable for 
steam and heating purposes but will not coke. The quantity of the 
output was 86,259 short tons in 1908. Copper ores are known to be 
quite widely distributed in the mountain districts, but there has 
been little work on any except some in Josephine and Grant counties ; 
in 1908 the state's output amounted to 291,377 ft of copper. _ Iron 
ore, platinum, lead, quicksilver and cobalt have been obtained in the 
state in merchantable quantities, and there is some zinc ore inthe 
Cascade Range. In Union county is a great amount of blue lime- 
stone, and there is limestone, also, in Baker, Grant, Wallowa, Jackson 
and Josephine counties. Sandstone is abundant, and there is some 
granite, in the Coast Range. A variegated marble is obtained in 
Douglas county, and other marbles arc found in several counties. 
Clays suitable for making brick and tile are found in nearly every 
part of the state: in 1908 the clay products of the state were valued 
at $555,768. Soapstone is abundant in both the E. and W. counties. 
Ochre, or mineral paint, and mineral waters, too, are widely 



OREGON 



245 



distributed. There is some roofing slate along the Rogue river, 
natural cement, nickel ore, bismuth and wolframite in Douglas county, 
gypsum in Baker county, fire-clay in Clatsop county, borate of soda 
on the marsh lands of Harney county, infusorial earth and tripoli 
in the valley of the Deschutes river, chromatc of iron in Curry 
and Douglas counties, molybdenite in Union county, bauxite in 
Clackamas county, borate of lime in Curry county, manganese ore in 
Columbia county, and asbestos in several of the southern and 
eastern counties. The total value of all mineral products in 1908 was 

82,743434- , . . , , , , , 

Manufactures. — Manufacturing is encouraged both by the variety 
and abundance of raw material furnished by the mines, the forests, 
the farms and the fisheries, and by the coal and water-power avail- 
able for operating the machinery. The total value of manufactures 
increased from §10,931,232 in 1880 to S41432M74 in 1890, or 279% 
in ten years, and although progress was slow from 1890 to 1900 there 
was a rapid advance again from 1900 to 1905, when the value of 
factory products increased from $36,592,714 to 855,525,123. The 
manufactures of greatest value are lumber and timber products 
($12,483,908 in 1905). Portland and Astoria arc the chief manu- 
facturing centres; in 1905 the value of the factory products of these 
two cities was 57-2% of that of the factory products of the entire 
state. 

Transportation and Commerce. — For 110 m. from the mouth of the 
Columbia river to Portland, 12 m. up the Willamette river, is a 
channel which in 1909 was navigable (20-22 ft. deep) by large ocean- 
going vessels, and which will have a minimum depth of 25 ft. at low 
water upon the completion of the Federal project of 1902. From the 
mouth of the Willamette river vessels of light draft ascend the 
Columbia (passing the Cascade Falls through a lock canal, which was 
opened in 1896 and has a depth of 8 ft., a width of 92 ft. and two 
locks, each 462 ft. long) to the mouth of the Snake river (in the state 
of Washington), up that river to the mouth of the Imnaha, in 
Wallowa county, on the eastern boundary of Oregon, and, when the 
water is high, up the Imnaha river to the town of Imnaha, 516 m. 
from the sea. The Willamette river is navigable to Harrisburg, 
152 m. above Portland, but boats seldom go farther up the river 
than Corvallis, 1 19 m. above Portland, and the depth at low water 
to Corvallis is only 3 ft. On the coast, Coos Bay, a tidal estuary, is 
the principal harbour between the mouth of the Columbia and San 
Francisco; it admits vessels drawing 14^ to 16 ft. of water, and both 
the north and south forks of the Coos river are navigable for vessels 
of light draft (the depth at low water is only 1-5 ft.) 14 m. from the 
mouth of that river, and 8-5 m. on each fork. Farther north, 
Yaquina Bay and Tillamook Bay also admit small steamboats. 
The Coquille river is navigable for about 37 m., the Yaquina river 
for 23 m. with a depth of 13 to 15 ft., the Siuslaw river for 6 m. 
(for vessels drawing less than 6 ft., 15 m. farther for very light 
draft vessels) and a few other coast streams for short distances. 
The beginning of railway building in Oregon was delayed a few years 
by a contest between parties desiring a line on the east side of the 
Willamette river and parties desiring one on the west side. Finally, 
on the 14th of May 1868, ground was broken for the proposed line on 
the west side, and two days later it was broken for one on the cast 
side ; that on the east side was completed for 20 m. south of Portland 
in 1869 and that on the west side was completed to the Yamhill river 
in 1872. In 1870 the mileage was 159 m. The principal period of 
railway building was from 1880 to 1890, during which 931-97 m. were 
built and the state's mileage increased from 508 m. to 1,439-97 m. 
In 1909 the total mileage was 2089-46 m. There is a state rail- 
way commission. The principal railways are: that of the Oregon 
Railroad & Navigation Company (controlled by the Union Pacific), 
which crosses the north-eastern corner of the state and then runs along 
the bank of the Columbia river to Portland; three lines of the 
Southern Pacific in the Willamette Valley, the main line connecting 
Portland with San Francisco; the Astoria & Columbia River, con- 
necting Portland and Astoria; the Coos Bay, Roseburg & Eastern 
Railroad & Navigation Company (owned by the Southern Pacific), 
connecting Coos Bay with one of the Southern Pacific lines; and the 
Corvallis & Eastern (owned by the Southern Pacific), connecting 
Yaquina Bay with all three lines of the Southern Pacific. Throughout 
the Cascade Mountain Region and the great semi-arid region east of 
those mountains, which together embrace more than two-thirds of 
the state's area, there is not a railway. 

The state carries on an extensive commerce with the Orient and 
with the Canadian provinces. Its exports are principally lumber, 
wheat, live-stock, fish and wool; its imports are largely a variety of 
products of the Oriental countries. There are four customs districts : 
southern Oregon, with Coos Bay as the port of entry; Willamette, 
with Portland as the port of entry ; Oregon, with Astoria as the port 
of. entry; and Yaquina, at the mouth of the Yaquina river. 

Population. — The population of Oregon was 13,294 in 1850; 
52,465 in i860; 90,923 in 1870; 174,768 in 1880; 317,704 in 1890; 
4i.3,S3 6 in 19 00 , an increase of 30-2% in the decade; and 672,765 
in 1910, a further increase of 62-7%. Of the total population in 
1900, 347,788, or 84-1%, were native-born, 65,748 were foreign- 
born, 394,582, or 95-4%, were of the white race, and 18,954 



were coloured. Of those born within the United States only 
164,431, or less than one-half, were natives of Oregon, and of 
those born in other states of the Union 128,654, or about seven- 
tenths, were natives of one or another of the following states: 
Missouri, Illinois, Iowa, Ohio, California, New York, Indiana, 
Kansas, Washington, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania. Nearly 
three-fourths of the foreign-born were composed of the following: 
13,292 Germans, 9365 Chinese, 9007 Scandinavians, 7508 
Canadians, 5663 English and 4210 Irish. The coloured popula- 
tion consisted of 10,397 Chinese, 4951 Indians, 2501 Japanese 
and 1 105 negroes. 

The Indians are remnants of a large number of tribes, most of 
which arc aboriginal to this region, and they represent ten or more 
distinct linguistic stocks. Most of them have been collected under 
five government schools; the Clackamas, Cow Creek, Calapooya, 
Lakmiut, Mary's River, Molala, Nestucca, Rogue River, Santiam, 
Shasta, Tumwater, Umpqua, Wapato and Yamhill, numbering 145 
in 1909, under the Grande Ronde school, on the Grande Rondc 
reservation in Polk and Yamhill counties; the Klamath (658), 
Modoc (216), Paiute (103), and Pit River or Achomawi (56), under 
the Klamath school on the Klamath reservation (1362-8 sq. m.) in 
Klamath and Lake counties; the Alsea, Coquille, Kusan, Kwatami, 
Rogue River, Skoton, Shasta, Saiustkea, Siuslaw, Tututni, Umpqua 
and several other small tribes, numbering 442 in 1909, under the 
Siletz school, on the Siletz reservation (5 sq. m.) in Lincoln 
county; the Cayuse, Umatilla and Wallawalla, numbering 1205 in 
1908, under the Umatilla school, on the Umatilla reservation (124-73 
sq. m.) in Umatilla county, and the Paiute, Tenino, Warm Springs 
and Wasco Indians, numbering 765 in 1909, under the Warm 
Springs school on the Warm Springs reservation (503-29 sq. m.) in 
Wasco and Crook counties. Most of the Indians are engaged in 
farming and stock-raising, but a few still derive their maintenance 
mainly from fishing and hunting. 

Roman Catholics are the most numerous religious sect in 
the state (in 1906 out of a total of 120,229 communicants of 
all religious bodies, they numbered 35,317). The rural popula- 
tion (i.e. population outside of incorporated places) is very 
sparse, only about 25, in 1900, to the square mile, and while 
it increased from 203,973 in T 89o to 229,894 in 1900, or only 
11 - 3%> the urban (i.e. population of places having 4000 in- 
habitants or more) together with the semi-urban (i.e. population 
of incorporated places having less than 4000 inhabitants) in- 
creased during the same decade from 113,731 to 183,642, or 
61-5%. The principal cities are Portland, Astoria, Baker 
City and Salem, which is the capital. 

Administration. — The state is still governed under its original 
constitution of 1857, with the amendments adopted in 1902, 
1906 and 1908. This constitution may be amended: by a 
majority of the popular vote at a regular general election, if 
the amendment has been passed by a majority vote of all the 
elected members of each house of the legislature; or by an 
initiative petition; or by a constitutional convention, which 
may not be called, however, unless the law providing for it 
is approved by popular vote. The right of suffrage is conferred 
by the constitution upon all white male citizens twenty-one 
years of age and over who have resided in the state during the 
six months immediately preceding the election, and upon every 
white male of the required age who has been a resident of the 
state for six months, and who, one year before the election, 
has declared his intention of becoming a citizen and who has 
resided in the United States for one year and in the state for 
six months prior to the election. Idiots, insane persons and 
persons convicted of serious crimes are disfranchised. The 
clause excluding negroes and Chinese from the suffrage has 
never been repealed, although it has been rendered nugatory 
by the Fifteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution. 
Another provision which has been annulled by amendment 
to the Federal Constitution, but which still remains in the state 
constitution, is a clause forbidding free negroes or mulattoes, 
not residing in the state at the time of the adoption of the 
constitution, to enter the state or to own real estate or make 
contracts and maintain suits therein, and bidding the legislature 
provide for the removal of such negroes and mulattoes and 
for the punishment of persons bringing them into the state, 
or employing or harbouring them. The constitution provides 
that no Chinaman, not a resident of the state at the time of 



246 



OREGON 



the adoption of the constitution, shall ever hold any real estate 
or mining claim, or work any mining claim in the state. 

The chief executive functions are vested in a governor, who 
is elected for a term of four years, and who must be at least 
30 years old and must have been a resident of the state for 
three years before his election. He is not eligible to the office 
for more than eight years in any period of twelve years. He 
has the right of pardon and a veto of legislative acts, which 
may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of the members present 
of each house of the legislature. The other important adminis- 
trative officers are the secretary of state (who succeeds the 
governor if he dies or resigns— there is no lieutenant-governor), 
treasurer, attorney-general, superintendent of public instruction 
and labour commissioner. No public officer may be impeached, 
but for sufficient cause the governor may remove a justice of 
the supreme court or a prosecuting attorney from office, upon 
a joint resolution of the legislature adopted by a two-thirds 
vote in each house. A public official may be tried for incom- 
petence, corruption or malfeasance according to the regular 
procedure in criminal cases, and if convicted he may be dis- 
missed from office and receive such other penalties as the law 
provides. 

The legislative department (officially called " the legislative 
assembly") consists of a Senate of thirty 1 members chosen for four 
years, with half the membership retiring every two years, and a House 
of Representatives with sixty 1 members elected biennially. A 
senatorial district, if it contains more than one county, must be 
composed of contiguous counties, and no county may be divided 
between different senatorial districts. The sessions of the legislature 
are biennial. Bills for raising revenue must originate in the House of 
Representatives, but the Senate may offer amendments. Until 1902 
the legislature was the sole law-making body in the state, but on the 
2nd of June of this year the voters adopted a constitutional amend- 
ment which declared that " the people reserve to themselves power 
to propose laws and amendments to the constitution, and to enact or 
reject the same at the polls, independent of the legislative assembly, 
and also reserve power at their own option to approve or reject at 
the polls any act of the legislative assembly." This provision for the 
initiative and the referendum was made effective by a legislative act 
of 1903. Eight per cent of the number of voters who at the last 
preceding election voted for a justice of the supreme court, by filing 
with the secretary of state a petition for the enactment of any law or 
constitutional amendment — the petition must contain the full text of 
the law and must be filed at least four months before the election at 
which it is to be voted upon — may secure a vote on the proposed 
measure at the next general election, and if it receives the approval of 
the voters it becomes a law without interposition of the legislature, 
and goes into effect from the day of the governor's proclamation 
announcing the result of the election. A referendum of legislative 
enactments may be ordered in two ways: the legislature itself may 
refer any of its acts to the people for approval or rejection at the next 
regular election, in which case the act may not be vetoed by the 
governor and does not go into effect until approved at the polls; or 
5 % of the number of voters at the last election for a supreme court 
justice may by petition order any act, except such as are " necessary 
for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety," 
to be referred to the voters for their approval or rejection. Such a 
petition must be filed within ninety days after the adjournment of 
the session in which the act was passed. The secretary of state is 
required to mail to every voter whose address he has a pamphlet 
containing the text of the laws to be voted upon at the ensuing 
election. Along with the text of the law, the state will print argu- 
ments in its favour if any are submitted by the persons initiating the 
measure and the cost of the extra printing is paid by the initiators. 
In like manner, any one who will defray the expense of the printing 
may submit arguments in opposition to any proposed measure, and 
these will be included in the pamphlet and distributed by the state 
at its own expense. This " text-book " for the voters contained 60 
pages in 1906 and 126 pages in 1908. 

The power of the initiative was first exercised by the people of 
Oregon in 1904, when they proposed and enacted a local option liquor 
law and a direct primary law. As a result of the first of these 
measures, in 1908 nineteen of the thirty-three counties of the state 
had prohibited the sale of intoxicants since 1905. The most important 
effect of the direct primary law has been the choice of United States 
senators by what is practically a popular vote. Candidates for the 
United States Senate are voted for in the primaries, and between 1904 
and 1909 candidates for the state legislature were required to say 
whether or not they would support the people's choice for United 

1 The constitution set 30 as the maximum number of senators, 
60 as the maximum number of representatives, and provided for 16 
senators and 34 representatives in 1857-1860. It provided for an 
enumeration and a reapportionment each tenth year after 1865. 



States senator regardless of their own preferences. 2 In the state 
election in June 1908 a Democrat received the highest popular vote 
for the senatorship, and as a majority of the legislature of 1909 had 
committed itself to vote for the people's choice, he was elected by 
that body, although five-sixths of its members were Republicans. 3 
This was an anomaly in American politics. In June 1906 five laws 
and five amendments to the constitution, proposed by initiative 
petitions, and one law on which the referendum was ordered by 
petition, were submitted to a popular vote. An amendment giving 
women the right to vote was defeated, and among those adopted was 
one providing for the initiative upon special and local laws and parts 
of laws, and another giving cities and towns the exclusive right to 
enact or amend their own charters, subject only to the constitution 
and the criminal laws. Oregon was thus the first American state 
to grant complete home rule to its municipalities. At the election 
in June 1908 the number of initiative and referendum measures 
amounted to nineteen, and the ballot required forty-one separate 
marks and was over 2j ft. long. 

The measures to be voted on consisted of eleven laws or con- 
stitutional amendments proposed by initiative petition, four con- 
stitutional amendments referred to the people by the legislature, and 
four laws upon which the voters had ordered a referendum. Among 
the measures defeated were the fourth woman's suffrage amendment 
voted down in Oregon, a single-tax bill and an " open town " bill 
designed to defeat the purpose of the local option liquor law. Among 
the measures adopted were : a' law (of doubtful constitutionality) 
requiring legislators to vote for the people's choice for a United 
States senator — this was adopted by a vote of 69,668 to 21,162; a 
corrupt practices act, regulating the expenditure of moneys in 
political campaigns and limiting a candidate's expenses to one- 
fourth of one year's salary; an amendment permitting the establish- 
ment of state institutions elsewhere than at the capital ; an amend- 
ment changing the time of state elections from June to November; 
an amendment permitting the legislature to pass a law providing for 
proportional representation, i.e. representation for each political 
party in proportion to its numerical strength, by providing for first 
and second choice in voting — the system of preferential voting 
adopted in Idaho in 1909; and the " recall," by which the voters 
may remove from office after six months' service by a special election 
any local official.' 

Judiciary. — The judicial department of the state consists of a 
supreme court, circuit courts, county courts (held by a county judge 
in each county) and the courts of local justices of the peace. The 
supreme court consists of five (before 1909 the number was three) 
justices elected for a term of six years, and its jurisdiction extends 
only to appeals from the decisions of the circuit courts. The judges 
of the circuit courts were formerly supreme court justices on circuit; 
they also are chosen for six years, and they have cognizance over all 
cases, including appeals from inferior courts, not specifically re- 
served by law for some other tribunal. The judges of the county 
courts are elected for four years, and their courts have jurisdiction 
over probate matters, civil cases involving amounts not exceeding 
$500, and criminal cases in which the offence is not punishable by 
death or imprisonment in the penitentiary. Each county is divided 
into a number of districts or precincts, for each of which there is a 
justice of the peace, elected biennially and having jurisdiction in 
minor cases. 

Local Government. — For the purposes of local government the 
state is divided into thirty-four counties. The constitution provides 
that no county may have an area of less than 400 sq. m., and that no 
new county may be created unless its population is at least 1200. 
County affairs are administered by the county judge acting with two 
commissioners. Any portion of a county containing as many as 150 
inhabitants may be incorporated as a town or city, and as such it 
possesses complete self-government in all purely local matters, even 






2 Before 1904, under a law of 1901, the people voted for candidates 
for the United States Senate, but the legislative assembly was in no 
way bound to carry out the decision of the popular vote; and in 
1904 the legislature chose as United States senator a candidate for 
whom no votes had been cast in the popular election. 

3 It is to be noted that the Republican party had not favoured 
requiring a pledge from members of the legislature that they would 
vote for the people's choice for senator; that the Democratic candi- 
date for senator (Gov. G. E. Chamberlain) was a prominent 
advocate of the initiative, the referendum and the direct election of 
United States senators; and that a wing of the Republican party 
worked for the choice of the Democratic candidate by the people in 
the hope that the (Republican) legislature would not ratify the 
popular choice and so would nullify the direct primary law. 

4 At times the two law-making bodies — the legislature and the 
people — have come into conflict. In 1906, for example, the people by 
the initiative secured a law forbidding public officers from accepting 
free passes from railways. In 1907 the legislature repealed all laws 
on this subject and required railways to furnish free transportation 
to certain officials. Upon this measure, however, the people ordered 
a referendum and it was rejected at the polls. In 1908 the people 
voted against increasing the number of supreme court judges; in 
1909 the legislature increased the number. 



OREGON 



247 



having the power to revise its own charter. A constitutional amend- 
ment of 1906 forbids the formation of corporations by special laws 
(formerly the constitution provided that corporations "shall not be 
created by special laws except for municipal purposes ") and says: 
" The legislative assembly shall not enact, amend or repeal any 
charter or act of incorporation for any municipality, city or town." 
The initiative and the referendum arc employed in municipal 
ordinances as well as in state laws; towns and cities make their own 
provisions as to " the manner of exercising the initiative and refer- 
endum powers as to their own municipal legislation "; but " not 
more than 10 % of the legal voters may be required to order the 
referendum nor more than 15 % to propose any measure by the 
initiative, in any city or town." 

Miscellaneous Laws. — The value of the homestead exempt from 
judicial sale for the satisfaction of liabilities is limited to $1500; the 
homestead must be owned and occupied by some member of the 
family claiming the exemption and may not exceed in area one block 
in a town or city or 160 acres outside of a municipality. The ex- 
emption is not valid against a mortgage, but the mortgage must be 
executed by both husband and wife, if the householder is married. 
The debtor claims the exemption where the levy is made, but if the 
sheriff deems the homestead greater in value than the law allows, he 
may choose three disinterested persons to appraise it and sell any 
portion that may be adjudged in excess of the legal limit. The 
constitution provides that the property and pecuniary rights of every 
married woman, at the time of her marriage, or afterwards, acquired 
by gift, devise or inheritance, shall not be subject to the debts or 
contracts of the husband; and that laws shall be passed providing 
for the registration of the wife's separate property. Marriages 
between whites and persons of negro descent, between whites and 
Indians, and between first cousins are forbidden or are void. One 
year's residence is necessary to secure a divorce, for which the causes 
recognized are a conviction of felony, habitual drunkenness for one 
year, physical incapacity, desertion for one year and cruelty or 
personal indignities. 

Education. — The public school system (organized 1873) is ad- 
ministered by the state superintendent of public instruction, who 
exercises a general supervision over the schools, and by the state 
board of education, which prescribes the general rules and regulations 
for their management. For the support of the schools there is a 
school fund, amounting on the 1st of April 1909 to $5,861,475, and 
consisting of the moneys derived from the sale of lands donated by 
the Federal government and of small sums derived from miscellane- 
ous sources. The fund is administered by a board consisting of the 
governor, the secretary of state and the state treasurer, and the 
income from it is apportioned among the counties according to the 
number of children of school age. The counties are also required to 
levy special school taxes, the aggregate annual amount of which 
shall be equivalent to at least seven dollars for every child between 
the ages of four and twenty years. If the total annual fund for a 
school district amounts to less than $300, the district must levy a 
special tax to bring the fund up to that sum. Each school district 
in the state is required to have a school term of six months or more. 
Special county taxes are levied for the maintenance of public school 
libraries also. For all children between the ages of nine and fourteen 
inclusive, school attendance is compulsory. 

The total number of teachers in the public schools in 1908 was 
4243; the total school enrollment, 107,493; the average daily 
attendance 94,333. In 1908 there was paid for the support of 
common schools $3,061,994; the average monthly salary of rural 
teachers was $49-60, and of school principals, $80-87. The pro- 
portion of illiterates is low: in 1900 of the total population 10 years 
of age or over only 3-3 % was illiterate; of the male population of 
the same age 3-9 %, of the female 2-3 % and of the native white 
population only 0-8 % were illiterate. 

In addition to the public schools, the state maintains; the Uni- 
versity of Oregon at Eugene (q.v.); the State Agricultural College 
(1870), at Corvallis (pop. 1900, 1819), the county-seat of Benton 
county, and the State Normal School (1882) at Monmouth (pop.in 
1900, 606), in Polk county. Among the institutions not receiving 
state aid are Albany College (Presbyterian, 1867), at Albany ; Colum- 
bia University (Roman Catholic, 1901), at Portland; Dallas College 
(United Evangelical, 1900), at Dallas; Pacific University (Congre- 
gational, 1853), at Forest Grove; McMinnville College (Baptist, 
1858), at McMinnville; Pacific College (Friends, founded in 1885 
as an academy, college opened in 1891), at Newberg; Philomath 
College (United Brethren, 1866), at Philomath; and Willamette 
University (Methodist Episcopal, 1844), at Salem. 

Charitable and Correctional Institutions. — The state supports the 
following charitable and correctional institutions: a soldiers' home 
(1894) at Roseburg and a school for deaf mutes (1870), an institute 
for the blind (1873), a reform school, an insane asyium and a peni- 
tentiary at Salem, the capital of the state. These institutions 
(except the penitentiary, of which the governor of the state is an 
inspector) are governed each by a board of three trustees, the 
governor of the state and the secretary of state serving on all boards, 
and the third trustee being the state treasurer on the boards for the 
state insane asylum, the state reform school and the institute for 
the feeble-minded, and the superintendent of public instruction 



on the boards for the school for deaf mutes and the institute for 
the blind. 

Finance. — The constitution forbids the establishment or incorpora- 
tion by the legislative assembly of any bank or banking company; 
and it forbids any bank or banking company in the state from issuing 
bills, checks, certificates, promissory notes or other paper to circulate 
as money. Except in case of war the legislative assembly may not 
contract a state debt greater than $50,000. To pay bounties to 
soldiers in the Civil War a debt of $237,000 was contracted; but in 
1870 only $90,000 of it was still outstanding. An issue of bonds (to be 
redeemed from the sale of public lands) for a privately built canal at 
Oregon City was authorized in 1870. About $175,000 more of debt 
was incurred by Indian wars in 1874 and 1878; in the latter year the 
public debt amounted to more than $650,000, but about $350,000 
of this was in 10 % warrants for road-building, &c. ; the bonds and 
warrants (with the exception of some never presented for redemption) 
were speedily redeemed by a special property tax. Revenues for the 
support of the government are derived from the following sources : the 
general property tax, the poll tax (the proceeds of which accrue to 
the county in which it is collected), the inheritance tax, corporation 
taxes, business taxes and licenses and fees. By far the most im- 
portant source of revenue is the general property tax, which is 
assessed for state, county and municipal purposes. The amount of 
revenue to be raised for state purposes each year by this tax is com- 
puted by a board consisting of the governor, the secretary of state 
and the state treasurer, and it is apportioned among the counties on 
the basis of their average expenditures for the previous five years. 
At the close of the year 1907 the state was free from bonded 
indebtedness; receipts into the treasury during the year were 
$2,851,471, and the expenditure was $2,697,645. 

History. — As to the European who first saw any portion of 
the present Oregon there is some controversy and doubt. It 
is known that within thirty years after the discovery of the 
Pacific Ocean the Spaniards had explored the western coasts 
of the American continent from the isthmus to the vicinity 
of the forty-second parallel of north latitude, and it is possible 
that the Spanish pilot Bartolome Ferrelo (or Ferrer), who in 
1543 made the farthest northward voyage in the Pacific re- 
corded in the first half of the 16th century, may have reached a 
point on the Oregon coast. The profitable trade between the 
Spanish colonies and the Far East, however, soon occupied 
the whole attention of the Spaniards, and caused them to 
neglect the exploration of the coast of north-western America 
for many years. In 1579 the Englishman, Francis Drake, 
came to this region seeking a route home by way of the North- 
west Passage, and in his futile quest he seems to have gone 
as far north as 43 . 1 He took possession of the country in the 
name of Queen Elizabeth and called it Albion. Near the end 
of the century persistent stories of a North-west Passage caused 
the Spanish rulers to plan further explorations of the Pacific 
coast, so as to forestall other nations in the discovery of the 
alleged new route and thus retain their monopoly of the South 
Sea (Pacific Ocean). In 1603 Sebastian Vizcaino, acting under 
orders of the viceroy of Mexico, reached the latitude of 42 N., 
and Martin Aguilar, with another vessel of the fleet, reached 
a point near latitude 43 which he called Cape Blanco and 
claimed to have discovered there a large river. For the next 
century and a half Spain again neglected this region, until the 
fear of English and Russian encroachment caused her to resume 
the work of exploration. In 1774 Juan Perez sailed up the 
coast as far as 54 N. lat., and on his return followed the shore 
line very closely, thus making the first real and undisputed 
exploration of the Oregon coast of which there is any record. 
In the following year Bruno Heceta landed off what is now 
called Point Grenville and took formal possession of the country', 
and later, in lat. 46°9', he discovered a bay whose swift currents 
led him to suspect that he was in the mouth of a large river 
or strait. In 1778 Jonathan Carver (q.v.) published in London 
Travels throughout the Interior Parts of North America, in which, 
following the example of the Spaniards, he asserted that there 
was a great river on the western coast, although, so far as is 
known, no white man had then ever seen such a stream. Whether 
his declaration was based on stories told by the Indians of the 
interior, or upon reports of Spanish sailors, or had no basis at 
all, is not known; its chief importance lies in the fact that 
Carver called this undiscovered stream the Oregon, and th?t 

1 Some early writers assert that Drake even reached the lat. ol 
48 N. and anchored in the Straits of Juan de Fuca. 



248 



OREGON 



this name was eventually applied to the territory drained by 
this great western river. The name, like the whole story, may 
have been of Spanish or Indian origin, or it may have been 
purely fanciful. 1 

The Spaniards made no effort to colonize north-western 
America or to develop its trade with the Indians, but toward 
the end of the iSth century the traders of the great British 
fur companies of the North were gradually pushing overland 
to the Pacific. Upon the sea, too. the English were not idle. 
Captain James Cook in March 177S sighted the coast of Oregon 
in the lat. of 44 , and examined it between 47 and 4S in the 
hope of finding the Straits of Juan de Fuca described in Spanish 
accounts. Soon after the close of the War of Independence 
American merchants began to buy furs along the north-west 
coast and to ship them to China to be exchanged for the products 
of the East. It was in the prosecution of this trade that Captain 
Robert Gray (1755-1806), an American in the service of Boston 
merchants, discovered in 1792 the long-sought river of the West, 
which he named the Columbia, after his ship. By the discovery 
of this stream Gray gave to the United States a claim to the 
whole territory drained by its waters. Other explorers had 
searched in vain for this river. Cook had sailed by without 
suspecting its presence; Captain John Meares (c. 1756-1S09), 
another English navigator, who visited the region in 178s, 
declared that no such river existed, and actually called its 
estuary " Deception Bay "; and George Vancouver, who 
visited the coast in 1792, was sceptical until he learned of Gray's 
discovery. 

Spanish claims to this part of North America did not long 
remain undisputed by England and the United States. By 
the Nootka Convention of 1790 Spain acknowledged the right 
of British subjects to fish, trade and settle in the parts of the 
northern Pacific coast not already occupied; and under the 
treaty of 1S19 (proclaimed in 1821) she ceded to the United 
States all the territory claimed by her N. of 42 . But even 
before these agreements had been reached, Alexander Mackenzie, 
in the service of the North-west Company, in 1793 had explored 
through Canada to the Pacific coast in lat. about 52 20' N., 
and Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, American explorers 
acting under the orders of President Jefferson, in 1S05-1S06 
had passed west of the Rocky Mountains and down the Columbia 
river to the Pacific Ocean. Both British and American 
adventurers were attracted to the region by the profitable fur 
trade. In. 1S08 the North-west Company had several posts on 
the Fraser river, and in the same year the American Fur Company 
was organized by John Jacob Astor, who was planning to build 
up a trade in the West. In 1S11 the Pacific Fur Company, a 
kind of western division of the American Fur Company, founded 
a trading post at the mouth of the Columbia which they called 
Astoria, and set up a number of minor posts on the Willamette, 
Spokane and Okanogan rivers. On hearing of the war between 
England and the United States, Astor's associates, deeming 
Astoria untenable, sold the property in October 1S13 to the 
North-west Company. In the following month a British ship 
arrived, and its captain took formal possession of the post 
and renamed it Fort George. 

Soon after the restoration of peace between England and the 
United States by the treaty of Ghent (1S14), there arose the 
so-called " Oregon question " or " North-western boundary 
dispute," which agitated both countries for more than a genera- 
tion and almost led to another war. As that treaty had stipulated 
that all territory captured during the war should be restored 
to its former owner, the American government in 1S17 took 

1 There have been many ingenious, but quite unsatisfactory, 
efforts to explain the derivation of the word Oregon. They are 
enumerated at length in Bancroft's History of Oregon, vol. i. pp. 17-25. 
It seems that after the publication of Carver's book the word Oregon 
did not appear again in print until William Cullen Bryant employed 
it in his poem Thanatopsis, in 1817. It was applied to the territory 
drained by the Columbia river for the first time, perhaps, by Hall 
J. Kelley, a promoter of immigration into the North-west, who in 
memorials to Congress and numerous other writings refex'red to the 
country as Oregon. 



steps to reoccupy the Columbia Valley. The British government 
at first protested, on the ground that Astoria was not captured 
territory, but finally surrendered the post to the United States 
in 181S. The United States was willing at the time to extend 
the north-western boundary along the forty-ninth parallel from 
the Lake of the Woods to the Pacific, but to this the British 
government would not consent; and on the 20th of October 
181 S both nations agreed to a convention providing for the 
" joint occupation " for ten years of the country " on the 
north-west coast of America, westward of the Stony 
[Rocky] Mountains." In the following year, as already 
stated, Spain waived her claim to the territory north of 42 
in favour of the United States. In 1S21, however, Russia 
asserted her claim to all lands as far south as the fifty-first 
parallel. Against this claim both England and the United 
States protested, and in 1S24 the United States and Russia 
concluded a treaty by which Russia agreed to make no settle- 
ments south of 54 40', and the United States agreed to make 
none north of that line. From this time until the final settle- 
ment of the controversy the Americans were disposed to believe 
that their title was clear to all the territory south of the Russian 
possessions; that is, to all the region west of the Rocky Mountains 
between 42 and 54 40' N. lat. In 1S27 the agreement of 1S18 
between Great Britain and the United States as to joint occupa- 
tion was renewed for an indefinite term, with the proviso that 
it might be terminated by either party on twelve months' notice. 

For the next two decades the history of Oregon is concerned 
mainly with the British fur traders and the American immigrants. 
The Hudson's Bay Company absorbed its rival, the North-west 
Company, in 182 1, and thus secured a practical monopoly of 
the fur trade of the North and West. Its policy was to dis- 
courage colonization so as to maintain the territory in which 
it operated as a vast game preserve. Fortunately for the 
Americans, however, the company in 1824 sent to the Columbia 
river as its chief factor and governor west of the Rocky Mountains 
Dr John McLoughlin (17S4-1S57), who ruled the region with 
an iron hand, but with a benevolent purpose, for twenty-two 
years. On the northern bank of the Columbia in 1824-1825 
he built Fort Vancouver, which became a port for ocean vessels 
and a great entrepot for the western fur trade; in 1S29 he began 
the settlement of Oregon City; and, most important of all, he 
extended a hearty welcome to all settlers and aided them in 
many ways, though this was against the company's interests. 

In 1S32 four Indian chiefs from the Oregon country journeyed 
to St Louis to obtain a copy of the white man's Bible; and this 
incident aroused the missionary zeal of the religious denomina- 
tions. In 1S34 Jason Lee (d. 1S45) and his nephew, Daniel 
Lee, went to Oregon as Methodist missionaries, and with 
McLoughlin's assistance they established missions in the 
Willamette valley. Samuel Parker went as a Presbyterian 
missionary in 1S35, and was followed in the next year by Marcus 
Whitman and Henry H. Spalding (c. 1801-1874), who ,were 
accompanied by their wives, the first white women, it is said, 
to cross the American continent. Whitman settled at Wai-i-lat- 
pu, about 5 m. W. of the present Walla Walla and 25 m. from 
the Hudson's Bay Company's Fort Walla Walla; and Spalding 
at Lapwai, near the present Lewiston, Idaho. Roman Catholic 
missions were established near Fort WaUa Walla in 1838. In 
this year Jason Lee returned to the Eastern states and carried 
back to Oregon with him by sea over fifty people, missionaries 
and their families. It is significant, if true, that part of the 
money for chartering his vessel was supplied from the secret- 
service fund of the United States government. 

As early as 1841 the Americans in Oregon began to feel the 
need of some form of civil government, as the regulations of the 
Hudson's Bay Company were the only laws then known to the 
country. After several ineffectual attempts a provisional 
government was finally organized by two meetings at Champoeg 
(in what is now Marion county, north-east of Salem) on the 2nd 
of May and on the 5th of July 1S43. The governing body was 
at first an executive committee of three citizens, but in 1845 
this committee was abolished and a governor was chosen. In 



OREGON 



249 



the " fundamental laws " of the provisional government 
were incorporated a number of Articles from the Ordinance of 
1 7S7, among them the one prohibiting slavery. The new govern- 
ment encountered the opposition of the missionaries and of the 
non-American population, but it was soon strengthened by the 
" Great Immigration " in 1S43, when nearly nine hundred men, 
women and children, after assembling at Independence, Missouri, 
crossed the plains in a body and settled in the Columbia Valley. 
After this year the flow of immigrants steadily increased, about 
1400 arriving in 1844, and 3000 in 1845.' Signs of hostility 
to the Hudson's Bay Company now began to appear among 
the American population, and in 1845 the provisional government 
sought to extend its jurisdiction north of the Columbia river, 
where the Americans had hitherto refrained from settling. 
A compromise was finally reached, whereby the company was 
to be exempt from taxes on all its property except the goods 
sold to settlers, and the officers and employees of the company 
and all the British residents were to become subject to the 
provisional government. Meanwhile the western states had 
inaugurated a movement in favour of the immediate and definite 
settlement of the Oregon question, with the result that the 
Democratic national convention of 1844 declared that the title 
of the United States to " the whole of the territory of Oregon " 
was " clear and unquestionable," and the party made " Fifty- 
four forty or fight " a campaign slogan. The Democrats were 
successful at the polls, and President Polk in his inaugural 
address asserted the claim of the United States to all of Oregon 
in terms suggesting the possibility of war. Negotiations, however, 
resulted in a treaty, drafted by James Buchanan, the American 
Secretary of State, and Richard Pakenham, the British envoy, 
which the president in June 1846 submitted to the Senate for 
its opinion and which he was advised to accept. By this instru- 
ment the northern boundary of Oregon was fixed at the forty- 
ninth parallel, extending westward from the crest of the Rocky 
Mountains to the middle of the channel separating Vancouver's 
Island from the mainland, " and thence southerly through the 
middle of the said channel, and of Fuca's Straits, to the Pacific 
Ocean." 

Although President Polk immediately urged the formation 
of a territorial government for Oregon, the bill introduced for 
this purpose was held up in the Senate on account of the opposi- 
tion of Southern leaders, who were seeking to maintain the abstract 
principle that slavery could not be constitutionally prohibited 
in any territory of the United States, although they had no hope 
of Oregon ever becoming slave territory. Indian outbreaks, 
however, which began in 1847, compelled Congress to take 
measures for the defence of the inhabitants, and on the 14th of 
August 1848 a bill was enacted providing a territorial govern- 
ment. As then constituted, the Territory embraced the whole 
area to which the title of the United States had been confirmed 
by the treaty of 1846, and included the present states of Oregon, 
Washington and Idaho, and parts of Wyoming and Montana. 
Its area was reduced in 1853 by the creation of the Territory of 
Washington. The discovery of gold in California drew many 
Oregon settlers to that country in 1848-1850, but this exodus 
was soon offset as a result of the enactment by Congress in 1850 
of the " land donation law," by which settlers in Oregon between 
1850 and 1853 were entitled to large tracts of land free of cost. 
The number of claims registered under this act was over eight 
thousand. 

In 1856 the people voted for statehood; and in June 1857 
they elected members of a constitutional convention which 
drafted a constitution at Salem in August and September 1857; 
the constitution was ratified by popular vote in November 

1 For many years it was generally believed that the administration 
at Washington was prevented from surrendering its claims to Oregon, 
in return for the grant by Great Britain of fishing stations in 
Newfoundland, by Marcus Whitman, who in 1 842-1 843 made a 
journey across the entire continent in the depth of winter to dissuade 
the government from this purpose. This story seems to have no 
foundation in fact; it was not Whitman, but the great influx of 
settlers in 1843-T844 that saved Oregon, if, indeed, there was then 
any danger of its being given up. (See Whitman, Marcus.) 



1857; and on the 14th of February 1850 Oregon was admitted 
into the Union with its present boundaries. The new state 
was at first Democratic in politics, and the southern faction of 
the Democratic party in i860 made a bid for its support by 
nominating as their candidate for vice-president, on the ticket 
with John C. Breckinridge, Joseph Lane ( 1801-188 r), then a 
senator from Oregon and previously its territorial governor. 
The Douglas Democrats and the Republicans, however, worked 
together as a union party, and Lincoln carried the stale by a small 
majority. The so-called union parly broke up after the Civil 
War, and by 1S70 the Democrats were strong enough to prevent 
the ratification by Oregon of the Fifteenth Amendment to the 
Federal Constitution. In 1876, after the presidential election, 
two sets of electoral returns were forwarded from Oregon, one 
showing the choice of three Republican electors, and the other 
(signed by the governor, who was a Democrat) showing the 
election of two Republicans and one Democrat. The popular 
vote was admittedly for the three Republican electors, but one 
of the Republican electors (Watts) was a deputy-postmaster 
and so seemed ineligible under the constitutional provision that 
" no . . . person holding an office of trust or profit under the 
United States shall be an elector." Watts resigned as deputy- 
postmaster, and the secretary of state of Oregon, who under 
the state law was the canvassing officer, certified the election 
of the three Republican electors. On the 6th of December the 
three met, Watts resigned, and was immediately reappointed 
by the other two. The Democratic claimant, with whom the 
two Republican electors whose election was conceded, refused 
to meet, met alone, appointed two other Democrats to fill the 
two " vacancies," and the " electoral college " of the state so 
constituted forthwith cast two votes for Hayes and one for 
Tilden. The Electoral Commission decided that the three votes 
should be counted for Hayes — if the one Democratic elector had 
been adjudged chosen, the Democratic candidate for the presi- 
dency, S. J. Tilden, would have been elected. The political 
complexion of the state has generally been Republican, although 
the contests between the two leading parties have often been 
very close. The Indian outbreaks which began in 1847 continued 
with occasional periods of quiet for nearly a generation, until 
most of the Indians were either killed or placed on reservations. 
The Indians were very active during the Civil War, when 
the regular troops were withdrawn for service in the eastern 
states, and Oregon's volunteers from 1861 to 1865 were needed 
for home defence. The most noted Indian conflicts within the 
state have been the Modoc War (1864-73) ar >d the Shoshone 
War (1866-68). During the Spanish-American War Oregon 
furnished a regiment of volunteers which served in the Philippines. 



Governors of Oregon 
Under the Provisional Government. 

George Abcrnethy 

Under the Territorial Government. 

Joseph Lane 

Knitzing Pritehett (acting) 

John P. Gaines 

Joseph Lane 

George Law Curry (acting) 

John W. Davis 

George Law Curry 



Under the State Government. 



1S45-1849 

1 849-1 850 

1850 
1 850-1 852 

1853 2 

1853 
1 853-1 854 
1 854-1 859 



John Whiteaker, Dem 1859-1862 

Addison Crandall Gibbs, Rep 1 862-1 866 

George Lemuel Woods, Rep 1866-1870 

La Fayette Grover, Dem 1870-1877 

Stephen Fowler Chadwiek (acting) . . . 1 877-1 878 

William Wallace Thayer, Dem 1878-1882 

Zenas Ferry Moody, Rep 1882-1887 

Sylvester Pennoyer, Dem 1887-1895 

William Paine Lord, Rep 1895-1899 

Theodore Thurston Geer, Rep 1 890-1 903 

George Earle Chamberlain, Dem. . . . 1903-1909 

Frank W. Benson, Rep. 1909-1911 3 

Oswald West. Dem. lqn- 

2 Held office only three days, May 16-19. 

3 Secretary of State; succeeded G. E. Chamberlain, who resigned 
to become a member of the U.S. Senate. 



25° 



OREGON CITY— OREL 



Bibliography. — See generally \V. Nash, The Settler's Handbook 
to Oregon (Portland, 1904); and publications and reports of the 
various national and state departments. For administration: J. R. 
Robertson, " The Genesis of Political Authority and of a Common- 
wealth Government in Oregon " in the Quarterly of the Oregon 
Historical Society, vol. i. (Salem, 1901); Journal of the Constitutional 
Convention of the Stale of Oregon held at Salem in 1857 (Salem, 1882) ; 
C. B. Bellinger and W. \V. Cotton, The Codes and Statutes of Oregon 
(2 vols., San Francisco, 1902); and Frank Foxcroft, " Constitution 
Mending and the Initiative," in the Atlantic Monthly for June 1906. 
For history: H. H. Bancroft's History of the North-west Coast (2 
vols., San Francisco, 1884) and History of Oregon (2 vols., San 
Francisco, 1886-1888); William Barrows's Oregon: The Struggle for 
Possession (Boston, 1883) in the "American Commonwealths" 
scries; J. Dunn's Oregon Territory and the British North American 
Fur Trade (Philadelphia, 1845); W. H. Gray's History of Oregon, 
1792-1849 (Portland, Oregon, 1870); H. S. Lyman's History of 
Oregon (4 vols., New York, 1903), the best complete history of the 
state; Joseph Schafer's " Pacific Slope and Alaska," vol. x. of G. C. 
Lee's History of North America (Philadelphia, 1904), more succinct. 
On special features of the state's history sec W. R. Manning's " The 
Nootka Sound Controversy," pp. 279-478 of the Annual Report for 
IQ04 (Washington, 1905) of the American Historical Association; 
F. V. Holman's Dr John McLoughlin, the Father of Oregon (Cleveland, 
1907); J. H. Gilbert's Trade and Currency in Early Oregon, in the 
Columbia University Studies in Economics, vol. xxvi., No. 1 (New 
York, 1907) ; and P. J. de Smet's " Oregon Missions and Travels over 
the Rocky Mountains in 1845-1846," in vol. xxix. of R. G. Thwaites's 
Early Western Travels (Cleveland, 1906). For the Whitman contro- 
versy see Whitman, Marcus. Much historical material may be 
found in the publications of the Oregon Historical Society, especially 
in the Society's Quarterly (1900 sqq.), and of the Oregon Pioneer 
Association. 

OREGON CITY, a city and the county-seat of Clackamas 
county, Oregon, U.S.A., on the E. bank of the Willamette 
river, and S. of the mouth of the Clackamas river, about 15 m.' 
S. by E. of Portland. Top. (iSqo) 3062; (1900) 3494 (535 being 
foreign-born); (1910) 4287. It is served by the Southern Pacific 
railway, by an electric line to Portland, by other electric lines, 
and by small river steamboats. The principal business streets are 
Main Street, on level ground along the river, and Seventh Street, 
on a bluff which rises abruptly 100 ft. above the river and is 
reached by four stairways elevated above thetracksof the Southern 
Pacific. The residences are for the most part on this bluff, which 
commands views of the peaks of the Cascade Mountains. The 
river here makes a picturesque plunge of about 40 ft. over a 
basalt ridge extending across the valley, and then flows between 
nearly vertical walls of solid rock 20-50 ft. high; it is spanned 
by a suspension bridge nearly 100 ft. above the water. A lock 
canal enables vessels to pass the falls. The water-power works 
woollen-mills, flour-mills, paper-mills, and an electric power 
plant (of the Portland Railway, Light and Power Company), 
which lights the city of Portland and transmits power 
to that city for street railways and factories. The muni- 
cipality owns the waterworks. Next to Astoria, Oregon City 
is the oldest settlement in the state. In 1829 Dr John 
McLoughlin (1784-1857), chief agent of the Hudson's Bay 
Company, established a claim to the water-power at the Falls 
of the Willamette and to land where Oregon City now stands, 
and began the erection of a mill and several houses. After 1840, 
in which year McLoughlin laid out a town here and named it 
Oregon City, a Methodist Mission disputed his claim. He aided 
many destitute American immigrants, left the service of the 
company, and removed to Oregon City. In 1850 Congress gave 
a great part of his claim at Oregon City for the endowment of 
a university, and in 1862 the legislature of Oregon reconveyed 
the land to McLoughlin's heirs on condition that they should 
give $1000 to the university fund; but the questionable title 
between 1840 and 1S62 hindered the growth of the place, which 
was chartered as a city in 1850. 

O'REILLY, JOHN BOYLE (1844-1890), Irish-American 
politician and journalist, was born near Drogheda on the 28th 
of June 1844, the son of a schoolmaster. After some years of 
newspaper experience, first as compositor, then as reporter, 
during which he became an ardent revolutionist and joined the 
Fenian organization known as the Irish Republican Brotherhood, 
he enlisted in a British cavalry regiment with the purpose of 
winning over the troops to the revolutionary cause (1863). 



At this period wholesale corruption of the army, in which there 
was a very large percentage of Irishmen, was a strong feature 
in the Fenian programme, and O'Reilly, who soon became a 
great favourite, was successful in disseminating disaffection in 
his regiment. In 1866 the extent of the sedition in the regiments 
in Ireland was discovered by the authorities. O'Reilly was 
arrested at Dublin, where his regiment was then quartered, tried 
by court-martial for concealing his knowledge of an impend- 
ing mutiny, and sentenced to be shot, but the sentence was 
subsequently commuted to twenty years' penal servitude. After 
confinement in various English prisons, he was transported in 
1867 to Bunbury, Western Australia. In 1869 he escaped to the 
United States, and settled in Boston, where he became editor 
of The Pilot, a Roman Catholic newspaper. He subsequently 
organized the expedition which rescued all the Irish military 
political prisoners from the Western Australia convict establish- 
ments (1876), and he aided and abetted the American propaganda 
in favour of Irish nationalism. O'Reilly died in Hull, Mass., 
on the 10th of August 1890. His reputation in America naturally 
differed very much from what it was in England, towards 
whom he was uniformly mischievous. He was the author of 
several volumes of poetry of considerable merit, and of a novel 
of convict life, Moondyne, which achieved a great success. He 
was also selected to write occasional odes in commemoration of 
many American celebrations. 

See J. J. Roche, Life of John Boyle O'Reilly, (Boston, 1891). 

OREL, or Orlov, a government of central Russia, bounded by 
the governments of Smolensk, Kaluga and Tula on the N., and 
by Voronezh and Kursk on the S., with an area of 18,036 sq. m. 
The surface is an undulating plateau sloping gently towards the 
west; the highest hills barely exceed 900 ft., and none of the 
valleys is less than 450 ft. above the sea. The principal rivers 
are the Don, which forms part of the eastern boundary, and its 
tributary the Sosna; the Oka, which rises in the district of 
Orel and receives the navigable Zusha; and the Desna, with 
the Bolva, draining the marshy lowlands in the west. Geologi- 
cally Orel consists principally of Lower Devonian limestones, 
marls and sandstones, covered with Jurassic clays, the last 
appearing at the surface, however, only as isolated islands, 
or in the valleys, being concealed for the most part under 
thick beds of Cretaceous chalk, marls and sands. The 
Carboniferous limestones and clays (of the so-called Moscow 
basin) show in the north-west only at a great depth. The Jurassic 
clays and marls are overlain at several places with a stratum of 
clay containing good iron-ore, while the Devonian sandstones and 
limestones are worked for building purposes. The whole is 
buried under a bed, 30 to 40 ft. thick, of boulder-clay and loess, 
the last covering extensive areas as well as the valleys. The 
soil — a mixture of " black earth " with clay — is fertile, except in 
the Desna region in the west, where sands and tenacious clays 
predominate. On the Oka, Zusha, Desna and Bolva there is a 
brisk traffic in corn, oil, hemp, timber, metal, glass, china, paper 
and building-stone. Marshes occupy large areas in the basin of 
the Desna, as also in several parts of that of the Oka; they are 
mostly covered with forests, which run up to 50 to 65% of the 
area in the districts of Bryansk, Trubchevsk and Karachev, 
while towards the east, in the basin of the Don, wood is so scarce 
that straw is used for fuel The climate is moderate, the average 
yearly temperature at Orel being 41-2° (14-8° in January and 
67-0° in July). 

The estimated population in 1906 was 2,365,700. It 
consists almost exclusively of Great Russians, belonging to the 
Orthodox Greek Church; the Nonconformists are reckoned at 
about 12,000, the Roman Catholics at 3000 and the Jews at 
1000. The chief occupation is agriculture, which is most pro- 
ductive in the east and towards the centre of the government. 
The principal crops are rye, oats, barley, wheat, hemp, potatoes, 
hops, vegetables, tobacco and fruit. Of the grain not used in the 
distilleries a large proportion is exported to the Baltic. Hemp 
and hemp-seed oil are extensively exported from the west to 
Riga, Libau and St Petersburg. Tobacco is cultivated with 
profit. Cattle and horse-breeding flourishes better than in the 



OREL— ORELLI, J. C. 



251 



neighbouring governments — the Orel breeds of both carriage and 
draught horses being held in estimation throughout Russia. 
Bee-keeping is widely diffused in the forest districts, as are also 
the timber-trade and the preparation of tar and pitch. Manu- 
factures are rapidly increasing; they produce cast-iron rails, 
machinery, locomotive engines and railway wagons, glass, 
hemp-yarn and ropes, leather, timber, soap, tobacco and 
chemical produce. There are also distilleries and a great many 
smaller oil-works and flour-mills. Karachev and Syevsk are 
important centres for hemp-carding; Bolkhov and Elets arc the 
chief centres of the tanning industry; while the districts of Elcts, 
Dmitrov and partly Mtsensk supply flour and various food- 
pastes. At Bryansk there is a government cannon-foundry. 
The " Maltsov works " in the district of Bryansk are an industrial 
colony (20,000), comprising several iron, machinery, glass and 
rope works, where thousands of peasants find temporary or 
permanent employment; they have their own technical school, 
employ engineers of their own training, and have their own 
narrow-gauge railways and telegraphs, both managed by boys of 
the technical school. Numerous petty trades are carried on by 
the peasants, along with agriculture. The government is divided 
into twelve districts, of which the chief towns are Orel, the 
capital, Bolkhov, Bryansk, Dmitrovsk, Elcts, Karachev, Kromy, 
Livny, Malo-arkhangelsk, Mtsensk, Syevsk and Trubchevsk. 

In the 9th century the country was inhabited by the Slav 
tribes of the Syeveryanes on the Desna and the Vyatichis on the 
Oka, who both paid tribute to the Khazars. The Syeveryanes 
recognised the rule of the princes of the Rurik family from 8S4, 
and the Vyatichis from the middle of the 10th century; but the 
two peoples followed different historical lines, the former being 
absorbed into the Suzdal principality, while the latter fell under 
the rule of that of Chernigov. In the nth century both had 
wealthy towns and villages; during the Mongol invasion of 
1 239-1 242 these were all burned and pillaged, and the entire 
territory devastated. With the decay of the Great Horde of the 
Mongols the western part of the country fell under Lithuanian 
rule, and was the object of repeated struggles between Lithuania 
and Moscow. In the 16th century the Russians began to erect 
new forts and fortify the old towns, and the territory was rapidly 
colonized by immigrants from the north. In 1610 the towns of 
the present government of Orel (then known as the Ukrayna 
Ukraine, i.e. " border-region,") took an active share in the 
insurrection against Moscow under the false Demetrius, and 
suffered much from the civil war which ensued. They continued, 
however, to be united with the rest of Russia. 

(P. A. K.; J. T. Be.) 

OREL, a town of Russia, capital of the government of the 
same name, lies at the confluence of the Oka with the Orlik, on 
the line of railway to the Crimea, 23S m. S.S.W. from Moscow. 
Pop. (1S75) 45>°oo. (1900) 70,075. It was founded in 1566, but 
developed slowly, and ,had only a very few houses at the beginning 
of the 1 8th century. The cathedral, begun in 1794, was finished 
only in 1861. The town possesses a military gymnasium (corps 
of cadets), a public library, and storehouses for grain and timber. 
The manufactures are rapidly increasing, and include hemp- 
carding and spinning, rope-making, flour-mills and candle 
factories. Orel is one of the chief markets of central Russia for 
corn, hemp, hempseed oil, and tallow, exported; metal wares, 
tobacco, kaolin, and glass ware are also exported, while salt, 
groceries and manufactured goods are imported. 

O'RELL, MAX, the nom-de-plumc of Paul Blouet (1848- 
1903), French author and journalist, who was born in Brittany 
in 1848. He served as a cavalry officer in the Franco-German 
War, was captured at Sedan, but was released in time to join the 
Versaillist army which overcame the Commune, and was severely 
wounded during the second siege of Paris. In 1S72 he went to 
England as correspondent of several French newspapers, and in 
1876 became the very efficient French master at St Paul's school, 
London, retaining that post until 1SS4. What induced him to 
leave was the brilliant success of his first book, John Bull ct son 
lie, which in its French and English forms was so widely read as to 
make his pseudonym a household word in England and America. 



Several other volumes of a similar type dealing in a like spirit 
with Scotland, America and France followed. He married an 
Englishwoman, who translated his books. But the main work of 
the years between 1S90 and 1900 was lecturing. Max O'Kcll was 
a ready and amusing speaker, and his easy manner and his 
humorous gift made him very successful on the platform. He 
lectured often in the United Kingdom and still more often in 
America. He died in Paris, where he was acting as correspondent 
of the New York Journal, on the 25th of May 1903. 

ORELLI, HANS KONRAD VON (1846- ), Swiss theolo- 
gian, was born at Zurich on the 25th of January 1846 and was 
educated at Lausanne, Zurich and Erlangcn. He also visited 
Tubingen for theology and Leipzig for oriental languages. In 
1S69 he was appointed preacher at the orphan house, Zurich, and 
in 1S71 Privaldozcnl at the university. In 1S73 he went to Basel 
as professor extraordinarius of theology, becoming ordinary pro- 
fessor in 1881. His chief work is on the Old Testament; in addi- 
tion to commentaries on Isaiah, Jeremiah (1S86), Ezekicl and the 
Twelve Prophets (1SS8), most of which have been translated, he 
wrote Die alttcstamcntlichc Weissagung von dcr Vollcndung des 
Gottcsrcichcs (Vienna, 1SS2; Eng. trans. Edinburgh, 1885), 
Die kimmlischcn Ilcerschaarcn (Basel, 1889), and a journal of 
Palestinian travel, Durchs Heilige Land (Basel, 187S). 

ORELLI, JOHANN CASPAR VON (1787-1840), Swiss classical 
scholar, was born at Zurich on the 13th of February 1787. He 
belonged to a distinguished Italian family, which had taken 
refuge in Switzerland at the time of the Reformation. His 
cousin, Johann Conrad Orelli (1 770-1826), was the author 
of several works in the department of later Greek literature. 
From 1S07 to 1S14 Orelli worked as preacher in the reformed 
community of Bergamo, where he acquired the taste for Italian 
literature which led to the publication of Contributions to the 
History of Italian Poetry (1810) and a biography (1S12) of 
Vittorino da Feltre, his ideal of a teacher. In 1S14 he became 
teacher of modern languages and history at the cantonal school 
at Chur (Coire); in 1S19, professorof eloquence and hermeneutics 
at the Carolinum in Zurich, and in 1833 professor at the new 
university, the foundation of which was largely due to his efforts. 
His attention during this period was mainly devoted to classical 
literature and antiquities. He had already published (1814) 
an edition, with critical notes and commentary, of the Antidosis 
of Isocrates, the complete text of which, based upon the MSS. 
in the Ambrosian and Laurentian libraries, had recently been 
made known by Andreas Mystoxedes of Corfu. The three 
works upon which his reputation rests are the following. (1) 
A complete edition of Cicero in seven volumes (1826-183S). 
The first four volumes contained the text (new ed., 1S4 5-1863), 
the fifth the old Scholiasts, the remaining three (called Ono- 
maslicon Tullianum) a fife of Cicero, a bibliography of previous 
editions, indexes of geographical and historical names, of laws 
and legal formulae, of Greek words, and the consular annals. 
After his death, the revised edition of the text was completed 
by J. G. Baiter and C. Halm, and contained numerous emenda- 
tions by Theodor Mommsen and J. N. Madvig. (2) The works 
of Horace (1837-1S3S; 4th ed., 1SS6-1S92). The exegetical 
commentary, although confessedly only a compilation from 
the works of earlier commentators, shows great taste and exten- 
sive learning, although hardly up to the exacting standard of 
modern criticism. (3) Inscriplionum Latinarum Seleetarum 
Collcetio (1S2S; revised edition by W. Henzen, 1S56), extremely 
helpful for the study of Roman public and private life and 
religion. His editions of Plato (1839-1841, including the old 
scholia, in collaboration with A. W. Winckelmann) and Tacitus 
(1S46-184S, new ed. by various scholars, 1S75-1S94) also 
deserve mention. Orelli died at Zurich on the 6th of January 
1S49. He was a most liberal-minded man, both in politics and 
religion, an enthusiastic supporter of popular education and a 
most inspiring teacher. He took great interest in the struggle 
of the Greeks for independence, and strongly favoured the 
appointment of the notorious J. F. Strauss to the chair of dog- 
matic theology at Zurich, which led to the disturbance of the 
6th of September 1S39 and the fall of the liberal government. 



252 



ORENBURG— ORENSE 



See Life by his younger brother Conrad in Neujahrsblalt der 
Stadtbibliothek Zurich (1851); J. Aden, Essai sur la Vie et les 
Travaux de J. CO. (Geneva, 1849); H. Schweizer-Sidler, Geddcht- 
nissrede auf J. CO. (Zurich, 1874); C. Bursian, Ceschichte der 
klassischen Philologie in Deutschland (1883). 

ORENBURG, a government of south-eastern Russia, bounded 
N. by the governments of Ufa and Perm, E. by Tobolsk, S.E. by 
Turgai, and W. by Uralsk and Samara, with an area of 73>7°4 
sq. m. Situated at the southern extremity of the Urals and 
extending to the north-east on their eastern slope, Orenburg 
consists of a hilly tract bordered on both sides by steppes. The 
central ridge occasionally reaches an elevation of 5000 ft.; 
there are several parallel ridges, which, however, nowhere exceed 
2600 ft., and gradually sink towards the south. A great variety 
of geological formations are represented within the government, 
which is rich in minerals. Diorites and granites enter it from 
the north and crop out at many places from underneath the 
Silurian and Devonian deposits. The Carboniferous limestones 
and sandstones, as well as softer Permian, Jurassic and Cretaceous 
deposits, have a wide extension in the south and east. Coal has 
been found on the Miyas (in N.) and near Iletsk (in S.). The 
extremely rich layers of rock salt at Iletsk yield about 24,000 
tons every year. Very fertile " black earth " covers wide areas 
around the Urals. The government is traversed from north to 
south by the Ural river, which also forms its southern boundary; 
the chief tributaries are the Sakmara and the Ilek. The upper 
courses of the Byelaya and Samara, tributaries of the Kama 
and the Volga, also he within the government, as well as affluents 
of the Tobol on the eastern slope of the Ural range. Numerous 
salt lakes occur in the district of Chelyabinsk; but several parts 
of the flat lands occasionally suffer from want of water. Sixteen 
per cent of the surface is under wood. The climate is continental 
and dry, the average temperature at Orenburg being 37-4° Fahr. 
(4-5° in January, 69-8° in July). Frosts of —33° and heats of 
9S are not uncommon. 

The estimated population in 1906 was 1,836,500, mainly 
Great Russians, with Bashkirs and Meshcheryaks (25%). Gold 
is extracted chiefly from alluvial deposits, about 116,500 oz. 
every year; also some silver. Nearly one-fifth of all the copper 
ore extracted in Russia comes from Orenburg (about 16,000 tons 
annually); and every year 16,000 to 20,000 tons of cast iron and 
11,500 tons of iron are obtained. Agriculture is carried on on 
a large scale, the principal crops being wheat, rye, oats, barley 
and potatoes. Horses, cattle and sheep are kept in large numbers 
and camels are bred. Kitchen-gardening gives occupation to 
nearly 11,000 persons. Various kinds of animal produce are 
largely exported, and by knitting " Orenburg shawls " of goats' 
wool the women earn £10,000 every year. The growth of 
the industries is slow, but trade, especially with the Kirghiz, is 
prosperous. The chief towns of the five districts into which the 
government is divided are Orenburg, Orsk, Chelyabinsk, Troitsk 
and Verkhne-Uralsk. 

The government of Orenburg was formerly inhabited by the 
Kirghiz in the south, and by the Bashkirs in the north. The latter 
were brought under the rule of Russia in 1557, and a few years 
later the fort of Ufa was erected in order to protect them against 
the raids of the Kirghiz. The frequent risings of the Bashkirs, 
and the continuous attacks of the Kirghiz, led the Russian 
government in the iSth century to erect a line of forts and 
blockhouses on the Ural and Sakmara rivers, and these were 
afterwards extended south-westwards towards the Caspian, and 
eastwards towards Omsk. The central point of these military 
lines was the fort of Orenburg, originally founded in 1735 at 
the confluence (now Orsk) of the Or with the Ural, and removed 
in 1 740-1 743 120 m. lower down the Ural river to its present site. 
In 1773 it was besieged by Pugachev, the leader of the revolt of 
the peasantry. (P. A. K.; J. T. Be.) 

ORENBURG, a town of Russia, capital of the government 
of the same name, on the Ural river; connected by rail with 
Samara (262 m.), and since 1905 with Tashkent (1150 m.). 
Pop. (1900) 65,006, of whom about 30% were Tatars, Jews, 
Bashkirs, &c. The town now includes the former suburbs of 



Golubinaya and Novaya. It is an episcopal see of the Orthodox 
Greek Church and the headquarters of the hetman of the Oren- 
burg Cossacks. To a " barter house," 3 m. from the town, 
the camel caravans bring carpets, silks, cottons, lambskins, 
dried fruits, &c, from Bokhara, Khiva, Kokand and Tashkent, 
to be bartered against the textiles, metallic goods, sugar and 
manufactured wares of Russia. From 20,000 to 100,000 horses, 
40,000 to 160,000 cattle, and 450,000 to 750,000 sheep are also 
sold every year at the barter house. Formerly most of these 
were sent alive to Russia; now some 200,000 head of cattle and 
sheep are killed every year, and exported in cold-storage wagons. 
Cattle are also bought by wandering merchants in the Steppe 
provinces and Turkestan. Every year many tons of tallow, 
hams, sausages, butter, cheese and game are exported by rail to 
Samara. Besides these, nearly a million hides and sheepskins, 
goat and astrakhan skins, as well as wool , horsehair, bristles, down, 
horns, bones, &c, are exported. There are two cadet corps, a 
theological seminary, seminaries for Russian and Kirghiz teachers, 
a museum, branches of the Russian Geographical Society and 
the Gardening Society, and a military arsenal. 

ORENDEL, a Middle High German poem, of no great literary 
merit, dating from the close of the 12th century. The story is 
associated with the town of Treves (Trier), where the poem was 
probably written. The introduction narrates the story of the Holy 
Coat, which, after many adventures, is swallowed by a whale. It 
is recovered by Orendel, son of King Eigel of Treves, who had 
embarked with twenty-two ships in order to woo the lovely 
Brida, the mistress of the Holy Sepulchre, as his wife. Suffering 
shipwreck, he falls into the hands of the fisherman Eise, and 
in his service catches the whale that has swallowed the Holy 
Coat. The coat has the property of rendering the wearer proof 
against wounds, and Orendel successfully overcomes innumer- 
able perils and eventually wins Brida for his wife. A message 
brought by an angel summons both back to Treves, where 
Orendel meets with many adventures and at last disposes of 
the Holy Coat by placing it in a stone sarcophagus. Another 
angel announces both his and Brida's approaching death, when 
they renounce the world and prepare for the end. 

The poem exists in a single manuscript of the 15th eentury, and in 
one print, dated 1512. It has been edited by von der Hagen (1844), 
L. Ettmiiller (1858) and A. E. Berger (1888); there is a modern 
German translation by K. Simrock (1845). See H. Harkensee, 
Untcrsuchungen iiber das Spielmannsgedicht Orendel (1879); F.Vogt, 
in the Zeitschrift fiir deutsche Philologie, vol. xxii. (1890) ; R. Heinzel, 
Uber das Gedicht vom Konig Orendel (1892); and K. Miillenhoff, 
in Deutsche Altertumskunde, vol. i. (2nd ed., 1890), pp. 32 seq. 

ORENSE, an inland province of north-western Spain, formed 
in 1S33 of districts previously included in Galicia, and bounded 
on the N. by Pontevedra and Lugo, E. by Leon and Zamora, 
S. by Portugal, and W. by Portugal and Pontevedra. Pop. 
(1900) 404,311; area 2694 sq. m. The surface of the province 
is almost everywhere mountainous. Its western half is traversed 
in a south-westerly direction by the river Mifio (Portuguese 
Minho), which flows through Portugal to the Atlantic; the 
Si], a left-hand tributary of the Mino, waters the north-eastern 
districts; and the Limia rises in the central mountains and 
flows west-south-west, reaching the sea at the Portuguese port 
of Vianna do Castello. The upper valley of the Limia is the 
only large tract of level country. The climate is very varied, 
mild in some valleys, cold and damp in the highlands, rainy 
near the northern border, and subject to rapid changes of 
temperature. The railway from Monforte to Vigo runs through 
the province. There are a few iron foundries of a primitive 
sort, but lack of transport and of cheap coal hinder the growth 
of mining and manufactures. 

Though the soil is fertile and well watered, agricultural 
products are not so important as arboriculture. The oak, 
beech, pine, chestnut, walnut and piane grow in abundance 
on the hills and mountains; pears, apples, cherries, almonds, 
figs, roses and olives in the valleys, and even oranges and 
lemons in sheltered spots. The chief towns are the capital, 
Orense, Allariz, Carballino, Viana, Nogueira de Ramuin, Boboras, 
Cartella and La Vega. See also Galicia. 



ORENSE— ORESTES 



253 



ORENSE, an episcopal see and the capital of the Spanish 
province of Orense; on the left bank of the river Mino, and 
on the Tuy-Monforte railway. Pop. (1900) 15,194. The river 
is here crossed by a bridge — one of the most remarkable in 
Spain — of seven arches, 1319 ft. in length, and at its highest 
point 135 ft. above the bed of the river. This bridge was built 
by Bishop Lorenzo in 1230, but has frequently been repaired. 
The Gothic cathedral, also dating from Bishop Lorenzo's time, 
is a comparatively small building, but has an image, El Santo 
Cristo, which was brought from Cape Finisterre in 1330 and 
is celebrated throughout Galicia for its miraculous powers. 
The city contains many schools, a public library and a theatre. 
In the older streets there are some interesting medieval houses. 
Chocolate and leather are manufactured, and there are saw- 
mills., flour-mills and iron foundries. The three warm springs 
to the west, known as Las Burgas, attract many summer visitors; 
the waters were well known to the Romans, as their ancient 
name, Aquae Originis, Aquae Urentes, or perhaps Aquae Salien- 
tis, clearly indicates. 

The Romans named Orense Aurium, probably from the 
alluvial gold found in the Mino valley. The bishopric, founded 
in the 5th century by the Visigoths, was named the Sedes 
Auriensis (see of Aurium), and from this the modern Orense 
is derived. The city became the capital of the Suevi in the 
6th century; it was sacked by the Moors in 716, and rebuilt 
only in 884. 

OREODON (i.e. " hillock-tooth "), the name of an Oligocene 
genus of North American primitive ruminants related to the 
camels, and typifying the family Oreodontidae. Typical oreo- 
donts were long-tailed, four-toed, partially plantigrade ruminants 
with sharp-crowned crescentic molars, of which the upper ones 
carry four cusps, and the first lower premolar canine-like both 
in shape and function. In the type genus there are forty-four 
teeth, forming an uninterrupted series. The vertebral artery 
pierces the neck-vertebrae in the normal manner. The name 
Oreodon is preoccupied by Orodus, the designation of a genus 
of Palaeozoic fishes, and is likewise antedated by Merycoidodon, 
which is now used by some writers. See Tylopoda. 

ORESME, NICOLAS (e. 1320-1382), French bishop, celebrated 
for his numerous works in both French and Latin on scholastic, 
scientific and political questions, was born in Normandy at 
the opening of the 14th century. In 134S he was a student 
in the college of Navarre at Paris, of which he became head 
in 1356. In 1361 he was named dean of the cathedral of Rouen. 
Charles V. had him appointed bishop of Lisieux on the 16th 
of November 1377. He died in that city on the nth of July 
13S2. One of his works, of great importance for the history 
of economic conceptions in the middle ages, was the De origine, 
natura, jure et mutationibus monetanun, of which there is also 
a French edition. Oresme was the author of several works on 
astrology, in which he showed its falseness as a science and 
denounced its practice. At the request of Charles V. he trans- 
lated the Ethics, Politics and Economics of Aristotle. In Decem- 
ber 1363 he preached before Urban V. a sermon on reform in 
the church, so severe in its arraignment that it was often brought 
forward in the 16th century by Protestant polemists. 

See Francis Meunier, Essai sur la vie et les ouvrages de Nicole 
Oresnie (Paris, 1857); Feret, La Faadte.de tkiologie de V University de 
Paris (Paris, 1896, t. iii. p. 290 sqq.); Emile Bridrey, Nicole Oresme. 
Etude des doctrines et des faits economiqiies (Paris, 1906). 

ORESTES, in Greek legend, son of Agamemnon and Clytaem- 
nestra. According to the Homeric story he was absent from 
Mycenae when his father returned from the Trojan War and 
was murdered by Aegisthus. Eight years later he returned 
from Athens and revenged his father's death by slaying his 
mother, and her paramour (Odyssey, iii. 306; xi. 542)- According 
to Pindar (Pythia, xi. 25) he was saved by his nurse, who con- 
veyed him out of the country when Clytaemnestra wished to 
kill him. The tale is told much more fully and with many 
variations in the tragedians. He was preserved by his sister 
Electra from his father's fate, and conveyed to Phanote on 
Mount Parnassus, where King Strophius took charge of him. 



In his twentieth year he was ordered by the Delphic oracle to 
return home and revenge his father's death. According to 
Aeschylus, he met his sister Electra before the tombof Agamem- 
non, whither both had gone to perform rites to the dead; a 
recognition takes place, and they arrange how Orestes shall 
accomplish his revenge. Orestes, after the deed, goes mad, 
and is pursued by the Erinyes, whose duty it is to punish any 
violation of the ties of family piety. He takes refuge in the 
temple at Delphi; but, though Apollo had ordered him to do 
the deed, he is powerless to protect his suppliant from the 
consequences. At last Athena receives him on the acropolis 
of Athens and arranges a formal trial of the case before twelve- 
Attic judges. The Erinyes demand their victim; he pleads 
the orders of Apollo; the votes of the judges are equally divided, 
and Athena gives her casting vote for acquittal. The Erinyes 
are propitiated by a new ritual, in which they are worshipped 
as Eumenides (the Kindly), and Orestes dedicates an altar to 
Athena Areia. With Aeschylus the punishment ends here, 
but, according to Euripides, in order to escape the persecutions 
of the Erinyes, he was ordered by Apollo to go to Tauris, carry 
off the statue of Artemis which had fallen from heaven, and 
bring it to Athens. He repairs to Tauris with Pylades, the son 
of Strophius and the intimate friend of Orestes, and the pair 
are at once imprisoned by the people, among whom the custom 
is to sacrifice all strangers to Artemis. The priestess of Artemis, 
whose duty it is to perform the sacrifice, is his sister Iphigeneia 
(q.v.). She offers to release Orestes if he will carry home a letter 
from her to Greece; he refuses to go, but bids Pylades take the 
letter while he himself will stay and be slain. After a conflict 
of mutual affection, Pylades at last yields, but the letter brings 
about a recognition between brother and sister, and all three 
escape together, carrying with them the image of Artemis. 
After his return to Greece, Orestes took possession of his father's 
kingdom of Mycenae, to which were added Argos and Laconia. 
He is said to have died of the bite of a snake in Arcadia. His 
body was conveyed to Sparta for burial (where he was the object 
of a cult), or, according to an Italian legend, to Aricia, whence 
it was removed to Rome (Servius on Aencid, ii. 116). The story 
of Orestes was the subject of the Orcstcia of Aeschylus (Agamem- 
non, Chocphori, Eumenides), of the Electro of Sophocles, of the 
Electra, Iphigeneia in Tauris, and Orestes, of Euripides. There 
is extant a Latin epic poem, consisting of about 1000 hexa- 
meters, called Orest'es Tragoedia, which has been ascribed to 
Dracontius of Carthage. 

Orestes appears also as a central figure in various legends 
connected with his madness and purification, both in Greece 
and Asia. In these Orestes is the guilt-laden mortal who is 
purified from his sin by the grace of the gods, whose merciful 
justice is shown to all persons whose crime is mitigated by 
extenuating circumstances. These legends belong to an age 
when higher ideas of law and of social duty were being established ; 
the implacable blood-feud of primitive society gives place to 
a fair trial, and in Athens, when the votes of the judges are 
evenly divided, mercy prevails. 

The legend of Orestes is the subject of a lengthy monograph by 
T. Zielinski, "Die Orestessage nnd die Rechtfertigungsidee" in Neue 
Jahrbiicher fur das klassische Altertum, ii. (1899). Orestes, according 
to Zielinski, is the son of the sky-god Zeus-Agamemnon, who over- 
comes his wife the earth-goddess Gaia-Clytaemnestra; with the 
assistance of the dragon Aegisthus, she slays her husband, whose 
murder is in turn avenged by his son. The religion of Zeus is then 
reformed under the influence of the cult of Apollo, who slays the 
dragon brought up by the earth-goddess on Parnassus, the seat of 
one of her oldest sanctuaries. Parnassus becomes the holy mountain 
of Apollo, and Orestes himself an hypostasis of Apollo " of the 
mountain," just as Pylades is Apollo "of the plain"; similarly 
Electra, Iphigeneia and Chrysothemis are hypostases of Artemis. 
Zeus being firmly seated on his throne as the result of the slaying of 
the dragon by Orestes, the theological significance of the myth 
is forgotten, and the identifications Zeus-Agamemnon and Gaia- 
Clytaemnestra are abandoned. In the Homeric Oresteia the soul 
of the murdered wife has no claim to vengeance, and Orestes rules 
unmolested in Argos. But the Apolline religion introduces the theory 
of the rights of the soul and revenge for bloodshed. Apollo, who has 
urged Orestes to parricide and has himself expiated the crime of 
slaying the dragon, is able to purify others in similar case. Hence 



254 



ORFILA— ORFORD, ist EARL OF 



Orestes, freed from the guilt of blood, is enabled to take possession 
of the throne of his father. This is the Delphic Oresteia. But a new 
idea is introduced by the Attic Oresteia. The claim that Apollo can 
in every case purify from sin is met by Athens with a counterclaim 
on behalf of the state. It is the community of which murdered and 
murderer were members which has the right to exact revenge and 
retribution, an idea which found expression in the foundation of the 
Areopagus. If the accused is acquitted, the state undertakes to 
appease the soul of the murdered person or its judicial representative, 
the Erinys. 

Others attach chief importance to the slaying of Neoptolemus 
(Pyrrhus) by Orestes at Delphi; according to Radermacher (Das 
Jenseits im Mythos der Hellenen, 1903), Orestes is an hypostasis of 
Apollo, Pyrrhus the principle of evil, which is overcome by the god; 
on the other hand, Usener (Archiv fur Religionswesen, vii., 1899, 
334) takes Orestes for a god of winter and the underworld, a double 
of the Phocian Dionysus the " mountain " god (among the Ionians a 
summer-god, but in this case corresponding to Dionysus tu\a.vai.yLs}, 
who subdues Pyrrhus " the light," the double of Apollo, the whole 
being a form of the well-known myths of the expulsion of summer by 
winter. S. Reinach (reviewing P. Mazan's UOrestie d'Eschyle, 1902) 
defends the theory of Bachofen, who finds in the legend of Orestes 
an indication of the decay of matriarchal ideas. 

See aiticle by Hofer in Roscher's Lexikon der Mythologie; A. 
Olivieri, " Sul mito di Oreste nella letteratura classica " (with a 
section on modern literature) in Rivista di Filologia, xxvi. (1898), 
and Jebb's edition of the Elcctra of Sophocles. 

ORFILA, MATHIEU JOSEPH BONA VENTURE (1 787-1 853), 
French toxicologist and chemist, was by birth a Spaniard, 
having been born at Mahon in Minorca on the 24th of April 
1787. An island merchant's son, he looked naturally first to the 
sea for a profession ; but a voyage at the age of fifteen to Sardinia, 
Sicily and Egypt did not prove satisfactory. He next took to 
medicine, which he studied at the universities of Valencia and 
Barcelona with such success that the local authorities of the 
latter city made him a grant to enable him to follow his studies 
at Madrid and Paris, preparatory to appointing him professor. 
He had scarcely settled for that purpose in Paris when the out- 
break of the Spanish war, in 1S07, threatened destruction to 
his prospects. But he had the good fortune to find a patron in 
the chemist L. N. Vauquelin, who claimed him as his pupil, 
guaranteed his conduct, and saved him from expulsion from 
Paris. Four years afterwards he graduated, and immediately 
became a private lecturer on chemistry in the French capital. 
In 1819 he was appointed professor of medical jurisprudence, 
and four years later he succeeded Vauquelin as professor of 
chemistry in the faculty of medicine at Paris. In 1830 he was 
nominated dean of that faculty, a high medical honour in France. 
Under the Orleans dynasty, honours were lavishly showered upon 
him; he became successively member of the council of education 
of France, member of the general council of the department 
of the Seine, and commander of the Legion of Honour. But 
by the republic of 1848 he was held in less favour, and chagrin 
at the treatment he experienced at the hands of the governments 
which succeeded that of Louis Philippe is supposed to have 
shortened his life. He died, after a short illness, in Paris on the 
12th of March 1853. 

Orfila's chief publications are Traite des poisons, or Toxicologic 
generate (1813); Elements de chimie medicate (1817); Lecons de 
medicine legale (1823); Traite des exhumations juridiques (1830); 
and Recherches sur Venipoisonnement par t'acide arsenieux (1841). 
He also wrote many valuable papers, chiefly on subjects connected 
with medical jurisprudence. His fame rests mainly on the first- 
named work, published when he was only in his twenty-seventh year. 
It is a vast mine of experimental observation on the symptoms of 
poisoning of all kinds, on the appearances which poisons leave in the 
dead body, on their physiological action, and on the means of de- 
tecting them. Few branches of science, so important on their bear- 
ings on every-day life and so difficult of investigation, can be said to 
have been created and raised at once to a state of high advancement 
by the labours of a single man. 

ORFORD, EDWARD RUSSELL, Earl of (1653-1727), British 
admiral, was born in 1653, the son of Edward Russell, a younger 
brother of the ist duke of Bedford. He was one of the first 
gentleman officers of the navy regularly bred to the sea. In 
167 1 he was named lieutenant of the "Advice" at the age of 
eighteen, captain in the following year. He continued in active 
service against the Dutch in the North Sea in 1672-73, and in 
the Mediterranean in the operations against the Barbary Pirates 



with Sir John Narborough and Arthur Herbert, afterwards earl 
of Torrington, from 1676 to 1682. In 1683 he ceased to be 
employed, and the reason must no doubt be looked for in the 
fact that all members of the Russell family had fallen into dis- 
favour with the king, after the discovery of William, Lord 
Russell's connexion with the Rye House Plot. The family had 
a private revenge to take which sharpened their sense of the 
danger run by British liberties from the tyranny of King James 

II. Throughout the negotiations preceding the revolution of 
1688 Edward Russell appears acting on behalf and in the name 
of the head of this great Whig house, which did so much to bring 
it about, and profited by it so enormously in purse and power. 
He signed the invitation which William of Orange insisted on 
having in writing in order to commit the chiefs of the opposition 
to give him open help. Edward Russell's prominence at this 
crisis was of itself enough to account for his importance after the 
Revolution. When the war began with France in 16S9, he served 
at first under the earl of Torrington. But during 1690, when that 
admiral avowed his intention of retiring to the Gunfleet, and of 
leaving the French in command of the Channel, Russell was one 
of those who condemned him most fiercely. In December 1690 
he succeeded Torrington, and during 1691 he cruised without 
meeting the French under Tourville (q.v.), who made no attempt 
to meet him. At this time Russell, like some of the other extreme 
Whigs, was discontented with the moderation of William of Orange 
and had entered into negotiations with the exiled court, partly 
out of spite, and partly to make themselves safe in case of a 
restoration. But he was always ready to fight the French, and 
in 1692 he defeated Tourville in the battle called La Hogue, 
or Barfleur. Russell had Dutch allies with him, and they were 
greatly superior in number, but the chief difficulty encountered 
was in the pursuit, which Russell conducted with great resolution. 
His utter inabih'ty to work with the Tories, with whom William 

III. would not quarrel altogether, made his retirement imperative 
for a short time. But in 1694 he was appointed to the command 
of the fleet which, taking advantage of the inability of the king 
of France to maintain a great fleet in the Channel from want of 
money, followed the French into the Mediterranean, confined 
them to Toulon for the rest of the war, and co-operated with the 
Spanish armies in Catalonia. He returned in 1695, and in 1697 
was created earl of Orford. For the rest of his life he filled posts 
of easy dignity and emolument, and died on the 26th of November 
1727. He married his cousin, Mary Russell; but his title became 
extinct on his death without issue. 

See Charnock, Biog. Nov. i. 354; Campbell's Lives of the Admirals, 
u. 317- (D. H.) 

ORFORD, ROBERT WALPOLE, ist Earl of (1676-1745), 
generally known as Sir Robert Walpole, prime minister of 
England from 1721 to 1742, was the third but eldest surviving 
son of Robert Walpole, M.P., of Houghton in Norfolk., by Mary, 
only daughter and heiress of Sir Jeffery Burwell, of Rougham, 
in Suffolk. The father, a jolly old squire of Whig poh'tics who 
revelled in outdoor sport and the pleasures of the table, trans- 
mitted to his son the chief traits in his own character. The future 
statesman was born at Houghton on the 26th of August 1676, 
was an Eton colleger from 1690 to 1695 and was admitted at 
King's College, Cambridge, as scholar on the 22nd of April 
1696. At this time he was destined, as a younger son, for the 
church, but his two elder brothers died young and he became 
the heir to an estate producing about £2000 a year, whereupon on 
the 25th of May 1698 he resigned his scholarship, and was soon 
afterwards withdrawn by his father from the university. In 
classical attainments he was excelled by Pulteney, Carteret, 
and many others of his contemporaries in politics. 

On his father's death in November 1700 the electors of the 
family borough of Castle Rising returned him (January 1701) 
to the House of Commons as their representative, but after two 
short-lived parliaments he sought the suffrages of the more 
important constituency of King's Lynn (July 23, 1702), 
and was elected as its member at every subsequent dissolution 
until he left the Lower House. From the first his shrewdness 
in counsel and his zeal for the interests of the Whigs were generally 



ORFORD, ist EARL OF 



255 



recognized. In June 1705 he was appointed one of the council 
to Prince George of Denmark, the inactive husband of Queen 
Anne, and then lord high admiral of England. Complaints 
against the administration of the navy were then loud and 
frequent (Burton's Queen Anne, ii. 22-31), and the responsibilities 
of his new position tested his capacity for public life. His 
abilities justified his advancement, in succession to his lifelong 
rival, Henry St John, to the more important position of secretary- 
at-war (February 25, 1708), which brought him into immediate 
contact with the duke of Marlborough and the queen. With 
this post he held for a short time (1710) thetreasurership of the 
navy, and by the discharge of his official duties and by his skill 
in debate became admitted to the inmost councils of the ministry. 
He could not succeed, however, in diverting Godolphin from the 
great error of that statesman's career, the impeachment of 
Sacheverell, and when the committee was appointed in December 
1709 for elaborating the articles of impeachment Walpole was 
nominated one of the managers for the House of Commons. 
On the wreck of the Whig party which ensued, Walpole shared 
in the general misfortune, and in spite of the flattery, followed 
by the threats, of Harley he took his place with his friends in 
opposition. His energies now shone forth with irresistible vigour; 
both in debate and in the pamphlet press he vindicated Godolphin 
from the charge that thirty-five millions of public money were not 
accounted for, and in revenge for his zeal his political opponents 
brought against him an accusation of personal corruption. On 
these charges, now universally acknowledged to have proceeded 
from party animosity, he was in January 1712 expelled from 
the House and committed to the Tower. His prison cell now 
became the rendezvous of the Whigs among the aristocracy, 
while the populace heard his praises commemorated in the ballads 
of the streets. The ignominy which the Tories had endeavoured 
to inflict upon him was turned into augmented reputation. In 
the last parliament of Queen Anne he took the leading part in 
defence of Sir Richard Steele against the attacks of the Tories. 

After the accession of George, the Whigs for nearly half a 
century retained the control of English politics. Walpole 
obtained the lucrative if unimportant post of paymaster- 
general of the forces in the administration which was formed 
under the nominal rule of Lord Halifax, but of which Stanhope 
and Townshend were the guiding spirits. A committee of 
secrecy was appointed to inquire into the acts of the late ministry, 
and especially into the Peace of Utrecht, with a view to the 
impeachment of Harley and St John, and to Walpole was en- 
trusted the place of chairman. Most of his colleagues in office 
were members of the House of Lords, and the lead in the Commons 
quickly became the reward of his talents and assiduity. Halifax 
died on the 19th of May 1715, and after a short interval Walpole 
was exalted into the conspicuous position of first lord of the 
treasury and chancellor of the exchequer (October 11, 1715). 
Jealousies, however, prevailed among the Whigs, and the 
German favourites of the new monarch quickly showed their 
discontent with the heads of the ministry. Townshend was 
forced into resigning his secretaryship of state for the dignified 
exile of viceroy of Ireland, but he never crossed the sea to Dublin, 
and the support which Sunderland and Stanhope, the new 
advisers of the king, received from him and from Walpole was 
so grudging that Townshend was dismissed from the lord- 
lieutenancy (April 9, 1717), and Walpole on the next morning 
withdrew from the ministry. They plunged' into opposition 
with unflagging energy, and in resisting the measure by which 
it was proposed to limit the royal prerogative in the creation 
of peerages (March-December 1718) Walpole exerted all his 
powers. This display of ability brought about a partial re- 
conciliation of, the two sections of the Whigs. To Townshend 
was given the presidency of the council, and Walpole once again 
assumed the paymastership of the forces (June 1720). 

On the financial crash which followed the failure of the South 
Sea scheme, the public voice insisted that he should assume 
a more prominent place in public life. At this crisis in England's 
fortunes Stanhope and James Craggs, the two secretaries 
of state, were seized by death, John Aislabie, the chancellor of 



the exchequer, was committed to the Tower, and Sunderland, 
though acquitted of corruption, was compelled to resign the lead. 
Walpole, at first lord of the treasury and chancellor of the 
exchequer (April 1721), became with Townshend responsible 
for the country's government (though for some years they had 
to contend with the influence of Carteret), the danger arising 
from the panic in South Sea stock was averted by its amalgama- 
tion with Bank and East India stock, and during the rest of the 
reign of George I. they remained at the head of the ministry. 
The hopes of the Jacobites, which revived with these financial 
troubles, soon drooped in disappointment. Atterbury, their 
boldest leader, was exiled in 1723; Bolingbroke, in dismay 
at their feebleness, sued for pardon, and was permitted to 
return to his own country. The troubles which broke out in 
Ireland over Wood's patent for a copper coinage were allayed 
through the tact of Carteret, who had been banished in April 
1724 as its lord-lieutenant by his triumphant rivals. The con- 
tinent was still troubled with wars and rumours of wars, but a 
treaty between England, Prussia and France was successfully 
effected at Hanover in 1725. 

England was kept free from warfare, and in the general 
prosperity which ensued Walpole basked in the royal favour. 
His eldest son was raised to the peerage as Baron Walpole 
(June 10, 1723) and he himself became a Knight of the Bath 
on the 27th of May 1725, and was rewarded with the Garter 
in May 1726. Next year the first King George died, and Walpole's 
enemies fondly believed that he would be driven from office, 
but their expectations were doomed to disappointment. The 
confidence which the old king had reposed in him was renewed by 
his successor, and in the person of Queen Caroline, the discreet 
ruler of her royal spouse, the second George, the Whig minister 
found a faithful and lifelong friend. For three years he shared 
power with Townshend, but the jealous Walpole brooked no 
rival near the throne, and his brother-in-law withdrew from 
official life to Norfolk in May 1730. Before and after that event 
the administration was based on two principles, sound finance 
at home and freedom from the intrigues and wars which raged 
abroad. On the continent congresses and treaties were matters 
of annual arrangement, and if the work of the plenipotentiaries 
soon faded it was through their labours that England enjoyed 
many years of peace. Walpole's influence received a serious 
blow in 1733. The enormous frauds on the excise duties forced 
themselves on his attention, and he proposed to check smuggling 
and avoid fraud by levying the full tax on tobacco and wine 
when they were removed from the warehouses for sale. His 
opponents fastened on these proposals with irresistible force, 
and so serious an agitation stirred the country that the ministerial 
measure was dropped amid general rejoicing. Several of his 
most active antagonists were dismissed from office or deprived 
of their regiments, but their spirits remained unquenched, as 
the incessant attacks in the Craftsman showed, and when Walpole 
met a new House of Commons in 1734 his supporters were far 
less numerous. The Gin Act of 1736, by which the tax on that 
drink was raised to an excessive amount, led to disorders in the 
suburbs of London; and the imprisonment of two notorious 
smugglers in the Tolbooth at Edinburgh resulted in those 
Porteous riots which have been rendered famous in the Heart 
of Midlothian. These events weakened his influence with 
large classes in England and Scotland, but his parliamentary 
supremacy remained umimpaired, and was illustrated in 1737 
by his defeat of Sir John Barnard's plan for the reduction 
of the interest on the national debt, and by his passing of 
the Playhouse Act, under which the London theatres are still 
regulated. That year, however, heralded his fall from power. 
His constant friend Queen Caroline died on the 20th of November 
1737, and the prince of Wales, long discontented with his parents 
and their minister, flung himself into active opposition. Many 
of the boroughs within the limits of the duchy of Cornwall 
were obedient to the prince's will, and he quickly attracted 
to his cause a considerable number of adherents, of whom 
Pitt and the Grenvilles were the most influential. The leading 
orators of England thundered against Walpole in the senate, 



256 



ORFORD— ORGAN 



and the press resounded with the taunts of the poet and 
pamphleteer, illustrious and obscure, who found abundant 
food for their invectives in the troubles with Spain over its 
exclusive pretensions to the continent of America and its claim 
to the right of searching English vessels. The minister long 
resisted the pressure of the opposition for war, but at the close 
of 1739 he abandoned his efforts to stem the current, and with a 
divided cabinet was forced, as the king would not allow him 
to resign, into hostility with Spain. The Tory minority known 
as " the patriots " had seceded from parliament in March 1739, 
but at the commencement of the new session, in November 
1739, they returned to their places with redoubled energies. 
The campaign was prosecuted with vigour, but the successes 
of the troops brought little strength to Walpole's declining 
popularity, and when parliament was dissolved in April 1741 
his influence with his fellow-countrymen had faded away. His 
enemies were active in opposition, while some of his colleagues 
were lukewarm in support. In the new House of Commons 
political parties were almost evenly balanced. Their strength 
was tried immediately on the opening of parliament. After 
the ministry had sustained some defeats on election petitions, 
the voting on the return for Chippenham was accepted as a 
decisive test of parties, and,as\Valpole was beaten in the divisions, 
he resolved on resigning his places. On the 9th of February 
1742 he was created earl of Orford, and two days later he ceased 
to be prime minister. A committee of inquiry into the conduct 
of his ministry for the previous ten years was ultimately granted, 
but its deliberations ended in nought. Although he withdrew to 
Houghton for a time, hisinflnence over public affairs was unbroken 
and he was still consulted by the monarch. He died at Arlington 
Street, London, on the iSth of March 1745 and was buried at 
Houghton on the 25th of March. With the permanent places, 
valued at £15,000 per annum, which he had secured for his 
family, and with his accumulations in office, he had rebuilt 
the mansion at great expense, and formed a gallery of pictures 
within its walls at a cost of £40,000, but the collection was sold 
by his grandson for a much larger sum in 1779 to the empress 
of Russia, and the estate and house of Honghton passed to Lord 
Cholmondeley, the third earl having married the premier's 
younger daughter. 

Walpole was twice married — in 1700 to Catherine, eldest 
daughter of John Shorter and grand-daughter of Sir John 
Shorter, lord mayor of London, who died in 1737, having had 
issue three sons and two daughters, and in March 1738 to Maria, 
daughter of Thomas Skerret, a lady often mentioned in the 
letters of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. He was succeeded 
in his earldom and other titles by his eldest son Robert (1701- 
1751), who had been created Baron Walpole of Walpole in 1723; 
the 3rd earl was the latter's only son George (1730-1791), " the 
last of the English nobility who practised the ancient sport of 
hawking," and the 4th earl was the famous Horace Walpole 
(q.v.) the youngest son of the great Sir Robert. Horace Walpole 
died unmarried on the 2nd of March 1797, when the earldom 
became extinct, but the barony of Walpole of Walpole passed to 
his cousin, Horatio (1 723-1809), who had already succeeded his 
father, Horatio Walpole, 1st Baron Walpole of Wolterton in that 
barony. In 1806 he was created earl of Orford, and this title still 
remains in the possession of his descendants, Robert Horace 
Walpole (b. 1854) becoming the 5th earl in 1894. When Horace 
Walpole died his splendid residence at Houghton and the Norfolk 
estates did not pass with the title, but were inherited by George 
James Cholmondeley, 4th earl and afterwards 1st marquess of 
Cholmondeley. 

Sir R. Walpole's life has been written by Archdeacon William 
Coxe (1798 and 1800, 3 vols.), A. C. Ewald (1878) and John Viscount 
Morley (1889). See also Walpole, a Study in Politics, by Edward 
Jenks (1894); English Hist. Rev. xv. 251, 479, 665, xvi. 67, 308, 
439 (his foreign policy, by Basil Williams) ; Bolingbroke, by Walter 
Sichel (1901-1902, 2 vols.); the histories, letters and reminiscences 
by his son, Horace Walpole; and the other lives of the chief political 
personages of the period. (W. P. C.) 

ORFORD, a small town, once of greater importance, in the 
south-eastern parliamentary division of Suffolk, England, 



21 m. E. by N. of Ipswich. Pop. (1901) 987. It lies by the 
right bank of the river Aide, where that river flows south-west- 
ward on the inner side of the great beach which has blocked its 
direct outflow to the sea, and swells ont seaward in the blunt 
promontory of Orford Ness. The church of St Bartholomew is 
of much interest. It retains a mined Norman chancel of rich 
and unusual design, while the body of the church is Decorated. 
Of Orford castle the keep remains, standing high on a mound; it 
is partly of Caen stone and partly of flintwork, and is of Norman 
date. 

ORGAN, in music, the name (from Gr. &pya.vov, Lat. organum, 
instrument) given to the well-known wind-instrument. The notes 
of the organ are produced by pipes, which are blown by air under 
pressure, technically called wind. 

Pipes differ from one another in two principal ways — (1) in 
pilch, (2) in quality of tone. (1) Consider first a series of pipes 
producing notes of similar quality, but differing in pitch. Such 
a series is called a slop. Each stop of the organ is in effect a 
musical instrument in itself. (2) The pipes of different stops 
differ, musically speaking, in their quality of tone, as well as 
sometimes in their pitch. Physically, they differ in shape and 
general arrangement. The sounding of the pipes is determined 
by the use of keys, some of which are played by the hands, some 
by the feet. A complete stop possesses a pipe for every key of 
some one row of manuals or pedals. If one stop alone is caused 
to sound, the effect is that of performance on a single instrument. 
There are such things as incomplete stops, which do not extend 
over a whole row of keys; and also there are stops which have 
more than one pipe to each key. Every stop is provided with 
mechanism by means of which the wind can be cut off from its 
pipes, so that they cannot sound even when the keys are pressed. 
This mechanism is made to terminate in a handle, which is 
commonly spoken of as the slop. When the handle is pushed in, 
the stop does not sound; when the handle is pnlled out, the stop 
sounds if the keys are pressed. An organ may contain from one 
to four manuals or keyboards and one set of pedals. There are 
exceptional instruments having five manuals, and also some 
having two sets of pedals. The usual compass of the manuals 
approximates to five octaves, from C to c"" inclusive. The 
compass of the pedal is two and a half octaves, from C to f. 
This represents the pitch in which the notes of the pedal are 
written; but the pedal generally possesses stops sounding one 
octave lower than the written note, and in some cases stops 
sounding two octaves below the written note. Each manual or 
pedal has as a rule one soundboard, on which all its pipes are 
placed. Underneath the soundboard is the windchesl, by which 
the wind is conveyed from the bellows, through the soundboard 
to the pipes. The windchest contains the mechanism of valves by 
which the keys control the admission of wind to the soundboard. 
The soundboard contains the grooves which receive the wind 
from the valves, and the 
slides by which the 
handles of the stops con- 
trol the transmission of 
the wind through the 
soundboard to the pipes 
of the different stops. 

The grooves of the 
soundboard are spaces 
left between wooden bars 
glued on to the table of 
the soundboard. There 
is usually one groove for 
every key. The grooves 
of the bass notes, which 
have to supply wind for 
large pipes, are broader 
than those of the treble. 

The bass bars are also thicker than those of the treble, that 
they may the better support the great weight which rests on 
the bass portion of the soundboard. The table forms the top of 
the grooves. The grooves are generally closed below with 






Fig. 1. — A portion of the Table with 
the open grooves seen from above. 



ORGAN 



257 



leather, except the opening left in each, which is closed by the 
key-valve or pallet. 

The sliders are connected with the draw-stops or stop-handles, 
which are covered in withstout upper boards, on which the pipes 



JluJU.r J 



Groov 



m 



J^aZlat 



Wxrul 



(X^L^st 



J7. 



TF 



WW 



Fig. 2. — A section of a groove, with 
the table, windchest and pallet. 



YMpmY 



■• 



Fig. 3. — A section at right 
angles to fig. 2. 







* 


9 


• 


• 


1 


t 


1 


1 


1 


71 




' 




• 




• 




• 




. 


• 




m 




. 




• 




. 




' 




' 










; 


• 


. 


• 










• 




* 




• 




• 


* 


m 


* 


m 


• 


t 


• 


* 


• 


, 


• 




■ 




I 

















Fig. 4. — A portion of the table 
as it appears from above, with the 
places for the sliders of the stops; 
the small circles show the holes for 
the wind. 



stand. The stop-handles are pulled out, and holes are then 
bored straight down through the upper boards, sliders and table 
to admit the wind from the grooves to the pipes. When the sliders 
are shifted by pushing in the handles, the holes no longer corre- 
spond, and the pipes are silenced. 

Pipes are divided first into flue-pipes and reed-pipes. Flue- 
pipes are blown by a wind mouthpiece characteristic of the organ, 

while hi reed-pipes the wind 
acts on a metal tongue vibrat- 
ing on a reed, and the motion 
of the tongue determines the 
speech of the pipe. 

Pipes are made either of 
wood or of metal. Wood 
flue-pipes are generally of the 
form of a rectangular parallel- 
epiped, metal flue-pipes of a 
cylindrical shape. Reed-pipes 
are conical or pyramidal, and 
widen towards the top. Some 
flue-pipes are made with 
stopped ends; these as a rule 
sound a note about an octave lower than the corresponding open 
pipes of the same length. Such are the stopped diapason, 
bourdon, and stopped flute. 

The general elementary theory of the resonance of a pipe is 
tolerably simple. The effective length of the pipe is determined 
by measuring from the upper lip to the open end in open pipes, 
and from the upper lip to the stopper and back again in stopped 

pipes. To this is added 
an allowance for the 
effect of each opening, 
since the condition of 
perfect freedom from 
constraint does not 
subsist at the opening 
itself. The corrected 
length is traversed 
twice (backwards and 
forwards) by sound, 
in the time of one 
vibration of the re- 
sultant note. This 
describes in a rough 
and general manner 
the way in which any 
disturbance gives rise 
to the note of the 
pipe; but the theory 
of the mouth-pieces is 
a much more difficult 
matter, into which we 
cannot here enter. 



n 



n 



q 



a 



Ui 



Fig. 5. — a, An open diapason ; b, a 
stopped diapason; r, an oboe; and d, a 
trumpet — c and d being forms of reed- 
pipes. 



In reed-pipes which are simply conical the resonance of the 
body is nearly the same as that of an open pipe of the same 
length. Where the form is irregular no simple rule can be given. 





Fig. 6. — Mouthpieces in some- 
what greater detail. 



But the resonance of the body of the pipe is generally the same 
as the note produced. The tongue of a reed-pipe alternately 
opens and closes the aperture of the reed. In this way it admits 
pulses of wind to the body of 
the pipe; these, if they recur at 
the proper intervals, maintain 
its vibration, which takes place 
when the note produced corre- 
sponds to the resonance of the 
pipe. The reed itself has its 
vibrating length determined by a 
wire which presses against it. 
The free end of this wire is 
touched with the tuning tool 
until a satisfactory note is pro- 
duced. 

The pitch of the different 
stops is commonly denoted by 
the conventional approximate 
length of the pipe sounded by 
C, the lowest key of the manual. 
Even in incomplete stops which have no bass, the length of the 
pipe which C would have if the stop were extended down serves 
to indicate the pitch. 

The conventional length of the C-pipe for stops having the 
normal pitch of the keys is 8 ft.; a pipe having twice this length 
sounds the octave below, a pipe having half that length the octave 
above, and so on. Thus stops which sound the octave below the 
normal pitch of the keys are spoken of as 16-foot stops. Even 
where the pipes are stopped so that the actual length is only 8ft., 
they are spoken of as having " 16-ft. lone." Similarly 3 2-ft. stops 
sound two octaves below the normal pitch of tbe keys. But if 
these notes are produced by stopped pipes, whose actual length 
is only 16 ft., they are spoken of as having "32-ft. tone." Sixteen- 
foot and 32-ft. stops are specially characteristic of the pedal, 
where the names also signify the length of the open pipe which 
would sound the note actually produced by the lowest C. Of 
stops higher than the normal pitch of the keys, the octave is 
denoted by 4 ft. if made with open pipes, 4-ft. tone if stopped; 
the twelfth is commonly spoken of as 2§ , tbe fifteenth or double 
octave as 2 ft. Higher-sounding stops are occasionally used, 
but these generally form part of "mixtures," and the foot- 
lengths of the separate ranks are not usually given. 

The true or accurate lengths of the pipes vary within con- 
siderable limits. The base of the scales (dimensions) varies 
according to the standard of pitch, and the voicing and the 
complicated natural laws of pipes produce other deviations 
from simple relations, so that the conventional dimensions 
can only be regarded as a simple means of classifying the 
stops according to their pitch-relations. For this purpose 
they are essential; they are continually appealed to in 
discussion and description; and they are almost invariably 
marked on the stop-handles in all countries, so that a moderate 
knowledge of foreign nomenclatures, combined with the habit 
of seizing the meaning of the figures such as 16, 8, 4, on the stop- 
handles, will frequently suffice as a key to the complexities of a 
foreign organ. 

Each of the manuals, or rows of keys, of an orga.n constitutes 
a separate organ, which is more or less complete in itself. The 
names of the different manuals or organs are great organ, swell 
organ, choir organ and solo organ. The fifth manual, where it 
occurs, is the echo organ. The above is the usual order in point 
of development and frequency of occurrence, although the solo 
is sometimes preferred to the choir organ. The great organ is in 
a certain sense the principal department of the organ. It may be 
regarded as formed by a completely developed series of those 
fundamental stops which constitute the solid basis of the tone 
of the instrument. If an instrument be constructed with only 
a single manual this necessarily assumes, in general, the character- 
istics of a great organ. The great organ is called " grande orgue " 
in French, and first manual or " haupt-werk " in German. 

It is proposed to describe the principal organ-stops under the 

xx. 9 



2 5 8 



ORGAN 



heads of the manuals to which they belong. The enumeration 
will not be exhaustive, but will include all the usual types. 

The great organ begins generally with stops of 16 ft. in large 
instruments. In some cases a 32-foot sounding stop is introduced, 
but this cannot be said to be a proper characteristic of the 
° reat great organ. The foundation tone is of 8 ft.; the stops 

orgaa. of higner p i tc h serve t o add brilliancy; those of 16 ft., 

which sound the octave below the normal pitch, serve to add gravity 
and weight to the tone. Sixteen-foot stops are commonly spoken of 
as " doubles," their conventional length being twice that of stops of 
normal pitch. 

The 16-ft. stops are the 16 double open diapason, and the 16 
bourdon or double stopped diapason, to which, in very large instru- 
ments, there may be added a 16 double trumpet. The double open 
diapason on the great organ consists usually of metal pipes, having 
moderate " scale," or transverse dimensions. These are of the same 
general character as the pipes of the ordinary open diapason, though 
they are made somewhat less powerful. In the better instruments of 
the second class as to size this stop alone would probably be regarded 
as representing suitably and sufficiently the class of doubles on the 
great organ. It gives great body to the general tone, and appears 
decidedly preferable to the bourdon, which frequently takes its place. 

The 16 bourdon, when used on the great organ, is made of rather 
small scale and light tone. It gives great body to a large great organ 
and affords interesting combinations with other stops, such as the 
4-ft. flute. It is used either alone in smaller organs of the second 
class, or in addition to a double open in larger instruments. 

The 16 double trumpet is a trumpet (large reed stop) sounding the 
octave below the normal pitch. It is used generally in instruments 
of the largest size, but is somewhat more common in Germany. It 
is useful in giving a massive character to the tone of the full great 
organ, which is apt to become disagreeable on account of the great 
development of stops of a piercing character. If, however, the 
double trumpet is rough in tone, it is apt to communicate to the 
whole a corresponding impression. 

We now proceed to the 8-ft. stops (the reeds come at the end 
according to ordinary usage). An ordinary great organ may contain 
8 stopped diapason, 8 open diapason (one or more), 8 
0reat gamba and 8 hohlflote. The 8 stopped diapason on the 

V^'l great organ is usually of moderate scale, and some con- 

siderable fulness of tone. Few stops admit of more 
variety and individuality in their quality of tone than the stopped 
diapason; but too frequently the great organ stopped diapason fails 
to attract attention on its merits, being regarded simply as an in- 
considerable portion of the foundation tone. 

If there is any one stop which in itself represents the organ as a 
whole it is the open diapason. The pipes of this stop are the typical 
metal pipes which have always been characteristic or the appearance 
of the organ. A single open diapason stop is capable of being used 
as an organ of sufficient power for many purposes, though of course 
without variety. The pipes of this stop are called " principal " in 
German, this appellation apparently corresponding to the fact that 
they are the true and original organ-pipes. The English appellation 
of " diapason " has been taken to mean that these are the normal 
pipes which run through the whole compass. This, however, does not 
appear to be the actual derivation of the term; originally it is 
technically applied to the organ-builder's rule, which gives the 
dimensions of pipes; and it appears that the application to the stop 
followed on this meaning. 

The scales, character and voicing of the open diapason vary with 
fashion, and are different in different countries. We may distinguish 
three principal types. The old English diapasons of the days before 
the introduction of pedal organs into England were characterized by 
a rich sweet tone, and were not very powerful. They were generally 
voiced on a light wind, having a pressure equivalent to that of a 
column of water of from 2 to 2\ in. The scale was in some cases 
very large, as in Green's two open diapasons in the old organ at St 
George's, Windsor; in these the wind was light, and the tone very 
soft. In other cases the scale was smaller and the voicing bolder, as 
in Father Smith's original diapasons in St Paul's Cathedral. But on 
the whole the old English diapasons presented a lovely quality of 
tone. English travellers of those days, accustomed to these diapasons, 
usually found foreign organs harsh, noisy and uninteresting. And 
there are many still in England who, while recognizing the necessity 
of a firmer diapason tone in view of the introduction of the heavy 
pedal bass, and the corresponding strengthening of the upper de- 
partments of the organ tone, lament the disappearance of the old 
diapason tone. However, it is possible with care to obtain diapasons 
presenting the sweet characteristics of the old English tone, com- 
bined with sufficient fulness and power to form a sound general 
foundation. And there can be no doubt that this should be one of 
the chief points to be kept in view in organ design. 

The German diapason was of an entirely different character from 
the English. The heavy bass of the pedals has been an essential 
characteristic of the German organ for at least two or three centuries, 
or, as it is said, for four. The development of the piercing stops of 
high pitch was equally general. Thus foundation work of com- 
paratively great power was required to maintain the balance of 
tone: the ordinary German diapason was very loud, and we may 



Great 
organ 
4 feet. 



almost say coarse, in its tone when compared with the old English 
diapason. The German stop was voiced as a rule on from 32 to 4 in. 
of wind, not quite twice the pressure used in England. 

The French diapason is a modern variety. It may be described 
as presenting rather the characteristics of a loud gamba than of a 
diapason. In other words the tone tends towards a certain quality 
which may be described as " nasal " or metallic, or as approaching 
to that of a string instrument of rather coarse character. Some 
modern English builders appear to aim at the same model, and not 
without success. 

The tone of a diapason must be strong enough to assert itself. It 
is the foundation of the whole organ tone. It is the voicer's business 
to satisfy this condition in conjunction with the requirement that 
the tone shall be full and of agreeable quality. 

The 8 spitzflote may be regarded as a variety of open diapason. 
The pipes taper slightly towards the top, and the quality is 
slightly stringy. This stop was much used at one time in place of a 
second open diapason. But it appears better that, where two open 
diapasons are desirable, they should both be of full diapason quality, 
though possibly of different strengths and dimensions. The ad- 
mixture of stringy qualities of tone with the diapasons is always to 
be deprecated. 

The 8 gamba was originally an imitation of the viola da gamba, a 
sort of violoncello. When made of a light quality of tone it is a 
pleasing stop; but its use in the great organ instead of a second open 
diapason is greatly to be deprecated for the reasons just stated. 

The 8 hohlflote is an open flute, usually of wood, and of small 
scale. If made to a moderate scale and fully voiced it possesses a 
full pleasant tone, which is a useful support to the foundation tone 
of the great organ. The 8 clarabella differs from the hohlflote in 
being usually of rather large scale, and having the open pipes only 
in the treble. In old organs a separate bass was generally 
provided; now it is more usual to supply the stop with a stopped 
bass. 

The 4-ft. stops of the great organ comprise the 4 principal and the 
4 flute. The 4 principal is the octave of the open diapason, generally 
of somewhat reduced scale and light but bright quality of 
tone. The use of the word " principal " in connexion 
with this stop is purely English, and is said to be con- 
nected with the use made of it as the standard of tuning 
for the whole organ. The Germans and French both designate this 
stop as " octave." 

Of the 4 flute there are several varieties — open, stopped, wood, 
metal and harmonic. The harmonic flute has open metal pipes of 
double the conventional length, which speak their octave. This is 
determined partly by the voicing, partly by making a small hole 
about the middle of the length, which determines the motion as that 
of the two separate lengths between which the hole lies. Harmonic 
flutes have a sweet but full and powerful tone. Other flutes are 
generally rather light, except the waldflote, which is a powerful stop 
of a somewhat hooting quality. 

The great organ flute is frequently used to give brilliancy to light 
combinations. Thus it may be used with the stopped diapason 
alone, or with the 16 bourdon alone, or with any^of these and either 
or both of the open diapasons. 

The ordinary use of the 4-ft. stops is to add a degree of loudness to 
the diapasons. This is accompanied with a certain measure of keen- 
ness, which may become disagreeable if the 4-ft. tone is dispro- 
portionately strong. The ordinary practice is to use the 4-ft. tone 
very freely. 

The 2f twelfth stop sounds fiddle g on the C key. It is composed 
of diapason pipes, rather small and gently voiced. Its _ 
use is said to be to thicken the tone, which it certainly ea 
does. But how far the particular effect produced is °^ a " 
desirable is another question. It is generally necessary ^.°£' ' ° ltcn 
that this stop should be accompanied by the fifteenth or 
other octave sounding stop of higher pitch. 

The 2 fifteenth, or superoctave, of the great organ consists of 
diapason pipes sounding notes two octaves above the normal pitch 
of the keys. The 2 piccolo is a fluty stop of less power, having the 
same pitch. The 2-ft. tone is commonly used as giving a degree of 
loudness to the great organ beyond that obtainable with the 4-ft. 
tone. 

The modern great organ fifteenth is generally a very powerful stop, 
and requires great caution in its use in organs of moderate size, or in 
limited spaces. The old English high pitched stops had little power, 
and their brilliancy was capable of pleasing without offence. The 
modern great organ up to fifteenth can only be heard with comfort 
in very large spaces. Under such suitable circumstances the 
fifteenth is capable of giving to the whole tone a ringing or silvery 
character, which lends itself specially to contrast with the tone of 
reeds. This peculiar keen tone requires for its full development the 
mixtures. 

Mixture, sesquialtera, furniture, cymbal, scharf, cornet, are various 
names applied to a description of stop which possesses several ranks 
or several pipes to each note. The pipes of each note sound a chord 
which is generally composed of concordant notes of the harmonic 
series whose fundamental is the proper note of the key. Modern 
mixtures generally consist of fifths and octaves. Their composition 
is not the same throughout the whole range of the keyboard. A 



ORGAN 



259 



three-rank mixture may consist of the following (the numbers signify 
intervals, reckoned along the scale) — 

C — c (tenor) 15 — 19 — 22 
cS to top 8 — 12 — 15. 

For a somewhat larger full mixture this may be modified as 
follows — 

C — c' (middle) 15 — 19—22 

c'S to top 1— 8— 12— 15. 

A sharp mixture suitable for a large instrument may be as follows — 

Five Ranks. 
C — c' 15 — 19 — 22 — 26 — 29 
c'$~ /"# 8— 12— 15— 19— 22 
g"— c" 1— 8— 12— 15— 19 
c'" to top I — 5 — 8— 12— 15. 
The last two compositions are given by Hopkins in his great 
treatise on the organ. 

The early mixtures generally included the tierce (17th, or two 
octaves and a third). The German practice was to unite this with 
a twelfth, carrying the combination 12-17 throughout the keyboard 
under the name of sesquialtera. The combination is not now usually 
provided. The old English sesquialtera was ordinarily simply a form 
of mixture, as was the furniture. The mounted cornet consisted 
usually of five ranks — ■ 

I — 8 — 12 — 15 — 17. 

It extended from middle c upwards. The pipes were raised on a small 
soundboard of their own. The stop was used for giving out a melody. 
It is now obsolete. 

The question of the employment and composition of mixtures is 
of the greatest importance with respect to the good effect of the full 
organ proper, i.e. without reeds. With reference to the whole 
question of keen-toned stops it may be laid down that their free 
employment in the great organ does not produce a good effect unless 
the organ is situated in a very large space. If this is the case, properly 
proportioned mixtures are capable of giving to the tone of the full 
diapason work a character which is brilliant without being over- 
powering. The contrast between this class of tone and that afforded 
by the reeds is one of the most charming and legitimate effects within 
the range of the instrument. 

We now pass to the reeds. The 16-ft. trumpet has been already 
alluded to, and there remain 8 trumpet and 4 clarion or octave 
trumpet. These arc both stops of great power. The best 
trumpets possess also richness and smoothness of tone. 
Stops of this class can be used with the diapasons only, 
producing what may be described as a rich-toned blare of 
moderate strength. The more usual employment of the reeds is in 
connexion with the entire great organ, the whole forming the ordinary 
fortissimo of the instrument. 

The second department of the English organ is the swell organ. 
The whole of the swell pipes are enclosed in a box, faced on one or 
more sides with a set of balanced shutters. When these 
are closed the tone is almost completely muffled. When 
the shutters are opened, by means of a pedal usually, the 
sound bursts out. In order that the use of the swell may be effective, 
it is necessary that the shutters should close tightly, and that there 
should be a sufficient volume of tone to produce an effect when they 
are opened. The swell is of entirely English origin; it has been 
introduced in Germany to a very small extent, but more widely in 
France. It is usually called " recitatif " on the Continent. The 
chief characteristic of the swell is the rich and powerful volume of 
reed-tone of a peculiar character which it contains. But other stops 
are also of importance. We consider them in order. The 16 bourdon, 
small scale, is very commonly used in swells. It assists in giving 
body to the tone. It occupies, however, a large space within the 
swell box; and where the choice between it and a 16-ft. reed has to 
be made there can be no doubt that the reed should be preferred, as it 
contributes so much more to the development of the characteristic 
swell tone. The 16 contra fagotto is the usual name of this stop. 
It imparts great richness to the tone of the other swell reeds. 

The 8-ft. diapason work is principally valuable for the soft effects 
obtained from it. The diapasons are voiced less loudly than for the 
great organ; and with the shutters closed they sound very soft. 
The dulciana is the softest stop generally available; and cither this 
or some similar stop is introduced into the swell for the purpose of 
obtaining effects of the most extreme softness. Space within the 
swell box has generally to be economized. The complete bass of the 
open diapason or dulciana requires an 8-ft. swell box, whereas even 
a 16-ft. reed can be bent round so as to go within a smaller box if 
necessary. The open diapason and the dulciana are therefore often 
cut short at tenor c, and completed, if desired, with stopped pipes. 
The 4 principal and the 4 flute stops are similar to the corresponding 
stops in the great organ, but are somewhat lighter in tone. 

The 2 fifteenth and mixtures are much more pleasing in the swell 
than in the great organ. The shutters tone them down, so that they 
cannot easily become offensive. Added to the reeds, they give a 
peculiar brilliancy to the full swell. But perhaps their most pleasing 
use is when all the diapason work of the swell is used alone, and as a 
contrast to the reeds. 



Great 
organ 
reeds. 



Swell 
organ. 



Choir 
organ. 



The usual reeds are as follows, besides the doubles already 
mentioned: 8 oboe, 8 cornopean, 8 trumpet and 4 clarion (octave 
trumpet). The oboe (hautboy) is a conventional imitation of 
the orchestral instrument. It is a stop of delicate tone, and perhaps 
is at its best in solo passages, softly accompanied on another manual. 
The cornopean has a powerful horn-like tone. It is the stop which, 
more than any other, gives to the English swell its peculiar 
character. The trumpet is used in addition to the cornopean in large 
instruments. The clarion serves to add brightness and point to the 
whole. The vox humana is also frequently placed on the swell. 

The third department is the choir organ. The 8-ft. 
work may contain 8 stopped diapason, 8 open diapason, 
8 gamba, 8 keraulophon and 8 hohlflote. 

As a rule no open diapason is provided for choir organs, unless they 
are larger than usual; but a small open is most useful as a means 
of obtaining a better balance than usual against the other manuals. 
The stopped diapason is generally made to contrast in some way with 
that on the great organ. The hohlflote, or its representative, is 
generally a lighter stop than what would be put on the great organ. 
The gamba is better placed in the choir organ than in the great or the 
swell. Such stops as the gamba and the keraulophon are frequently 
placed in the swell with the idea of adding to the reediness of the 
tone. But this is fallacious. Their tone is not strong enough to 
assert itself through the shutters, and their peculiar character is 
therefore lost. On the choir organ, on the other hand, the sort of 
strength required is just about what they possess, and they show to 
advantage. The keraulophon is a stop invented by Gray and 
Davison, and has been widely adopted for many years. It has a hole 
made in each pipe near the top, and gives a peculiar tone very well 
described by its name (horn-flute). Though not very like the gamba, 
its tone is so far of the same type of quality that the two stops would 
hardly be used together. It is generally the case that similar stops of 
exceptional characters do not combine well, whereas stops of opposed 
qualities do combine well. Thus a gamba and a keraulophon would 
not combine well, whereas either of them forms an excellent com- 
bination with a stopped diapason or a hohlflote. 

The 4 principal is sometimes very useful. A light combination on 
the choir, with excess of 4-ft. tone, may often be advantageously 
contrasted with the more full and solid tone of the great diapasons, 
or with other attainable effects. The 4 flute is constantly used. 
The 2 piccolo is frequently found on the choir organ, but is not 
particularly useful. 

In organs which have no solo manual there is usually a clarionet 
(cremona, cromorne or krummhorn, in old organs sometimes corno di 
bassetto) on the choir, and often an orchestral oboe (real imitation of 
the instrument). These are reed-stops. The dulciana and another 
soft stop, the salicional, salcional or salicet (of similar strength, but 
slightly more pungent quality), are often placed on the choir. They 
arc, however, hardly strong enough to be of much use there, and in 
the swell they are useful for effects of extreme softness. In very 
large instruments a fifteenth and a mixture are sometimes placed on 
the choir, which in this case has a complete series of diapason work. 
If the fifteenth and the mixtures are light enough the result is a sort 
of imitation of the tone of the old English organ. It also forms a 
useful echo to the great organ, i.e. a passage played on the great may 
be repeated on the similar but fainter tone of the choir with the effect 
of an echo. In instruments of the largest size the choir is sometimes 
provided with a very small bourdon of 16-ft. tone, which helps to 
give to the tone the character of that of a small full organ without 
reeds. 

The solo organ is comparatively modern, at all events in its 
present usual form. A fourth manual was not unknown in old 
German organs; but the contents of all four resembled 
each other in a general sort of way, and there was nothing 
like the English swell or the modern solo. The solo 
appears to have arisen with Cavailld-Coll in France, and Hill in 
England, as a vehicle for the powerful reed-stops on heavy wind 
introduced by these builders. Thus the French term for the solo is 
"clavier des bombardes"; and in the earlier English solos the 
" tuba mirabilis " was usually prominent. A solo organ may suitably 
contain any of the following stops: 8 tromba (a powerful reed on 
heavy wind), 8 harmonic flute (powerful tone and heavy wind), 8 
clarionet and 8 orchestral oboe (real imitations of the instruments) and 
8 vox humana (conventional imitation of the human voice). The last 
three stops are reeds. They may be with advantage enclosed in a 
swell box, having a separate pedal. In very large instruments a 
complete series of both diapason and reed stops is occasionally placed 
on the solo. But there docs not seem to be much advantage in this 
arrangement. 

We now come to the pedal. This forms the general bass to the 
whole organ. Thirty-two foot stops only occur in the largest 
instruments; they are as follows: 32 open diapason 
(wood or metal), 32-ft. tone bourdon and 32 contra 
trombone, posaune, bombardc, sackbut (reed). The 
32-ft. open diapason, whether wood or metal, is usually made of 
large scale, and produces true musical notes throughout. Its musical 
effect in the lower part of its range is, however, questionable, so far as 
this depends on the possibility of recognizing the pitch of the notes. 
It adds great richness to the general effect, particularly in large 
spaces. The 32-ft. tone bourdon is not usually a successful stop. 



Solo 
organ. 



Pedal 
organ. 



260 



ORGAN 



It rarely produces its true note in the lower part of its range. The 
32-ft. reed on the pedal has long been a characteristic of the largest 
instruments. With the old type of reed it was rarely pleasant to 
hear. The manufacture has been greatly improved, and these large 
reeds are now made to produce a fairly smooth effect. Deep reed 
notes, when rich and good, undoubtedly form one of the principal 
elements in giving the impression of power produced by large organs. 
From this point of view they are of great importance. Nevertheless 
the effect of large pedal reeds is generally more satisfactory to the 
performer than to the listener. 

The 16-ft. pitch may be regarded as the normal pitch of the pedal; 
the principal stops are as follows: 16 open diapason (wood or metal), 
16-ft. tone bourdon, 16 violone (imitation of double bass) and 16 
trombone or posaune (reed). The 16-ft. open diapason on the pedal 
assumes different forms according to circumstances. As a rule the 
character is sufficiently indicated by the stop being of wood or metal. 
The wooden open is generally of very large scale, and produces a 
ponderous tone of great power and fulness, which is only suitable 
for the accompaniment of the full organ, or of very powerful manual 
combinations. Such a stop is, as a rule, unsuitable in organs of 
moderate size, unless supplemented by lighter 16s for ordinary- 
purposes. The metal open is of considerably smaller scale (in fact all 
metal pipes are effectively of much smaller scale than wooden pipes 
of similar diameter). The metal gives a clear tone, lighter than that 
of large wooden pipes, and pleasanter for ordinary purposes. The 
metal open combines advantageously with a bourdon. In the 
largest organs both wood and metal open 16s may be suitably 
provided. Where metal pipes are made a feature in the organ-case, 
both the double open diapason in the great organ and the metal 16 
of the pedal may be properly made of good metal (polished tin or 
spotted metal), and worked in to the design of the organ-case. 1 
The same applies to the 32-ft. metal opens of the largest instruments. 
This saves space in the interior, and gives the large pipes room to 
speak, which is apt to be wanting when they are placed inside. 
The 16-ft. tone bourdon on the pedal may be made of any scale 
according to circumstances. If it is the chief bass of the organ it is 
made very large and with great volume of tone. Such stops are un- 
suitable for soft purposes, and a soft 16, usually a violone, is required 
in addition. If the loud department of the 16 tone is otherwise 
provided for the bourdon may be made of moderate strength. It 
may also be made very soft, like a manual bourdon. These three 
different strengths ought always to be provided for in an instrument 
of a complete character. The violone is also made of all three 
strengths. In a few cases it furnishes the principal bass; frequently 
it furnishes the moderate element ; and it is often applied to obtain 
a very soft 16-ft. tone. The 16-ft. reed is very common. The 
observations made as to the effect of 32-ft. reeds are applicable also 
in this case. . , , . 

The 8-ft. department of the pedal is only less important than the 
16, because it is possible to replace it to a certain extent by coupling 
or attaching the manuals to the pedals. The usual 8-ft. pedai- 
stops are as follows: 8 principal bass (metal or wood), 8 bass flute 
(stopped), 8 violoncello (imitation of the instrument) and 8 trumpet. 
The remarks made above as to the scale of open 16s apply with little 
change to the pedal principal. Only, since the manuals are generally 
coupled, it is perhaps best to provide the large scale wood-stop, which 
presents the powerful class of tone in which the manual diapasons are 
deficient. The bass flute is almost a necessity in combination with 
the light 16-ft. tone. A composition ought to be provided by which 
the pedal can be reduced to these two elements by a single move- 
ment. The violoncello is sometimes used instead of the bass flute 
for the last-named purpose, for which, however, it is not so suitable. 
It is a favourite stop for some solo purposes, but is not of much 
general utility. The 8-ft. trumpet serves to give clearness and point 
to the tone of the 16-ft. reed. 

In the short preface to Mendelssohn's Organ Sonatas it is stated 
that everywhere, even in pianissimo, it is intended that the 16-ft. 
tore of the pedal should be accompanied by 8-ft. tone. For the 
purpose of realizing this as a general direction the soft 16-ft. and 8-ft. 
stops are required; large instruments are, however, occasionally 
found which possess nothing of the kind. 

The following stops of higher pitch are occasionally found on the 
pedal: 5i twelfth bass, 4 fifteenth bass, mixture and 4 clarion. 
These serve to make the pedal tone practically independent of 
coupling to the manual, which is a matter of great importance, 
especially in the performance of certain compositions of Bach and 
other writers, who appear to have been independent of couplers. 

In some instruments two sets of pedals are provided, which may 

be described as great and choir pedals. The great pedal is in the 

usual position; the choir pedal is in front of the other, and 

Second s l op i ng . It is so placed that the feet rest on it naturally 

pedal. when stretc hed out in front of the performer. There is a 



hoir pedal of this kind in the organ in the minster at Ulm, built by 
Yalcker of Ludwigsburg. It is a very large instrument, having 100 



1 Anything down to one-third tin and two-thirds lead is called tin. 
But " pure tin" should have over 90% of tin. Absolutely pure 
tin could not be worked. Spotted metal is said to have from one- 
third to two-thirds tin. Under one-third tin no spots are said to rise, 
and the mixture has the general characters of lead. 



In square 




sounding stops. It has no compositions, which indeed are but little 
known in Germany ; and without some arrangement such as this a 
soft pedal would hardly be obtainable. There are a few other instru- 
ments which have choir pedals, but they have not been introduced 
into England. 

In organs which have a single manual the characteristics of the 
great and choir organs are usually united. In organs which have 
two manuals the lower usually represents the united great 
and choir, the upper is the swell. In organs which have Arrange- 
three manuals the lower is usually the choir, but some- meat of 
times combines choir and solo, the middle is the great, raanuate. 
and the top is the swell. In organs which have four manuals the 
order is solo, swell, great, choir, the solo being at the top and the 
choir at the bottom. 

Compositions are mechanical contrivances for moving the stop- 
handles in groups at a time. The ordinary form consists of pedals, 
which project from the front just above the pedal keys. 
The arrangements are various. We may refer to the C°mposi- 
arrangement in the organ at Windsor, given later on. " oas- 
A species of composition was introduced by Willis some years ago, 
and has been adopted in many large English instruments, which acts 
by means of a series of brass disks placed just under the front of the 
keys of each manual, wuhin reach of the thumb. These act by 
means of pneumatic levers. A slight pressure on one of the disks sets 
the machine attached to it in action, and the required change in the 
stops is made without any exertion on the part of the performer. 

The connexion between the keys and their pallets is made by 
various mechanisms, some of which are very ancient. 
and irackerwork (fig. 7) 
the old squares were General 
made of wood. They ««*<"" 
resemble in function the sm ' 
squares used for taking bell-wires 
round a corner. The trackers are 
slight strips of wood, having 
screwed wires whipped on to their 
ends.which hold by leather buttons. 
The trackers play the part of the FlG A B tracker; 

bell-wires. \\ here pressure has to c me tal square 
be transmitted instead of a pull, ' 

thin but broad slips of wood are used, having pins stuck into their 
ends to keep them in their places. These are stickers _ (fig. 8). Back- 
falls (fig. 9) are narrow wooden levers turning on pins which pass 
through their centres. 
The fan frame (fig. 10) is 
a set of backfalls having 
one set of ends close 
together, usually corres- 
ponding to the keys; the 
other ends are spread 
widely apart. The roller 
board (fig. 11) is a more 
general mode of _ shifting 
the movements sideways. 
The roller is a slip of 
wood, or a bit of metal 

tube, which turns on two pins inserted into its ends. It has two 
arms projecting at right angles to its length. One of these receives 
the pull at one point, the other gives it off at another. In case a 

pull has to be transmitted 

to more than one quarter, c __, -" -. --, t- _, 

a roller will sometimes 1 1 

have more than two arms. 

The name of couplers 

(fig. 12) is given to the 

mechanical stop by which 

the keys of one manual are made to take down those ot another, 

or those of the pedal to take down those of the manuals, borne 

old forms of the mechanism could not be put on while any of the 

keys were depressed; others had a 

tendency to throw the fingers off the 

keys. These forms have been entirely 

superseded. That now used consists 

of a series of backfalls centred on a 

movable support. The one set of ends 

is connected with the moving keys; 

the other set of ends is pierced by the 

wires of the trackers or stickers from 

the keys to be moved. In the one 

position of the support these ends play 

freely over the wires; in the other 

they are brought up against the buttons 

of the trackers or against the stickers 

to be moved. The usual couplers are 

— each of the manuals to the pedal, 

swell to great, swell to great octave, 

swell to great sub-octave, swell to „„+,,,„ 

choir, choir to great sub-octave, and solo to great The swel octave 

and sub-octave couplers are sometimes placed on the swell itselt. 1 he 

objection to this is, that if they are used when the swell is coupled to 




J 



Fig. 8. — A and B as in fig. 7; C, sticker. 



Fig. 9. — Backfall. 




Fig. 10. — Fan Frame. 



ORGAN 



261 




Roller Board. 



Fig. 12. — Coupler. 



the great organ, as is very commonly the case, the octaves are reached 
through two couplers. And, as couplers are not generally screwed 
up quite tight, the octaves are often not sufficiently put down to 
sound in tune. The choir to great sub-octave coupler was used 

chiefly as a substitute for a 
double on the great organ. 
It is common in organs of 
the transition period, but 
is not a good arrangement. 
The pneumatic lever (fig. 
13) consists of a small 
power bellows attached to 
each key, so that the de- 
pression of the key admits 
high-pressure wind to the 
power bellows. The power 
bellows then performs the 
work of opening the valves, &c. In large organs the work to be 
done would be beyond the reach of the most powerful finger with- 
out this device. Similar devices are sometimes applied to the 
compositions and other mechanical arrangements. 

Pneumatic transmission, with many other mechanical devices, was 
invented by Willis. It consists of a divided pneumatic action. The 
pneumatic wind, instead of being at once admitted to the power 
bellows, is made to traverse a length of tubing, at the farther end of 
which it reaches the work to be done. This principle admits of 
application to divided organs, the pneumatic transmission passing 
under the floor, as in the organ at St Paul's Cathedral. 

Ventils are valves which control the wind-supply of the different 
groups of stops. They were much recommended at one time as a 

substitute for compositions. The 
ri — ■ -■■ ^-j , practical difference is that com- 

positions shift the stop-handles, so 
that one can always see what there 
is on the organ; ventils leave the 
stop handles unmoved, so that the 
player is liable to be deceived. 
Other inconveniences might be 
mentioned, but it is enough to say that practical opinion appears 
decidedly to condemn the use of ventils. 

The original pedal boards of Germany were flat and of very large 
scale. The early practice in England was to make them very small, 
as well as of short compass. Of late the compass C — /', 
thirty notes, has been universally adopted with scales 
varying from 2j to 2§ in. from centre to centre of the 
naturals; 2§ in. is the scale now recommended. A large 
number of organs have been provided with concave 
radiating pedal boards. The objections to this arrange- 
ment are mainly two: They present different scales at different 
distances from the front; and, except just in front, they become so 

narrow that the smallest 
foot can hardly put down 
the pedals singly. This 
renders difficult the old 
Bach style of playing, the 
essence of which consists 
in putting the feet over 
each other freely, so as to 
use the alternate method 
as much as possible; and 
this requires that the back 
of the pedal board shall be 
as available as the front. 

The diversities of the 
arrangements of different 
organs present a great 
difficulty. The best players 
take a certain time to 
master the arrangements 
of a strange instrument. 
With a view to the intro- 
duction of uniformity a 
conference on the subject 
was arranged by the Col- 
lege of Organistsin London, 
and a series of resolutions and a series of recommendations were 
published which deserve attention (1881), though they have now 
been withdrawn. We may mention that the parallel concave form 
was recommended for the pedal board, and 2| in. for the scale. The 
positions of the stops of the various organs were to be as follows: — 
Left. Right. 

Swell. Solo. 

Pedal. Great. 

Couplers. Choir. 

The order of compositions, &c, from piano to forte was to be in all 
cases from left to right. The groups of compositions were to be in 
the order from left to right — pedal, swell, couplers, great. 

Two other points of detail may be alluded to. One is the position 
of the pedal board with reference to the keys. The height from the 



Arrange 
meats 
about 
the per~ 
former. 




Grscct Orqo,ri ■ 



Q 



Ti Old 

1/ — 



arrurhqem^ixt 



middle of the pedals to the great organ keys, it is agreed, should be 
32 in. But as to the forward position there is a difference. The 
resolutions said that " a plumb-line dropped from the front of the 
great organ sharp keys falls 2 in. nearer the player than the front of 
the centre short key of the pedal board." The old arrangement gave 
usually 1 5 in. for this distance. But it is thought that the change 
has not gone far enough, and 4 in. has been found preferable. There 
is scarcely any single arrangement which is so important for the 
comfort of the player as having sufficient space in this direction (fig. 
14). The second matter is the provision of some other means of 
acting on the swell than by the swell pedal. The use of the swell 
pedal is inconsistent with the proper use of both feet on the pedal 
keys; and there is no 
doubt that incorrect habits 1 

in this respect are com- ! , , 

monly the result of the 
English use of the swell 
pedal. In fact, players 
sometimes keep one foot 
on the swell pedal all the 
time, so that proper pedal 
playing is impossible. 
Arrangements have been 
devised by means of which 
a movable back to the seat 
can be made the means of 
acting on the swell. The 
first " recommendation " 
of the College of Organists 
illustrated the require- 
ment; it was, that "the 
consideration of organ- — — — 
builders be directed to the 
widely-expressed desire for 
some means of operating 
on the swell in addition to 
the ordinary swell pedal." 
G. Cooper had a movable 
back to the seat of the 
organ at St Sepulchre's, Fig. 14 
London. The swell was 
opened by leaning back, 

so that it could only be used when the swell was coupled to the 
great. The writer has had an organ for more than twenty years 
in which the movable back is provided with a strap passing 
over one shoulder and buckling in front. It opens the swell 
when the player leans forward. It is most valuable, particularly in 
such things as accompanying the service. The emphasis required is 
obtained when wanted without taking the feet from their other 
duties. Young people pick it up easily; older people have difficulty. 
As an example of an organ of a complete but not enormously large 
character, we give the details of the organ at St George's Chapel, 
Windsor, which was rebuilt by Messrs Gray and Davidson, according 
to Sir Walter Parratt's designs, in the year 1883. 



• 2 CcVUyc qfOr yitnista 



\iiaffdal-en CoJhgi & 
• S' Geary ei Win dsor 



-Relative Position 
and Pedal. 



of Manual 



Four manuals, C to a'", 58 
notes. Pedal, C to/', 30 notes. 

Great Organ (3j-in. wind). 
Double open diapason . . 16 
Large open diapason ... 8 
Open diapason .... 8 
Stopped diapason ... 8 

Clarabella 8 

Principal 4 

Harmonic flute .... 4 

Twelfth 2§ 

Fifteenth 2 

Sesquialtera 1 . .Ill ranks 

Harmonic piccolo ... 2 

Posaune 8 

Clarion . .... 4 

Swell Organ (3-in. wind). 
Lieblich bourdon .... 16 
Open diapason .... 8 
Stopped diapason . '. . 8 

Dulciana 8 

Vox coelestis 1 8 

Principal 4 

Octave dulciana .... 4 

Fifteenth 2 

Mixture 2 .... ill ranks 
Contra fagotto . . .16 

Cornopean 8 

Oboe 8 

Vox humana 8 

Clarion .... .4 



Choir Organ (2j-in. wind). 
Dulciana .... 
Keraulophon . 
Stopped diapason 
Viol d'orchestre . 

Flute 

Piccolo 

Corno di bassetto (reed) 

Solo Organ (6-in. wind) 
Harmonic flute 
Orchestral oboe . 
Tromba .... 

Pedal Organ (4-1'n. wind) 
Open diapason (wood) 
Violone (metal) 
Bourdon (wood) . 
Wood flute. . . . 
Trombone (wood tubes) 



16 
16 
16 

8 
16 



Couplers. 
Solo to great. Swell to pedal. 
Swell to great. Great to pedal. 
Solo to pedal. Choir to pedal. 

Pneumatic action to great 
organ and its couplers. 

The arrangement of the stops 
and compositions is as follows : — 
Left. Over the keys. Right. 
Solo. Couplers. Swell. 

Choir. Tremulant. Great. 
Pedal. (Knob below swell keys.) 



1 These are the old mixtures. 



262 



ORGAN 



Composition Pedals. 



/ 



I 
St 



•mf 



TT 



Great and pedal 
combined 



I I 1 I 



I Great to pedal 
in and out. 



Beduce pedal to violone 
Great to pedal in. 

One swell pedal controls two sides of the swell box. The other 
controls the box in which the orchestral oboe is placed. The vox 
humana is in a box which is always shut, inside the swell box. 

History of the Modem Organ. 

The history of the ancient organ is dealt with in a separate 
section below. The first keyboard is said to have been intro- 
duced into the organ in the cathedral at Magdeburg about the 
close of the nth century. There were sixteen keys; and a 
drawing exists in a work of the 17th century 1 which purports 
to represent them. They are said to have been an ell long and 
3 in. broad. The drawing represents a complete octave with 
naturals and short keys (semitones), arranged in the same 
relative positions as in the modern keyboard. In early organs 
with keyboards the keys are said to have required blows of the 
fist to put them down. In these eases probably sounding the 
notes of the plain song was all that could be accomplished. 

As to the precise time and conditions under which the key- 
board assumed its present form we know nothing. It is commonly 
said that the change to narrow keys took place in the course of the 
14th century, and the semitones were introduced about the 
same time. 

Many examples of organ keyboards still exist, both in England 
and on the Continent, which have black naturals and white 
short keys (semitones). The organ in the church at Heiligenblut 
in Tirol had in 1S70 two manuals, one having black naturals 
and white semitones, the other white naturals and black semi- 
tones. In this organ the stops were acted on by iron levers 
which moved right and left. It had a beautiful tone; it pos- 
sessed a reservoir bellows of great capacity, and was altogether a 
remarkable instrument. Harpsichords with black keyboards 
also exist. 

The mode of blowing practised about the time of the intro- 
duction of the first keyboard appears to have been that which 
Bellows ultimately developed into the method still generally 
used in Germany. There were a great many separate 
bellows, each like a magnified kitchen-bellows, but provided 
with a valve, so that the wind could not return into the bellows. 
One man had charge of two of these. Each foot was attached to 
one bellows, and the blower held on by a bar above. It was 
possible, by raising each of the two bellows in turn and then 
resting his weight upon it, to produce a constant supply of wind 
with the pressure due to his weight. A great many such bellows 
were provided, and it seems that each pair required one man; 
so that great numbers of blowers were employed. A slight 
modification is enough to change this method into the German 
one. Instead of fastening the feet to the bellows and pulling 
them up, the blower treads on a lever which raises the bellows. 
The bellows being loaded then supplies the wind of itself. The 
bellows thus used have diagonal hinges, and various expedients 
are employed to make them furnish steady wind. But the 
English system of horizontal reservoirs and feeders appears far 
superior. 

The invention of the pedal may be set down to the 1 5th century. 
About that time the organ assumed on the Continent of Europe 
Pedal l ^ e 8 enera ' f° rrn which it has retained till lately, 

more especially in Germany. This may be described 
generally as having a compass of about four octaves in the 
manuals and of two octaves in the pedal, with occasionally extra 
notes at the top in both, and frequently " short octaves " at the 
bottom. German short octaves are as follows. The manual and 
pedal appear to terminate on E instead of C. Then the E key 
sounds C, F = F, F#=D, G=G, G# = E, and the rest as usual. 
There were often three, sometimes four, manuals in large organs. 
1 Praetorius, Tlieatrum Instmmentoriim. 



Cases. 

1390 
1429 
1490 
1504 



The character of all these was in general much the same, but they 
were more softly voiced in succession, the softest manual being 
sometimes spoken of as an echo organ. There are one or two 
examples of the echo as a fourth or fifth manual in England at the 
present time, in organs which have been designed more or less 
under German inspiration. The old echo was long ago super- 
seded by the swell in England. 

A few ancient cases survive in a more or less altered condition. 
Of these the following are worthy of mention, as 
bearing on the question of date. 

Sion (Switzerland). Gothic. A small instrument 
Amiens. Originally Gothic. Large, with 16-ft. pipes . 
Perpignan. Gothic. Large, with 32-ft. pipes . 
Liibeck. One of the finest Gothic organs in Europe. 32s. 
(or, according to Hopkins, 1518). 

In all these the cases are sufficiently preserved to make it almost 
certain that pipes of the same lengths were originally employed. 
The actual pipes are generally modern. Shortly after this date 
we find Renaissance cases. At La Ferte Bernard (dep. Sarthe) 
part of the substructure is Gothic, and is known to be of date 
1501; the organ above is Renaissance, and is known to be of 
date 1536. At St Maurice, Angers, an organ was built in 1511, 
with Renaissance case, two towers of 32-ft. pipes, 48 stops 
and a separate pedal. An account of the instrument in a proces 
verbal of 1533 furnishes good evidence. In the 16th century, 
therefore, the organ had attained great completeness, and the 
independent pedal was general on the Continent. 

We cannot follow the history of German organs through the 
intervening centuries; but we propose to give the items of one 
of the principal organs of the Silbermanns, the great 
builders of the 18th century — namely, that standing 
in the Royal Catholic Church, Dresden. Without 
being an enormously large instrument it is complete in its way, 
and gives a very good idea of the German organ. The account 
is taken from Hopkins. The date is 1754. 2 

Greet. 



German 
organ. 



Principal 


. 16 


Octave 


2 


Bourdon 


. 16 tone 


Tertia . 


i| 


Principal 


. 8 


Mixtur . . 


lv ranks 


Viola da Gamba 


. 8 


Cymbel 


m 


Rohrflote . 


8 tone 


Cornet 


V 


Octave 


■ 4 


Fagott 


16 


Spitzflote . 


■ 4 


Trumpet . 


8 


Quinta . 


• 2§ 


Clarin . 


4 




Echo. 




Quintaton . 


. 16 tone 


Octave 


2 


Principal 


. 8 


Tertia 


1 3 

1 5 


Gedackt 


8 tone 


Flageolet . 


1 


Unda Maris 


. 8 tone 


Mixtur 


iv ranks 


Octave . 


• 4 


Echo . 


V 


Rohrflote . 


4 tone 


Vox humana . 


8 tone 


Nassat . 


■ 2! 








Choir. 




Gedackt 


. 8 tone 


Quinta 


la 


Principal 


• 4 


Sifflote . . 


1 


Rohrflote 


4 tone 


Mixtur 


ill ranks 


Nassat . 


■ 2| 


Sesquialtera . 


11 


Octave . 


. 2 


Chalumeaux . 


8 tone 




Pedal. 




Untersatz . 


. 32 tone 


Mixtur 


iv ranks 


Principal 


. 16 


Pausan (trombone 


) 16 


Octave-bass 


. 8 


Trompette 


8 


Octave . 


• 4 


Clarin . 


4 




Accessories. 




Echo to great. 


Tremulant echo. 




Great to pedal. 


1 Tremulant great. 
Compass. 




Manuals — C to d" 


' in alt. 


Pedal — Ci to teno 


r c. 



The chief difference between English organs and those of the 
Continent was that until the 19th century the pedal was absolutely 
unknown in England. The heavy bass given by the 
pedal being absent, a lighter style of voicing was f^** 
adopted, and the manuals were usually continued 
down below the 8-ft. C so as to obtain additional bass by 

2 The writer heard this instrument as a boy, and has a very 
pleasant recollection of the general effect. 



ORGAN 



263 



playing octaves with the hands. Thus the old organ (date 1697) 
of Father Smith in St Paul's Cathedral had manuals descending 
to the 16-ft. C (Ci), with two open diapasons throughout. 
Green's old organ at St George's, Windsor, had manuals descend- 
ing to the 12-ft. F, also two open diapasons throughout, no 
F#. But the more usual practice was to make the manual 
descend to the iof G, leaving out the G#. At the Revolution 
most of the organs in England had been destroyed. Shortly 
afterwards Bernard Smith, a German, commonly called Father 
Smith, and Thomas and Rene Harris, Frenchmen, were largely 
employed in building organs, which were wanted everywhere. 
Father Smith perhaps had the greatest reputation of any builder 
of the old time, and his work has lasted wonderfully. There is a 
list in Rimbault of forty-five organs built for churches by him. 
The list of Rene Harris is scarcely less extensive. 

The most important step in the development of the old English 
organ was the invention of the swell. This was first introduced 
into an organ built by two Jordans, father and son, for St 
Magnus's church near London Bridge, in 1712. 

Burney writes (1771): — 

" It is very extraordinary that the swell, which has been introduced 
into the English organ more than fifty years, and which is so capable 
of expression and of pleasing effects that it may be well said to be the 
greatest and most important improvement that was ever made in 
any keyed instrument, should be utterly unknown in Italy; and, 
now I am on this subject, I must observe that most of the organs 1 
have met with on the Continent seem to be inferior to ours by Father 
Smith, Byfield or Snetzler, in everything but size ! As the churches 
there are very often immense, so are the organs; the tone is indeed 
somewhat softened and refined by space and distance; but, when 
heard near, it is intolerably coarse and noisy; and, though the 
number of stops in these large instruments is very great, they afford 
but little variety, being for the most part duplicates in unisons and 
octaves to each other, such as the great and small I2ths, flutes and 
I5ths; hence in our organs, not only the touch and tone, but the 
imitative stops, are greatly superior to those of any other organs 1 
have met with." 

(As to these opinions, compare what is said on great organ 
open diapasons above.) 

In the course of the 18th century most of the old echoes were 
altered into swells, and the swell came into almost universal 
use in England. The 'development of the swell is inseparably 
associated with the peculiar quality of English swell reeds. 
These must have originated during the development of the 
swell. We hear of a " good reed voicer " named Hancock, who 
worked with Cranz, changing echoes into swells. However 
it originated, the English reed is beautiful when properly made. 
The original swells were usually short in compass downwards, 
frequently extending only to fiddle g. It is only lately that the 
value of the bass of the swell has been properly appreciated. 
Short-compass swells may be said to have now disappeared. 

The organ in St Stephen's, Coleman Street, was probably nearly 
Avery's ' n ' ts original condition at the date when it was 
old described by Hopkins. It was built by Averyin 1775. 

English At all events the following arrangements might very 
•rgan. we jj jj ave b een the original ones. The pedal clavier 
without pipes is no doubt a subsequent addition, and is omitted. 

Great. 
Open diapason. 



Stopped diapason. 
Principal. 
Twelfth. 
Fifteenth. 

Stopped diapason. 

Principal. 

Flute. 

Open diapason. 
Stopped diapason. 
Principal. 



Great and choir- 
no Gi#. 



-Gi toe' 



Choir. 



Swell. 



Compass. 



Sesquialtera — in ranks. 

Mixture — 11 ranks. 

Trumpet. 

Clarion. 

Cornet to middle c — v ranks. 

Fifteenth. 
Cremona to tenor c. 



Cornet — ill ranks. 

Trumpet. 

Hautboy. 

Swell — fiddle g to e'". 



This gives an excellent idea of the old English organ. There 
are several different accounts of the introduction of pedals 



Pedals In 
England. 



into England. It took place certainly before the end of the 
18th century, but only in a few instances; and for long after 
the usual arrangement was simply to provide a pedal 
clavier, usually from F, or G t to tenor c or d, which took 
down the notes of the great organ. Unison diapason 
pipes (12-ft.) were occasionally used. In one or two cases, 
as in the transition states of the old organ at St George's, Windsor, 
a 24-ft. open diapason was employed as well as the unison 
stop. But a more usual arrangement, of a most objectionable 
character, was to combine the G, — c pedal-board with a single 
octave of so-called pedal-pipes, extending from the 16-ft. to 
the S— ft. C; so that, instead of a uniform progression in ascending 
the scale, there was always a break or repetition in passing C. 

About the middle of the 19th century it began to be generally 
admitted that the German arrangement of the pedal was the 
better, and the practice gradually became general of providing 
a complete pedal-board of 2^ octaves (C— /'), with at least one 
stop of 16-ft. tone throughout, even on the smallest organs 
that pretended to be of any real use. The study of the classical 
works of Bach and Mendelssohn went hand in hand with this 
change; for that study was impossible without the change, 
and yet the desire for the study was one of the principal 
motives for it. In the meantime Bishop, an English builder, 
had invented composition pedals, which so greatly facilitate 
dealing with groups of stops. About the same time (1850) the 
mechanics of the organ were advanced by the general introduction 
of the pneumatic lever into large instruments; the whole 
mechanism of the organ was revolutionized by Willis's improve- 
ments; and the organ-builders of England, having obtained 
from the Continent the fundamental ideas necessary for com- 
pleteness, advanced to a point at which they appear to have 
been decidedly ahead. 

In the early part of the last quarter of the 19th century, 
the future of the English organ appeared to be one of great 
promise. Much confidence was felt in the brilliant 
combinations of Willis's mechanism. The employment Present 
of electricity had reached a certain stage, and the 
necessary fundamental mechanism, under the name of 
the electro-pneumatic lever, was to be obtained in a practical 
form. Several new devices were in the air, by means of which the 
control of the various valves was accomplished by the action 
of wind, traversing channels, with complete abolition of trackers, 
and even of stop slides; and Willis's classical mechanisms, 
including those for acting on stop slides pneumatically without 
direct mechanical connexion between slide and handle, were 
almost universally adopted in large organs. The delicate 
device of pneumatic lever on pneumatic lever, by which alone the 
small electromagnetic impulses available could be made to do 
heavy work, had obtained recognition. If there was an occasional 
failure, it was thought to be no more than might be expected 
with work of a novel and delicate character. And it was con- 
fidently expected that these devices would, in time, with the 
improvements associated with practical use, come to be reliable. 
This expectation has not been realized. The objections to the 
modern pneumatic, and still more to the clectropneumatic 
machinery, are of two kinds — noise and inefficiency. 

Noise in the Key Action. — We take as the standard of comparison 
the old tracker organ, without pneumatics. There was always a 
certain amount of noise. Now, even in the best instruments of 
Willis himself during his lifetime, and still more in the best instru- 
ments of the present day, the noise of the key action is judged to 
be as bad as in the old tracker organ. The pneumatics have to be 
driven by a powerful wind; the consequence is they get home with 
a knock. 

Noise in the Stop Action. — If in a large instrument with pneumatic 
drawstop action one of the compositions which affects several stops 
is put in action, the movement of the stops is followed by a blow 
like a hammer, which is caused by the pneumatics getting home 
under the powerful force employed. This is much worse than any- 
thing there was in the old organ. 

Inefficiency in the Key Action ; Delay and Cyphering. — This chiefly 
shows itself in delay, both at the depressing and at the recovery of 
the key. Some of the causes are the size of the pneumatic bellows, 
which takes time to fill and time to empty ; and, very often, defective 
regulation of the valves. The regulation of the valves is an art 



day 
organs. 



264 



ORGAN 



in itself, and it is often the case that the performance in this respect 
can be greatly improved by going over the regulation. The test is 
the possibility of executing shakes and repetitions. It is quite 
common to find mechanism by the first organ-builders of the day 
on which shakes or repetitions cannot be executed. 

Pneumatic transmission is also specially liable to cause delay. 
In divided organs the swell is usually on the far side from the keys, 
and the pneumatic transmission tubes pass it under the floor. The 
swell touch is then considerably worse than the great. In all cases 
there must be some delay on account of the time the pulse takes to 
traverse the transmission tube with the velocity of sound. And if a 
pneumatic bellows has to be filled at the far end the delay will be 
more. Some of the delay experienced in large buildings may be due 
to the time taken in supplying the energy necessary for setting up 
and maintaining the vibrations of the air in the building. This 
should, however, have been the same with the old tracker action; 
and the opinion of old players is unanimous that they never ex- 
perienced anything of the land. The shake and repetition are the 
only real tests so far as the action is concerned. 

Inefficiency in the key action also takes the form of " cyphering," 
i.e. a note sticks down. With the old tracker organ this could gener- 
ally be cured without much difficulty by working on the action, 
and with the separate pneumatic lever something could be done. 
But the modern types of elaborated action are entirely enclosed in 
wind-chest and sound-board. It was always foreseen that these 
types would be dangerous, unless they could be made quite perfect, 
and they have not been made perfect. When a note sticks, there is no 
way of curing it except to get at the inside of the wind-chest, or to 
remove all the pipes belonging to the note. A case happened 
recently where, during a performance on an organ by a first-rate 
modern builder, two cypherings took place. To cure the first all 
the pipes belonging to the note were removed. In the second the 
last three pages of a Bach fugue were played with a note cyphering 
all the time; and such cases are of frequent occurrence. 

Inefficiency in the Stop Action. — In this case the power provided 
is insufficient to move the stop slide. As there is no direct connexion 
between slide and handle, nothing can be done but to get inside the 
organ and move the slide by hand. A case has recently occurred 
where an organ by a first-rate builder, in constant use, and perfectly 
cared for, got one of the slides stuck while in use. The organ was 
locked, so nothing could be done. The same happened to another 
slide a couple of days later. It is also an everyday experience that 
the pneumatic compositions are insufficient to move the stops; 
sometimes they move the stops about halfway, when a sort of wail 
is heard. 

One practical result is — where an organ is not too large to be dealt 
with by the old mechanical methods, there is much to be said for 
adhering to them. 

It seems worth while to mention two suggestions by which these 
imperfections in large organs might be reduced toa minimum. 

For blowing, motors for stop action, &c, the writer would suggest 
the employment of the Armstrong hydraulic accumulator system, at a 
pressure of say 600 lb on the square inch. The pumping of the system 
would be done by external power (electricity, gas, oil or steam), 
quite away from the building containing the organ. The blowing 
would be done by the hydraulic system at a point near the organ. 
The small hydraulic motors attached to the stop slides, swell, &c, 
might have almost infinite power and be perfectly noiseless. The 
key-work should be pneumatic and should use Willis's floating lever. 
The swell pedal should be hydraulic, with the floating lever, as also 
the action of the back of the seat if employed for opening the swell. 
The effect of the floating lever is that the movement of the work 
corresponds exactly with the movement of the part connected with 
key or pedal. The connexion with the key would have a regulation 
so that the lever would begin to move a little later than the key, 
the regulation being adjusted by trial so as to give shakes and 
repetitions. 

The principle of the floating lever is the same as that of the steam 
steering gear in ships. The control of the power is attached to the 
floating centre. It is always such that the movement of the work 
brings back the floating centre into its standard position, and it acts 
like a fixed centre with added power. 

As to the general arrangement of the instrument, it is desired to 
make two protests. Firstly, the organ chamber is a monstrosity. 
Shutting up the organ in a confined space is simply throwing money 
away. An organ of a quarter the size would do the work better 
if not shut up in an organ chamber. Secondly, it has become 
customary to separate the different parts of an organ, putting the 
pipes of the pedal, great and swell perhaps in different places at a 
distance from one another, and the soft choir organ, which should be 
close to the singers, perhaps, as in one actual case, in a remote 
position where it cannot be heard at all and is useless for accompani- 
ment. The parts of an organ so dispersed will not give a tone which 
blends into a whole. The practice is undesirable. The divided organ 
with pneumatic or electric transmission is to be avoided for all reasons. 

General Remarks on Organ Treatment 
The organ probably presents more difficulties then any other 
instrument in the way of a sound elementary mastery. A 



person of ordinary capacity may work at it for years before 
being able to play passages of moderate difficulty with con- 
fidence and correctness. The special difficulty appears to be 
chiefly mental, and arises from the number of things that have 
to be thought of simultaneously. It does not lie in the execution 
— at least not chiefly; for to play a hymn-tune correctly, the 
bass being taken with the pedals, the tenor with the left hand, 
and the two upper parts with the right, is a matter in which 
there is no execution required; but it is of great difficulty to 
an inexperienced player. Other distributions of parts— such as 
bass with pedals, treble with right hand on a solo stop (e.g. 
clarinet), two inner parts with a soft open diapason, or some- 
thing of the kind — are of much greater difficulty in the first 
instance. Another distribution is bass with pedals, melody with 
reed or solo combination in the tenor with left hand (an octave 
below its true pitch), inner parts with right hand on a soft open 
diapason, or something that balances. This is of far greater 
difficulty, as it requires rearrangement of parts to avoid those 
faults of inversion the avoidance of which is known as double 
counterpoint. All this can be practised with common hymn- 
tunes; but the performer who can do these things with ease 
is in some respects an advanced player. 

There is a natural gift, which may be called the polyphonic 
ear-brain. It is possessed by (roughly) about one in fifty of 
musical students, by students of the organ in much the largest 
proportion, and probably by a much smaller proportion of the 
unsifted population. For the polyphonic ear-brain these diffi- 
culties have no existence, or take little trouble to surmount. It 
consists of the power of hearing the notes of a combination simul- 
taneously, each being heard as an ordinary person hears a single 
note. When a composition is played or sung in parts, each 
part is heard as a separate tune; and the effect is realized in a 
manner quite different from the single melody with accom- 
paniment, which is all that an ordinary person usually hears. 
This is in many but not all cases associated with the rare 
power of remembering permanently the actual pitch of notes 
heard. 

The observations made in the 9th edition of this Encyclopaedia 
on "Balance of tone" do not now call for the stress there laid 
on them, as there is an improvement in this respect. But it is 
still desirable to insist on the importance of balance in the 
performance of organ trios such as the organ sonatas of Bach. 
In these compositions there are generally three notes sounding, 
which may be regarded as belonging to three different voices, 
of nearly equal strength but different mean pitch, and, if possible, 
different quality; of these one is appropriated by each hand 
and one by the pedal. They are written in three lines, and are 
intended to be played on two manuals and the pedal. 

The fugues of Bach are the classical organ music par excellence. 
As to these nothing has come down to us as to the composer's 
intentions, except that he generally played the fugues on the 
full organ with doubles. It does not seem clear that this was 
the case with the preludes; and, any way, the modern organ, 
with its facilities for managing the stops, appears to counten- 
ance a different treatment. The effect of doubles when a subject 
or tune is given out in solo on a manual is very bad. The doubles 
may be drawn with advantage when the parts are moving in 
massive chords. The usual practice is perhaps to employ various 
manual effects of a light character until the pedal enters, and 
then to produce full organ in its various modifications, but 
always to aim at variety of tone. If a prelude begins with heavy 
chords and pedal, then produce full organ at once. If it then 
passes to lighter matter, reduce to some extent. Some begin 
a fugue on the stopped diapason of the great organ, add more 
as the parts enter, and continue working up throughout. But 
perhaps it is the better practice to throw in loud organ during 
the pedal parts, and soften between times. 

One of the greatest requisites in organ-playing is dignity of 
treatment. This is continually competing with clearness. The 
chief mode of keeping the different parts distinct, where that 
is necessary, is by using reeds of a pronounced character. These 
reeds sometimes verge on the comic, and anything more than 



ORGAN 



265 



the most sparing and careful employment of them is undesirable. 1 
Expression is not possible unless the stops are enclosed in a 
swell box — a most desirable arrangement. In all cases hurry 
is to be avoided. A calm steadiness, a minute finish of all the 
phrasing, forms most of the difference between first- and second- 
rate players. 

With reference to the general treatment of modern music we 
quote the preface to Mendelssohn's Organ Sonatas: " In these 
sonatas very much depends on the correct choice of the stops; 
but, since every organ with which I am acquainted requires 
in this respect special treatment, the stops of given names not 
producing the same effect in different instruments, I have only 
indicated certain limits, without specifying the names of the 
stops. By fortissimo I mean the full organ; by pianissimo 
usually one soft 8-foot stop alone; by forte, full organ without 
some of the most powerful stops; by piano, several soft 8-foot 
stops together; and so on. In the pedal I wish everywhere, 
even in pianissimo, S-foot and 16-foot (tone) together, except 
where the contrary is expressly indicated, as in the sixth sonata 
[this refers to a passage where an 8-foot pedal is used without 
16]. It is therefore left to the player to combine the stops suit- 
ably for the different pieces, but particularly to see that, in the 
simultaneous use of two manuals, the one keyboard is distin- 
guished from the other by its quality, without forming a glaring 
contrast." 

Importance is attached to the above directions as to single 
stops. The habit of mixing up two or more stops unnecessarily 
results in the loss of the characteristic qualities of tone which 
reach their highest value in single stops. 

A habit is prevalent of using couplers in excess. One hears 
the swell coupled to the great during an entire service. The 
characteristics of the two manuals, which, separated, lend them- 
selves to such charming contrasts, are lost in the mixture, just 
as the characteristics of single stops are lost when employed 
in groups. It is common to see an English organist keep the 
right foot on the swell pedal and hop about with the left on 
the pedals. This cannot be called pedal-playing. Both feet 
should be used, except where the swell pedal is actually required. 
It is a common babit to hold a note down when it should be 
repeated. It should be struck again when indicated. The 
repetition is a relief to the ear. 

The older organists commonly filled up their chords, striking 
pretty nearly every concordant note within reach. The effect of 
this was in many cases to destroy effects of parts, or effects of re- 
straint leading to contrasts intended by the composer. There 
is a well-known case of a climax about a line before the end of 
Bach's " Passacaglia." Here there is a pause on a chord of four 
notes; one low in the bass (pedal); two forming a major third 
in the middle; and one high in the treble. Some players fill in 
every concordant note within the reach of both hands. Others 
consider the effect of Bach's four notes superior. The writer 
thinks that the average listener prefers the full chord, and the 
polyphonic hearer the thin arrangement of parts. Of course 
the parts are lost if thick chords are used. Restraint in the 
use of the pedal is also sometimes intended to lead up to a con- 
trast which is lost if the pedal is introduced too soon. 

Contrast and variety are essential elements in organ effects. 
A suitable phrase repeated on solo stops of different characters; 
a see-saw in a series of rhythmical chords between two manuals 
of different characters — contrasts generally — are charming when 
suitably employed. Phrasing we cannot describe here. It is 
just as important in the organ as in any solo instrument, or in 
song. 

There has been a tendency to attempt too much in the imita- 
tion of orchestral instruments. While such stops as good flutes 
and good imitations of wind instruments have their value, the 
imitation of stringed instruments and of the orchestra in general 

1 As some difficulty has been felt as to what is here meant, an 
instance is given. The writer has heard a first-rate player emphasize 
the entrance of a chorale in the pedal (Mendelssohn's 3rd sonata in 
A) by coupling the choir clarinet to the pedal. The effect was coarse 
and disagreeable, and would have been ridiculous if it had not been 
so ugly. It was clear, but not dignified. 



is undesirable. The organ's own proper tones are unequalled, 
and it is a pity to make it a mere caricature of the orchestra. 

The writer has had the opportunity of inspecting two of the 
installations known by the name of R. Hope-Jones; both under 
the care of an able enthusiast in the matter, Mr Collinson, of 
Edinburgh. The Hope-Jones system consists of two parts: 
a mechanism, and a system of pipe-work. These must be con- 
sidered separately. The mechanism is entirely electric. One 
example consisted of an application of this mechanism to a fine- 
organ by Willis. The conditions were as favourable as possible, 
with temperature regulation and constant use. Yet even in 
this case the contacts failed occasionally. The difficulty about 
repetition appeared to have been entirely got over, the perform- 
ance being satisfactory when the contact was in good order. 
These contacts appear to be the weak part of the system. All the 
mechanism, couplers and all, is worked by means of these con- 
tacts. With the care which is taken no difficulty is found in 
getting the arrangement to work in the case of the Willis instru- 
ment. The system is very complicated, with double touch 
couplers throughout, by means of which a solo can be effected 
on one manual by varying the pressure. The study of the 
double touch appears very difficult. Stop handles are done away 
with. They are replaced by rockers, the faces of which arc about 
the size of small railway tickets. The appearance is as if the 
surface where the stop handles would be was plastered over with 
these rockers. They turn on a horizontal axis through the middle, 
and a touch of the finger at top or bottom opens or closes the 
stop. The other instrument was Hope-Jones thoughout, pipes 
and mechanism. The curator was the same as in the case of the 
Willis instrument. But, the hall being little used, there was no 
temperature regulation, and very little use. The state of the 
mechanism was inferior, the contacts failing freely. It could not 
be regarded as an admissible mechanism from the writer's point 
of view. As to the pipe-work, the effect was remarkable; but 
it could not be regarded as genuine organ work, as the player 
admitted. Our requirement in the matter of action is a perfectly 
unfailing connexion between key and pipe. And in this respect 
we adhere to a preference for the old tracker action, where 
possible. Anything that leaves a possibility of failure in the 
connexion we regard as inadmissible. 

The writer desires to acknowledge his obligations to Sir Walter 
Parratt for much assistance in the preparation of this article. 

(R. H. M. B.) 

History of the Ancient Organ. 

The earliest authentic records of the organ itself do not extend 
beyond the second century B.C., but the evolution of the instru- 
ment from the Syrinx or Pan-pipe goes back to a remote period. 
The hydraulic and pneumatic organs of the ancients were 
practically the same instrument, differing only in the method 
adopted for the compression of the wind supply; in the former 
this was effected by the weight of water, and in the latter by 
the more primitive expedient of working the bellows by hand or 
foot. What is known, therefore, of the evolution of the organ 
before hydraulic power was applied to it is common to both 
hydraulic and pneumatic organs. The organ of the ancients was 
a simple contrivance, consisting, in order of evolution, of three 
essentia] parts: (1) a sequence of pipes graduated in length 
and made of reed, wood or bronze; (2) a contrivance for com- 
pressing the wind and for supplying it to the pipes in order to 
make them speak, the ends of such pipes as were required to be 
silent being at first stopped by the fingers; and (3) a system for 
enabling the performer to store the wind and to control the 
distribution of the supply separately to the several pipes at will. 
The pipes of the syrinx were the prototypes of ls T o. 1 ; the 
bellows and the bag-pipe — which was but the application of the 
former to the reed — foreshadowed No. 2. The third part of the 
organ was composed of contrivances and common objects used 
by carpenters, such as boxes having sliding lids running in 
grooves, levers, &c. 

It seems probable that the syrinx was recognized by the ancients 
as the basis of the organ. Hero of Alexandria, in his description of 
the hydraulic organ, calls it a syrinx. Philo of Alexandria (c. 
200 B.C.), mentioning the invention of the hydraulis(us) by Ctesibius, 

XX. 9 a 



2 66 



ORGAN 



says, " the kind of syrinx played by hand which we call hydraulis." 
The fact that the syrinx was an assemblage of independent stopped 
pipes, which in their original condition could not be mechanically 
blown, since the movable lip of the player used to direct the air 
stream against the sharp edge of the open end of the pipe was a 
necessity, is no bar to the suggested derivation. Wind projected 
into a pipe can produce no musical sound unless the wind be first 
compressed and the even flow of the stream be interrupted and 
converted into a series of pulses. In order to produce these pulses 
in an organ-pipe, it is necessary to make use of some such contrivance 
as a reed, flute or whistle mouthpiece (q.v.). 

In the earliest organs there is no doubt that the pipes consisted 
of lengths of the large reed known as KaXa^os used for the syrinx, 
but converted into open flue-pipes. Instead of cutting off the reed 
immediately under the knot, as for syrinx pipes, a little extra length 
was left and shaped to a point to form a foot or mouthpiece, which 
was placed over the aperture in the wind-chest, so that it caused the 
stream of air to split in two as it was driven through the hole into the 
pipe by the action of the bellows. A narrow fissure was made through 
the knot near the front of the pipe, and above it a horizontal slic was 
cut in the reed, the two edges being bevelled inwards. When the 
wind was pumped into the chest it found an outlet through one of 
the holes in the lid, and the current, being divided by the foot of the 
pipe, became compressed and was forced through the fissure in the 
knot. It then ascended the pipe in an even stream, as yet silent, 
until thrown into commotion by another obstacle, the upper sharp 
edge or lip of the notch, which produced the regular flutterings or 
pulses requisite for the emission of a note. The very simplicity of 
this process disposes of any difficulty in accepting the syrinx as an 
important factor in the evolution of the organ. The conversion of 
a syrinx pipe is, in fact, a simpler and more natural expedient than 
the more elaborate construction of a wooden flue-pipe. 

In order to convert the syrinx into a mechanically played instru- 
ment, the addition of the actuating principle of the bag-pipe was 
necessary. It is probable that in the earliest attempts the leather 
bag was actually retained and that the supply of wind was still 
furnished by the mouth through an insufflation pipe. Such an 
instrument is described and illustrated by Father Athanasius 
Kireher, 1 but his drawing should be accepted with reserve, as it was 
probably only an effort of the imagination to illustrate the text. 
In the instrument, which he calls the Magraketha or Mashrokitha 
of the Chaldees, the bag is described as being inside the wind-chest, 
the insufflation pipe being carried through a hole in the side of the 
box. _ Little wooden sliders manipulated by the fingers formed a 
primitive means of controlling the escape of the wind through any 
given pipe. 

We have two pottery figures of musicians playing on primitive 
organs in the next stage of development, namely with bellows, 
and a description in the Talmud. The quotation as given by 
Blasius Ugolinus states that the instrument known as the Magrepha 
d'Aruchin 1 " consisted, as theSchilte Haggiborim teaches, of several 
rows of pipes and was blown by bellows. It had, besides, holes and 
small sliders answering to each pipe, which were set in motion by 
thepressure of the organist; the vent-holes being open, a wonderful 
variety of sounds was produced." The spurious letter of St Jerome 
to Dardanus might also be consulted in this connexion. At Tarsus 
in Asia Minor pottery and coins dating from c. 200 B.C. were ex- 
cavated by W. Burckhardt Barker, 3 and amongst them is the frag- 
ment of a figure of a musician playing upon an instrument fastened 
to his breast, and having seven pipes set in a rectangular wind-chest, 
in the centre of which appear to be two bellows of unequal sizes. 
Unfortunately both drawing and description are somewhat vague: 
nevertheless, there is no room for doubt that this was an organ, 
perhaps without sliders or keys, the pipes being stopped at the open 
end, nearest the player's mouth, by the fingers, supposing that there 
was only one bellows. Another piece of pottery from Tarsus, dis- 
covered in 1852, during excavations carried out at Kusick-Kolah by 
M. M. Mazvillier and V. Langlois, 4 and preserved in the Louvre, 
shows the back of an organ having fifteen pipes. Two models of 
organs of more recent date recall the construction of that found by 
Mr Barker. One found in Chinese Turkestan on the site of ancient 
Khotan 6 (fig. 1) represents a musician holding the instrument to 
his breast; both hands seem to be pressing what might he bellows; 
and there are seven pipes below the bellows. The other instrument 
(fig. 2)_ is of Roman origin, and forms part of the decoration on a 
medallion on a yellow pottery vase, which was excavated at Orange 
(Dauphin6, France), and is now preserved in the collection of M. 
Emilien Dumas de Sommieres. The subject represented in the 

1 See Musurgia, bk. ii. ch. iv. § 3, p. 3. 

2 or Eruchin. Treatise XXXI II. of Babyl. Talmud. See Thesaurus 
Anliquilatum Sacrarum (Venice, 1744-1769), xxxii. II and 21. 

3 See Lares and Penates (London, 1853), p. 260, fig. 69. 

4 See W. Froehner, Monuments antiques dtt musee de France 
(Paris, 1873), pi. 32; also Archives des missions scientifiques , iv. 
64-67. 

6 See Ancient Khotan, detailed report of archaeological explorations 
in Chinese Turkestan, carried out by H.M. Indian Government, by 
Marc. Aurel Stein (Oxford, 1907), plate xliii. 




medallion is an amphitheatre, and in the centre a pneumatic organ 
with bellows is plainly visible (fig. 2). 

This brings us to a point in the history of the organ when the 
existence of the hydraulic organ can no longer be ignored. Some 
writers consider that the invention of the hydraulis in the 2nd 
century B.C. by Ctesibius" of Alexandria constitutes the invention 
of the organ.and that the pneumatic organ followed as an improve- 
ment or variety. Such an assertion would seem to be untenable 
in the face of what has been said above. It is most improbable that 
a man busy with the theory and practice of. hydraulics would invent 
a highly complex musical 
instrument in which 
essential parts lying out- 
side his realm, such as 
t he flue-pipes, the 
balanced keyboard, the 
arrangements within the 
wind-chest for the dis- 
tribution of the wind, 
are all in a highly de- 
veloped state ; it would 
be a case for which no 
parallel exists in the 
history of musical instru- 
ments, all of which have 
evolved slowly and surely 
through the ages. On 
the other hand, given a 
pneumatic organ in 
which the primitive un- 
weighted bellows worked 
unsatisfactorily, an 
engineer would be prompt to see an opportunity for the advan- 
tageous application of his art. 

There are two detailed and duly accredited descriptions of the 
hydraulis extant, both of which presuppose the existence of a pneu- 
matic organ. One is in Greek by Hero of Alexandria, 7 said to be a 
pupil of Ctesibius, 8 and the other in Latin by Vitruvius (De Arch. 
lib. x. cap. ii.). In both accounts reference is made to drawings 
now lost. Mr Woodcroft states that in each MS. the diagrams are 
said to have been copied faithfully, and that on consulting four MSS. 
and three early printed editions ' he found that the mechanical 
parts in all agree essentially, and that it is only the case of the 
organ and the arrangement of the pipes which vary according to the 
fancy of the artist. 

The principle of the hydraulis, which remained a complete mystery 
until recently, is now well understood. Representations of Roman 
hydraulic organs abound, but they were not always identified as 
such. 10 As the front of the organ (the performer sat or stood at the 
back) was invariably represented, there had been no indication of 
the manner in which the pipes were made to sound. A clue was 
furnished by a little baked clay model of an hydraulus, and parts of 
the performer, excavated in 1885 on the ruins of Carthage and now 
preserved in the Muste Lavigerie, attached to the cathedral of S. 
Louis of Carthage. This little clay model, measuring 7^ in. by 
2f in. (figs. 3 and 4), modelled by Possessoris, a potter working at 
the beginning of the 2nd century A.D., whose name appears on the 
front, below the ends of the sliders, is so accurately designed that 
it tallies in every point with the description of the instrument by 
Hero and Vitruvius. The number and relative sizes of the three 



From Marc Aurel Stein. 
Ancient Khotan, by permis- 
sion of the Clarendon Press. 

Fig. 1. 



From Orange. 

Fig. 2. — Roman 
Pneumatic Organ. 



6 Tertullian (De anima, 14) names Archimedes, which is probably 
an error. See in this connexion Hermann Degering, who devotes 
considerable space to the question, Die Orgel, ihre Erfindung und ihre 
Geschichte (Muenster, 1905). 

7 See The Pneumatics of Hero of Alexandria, translated from the 
original Greek by Bennett Woodcroft (London, 1 851), with diagrams. 

8 Edward Buhle in Die musikalischen Inslrumente in den Minia- 
turen des fruhen Mittelalters, pt. i. (Leipzig, 1903), p. 55. Note 1 
corrects this as an error, assigning Hero's activity to the beginning 
of our era, in which ease the description by Vitruvius would be the 
earlier in spite of the fact that the hydraulus, as he describes it, 
contains an improvement on that of Hero, i.e. registers, and two 
pumps instead of one, and that he omits to explain the purpose for 
which water is used. Buhle gives as his authority Diels, " Das 
phys. System des Strabon," p. 291, in Berliner Monatsberichte (Feb. 
1893)- 

9 For an exhaustive and careful compilation of these editions, 
and of the literature of the hydraulus generally, see Dr Charles 
Maclean's article, " The Principle of the Hydraulic Organ," Intern. 
Mus. Ges. Sbd. vi. 2, pp. 183-237; also John W. Warman, Biblio- 
graphy of the Organ, who, however, takes the erroneous view that the 
medieval editions of Vitruvius and Hero may be taken as evidence 
that the instrument itself was in use until about the middle or end 
of the 17th century. See Proc. Mus. Assoc. (1903-1904), p. 40. 

10 The present writer was apparently the first in England to draw 
attention to this identity by introducing the drawing from the 
Utrecht Psalter and the model of the Carthage Organ, &c. See 
Music (London, Sept. 1898), p. 438. 



ORGAN 



267 




Fig. 3. — Pottery Model 
of the Hydraulus — Car- 
thage, c. a.d. 150. 



Fig. 4. 
Carthage, c. a.d. 150. 



rows of pipes, gauged by the remains of the organist, give the 
requisite compass for the production of the six Greek scales in use 
at that date. 1 A working reproduction based on the proportions 
of the remains of the organist, but at half scale for the sake of 
portability (the real organ must have measured 10 ft. in height by 

4! ft. in width), 
was successfully 
carried out by the 
Rev. F. VV. Galpin 
in 1900-1901 by 
the help of photo- 
graphs 2 and of the 
text of Vitruvius. 
The principle of 
the hydraulus is 
simple. An in- 
verted funnel, or 
bell of metal, 
standing on short 
feet and immersed 
in water within 
the altar-like re- 
ceptacle forming 
the base or pede- 
stal, communi- 
cates by means of 
a pipe, with the 
wind-chest, placed 
above it. When 
the air is pumped 
into the funnel by 
the alternate action of two pumps, one on each side of the organ, 
constructed bucket within bucket and fitted with valves, the water 
retreating before the compressed air, rises in the receptacle and 
by its weight holds the air in a state of compression in the 
funnel, whence it travels through the pipe into the wind-chest. 
The rest of the process is common also to the pneumatic organ. 
As there are two pumps worked alternately, these conditions 
remain unchanged, until by pressure on a key working a 
slider under the apertures leading to the pipes, the compressed air 
is afforded an exit through the latter, thus producing the desired 
note. 3 It will be seen, therefore, that water 
acts on the air as a compressor exactly in the 
same manner as lead weights are used on the 
wind reservoir of modern pneumatic organs. 
The discovery of the Carthage model was of 
the greatest importance to the history of the 
keyboard (q.v.), for it proved beyond a doubt 
the use at the beginning of our era of balanced 
keys (seen in front of the organist) on the 
principle described by Vitruvius. What 
appears to be a second keyboard with smaller 
keys on the side of the hydraulus labelled 
Possessoris (fig. 4) is simply the ends of the 
sliders, which are pushed out or drawn in by 
the action of the keys. 

The principle of the hydraulus made it 
possible to construct large organs of powerful 
tone more suitable for use in the arena than 
the small pneumatic instruments, but the 
hydraulic organ never entirely supplanted the 
pneumatic, which was probably not so im- 
perfect at the beginning of our era as has been 
thought, since it outlived the former and seems 
to have differed from it only in the matter of 
pressure. The hydraulus, on the other hand, 
must have had many drawbacks, that of causing 
damp in the instrument being of a serious 
nature; it was also unwieldy and difficult to 
carry about. 

Of the pneumatic organ in portable and portative form, 
traces have been found during the palmy days of the Roman 
empire, and the art of organ-building, of which the organ in fig. 5 
is an example, never seems to have quite died out during the 
decline of classic Rome and the dawn of Western civilization. 
This illustration is derived from a 4th- or 5th-century slab in the 
church of St Paul extra muros at Rome. It is evident that the 
hydraulic organ was widely known and used in the East during 
the early centuries of our era, but it never won a footing in the 

1 See Anonymi scriptio de musica, ed. Bellermann, p. 35. 

2 See "Notes on a Roman Hydraulus," Reliquary (1904); also 
the writer's " Researches into the Origin of the Organs of the 
Ancients " in Intern. Mus. Ges., Sbd. ii. 2, pp. 167-202 (Leipzig, 
1901), and Proc. Mus. Assoc. (1903-1904), pp. 54-55. 

3 For a more complete explanation of the action of the hydraulus, 
with diagrams, see Victor Loret, Revue archeol. (Paris, 1890); 
W. Chappell, History of Music (London, 1874), pp. 325-361. 




From the Church of 
St Paul extra muros, 
Rome. 4th or 5th cent. 

A.D. 



Fig. 5. 



West, although a few solitary specimens found their way into the 
palaces of kings and princes. On account of its association with 
the theatre, gladiatorial combats and pagan amusements of 
corrupt Rome, it was placed under a ban by the Church. The 
ignorance and misinformation displayed on the subject by writers 
and miniaturists of the early and late middle ages leave no room 
for doubt that the instrument itself was unknown to them except 
from hearsay. 

Venice seems to have been famed for its organ-builders during 
the oth century, for Louis le Debonnaire (778-840) sent there, 
it is recorded, for a certain monk, Gcorgius Bcnevento, 4 to con- 
struct an hydraulic organ for his palace at Aix-la-Chapclle. 

No progress in the art of organ-building is recorded until the 
use of organs in the churches had long been established. The 
recognition of the value of the organ in Christian worship proved an 
incentive which led to the rapid development of the instrument. 

In France and Germany the Romans must have used organs 
and have introduced them to the conquered tribes as they did 
in Spain, but the art of making them was soon lost after Roman 
influence and civilization were withdrawn. Pippin, when he 
wished to introduce the Roman ritual into the churches of 
France, felt the need of an organ and applied to the Byzantine 
emperor, Constantine Copronymus, to send him one, which 
arrived by special embassy in 757 and was placed in the church 
of St Corncillc at Compicgnc; the arrival of this organ was 
obviously considered a great event; it is mentioned by all the 
chroniclers of his reign. Charlemagne received a similar present 
from the emperor of the East in 812, of which a description has 
been preserved. 6 The bellows were of hide, the pipes of bronze; 
its tone was as loud as thunder and as sweet as that of lyre and 
psaltery. This organ must have had registers like those of the 
hydraulus of Vitruvius and the portative from Pompeii. In 826 
we hear that his son Louis le Debonnaire obtained a pneumatic 
organ for the church at Aix-la-Chapelle, not to be confounded with 
the hydraulus installed in his palace. 

The statement that the organ was introduced into the Roman 
Church by Pope Vitalian at the end of the 7th century, which 
has been generally accepted, is rejected by Buhle 6 on the ground 
of insufficient proof. There is abundant evidence to show that 
the organ had taken its place in the churches in the 10th century, 
not only in England but in Germany, where the construction by 
monks had become so general that we find no fewer than three 
treatises on organ-building 7 written by monks, followed by three 
more in the nth century. 8 I 

Considerable activity was displayed in England in the 10th 
century in organ-building on a large scale for churches and 
monasteries, such as the monster organ for Bishop Alphege at 
Winchester, which had 400 bronze pipes, 26 bellows and 2 
manuals of 20 keys, each governing 10 pipes. 9 There is also the 
elaborate organ presented by St Dunstan to his monastery at 
Malmesbury. 10 

* " Vita Hludovici Imperatoris," Mon. Germ. ii. pp. 629-630; 
see also Buhle, op. cit. p. 58, note 4, where fuller references are 
given. 

6 Gesta Karoli Monachi Sangallensis, lib. ii. cap. x. p. 751. 

6 Op. cit. p. 61, note 2, where the evidence is carelully sifted. 

7 (1) by Notker of St Gallen (see Hattemer, Denkmaler, Bd. iii. 
pp. 568 seq.; Hugo Riemann, Studien Z. Gesch. der Notenschrift, 
pp. 297 seq.;_ Martin Gerbert, i. pp. 100 seq. (2) By Bernelinius 
(see Gerbert, i. pp. 318 and 325). The third is an anonymous 9th- 
century tract, the earliest of all, De mensura fistularum, giving only 
the proportions of organ pipes. MS. Lat. 12949 fol. 43 . Paris Bibl. 
Nat. reproduced by Buhle, op. cit. p. 104 (Latin only). 

8 (1) De fistulis organicis, introduced in a MS. copy of Mart. Cap. 
by a Bernese monk; see A. Schubiger, Musikal. Spicilegien, pp. 82 
seq. Reproduced also by Buhle, op. cit. Beilage iv. pp. 114-116, 
collated with a German translation. (2) Theophilus, De divers, 
artibus, edited and translated into English by Robert Hendrie 
(London, 1847); reproduced by Buhle, op. cit. Beilage iii. pp. 105 
seq., Latin and German collated, who gives the title as Schedula 
artium. (3) Tractatus de mensura fistularum, by Bishop Eberhard 
of Freising. Martin Gerbert, op. cit. ii. pp. 279-281. 

9 See Wolstani, monachi Ventani, De Vita S. Swithuni; Cousse- 
maker, " Essai sur les instruments de musique du moyen-age," in 
Ann. Archeol., iii. pp. 281-282. 

10 William of Malmesbury, Gest. Pontif., lib. v. 



268 



ORGANISTRUM 



Earl Elwin gave money " Iriginta libras " to the monastery at 
Ramsay for copper pipes for a great pneumatic organ to be played 
on high days and holidays. 1 

The great activity recorded in the 12th and 13th centuries in 
Germany is probably due to the influence and teaching of 

Byzantine masters 
during the 9th cen- 
tury. Pope John 
VIII. (872-8S0) ap- 
plied to Bishop Anno 
of Freising to send 
him an organ and an 
organist. 2 Organs 
were installed in 
Cologne (10th cen- 
tury) , in Halberstadt , 
in Erfurt, in Augs- 
burg, Weltenburg 
(nth century); in 
Utrecht, Constance, 
Petershausen (12th 
century) ; Peters- 




From the Bible of St Etienne Harding at Dijon. 1 2th cent. 

Fig. 6. 



berg, Cologne Cathedral, 13th century. 3 The rest of the 
literary and archaeological material — treatises, monuments, 
miniatures — available during the later middle ages yields 
very scant authenticated information as to the progressive 

steps which lie between the 12th- 
century organ as described by 
Theophilus and the large church 
organs of the days of Praetorius 4 
(161S). 

The keyboard is the principal feature 
concerning which miniatures offer any 
evidence. Here and there a 13th- 
century miniature gives a hint of 
balanced keys on small portative 
organs which already abound during 
that and the next century. The 
Bernese monk in his treatise on the 

ic r „ iriv'^'-Z- organ, to which reference was made 

Bnt. Hits. Cotton MSS. Tiberius • & ., , , . . ., 

A vii. foL 104b. i 4 tb century. ln the note above, clearly describes 

p IG - balanced keys, depressa lamina, 

pressed down, not pulled out, as were 

those mentioned by Theophilus; his description conforms strictly 

with that of Hero, which suggests that he was borrowing from 

classical authorities rather than describing an actual instrument 

with which he was well acquainted, an expedient to which 





Brit. Mus. Add. MS. 27605. 14th century. 

Fig. 8. 

many medieval writers had recourse. In the 14th-century minia- 
tures, balanced keys are general for the larger portable organs. 
The adoption of narrower keys in the larger organs may no 
doubt be traced to the influence of the portatives, in which they in 

1 Vita S. Oswaldi: see Mabillon Acta S. scl. v. p. 756. 

2 See Baluze, Miscell. v. p. 490. 

3 Buhle {op. cit.) gives a list with quotations from authorities; 
see pp. 66 and 67. 

* See Michael Praetorius Syntagma Musicum (Wolfenbiittel, 1618). 




Brit. Mus. Add. MS. 20QO2. 
fol. 6. 14th century. 



most cases resemble the white keys of the modern pianoforte. There 
is no miniature on record in which the fist action on the keys is 
indicated, the performer during the 10th, nth and 12th centuries 
being depicted in the act of drawing out the stop-like sliders — as for 
instance, in the 12th-century manuscript Bible of St Etienne Harding 
at Dijon 6 (fig. 6) , where the organist is playing the notes D and F, the 
sliders being lettered from C to C. From the 13th century the keys 
are shown pressed down by means of one finger or of finger and 
thumb (fig. 7). In the beautiful Spanish MS. said to have been 
compiled for Alphonso XII. (c. 1237), 
known as the Cantigas de Santa Mario, 
a portative is shown having balanced 
keys, one of which is being lightly pressed 
by the thumb, the instrument resting on 
the palm — while the left hand manipu- 
lates the bellows. 

The keys themselves varied in shape, 
being either likea T; a wide rectangle, 
with or without the corners rounded off, 
or a narrow rectangle. The earliest in- 
stance of chromatic keyboard is that of 
the organ at Halberstadt 6 built in 1 361 
and restored in 1495. An inscription on 
the keyboard states that it formed part 
of the original organ, which had the 
semitonal arrangement of keys. 7 

It must not, however, be inferred from 
these isolated cases that balanced keys 
were general from the 13th century, nor 
that the chromatic keys were common in 
the 14th. The St Cecilia in the altar- 
piece in Ghent by the brothers Hubert 
and Jan van Eyck (15th cent.) is repre- ^ IG - 9- 

sented as playing upon an organ with a modern-looking keyboard. 

A picture by Fra Angelico (15th cent.) in the National Gallery 
shows a portative with accidentals. It will probably be found 
that the earliest development of the organ took place in Germany 
and in the Netherlands. (K. S.). 

ORGANISTRUM, the medieval Latin name for the earliest 
known form of the hurdy-gurdy (q.v.). The organistrum was 
large enough to rest on the knees of two performers sitting side 
by side, one of whom turned the crank setting the wheel in 
motion, while the other, the artist, manipulated the keys. The 
word organistrum is derived from organum and instrumenlum; 
the former term was applied to the primitive harmonies, con- 
sisting of octaves accompanied by fourths or fifths, first practised 
by Hucbald in the 10th century. This explanation enables 
us to fix with tolerable certainty the date of the invention of 
the organistrum, at the end of the 10th or beginning of the nth 
century, and also to understand the construction of the instru- 
ment. A stringed instrument of the period — such as a guitar- 
fiddle, a rotta or oval vielle — being used as model, the proportions 
were increased for the convenience of holding the instrument and 
of dividing' the performance between two persons. Inside the 
body was the wheel, having a tire of leather well rosined, and 
working easily through an aperture in the sound-board. The 
three strings resting on the wheel and supported besides on a 
bridge of the same height all sounded at once as the wheel 
revolved, and in the earliest examples the wooden tangents 
taking the place of fingers on the frets of the neck acted upon 
all three strings at once, thus producing the harmony known 
as organum. 

The organistrum appears on a bas-relief from the abbey of St 
Georges de Boschcrville (nth cent.), now preserved in the museum 
of Rouen, where it is played by a royal lady, her maid turning the 
crank. It has the place of honour in the centre of the band of 
musicians representing the twenty-four elders of the Apocalypse 
in the tympanum of the Gate of Glory of the cathedral of Santiago 
da Compostella (12th cent.). There is also a fine example in a 
miniature of a psalter of English workmanship (12th cent.), forming 
part of the Hunterian collection in Glasgow University; this was 
shown at the Exhibition of Illuminated MSS. at the Burlington 
Fine Arts Club in 1908. (K. S.) 

6 See also for other organs with sliders being drawn out, A. Haseloff , 
Eine Sachsischihiiringische Malerschule um die Wende des XIII. 
Jahrh., pi. xxvi. No. 57, part of Studien zu der KunslgcschichU; 
the same is reproduced in Gori's Thesaurus diptychorum, Bd. iii. 
Tab. 16, where it is falsely ascribed to the 9th century. 

6 Praetorius mentions the Halberstadt and Erfurt organs as having 
been built 600 years before his time (1618), and still bearing on them 
the date inscribed. See op. cit. p. 93. 

7 See A. J. Hipkins, History of the Pianoforte (London, 1896). 



OF <GANON— ORIENTATION 



269 



ORGANON (Gr. opyavov struma frQm » work)> 

the name given to Anstot e s logical treatises . They arc so 
called because logic is itself neither a lative sciencc nor a 

practical art in the ordinary sense, ^ ut an aid or instrument 
to aU scientific thought. Francs * B regarding the Aris- 

totelian logic as he understood it a ?j q£ nQ avai] t0 his own 

treatise the name Novum Or gam . q the bdief that hc had 
discovered a new inductive logic' wh;ch ^^ kad necessarily 
to the acquisition of new scient ; . fic knowkd Compare also 

Whewells Novum Orgamun R hm and Lambert's Ncucs 

Organon. In medieval music » term wag i;cd in a similar 
sense to early attempts at im ' ^ tA counterpoint i.e. a part 
sung as an accompaniment ab ■ Qr bdow tfae mclody or plain . 
song; it consisted of Sths :' hg , hs) added t0 the 

plainsong. ~. 

ORGY (through French ft£ Lat _ . Gr & b dcriva . 

tion connected probably wr* ., ^ cf Lat cpcrarc< t0 

sacrifice), a term origmall- ^^ the secret ri tes or cere- 
monies connected with th£* Qf ccrta!n deitieS; cspecial i y 
those of Dionysus-Baccht" The > Di iac org ; eSj which wcre 
restricted to women, wer* ce]cbrated ; n thc winter among the 
Thracan hills or in spot* remote frQm d ^ Thc womcn 
met, clad in fawn-skins J" ^ ^ dishcvelled swinging the 
thyrsus and beating tM faal th danced and worked 
themselves up to a stat£ ^ e ; dtement . The holicst rites 
took place at night by t l; fat of torcheS- A bull> thc repre . 
sentative of the god, , ^ - n ces fa them as Dionysus . 
Zagreus had been tor* ^ bellowi rcproduced the cries of 
the suffering g" ■ ^ '^^ ^ th<j bull with thdr tcctn> 
and the eating of the £ flegh wag & necc t o{ the rit ual. 
Some further rites wb-e ^ ^^ ^ represented 
the resurrection of th* tfae Qn Mount Parnassus 

the women earned J°- * Dionysus . L icnitcs, the child cradled 
in the winnowing f^ The ^ £amQUS festiya] of the kind 
was the Tpienjpu cd eye seCQnd ^^ on Parnassus 

by the women of At J and phods The cdebrants were caUed 
Maenads or Bacchate The ^^ enthusiasm of the Thracian 
women KXcocW ^r ^ ^ s especially distinguished. 

Thewild dances,^ ^ and Qther « iastic » cere . 

monies which were* jf ^^j* of these rites have given rise 
to the use of the • ¥ drunken wUd reyd or 

festivity (see Dior f" °* ^ 

nniA * tn ™ „~»ysus and Mystery). 
ukia, a town ov-i in the ovince of Lecce 2S m . 

°, r a pon r iS .Jm. S.W. of Brindisi by rail, 540 ft. above 
Uda Ihe chief to ir^90i), 8838. It occupies the site of the ancient 
una, ine cniei 10 q£ ^ Sallentinij wh ; ch stood In a command- 

ing position in tPg ^^ of tfae peninsula of the anc i en t Calabria 
ihV'T- Hdway between Brundusium and Tarentum on 
Ift^Mp^Vle Strabo mentions that he saw there the old palace 

small Museum in kin S s ( vL 3- 6 > P- 2g2 )- The town ?? tainS a 
nSland a fine castle of Frederick II., erected in 1227. 
frnmVcerS'ily of Genoa and Rome is said to derive its name 
FV^mVk?S' Tommaso d'Oria, who led the rebellion against 
• oa n Manfred. Much damage was done by a cyclone 

in 1070. 

*n?pw!hr£,7.r Ourebi, the local name of a small South African 
™H Sp V<* scoparia), standing about 24 in. at the shoulder, 
hplr>™ ihl P , P nzed by the presence of a bare glandular spot 
fnr » .»,«rtTv, the upright horns of the bucks, which are ringed 
I- h th \ h istance above the face, and the tufted bushy tail, of 
to incluH- tHt rminal two-thirds are black. The name is extended 
. h ■•;„ th je other members of the same genus, such as the 
wKyO. monlana; the Gambian, O. nigricandala; the 
tdenL S African ' °- hQ M ardi ' and the Mozambique, 0. 

° R t i5 L ln 1°k|»HN FOSTER, Baron (1740-1828), Irish politician, 
was returned of Anthony Foster of Louth, an Irish judge. He 

mark in finmsP t0 the Irish P arliament in ^ bl > and mad ? his 
rhx-nrMriT ^*r, ln cial and commercial questions, being appointed 
bounties on ^ £ the Irish exch equer in 1784. His law giving 
on its imnored the ex P ortation of corn and im P osin S heavy taxes 
-tation is noted by Lecky as responsible for making 



Ireland an arable instead of a pasture country. In 1 785 he became 
Speaker. He opposed the Union, and ultimately refused to 
surrender the Speaker's mace, which was kept by his family. 
He was returned to the united parliament, and in 1804 became 
chancellor of the Irish exchequer under Pitt. In 1821 he was 
created a peer of the United Kingdom as Baron Oriel of Ferrard 
in the county of Louth, and died on the 23rd of August 1828. 
His wife (d. 1824) had in 1790 been created an Irish peeress, 
as Baroness Oriel, and in 1797 Viscountess Ferrard; and their 
son, Thomas Henry (d. 1843) , who married Viscountess Massereene 
(in her own right) and took the name of ShefTington, inherited 
all these titles; the later Viscounts Massereene being their 
descendants. 

ORIEL, in architecture, a projecting bay window on an upper 
storey, which is carried by corbels or mouldings. It is usually 
polygonal or semicircular in plan, but at Oxford in some of the 
colleges there are examples which are rectangular and rise 
through two or three storeys. In Germany it forms a favourite 
feature, and is sometimes placed at the angle of a building, 
carried up through two or three floors and covered with a lofty 
roof. The oriel is also said to have been provided as a recess 
for an altar in an oratory or small chapel. In the 1 5th century 
oriels came into general use, and are frequently found over 
entrance gateways. 

The origin of the word is unknown. The suggested derivation 
from Lat. aureolum, with the supposed meaning of a gilded 
chamber or room, is not, according to the New English Dictionary, 
borne out by any historical evidence, and early French forms 
— such as eurieul— do not point to an origin in a word beginning 
with an. Du Cange (Glossarium, s.v. Oriolum) quotes Matthew 
of Paris (1251, Vitac Abbatum S. Albani): adjacct atrium nobilis- 
simam in introitu, quod porticus vel Oriolum appcllatur; and also 
a French use of 1338, where a licence to build an oriol is granted 
to one Jehan Bourgos. The earliest meaning seems to be a 
gallery, portico or corridor, and the application of the term to 
a particular form of window apparently arose from such a window 
being in an ".oriel." In Cornwall " orrel " is still used of a 
balcony or porch at the head of an outside staircase leading to 
an upper story in a fisherman's cottage. The name of Oriel 
College, at Oxford, comes from a tenement known as Seneschal 
Hall or La Oriole, and granted to the college in 1327. There 
is no trace of the reason why the tenement was so called,_ but it 
would seem that it referred to one of the earlier applications of 
the word, to a gallery or porch, rather than to a window. 

ORIENTATION, the term in architecture given to the position 
of a building generally with reference to the points of the com- 
pass, and more especially (as the word implies) to that of the 
East. It would seem that some of the Egyptian temples were 
orientated in the direction of the sun or of some selected star, the 
exact position of which on some particular day would be an 
indication to the priest of the exact time of the year— a matter 
of great importance in an agricultural country, when the calendar 
was not known. The orientation of Greek temples has enahled 
astronomers to calculate the dates of the foundation of early 
temples, allowance being made for the gradual changes which in 
the course of centuries had taken place in the precession of the 
equinox. The principal front of the Greek temple always faced 
east; and the rays of the rising sun, passing through the great 
doorway of the naos, lighted up the statue at the further end, this 
being the only occasion on which the people who came to witness 
the event were able to gaze on the sculptured figure of the deity. 
In early Christian architecture, in the five first basilicas built by 
Constantine, the apse of the church was at the west end, and the 
priest, standing behind the altar, faced the east; this orientation 
being probably derived from that of the church of the Holy 
Sepulchre at Jerusalem and the church at Bethlehem. Three- 
fourths of the early churches in Rome followed this orientation, 
but in many it was reversed at a later date. In Sta. Sophia. 
Constantinople, and all the Byzantine churches, the apse was 
always at the east end, and the same custom obtains in the early- 
churches in Syria and the Coptic churches in Egypt. 

In Spain, Germany and England generally the eastern 



270 



ORIENTE— ORIGEN 



orientation is generally observed, but in France and Italy 
there are many variations. In Scotland it was the custom to 
fix a pole in the ground over night, and in the morning 
at sunrise to note the direction taken by the shadow of 
the pole, which was followed when setting out the axis of the 
choir; if such a custom had been followed in an early church, 
when setting out another of later date there should be some 
difference in the orientation of the two, on account of the varia- 
tion of the obliquity of the ecliptic in the interval, and this in 
some cases accounts for the change of the axial line which is 
found in some churches, cither when the east end has been 
rebuilt, as was constantly the case throughout Europe, or when 
a nave has been added to an earlier structure. In describing 
churches it is usual to use the terms east, west, north and south, 
on the assumption that the altar is at the east end, although this 
may not be the real bearing of the edifice. 

Indirectly also the term is sometimes used in the planning of 
houses and the relation of the windows of the various rooms to 
the sunshine and the weather — in other words, to the points of 
the compass; thus an eastward aspect should be provided for 
the morning- and dining-rooms, a south-western aspect for the 
drawing-room, a westward for the library, and north by west for 
the kitchen, larder, &c. (R. P. S.) 

ORIENTE, or La Region Orientale, a large undefined 
territory of Ecuador, comprising all that part of tbe republic 
lying east of the Andes. Pop. (1887 estimate), 80,000. The 
territory was formed in 1884 from the older territories of Napo, 
Canelos and Zamora, but its boundaries with the neighbouring 
republics of Colombia and Peru are disputed. The territory is 
covered with great forests, inhabited by wild Indians, and its 
climate is hot and exceptionally humid. There are some mission 
settlements and trading stations in the Andean foothills and on 
some of the river courses, one of which is Archidona, on a small 
tributary of the Napo, which is the nominal capital. 

ORIGEN (c. 185-c. 254), tbe most distinguished and most 
influential of all the theologians of the ancient church, with the 
possible exception of Augustine. He is the father of the church's 
science; he is the founder of a theology which was brought to 
perfection in the 4th and 5th centuries, and which still retained 
the stamp of his genius when in tbe 6th century it disowned its 
author. It was Origcn who created the dogmatic of the church 
and laid the foundations of the scientific criticism of the Old and 
New Testaments. He could not have been what he was unless 
two generations before him had laboured at the problem of 
finding an intellectual expression and a philosophic basis for 
Christianity (Justin, Tatian, Athenagoras, Pantaenus, Clement). 
But their attempts, in comparison with his, are like a schoolboy's 
essays beside the finished work of a master. Like all great 
epoch-making personalities, he was favoured by the circum- 
stances of his life, notwithstanding the relentless persecution 
to which he was exposed. He lived in a time when tbe Christian 
communities enjoyed almost uninterrupted peace and held an 
acknowledged position in the world. By proclaiming the 
reconciliation of science with the Christian faith, of the highest 
culture with the Gospel, Origen did more than any other man to 
win the Old World to the Christian religion. But he entered into 
no diplomatic compromises; it was his deepest and most 
solemn conviction thatthe sacredoracles of Christendom embraced 
all the ideals of antiquity. His character was as transparent as 
his life was blameless; there are few church fathers whose 
biography leaves so pure an impression on the reader. The 
atmosphere around him was a dangerous one for a philosopher 
and theologian to breathe, but he kept his spiritual health un- 
impaired, and even his sense of truth suffered less injury than 
was the case with most of his contemporaries. To us, indeed, 
his conception of the universe, like that of Philo, seems a strange 
medley, and one may be at a loss to conceive how he could bring 
together such heterogeneous elements; but there is no reason to 
doubt that the harmony of all the essential parts of his system 
was obvious enough to himself. It is true that in addressing the 
Christian people he used different language from that which he 
employed to the cultured; but there was no dissimulation in 



that— on the contrary>e v't was a requirement of his system. 
Orthodox theology has rfc oiever > >n any of the confessions, ventured 
beyond the circle which If * ne mind of Origen first measured out. 
It has suspected and amL^^d its author, it has expunged his 
heresies; but whether it has° bP ut anything better or more tenable 
in their place may be gravel^ V questioned. 

Origen was born, perhaps aV t Alexandria, of Christian parents 
in the year 185 or 1S6. As a br °y he showed evidence of remark- 
able talents, and his father Weonidas gave him an excellent 
education. At a very early age, \ frbout the year 200, he listened to 
the lectures of Pantaenus and ClV - m ent in the catechetical school. 
This school, of which the origin (t&ough assigned to Athenagoras) 
is unknown, was the first and for i '• Jong time the only institution 
where Christians were instructed simultaneously in the Greek 
sciences and the doctrines of the ta holy Scriptures. Alexandria 
had been, since the days of the Ptof^mies, a centre for the inter- 
change of ideas between East and \\ a t est — between Egypt, Syria, 
Greece and Italy; and, as it had fijurnished Judaism with an 
Hellenic philosophy, so it also brou 1 'ght about the alliance of 
Christianity with Greek philosophy. ^Asia Minor and the West 
developed the strict ecclesiastical forn is by means of which the 
church closed her fines against heam-thenism, and especially 
against heresy; in Alexandria Christian ideas were handled in 
a free and speculative fashion and worked out with the help of 
Greek philosophy. Till near the end of-.' the 2nd century the line 
between heresy and orthodoxy was less it "igidly drawn there than . 
at Ephesus, Lyons, Rome or Carthagf £• In the year 202 a 
persecution arose, in which the fatheT 1 ^ of Origen became a 
martyr, and the family lost their livelihd , od. Origen, who had 
distinguished himself by his intrepid zeairl> was supported for a 
time by a lady of rank, but began a xbout the same time 
to earn his bread by teaching; and in'\ 203 he was placed, 
with the sanction of the bishop Demetriu', s, at the head of the 
catechetical school. Even then his attainments > n tne whole 
circle of the sciences were extraordinary, t But the spirit of 
investigation impelled him to devote hirm'self to the highest 
studies, philosophy and the exegesis of thfj^ sacred Scriptures. 
With indomitable perseverance he applied^ himself to these 
subjects; although himself a teacher, he regr'Jlarly attended the 
lectures of Ammonius Saccas, and made a the 'rough study of the 
books of Plato and Numenius, of the Stoics and the Pythagoreans. 
At the same time he endeavoured to acquiix'e a knowledge of 
Hebrew, in order to be able to read the Old ^Testament in the 
original. His manner of life was ascetic; tiffie sayings of the 
Sermon on the Mount and the practical maxims of tbe Stoics 
were his guiding stars. Four oboli a day, eai ( fned by copying 
manuscripts, sufficed for his bodily sustenances A rash resolve 
led him to mutilate himself that he might escap e from the lusts 
of the flesh, and work unhindered in the instruction of the 
female sex. This step he afterwards regretted. -> As the attend- 
ance at his classes continually increased — papjans thronging 
to him as well as Christians — he handed over tfoje beginners to 
his friend Heracles, and took charge of the more advanced pupils 
himself. Meanwhile the literary activity of Origen bwas increasing 
year by year. He commenced his great work On the textual 
criticism of the Scriptures; and at the instigatioif of his friend 
Ambrosius, who provided him with the necessary' amanuenses, 
he published his commentaries on the Old Testament and 
his dogmatic investigations. In this manner he^ laboured at 
Alexandria for twenty-eight years (till 231-232). f This period, 
however, was broken by many journeys, undertaken partly for 
scientific and partly for ecclesiastical objects. W.e know that 
he was in Rome in the time of Zephyrinus, agairi in Arabia, 
where -a Roman official wanted to hear his lectures, and in 
Antioch, in response to a most flattering invitation from Julia 
Mammaea (mother of Alexander Severus, afterwards emperor), 
who wished to become acquainted with his philosophy. In the 
year 216 — the time when the imperial executioners w'ere ravaging 
Alexandria — we find Origen in Palestine. There tlic bishops of 
Jerusalem and Caesarea received him in the most frieindly manner, 
and got him to deliver public lectures in the churches. In the 
East, especially in Asia Minor, it was still no unuspal thing for 



ORIGEN 



271 



laymen, with permission of the bishop, to address the people in the 
church. In Alexandria, however, this custom had been given 
up, and Demetrius took occasion to express his disapproval and 
recall Origen to Alexandria. Probably the bishop was jealous of 
the high reputation of the teacher; and a coolness arose between 
them which led, fifteen years later, to an open rupture. On his 
way to Greece (apparently in the year 230) Origen was ordained 
a presbyter in Palestine by his friends the bishops. This was 
undoubtedly an infringement of the rights of the Alexandrian 
bishop; at the same time it was simply a piece of spite on the part 
of the latter that had kept Origen so long without any ecclesi- 
astical consecration. Demetrius convened a synod, at which it 
was resolved to banish Origen from Alexandria. Even this did 
not satisfy his displeasure. A second synod, composed entirely 
of bishops, determined that Origen must be deposed from the 
presbyterial status. This decision was communicated to the 
foreign churches, and seems to have been justified by referring 
to the self-mutilation of Origen and adducing objectionable 
doctrines which he was said to have promulgated. The details 
of the incident are, however, unfortunately very obscure. No 
formal excommunication of Origen appears to have been decreed; 
it was considered sufficient to have him degraded to the position 
of a layman. The sentence was approved by most of the 
churches, in particular by that of Rome. At a later period 
Origen sought to vindicate his teaching in a letter to the Roman 
bishop Fabian, but, it would seem, without success. Even 
Heracles, his former friend and sharer of his views, took part 
against him; and by this means he procured his own election 
shortly afterwards as successor to Demetrius. 

In these circumstances Origen thought it best voluntarily to 
retire from Alexandria (231-232). He betook himself to Palestine, 
where his condemnation had not been acknowledged by the 
churches any more than it had been in Phoenicia, Arabia and 
Achaea. He settled in Caesarea, and very shortly he had 
a flourishing school there, whose reputation rivalled that of 
Alexandria. His literary work, too, was prosecuted with 
unabated vigour. Enthusiastic pupils sat at his feet (see the 
Panegyric of Gregory Thaumaturgus), and the methodical 
instruction which he imparted in all branches of knowledge was 
famous all over the East. Here again his activity as a teacher 
was interrupted by frequent journeys. Thus he was for two 
years together at Caesarea in Cappadocia, where he was over- 
taken by the Ma.ximinian persecution; here he worked at his 
recension of the Bible. We find him again in Nicomedia, in 
Athens, and twice in Arabia. He was called there to combat the 
unitarian christology of Beryllus, bishop of Bostra, and to clear 
up certain eschatological questions. As he had formerly had 
dealings with the house of Alexander Severus, so now he entered 
into a correspondence with the emperor Philip the Arabian and 
his wife Severa. But through all situations of his life he pre- 
served his equanimity, his keen interest in science, and his 
indefatigable zeal for the instruction of others. In the, year 250 
the Decian persecution broke out, Origen was arrested, imprisoned 
and maltreated. But he survived these troubles — it is a malicious 
invention that he recanted during the persecution — and lived a 
few years longer in active intercourse with his friends. He died, 
probably in the year 254 (consequently under Valerian), at Tyre, 
where his grave was still shown in the middle ages. 

Writings. — Origen is probably the most prolific author of the 
ancient church. " Which of us," asks Jerome, " can read all 
that he has written?" The number of his works was estimated 
at 6000, but that is certainly an exaggeration. Owing to the 
increasing unpopularity of Origen in the church, a comparatively 
small portion of these works have come down to us in the original. 
We have more in the Latin translation of Rufinus; but this 
translation in by no means trustworthy, since Rufinus, assuming 
that Origen's writings had been tampered with by the heretics, 
considered himself at liberty to omit or amend heterodox state- 
ments. Origen's real opinion, however, may frequently be 
gathered from the Philocalia — a sort of anthology from his 
works prepared by Basil the Great and Gregory Nazianzenus. 
The fragments in Photius and in the Apology of Pamphilus serve 



for comparison. The writings of Origen consist of letters, and of 
works in textual criticism, exegesis, apologetics, dogmatic and 
practical theology. 

1. Eusebius (to whom we owe our full knowledge of his life) 
collected more than a hundred of Origen's letters, arranged 
them in books, and deposited them in the library at Caesarea 
(//. E. vi. 36). In the church library at Jerusalem (founded by 
the bishop Alexander) there were also numerous letters of this 
father (Euseb. //. E. vi. 20). But unfortunately they have all 
been lost except two — one to Julius Africanus (about the history 
of Susanna) and one to Gregory Thaumaturgus. There are, 
besides, a couple of fragments. 

2. Origen's textual studies on the Old Testament were under- 
taken partly in order to improve the manuscript tradition, 
and partly for apologetic reasons, to clear up the relation between 
the LXX and the original Hebrew text. The results of more 
than twenty years' labour were set forth in his Ilcxapla and 
Tctrapla, in which he placed the Hebrew text side by side with 
the various Greek versions, examined their mutual relations 
in detail, and tried to find the basis for a more reliable text 
of the LXX. The Hcxapla was probably never fully written 
out, but excerpts were made from it by various scholars at 
Caesarea in the 4th century; and thus large sections of it have 
been saved. 1 Origen worked also at the text of the New Testa- 
ment, although he produced no recension of his own. 

3. The exegetical labours of Origen extend over the whole 
of the Old and New Testaments. They are divided into Scholia 
(o-q/j.ei6>o~us, short annotations, mostly grammatical), Homilies 
(edifying expositions grounded on exegesis), and Commentaries 
(rofiOL). In the Greek original only a very small portion has 
been preserved; in Latin translations, however, a good deal. 
The most important parts are the homilies on Jeremiah, the 
books of Moses, Joshua and Luke, and the commentaries on 
Matthew, John and Romans. With grammatical precision, 
antiquarian learning and critical discernment Origen combines 
the allegorical method of interpretation — the logical corollary 
of his conception of the inspiration of the Scriptures. He 
distinguishes a threefold sense of scripture, a grammatico- 
historical, a moral and a pneumatic — the last being the proper 
and highest sense. He thus set up a formal theory of allegorical 
exegesis, which is not quite extinct in the churches even yet, 
but in his own system was of fundamental importance. On this 
method the sacred writings are regarded as an inexhaustible 
mine of philosophical and dogmatic wisdom; in reality the 
exegete reads his own ideas into any passage he chooses. The 
commentaries are of course intolerably diffuse and tedious, 
a great deal of them is now quite unreadable; yet, on the other 
hand, one has not unfrequently occasion to admire the sound 
linguistic perception and the critical talent of the author. 2 

4. The principal apologetic work of Origen is his book Kara 
KeXcjov (eight books), written at Caesarea in the time of Philip 
the Arabian. It has been completely preserved in the original. 
This work is invaluable as a source for the history and situation 
of the church in the 2nd century; for it contains nearly the whole 
of the famous work of Celsus (Aoyos aXrjdrj^) against Christianity. 
What makes Origen's answer so instructive is that it shows how 
close an affinity existed between Celsus and himself in their 
fundamental philosophical and theological presuppositions. The 
real state of the case is certainly unsuspected by Origen himself; 
but many of his opponent's arguments he is unable to meet 
except by a speculative reconstruction of the church doctrine 
in question. Origen's apologetic is most effective when he 
appeals to the spirit and power of Christianity as an evidence 
of its truth. In details his argument is not free from sophistical 
subterfuges and superficial reasoning. 3 

1 Field, Origenis Hexaplorum quae supersunt (2 vols., Oxon., 
1 867-1 874). 

- See Reuss, Geschichte der heil. Schriften d. N.T. (5th ed.), § 51 1. 

3 Keim, Celsus (1873); Aub6, Hisl. des persecut. de I'cglise, vol. ii. 
(1875) ; Ornsby, " Origen against Celsus," Dublin Review (July 1879), 
p. 58; PeMagaud, Etude sur Celse (1S7S); Lebedeff, Origen's Book 
against Celsus (Moscow, 1 878) (Russian) ; Overbeck in the Tlieolog. Lit. 
Zeititng (187S), No. 22 (1879), No. 9; Orig. c. Cels., ed. Sehvyn (1S76). 



272 



ORIGEN 



5. Of the dogmatic writings we possess only one in its integrity, 
and that only in the translation of Rufinus, 1 Tlepi txpx&v (On 
the Fundamental Doctrines). This work, which was composed 
before 228, is the first attempt at a dogmatic at once scientific 
and accommodated to the needs of the church. The material 
is drawn from Scripture, but in such a way that the propositions 
of the regala fidei are respected. This material is then formed 
into a system by all the resources of the intellect and of specula- 
tion. Origen thus solved, after his own fashion, a problem 
which his predecessor Clement had not even ventured to grapple 
with. The first three books treat of God, the world, the fall 
of spirits, anthropology and ethics. " Each of these three 
books really embraces, although not in a strictly comprehensive 
way, the whole scheme of the Christian view of the world, from 
different points of view, and with different contents." The 
fourth book explains the divinity of the Scriptures, and deduces 
rules for their interpretation. It ought properly to stand as 
first book at the beginning. The ten books of Stromata (in which 
Origen compared the teaching of the Christians with that of the 
philosophers, and corroborated all the Christian dogmas from 
Plato, Aristotle, Numenius and Cornutus) have all perished, 
with the exception of small fragments; so have the tractates 
on the resurrection and on freewill. 2 

6. Of practical theological works we have still the HporpeimKos 
ds fiaprvpLov and the livvrayfia Trepl evxvs- For a knowledge 
of Origen's Christian estimate of life and his relation to the 
faith of the church these two treatises are of great importance. 
The first was written during the persecution of Maximinus 
Thrax, and was dedicated to his friends Ambrosius and 
Protoctetus. The other also dates from the Caesarean period; 
it mentions many interesting details, and concludes with a fine 
exposition of the Lord's Prayer. 

7. In his own lifetime Origen had to complain of falsifications 
of his works and forgeries under his name. Many pieces still in 
existence are wrongly ascribed to him ; yet it is doubtful whether a 
single one of them was composed on purpose to deceive. Themost 
noteworthy are the Dialogues of a certain Adamantius "de recta 
in Deum fide," which seem to have been erroneously attributed to 
Origen so early as the 4th century, one reason being the fact that 
Origen himself also bore that name. (Eusebius, H.E. vi. 14.) 

Outline of Origen's View of the Universe and of Life. — The 
system of Origen was formulated in opposition to the Greek 
philosophers on the one hand, and the Christian Gnostics on the 
other. 3 But the science of faith, as expounded by him, bears 
unmistakably the stamp both of Neo-Platonism and of Gnosticism. 
As a theologian, in fact, Origen is not merely an orthodox 
traditionalist and believing exegete, but a speculative philosopher 
of Neo-Platonic tendencies. He is, moreover, a judicious critic. 
The union of these four elements gives character to his theology, 
and in a certain degree to all subsequent theology. It is this 
combination which has determined the peculiar and varying 
relations in which theology and the faith of the church have 
stood to each other since the time of Origen. That relation 
depends on the predominance of one or other of the four factors 
embraced in his theology. 

As an orthodox traditionalist Origen holds that Christianity 
is a practical and religious saving principle, that it has unfolded 
itself in an historical series of revealing facts, that the church 
has accurately embodied the substance of her faith in the regula 
fidei, and that simple faith is sufficient for the renewal and salva- 
tion of man. As a philosophical idealist, however, he transmutes 
the whole contents of the faith of the church into ideas which 
bear the mark of Neo-Platonism, and were accordingly recognized 
by the later Neo-Platonists as Hellenic. 4 In Origen, however, 

'There are, however, extensive fragments of the original in 
existence. 

2 See Redepenning, Origenis de principiis, first sep. ed. (Leipzig, 
1836) ; Schnitzer, Orig. iiber die Grundlehren des Glaiibens, an attempt 
at reconstruction (1835). 

3 The opposition to the unitarians within the church must also be 
kept in mind. 

4 Porphyry says of Origen, icard ras iripl rpa.yna.Tui> ical tov Bdov 
56£a? 'EXXiji/ifcoi' (Euseb. H.E. vi. 19). 



the mystic and ecstatic element is held in abeyance. The 
ethico-religious ideal is the sorrowless condition, the state of 
superiority to all evils, the state of order and of rest. In this 
condition man enters into likeness to God and blessedness; 
and it is reached through contemplative isolation and self- 
knowledge, which is divine wisdom. "The soul is trained as 
it were to behold itself in a mirror, it shows the divine spirit, 
if it should be found worthy of such fellowship, as in a mirror, 
and thus discovers the traces of a secret path to participation 
in the divine nature." As a means to the realization of this ideal, 
Origen introduces the whole ethics of Stoicism. But the link 
that connects him with churchly realism, as well as with the Neo- 
Platonic mysticism, is the conviction that complete and certain 
knowledge rests wholly on divine revelation, i.e. on oracles. 
Consequently his theology is cosmological speculation and ethical 
reflection based on the sacred Scriptures. The Scriptures, 
however, are treated by Origen on the basis of a matured theory 
of inspiration in such a way that all their facts appear as the 
vehicles of ideas, and have their highest value only in this aspect. 
That is to say, his gnosis neutralizes all that is empirical and 
historical, if not always as to its actuality, at least absolutely 
in respect of its value. The most convincing proof of this is that 
Origen (1) takes the idea of the immutability of God as the 
regulating idea of his system, and (2) deprives the historical 
" Word made flesh " of all significance for the true Gnostic. 
To him Christ appears simply as the Logos who is with the Father 
from eternity, and works from all eternity, to whom alone the 
instructed Christian directs his thoughts, requiring nothing more 
than a perfect — i.e. divine — teacher. In such propositions 
historical Christianity is stripped off as a mere husk. The objects 
of religious knowledge are beyond the plane of history, or rather — 
in a thoroughly Gnostic and Neo-Platonic spirit — they are 
regarded as belonging to a supra-mundane history. On this 
view contact with the faithof the church could only be maintained 
by distinguishing an exoteric and an esoteric form of Christianity. 
This distinction was already current in the catechetical school 
of Alexandria, but Origen gave it its boldest expression, and 
justified it on the ground of the incapacity of the Christian 
masses to grasp the deeper sense of Scripture, or unravel the 
difficulties of exegesis. On the other hand, in dealing with the 
problem of bringing his heterodox system into conformity with 
the regula fidei he evinced a high degree of technical skill. An 
external conformity was possible, inasmuch as speculation, 
proceeding from the higher to the lower, could keep by the stages 
of the regula fidei, which had been developed into a history of 
salvation. The system itself aims in principle at being thoroughly 
monistic; but, since matter, although created by God out of 
nothing, was regarded merely as the sphere in which souls are 
punished and purified, the system is pervaded by a strongly 
dualistic element. The immutability of God requires the 
eternity of the Logos and of the world. At this point Origen 
succeeded in avoiding the heretical Gnostic idea of God by 
assigningtotheGodheadtheattributesof goodness and righteous- 
ness. The pre-existence of souls is another inference from the 
immutability of God, although Origen also deduced it from the 
nature of the soul, which as a spiritual potency must be eternal. 
Indeed this is the fundamental idea of Origen — " the original 
and indestructible unity of God and all spiritual essences." 
From this follows the necessity for the created spirit, after 
apostasy, error and sin, to return always to its origin in God. 
The actual sinfulness of all men Origen was able to explain by 
the theological hypothesis of pre-existence and the premundane 
fall of each individual soul. He holds that freedom is the 
inalienable prerogative of the finite spirit; and this is the second 
point that distinguishes his theology from the heretical Gnosticism. 
The system unfolds itself like a drama, of which the successive 
stages are as follows: the transcendental fall, the creation of 
the material world, inaugurating the history of punishment 
and redemption, the clothing of fallen souls in flesh, the dominion 
of sin, evil and the demons on earth, the appearing of the Logos, 
His union with a pure human soul, His esoteric preaching of 
salvation, and His death in the flesh, then the imparting of the 



ORIGINAL PACKAGE 



73 



Spirit, and the ultimate restoration of all things. The doctrine 
of the restoration appeared necessary because the spirit, in 
spite of its inherent freedom, cannot lose its true nature, and 
because the final purposes of God cannot be foiled. The end, 
however, is only relative, for spirits are continually falling, and 
God remains through eternity the creator of the world. Moreover 
the end is not conceived as a transfiguration of the world, but 
as a liberation of the spirit from its unnatural union with the 
sensual. Here the Gnostic and philosophical character of the 
system is particularly manifest. The old Christian eschatology 
is set aside; no one has dealt such deadly blows to Chiliasm 
and Christian apocalypticism as Origen. It need hardly be said 
that he spiritualized the church doctrine of the resurrection of 
the flesh. But, while in all these doctrines he appears in the 
character of a Platonic philosopher, traces of rational criticism 
are not wanting. Where his fundamental conception admits 
of it, he tries to solve historical problems by historical 
methods. Even in the christology, where he is treating of the 
historical Christ, he entertains critical considerations; hence 
it is not altogether without reason that in after times he was 
suspected of " Ebionitic "' views of the Person of Christ. Not 
unfrequently he represents the unity of the Father and the Son 
as a unity of agreement and harmony and " identity of will." 

Although the theology of Origen exerted a considerable in- 
fluence as a whole in the two following centuries, it certainly 
lost nothing by the circumstance that several important pro- 
positions were capable of being torn from their original setting 
and placed in new connexions. It is in fact one of the peculiarities 
of this theology, which professed to be at once churchly and 
philosophical, that most of its formulae could be interpreted 
and appreciated in utramque partem. By arbitrary divisions 
and rearrangements the doctrinal statements of this " science 
of faith " could be made to serve the most diverse dogmatic 
tendencies. This is seen especially in the doctrine of the Logos. 
On the basis of his idea of God Origen was obliged to insist in 
the strongest manner on the personality, the eternity (eternal 
generation) and the essential divinity of the Logos. 1 On the 
other hand, when he turned to consider the origin of the Logos 
he did not hesitate to speak of Him as a Krla/ia, and to include 
Him amongst the rest of God's spiritual creatures. A Krla/ia, 
which is at the same time dfioovoiov t<3 OecjS, was no contradiction 
to him, simply because he held the immutability, the pure know- 
ledge and the blessedness which constituted the divine nature 
to be communicable attributes. In later times both the orthodox 
and the Arians appealed to his teaching, both with a certain 
plausibility; but the inference of Arius, that an imparted 
divinity must be divinity in the second degree, Origen did not 
draw. With respect to other doctrines also, such as those of the 
Holy Spirit and the incarnation of Christ, &c, Origen prepared 
the way for the later dogmas. The technical terms round which 
such bitter controversies raged in the 4th and 5th centuries are 
often found in Origen lying peacefully side by side. But this 
is just where his epoch-making importance lies, that all the later 
parties in the church learned from him. And this is true not 
only of the dogmatic parties; solitary monks and ambitious 
priests, hard-headed critical exegetes, 2 allegorists, mystics, all 
found something congenial in his writings. The only man who 
tried to shake off the theological influence of Origen was Marcellus 
of Ancyra, who did not succeed in producing any lasting effect 
on theology. 

The attacks on Origen, which had begun in his lifetime, 
did not cease for centuries, and only subsided during the time 
of the fierce Arian controversy. It was not so much the relation 
between pistis and gnosis— faith and knowledge — as defined by 
Origen that gave offence, but rather isolated propositions, such 
as his doctrines of the pre-exist ence of souls, of the soul and body 
of Christ, of the resurrection of the flesh, of the final restoration, 

'"Communis substantiae est filio cum patre; diroppom enim 
o/ioouo-ios videtur, i.e. unius substantiae cum illo corpore ex quo 
est Airoppota." 

2 E.g. Dionysius of Alexandria; compare his judicious verdict on 
the Apocalypse. 



and of the plurality of worlds. Even in the 3rd century Origen's 
view of the Trinity and of the Person of Christ was called in 
question, and that from various points of view. It was not till 
the 5th century, however, that objections of this kind became 
frequent. In the 4th century Pamphilus, Eusebius of Caesarca, 
Athanasius, the Cappadocians, Uidymus, and Rufinus were on the 
side of Origen against the attacks of Methodius and many others. 
But, when the zeal of Epiphanius was kindled against him, 
when Jerome, alarmed about his own reputation, and in defiance 
of his past attitude, turned against his once honoured teacher, 
and Theophilus, patriarch of Alexandria, found it prudent, for 
political reasons, and out of consideration for the uneducated 
monks, to condemn Origen — then his authority received a 
shock from which it never recovered. There were, doubtless, 
in the 5th century church historians and theologians who still 
spoke of him with reverence, but such men became fewer and 
fewer. In the West Vincent of Lerins held up Origen as a 
warning example {Commonil. 23), showing how iven the most 
learned and most eminent of church teachers might become a 
misleading light. In the East the exegetical school of Antioch 
had an aversion to Origen; the Alexandrians had utterly 
repudiated him. Nevertheless his writings were much read, 
especially in Palestine. The monophysite monks appealed to his 
authority, but could not prevent Justinian and the fifth oecumeni- 
cal council at Constantinople (553) from anathematizing his 
teaching. It is true that many scholars (e.g. Hefele, Concilien- 
gesch. ii. p. 858 sq.) deny that Origen was condemned by this 
council; but Moller rightly holds that the condemnation is 
proved {Realcncyklop. j. protest. Theol. u. Kirche, xi. 113). 

Sources and Literature. — Next to the works of Origen (see 
Redepenning, " Des Hieronymus wiederaufgefundenes Verzeichnis 
derSchriften desOrigens," in Zeil.f. d. hist. Theol. (1851), pp. 66seq.) 
the most important sources are: Gregory Thaumat., Panegyricus 
in Orig.; Eusebius, H.E. vi.; Epiphanius, Haer. 64; the works of 
Methodius, the Cappadocians, Jerome (see De vir. ill. 54, 61) and 
Rufinus; Vincent. Lerin. Commonit. 23; Palladius, Hist. Laus. 147; 
Justinian, Ep. ad Mennam (Mansi, ix. p. 487 seq.); Photius, Bibliolh. 
118, &c. There is no complete critical edition of Origen's works. 
The best edition is that of Car. and C. Vine. Delarue (4 vols, fol.) 
(Paris, 1733-1759), reprinted by Lommatzsch (25 vols. 8vo) (Berlin, 
1 831-1848) and by Migne, Patrol, curs, compl. ser. Gr., vols, xi.-xvii. 
Several new pieces have been edited by Gallandi and A. Mai. 
Amongst the older works on Origen those of Huetius (printed in 
Delarue, vol. iv.) are the best; but Tillemont, Fabricius, Walch 
{Historic d. Ketzereien, vii. pp. 362-760) and Schrockh also deserve 
to be mentioned. In recent times the doctrine of Origen has been 
expounded in the great works on church history by Baur, Dorner, 
Bohringer, Neander, Moller (Ceschichte der Kosmologie in der 
griechisclien Kirche) and Kahnis (Die Lehre vom h. Ceist, vol. i.); 
compare with these the works on the history of philosophy by Ritter, 
Erdmann, Ueberweg and Zeller. Of monographs, the best and 
most complete is Redepenning, Origenes, eine Darstellung seines 
Lebens und seiner Lehre (2 vols., 1841, 1846). Compare Thomasius, 
Orig. (1837); Kriiger, " Uber das Verhaltnis des Orig. zu Ammonius 
Sakkas," in the Ztschr. f. hist. Theol. (1843), '• P- 46 seq.; Fischer, 
Comment, de Orig. theologia et cosmologia (1846); Ramers, Orig. 
Lehre von der Auferstehung des Fleischcs (1851); Knittel, "Orig. 
Lehre von der Menschwerdung," in the Theol. Quartalschr. (1872); 
Schultz, " Christologie des Orig.," in the Johrb. f. protest. Theol. 
(1875); Mehlhorn, " Die Lehre von der menschlichen Freiheit nach 
Orig.," in Zeitschr. f. Kirchengesch. vol. ii. (1878); Freppel, Origene, 
vol. i., 2nd ed. (Paris, 187,=;). A full list of the later bibliography will 
be found in Harnack's Dogmengeschichte and Chronologic (A. Ha.) 

ORIGINAL PACKAGE, a legal term in America, meaning, 
in general usage, the package in which goods, intended for 
interstate commerce, are actually transported wholesale. The 
term is used chiefly in determining the boundary between 
Federal and state jurisdiction in the regulation of commerce, 
and derives special significance by reason of the conflict between 
the powers of Congress to regulate commerce and the police 
legislation of the several states with respect to commodities 
considered injurious to public health and morals, such as in- 
toxicating liquors, cigarettes and oleomargarine. By the Federal 
constitution Congress is vested with the power " to regulate 
commerce with foreign nations and among the several states, 
and with the Indian tribes," and each state is forbidden, without 
the consent of Congress, to " lay any imposts or duties on imports 
or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing 



274 



ORIGINAL PACKAGE 



its inspection laws," and the basis of the law on the subject of 
"original package" was laid when, in 1827, Chief Justice Marshall 
interpreted these clauses in his decision of the case of Brown v. 
Maryland, 1 which tested the constitutionality of an act of the 
legislature of Maryland requiring a licence from importers of 
foreign goods by bale or package and from persons selling the 
same by wholesale, bale, package, hogshead, barrel or tierce. 
After pronouncing such a licence to be in effect a tax, the chief 
justice observed that so long as the thing imported remained 
" the property of the importer, in his warehouse, in the original 
form or package in which it was imported," a tax upon it was 
too plainly a duty on imports to escape the prohibition of the 
Constitution, that imported commodities did not become subject 
to the taxing power of the state until they had " become incor- 
porated and mixed with the mass of property in the country," 
that the right to sell a thing imported was incident to the right 
to import it, and consequently that a state tax upon the sale 
was repugnant to the power of Congress to regulate foreign 
commerce; and he added that the court supposed the same 
principles applied equally to interstate commerce. Later 
decisions agree that the right to import commodities or to ship 
them from one state to another carries with it the right to sell 
them and have established the boundary b'ne between Federal 
and state control of both foreign imports and interstate ship- 
ments at a sale in the original package 2 or at the breaking of the 
original package before sale for other purposes than inspection. 3 
A state or a municipality may, however, tax while in their 
original packages any commodities which have been shipped in 
from another state provided there he no discrimination against 
such commodities; this permission being granted on the theory 
that a general non-discriminating tax is not a regulation of 
commerce and therefore not repugnant to the power of Congress 
to regulate interstate commerce. 4 The first cases involving a 
serious conflict between the power of Congress to regulate inter- 
state commerce and the police powers of the several states were 
the Licence Cases adjudicated by the Supreme Court of the 
United States in January 1S47. 5 They were to test the con- 
stitutionality of a law of Massachusetts requiring a licence for the 
sale of wines or spirituous liquors in a less quantity than 28 
gallons, of a law of Rhode Island requiring a licence for the sale 
of such liquors in a less quantity than 10 gallons, and a law 
of New Hampshire requiring a licence for the sale of wines or 
spirituous bquors in any quantity whatever, and in this case a 
barrel of gin had been bought in Boston Mass., carried to Dover, 
N.H., and there sold in the same barrel. Although the justices 
based their opinions on different principles, the court pronounced 
the laws constitutional. The justices did not even agree that 
the power of Congress to regulate an interstate shipment in- 
cluded the power to authorize a sale after shipment, which is the 
basis of the original package doctrine as applied to interstate 
commerce, and Chief Justice Taney with two other justices 
who were of this opinion held that a state might nevertheless 
in the exercise of its police powers regulate such sales so long as 
Congress did not pass an act for that purpose. In this confused 
and uncertain state the matter rested until the adjudication of 
Leisy v. Hardin 6 in 1889. In this case beer had been shipped 
from Illinois into Iowa and then sold in the original kegs and cases 
by an agent of the Illinois firm when Iowa had a law absolutely 
prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquors within its limits 
except for pharmaceutical, medicinal, chemical or sacramental 
purposes. None of the justices now denied that the power of 
Congress to regulate an interstate shipment included the power 
to authorize a sale after shipment, and although there was dis- 
agreement with reference to the right of a state to regulate the 
sale in the absence of an act of Congress for that purpose, the 

1 12 Wheaton 419. 

2 Waring v. Mobile, 8 Wall. 110. 

s Mayti. New Orleans, 178 U.S. 498 and in re McAllister (C.C.Md.), 
51 Fed. 282. 

4 Woodruff v. Parham, 8 Wallace 123, and Hinson v. Lott, 8 
Wallace 148. 

6 5 Howard 504. 

6 135 U.S. 100. 



majority of the court were of the opinion that: " Whenever a 
particular power of the general government is one which must 
necessarily be exercised by it, and Congress remains silent, 
this is not only not a concession that the powers reserved by the 
states may be exerted as if the specific power had not been 
elsewhere reposed, but, on the contrary, the only legitimate 
conclusion is that the general government intended that power 
should not be affirmatively exercised, and that the action of 
the states cannot be permitted to effect that which would be 
incompatible with such intention. Hence, inasmuch as inter- 
state commerce, consisting in the transportation, purchase, 
sale and exchange of commodities, is national in its character 
and must be governed by a uniform system, so long as Congress 
does not pass any law to regulate it, or allowing the states so to do, 
it thereby indicates its will that such commerce shall be free and 
untrammelled." The opinion of Chief Justice Taney in Pierce 
v. New Hampshire was therefore in part overruled and the Iowa 
law in so far as it applied to the sale in the original packages of 
liquors shipped in from another state was pronounced uncon- 
stitutional. As a consequence of this decision, Congress, in 1890, 
passed the Wilson Act providing that all fermented, distilled, or 
other intoxicating liquors or liquids transported into any state 
or Territory for use, consumption, sale or storage therein should, 
even though in the original packages, be subject to the police 
laws of the state or Territory to the same extent as those produced 
within the state or Territory. Even with this act, however, a 
state is not permitted to interfere with an interstate shipment 
of liquor direct to the consumer. 7 

What constitutes an original package was the principal 
question in Austin v. Tennessee* which was decided in November 
1900. The general assembly of Tennessee had in this case made 
it a misdemeanour for any party to sell or to bring into the state 
for selling or giving away any cigarettes. The defendant had 
purchased at Durham, North Carolina, a quantity of cigarettes. 
They were packed in pasteboard boxes containing ten cigarettes 
each. The boxes were then placed in an open basket and in this 
manner the cigarettes were delivered at the defendant's place 
of business in Tennessee where he sold a package without 
breaking it. The court decided against the defendant because it 
held that the manner of transportation was evidently for the 
purpose of evading the state law and that the boxes were not 
original packages within the meaning of the Federal law, and in 
this connexion it observed that " The whole theory of the exemp- 
tion of the original package from the operation of the state laws is 
based upon the idea that the property is imported in the ordinary 
form in which, from time to time immemorial, foreign goods have 
been brought into the country. These have gone at once into the 
hands of the wholesale dealers, who have been in the habit of 
breaking the package and distributing their contents among the 
several retail dealers throughout the state. It was with reference 
to this method of doing business that the doctrine of the exemption 
of the original package grew up. " In the case of Schollenberger v. 
Pennsylvania, 9 however, the court decided that the state of 
Pennsylvania could not prohibit the sale of oleomargarine by retail 
when it had been shipped from Rhode Island in packages con- 
taining only 10 lb each, and the original package doctrine has 
been sharply criticized because of the difficulty in determining 
what constitutes an original package as well as because of the 
conflict between the doctrine and the police powers of the several 
states. It has been urged that the doctrine be abandoned and 
that commodities shipped into one state from another " be 
treated just like other goods already there are treated." 

See J. B. Uhle, " The Law Governing an Original Package," in 
The American Law Register, vol. xxix. (Philadelphia, 1890); Shackel- 
ford Miller, " The Latest Phase of the Original Package Doctrine," 
and M. M. Townley, " What is the Original Package Doctrine?" 
both in The American Law Revietu, vol. xxxv. (St Louis, 1901); 
also F. H. Cooke, The Commerce Clause of the Federal Constitution 
(New York, 1908). 



7 See Vance v. W. 

8 179 U.S. 343. 

9 171 U.S. I. 



A. Vandercook Company, 170 U.S. 438. 



ORIHUELA— ORINOCO 



275 



ORIHUELA, a town and episcopal see of eastern Spain, in the 
province of Alicante; 13 m. N.E. of Murcia and about 15 m. 
from the Mediterranean Sea, on the Murcia-Elche railway. 
Pop. (1900) 28,530. Orihuela is situated in a beautiful and 
exceedingly fertile hucrta, or tract of highly cultivated land, 
at the foot of a limestone bridge, and on both sides of the river 
Segura, which divides the city into two parts, Roig and San 
Augusto, and is spanned by two bridges. There are remains 
of a Moorish fort on the hill commanding the town; and the 
north gateway — the Puerta del Colcgio — is a fine lofty arch, 
surmounted by an emblematic statue and the city arms. The 
most prominent buildings are the episcopal palace (1733), with 
a frontage of 600 ft.; the town house (1843), containing im- 
portant archives; and the cathedral, a small Gothic structure 
built on the site of a former mosque in the 14th century, and 
enlarged and tastelessly restored in 1829. The university of 
Orihuela, founded in 1568 by the archbishop of Valencia, was 
closed in 1835, part of the revenue being applied to the support 
of a college affiliated to the university of Valencia. Besides 
numerous primary schools there are a theological seminary 
and a normal school. The trade in fruit, cereals, oil and wine 
is considerable. There are also tanneries, dye-works and manu- 
factures of silk, linen and woollen fabrics, leather and starch. 

Orihuela was captured by the Moors in 713, and retaken by 
James I. of Aragon, for his father-in-law Alphonso of Castile, 
in 1265. It was sacked during the disturbances at the beginning 
of the reign of Charles V. (1520), and again in the War of Succes- 
sion (1706). Local annals specially mention the plague of 1648, 
the flood of 1651 and the earthquake of 1829. 

0R1LLIA, a town and port of entry of Simcoe county, Ontario, 
Canada, situated 84 m. N. of Toronto, on Lake Couchiching 
and on the Grand Trunk railway. Pop. (1901) 4907. It is a 
favourite summer resort, and has steamboat communication 
with other ports on Lakes Simcoe and Couchiching. It contains 
an asylum maintained by the provincial government; also saw 
and grist mills and iron foundries. 

ORINOCO, a river in the north of South America, falling 
north-east into the Atlantic between 6o° 20' and 62 30' W. It 
is approximately 1500 m. long, but it is several hundred miles 
longer if measured by its Guaviare branch. Lying south and 
east of the main stream is a vast, densely forested region called 
Venezuelan Guiana, diversified by ranges of low mountains, 
irregular broken ridges and granitic masses, which define the 
courses of many unexplored tributaries of the Orinoco. 

In 1498, Columbus, when exploring the Gulf of Paria, which 
receives a large part of the outflow of the Orinoco, noted the 
freshness of its waters, but made no examination of their origin. 
The caravels of Ojeda which, in 1499, followed almost the same 
track as that of Columbus, probably passed in sight of one or 
more of the mouths of the Orinoco. The first to explore any 
portion of the mighty river was the reckless and daring adven- 
turer Ordaz. In his expedition (1531— 1532) he entered its 
principal outlet, the Boca de Navios, and, at the cost of many 
lives, ascended to the junction of the Meta with the parent 
stream. From Ordaz up to recent times the Orinoco has been 
the scene of many voyages of discovery, including those in quest 
of El Dorado, and seme scientific surveys have been made, 
especially among its upper waters, by Jose Solano and Diaz de 
la Fuente of the Spanish boundary line commission of Yturriaga 
and Solano (1757-1763), Humboldt (1800) and Michelena y 
Rojas (1855-1857). The last ascended to the Mawaca, a point 
about 170 m. above the northern entrance to the Casiquiare 
canal, and then a few miles up the Mawaca. A little knowledge 
about its sources above these points was given by the savages 
to de la Fuente in 1759 and to Mendoza in 1764, and we are also 
indebted to Humboldt for some vague data. 

At the date of the discovery, the Orinoco, like the Amazon, 
bore different names, according to those of the tribes occupying 
its margins. The conquistador Ordaz found that, at its mouth, 
it was called the Uriaparia, this being the name of the cacique 
of the tribe there. The Caribs, holding a certain section of the 
river, named it the Ibirinoco, corrupted by the Spaniards into 



Orinoco. It was known to other tribes as the Barraguan and 
to others as the Maraguaca. The Cabres called it the Paragua, 
because it flooded such a vast area of country. 

The principal affluent of the Orinoco from the Guiana district 
is the Ventuari, the head -waters of which are also unknown. It 
is an important stream, which, running south-west, joins the Orinoco 
about 90 m. above its Guaviare branch. Two other large tributaries 
of the Orinoco flow north from the interior of this mysterious Guiana 
region, the Caura and the Caroni. The former has recently been 
explored by Andre, who found it greatly obstructed by falls and 
rapids; the latter is about 800 m. long, 400 of which are more or less 
navigable. 

South of the Guaviare, as far as the divortiwn aquarum, between 
it and the Rio Negro branch of the Amazon, the country is dry and 
only partially swept by moisture-laden winds, so that few streams of 
moment are found in its southern drainage area; but north of it, 
as far as 6° 30' N., the north-east trade winds, which have escaped 
condensation in the hot lower valley of the Orinoco, beat against the 
cold eastern slopes of the lofty Colombian Andes, and ceaselessly 
pour down such vast volumes of water that the almost countless 
streams which flow across the plains of Colombia and western 
Venezuela are taxed beyond their capacity to carry it to the Orinoco, 
and for several months of the year they flood tens of thousands of 
square miles of the districts they traverse. Among these the Apure, 
Arauca, Meta and Guaviare hold the first rank. 

The Apure is formed by two great rivers, the Uribante and Sarare. 
The former, which rises in the Sierra de Merida, which overlooks the 
Lake of Maracaibo, has 16 large affluents; the latter has its sources 
near the Colombian city of Pamplona, and they are only separated 
from the basin of the river Magdalena by the " Oriental " Andean 
range. From the Uribante-Sarare junction to the Orinoco the length 
of the Apure is 645 m., of which Codazzi makes the doubtful claim 
that 564 are navigable, for there are some troublesome rapids 114 m. 
above its mouth, where the Apure is 3 m. wide. The numerous 
affluents which enter it from the north water the beautiful eastern 
and southern slopes of the Merida, Caraboso and Caracas mountain 
ranges. A few of them are navigable for a short distance; among 
these the most important is the many-armed Portugueza, on the 
main route south from the Caribbean coast to the llanos. A few 
large streams enter the lower Apure from the south, but they are 
frequently entangled in lateral canals, due to the slight elevation of 
the plains above sea-level, the waters of the Apure, especially 
during flood time, having opened a great number of canos before 
reaching the Orinoco. 

The " Oriental " Andes of Colombia give birth to another great 
affluent of the Orinoco, the Arauca, which soon reaches the plain 
and parallels the Apure on the south. Perez says that the Sarare 
branch of the Apure has formed a gigantic dam across its own 
course by prodigious quantities of trees, brush, vines and roots, 
and thus, impounding its own waters, has cut a new channel to 
the southward across the lowlands and joined the Arauca, from 
which the Sarare may be reached in small craft and ascended to 
the vicinity of Pamplona. The Arauca is navigable for large boats 
and barges up to the Andes, and by sail to its middle course. In 
floods, unable to carry the additional water contributed by the 
Sarare, it overflows its banks, and by several canos gives its surplus 
to the Capanaparo, which, about 18 m. farther south, joins the 
Orinoco. 

The Meta is known as such from the union of two Andean streams, 
the Negro and Humadea, which rise near Bogota. At their junction, 
700 ft. above sea-level, it is 1000 ft. wide and 7 ft. deep in the dry 
season, but in flood the Meta rises 30 ft. It is navigable up to the 
old " Apostadero," about 150 m. above its mouth, but launches may 
ascend it, in the wet season, about 500 m., to the junction of the Negro 
with the Humadea. In the dry season, however, it is obstructed by 
reefs, sandbanks, shallows, snags, trees and floating timber from the 
" Apostadero " up, so that even canoes find its ascent difficult, while 
savage hordes along its banks add to the dangers to be encountered. 

The Guaviare is the next great western tributary of the Orinoco. 
Eugenio Alvarado, a Spanish commissioner for the boundary 
delimitation of Colombia with Brazil in 1759, informed the viceroy 
at Bogota that the rivers Arivari and Guayabero rise between 
Neiva and Popayan, and unite to take the composite name of 
Guaviare. In those times they called it Guaibari, or Guayuare. 
The Guaviare is about 500 m. long, of which 300 are called navigable, 
although not free from obstructions. Its upper portion has many 
rapids and falls. The banks are forested throughout, and the river 
is infested by numerous alligators, so ferocious that they attack 
canoes. Two-thirds of the way up, it receives its Ariari tributary 
from the north-west, which is navigable for large boats. Near its 
mouth the Guaviare is joined by its great south-western affluent, the 
Ynirida. Above its rapid of Mariapiri, 180 m. up, this stream runs 
swiftly through a rough country, but for a long distance is a succes- 
sion of lakes and shallow, overflowed areas. Its head-waters do not 
reach the Andes. 

Between the Guaviare and the Meta the Orinoco is obstructed by 
the famous Maipures cataract, where, in several channels, it breaks 
through a granite spur of the Guiana highlands for a length of about 



276 



ORIOLE— ORION 



4 m., with a total fall of about 40 ft., and then, after passing two 
minor reefs, reaches the Atures rapids, where it plunges through a 
succession of gorges for a distance of about 6 m., winding among 
confused masses of granite boulders, and falling about 30 ft. At 
the mouth of the Meta it is about I m. wide, but as it flows north- 
wards it increases its width until, at the point where it receives its 
Apure affluent, it is over 2 m. wide in the dry season and about 
7 m. in floods. It rises 32 ft. at Cariben, but at the Angostura, or 
narrows, where the river is but 800 ft. wide, the difference between 
high and low river is 50 ft., and was even 60 in 1892. 

The Orinoco finds its way to the ocean through a delta of about 
700 sq. m. area, so little above sea level that much of it is periodically 
flooded. The river is navigable for large steamers up to the raudal 
or rapid of Cariben, 700 m. from the sea, and to within 6 m. of the 
mouth of the Meta. Maintaining its eastern course from the Apure, 
the main stream finds its way along the southern side of the delta, 
where it is called the Corosimi river, and enters the sea at the Boca 
Grande; but in front of the Tortola island, at the beginning of the 
Corosimi and 100 m. from the sea, it throws northwards to the 
Gulf of Paria another great arm which, about 100 m. long, and 
known as the Rio Vagrc, bounds the western side of the delta. En 
route to the gulf the Vagre sends across the delta, east and north, two 
canos or canals of considerable volume, called the Macareo and 
Cuscuino. The delta is also cut into many irregular divisions by 
other canals which derive their flow from its great boundary rivers, 
the Corosimi and Vagre, and its numerous islands and vast swamps 
are covered with a dense vegetation. The Boca Grande outlet 
is the deepest, and is the main navigable entrance to the Orinoco at 
all seasons, the muddy bar usually maintaining a depth of 16 ft. 

The Spanish conquislador and his descendants have not been 
a blessing to the basin of the Orinoco. All they can boast of is 
the destruction of its population and products, so that the number 
of inhabitants of one of the richest valleys in the world is less 
to-day than it was four centuries ago. The entire river trade 
centres upon Ciudad Bolivar, on the right bank of the Orinoco, 
373 m. above its moutb. The only other river port of any 
importance is San Fernando, on the Apure. It is a stopping- 
point for the incipient steamer traffic of the valley, which is 
principally confined to the Apure and lower Orinoco. It 
occupies, however, but a few small steam craft. There is steam 
connexion between Ciudad Bolivar and the island of Trinidad. 
Cattle are carried by vessels from the valley to the neighbouring 
foreign colonies, and a few local steamers do a coasting trade 
between the river and the Caribbean ports of Venezuela. A 
transit trade with Colombia, via the Meta river, has been carried 
on by two small steamers, but subject to interruptions from 
political causes. (G. E. C.) 

ORIOLE (O. Fr. Oriol, Lat. aurcolus), the name once applied 
to a bird, from its golden colouring — the Oriolus galbula of 
Linnaeus — but now commonly used in a much wider sense. 
The golden oriole, which is the type of the Passerine family 
Oriolidae, is a far from uncommon spring-visitor to the British 
Islands, but has very rarely bred there. On the continent of 
Europe it is a well-known if not an abundant bird, and its range 
in summer extends so far to the east as Irkutsk, while in winter 
it is found in Natal and Damaraland. In India it is replaced 
by a closely allied form, 0. knndoo, the mango-bird, chiefly 
distinguishable by the male possessing a black streak behind 
as well as in front of the eye; and both in Asia and Africa are 
several other species more or less resembling 0. galbida, but some 
depart considerably from that type, assuming a black head, or 
even a glowing crimson, instead of the ordinary yellow colouring, 
while others again remain constant to the dingy type of plumage 
which characterizes the female of the more normal form. Among 
these last are the aberrant species of the group Mimctes or 
Mimcta, belonging to the Australian Region, respecting which 
A. R. Wallace pointed out, first in the Zoological Society's 
Proceedings (1863, pp. 26-28), and afterwards in his Malay 
Archipelago (ii. pp. 150-153), the very curious signs of " mimi- 
cry " (see Honey-eater). It is a singular circumstance that 
this group Mimcta first received its name from P. P. King 
(Survey, cVc. of Australia, ii. 417) under the belief that the birds 
composing it belonged to the family Mcliphagidae, which had 
assumed the appearance of orioles, whereas Wallace's investiga- 
tions tend to show that the imitation (unconscious, of course) 
is on the part of the latter. The external similarity of the 
Mimcta and the Tropidorhynchus of the island of Bouru, one 



of the Moluccas, is perfectly wonderful, and has again and again 
deceived some of the best ornithologists, though the birds are 
structurally far apart. Another genus which has been referred 
to the Oriolidae, and may here be mentioned, is Sphecotheres, 
peculiar to the Australian Region, and distinguishable from the 
more normal orioles by a bare space round the eye. Orioles 
are shy and restless birds, frequenting gardens and woods, and 
living on insects and fruit. The nest is pocket-shaped, of bark, 
grass and fibres, and the eggs are white or salmon-coloured 
with dark spots. The " American orioles " (see Icterus) belong 
to a different Passerine family, the Icteridac. (A. N.) 

ORION (or Oarion), in Greek mythology, son of Hyrieus 
(Eponymus of Hyria in Boeotia), or of Poseidon, a mighty hunter 
of great beauty and gigantic strength, perhaps corresponding 
to the " wild huntsman " of Teutonic mythology. He is also 
sometimes represented as sprung from the earth. He was the 
favourite of Eos, the dawn-goddess, who loved him and carried 
him off to Delos; but the gods were angry, and would not be 
appeased till Artemis slew him with her arrows (Odyssey, v. 121). 
According to other accounts which attribute Orion's death 
to Artemis, the goddess herself loved him and was deceived 
by the angry Apollo into shooting him by mistake; or he paid 
the penalty of offering violence to her, or of challenging her 
to a contest of quoit-throwing (Apollodorus i. 4; Hyginus, 
Poet, astron. ii. 34; Horace, Odes, iii. 4, 71). In another legend 
he was blinded by Oenopion of Chios for having violated his 
daughter Merope; but having made his way to the place where 
the sun rose, he recovered his sight (Hyginus, loc. cit. ; Parthenius, 
Erotica, 20). He afterwards retired to Crete, where he lived 
the life of a hunter with Artemis; but having threatened to 
exterminate all living creatures on the island, he was killed by 
the bite of a scorpion sent by the earth-goddess (Ovid, Fasti, 
v - 537). In the lower world his shade is seen by Odysseus 
driving the wild beasts before him as he had done on earth 
(Odyssey, xi. 572). After his death he was changed into the 
constellation which is called by his name. It took the form 
of a warrior, wearing a girdle of three stars and a lion's skin, 
and carrying a club and a sword. When it rose early it was 
a sign of summer; when late, of winter and stormy weather; 
when it rose about midnight it heralded the season of vintage. 

See Kiientzle, t/ber die Sternsagen der Griechen (1897), and his 
article in Roscher's Lexikon; he shows that in the oldest legend 
Orion the constellation and Orion the hero are quite distinct, without 
deciding which was the earlier conception. The attempt sometimes 
made to attribute an astronomical origin to the myths connected 
with his name is unsuccessful, except in the case of Orion's pursuit 
of Pleione and her daughters (see Pleiades) and his death from the 
bite of the scorpion ; see also C. O. M tiller, Kleine Deutsche Schriften, 
ii. (1848); O. Gruppe, Griechische Mythologie, ii. pp. 945, 952; 
Preller-Robert, Griechische Mythologie (1894), pp. 448-454; Grimm, 
Teutonic Mythology (Eng. trans., 1883), ii. p. 726, iii. p. 948. 

In Astronomy. — The constellation Orion is mentioned by 
Homer (77. xviii. 486, xxii. 29; Od. v. 274), and also in the 
Old Testament (Amos v. 8, Job ix. 9). The Hebrew name 
for Orion also means " fool," in reference perhaps to a mytho- 
logical story of a " foolhardy, heaven-daring rebel who was 
chained to the sky for his impiety " (Driver). For the Assyrian 
names see Constellation. Ptolemy catalogued 38 stars, 
Tycho Brahe 42 and Hevelius 62. Orion is one of the most 
conspicuous constellations. It consists of three stars of the 1st 
magnitude, four of the 2nd, and many of inferior magnitude. 
a Orionis, or Betelgeuse, is a bright, yellowish-red star of varying 
magnitude (0-5 to 1-4, generally o-g). (5 Orionis or Regel is a 
1st magnitude star, y Orionis or Bellatrix, and k Orionis are 
stars of the 2nd magnitude. These four stars, in the order 
a, (5, 7, k, form an approximate rectangle. Three collinear 
stars f, e and 5 Orionis constitute the "belt of Orion"; of 
these e, the central star, is of the 1st magnitude, 5 of the 2nd, 
while f Orionis is a fine double star, its components having 
magnitudes 2 and 6; there is also a faint companion of magnitude 
10. a Orionis, very close to f Orionis, is a very fine multiple star, 
described by Sir William Herschel as two sets of treble stars; 
more stars have been revealed by larger telescopes. 6 Orionis is 






ORION AND ORUS— ORISTANO 



'*11 



a multiple star, situated in the famous nebula of Orion, one 
of the most beautiful in the heavens. (See Nebula.) 

ORION and ORUS, the names of several Greek grammarians, 
frequently confused. The following are the most important, 
(i) Orion of Thebes in Egypt (5th century a.d.), the teacher 
of Proclus the neo-Platonist and of Eudocia, the wife of the 
younger Theodosius. He taught at Alexandria, Caesarea in 
Cappadocia and Byzantium. He was the author of a partly 
extant etymological Lexicon (ed. F. \V. Sturz, 1820), largely 
used by the compilers of the Etymologicum Magnum, the Elymolo- 
gicum Gtidianum and other similar works; a collection of 
maxims in three books, addressed to Eudocia, also ascribed 
to him by Suidas, still exists in a Warsaw MS. (2) Orus of 
Miletus, who, according to Ritschl, flourished not later than the 
2nd century a.d., and was a contemporary of Herodian and a 
little junior to Phrynichus (according to Reitzenstein he was 
a contemporary of Orion). His chief works were treatises on 
orthography; on Atticisms, written in opposition to Phrynichus; 
on the names of nations. 

See F. Ritschl, De Oro el Orione Commenlatio (1834); R. Reitzen- 
stein, Geschichte der griechischen Etymologika (1807); and article 
" Orion " in Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography. 

ORISKANY, a village of Oneida county, New York, U.S.A., 
about 7 m. N.W. of Utica. Pop. about 800. Oriskany is served 
by the New York Central & Hudson River railway. There are 
malleable iron works and a manufactory of paper makers' felts 
here. In a ravine, about 2 m. west of Oriskany, was fought 
on the 6th of August 1777 the battle of Oriskany, an important 
minor engagement of the American War of Independence. 
On the 4th of August Gen. Nicholas Herkimer, who had been 
colonel jof the Tyrone county (New York) militia in 1775, and 
had been made a brigadier-general of the state militia in 1776, 
had gathered about 800 militiamen at Fort Dayton (on the site 
of the present Herkimer, New York) for the relief of Fort Schuyler 
(see Rome, N.Y.) then besieged by British and Indians under 
Colonel Barry St Leger and Joseph Brant. On the 6th General 
Herkimer's force, on its march to Fort Schuyler, was ambushed 
by a force of British under Sir John Johnson and Indians under 
Joseph Brant in the ravine above mentioned. The rear portion 
of Herkimer's troops escaped from the trap, but were pursued 
by the Indians, and many of them were overtaken and killed. 
Between the remainder and the British and Indians there was 
a desperate hand-to-hand conflict, interrupted by a violent 
thunderstorm, with no quarter shown by either side. On 
hearing the firing near Fort Schuyler (incident to a sortie by 
Lieut .-Colonel Marinus Willett) the British withdrew, after 
about 200 Americans had been killed and as many more taken 
prisoners, the loss of the British in killed being about the same. 
General Herkimer (who had advised advancing slowly, awaiting 
signal shots announcing the sortie, and had been called " Tory " 
and " coward " in consequence), though his leg had been broken 
by a shot at the beginning of the action, continued to direct 
the fighting on the American side, but died on the 16th of August 
as a result of the clumsy amputation of his leg. The battle, 
though indecisive, had an important influence in preventing 
St Leger from effecting a junction with General Burgoyne. 
The battlefield is marked by a monument erected in 1884. 

See Orderly Book oj Sir John Johnson during the Oriskany Campaign 
(Albany, 1882), with notes by VV. L. Stone and J. W. De Peyster; 
Publications of the Oneida Historical Society, vol. i. (Utica, N.Y., 
1877) ; and Phoebe S. Cowen, The Herkimers and Schuyiers (Albany, 
1903). 

ORISSA, a tract of India, in Bengal, consisting of a British 
division and twenty-four tributary states. The historical capital 
is Cuttack; and Puri, with its temple of Jagannath, is world- 
famous. Orissa differs from the rest of Bengal in being under 
a temporary settlement of land revenue. A new settlement 
for a term of thirty years was concluded in 1900, estimated 
to raise the total land revenue by more than one half; the 
greater part of this increase being levied graduaDy during the 
first eleven years of the term. To obviate destructive inun- 
dations and famines, the Orissa system of canals has been con- 
structed, with a capital outlay of nearly two millions sterling. 



(See Mahanadi). The province is traversed by the East Coast 
railway, which was opened throughout from Calcutta to Madras 
in 1901. 

The Division of Orissa consists of the five districts of Cuttack, 
Puri, Balasore, Sambolpur and the forfeited state of Angul. 
Total area 13,770 sq. m.; pop. (1901) 5,003,121, showing an 
increase of 7% in the decade. According to the census of 1901 
the total number of persons in all India speaking Oriya was more 
than 9^ millions, snowing that the linguistic area (extending 
into Madras and the Central Provinces) is much larger than the 
political province. 

The whole of Orissa is holy ground. On the southern hank 
of the Baitarani shrine rises after shrine in honour of Siva, the 
All-Destroyer. On leaving the stream the pilgrim enters Jajpur, 
literally the city of sacrifice, the headquarters of the region of 
pilgrimage sacred to the wife of the All-Destroyer. There is 
not a fiscal division in Orissa without its community of cenobites, 
scarcely a village without consecrated lands, and not a single 
ancient family that has not devoted its best acres to the gods. 
Every town is filled with temples, and every hamlet has its shrine. 
The national reverence of the Hindus for holy places has been 
for ages concentrated on Puri, sacred to Vishnu under his title 
of Jagannath, the Lord of the World. Besides its copious water- 
supply in time of high flood, Orissa has an average rainfall 
of 62-J in. per annum. Nevertheless, the uncontrolled state 
of the water-supply has subjected the country from time im- 
memorial to droughts no less than to inundation. Thus the 
terrible famine of 1 865-1 866, which swept away one-fourth of the 
entire population, was followed in 1866 by a flood which destroyed 
crops to the value of £3,000,000. Since then much has been done 
by government to husband the abundant water-supply. 

The early history of the kingdom of Orissa (Odra-desa), as 
recorded in the archives of the temple of Jagannath, is largely 
mythical. A blank in the records from about 50 B.C. to a.d. 319 
corresponds to a period of Yavana occupation and Buddhist 
influence, during which the numerous rock monasteries of Orissa 
were excavated. The founder of the Kesari or Lion dynasty, 
which ruled from a.d. 474 to 1132, is said to have restored the 
worship of Jagannath, and under this line the great Sivaite temple 
at Bhuvaneswar was constructed. In 1132 a new line (the 
Gajapati dynasty) succeeded, and Vishnu took the place of Siva 
in the royal worship. This dynasty was extinguished in 1532- 
1534, and in 1578, after half a century of war, Orissa became 
a province of the Mogul empire. It nominally passed to the 
British in 1765, by the Diwani grant of Bengal, Bhar and 
Orissa; but at that time it was occupied by the Mahratta 
raja of Nagpur, from whom it was finally conquered in 1803. 

The Tributary States of Orissa, known also as the Tributary 
Mahals, or the Garhjats, occupy the hills between the British 
districts and the Central Provinces. The most important are 
Mayurbhanj, Keonjhar, Dhenkanal, Baud and Nayagarh. 
In 1905 five Oriya-speaking states (Bamra, Rairakhol, Sonpur, 
Patna and Kalahandi) were added from the Central Provinces 
and two (Gangpur and Bonai) from the Chota Nagpur states. 
This made the total area 28,046 sq. m. and the pop. (1901) 

3.173.395- 

Up to the year 1888 some doubt existed as to the actual 
position of the Tributary states of Orissa; but in that year the 
secretary of state accepted the view that they did not form part 
of British India, and modified powers were handed over to the 
Orissa chiefs under the control of a superintendent. 

See Sir W. W. Hunter, Orissa (1872). 

ORISTANO, a town and archiepiscopal see of Sardinia, situated 
23 ft. above sea-level, about 3 m. from the eastern shore of a 
gulf on the W. coast, to which it gives its name, and 59 m. N. 
by W. of Cagliari by rail. Pop. (1901) 7107. The town preserves 
some scanty remains of the walls (dating from the end of the 13th 
century), by which it was surrounded, and two gates, the Porta 
Manna, surmounted by a lofty square tower, known also as the 
Torre S. Cristoforo, and the Porta Marina. The houses are 
largely constructed of sun-dried bricks, and are low, so that the 
area of the town is considerable in proportion to it's population. 



2 7 8 



ORIYA— ORKNEY, EARL OF 



The cathedral was reconstructed in 1733 in the baroque style, 
and scanty traces of the original building of the 12th century 
exist (see D. Scano in L' Arte, 1001, p. 359; 1903, p. 15): and also 
in Storia dell' arte in Sardegna dal XI. al XI V. sccolo, Cagliari- 
Sassari, 1907). Some statuettes and sculptured slabs partly 
belonging to its pulpit, perhaps the work of Andrea Pisano, 
have been found; upon the reverse side of two of the slabs are 
still older reliefs of the Sth or 9th century; so that the slabs 
perhaps originally came from Tharros. In the sacristy is some 
fine silverwork. The church of S. Francesco also dates from 
the end of the 13th century, but has been altered. A fine statue 
by Nino, son of Andrea, is preserved here. Two m. south of 
Oristano is the village of S. Giusta, with a beautiful Romanesque 
church of the Pisan period dedicated to this saint (D. Scano, 
Bollettino dell' arte, Feb. 1907, p. 8), containing several antique 
columns. It was once an independent episcopal see. The lagoons 
on the coast are full of fish, but are a cause of malaria. The 
environs are fertile, and a quantity of garden produce is grown; 
while good wine (veniaccia) is also made, and also ordinary 
pottery in considerable quantities, supplying most of the island. 
The bridge crossing the river Tirso, a little to the north of the 
town, over 300 ft. long, with five arches, took the place, in 1870, 
of an old one which is said to have been of Roman origin. A 
m. south of the mouth of this river is the landing-place for 
shipping. The large orange groves of Milis lie 13 m. N. of 
Oristano at the base of Monte Ferru, where they are sheltered 
from the wind. The finest belong to the Marchese Boyl, whose 
plantation contains some 500,000 orange and lemon trees. The 
inhabitants of Milis manufacture reed baskets and mats, which 
they sell throughout Sardinia. 

Oristano occupies the site of the Roman Othoca, the point at 
which the inland road and the coast road from Carales to Turris 
Libisonis bifurcated, but otherwise an unimportant place, 
overshadowed by Tharros. The medieval town is said to have 
been founded in 1070. It was the seat from the nth century 
onwards of the giudici (judges) of Arborea, one of the four 
divisions of the island. Almost the last of these judges was 
Eleonora (1347-1403) ; after her death Oristano became the seat 
of a marquisate, which was suppressed in 1478. The frontier 
castles of Monreale and Sanluri, some 20 and 30 m. respectively 
to the S.S.E., were the scene of much fighting between the 
Aragonese government and the giudici and marquises of Arborea 
in the 14th and 15th centuries. (T. As.) 

ORIYA (properly Oriya), the Aryan language of Odra or 
Orissa in India. It is the vernacular not only of that province 
but also of the adjoining districts and native states of Madras 
and of the Central Provinces. In 1 901 it was spoken by 9,687,429 
people. It is closely related to Bengali and Assamese, and with 
them and with Bihari it forms the Eastern Group of the Indo- 
Aryan vernaculars. See Bengali. 

ORIZABA (Aztec, Citlaltepetl, " star mountain "), an extinct 
or dormant volcano, on the boundary between the Mexican states 
of Puebla and Vera Cruz and very nearly on the 19th parallel. 
It rises from the south-eastern margin of the great Mexican 
plateau to an elevation of 18,314 ft., according to Scovell and 
Bunsen's measurements in 1891-1892, or 18,250 and 18,209 &• 
according to other authorities, and 18,701 (5700 metres) by the 
Comision Geografica Exploradora. It is the highest peak in 
Mexico and the second highest in North America. Its upper 
timber line is about 13,500 ft. above sea-level, and Hans Gadow 
found patches of apparently permanent snow at an elevation of 
14,400 ft. on its S.E. side in 1902. The first ascent of Orizaba 
was made by Reynolds and Maynard in 1848, since when other 
successful attempts have been made and many failures have been 
recorded. Its last eruptive period was 1 545-1 566, and the volcano 
is now considered to be extinct, although Humboldt records that 
smoke was seen issuing from its summit as late as the beginning 
of the 19th century. 

ORIZABA (Indian name Almaializ-apan, pleasant waters), 
a city of Mexico in the state of Vera Cruz, 82 m. by rail W.S.W. 
of the port of Vera Cruz. Pop. (1900) 32,894, including a large 
percentage of Indians and half-breeds. The Mexican railway 



affords frequent communication with the City of Mexico and 
Vera Cruz, and a short line (45 m.) connects with Ingenio, an 
industrial village. Orizaba stands in a fertile, well-watered, 
and richly wooded valley of the Sierra Madre Oriental, 4025 
ft. above sea-level, and about 18 m. S. of the snow-crowned 
volcano that bears its name. It has a mild, humid and healthful 
climate. The public edifices include the parish church of San 
Miguel, a chamber of commerce, a handsome theatre, and some 
hospitals. The city is the centre of a rich agricultural region 
which produces sugar, rum, tobacco and Indian corn. In 
colonial times, when tobacco was one of the crown monopolies, 
Orizaba was one of the districts officially licensed to produce it. 
It is also a manufacturing centre of importance, having good 
water power from the Rio Blanco and producing cotton and 
woollen fabrics. Its cotton factories are among the largest 
in the republic. Paper is also made at Cocolapan in the canton 
of Orizaba. The forests in this vicinity are noted for orchids 
and ferns. An Indian town called Ahuaializapan, subject to 
Aztec rule, stood here when Cortes arrived on the coast. The 
Spanish town that succeeded it did not receive its charter until 
1774, though it was one of the stopping-places between Vera 
Cruz and the capital. In 1862 it was the headquarters of the 
French. 

ORKHON INSCRIPTIONS, ancient Turkish inscriptions of the 
Sth century a.d., discovered near the river Orkhon to the south 
of Lake Baikal in 1889. They are written in an alphabet derived 
from an Aramaic source and recount the history of the northern 
branch of the Turks or Tu-kiue of Chinese historians. See 
Turks. 

ORKNEY, EARL OF, a Scottish title held at different periods 
by various families, including its present possessors the Fitz- 
maurices. The Orkney Islands (q.v.) were ruled by jarls or earls 
under the supremacy of the kings of Norway from very early times 
to about 1360, many of these jarls being also earls of Caithness 
under the supremacy of the Scottish kings. Perhaps the most 
prominent of them were a certain Paul (d. 1099) who assisted the 
Norwegian king, Harald III. Haardraada, when he invaded 
England in 1066; and his grandson Paul the Silent, who built, 
at least in part, the cathedral of St Magnus at Kirkwall. They 
were related to the royal families of Scotland and Norway. 

In its more modern sense the earldom dates from about 1380, 
and the first family to hold it was that of Sinclair, Sir Henry 
Sinclair (d. c. 1400) of Roslin, near Edinburgh, being recognized 
as earl by the king of Norway. Sir Henry was the son of Sir 
William Sinclair, who was killed by the Saracens whilst accom- 
panying Sir James Douglas, the bearer of the Bruce's heart, to 
Palestine in 1330, and on the maternal side was the grandson of 
Malise, who called himself earl of Strathearn, Caithness and 
Orkney. He ruled the islands almost like a king, and employed 
in his service the Venetian travellers Nicolo and Antonio Zeno. 
His son Henry (d. 1418) was admiral of Scotland and was taken 
prisoner by the English in 1406, together with Prince James, 
afterwards King James I.; his grandson William, the 3rd earl 
(e. 1404-1480), was chancellor of Scotland and took some part 
in public affairs. In 1455 William was created earl of Caithness, 
and in 1470 he resigned his earldom of Orkney to James III. of 
Scotland, who had just acquired the sovereignty of these islands 
through his marriage with Margaret, daughter of Christian I., 
king of Denmark and Norway. In 1567 Queen Mary's lover, 
James Hepburn, earl of Bothwell, was created duke of Orkney, 
and in 1581 her half-brother Robert Stewart (d. 1592), an illegiti- 
mate son of James V., was made earl of Orkney. Robert, who 
was abbot of Holyrood, joined the party of the reformers and was 
afterwards one of the principal enemies of the regent Morton. 
His son Patrick acted in a very arbitrary manner in the Orkneys, 
where he set the royal authority at defiance; in 1609 he was 
seized and imprisoned, and, after his bastard son Robert had 
suffered death for heading a rebellion, he himself wus executed in 
February 1614, when his honours and estates were forfeited. 

In 1696 Lord George Hamilton was created earl of Orkney 
(see below). He married Elizabeth Villiers (see below), and he 
was succeeded by his daughter Anne (d. 1756), the wife of 









ORKNEY, COUNTESS OF— ORKNEY ISLANDS 



279 



William O'Brien, 4th earl of lnehiquin. Anne's daughter Mary 
(c. 1721-1791) and her granddaughter Mary (1755-1831) were 
both countesses of Orkney in their own right; the younger 
Mary married Thomas Fitzmauriee (1742-170.3), son of John 
Petty, earl of Shelburne, and was succeeded in the title by 
her grandson, Thomas John Hamilton Fitzmauriee (1803-1877), 
whose descendants still hold the earldom. 

ORKNEY, ELIZABETH HAMILTON, Countess of (c. 1657- 
I 733): mistress of the English King William III., daughter of 
Colonel Sir Edward Villiers of Richmond, was born about 1657. 
Her mother, Frances Howard, daughter of the 2nd earl of Suffolk, 
was governess to theprineesses Mary and Anne, and secured place 
and influence for her children in Mary's household. Edward 
Villiers, afterwards created 1st earl of Jersey (1656-1711), 
became master of the horse, while his sisters Anne and Elizabeth 
were among the maids of honour who accompanied Mary to the 
Hague on her marriage. Elizabeth Villiers became William's 
acknowledged mistress in 1680. After his accession to the 
English crown he settled on her a large share of the confis- 
cated Irish estates of James II. This grant was revoked by 
parliament, however, in 1690. Mary's distrust of Marlborough 
was fomented by Edward Villiers, and the bitter hostility 
between Elizabeth Villiers and the duchess of Marlborough 
perhaps helped to secure the duke's disgrace with William. 
Shortly after Mary's death, William, actuated, it is said, by his 
wife's expressed wishes, broke with Elizabeth Villiers, who was 
married to her cousin, Lord George Hamilton, fifth son of the 
3rd duke of Hamilton, in November 1695. The husband was 
gratified early in the next year with the titles of earl of Orkney, 
viscount of Kirkwall and Baron Dechmont. The countess of 
Orkney served her husband's interests with great skill, and the 
marriage proved a happy one. She died in London on the 19th 
of April 1733. 

ORKNEY, GEORGE HAMILTON, Earl of (1666-1737), 
British soldier, was the fifth son of William, duke of Hamilton, 
and was trained for the military career by his uncle, Lord 
Dumbarton, in the 1st Foot. In 1689 he became lieut.- 
colonel and a few months later brevet colonel. He served at the 
battles of the Boyne and of Aughrim, and, at the head of the 
Royal Fusiliers, at Steinkirk. As colonel of his old regiment, the 
1st Foot, he took part in the battle of Landen or Neerwinden, and 
in the siege of Namur, serving also at Athlone and Limerick in 
the Irish war. At Namur Hamilton received a severe wound, 
and in recognition of his services was made a brigadier. In 
1695 he married Elizabeth Villiers (see above), who was " the 
wisest woman " Swift " ever knew." The following year he was 
made earl of Orkney in the Scottish peerage. As a major- 
general he took the field with Marlborough in Flanders, and 
on January 1st, 1703-1704 he became lieutenant-general. At 
Blenheim it was Orkney's command which carried the village, 
and in June 1705 he led a flying column which marched from the 
Moselle to the rescue of Liege. At Ramillies he headed the 
pursuit of the defeated French, at Oudenarde he played a dis- 
tinguished part and in 1708 he captured the forts of St Amand 
andjSt Martin at Tournay. At the desperately fought battle of 
Malplaquet Lord Orkney's battalions led the assault on the 
French entrenchments, and suffered very severe losses. He 
remained with the army in Flanders till the end of the war, as 
" general of the foot," and at the peace he was made colonel- 
commandant of the 1st Foot as a reward for his services. He 
occupied various civil and military posts of importance, culminat- 
ing with the appointment of " field marshal of all His Majesty's 
forces " in 1736. This appointment is the first instance of field 
marshal's rank (as now understood) in the British Service. A 
year later he died in London. 

ORKNEY ISLANDS, a group of islands, forming a county, 
off the north coast of Scotland. The islands are separated from 
the mainland by the Pentland Firth, which is 61 m. wide between 
Brough Ness in the island of South Ronaldshay and Duncansbay 
Head in Caithness-shire. The group is commonly estimated 
to consist of 67 islands, of which 30 are inhabited (though in the 
case of four of them the population comprises only the light- 



house attendants), but the number may be increased to as many 
as 90 by including rocky islets more usually counted with the 
islands of which they probably once formed part. The Orkneys 
lie between 58° 41' and 59° 24' N, and 2° 22' and 3° 26' W., 
measure 50 m. from N.E. to S.W. and 29 m. from E. to W., 
and cover 240,476 acres or 375-5 sq. m. Excepting on the west 
coasts of the larger islands, which present rugged cliff scenery 
remarkable both for beauty and for colouring, the group lies 
somewhat low and is of bleak aspect, owing to the absence of 
trees. The highest hills are found in Hoy. The only other islands 
containing heights of any importance are Pomona, with Ward 
Hill (880 ft.), and Wideford (740 ft.) and Rousay. Nearly all of 
the islands possess lakes, and Loch Harray and Loch Stenness 
in Pomona attain noteworthy proportions. The rivers are 
merely streams draining the high land. Excepting on the west 
fronts of Pomona, Hoy and Rousay, the coast-line of the islands 
is deeply indented, and the islands themselves are divided from 
each other by straits generally called sounds or firths, though off 
the north-east of Hoy the designation Bring Deeps is used, 
south of Pomona is Scapa Flow and to the south-west of Eday 
is found the Fall of Warness. The very names of the islands 
indicate their nature, for the terminal a or ay is the Norse cy, 
meaning " island," which is scarcely disguised even in the words 
Pomona and Hoy. The islets are usually styled holms and the 
isolated rocks skerries. The tidal currents, or races, or roost 
(as some of them are called locally, from the Icelandic) off many 
of the isles run with enormous velocity, and whirlpools are of 
frequent occurrence, and strong enough at times to prove a 
source of danger to small craft. The charm of the Orkneys 
does not He in their ordinary physical features, so much as in 
beautiful atmospheric effects, extraordinary examples of light 
and shade, and rich coloration of cliff and sea. 

Geology. — All the islands of this group are built up entirely of Old 
Red Sandstone. As in the neighbouring mainland of Caithness, 
these rocks rest upon the metamorphic rocks of the eastern schists, 
as may be seen on Pomona, where a narrow strip is exposed between 
Stromness and Inganess, and again in the small island of Graemsay; 
they are represented by grey gneiss and granite. The upper division 
of the Old Red Sandstone is found only in Hoy, where it forms the 
Old Man and neighbouring cliffs on the N.W. coast. The Old Man 
presents a characteristic section, for it exhibits a thick pile of massive, 
current-bedded red sandstones, resting, near the foot of the pinnacle, 
upon a thin bed of amygdaloidal porphyrite, which in its turn lies 
unconformably upon steeply inclined flagstones. This bed of volcanic 
rock may be followed northward in the cliffs, and it may be noticed 
that it thickens considerably in that direction. The Lower Old 
Red Sandstone is represented by well-bedded flagstones over most 
of the islands; in the south of Pomona these are faulted against an 
overlying series of massive red sandstones, but a gradual passage 
from the flagstones to the sandstones may be followed from Westray 
S.E. into Eday. A strong synclinal fold traverses Eday and Shapin- 
say, the axis being N. and S. Near Haco's Ness in Shapinsay there 
is a small exposure of amygdaloidal diabase which is of course older 
than that in Hoy. Many indications of ice action are found in these 
islands; striated surfaces are to be seen on the cliffs in Eday and 
Westray, in Kirkwall Bay and on Stennie Hill in Eday; boulder 
clay, with marine shells, and with many boulders of rocks foreign 
to the islands (chalk, oolitic limestone, flint, &c), which must have 
been brought up from the region of Moray Firth, rests upon the old 
strata in many places. Local moraines are found in some of the 
valleys in Pomona and Hoy. 

Climate and Industries. — The climate is remarkably temperate 
and equable for so northerly a latitude. The average temperature 
for the year is 46° F., for winter 39° F. and for summer 54 3' F. 
The winter months are January, February and March, the last being 
the coldest. Spring never begins till April, and it is the middle of 
June before the heat grows genial. September is frequently the 
finest month, and at the end of October or beginning of November 
occurs the peerie (or little) summer, the counterpart of the St 
Martin's summer of more southerly climes. The average annual 
rainfall varies from 33-4 in. to 37 in. Fogs occur during summer and 
early autumn, and furious gales may be expected four or five times 
in the year, when the crash of the Atlantic waves is audible for 
20 m. To tourists one of the fascinations of the islands is their 
" nightless summers." On the longest day the sun rises at 3 o'clock 
A.M. and sets at 9.25 p.m., and darkness is unknown, it being possible 
to read at midnight. Winter, however, is long and depressing. On 
the shortest day the sun rises at 9.10 a.m. and sets at 3. 1" P.M. 
The soil generally is a sandy loam or a strong but friable clay, and 
very fertile. Large quantities of seaweed as well as lime and marl 
are available for manure. Until the middle of the 19th century 



28o 



ORKNEY ISLANDS 



the methods of agriculture were of a primitive character, but since 
then they have been entirely transformed, and Orcadian farming 
is now not below the average standard of the Scottish lowlands. 
The crofters' houses have been rebuilt of stone and lime, and are 
superior to those in most parts of the Highlands. The holdings run 
fairly small, the average being between 30 and 40 acres. Practically 
the only grain crops that are cultivated are oats (which greatly 
predominate) and barley, while the favoured root crops are turnips 
(much the most extensively grown) and potatoes. Not half of the 
area has been brought under cultivation, and the acreage under wood 
is insignificant. The raising of live stock is rigorously pursued. 
Shorthorns and polled Angus are the commonest breeds of cattle; 
the sheep are mostly Cheviots and a Cheviot-Leicester cross, but the 
native sheep are still reared in considerable numbers in Hoy and 
South Ronaldshay, pigs are also kept on several of the islands, 
and the horses — as a rule hardy, active and small, though larger 
than the famous Shetland ponies — are very numerous, but mainly 
employed in connexion with agricultural work. The woollen trade 
once promised to reach considerable dimensions, but towards the 
end of the 18th century was superseded by the linen (for which flax 
came to be largely grown) ; and when this in turn collapsed before 
the products of the mills of Dundee, Dunfermline and Glasgow, 
straw-plaiting was taken up, though only to be killed in due time 
by the competition of the south. The kelp industry, formerly of at 
least miaor importance, has ceased. Sandstone is quarried on several 
islands, and distilleries are found in Pomona (near Kirkwall and 
Stromness). But apart from agriculture the principal industry is 
fishing. For several centuries the Dutch practically monopolized 
the herring fishery, but when their supremacy was destroyed by the 
salt duty, the Orcadians failed to seize the opportunity thus pre- 
sented, and George Barry (d. 1805) says that in his day the fisheries 
were almost totally neglected. The industry, however, has now been 
organized, and over 2000 persons are employed in the various branches 
of it. The great catches are herring, cod and ling, but lobsters and 
crabs are also exported in large quantities. There is a regular com- 
munication by steamer becween Stromness and Kirkwall, and Thurso, 
Wick, Aberdeen and Leith, and also between Kirkwall and Lerwick 
and other points of the Shetlands. 

Population and Administration. — In 1891 the population 
numbered 30,453, and in 1001 it was 28,699, or 67 persons to 
the sq. m. In 1901 there were 70 persons who spoke Gaelic 
and English, but none who spoke Gaelic only. Orkney unites 
with Shetland to send one member to parliament, and Kirkwall, 
the county town and the only royal burgh, is one of the Wick 
district groups of parliamentary burghs. There is a combination 
poorhouse at Kirkwall, where there are also two hospitals. 
Orkney forms a sheriffdom with Shetland and Caithness, and a 
resident sheriff-substitute sits at Kirkwall. The county is under 
the school-board jurisdiction, but at Kirkwall and Stromness 
there are public schools giving secondary education. 

The Inhabited Islands. — Premising that they are more or less 
scattered, and that several lie on the same plane, the following list 
gives the majority of the inhabited islands from south to north, 
the number within brackets indicating the population. Sule Skerry 
(3) and the Pentland Skerries (8) lie at the eastern entrance of the 
Portland Firth; Swona (23), ij m. from the mainland, belongs to 
Caithness and is situated in the parish of Canisbay; South Ronald- 
shay (1991) is the best cultivated and most fertile of the southern 
isles of the group. On Hoxa Head, to the west of the large village 
of St Margaret's Hope, is a broch, or round tower, and the island 
contains, besides, examples of Picts' houses and standing stones. 
Hoy {q.v. ; 1216) is the southernmost of the larger islands. Flotta 
(372), east of Hoy, was the home for a long time of the Scandinavian 
compiler of the Codex Flotticensis, which furnished Thormodr 
Torfasus (1636-1719), the Icelandic antiquary, with many of the 
facts for his History of Norway, more particularly with reference to 
the Norse occupation of Orkney. Pharay (59) also lies E. of Hoy. 
Burray (677) is famous for the broch from which the island takes its 
name (Borgarey, Norse, " island of the broch "). The tower stands 
on the north-western shore, is 15 ft. high, has walls from 15 to 20 ft. 
thick, built of layers of flat stones without cement or mortar, and 
an interior diameter of 40 ft. It is entered from the east by a 
passage, on each side of which there is a small chamber constructed 
within the thickness of the wall. Similar chambers occur on the 
west, north and south sides, accessible only from the interior. 
Adjoining the southern chamber is the inside stair conducting to 
the top of the broch ; of this stair some twenty steps remain. Between 
Hoy and Pomona are Hunda (8), Cava (17), and Graemsay (195), 
which has excellent soil and is mostly under cultivation. The isle 
is surrounded by shoals, and high-level and low-level lighthouses 
have been erected, the one at the north-west and the other at the 
north-east corner. The cliffs of Copinshay (10) are a favourite haunt 
of sea-birds, which are captured by the cragsmen for their feathers 
and eggs. Half a mile to the N.E. is the great rock which, from a 
fancied resemblance to a horse rearing its head from the sea, is called 
the Horse of Copinshay. Pomona (q.v. ; 16,235) ' s the principal 



island, and as such is known also as Mainland. Shapinshay (765) 
was the birthplace of William Irving, father of Washington Irving. 
It possesses several examples of Pictish and Scandinavian an- 
tiquities, such as the " Odin stone " and the broch of Burrowstone. 
Balfour Castle, a mansion in the Scottish Baronial style built in 1848, 
is situated near the south-western extremity of the island. The 
island takes its name from Hjalpand, a Norse viking. Gairsay (33) 
was the residence of Sweyn Asleifson, the rover, celebrated in the 
Orkneyinga Saga for his exploits as a trencherman and his feats in 
battle. Stronsay (1159) is a busy station of the herring fishery, 
and is also largely under cultivation. At Lamb Head, its south- 
easterly point, is a broch and Pictish pier, and about 2 m. farther 
north, on Odin Bay, is a round pit in the rocks called the Vat of 
Kirbuster. The well of Kildinguie was once resorted to as a specific 
for leprosy. Papa Stronsay (16) commemorates in its name, as 
others of both the Orkneys and Shetlands do, the labours of the 
Celtic papae, or missionaries, who preached the Christian gospel before 
the arrival of the Northmen. The adjacent Veira or Wire has a 
population of 60. Egilshay (142) is the island on which St Magnus 
was murdered by his cousin Hacco in 115. It derives its name — 
Church (ecclesia) Island — from the little church of St Magnus, 
now in ruins, consisting of a chancel 15 ft. long, and nave 30 ft. long. 
The building has a round tower at the west end of the nave. The 
tower resembles similar constructions found beside Irish churches 
of the 7th and 8th centuries and has walls 3 ft. thick. It is doubtful 
whether it must be ascribed to the Celtic evangelists or to a much 
later period — not earlier than the 12th century. On Rousay (627) 
the cairn of Blotchnie Fiold (81 1 ft.), the highest point of the island, 
commands a beautiful survey of the northern isles of the archipelago. 
At the southern base of the hill stands the fine mansion of Trumbland 
House. Eday (596) contains several specimens of weems, mounds 
and standing stones. It affords good pasturage and has sandstone 
quarries. Carrick village, once a burgh of barony, with salt pans 
and other manufactures, was named after the earl of Carrick, brother 
of Patrick Stewart, 2nd earl of Orkney (d. 1614). It was off this 
island that John Gow, the pirate, was taken in 1725. Sanday 
(1727), with an area of 19 sq. m., is one of the largest of the northern 
isles, and yields excellent crops of potatoes and grain. It has safe 
harbours, in the north at Otterswick and in the south at Kettletoft. 
The antiquities include a broch in Elsness. Pharay (47) lies W. of 
Edey. Westray (1956), one of the seats of the cod fishery, has a 
good harbour at Pier-o'-wall. Noltland Castle, in the vicinity, is 
interesting as having been proposed as the refuge of Queen Mary 
after her flight from Loch Leven. It dates from the 15th century 
or even earlier, and was at one time the property of Sir Gilbert 
Balfour, the Master of Queen Mary's Household. The building, now 
in ruins, was never completed. On one side of the inner court, to 
which a finely ornamental doorway gives access, is a large hall with 
a vaulted ceiling of stone, 20 ft. high. The cliffs and overhanging 
crags at Noup Head (250 ft.), the most westerly point, are remark- 
ably picturesque. An isolated portion, divided from the headland 
by a narrow chasm, is known as the Stack of Noup. Gentleman's 
Cave, 1 m. to the south, was so called from the circumstance that it 
afforded shelter to five of the leading followers of Prince Charles 
Edward, who lay here during the winter of 1745-1746. Papa 
Westray (295) and North Ronaldshay (442) are the most northerly 
islands of the group. The latter is only reached from Sanday, from 
which it is separated by a dangerous firth 2J m. wide. The monu- 
mental stone with Ogham inscription, which was discovered in the 
broch of Burrian, must date from the days of the early Christian 



missionaries. 



History. — The Orkneys were the Orcades of classical writers, 
and the word is probably derived from the Norse Orkn, seal, 
and cy, island. The original inhabitants were Picts, evidence 
of whose occupation still exists in numerous weems or under- 
ground houses, chambered mounds, barrows or burial mounds, 
brochs or round towers, and stone circles and standing stones. 
Such implements as have survived are of the rudest description, 
and include querns or stone handmills for grinding corn, stone 
worls and bone combs employed in primitive forms of woollen 
manufacture, and specimens of simple pottery ware. If, as 
seems likely, the Dalriadic Scots towards the beginning of the 
6th century established a footing in the islands, their success 
was short-lived, and the Picts regained power and kept it until 
dispossessed by the Norsemen in the 9th century. In the wake 
of the Scots incursionists followed the Celtic missionaries about 
565. They were companions of St Columba and their efforts to 
convert the folk to Christianity seem to have impressed the 
popular imagination, for several islands bear the epithet " Papa " 
in commemoration of the preachers. Norse pirates having 
made the islands the headquarters of their buccaneering expedi- 
tions indifferently against their own Norway and the coasts and 
isles of Scotland, Harold Haarfager (" Fair Hair ") subdued 



ORLEANAIS— ORLEANISTS 



:8l 



the rovers in 875 and both the Orkneys and Shetlands to 
Norway. They remained under the rule of Norse earls until 
1 231, when the line of the jarls became extinct. In that year 
the earldom of Caithness was granted to Magnus, second son of 
the earl of Angus, whom the king of Norway apparently con- 
firmed in the title. In 1468 the Orkneys and Shetlands were 
pledged by Christian I. of Denmark for the payment of the dowry 
of bis daughter Margaret, betrothed to James III. of Scotland, 
and as the money was never paid, their connexion with the crown 
of Scotland has been perpetual. In 1471 James bestowed the 
castle and lands of Ravenscraig in Fife on William, earl of Orkney, 
in exchange for all his rights to the earldom of Orkney, which, 
by act of parliament passed on the 20th of February of the same 
year, was annexed to the Scottish crown. In 1564 Lord Robert 
Stewart, natural son of James V., who had visited Kirkwall 
twenty-four years before, was made sheriff of the Orkneys and 
Shetlands, and received possession of the estates of the udollers; 
in 1 581 he was created earl of Orkney by James IV., the charter 
being ratified ten years later to his son Patrick, but in 1615 the 
earldom was again annexed to the crown. The islands were the 
rendezvous of Montrose's expedition in 1650 which culminated 
in his imprisonment and death. During the Protectorate they 
were visited by a detachment of Cromwell's troops, who initiated 
the inhabitants into various industrial arts and new methods 
of agriculture. In 1707 the islands were granted to the earl of 
Morton in mortgage, redeemable by the Crown on payment 
of £30,000, and subject to an annual feu-duty of £500; but 
in 1766 his estates were sold to Sir Lawrence Dundas, ancestor 
of the earls of Zetland. In early times both the archbishop 
of Hamburg and the archbishop of York disputed with the 
Norwegians ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the Orkneys and 
the right of consecrating bishops; but ultimately the Norwegian 
bishops, the first of whom was William the Old, consecrated 
in 1102, continued the canonical succession. The see remained 
vacant from 1580 to 1606, and from 1638 till the Restoration, 
and, after the accession of William II., the episcopacy was finally 
abolished (1697), although many of the clergy refused to conform. 
The topography of the Orkneys is wholly Norse, and the Norse 
tongue, at last extinguished by the constant influx of settlers 
from Scotland, lingered until the end of the 18th century. Readers 
of Scott's Pirate will remember the frank contempt which Magnus 
Troil expressed for tbe Scots, and his opinions probably accurately 
reflected the general Norse feeling on the subject. When the 
islands were given as security for the princess's dowry, there 
seems reason to believe that it was intended to redeem the pledge, 
because it was then stipulated that the Norse system of govern- 
ment and tbe law of St Olaf should continue to be observed in 
Orkney and Shetland. Thus the tidal succession and mode of 
land tenure (or, that is, absolute freehold as distinguished from 
feudal tenure) still obtain to some extent, and the remaining 
udollers hold their lands and pass them on without written title. 
Among well-known Orcadians may be mentioned James Atkine 
(1613-1687), bishop first of Moray and afterwards of Galloway; 
Murdoch McKenzie (d. 1797), the hydrographer; Malcolm Laing 
(1762-1818), author of the History of Scotland from the Union 
of the Crowns to the Union of the Kingdoms; Mary Brunton 
(1778-1818), author of Self-Control, Discipline and other novels; 
Samuel Laing (1780-1868), author of A Residence in Norway, 
and translator of the Heimskringla, the Icelandic chronicle of 
the kings of Norway; Thomas Stewart Traill (1781-1862), pro- 
fessor of medical jurisprudence in Edinburgh University and 
editor of the 8th edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica; 
Samuel Laing (181 2-1897), chairman of the London, Brighton 
& South Coast railway, and introducer of the system of 
"parliamentary" trains with fares of one penny a mile; Dr 
John Rae (1813-1893), the Arctic explorer; and William 
Balfour Baikie (1825-1864), the African traveller. 

Bibliography. — The Orkneyinga Saga, ed. G. Vigfusson, trans- 
lated by Sir George Dasent (1887-1 894), and the edition of Dr Joseph 
Anderson (1873); James Wallace, Account of the Islands of Orkney 
(1700; new ed., 1884); George Low, Tour through the Islands of 
Orkney and Shetland in 1774 (1879); G. Barry, History of Orkney 
(1805, 1867); Daniel Gorrie, Summers and Winters in the Orkneys 



(1868); D. Balfour, Odal Rights and Feudal Wrongs (i860); J. 
Fergusson, The Broths and Rude Stone Monuments of the Orkney 
Islands (1877); J. B. Craven, History of the Episcopal Church in 
Orkney (1883); J. R. Tudor, Orkney and Shetland (1883). 

ORLEANAIS, one of the provinces into which France was 
divided before the Revolution. It was the country around 
Orleans, the pagus Aurclianensis; it lay on both banks of the 
Loire, and for ecclesiastical purposes formed the diocese of 
Orleans. It was in the possession of the Capet family before 
the advent of Hugh Capet to the throne of France in 987, and in 
1344 Philip VI. gave it with the title of duke to Philip (d. 1375), 
one of his younger sons. In a geographical sense the region 
around Orleans is sometimes known as Orleanais, but this is 
somewhat smaller than the former province. 

See A. Thomas, Lcs Etats provinciaux de la France centrale (1879). 

ORLEANISTS, a French political party which arose out of 
the Revolution, and ceased to have a separate existence shortly 
after the establishment of the third republic in 1872. It took 
its name from the Orleans branch of the house of Bourbon, the 
descendants of the duke of Orleans, the younger brother of 
Louis XIV., who were its chiefs. The political aim of the 
Orleanists may be said to have been to find a common measure 
for the monarchical principle and the " rights of man " as set 
forth by the revolutionary leaders in 1789. The articles on 
Philippe, nicknamed Egalite (see Orleans, L. P.J. , duke of), and 
his son Louis Philippe, king of the French (1830-1S48), will show 
the process of events by which it came to pass that the Orleans 
princes became the more or less successful advocates of this 
attempted compromise between old and new. It may be noted 
here, however, that a certain attitude of opposition, and of 
patronage of " freedom," was traditional in this branch of the 
house of Bourbon. Saint-Simon tells us that the regent Orleans 
who died in 1723 was in the habit of avowing his admiration for 
English liberty — at least in safe company and private con- 
versation. Egalite, who had reasons to dislike King Louis XVI. 
and his queen, Marie Antoinette, stepped naturally into the 
position of spokesman of the liberal royalists of the early revolu- 
tionary time, and it was a short step from that position to the 
attitude of liberal candidates for the throne, as against the elder 
branch of the royal house which claimed to reign by divine 
right. The elder branch as represented by Louis XVIII. was 
prepared to grant (octroycr), and did grant, a charter of liberties. 
The count of Chambord, the last of the line (the Spanish Bourbons 
who descended directly from Louis XIV. were considered to be 
barred by the renunciation of Philip V. of Spain), was equally 
ready to grant a constitution. But these princes claimed to 
rule " in chief of God " and to confer constitutional rights on 
their subjects of their own free will, and mere motion. This 
feudal language and these mystic pretensions offended a people 
so devoted to principles as the French, and so acute in drawing 
deductions from premises, for they concluded, not unreasonably, 
that rights granted as a favour were always subject to revocation 
as a punishment. Therefore those of them who considered a 
monarchical government as more beneficial to France than a 
republic, but who were not disposed to hold their freedom 
subject to the pleasure of a king, were either Bonapartists who 
professed to rule by the choice of the nation, or supporters of the 
Orleans princes who were ready to reign by an " original com- 
pact " and by the will of the people. The difference therefore 
between the supporters of the elder line, or Legitimists, and 
the Orleanists was profound, for it went down to the very 
foundations of government. 

The first generation of Orleanists, the immediate supporters of 
Philippe Egalite, were swamped in the turmoil of the great 
revolution. Yet it has been justly pointed out by Albert Sore! 
in his L'Europe ct la revolution franqoise, that they subsisted 
under the Empire, and that they came naturally to the front 
when the revival of liberalism overthrew the restored legitimate 
monarchy of Louis XVIII. and Charles X. During the Restora- 
tion, 1815-1830, everything tended to identify the liberals with 
the Orleanists. Legitimism was incompatible with constitutional 
freedom. Bonapartism was in eclipse, and was moreover 
essentially a Caesarism which in the hands of the great Napoleon 



282 



ORLEANS, DUKES OF— ORLEANS, DUKE OF 



had been a despotism, calling itself democratic for no better 
reason than because it reduced all men to an equality of 
submission to a master. Those rights of equality before the 
law, and in social life, which had been far dearer to Frenchmen 
of the revolutionary epoch than political freedom, were secured. 
The next step was to obtain political freedom, and it was made 
under the guidance of men who were Orleanists because the 
Orleans princes seemed to them to offer the best guarantee for 
such a government as they desired — a government which did not 
profess to stand above the people and to own it by virtue of a 
divine and legitimate hereditary right, nor one which, like the 
Bonapartists, implied a master relying on an army, and the 
general subjection of the nation. The liberals who were Orleanists 
had the advantage of being very ably led by men eminent in 
letters and in practical affairs — Guizot, Thiers, the Broglies, 
the banker Laffitte and many others. When the unsurpassed 
folly of the legitimate rulers brought about the revolution of 1S30, 
the Orleanists stepped into its place, and they marked the pro- 
found change which had been made in the character of the govern- 
ment by calling the king. " King of the French " and not " King 
of France and Navarre." He was chief of the people by compact 
with the people, and not a territorial lord holding, in feudal 
phrase, " in chief of God." 

The events of the eighteen years of Orleanist rule cannot be 
detailed here. They^were on the whole profitable to France. 
That they ended in another "general overturn" in 1848 was 
due no doubt in part to errors of conduct in individual princes and 
politicians, but mainly to the fact that the Orleanist conception 
of what was meant by the word " people " led tbem to offend 
the long-standing and deeply-rooted love of the French for 
equality. It had been inevitable that the Orleanists, in their 
dislike of " divine right " on the one hand, and their fear of 
democratic Caesarism on the other, should turn for examples 
of a free government to England, and in England itself to the 
Whigs, both the old Whigs of the Revolution Settlement of 1689, 
and the new Whigs who extorted political franchises for the 
middle classes by the Reform Bill. They saw there a monarchy 
based on a parliamentary title, governing constitutionally and 
supported by the middle classes, and they endeavoured to 
establish the like in France under the name of a juste-milieu, 
a via media between absolutism by divine right, and a democracy 
which they were convinced would lead to Caesarism. The French 
equivalent for the English middle-class constituencies was to be 
a pays legal of about a quarter of a million of voters by whom 
all the rest of the country was to be " virtually represented." 
The doctrine was expounded and was acted upon by Guizot with 
uncompromising rigour. The Orleanist monarchy became so 
thoroughly middle-class that the nation outside of the pays legal 
ended by thinking that it was being governed by a privileged 
class less offensive, but also a great deal less brilliant, than the 
aristocracy of the old monarchy. 

The revolution of 1848 swept the Orleanist party from power 
for ever. The Orleanists indeed continued throughout the 
Second Republic and the Empire (1848-1870) to enjoy a marked 
social and literary prestige, on the strength of the wealth and 
capacity of some of their members, their influence in the French 
Academy and the ability of their organs in the press — particu- 
larly the Revue des deux mondcs,ihe Journal des debats, and the 
papers directed by E. Herve. During the Empire the discreet 
opposition of the Orleanists, exercised for the most part with 
infinite dexterity and tact, by reticences, omissions, and historical 
studies in which the Empire was attacked under foreign or 
ancient names, was a perpetual thorn in the side of Napoleon III. 
Yet they possessed little hold on the country and outside of a 
cultivated liberal circle in Paris. Their weakness was demon- 
strated when the second empire was swept away by the German 
War of 1870-71. The country in its disgust at the Bonapartists 
and its fear of the Republicans, chose a great many royalists to 
represent it in the Assembly which met in Bordeaux on the 12th 
of February 1S72. In this body the Orleanists again exercised 
a kind of leadership by virtue of individual capacity, but they 
were counterbalanced by the Legitimists. The most effective 



proof of power they gave was to render possible the expulsion 
from power of Thiers on the 24th of May 1873, as punishment for 
his dexterous imposition of the Republic on the unwilling 
majority of the Assembly. Their real occupation was to en- 
deavour to bring about a fusion between themselves and the 
Legitimists which should unite the two royalist parties for the 
confusion of the Bonapartists and Republicans. The belief 
that a fusion would strengthen the royalists was natural and 
was not new. As far back as 1850 Guizot had proposed, or had 
thought of proposing, one, but it was on the condition that the 
comte de Chambord would resign his divine pretentions. When 
a fusion was arranged in 1873 it wa s on quite another footing. 
After much exchange of notes and many agitated conferences in 
committee rooms and drawing-rooms, the comte de Paris, the 
representative of the Orleanists, sought an interview with the 
comte de Chambord at Frohsdorff, and obtained it by giving a 
written engagement that he came not only to pay his respects to 
the head of his house, but also to " accept his principle." It has 
been somewhat artlessly pleaded by the Orleanists that this 
engagement was given with mental reservations. But there were 
no mental reservations on the part of the comte de Chambord, 
and the country showed its belief that the liberal royalists had 
been fused by absorption in the divine right royalists. It 
returned republicans at by-elections till it transformed the 
Assembly. The Orleanist princes had still a part to play, more 
particularly after the death of the comte de Chambord in 1883 
left them heads of the house of France, but the Orleanist party 
ceased to exist as an independent political organization. 

Authorities. — The Orleanists are necessarily more or less dealt 
with in all histories of France since 1789, and in most political 
memoirs, but their principles can be learnt and their fortunes 
followed from the following: A. Sorel, V Europe el la revolution 
francaise (Paris, 1885-1904); F. Guizot, Hisloire parlementaire de 
la France (Paris, 1819-1848) and Memoires pour servir & I'histoire 
de mon temps (Paris, 1 858-1 867); P. de la Gorce, Hisloire du second 
empire (Paris, 1894-1904); and G. Hanotaux, Hisloire de la France 
contemporaine (Paris, 1903, &c). (D. H.) 

ORLEANS, DUKES OF. The title of duke of Orleans was 
first created by King Philip VI. in favour of his son Philip, 
who died without legitimate issue in 1375. The second duke 
of Orleans, created in 1392, was Louis, a younger son of Charles 
V., whose heir was his son, the poet Charles of Orleans. Charles's 
son Louis, the succeeding duke, became king of France as Louis 
XII. in 1498, when the duchy of Orleans was united with the 
royal domain. In 1626 Louis XIII. created his brother, Jean 
Baptiste Gaston, duke of Orleans, and having become extinct 
on the death of this prince in 1660 the title was revived in the 
following year by Louis XIV. in favour of his brother Philip. 
Descendants of this duke have retained the title until the present 
day, one of them becoming king of France as Louis Philippe 
in 1830. Two distinguished families are descended from the 
first house of Orleans: the counts of Angouleme, who were 
descended from John, a son of Duke Louis I., and who furnished 
France with a king in the person of Francis I.; and the counts 
and dukes of Longueville, whose founder was John, count of 
Dunois, the bastard of Orleans, a natural son of the same duke. 
In addition to the dukes of Orleans the most important members 
of this family are: Anne Marie Louise, duchess of Montpensier; 
Francis, prince of Joinville; Louis Philippe Albert, count of 
Paris; and the traveller Prince Henry of Orleans. See the 
genealogical table to the article Bourbon. 

See below for separate articles on the chief personages. 

ORLEANS, CHARLES, Duke of (1391-1465), commonly 
called Charles d'Orleans, French poet, was the eldest son of 
Louis, duke of Orleans (brother of Charles VI. of France), and 
of Valentina Visconti, daughter of Giau Galeazzo, duke of 
Milan. He was born on the 26th of May 1391. Although 
many minor details are preserved of his youth, nothing except his 
reception in 1403, from his uncle the king, of a pension of 12,000 
livres d'or is worth noticing, until his marriage three years 
later (June 29, 1406) with Isabella, his cousin, widow of 
Richard II. of England. The bride was two years older than 
her husband, and is thought to have married him unwillingly. 



ORLEANS, DUKE OF— ORLEANS, PRINCE OF 



283 



but she brought him a great dowry — it is said, 500,000 francs. 
She died three years later, leaving Charles at the age of eighteen 
a widower and father of a daughter. He was already duke of 
Orleans, for Louis had been assassinated by the Burgundians 
two years before (1407). He soon saw himself the most im- 
portant person in France, except the dukes of Burgundy and 
Brittany, the king being a cipher. This position his natural 
temperament by no means qualified him to fill. His mother 
desired vengeance for her husband, and Charles did his best 
to carry out her wishes by filling France with intestine war. 
Of this, however, he was only nominally one of the leaders, the 
real guidance of his party resting with Bernard VII., the great 
count of Armagnac, whose daughter, Bonne, he married, or at 
least formally espoused, in 1410. Five years of confused negotia- 
tions, plots and fightings passed before the English invasion 
and the battle of Agincourt, where Charles was joint commander- 
in-chief. According to one account he was dangerously wounded 
and narrowly escaped with his life. He was certainly taken 
prisoner and carried to England, which country was his residence 
thenceforward for a full quarter of a century. Windsor, Ponte- 
fract, Ampthill, Wingfield (Suffolk) and the Tower are named 
among other places as the scenes of his captivity, which, how- 
ever, was anything but a rigorous one. He was maintained 
in the state due not merely to one of the greatest nobles of 
France but to one who ranked high in the order of succession 
to the crown. He hunted and hawked and enjoyed society 
amply, though the very dignities which secured him these 
privileges made his ransom great, and his release difficult to 
arrange. Above all, he had leisure to devote himself to literary 
work. But for this he would hardly be more than a name. 

This work consists wholly of short poems in the peculiar 
artificial metres which had become fashionable in France about 
half a century or more before his birth, and which continued 
to be fashionable till nearly a century after his death. Besides 
these a number of English poems have been attributed to him, 
but without certainty. They have not much poetical merit, 
but they exhibit something of the smoothness of versification 
not uncommon in those who write, with care, a language not 
their own. The ingenuity of a single English critic has striven 
to attribute to him a curious book in prose, called Le Debat dcs 
heraitts de France ct d'Anglcterre, but Paul Meyer, in his edition 
of the book in question, has completely disposed of this theory. 
For all practical purposes, therefore, Charles's work consists 
of some hundreds of short French poems, a few in various 
metres, but the majority either ballades or rondels. The chrono- 
logy of these poems is not always clear, still less the identity 
of the persons to whom they are addressed, and it is certain 
that some, perhaps the greater part of them, belong to the later 
years of the poet's life. But many are expressly stated in the 
manuscripts to have been " composed in prison," others are 
obviously so composed, and, on the whole, there is in them a 
remarkable unity of literary flavour. Charles d'Orleans is not 
distinguished by any extraordinary strength of passion or origin- 
ality of character; but he is only the more valuable as the last 
and not the least accomplished representative of the poetry 
of the middle of the middle ages, in which the form was almost 
everything, and the personality of the poet, save in rare instances, 
nothing. Yet he is not entirely without differentia. He is a 
capital example of the cultivated and refined — it may almost 
be called the lettered — chivalry of the last chivalrous age, 
expert to the utmost degree in carrying out the traditional 
details of a graceful convention in love and literature. But 
he is more than this; in a certain easy grace and truth of ex- 
pression, as well as in a peculiar mixture of melancholy, which 
is not incompatible with the enjoyment of the pleasures, even 
the trifling pleasures, of life, with listlessness that is fully able 
to occupy itself about those trifles, he stands quite alone. He 
has the urbanity of the 18th century without its vicious and 
prosaic frivolity, the poetry of the middle ages without their 
tendency to tediousness. His best-known rondels — those on 
Spring, on the Harbingers of Summer, and others — rank second 
to nothing of their kind. 



Poetry, however, could hardly be an entire consolation, and 
Charles was perpetually scheming for liberty. But the English 
government had too many reasons for keeping him, and it was 
not till his hereditary foe Philip the Good of Burgundy interested 
himself in him that the government of Henry VI., which had 
by that time lost most of its hold on France, released him in 
return for an immediate payment of 80,000 saltits d'or, and an 
engagement on his part to pay 140,000 crowns at a future time. 
The agreement was concluded on the 2nd of July, 1440. He was 
actually released on the 3rd of November following, and almost 
immediately cemented his friendship with Duke Philip by marry- 
ing his niece, Mary of Cleves, who brought him a considerable 
dowry to assist the payment of his ransom. He had, however, some 
difficulty in making up the balance, as well as the large sum 
required for his brother, Jean d'Angouleme, who also was an 
English prisoner. The last twenty-five years of his life (for, 
curiously enough, it divides itself into three almost exactly 
equal periods, each of that length) were spent partly in negotiat- 
ing, with a little fighting intermixed, for the purpose of gaining 
the Italian county of Asti, on which he had claims through 
his mother, partly in travelling about, but chiefly at his principal 
seat of Blois. Here he kept a miniature court which, from the 
literary point of view at least, was not devoid of brilliancy. 
At this most of the best-known French men-of-letters at the 
time — Villon, Olivier de la Marche, Chastelain, Jean Meschinot 
and others — were residents or visitors or correspondents. His 
son, afterwards Louis XII., was not born till 1462, three years 
before Charles's own death. He had become, notwithstanding 
his high position, something of a nullity in politics, and tradition 
ascribes his death to vexation at the harshness with which 
Louis XI. rejected his attempt to mediate on behalf of the duke 
of Brittany. At any rate he died, on the 4th of January, 1465, at 
Amboise. Many of his later poems are small occasional pieces 
addressed to his courtiers and companions, and in not a few 
cases answers to them by those to whom they were addressed 
exist. 

The best edition of Charles d'Orleans's poems, with a brief but 
sufficient account of his life, is that of C. d'H6ricault in the Nouvelle 
collection Jannet (Paris, 1874). For the English poems see the 
edition by Watson Taylor for the Roxburghe Club (1827). (G. Sa.) 

ORLEANS, FERDINAND PHILIP LOUIS CHARLES HENRY, 

Duke of (1810-1842), born at Palermo on the 3rd of September 
1810, was the son of Louis Philippe, duke of Orleans, afterwards 
king of France, and Marie Amelie, princess of the Two Sicilies. 
Under the Restoration he bore the title of duke of Chartres, and 
studied classics in Paris at the College Henri IV. At the out- 
break of the Revolution, which in 1830 set his father on the 
throne, he was colonel of a regiment of Hussans. He then 
assumed the title of duke of Orleans, and was sent by the king to 
Lyons to put down the formidable riots which had broken out 
there (1831), and then to the siege of Antwerp (1832). He was 
appointed lieutenant-general, and made several campaigns in 
Algeria (1835, J &39, 1840). On his return to France he organized 
the battalions of light infantry known as the chasseurs d'Orleans. 
He died as the result of a carriage accident at Neuilly, near Paris, 
on the 13th of July 1842. 

The duke of Orleans had married (May 30, 1837) Helene 
Louise Elisabeth of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, and had by her two 
sons, the count of Paris and the duke of Chartres. On the 24th 
of February 1848, after the abdication of Louis Philippe, the 
duchess of Orleans went to the Chamber of Deputies assembled 
in the Palais Bourbon in the hope of having her eldest son 
proclaimed and of obtaining the regency; but the threatening 
attitude of the populace forced her to flee. She took refuge in 
England, and died at Richmond on the 18th of May 1858. 

(M. P.*) 

ORLEANS, HENRI, Prince of (1867-1001), eldest son of 
Robert, duke of Chartres, was born at Ham, near Richmond, 
Surrey, on the 16th of October 1867. In 1S89, at the instance 
of his father, who paid the expenses of the tour, he undertook, 
in company with MM. Bonvalot and Dedecken, a journey through 
Siberia to Siam. In the course of their travels they crossed the 



284 



ORLEANS, DUCHESS OF— ORLEANS, DUKE OF 



mountain range of Tibet, and the fruits of their observations, 
submitted to the Geographical Society of Paris (and later in- 
corporated in De Paris an Tonkin a trovers le Tibet inconnu, 
published in 1S92), brought them conjointly the gold medal 
of that society. In 1S92 the prince made a short journey of 
exploration in East Africa, and shortly afterwards visited 
Madagascar, proceeding thence to Tongking. From this point 
he set out for Assam, and was successful in discovering the 
sources of the river Irrawaddy, a brilliant geographical achieve- 
ment which secured the medal of the Geographical Society of 
Paris and the cross of the Legion of Honour. In 1897 he revisited 
Abyssinia, and political differences arising from this trip led to a 
duel with the comte de Turin, in which both combatants were 
wounded. While on a trip to Assam in 1901 he died at Saigon 
on the 9th of August. Prince Henri was a somewhat violent 
Anglophobe, and his diatribes against Great Britain contrasted 
rather curiously with the cordial reception which his position as 
a traveller obtained for him in London, where he was given the 
gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society. 

ORLEANS, HENRIETTA, Duchess of (1644-1670), third 
daughter of the English king, Charles I., and his queen, Henrietta 
Maria, was born during the Civil War at Exeter on the 16th of 
June 1644. A few days after her birth her mother left England, 
and provision for her maintenance having been made by Charles 
she lived at Exeter under the care of Lady Dalkeith (afterwards 
countess of Morton) until the surrender of the city to the parlia- 
mentarians, when she was taken to Oatlands in Surrey. Then 
in July 1646 Lady Dalkeith carried the princess in disguise to 
France, and she rejoined her mother in Paris, where her girlhood 
was spent and where she was educated as a Roman Catholic. 
Henrietta was present at the coronation of Louis XIV., and was 
mentioned as a possible bride for the king, but she was betrothed, 
not to Louis, but to his only brother Philip. After the restoration 
of her brother Charles II., she returned to England with her 
mother, but a few months later she was again in Paris, where 
she was married to Philip, now duke of Orleans, on the 30th of 
March 1661. The duchess was very popular at the court of 
Louis XIV., and was on good terms with the grand monarch 
himself; she shared in the knowledge of state secrets, but was 
soon estranged from her husband, and at the best her conduct 
was very imprudent. In 1670, at the instigation of Louis, she 
visited England and obtained the signature of Charles II. 's 
ministers to the treaty of Dover; her success in this matter 
greatly delighted Louis, but it did not improve her relations with 
Philip, who had long refused his consent to his wife's visit to 
England. Shortly after returning to France, Henrietta died at 
St Cloud on the 30th of June 1670. She was buried at St Denis, 
her funeral oration being pronounced by her friend Bossuet, 
and it was asserted that she had been poisoned by order of her 
husband. She left two daughters, Marie Louise, wife of Charles 
II. of Spain, and Anne Marie, wife of Victor Amadeus II. of Savoy. 
According to legitimist principles, the descendants of Henrietta, 
through her daughter Marie of Savoy, are entitled to wear the 
British crown. 

ORLEANS, JEAN BAPTISTE GASTON, Duke of (1608-1660), 
third son of the French king Henry IV., and his wife Marie de 
Medici, was born at Fontainebleau on the 25th of April 1608. 
Known at first as the duke of Anjou, he was created duke of 
Orleans in 1626, and was nominally in command of the army 
which besieged La Rochelle in 1628, having already entered 
upon that course of political intrigue which was destined to 
occupy the remainder of his life. On two occasions he was 
obliged to leave France for conspiring against the government of 
his mother and of Cardinal Richelieu; and after waging an 
unsuccessful war in Languedoc, he took refuge in Flanders. 
Reconciled with his brother Louis XIII., he plotted against 
Richelieu in 1635, fled from the country, and then submitted 
to the king and the cardinal. Soon afterwards the same process 
was repeated. Orleans stirred up Cinq-Mars to attempt Riche- 
lieu's murder, and then deserted his unfortunate accomplice. 
In 1643, on tne death of Louis XIII., Gaston became lieutenant- 
general of the kingdom, and fought against Spain on the northern 



frontiers of France; but during the wars of the Fronde he passed 
with great facility from one party to the other. Then exiled by 
Mazarin to Blois in 1652 he remained there until his death 
on the 2nd of February 1660. Gaston's first wife was Marie 
(d. 1627), daughterand heiress of Henri de Bourbon, ducde Mont- 
pensier (d. 1608), and his second wife was Marguerite (d. 1672), 
sister of Charles III., duke of Lorraine. By Marie he left a 
daughter, Anne Marie, duchesse de Montpensier (?.».); and by 
Marguerite he left three daughters, Marguerite Louise (1645- 
1721), wife of Cosimo III., grand duke of Tuscany; Elizabeth 
(1646-1656), wife of Louis Joseph, duke of Guise; and Frangoise 
Madeleine (164S-1664), wife of Charles Emmanuel II., duke of 
Savoy. (M. P.*) 

ORLEANS, LOUIS, Duke of (1372-1407), younger son of the 
French king, Charles V., was born on the 13th of March 1372. 
Having been made count of Valois and of Beaumont-sur-Oise, 
and then duke of Touraine, he received the duchy of Orleans 
from his brother Charles VI. in 1392, three years after his 
marriage with Valentina (d. 140S), daughter of Gian Galeazzo 
Visconti, duke of Milan. This lady brought the county of Asti 
to her husband; but more important was her claim upon Milan, 
which she transmitted to her descendants, and which furnished 
Louis XII. and Francis I. with a pretext for interference in 
northern Italy. When Charles VI. became insane in 1392, 
Orleans placed himself in opposition to his uncle Philip II., 
duke of Burgundy, who was conducting the government; and 
this quarrel was not only the dominating factor in the affairs of 
France, but extended beyond the borders of that country. 
Continued after Philip's death in 1404 with his son and successor, 
John the Fearless, it culminated in the murder of Orleans by 
one of John's partisans on the 23rd of November 1407. The 
duke, who was an accomplished and generous prince, was 
suspected of immoral relations with several ladies of the royal 
house, among them Isabella of Bavaria, the queen of Charles VI. 
He had eight children by Valentina Visconti, including his 
successor, Charles of Orleans, the poet, and one of his natural 
sons was the famous bastard of Orleans, John, count of Dunois. 

See E. Jarry, La Vie politique de Louis a" Orleans (Paris, 1889). 

ORLEANS, LOUIS, Duke of (1703-1752), only son of Duke 
Philip II., the regent Orleans, was born at Versailles on the 
4th of August 1703. A pious, charitable and cultured prince, 
he took very little part in the politics of the time, although he 
was conspicuous for his hostility to Cardinal Dubois in 1723. 
In 1730 Cardinal Fleury secured his dismissal from the position 
of colonel-general of the infantry, a post which he had held for 
nine years; and retiring into private life, he spent his time 
mainly in translating the Psalms and the epistles of St Paul. 
Having succeeded his father as duke of Orleans in 1723, he died 
in the abbey of St Genevieve at Paris on the 4th of February 
1752. His wife Augusta (d. 1726), daughter of Louis William, 
margrave of Baden, bore him an only son, Louis Philippe, who 
succeeded his father as duke of Orleans. 

ORLEANS, LOUIS PHILIPPE, Duke of (1725-1785), son of 
Louis, duke of Orleans, was born at Versailles on the 12th of 
May 1725, and was known as the duke of Chartres until his 
father's death in 1752. Serving with the French armies he 
distinguished himself in the campaigns of 1742, 1743 and 1744, 
and at the battle of Fontenoy in 1745, retiring to Bagnolet in 
1757, and occupying his time with theatrical performances and 
the society of men of letters. He died at St Assise on the 18th 
of November 1785. The duke married Louise Henriette de 
Bourbon-Conti, who bore him a son Philip (Egalite), duke of 
Orleans, and a daughter, who married the last duke of Bourbon. 
His second wife, Madame de Montesson, whom he married 
secretly in 1773, was a clever woman and an authoress of some 
repute. He had two natural sons, known as the abbot of St 
Far and the abbot of St Albin. 

See L'Automne d'un prince, a collection of letters from the duke to 
his second wife, edited by J. Hermand (1910). 

ORLEANS, LOUIS PHILIPPE JOSEPH, Duke of (1747-1793), 
called Philippe Egalite, son of Louis Philippe, duke of Orleans, 
and of Louise Henriette of Bourbon-Conti, was born at St Cloud 



ORLEANS, DUKES OF 



285 



on the 13th of April 1747. Having borne the title of duke of 
Montpensier until his grandfather's death in 1752, he became 
duke of Chartres, and in 1769 married Louise Marie Adelaide 
de Bourbon-Penthievre, daughter and heiress of the duke of 
Penthievre, grand admiral of France, and the richest heiress of 
the time. Her wealth made it certain that he would be the richest 
man in France, and he determined to play a part equal to that of 
his great-grandfather, the regent, whom he resembled in character 
and debauchery. As duke of Chartres he opposed the plans of 
Maupeou in 1771, and was promptly exiled to his country 
estate of Villers-Cotterets (Aisne). When Louis XVI. came 
to the throne in 1774 Chartres still found himself looked on coldly 
at court; Marie Antoinette hated him, and envied him for his 
wealth, wit and freedom from etiquette, and be was not slow 
to return her hatred with scorn. In 1778 he served in the 
squadron of D'Orvilliers, and was present in the naval] battle 
of Ushant on the 27th of July 1778. He hoped to see further 
service, but the queen was opposed to this, and he was removed 
from the navy, and given the honorary post of colonel-general 
of hussars. He then abandoned himself to pleasure; he often 
visited London, and became an intimate friend of the prince 
of Wales (afterwards George IV.); he brought to Paris the 
" anglo-mania," as it was called, and made jockeys as fashionable 
as they were in England. He also made himself very popular 
in Paris by his large gifts to the poor in time of famine, and 
by throwing open the gardens of the Palais Royal to the people. 
Before the meeting of the notables in 1787 he had succeeded his 
father as duke of Orleans, and showed his liberal ideas, which 
were largely learnt in England, so boldly that he was believed 
to be aiming at becoming constitutional king of France. In 
November he again showed his liberalism in the lit de justice, 
which Brienne had made the king hold, and was again exiled to 
Villers-Cotterets. The approaching convocation of the states- 
general made his friends very active on his behalf; he circulated 
in every bailliage the pamphlets which F. J. Sieyes had drawn 
up at his request, and was elected in three — by the noblesse 
of Paris, Villers-Cotterets and Crepy-en-Valois. In the estate 
of the nobility he headed the liberal minority under the guidance 
of Adrien Duport, and led the minority of forty-sever, noblemen 
who seceded from their own estate (June 1789) and joined the 
Tiers Etat. The part he played during the summer of 1789 is 
one of the most debated points in the history of the Revolution. 
The court accused him of being at the bottom of every popular 
movement, and saw the " gold of Orleans " as the cause of the 
Reveillon riot and the taking of the Bastille, as the republicans 
later saw the " gold of Pitt " in every germ of opposition to 
themselves. There can be no doubt that he hated the queen, 
and bitterly resented his long disgrace at court, and also that he 
sincerely wished for a thorough reform of the government and 
the establishment of some such constitution as that of England; 
and no doubt such friends as Adrien Duport and Choderlos 
de Laclos, for their own reasons, wished to see himkingof France. 
The best testimony for the behaviour of Orleans during this 
summer is the testimony of an English lady, Mrs Grace Dalrymple 
Elliott, who shared his heart with the comtesse de Buffon, and 
from which it is absolutely certain that at the time of the riot 
of the 1 2th of July he was on a fishing excursion, and was 
rudely treated by the king on the next day when going to offer 
him his services. He indeed became so disgusted with the 
false position of a pretender to the crown, into which he was 
being forced, that be wished to go to America, but, as the 
comtesse de Buffon would not go with him, he decided to remain 
in Paris. He was again accused, unjustly, of having caused 
the march of the women to Versailles on the 5th of October. 
La Fayette, jealous of his popularity, persuaded the king to 
send the duke to England on a mission, and thus get him out 
of France, and be accordingly remained in England from October 
1789 to July 1790. On the 7th of July he took his seat in the 
Assembly, and on the 2nd of October both he and Mirabeau were 
declared by the Assembly entirely free of any complicity in the 
events of October. He now tried to keep himself as much out 
of the political world as possible, but in vain, for the court would 



suspect him, and his friends would talk about his being king. 
The best proof of his not being ambitious of such a doubtful 
piece of preferment is that he made no attempt to get himself 
made king, regent or lieutenant-general of the kingdom at the 
lime of the flight to Varennes in June 1791. He, on the contrary, 
again tried to make his peace with the court in January 1792, 
but he was so insulted that he was not encouraged to sacrifice 
himself for the sake of the king and queen, who persisted in 
remembering all old enmities in their time of trouble. In the 
summer of 1792 he was present for a short time with the army 
of the north, with his two sons, the duke of Chartres and the 
duke of Montpensier, but had returned to Paris before the 10th 
of August. After that day he underwent great personal risk 
in saving fugitives; in particular, he saved the life of the count 
of Champcenetz, the governor of the Tuileries, who was his 
personal enemy, at the request of Mrs Elliott. It was impossible 
for him to recede, and, after accepting the title of Citoyen Egalite, 
conferred on him by the commune of Paris, he was elected 
twentieth and last deputy for Paris to the Convention. In that 
body he sat as quietly as he had done in the National Assembly, 
but on the occasion of the king's trial he had to speak, and then 
only to give his vote for the death of Louis. His compliance 
did not save him from suspicion, which was especially aroused by 
the friendship of his eldest son, the duke of Chartres, with 
Dumouriez, and when the news of the desertion of Chartres 
with Dumouriez became known at Paris all the Bourbons left 
in France, including Egalite, were ordered to be arrested on the 
5th of April. He remained in prison till the month of October, 
when the Reign of Terror began. He was naturally the very 
sort of victim wanted, and he was decreed " of accusation " 
on the 3rd of October. He was tried on the 6th of November 
and was guillotined on the same day, with a smile upon his lips 
and without any appearance of fear. No man ever was more 
blamed than Orleans during the Revolution, but the faults 
of ambition and intrigue were his friends', not his own; it was 
his friends who wished him to be on the throne. Personally 
he possessed the charming manners of a polished grand seigneur: 
debauched and cynical, but never rude or cruel, full of gentle 
consideration for all about him but selfish in his pursuit of 
pleasure, he has had to bear a heavy load of blame, but it is 
ridiculous to describe the idle and courteous voluptuary as being 
a dark and designing scoundrel, capable of murder if it would 
serve his ambition. The execution of Philippe Egalite made 
the friend of Dumouriez, who was living in exile, duke of Orleans. 
Authorities. — Baschet, Histoire de Philippe Egalite; Journal 
of Mrs Grace Dalrymple Elliott (1859); A. Nettement, Philippe- 
Egalite (Paris, 1842); Laurentie, Histoire des dues d'Orleans (Paris, 
1832); G. Peignot, Precis historique de la maison d'Orleans (Paris, 
1830); L. C. R(ousselet), Correspondance de Louis-Philippe Joseph 
d'Orleans avec Louis XVI (Paris, 1800); Rivarol, Portrait du due 
d'Orleans ct de Madame de Genlis; Toumois, Histoire du Louis 
Philippe Joseph due d'Orleans (Paris, 1842). 

ORLEANS, LOUIS PHILIPPE ROBERT, Duke of (r869- 
), eldest son of the comte de Paris, was born at York House, 
Twickenham, on the 6th of February 1869. The law of exile 
against the French princes having been abrogated in 1S71, be 
returned with his parents to France. He was first educated by a 
private tutor, and then followed the courses of the municipal 
college at Eu. In 1882 he entered the College Stanislas, Paris, 
and took a first prize in a competitive Latin translation. On the 
death of the comte de Chambord, the comte de Paris became head 
of the Bourbons; and in 1886 he and his son were exiled from 
France. Queen Victoria appointed the duke of Orleans a super- 
numerary cadet at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. 
After passing his examinations be received a commission in the 
4th battalion of the 60th Rifles, then quartered in India. In 
January 1888 the duke went out to India, accompanied by 
Colonel de Parseval as military governor and adviser. At 
Bombay he was received by the duke of Connaught and Lord 
Reay, and at Calcutta he became the guest of the viceroy, the 
marquess of Dufferin, who organized for the duke and his cousin, 
Prince Henry of Orleans, a grand tiger-shooting expedition in 
Nepaul. The duke now reported himself to the commander-in- 



2 86 



ORLEANS, DUKES OF— ORLEANS 



chief .afterwards Earl Roberts, and joined his regiment at Chakrata. 
After seeing service, the duke ceased his connexion with the 
Indian army in February 1889, and returned to England. On 
attaining his majority, he entered Paris (February 7, 1S90), 
and proceeding to the mairie, expressed his desire, as a French- 
man, to perform his military service. This act caused great 
excitement, and he was arrested in conformity with the law of 
1886, which forbade the soil of France to the direct heirs of the 
families which had reigned there. He was tried, and sentenced 
to two years' imprisonment; but he was liberated by President 
Garnot after a few months' nominal incarceration (June 4), 
and conducted to the Swiss frontier. This escapade won for him 
the title of " Le Premier Consent de France." After the comte 
de Paris's funeral (September 12, 1894) the duke received his 
adherents in London, and then removed to Brussels, as being 
nearer France. On the 5th of November 1896 the duke 
married the archduchess Maria Dorothea Amalia of Austria, the 
ceremony taking place at Vienna. It was alleged that some of 
his followers were implicated in the conspiracies against the 
French Republic in 1899. A letter which the duke wrote in 1900, 
approving the artist whose caricatures were grossly insulting to 
Queen Victoria, excited great indignation both in England and 
in many French circles, and estranged him from many with 
whom he had formerly been upon friendly terms; but after 
Queen Victoria's death it was allowed to become known that 
this affair had been forgotten and forgiven by the British 
royal family. The duke of Orleans made several long ex- 
ploring journeys, being particularly interested in polar dis- 
coveries. In 1905 he published Une croisiere an Spitzbcrg, and, 
later, another account of his travels, under the title A Iravers 
la Banquise. 

ORLEANS, PHILIP I., Duke of (1640-1701), son of the French 
king Louis XIII., was born at St Germain-en-Laye on the 21st of 
September 1640. In 1661 he was created duke of Orleans, and 
married Henrietta, sister of Charles II. of England; but the 
marriage was not a happy one, and the death of the duchess in 
1670 was attributed to poison. Subsequently he married 
Charlotte Elizabeth, daughter of Charles Louis, elector palatine 
of the Rhine. Having fought with distinction in Flanders in 
1667, Monsieur, as Orleans was generally called, returned to 
military life in 1672, and in 1677 gained a great victory at Cassel 
and took St Omer. Louis XIV., it was said, was jealous of his 
brother's success; at all events Orleans never commanded an 
army again. He died at St Cloud on the 8th of June 1701, 
leaving a son, Philip, the regent Orleans, and two daughters: 
Anne Marie (1669-1728), wife of Victor Amadeus II., duke 
of Savoy; and Elizabeth Charlotte (1676-1744), wife of Leo- 
pold, duke of Lorraine. His eldest daughter, Marie Louise 
(1662-1689), wife of Charles II. of Spain, died before her 
father. (M. P.*) 

ORLEANS, PHILIP II., Duke of (1674-1723), regent of France, 
son of Philip I., duke of Orleans, and his second wife, the 
princess palatine, was born on the 2nd of August 1674, and had 
his first experience of arms at the siege of Mons in 1691. His 
marriage with Mile de Blois, the legitimized daughter of Louis 
XIV., won him the favour of the king. He fought with distinc- 
tion at Steinkerk, Neerwinden and Namur (1692-1695). During 
the next few years, being without employment, he studied 
natural science. He was next given a command in Italy (1706) 
and in Spain (1 707-1 708) where he gained some important 
successes, but he cherished lofty ambitions and was suspected of 
wishing to take the place of Philip V. on the throne of Spain. 
Louis XIV. was angry at these pretensions, and for a long time 
held him in disfavour. In his will, however, he appointed him 
president of the council of regency of the young King Louis XV. 
(1715). After the death of the king, the duke of Orleans went to 
the parlement, had the will annulled, and himself invested with 
absolute power. At first he made a good use of this, counselling 
economy, decreasing taxation, disbanding 25,000 soldiers and 
restoring liberty to the persecuted Jansenists. But the inquisi- 
torial measures which he had begun against the financiers led to 
disturbances. He was, moreover, weak enough to countenance 



the risky operations of the banker John Law (1717), whose 
bankruptcy led to such a disastrous crisis in the public and 
private affairs of France. 

There existed a party of malcontents who wished to transfer 
the regency from Orleans to Philip V., king of Spain. A con- 
spiracy was formed, under the inspiration of Cardinal Alberoni, 
first minister of Spain, and directed by the prince of Cellamare, 
Spanish ambassador in France, with the complicity of the duke 
and duchess of Maine; but in 1718 it was discovered and 
defeated. Dubois, formerly tutor to the duke of Orleans, and 
now his all-powerful minister, caused war to be declared against 
Spain, with the support of the emperor, and of England and 
Holland (Quadruple Alliance). After some successes of the 
French marshal, the duke of Berwick, in Spain, and of the 
imperial troops in Sicily, Philip V. made peace with the regent 
(1720). 

On the majority of the king, which was declared on the 15th 
of February 1723, the duke of Orleans resigned the supreme 
power; but he became first minister to the king, and remained 
in office till his death on the 23rd of December 1723. The 
regent had great qualities, both brilliant and solid, which were 
unfortunately spoilt by an excessive taste for pleasure. His 
dissolute manners found only too many imitators, and the 
regency was one of the most corrupt periods in French history. 

See J. B. H. R. Capefigue, Histoire de Philippe d'Orleans, regent de 
France (2 vols., Paris, 1838); A. Baudrillart, Philippe V. et la cour 
de France, vol. ii. (Paris, 1890); and L. Wiesener, Le regent, Vabbe 
Dubois et les Anglais (3 vols., Paris, 1891-1899). (M. P.*) 

ORLEANS, a city of north central France, chief town of the 
department of Loiret, on the right bank of the Loire, 77 m. 
S.S.W. of Paris by rail. Pop. (1906), town, 57,544; commune, 
68,614. At Les Aubrais, a mile to the north, is one of the chief 
railway junctions in the country. Besides the Paris and Orleans 
railway, which there divides into two main lines — a western to 
Nantes and Bordeaux via Tours, and a southern to Bourges and 
Toulouse via Vierzon — branches leave Les Aubrais eastwards 
for Pithiviers, Chalons-sur-Marne and Gien, north-west for 
Chateaudun and Rouen. The whole town of Orleans is clustered 
together on the right bank of the river and surrounded by fine 
boulevards, beyond which it sends out suburbs along the various 
roads. It is connected with the suburb of St Marceau on the 
left bank by a handsome stone bridge of nine arches, erected in the 
18th century. Farther up is the railway bridge. The river is 
canalized on the right, and serves as a continuation of the 
Orleans Canal, which unites the Loire with the Seine by the 
canal of the Loing. 

Owing to its position on the northernmost point of the Loire 
Orleans has long been the centre of communication between the 
Loire basin and Paris. The chief interest of the place lies in 
its public buildings and the historical events of which it has been 
the scene. Proceeding from the railway station to the bridge 
over the Loire, the visitor crosses Orleans from north to south 
and passes through the Place du Martroi, the heart of the city. 
In the middle of the square stands an equestrian statue of Joan of 
Arc, in bronze, resting on a granite pedestal surrounded by 
bas-reliefs representing the leading episodes in her life. In 1855 
it took the place of an older statue executed in the beginning of 
the century, which was then transferred to the left bank of the 
Loire at the end of the bridge, a few paces from' the spot where a 
simple cross marks the site of the Fort des Tourelles captured by 
Joan of Arc in 1429. From the Place du Martroi, the Rue Jeanne 
d'Arc leads to the cathedral of Ste Croix. This church, begun in 
1 287, was burned by the Huguenots in 1567 before its completion. 
Henry IV., in 1601, laid the first stone of the new structure, the 
building of which continued until 1S29. It consists of a vestibule, 
a nave with double aisles, a corresponding choir, a transept and 
an apse. Its length is 472 ft., its width at the transept 220 ft. 
and the height of the central vaults 112 ft. The west front has 
two fiat-topped towers, each of three storeys, of which the first 
is square, the second octagonal and the third cylindrical. The 
whole front is Gothic, but was designed and constructed in the 
18th century and exhibits all the defects of the period, though its 



ORLEANS 



287 



proportions are impressive. A central spire (19th century) 32S ft. 
high, on the other hand, recalls the pure Gothic style of the 
13th century. In the interior the choir chapels and the apse, 
dating from the original erection of the building, and the fine 
modern tomb of Mgr. F. A. P. Dupanloup, bishop from 1849 to 
1878, are worthy of note. In the episcopal palace and the higher 
seminary are several remarkable pictures and pieces of wood- 
carving; and the latter building has a crypt of the 9th century, 
belonging to the church of St Avit demolished in 1428. The 
church of St Aignan consists of a transept and choir of the second 
half of the 15th century; it contains in a gilded and carved 
wooden shrine the remains of its patron saint, who occupied the 
see of Orleans at the time of Attila's invasion. The crypt dates 
from the 9th to the beginning of the nth century. The once 
beautiful sculpture of the exterior has been altogether ruined; 
the interior has been restored, but not in keeping with the 
original style. A third church, St Euverte, dedicated to one of 
the oldest bishops of Orleans (d. 391), is an early Gothic building 
dating from the 13th, completely restored in the 15th century. 
St Pierre-le-Puellier dates in its oldest portions from the 10th 
or even the 9th century. To the west of the Rue Royale stand 
the church of St Paul, whose facade and isolated tower both 
bear fine features of Renaissance work, and Notre-Dame de 
Recouvrance, rebuilt between 1517 and 1519 in the Renaissance 
style and dedicated to the memory of the deliverance of the city. 
The hotel de ville, built under Francis I. and Henry II. and 
restored in the 19th century, was formerly the residence of the 
governors of Orleans, and 