ANNA COMNENA, daughter of the emperor Alexius I. Comnenus, the first
woman historian, was born on the 1st of December 1083. She was her
father's favourite and was carefully trained in the study of poetry,
science and Greek philosophy. But, though learned and studious, she was
intriguing and ambitious, and ready to go to any lengths to gratify her
longing for power. Having married an accomplished young nobleman,
Nicephorus Bryennius, she united with the empress Irene in a vain
attempt to prevail upon her father during his last illness to disinherit
his son and give the crown to her husband. Still undeterred, she entered
into a conspiracy to depose her brother after his accession; and when
her husband refused to join in the enterprise, she exclaimed that
"nature had mistaken their sexes, for he ought to have been the woman."
The plot being discovered, Anna forfeited her property and fortune,
though, by the clemency of her brother, she escaped with her life.
Shortly afterwards, she retired into a convent and employed her leisure
in writing the _Alexiad_--a history, in Greek, of her father's life and
reign (1081-1118), supplementing the historical work of her husband. It
is rather a family panegyric than a scientific history, in which the
affection of the daughter and the vanity of the author stand out
prominently. Trifling acts of her father are described at length in
exaggerated terms, while little notice is taken of important
constitutional matters. A determined opponent of the Latin church and an
enthusiastic admirer of the Byzantine empire, Anna Comnena regards the
Crusades as a danger both political and religious. Her models are
Thucydides, Polybius and Xenophon, and her style exhibits the striving
after Atticism characteristic of the period, with the result that the
language is highly artificial. Her chronology especially is defective.

  Editions in Bonn _Corpus Scriptorum Hist. Byz._, by J. Schopen and A.
  Reifferscheid (1839-1878), with Du Cange's valuable commentary; and
  Teubner series, by A. Reifferscheid (1884). See also C. Krumbacher,
  _Geschichte der byzantinischen Literatur_ (2nd ed. 1897); C. Neumann,
  _Griechische Geschichtschreiber im 12 Jahrhunderte_ (1888); E. Oster,
  _Anna Komnena_ (Rastatt, 1868-1871); Gibbon, _Decline and Fall_, ch.
  48; Finlay, _Hist, of Greece_, iii. pp. 53, 128 (1877); P. Adam,
  _Princesses byzantines_ (1893); Sir Walter Scott, _Count Robert of
  Paris_; L. du Sommerard, _Anne Comnène ... Agnès de France_ (1907); C.
  Diehl, _Figures byzantines_ (1906).
