ANNATES (Lat. _annatae_, from _annus_, "year"), also known as
"first-fruits" (Lat. _primitiae_). in the strictest sense of the word,
the whole of the first year's profits of a spiritual benefice which, in
all countries of the Roman obedience, were formerly paid into the papal
treasury. This custom was only of gradual growth. The _jus deportuum,
annalia_ or _annatae_, was originally the right of the bishop to claim
the first year's profits of the living from a newly inducted incumbent,
of which the first mention is found under Pope Honorius (d. 1227), but
which had its origin in a custom, dating from the 6th century, by which
those ordained to ecclesiastical offices paid a fee or tax to the
ordaining bishop. The earliest records show the _annata_ to have been,
sometimes a privilege conceded to the bishop for a term of years,
sometimes a right based on immemorial precedent. In course of time the
popes, under stress of financial crises, claimed the privilege for
themselves, though at first only temporarily. Thus, in 1305, Clement V.
claimed the first-fruits of all vacant benefices in England, and in 1319
John XXII. those of all Christendom vacated within the next two years.
In those cases the rights of the bishops were frankly usurped by the
Holy See, now regarded as the ultimate source of the episcopal
jurisdiction; the more usual custom was for the pope to claim the
first-fruits only of those benefices of which he had reserved the
patronage to himself. It was from these claims that the papal annates,
in the strict sense, in course of time developed.

These annates may be divided broadly into three classes, though the
chief features are common to all: (1) the _servitia communia_ or
_servitia Camerae Papae_, i.e. the payment into the papal treasury by
every abbot and bishop, on his induction, of one year's revenue of his
new benefice. The _servitia communia_ are traceable to the _oblatio_
paid to the pope when consecrating bishops as metropolitan or patriarch.
When, in the middle of the 13th century, the consecration of bishops
became established as the sole right of the pope, the oblations of all
bishops of the West were received by him and, by the close of the 14th
century, these became fixed at one year's revenue.[1] A small additional
payment, as a kind of notarial fee was added (_servitia minuta_). (2)
The _jus deportuum, fructus medii temporis_, or _annalia_, i.e. the
annates due to the bishop, but in the case of "reserved" benefices paid
by him to the Holy See. (3) The _quindennia, i.e._ annates payable,
under a bull of Paul II. (1469), by benefices attached to a corporation,
every fifteen years and not at every presentation.

The system of annates was at no time worked with absolute uniformity and
completeness throughout the various parts of the church owning obedience
to the Holy See, and it was never willingly submitted to by the clergy.
Disagreements and disputes were continual, and the easy expedient of
rewarding the officials of the Curia and increasing the papal revenue by
"reserving" more and more benefices was met by repeated protests, such
as that of the bishops and barons of England (the chief sufferers),
headed by Robert Grosseteste of Lincoln, at the council of Lyons in
1245.[2] The subject, indeed, frequently became one of national
interest, on account of the alarming amount of specie which was thus
drained away, and hence numerous enactments exist in regard to it by the
various national governments. In England the collection and payment of
annates to the pope was prohibited in 1531 by statute. At that time the
sum amounted to about 3000 pounds a year. In 1534 the annates were,
along with the supremacy over the church in England, bestowed on the
crown; but in February 1704 they were appropriated by Queen Anne to the
assistance of the poorer clergy, and thus form what has since been known
as "Queen Anne's Bounty" (q.v.). The amount to be paid was originally
regulated by a valuation made under the direction of Pope Innocent IV.
by Walter, bishop of Norwich, in 1254, later by one instituted under
commission from Nicholas III. in 1292, which in turn was superseded in
1535 by the valuation, made by commissioners appointed by Henry VIII.,
known as the _King's Books_, which was confirmed on the accession of
Elizabeth and is still that by which the clergy are rated. In France, in
spite of royal edicts--like those of Charles VI., Charles VII., Louis
XI, and Henry II.--and even denunciations of the Sorbonne, at least the
custom of paying the _servitia communia_ held its ground till the famous
decree of the 4th of August during the Revolution of 1789. In Germany it
was decided by the concordat of Constance, in 1418, that bishoprics and
abbacies should pay the _servitia_ according to the valuation of the
Roman chancery in two half-yearly instalments. Those reserved benefices
only were to pay the _annalia_ which were rated above twenty-four gold
florins; and as none were so rated, whatever their annual value may have
been, the annalia fell into disuse. A similar convenient fiction also
led to their practical abrogation in France, Spain and Belgium. The
council of Basel (1431-1443) wished to abolish the _servitia_, but the
concordat of Vienna (1448) confirmed the Constance decision, which, in
spite of the efforts of the congress of Ems (1786) to alter it, still
remains nominally in force. As a matter of fact, however, the revolution
caused by the secularization of the ecclesiastical states in 1803
practically put an end to the system, and the _servitia_ have either
been commuted _via gratiae_ to a moderate fixed sum under particular
concordats, or are the subject of separate negotiation with each bishop
on his appointment. In Prussia, where the bishops receive salaries as
state officials, the payment is made by the government.

In Scotland _annat_ or _ann_ is half a year's stipend allowed by the Act
1672, c. 13, to the executors of a minister of the Church of Scotland
above what was due to him at the time of his death. This is neither
assignable by the clergyman during his life, nor can it be seized by his
creditors.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] For cases see du Cange, _Glossarium_, s. _Servitium Camerae
    Papae_; J.C.L. Gieseler, _Eccles. Hist._, vol. iii. div. iii., notes
    to p. 181, &c. (Eng. trans., Edinburgh, 1853).

  [2] Durandus (Guillaume Durand), in his _de modo generalis concilii
    celebrandi_, represents contemporary clerical hostile opinion and
    attacks the corruptions of the officials of the Curia.
