ANNE (1665-1714), queen of Great Britain and Ireland, second daughter of
James, duke of York, afterwards James II., and of Anne Hyde, daughter of
the ist earl of Clarendon, was born on the 6th of February 1665. She
suffered as a child from an affection of the eyes, and was sent to
France for medical treatment, residing with her grandmother, Henrietta
Maria, and on the latter's death with her aunt, the duchess of Orleans,
and returning to England in 1670. She was brought up, together with her
sister Mary, by the direction of Charles II., as a strict Protestant,
and as a child she made the friendship of Sarah Jennings (afterwards
duchess of Marlborough), thus beginning life under the two influences
which were to prove the most powerful in her future career. In 1678 she
accompanied Mary of Modena to Holland, and in 1679 joined her parents
abroad and afterwards in Scotland. On the 28th of July 1683 she married
Prince George of Denmark, brother of King Christian V., an unpopular
union because of the French proclivities of the bridegroom's country,
but one of great domestic happiness, the prince and princess being
conformable in temper and both preferring retirement and quiet to life
in the great world. Sarah Churchill became Anne's lady of the
bedchamber, and, by the latter's desire to mark their mutual intimacy
and affection, all deference due to her rank was abandoned and the two
ladies called each other Mrs Morley and Mrs Freeman.

On the 6th of February 1685 James became king of England. In 1687 a
project of settling the crown on the princess, to the exclusion of Mary,
on the condition of Anne's embracing Roman Catholicism, was rendered
futile by her pronounced attachment to the Church of England, and beyond
sending her books and papers James appears to have made no attempt to
coerce his daughter into a change of faith,[1] and to have treated her
with kindness, while the birth of his son on the 20th of June 1688 made
the religion of his daughters a matter of less political importance.
Anne was not present on the occasion, having gone to Bath, and this gave
rise to a belief that the child was spurious; but it is most probable
that James's desire to exclude all Protestants from affairs of state was
the real cause. "I shall never now be satisfied," Anne wrote to Mary,
"whether the child be true or false. It may be it is our brother, but
God only knows ... one cannot help having a thousand fears and
melancholy thoughts, but whatever changes may happen you shall ever find
me firm to my religion and faithfully yours."[2] In later years,
however, she had no doubt that the Old Pretender was her brother. During
the events immediately preceding the Revolution Anne kept in seclusion.
Her ultimate conduct was probably influenced by the Churchills; and
though forbidden by James, to pay Mary a projected visit in the spring
of 1688, she corresponded with her, and was no doubt aware of William's
plans. Her position was now a very critical and painful one. She refused
to show any sympathy with the king after William had landed in November,
and wrote, with the advice of the Churchills, to the prince, declaring
her approval of his action.[3] Churchill abandoned the king on the 24th,
Prince George on the 25th, and when James returned to London on the 26th
he found that Anne and her lady-in-waiting had during the previous night
followed their husbands' examples. Escaping from Whitehall by a back
staircase they put themselves under the care of the bishop of London,
spent one night in his house, and subsequently arrived on the 1st of
December at Nottingham, where the princess first made herself known and
appointed a council. Thence she passed through Leicester, Coventry and
Warwick, finally entering Oxford, where she met Prince George, in
triumph, escorted by a large company. Like Mary, she was reproached for
showing no concern at the news of the king's flight, but her
justification was that "she never loved to do anything that looked like
an affected constraint." She returned to London on the 19th of December,
when she was at once visited by William. Subsequently the Declaration of
Rights settled the succession of the crown upon her after William and
Mary and their children.

Meanwhile Anne had suffered a series of maternal disappointments.
Between 1684 and 1688 she had miscarried four times and given birth to
two children who died infants. On the 24th of July 1689, however, the
birth, of a son, William, created duke of Gloucester, who survived his
infancy, gave hopes that heirs to the throne under the Bill of Rights
might be forthcoming. But Anne's happiness was soon troubled by quarrels
with the king and queen. According to the duchess of Marlborough the two
sisters, who had lived hitherto while apart on extremely affectionate
terms, found no enjoyment in each other's society. Mary talked too much
for Anne's comfort, and Anne too little for Mary's satisfaction. But
money appears to have been the first and real cause of ill-feeling. The
granting away by William of the private estate of James, amounting to
22,000 pounds a year, to which Anne had some claim, was made a
grievance, and a factious motion brought forward in the House to
increase her civil list pension of 30,000 pounds, which she enjoyed in
addition to 20,000 pounds under her marriage settlement, greatly
displeased William and Mary, who regarded it as a plot to make Anne
independent and the chief of a separate interest in the state, while
their resentment was increased by the refusal of Anne to restrain the
action of her friends, and by its success. The Marlboroughs had been
active in the affair and had benefited by it, the countess (as she then
was) receiving a pension of 1000 pounds, and their conduct was noticed
at court. The promised Garter was withheld from Marlborough, and the
incensed "Mrs Morley" in her letters to "Mrs Freeman" styled the king
"Caliban" or the "Dutch Monster." At the close of 1691 Anne had declared
her approval of the naval expedition in favour of her father, and
expressed grief at its failure.[4] According to the doubtful _Life of
James_, she wrote to him on the 1st of December a "most penitential and
dutiful" letter, and henceforward kept up with him a "fair
correspondence."[5] The same year the breach between the royal sisters
was made final by the dismissal of Marlborough, justly suspected of
Jacobite intrigues, from all his appointments. Anne took the part of her
favourites with great zeal against the court, though in all probability
unaware of Marlborough's treason; and on the dismissal of the countess
from her household by the king and queen she refused to part with her,
and retired with Lady Marlborough to the duke of Somerset's residence at
Sion House. Anne was now in disgrace. She was deprived of her guard of
honour, and Prince George, on entering Kensington Palace, received no
salute, though the drums beat loudly on his departure.[6] Instructions
were given that the court expected no one to pay his respects, and no
attention in the provinces was to be shown to their rank. In May,
Marlborough was arrested on a charge of high treason which subsequently
broke down, and Anne persisted in regarding his disgrace as a personal
injury to herself. In August 1693, however, the two sisters were
temporarily reconciled, and on the occasion of Mary's last illness and
death Anne showed an affectionate consideration.

The death of Mary weakened William's position and made it necessary to
cultivate good relations with the princess. She was now treated with
every honour and civility, and finally established with her own court at
St James's Palace. At the same time William kept her in the background
and refrained from appointing her regent during his absence. In March
1695 Marlborough was allowed to kiss the king's hands, and subsequently
was made the duke of Gloucester's governor and restored to his
employments. In return Anne gave her support to William's government,
though about this time, in 1696--according to James, in consequence of
the near prospect of the throne--she wrote to her father asking for his
leave to wear the crown at William's death, and promising its
restoration at a convenient opportunity.[7] The unfounded rumour that
William contemplated settling the succession after his death on James's
son, provided he were educated a Protestant in England, may possibly
have alarmed her.[8] Meanwhile, since the birth of the duke of
Gloucester, the princess had experienced six more miscarriages, and had
given birth to two children who only survived a few hours, and the last
maternal hope flickered out on the death of the young prince on the 29th
of July 1700. Henceforth Anne signs herself in her letters to Lady
Marlborough as "your poor unfortunate" as well as "faithful Morley." In
default of her own issue, Anne's personal choice would probably have
inclined at this time to her own family at St Germains, but the
necessity of maintaining the Protestant succession caused the enactment
of the Act of Settlement in 1701, and the substitution of the Hanoverian
branch. She wore mourning for her father in 1701, and before his death
James is said to have written to his daughter asking for her protection
for his family; but the recognition of his son by Louis XIV. as king of
England effectually prevented any good offices to which her feelings
might have inclined her.

On the 8th of March 1702 Anne became, by King William's death, queen of
Great Britain, being crowned on the 23rd of April. Her reign was
destined to be one of the most brilliant in the annals of England.
Splendid military triumphs crushed the hereditary national foe. The Act
of Union with Scotland constituted one of the strongest foundations of
the future empire. Art and literature found a fresh renascence.

In her first speech to parliament, like George III. afterwards, Anne
declared her "heart to be entirely English," words which were resented
by some as a reflection on the late king. A ministry, mostly Tory, with
Godolphin at its head, was established. She obtained a grant of 700,000
pounds a year, and hastened to bestow a pension of 100,000 pounds on her
husband, whom she created generalissimo of her forces and lord high
admiral, while Marlborough obtained the Garter, with the
captain-generalship and other prizes, including a dukedom, and the
duchess was made mistress of the robes with the control of the privy
purse. The queen showed from the first a strong interest in church
matters, and declared her intention to keep church appointments in her
own hands. She detested equally Roman Catholics and dissenters, showed a
strong leaning towards the high-church party, and gave zealous support
to the bill forbidding occasional conformity. In 1704 she announced to
the Commons her intention of granting to the church the crown revenues,
amounting to about 16,000 pounds or 17,000 pounds a year, from tenths
and first-fruits (paid originally by the clergy to the pope, but
appropriated by the crown in 1534), for the increase of poor livings;
her gift, under the name of "Queen Anne's Bounty," still remaining as a
testimony of her piety. This devotion to the church, the strongest of
all motives in Anne's conduct, dictated her hesitating attitude towards
the two great parties in the state. The Tories had for this reason her
personal preference, while the Whigs, who included her powerful
favourites the Marlboroughs, identified their interests with the war and
its glorious successes, the queen slowly and unwillingly, but
inevitably, gravitating towards the latter.

In December, the archduke Charles visited Anne at Windsor and was
welcomed as the king of Spain. In 1704 Anne acquiesced in the
resignation of Lord Nottingham, the leader of the high Tory party. In
the same year the great victory of Blenheim further consolidated the
power of the Whigs and increased the influence of Marlborough, upon whom
Anne now conferred the manor of Woodstock. Nevertheless, she declared in
November to the duchess that whenever things leaned towards the Whigs,
"I shall think the church is beginning to be in danger." Next year she
supported the election of the Whig speaker, John Smith, but long
resisted the influence and claims of the _Junto_, as the Whig leaders,
Somers, Halifax, Orford, Wharton and Sunderland, were named. In October
she was obliged to appoint Cowper, a Whig, lord chancellor, with all the
ecclesiastical patronage belonging to the office. Marlborough's
successive victories, and especially the factious conduct of the Tories,
who in November 1705 moved in parliament that the electress Sophia
should be invited to England, drove Anne farther to the side of the
Whigs. But she opposed for some time the inclusion in the government of
Sunderland, whom she especially disliked, only consenting at
Marlborough's intercession in December 1706, when various other offices
and rewards were bestowed upon Whigs, and Nottingham with other Tories
was removed from the council. She yielded, after a struggle, also to the
appointment of Whigs to bishoprics, the most mortifying submission of
all. In 1708 she was forced to dismiss Harley, who, with the aid of Mrs
Masham, had been intriguing against the government and projecting the
creation of a third party. Abigail Hill, Mrs Masham, a cousin of the
duchess of Marlborough, had been introduced by the latter as a poor
relation into Anne's service, while still princess of Denmark. The queen
found relief in the quiet and respectful demeanour of her attendant, and
gradually came to prefer her society to that of the termagant and
tempestuous duchess. Abigail, however, soon ventured to talk "business,"
and in the summer of 1707 the duchess discovered to her indignation that
her protégée had already undermined her influence with the queen and had
become the medium of Harley's intrigue. The strength of the Whigs at
this time and the necessities of the war caused the retirement of
Harley, but he remained Anne's secret adviser and supporter against the
faction, urging upon her "the dangers to the crown as well as to the
church and monarchy itself from their counsels and actions,"[9] while
the duchess never regained her former influence. The inclusion in the
cabinet of Somers, whom she especially disliked as the hostile critic of
Prince George's admiralty administration, was the subject of another
prolonged struggle, ending again in the queen's submission after a
futile appeal to Marlborough in October 1708, to which she brought
herself only to avoid a motion from the Whigs for the removal of the
prince, then actually on his deathbed. His death on the 28th of October
was felt deeply by the queen, and opened the way for the inclusion of
more Whigs. But no reconciliation with the duchess took place, and in
1709 a further dispute led to an angry correspondence, the queen finally
informing the duchess of the termination of their friendship, and the
latter drawing up a long narrative of her services, which she forwarded
to Anne together with suitable passages on the subject of friendship and
charity transcribed from the Prayer Book, the _Whole Duty of Man_ and
from Jeremy Taylor.[10] Next year Anne's desire to give a regiment to
Hill, Mrs Masham's brother, led to another ineffectual attempt in
retaliation to displace the new favourite, and the queen showed her
antagonism to the Whig administration on the occasion of the prosecution
of Sacheverell. She was present at his trial and was publicly acclaimed
by the mob as his supporter, while the Tory divine was consoled
immediately on the expiration of his sentence with the living of St
Andrew's, Holborn. Subsequently the duchess, in a final interview which
she had forced upon the queen, found her tears and reproaches
unavailing. In her anger she had told the queen she wished for no
answer, and she was now met by a stony and exasperating silence, broken
only by the words constantly repeated, "You desired no answer and you
shall have none."

The fall of the Whigs, now no longer necessary on account of the
successful issue of the war, to accomplish which Harley had long been
preparing and intriguing, followed; and their attempt to prolong
hostilities from party motives failed. A friend of Harley, the duke of
Shrewsbury, was first appointed to office, and subsequently the great
body of the Whigs were displaced by Tories, Harley being made chancellor
of the exchequer and Henry St John secretary of state. The queen was
rejoiced at being freed from what she called a long captivity, and the
new parliament was returned with a Tory majority. On the 17th of January
1711, in spite of Marlborough's efforts to ward off the blow, the
duchess was compelled to give up her key of office. The queen was now
able once more to indulge in her favourite patronage of the church, and
by her influence an act was passed in 1712 for building fifty new
churches in London. Later, in 1714, she approved of the Schism Bill. She
gave strong support to Harley, now earl of Oxford and lord treasurer, in
the intrigues and negotiations for peace. Owing to the alliance between
the Tory Lord Nottingham and the Whigs, on the condition of the support
by the latter of the bill against occasional conformity passed in
December 1711, the defeated Whigs maintained a majority in the Lords,
who declared against any peace which left Spain to the Bourbons. To
break down this opposition Marlborough was dismissed on the 31st from
all his employments, while the House of Lords was "swamped" by Anne's
creation of twelve peers,[11] including Mrs Masham's husband. The
queen's conduct was generally approved, for the nation was now violently
adverse to the Whigs and war party; and the peace of Utrecht was finally
signed on the 31st of March 1713, and proclaimed on the 5th of May in
London.

As the queen's reign drew to its close, rumours were rife on the great
subject of the succession to the throne. Various Jacobite appointments
excited suspicion. Both Oxford and Bolingbroke were in communication
with the Pretender's party, and on the 27th of July Oxford, who had
gradually lost influence and quarrelled with Bolingbroke, resigned,
leaving the supreme power in the hands of the latter. Anne herself had a
natural feeling for her brother, and had shown great solicitude
concerning his treatment when a price had been set on his head at the
time of the Scottish expedition in 1708. On the 3rd of March 1714 James
wrote to Anne, Oxford and Bolingbroke, urging the necessity of taking
steps to secure his succession, and promising, on the condition of his
recognition, to make no further attempts against the queen's government;
and in April a report was circulated in Holland that Anne had secretly
determined to associate James with her in the government. The wish
expressed by the Whigs, that a member of the electoral family should be
invited to England, had already aroused the queen's indignation in 1708;
and now, in 1714, a writ of summons for the electoral prince as duke of
Cambridge having been obtained, Anne forbade the Hanoverian envoy, Baron
Schütz, her presence, and declared all who supported the project her
enemies; while to a memorial on the same subject from the electress
Sophia and her grandson in May, Anne replied in an angry letter, which
is said to have caused the death of the electress on the 5th of June,
requesting them not to trouble the peace of her realm or diminish her
authority.

These demonstrations, however, were the outcome not of any returning
partiality for her own family, but of her intense dislike, in which she
resembled Queen Elizabeth, of any "successor," "it being a thing I
cannot bear to have any successor here though but for a week"; and in
spite of some appearances to the contrary, it is certain that religion
and political wisdom kept Anne firm to the Protestant succession.[12]
She had maintained a friendly correspondence with the court of Hanover
since 1705, and in 1706 had bestowed the Garter on the electoral prince
and created him duke of Cambridge; while the Regency Act provided for
the declaration of the legal heir to the crown by the council
immediately on the queen's death, and a further enactment naturalized
the electress and her issue. In 1708, on the occasion of the Scottish
expedition, notwithstanding her solicitude for his safety, she had
styled James in her speech closing the session of parliament as "a
popish pretender bred up in the principles of the most arbitrary
government." The duchess of Marlborough stated in 1713 that all the time
she had known "that thing" (as she now called the queen), "she had never
heard her speak a favourable word of him."[13] No answer appears to have
been sent to James's letter in 1714; on the contrary, a proclamation was
issued (June 23) for his apprehension in case of his arrival in England.
On the 27th of April Anne gave a solemn assurance of her fidelity to the
Hanoverian succession to Sir William Dawes, archbishop of York; in June
she sent Lord Clarendon to Hanover to satisfy the elector.

The sudden illness and death of the queen now frustrated any schemes
which Bolingbroke, or others might have been contemplating. On the 27th,
the day of Oxford's resignation, the discussions concerning his
successor detained the council sitting in the queen's presence till two
o'clock in the morning, and on retiring Anne was instantly seized with
fatal illness. Her adherence to William in 1688 had been a principal
cause of the success of the Revolution, and now the final act of her
life was to secure the Revolution settlement and the Protestant
succession. During a last moment of returning consciousness, and by the
advice of the whole council, who had been joined on their own initiative
by the Whig dukes Argyll and Somerset, she placed the lord treasurer's
staff in the hands of the Whig duke of Shrewsbury, and measures were
immediately taken for assuring the succession of the elector. Her death
took place on the 1st of August, and the security felt by the public,
and perhaps the sense of perils escaped by the termination of the
queen's life, were shown by a considerable rise in the national stocks.
She was buried on the south side of Henry VII.'s chapel in Westminster
Abbey, in the same tomb as her husband and children. The elector of
Hanover, George Louis, son of the electress Sophia (daughter of
Elizabeth, daughter of James I.), peacefully succeeded to the throne as
George I. (q.v.).

According to her physician Arbuthnot, Anne's life was shortened by the
"scene of contention among her servants. I believe sleep was never more
welcome to a weary traveller than death was to her." By character and
temperament unfitted to stand alone, her life had been unhappy and
tragical from its isolation. Separated in early years from her parents
and sister, her one great friendship had proved only baneful and
ensnaring. Marriage had only brought a mournful series of infant
funerals. Constant ill-health and suffering had darkened her career. The
claims of family attachment, of religion, of duty, of patriotism and of
interest, had dragged her in opposite directions, and her whole life had
been a prey to jealousies and factions which closed around her at her
accession to the throne, and surged to their height when she lay on her
deathbed. The modern theory of the relations between the sovereign and
the parties, by which the former identifies himself with the faction for
the time in power while maintaining his detachment from all, had not
then been invented; and Anne, like her Hanoverian successors, maintained
the struggle, though without success, to rule independently finding
support in Harley. During the first year of her reign she made known
that she was "resolved not to follow the example of her predecessor in
making use of a few of her subjects to oppress the rest. She will be
queen of all her subjects, and would have all the parties and
distinctions of former reigns ended and buried in hers."[14] Her motive
for getting rid of the Whigs was not any real dislike of their
administration, but the wish to escape from the domination of the
party,[15] and on the advent to power of the Tories she carefully left
some Whigs in their employments, with the aim of breaking up the party
system and acting upon what was called "a moderate scheme." She attended
debates in the Lords and endeavoured to influence votes. Her struggles
to free herself from the influence of factions only involved her deeper;
she was always under the domination of some person or some party, and
she could not rise above them and show herself the leader of the nation
like Elizabeth.

Anne was a women of small ability, of dull mind, and of that kind of
obstinacy which accompanies weakness of character. According to the
duchess she had "a certain knack of sticking to what had been dictated
to her to a degree often very disagreeable, and without the least sign
of understanding or judgment."[16] "I desire you would not have so ill
an opinion of me," Anne writes to Oxford, "as to think when I have
determined anything in my mind I will alter it."[17] Burnet considered
that "she laid down the splendour of a court too much," which was "as it
were abandoned." She dined alone after her husband's death, but it was
reported by no means abstemiously, the royal family being characterized
in the lines:--

  "King William thinks all.
   Queen Mary talks all,
   Prince George drinks all,
   And Princess Anne eats all."[18]

She took no interest in the art, the drama or the literature of her day.
But she possessed the homely virtues; she was deeply religious, attached
to the Church of England and concerned for the efficiency of the
ministry. One of the first acts of her reign was a proclamation against
vice, and Lord Chesterfield regretted the strict morality of her court.
Instances abound of her kindness and consideration for others. Her
moderation towards the Jacobites in Scotland, after the Pretender's
expedition in 1708, was much praised by Saint Simon. She showed great
forbearance and generosity towards the duchess of Marlborough in the
face of unexampled provocation, and her character was unduly disparaged
by the latter, who with her violent and coarse nature could not
understand the queen's self-restraint in sorrow, and describes her as
"very hard" and as "not apt to cry." According to her small ability she
served the state well, and was zealous and conscientious in the
fulfilment of public duties, in which may be included touching for the
king's evil, which she revived. Marlborough testifies to her energy in
finding money for the war. She surrendered 10,000 pounds a year for
public purposes, and in 1706 she presented 30,000 pounds to the officers
and soldiers who had lost their horses. Her contemporaries almost
unanimously record her excellence and womanly virtues; and by Dean
Swift, no mild critic, she is invariably spoken of with respect, and
named in his will as of "ever glorious, immortal and truly pious memory,
the real nursing-mother of her kingdoms." She deserves her appellation
of "Good Queen Anne," and notwithstanding her failings must be included
among the chief authors and upholders of the great Revolution
settlement. Her person was described by Spanheim, the Prussian
ambassador, as handsome though inclining to stoutness, with black hair,
blue eyes and good features, and of grave aspect.

Anne's husband, Prince George (1653-1708), was the second son of
Frederick III., king of Denmark. Before marrying Anne he had been a
candidate for the throne of Poland. He was created earl of Kendal and
duke of Cumberland in 1689. Some censure, which was directed against the
prince in his capacity as lord high admiral, was terminated by his
death. In religion George remained a Lutheran, and in general his
qualities tended to make him a good husband rather than a soldier or a
statesman.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--_Dict. of Nat. Biography_ (Dr A.W. Ward); A.
  Strickland, _Lives of the Queens of England_ (1852), somewhat
  uncritical; an excellent account written by Spanheim for the king of
  Prussia, printed in the _Eng. Hist. Rev._ ii. 757; histories of
  Stanhope, Lecky, Ranke, Macaulay, Boyes, Burnet, Wyon, and Somerville;
  F.E. Morris, _The Age of Anne_ (London, 1877); _Correspondence and
  Diary of Lord Clarendon_ (1828); _Hatton Correspondence_ (Camden Soc.,
  1878); Evelyn's _Diary_; Sir J. Dalrymple's _Memoirs_ (1790); N.
  Luttrell's _Brief Hist. Relation_ (1857); _Wentworth Papers_ (1883);
  W. Coxe, _Mem. of the Duke of Marlborough_ (1847); Conduct of the
  Dowager Duchess of Marlborough (1742); Ralph, _The other Side of the
  Question_ (1742); _Private Correspondence of Sarah Duchess of
  Marlborough_ (1838); A. T, Thomson, _Mem. of the Duchess and the Court
  of Queen Anne_ (1839); J.S. Clarke's _Life of James II._ (1816); J.
  Macpherson's _Original Papers_ (1775); Swift's _Some Considerations
  upon the Consequences from the Death of the Queen, An Inquiry into the
  Behaviour of the Queen's last Ministry, Hist. of the Four Last Years
  of Queen Anne_, and _Journals and Letters; The Lockhart Papers_
  (1817), i.; F. Salomon, _Geschichte des letzten Ministeriums Konigin
  Annas_ (1894); _Marchmont Papers_, iii. (1831); W. Sichel _Life of
  Bolingbroke_ (1901-1902); _Mem. of Thomas Earl of Ailesbury_
  (Roxburghe Club, 1890); _Eng. Hist. Rev._ i. 470, 756, viii. 740;
  _Royal Hut. Soc. Trans._ N.S. xiv. 69; _Col. of State Papers;
  Treasury; Hist. MSS. Comm. Series, MSS. of Duke of Portland_,
  including _the Harley Papers, Duke of Buccleugh at Montagu House, Lord
  Kenyan, Marq. of Bath at Longleat; Various Collections_, ii. 146,
  _Duke Of Rutland at Belvoir, 7th Rep. app._, and _H.M. the King_
  (_Stuart Papers_, i.); _Stowe MSS._ in Brit. Museum; Sir J.
  Mackintosh's Transcripts, _Add. MSS._ in Brit. Museum, 34, 487-526;
  _Edinburgh Rev._, October 1835, p. 1; _Notes and Queries_, vii. ser.
  iii. 178, viii. ser. i. 72, xii. 368, ix, ser. iv. 282, xi, 254; C.
  Hodgson, _An Account of the Augmentation of Small Livings by the
  Bounty of Queen Anne_ (1845); _Observations of the Governors of Queen
  Anne's Bounty_ (1867); _Somers Tracts_, xii. xiii. (1814-1815); H.
  Paul, _Queen Anne_ (London, 1907).     (P. C. Y.)


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] See also _Hist. MSS. Comm., MSS. of Duke of Rutland at Belvoir_,
    ii. 109.

  [2] Dalrymple's _Memoirs_, ii. 175.

  [3] Dalrymple's _Memoirs_, ii. 249.

  [4] Lord Ailesbury's _Memoirs_, 293.

  [5] Macpherson i. 241; Clarke's _Life of James II_., ii. 476. The
    letter, which is only printed in fragments, is not in Anne's style,
    and if genuine was probably dictated by the Churchills.

  [6] Luttrell ii. 366, 376.

  [7] Macpherson i. 257; Clarke's _James II_., ii. 559. See also
    Shrewsbury's anonymous correbpondent in _Hist. MSS. Comm. Ser.; MSS.
    Duke of Buccleugh at Montagu House_, ii. 169.

  [8] Macaulay iv. 799 _note_

  [9] Swift's _Mem. on the Change of the Ministry._

  [10] _Conduct of the Duchess of Marlborough_, p. 225.

  [11] For their names see Hume and Smollett's _Hist_. (Hughes, 1854)
    viil. 110.

  [12] See also _Hist. MSS. Comm. Ser._ Rep. vii. App. 246b.

  [13] _Ibid. Portland MSS_. v. 338.

  [14] Sir J. Leveson-Gower to Lord Rutland, _Hist. MSS. Comm., Duke of
    Rutland's MSS_. ii. 173.

  [15] See Bolingbroke's _Letter to Sir W. Wyndham_.

  [16] _Private Correspondence_, ii. 120.

  [17] _Hist. MSS. Comm., MSS. of Marq. of Bath at Longleat_, i. 237.

  [18] _Notes and Queries_, xi. 254.
