ANOMALY (from Gr. [Greek: anomalia], unevenness, derived from [Greek:
an-], privative, and [Greek: homalos], even), a deviation from the
common rule. In astronomy the word denotes the angular distance of a
body from the pericentre of the orbit in which it is moving. Let AB be
the major axis of the orbit, B the pericentre, F the focus or centre of
motion, P the position of the body. The anomaly is then the angle BFP
which the radius vector makes with the major axis. This is the actual or
_true anomaly_. _Mean anomaly_ is the anomaly which the body would have
if it moved from the pericentre around F with a uniform angular motion
such that its revolution would be completed in its actual time (see
ORBIT). _Eccentric anomaly_ is defined thus:--Draw the circumscribing
circle of the elliptic orbit around the centre C of the orbit. Drop the
perpendicular RPQ through P, the position of the planet, upon the major
axis. Join CR; the angle CRQ is then the eccentric anomaly.

[Illustration]

In the ancient astronomy the anomaly was taken as the angular distance
of the planet from the point of the farthest recession from the earth.

_Kepler's Problem_, namely, that of finding the co-ordinates of a planet
at a given time, which is equivalent--given the mean anomaly--to that of
determining the true anomaly, was solved approximately by Kepler, and
more completely by Wallis, Newton and others.

The anomalistic revolution of a planet or other heavenly body is the
revolution between two consecutive passages through the pericentre.
Starting from the pericentre, it is completed on the return to the
pericentre. If the pericentre is fixed, this is an actual revolution;
but if it moves the anomalistic revolution is greater or less than a
complete circumference.

An _Anomalistic year_ is the time (365 days, 6 hours, 13 minutes, 48
seconds) in which the earth (and similarly for any other planet) passes
from perihelion to perihelion, or from any given value of the anomaly to
the same again. Owing to the precession of the equinoxes it is longer
than a tropical or sidereal year by 25 minutes and 2.3 seconds. An
_Anomalistic month_ is the time in which the moon passes from perigee to
perigee, &c.

  For the mathematics of Kepler's problem see E.W. Brown, _Lunar Theory_
  (Cambridge 1896), or the work of Watson or of Bauschinger on
  Theoretical Astronomy.
