ANSELM (c. 1033-1109), archbishop of Canterbury, was born at Aosta in
Piedmont. His family was accounted noble, and was possessed of
considerable property. Gundulph, his father, was by birth a Lombard, and
seems to have been a man of harsh and violent temper; his mother,
Ermenberga, was a prudent and virtuous woman, from whose careful
religious training the young Anselm derived much benefit. At the age of
fifteen he desired to enter a convent, but he could not obtain his
father's consent. Disappointment brought on an illness, on his recovery
from which he seems for a time to have given up his studies, and to have
plunged into the gay life of the world. During this time his mother
died, and his father's harshness became unbearable. He left home, and
with only one attendant crossed the Alps, and wandered through Burgundy
and France. Attracted by the fame of his countryman, Lanfranc, then
prior of Bec, he entered Normandy, and, after spending some time at
Avranches, settled at the monastery of Bec. There, at the age of
twenty-seven, he became a monk; three years later, when Lanfranc was
promoted to the abbacy of Caen, he was elected prior. This office he
held for fifteen years, and then, in 1078, on the death of Herlwin, the
warrior monk who had founded the monastery, he was made abbot. Under his
rule Bec became the first seat of learning in Europe, a result due not
more to his intellectual powers than to the great moral influence of his
noble character and kindly discipline. It was during these quiet years
at Bec that Anselm wrote his first philosophical and religious works,
the dialogues on Truth and Freewill, and the two celebrated treatises,
the _Monologion_ and _Proslogion_.

Meanwhile the convent had been growing in wealth, as well as in
reputation, and had acquired considerable property in England, which it
became the duty of Anselm occasionally to visit. By his mildness of
temper and unswerving rectitude, he so endeared himself to the English
that he was looked upon and desired as the natural successor to
Lanfranc, then archbishop of Canterbury. But on the death of that great
man, the ruling sovereign, William Rufus, seized the possessions and
revenues of the see, and made no new appointment. About four years
after, in 1092, on the invitation of Hugh, earl of Chester, Anselm with
some reluctance, for he feared to be made archbishop, crossed to
England. He was detained by business for nearly four months, and when
about to return, was refused permission by the king. In the following
year William fell ill, and thought his death was at hand. Eager to make
atonement for his sin with regard to the archbishopric, he nominated
Anselm to the vacant see, and after a great struggle compelled him to
accept the pastoral staff of office. After obtaining dispensation from
his duties in Normandy, Anselm was consecrated in 1093. He demanded of
the king, as the conditions of his retaining office, that he should give
up all the possessions of the see, accept his spiritual counsel, and
acknowledge Urban as pope in opposition to the anti-pope, Clement. He
only obtained a partial consent to the first of these, and the last
involved him in a serious difficulty with the king. It was a rule of the
church that the consecration of metropolitans could not be completed
without their receiving the _pallium_ from the hands of the pope.
Anselm, accordingly, insisted that he must proceed to Rome to receive
the pall. But William would not permit this; he had not acknowledged
Urban, and he maintained his right to prevent any pope being
acknowledged by an English subject without his permission. A great
council of churchmen and nobles, held to settle the matter, advised
Anselm to submit to the king, but failed to overcome his mild and
patient firmness. The matter was postponed, and William meanwhile
privately sent messengers to Rome, who acknowledged Urban and prevailed
on him to send a legate to the king bearing the archiepiscopal pall. A
partial reconciliation was then effected, and the matter of the pall was
compromised. It was not given by the king, but was laid on the altar at
Canterbury, whence Anselm took it.

Little more than a year after, fresh trouble arose with the king, and
Anselm resolved to proceed to Rome and seek the counsel of his spiritual
father. With great difficulty he obtained a reluctant permission to
leave, and in October 1097 he set out for Rome. William immediately
seized on the revenues of the see, and retained them to his death.
Anselm was received with high honour by Urban, and at a great council
held at Bari, he was put forward to defend the doctrine of the
procession of the Holy Ghost against the representatives of the Greek
Church. But Urban was too politic to embroil himself with the king of
England, and Anselm found that he could obtain no substantial result. He
withdrew from Rome, and spent some time at the little village of
Schiavi, where he finished his treatise on the atonement, _Cur Deus
homo_, and then retired to Lyons.

In 1100 William was killed, and Henry, his successor, at once recalled
Anselm. But Henry demanded that he should again receive from him in
person investiture in his office of archbishop, thus making the dignity
entirely dependent on the royal authority. Now, the papal rule in the
matter was plain; all homage and lay investiture were strictly
prohibited. Anselm represented this to the king; but Henry would not
relinquish a privilege possessed by his predecessors, and proposed that
the matter should be laid before the Holy See. The answer of the pope
reaffirmed the law as to investiture. A second embassy was sent, with a
similar result. Henry, however, remained firm, and at last, in 1103,
Anselm and an envoy from the king set out for Rome. The pope, Paschal,
reaffirmed strongly the rule of investiture, and passed sentence of
excommunication against all who had infringed the law, except Henry.
Practically this left matters as they were, and Anselm, who had received
a message forbidding him to return to England unless on the king's
terms, withdrew to Lyons, where he waited to see if Paschal would not
take stronger measures. At last, in 1105, he resolved himself to
excommunicate Henry. His intention was made known to the king through
his sister, and it seriously alarmed him, for it was a critical period
in his affairs. A meeting was arranged, and a reconciliation between
them effected. In 1106 Anselm crossed to England, with power from the
pope to remove the sentence of excommunication from the illegally
invested churchmen. In 1107 the long dispute as to investiture was
finally ended by the king resigning his formal rights. The remaining two
years of Anselm's life were spent in the duties of his archbishopric. He
died on the 21st of April 1109. He was canonized in 1494 by Alexander
VI.

Anselm may, with some justice, be considered the first scholastic
philosopher and theologian. His only great predecessor, Scotus Erigena,
had more of the speculative and mystical element than is consistent with
a schoolman; but in Anselm are found that recognition of the relation of
reason to revealed truth, and that attempt to elaborate a rational
system of faith, which form the special characteristics of scholastic
thought. His constant endeavour is to render the contents of the
Christian consciousness clear to reason, and to develop the intelligible
truths interwoven with the Christian belief. The necessary preliminary
for this is the possession of the Christian consciousness. "He who does
not believe will not experience; and he who has not experienced will not
understand." That faith must precede knowledge is reiterated by him.
_"Negue enim quaero intelligere ut credam, sed credo ut intelligam. Nam
et hoc credo, quia, nisi credidero, non intelligam."_ ("Nor do I seek to
understand that I may believe, but I believe that I may understand. For
this too I believe, that unless I first believe, I shall not
understand.") But after the faith is held fast, the attempt must be made
to demonstrate by reason the truth of what we believe. It is wrong not
to do so. _"Negligentiae mihi esse videtur, si, postquam confirmati
sumus in fide, non studemus quod credimus, intelligere."_ ("I hold it to
be a failure in duty if after we have become steadfast in the faith we
do not strive to understand what we believe.") To such an extent does he
carry this demand for rational explanation that, at times, it seems as
if he claimed for unassisted intelligence the power of penetrating even
to the mysteries of the Christian faith. On the whole, however, the
qualified statement is his real view; merely rational proofs are always,
he affirms, to be tested by Scripture. (_Cur Deus homo_, i. 2 and 38;
_De Fide Trin_. 2.)

The groundwork of his theory of knowledge is contained in the tract _De
Veritate_, in which, from the consideration of truth as in knowledge, in
willing, and in things, he rises to the affirmation of an absolute
truth, in which all other truth participates. This absolute truth is God
himself, who is therefore the ultimate ground or principle both of
things and of thought. The notion of God comes thus into the foreground
of the system; before all things it is necessary that it should be made
clear to reason, that it should be demonstrated to have real existence.
This demonstration is the substance of the _Monologion_ and
_Proslogion_. In the first of these the proof rests on the ordinary
grounds of realism, and coincides to some extent with the earlier theory
of Augustine, though it is carried out with singular boldness and
fulness. Things, he says, are called good in a variety of ways and
degrees; this would be impossible if there were not some absolute
standard, some good in itself, in which all relative goods participate.
Similarly with such predicates as great, just; they involve a certain
greatness and justice. The very existence of things is impossible
without some one Being, by whom they are. This absolute Being, this
goodness, justice, greatness, is God. Anselm was not thoroughly
satisfied with this reasoning; it started from _a posteriori grounds_,
and contained several converging lines of proof. He desired to have some
one short demonstration. Such a demonstration he presented in the
_Proslogion_; it is his celebrated ontological proof. God is that being
than whom none greater can be conceived. Now, if that than which nothing
greater can be conceived existed only in the intellect, it would not be
the absolutely greatest, for we could add to it existence in reality. It
follows, then, that the being than whom nothing greater can be
conceived, i.e. God, necessarily has real existence. This reasoning, in
which Anselm partially anticipated the Cartesian philosophers, has
rarely seemed satisfactory. It was opposed at the time by the monk
Gaunilo, in his _Liber pro Insipiente_, on the ground that we cannot
pass from idea to reality. The same criticism is made by several of the
later schoolmen, among others by Aquinas, and is in substance what Kant
advances against all ontological proof. Anselm replied to the objections
of Gaunilo in his _Liber Apologeticus_. The existence of God being thus
held proved, he proceeds to state the rational grounds of the Christian
doctrines of creation and of the Trinity. With reference to this last,
he says we cannot know God from himself, but only after the analogy of
his creatures; and the special analogy used is the self-consciousness of
man, its peculiar double nature, with the necessary elements, memory and
intelligence, representing the relation of the Father to the Son. The
mutual love of these two, proceeding from the relation they hold to one
another, symbolizes the Holy Spirit. The further theological doctrines
of man, original sin, free will, are developed, partly in the
_Monologion_, partly in other mixed treatises. Finally, in his greatest
work, _Cur Deus homo_, he undertakes to make plain, even to infidels,
the rational necessity of the Christian mystery of the atonement. The
theory rests on three positions: that satisfaction is necessary on
account of God's honour and justice; that such satisfaction can be given
only by the peculiar personality of the God-man; that such satisfaction
is really given by the voluntary death of this infinitely valuable
person. The demonstration is, in brief, this. All the actions of men are
due to the furtherance of God's glory; if, then, there be sin, i.e. if
God's honour be wounded, man of himself can give no satisfaction. But
the justice of God demands satisfaction; and as an insult to infinite
honour is in itself infinite, the satisfaction must be infinite, i.e. it
must outweigh all that is not God. Such a penalty can only be paid by
God himself, and, as a penalty for man, must be paid under the form of
man. Satisfaction is only possible through the God-man. Now this
God-man, as sinless, is exempt from the punishment of sin; His passion
is therefore voluntary, not given as due. The merit of it is therefore
infinite; God's justice is thus appeased, and His mercy may extend to
man. This theory has exercised immense influence on the form of church
doctrine. It is certainly an advance on the older patristic theory, in
so far as it substitutes for a contest between God and Satan, a contest
between the goodness and justice of God; but it puts the whole relation
on a merely legal footing, gives it no ethical bearing, and neglects
altogether the consciousness of the individual to be redeemed. In this
respect it contrasts unfavourably with the later theory of Abelard.

Anselm's speculations did not receive, in the middle ages, the respect
and attention justly their due. This was probably due to their
unsystematic character, for they are generally tracts or dialogues on
detached questions, not elaborate treatises like the great works of
Albert, Aquinas, and Erigena. They have, however, a freshness and
philosophical vigour, which more than makes up for their want of system,
and which raises them far above the level of most scholastic writings.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--The main sources for the history of St Anselm and his
  times are Eadmer's _Vita Anselmi_ and his _Historia Novorum_, edited
  by M. Rule in _Rolls Series_ (London, 1884); the best modern work is
  by Père Ragey, _Histoire de Saint Anselme_ (Paris, 1890), and _Saint
  Anselme professeur_ (Paris, 1890). Other appreciations are by A.
  Mohler, _Anselm Erzbischof von Canterbury_ (Regensburg, 1839; Eng.
  trans. by H. Rymer, London, 1842); F.R. Hasse, _Anselm von Canterbury_
  (2 vols., Leipzig, 1842-1853); C. de Rémusat, _S. Anseime de
  Cantorbéry_ (Paris, 1853, new ed. 1868); R.W. Church, _St Anselm_,
  first published in _Sunday Library_ (London, 1870; often reprinted);
  Martin Rule, _Life and Times of St Anselm_ (London, 1883).

  _Works_: The best edition of St Anselm's complete works is that of
  Dom Gerberon (Paris, 1675); reprinted with many notes in 1712;
  incorporated by J. Migne in his _Patrologia Latina_, tomi
  clviii.-clix. (Paris. 1853-1854). Migne's reprint contains many
  errors. The _Cur Deus homo_ may be best studied in the editions
  published by D. Nutt (London, 1885) and by Griffith (1898). The
  _Mariale_, or poems in honour of the Blessed Virgin, has been
  carefully edited by P. Ragey (Tournai, 1885); the _Monologion_ and
  _Proslogion_, by C.E. Ubaghs (Louvain, 1854; Eng. trans. by S.N.
  Deane, Chicago, 1903); the _Meditationes_, many of which are wrongly
  attributed to Anselm, have been frequently reprinted, and were
  included in Methuen's _Library of Devotion_ (London, 1903).

  The best criticism of Anselm's philosophical works is by J.M. Rigg
  (London, 1896), and Domet de Verges (_Grands Philosophes_ series,
  Paris, 1901). For a complete bibliography, see A. Vacant's
  _Dictionnaire de théologie_.
