ANT-LION, the name given to neuropterous insects of the family
_Myrmeleonidae_, with relatively short and apically clubbed antennae and
four large densely reticulated wings in which the apical veins enclose
regular oblong spaces. The perfect insects are for the most part
nocturnal and are believed to be carnivorous. The best-known species,
_Myrmeleon formicarius_, which may be found adult in the late summer,
occurs in many countries on the European continent, though like the rest
of this group it is not indigenous in England. Strictly speaking,
however, the term ant-lion applies to the larval form, which has been
known scientifically for over two hundred years, on account of its
peculiar and forbidding appearance and its skilful and unique manner of
entrapping prey by means of a pitfall. The abdomen is oval, sandy-grey
in hue and beset with warts and bristles; the prothorax forms a mobile
neck for the large square head, which carries a pair of long and
powerful toothed mandibles. It is in dry and sandy soil that the
ant-lion lays its trap. Having marked out the chosen site by a circular
groove, it starts to crawl backwards, using its abdomen as a plough to
shovel up the soil. By the aid of one front leg it places consecutive
heaps of loosened particles upon its head, then with a smart jerk throws
each little pile clear of the scene of operations. Proceeding thus it
gradually works its way from the circumference towards the centre. When
the latter is reached and the pit completed, the larva settles down at
the bottom, buried in the soil with only the jaws projecting above the
surface. Since the sides of the pit consist of loose sand they afford an
insecure foothold to any small insect that inadvertently ventures over
the edge. Slipping to the bottom the prey is immediately seized by the
lurking ant-lion; or if it attempt to scramble again up the treacherous
walls of the pit, is speedily checked in its efforts and brought down by
showers of loose sand which are jerked at it from below by the larva. By
means of similar head-jerks the skins of insects sucked dry of their
contents are thrown out of the pit, which is then kept clear of refuse.
A full-grown larva digs a pit about 2 in. deep and 3 in. wide at the
edge. The pupa stage of the ant-lion is quiescent. The larva makes a
globular case of sand stuck together with fine silk spun, it is said,
from a slender spinneret at the posterior end of the body. In this it
remains until the completion of the transformation into the sexually
mature insect, which then emerges from the case, leaving the pupal
integument behind. In certain species of _Myrmeleonidae_, such as
_Dendroleon pantheormis_, the larva, although resembling that of
_Myrmeleon_ structurally, makes no pitfall, but seizes passing prey from
any nook or crevice in which it shelters.

The exact meaning of the name ant-lion (Fr. _fourmilion_) is uncertain.
It has been thought that it refers to the fact that ants form a large
percentage of the prey of the insect, the suffix "lion" merely
suggesting destroyer or eater. Perhaps, however, the name may only
signify a large terrestrial biting apterous insect, surpassing the ant
in size and predatory habits.     (R. I. P.)