ANT (O. Eng. _aémete_, from Teutonic a, privative, and _maitan_, cut or
bite off, i.e. "the biter off"; _aémete_ in Middle English became
differentiated in dialect use to _amete_, then _amte_, and so _ant_, and
also to _emete_, whence the synonym "emmet," now only used provincially,
"ant" being the general literary form). The fact that the name of the
ant has come down in English from a thousand years ago shows that this
class of insects impressed the old inhabitants of England as they
impressed the Hebrews and Greeks. The social instincts and industrious
habits of ants have always made them favourite objects of study, and a
vast amount of literature has accumulated on the subject of their
structure and their modes of life.

_Characters._--An ant is easily recognized both by the casual observer
and by the student of insects. Ants form a distinct and natural family
(_Formicidae_) of the great order _Hymenoptera_, to which bees, wasps
and sawflies also belong. The insects of this order have mandibles
adapted for biting, and two pairs of membranous wings are usually
present; the first abdominal segment (propodeum) becomes closely
associated with the fore-body (thorax), of which it appears to form a
part. In all ants the second (apparently the first) abdominal segment is
very markedly constricted at its front and hind edges, so that it forms
a "node" at the base of the hind-body (fig. 1), and in many ants the
third abdominal segment is similarly "nodular" in form (fig. 3, _b,
c._). It is this peculiar "waist" that catches the eye of the observer,
and makes the insects so easy of recognition. Another conspicuous and
well-known feature of ants is the wingless condition of the "workers,"
as the specialized females, with undeveloped ovaries, which form the
largest proportion of the population of ant-communities, are called.
Such "workers" are essential to the formation of a social community of
Hymenoptera, and their wingless condition among the ants shows that
their specialization has been carried further in this family than among
the wasps and bees. Further, while among wasps and bees we find some
solitary and some social genera, the ants as a family are social, though
some aberrant species are dependent on the workers of other ants. It is
interesting and suggestive that in a few families of digging Hymenoptera
(such as the _Mutillidae_), allied to the ants, the females are
wingless. The perfect female or "queen" ants (figs. 1, 1, 3, a) often
cast their wings (fig. 3, b) after the nuptial flight; in a few species
the females, and in still fewer the males, never develop wings. (For the
so-called "white ants," which belong to an order far removed from the
_Hymenoptera_, see TERMITE.)

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Wood Ant (_Formica rufa_). 1, Queen; 2, male; 3,
worker.]

_Structure._--The head of an ant carries a pair of elbowed feelers, each
consisting of a minute basal and an elongate second segment, forming the
stalk or "scape," while from eight to eleven short segments make up the
terminal "flagellum." These segments are abundantly supplied with
elongate tooth-like projections connected with nerve-endings probably
olfactory in function. The brain is well developed and its
"mushroom-bodies" are exceptionally large. The mandibles, which are
frequently used for carrying various objects, are situated well to the
outside of the maxillae, so that they can be opened and shut without
interfering with the latter. The peculiar form and arrangement of the
anterior abdominal segments have already been described. The fourth
abdominal segment is often very large, and forms the greater part of the
hind-body; this segment is markedly constricted at its basal (forward)
end, where it is embraced by the small third segment. In many of those
ants whose third abdominal segment forms a second "node," the basal
dorsal region of the fourth segment is traversed by a large number of
very fine transverse striations; over these the sharp hinder edge of the
third segment can be scraped to and fro, and the result is a
stridulating organ which gives rise to a note of very high pitch. For
the appreciation of the sounds made by these stridulators, the ants are
furnished with delicate organs of hearing (chordotonal organs) in the
head, in the three thoracic and two of the abdominal segments and in the
shins of the legs.

The hinder abdominal segments and the stings of the queens and workers
resemble those of other stinging Hymenoptera. But there are several
subfamilies of ants whose females have the lancets of the sting useless
for piercing, although the poison-glands are functional, their secretion
being ejected by the insect, when occasion may arise, from the greatly
enlarged reservoir, the reduced sting acting as a squirt.

_Nests._--The nests of different kinds of ants are constructed in very
different situations; many species (_Lasius_, for example) make
underground nests; galleries and chambers being hollowed out in the
soil, and opening by small holes on the surface, or protected above by a
large stone. The wood ant (_Formica rufa_, fig. 1) piles up a heap of
leaves, twigs and other vegetable refuse, so arranged as to form an
orderly series of galleries, though the structure appears at first sight
a chaotic heap. Species of _Camponotus_ and many other ants tunnel in
wood. In tropical countries ants sometimes make their nests in the
hollow thorns of trees or on leaves; species with this habit are
believed to make a return to the tree for the shelter that it affords by
protecting it from the ravages of other insects, including their own
leaf-cutting relations.

_Early Stages._--The larvae of ants (fig. 3, e) are legless and helpless
maggots with very small heads (fig. 3, f), into whose mouths the
requisite food has to be forced by the assiduous "nurse" workers. The
maggots are tended by these nurses with the greatest care, and carried
to those parts of the nest most favourable for their health and growth.
When fully grown, the maggot spins an oval silken cocoon within which it
pupates (fig. 3, g). These cocoons, which may often be seen carried
between the mandibles of the workers, are the "ants' eggs" prized as
food for fish and pheasants. The workers of a Ceylonese ant (_Oecophylla
smaragdina_) are stated by D. Sharp to hold the maggots between their
mandibles and induce them to spin together the leaves of trees from
which they form their shelters, as the adult ants have no silk-producing
organs.

_Origin of Societies._--Ant-colonies are founded either by a single
female or by several in association. The foundress of the nest lays eggs
and at first feeds and rears the larvae, the earliest of which develop
into workers. C. Janet observed that in a nest of _Lasius alienus_,
established by a single female, the first workers emerged from their
cocoons on the 102nd day. These workers then take on themselves the
labour of the colony, some collecting food, which they transfer to their
comrades within the nest whose duty is to tend and feed the larvae. The
foundress-queen is now waited on by the workers, who supply her with
food and spare her all cares of work, so that henceforth she may devote
her whole energies to egg-laying. The population of the colony increases
fast, and a well-grown nest contains several "queens" and males, besides
a large number of workers. One of the most interesting features of
ant-societies is the dimorphism or polymorphism that may often be seen
among the workers, the same species being represented by two or more
forms. Thus the British "wood ant" (_Formica rufa_) has a smaller and a
larger race of workers ("minor" and "major" forms), while in _Ponera_ we
find a blind race of workers and another race provided with eyes, and in
_Atta_, _Eciton_ and other genera, four or five forms of workers are
produced, the largest of which, with huge heads and elongate trenchant
mandibles, are known as the "soldier" caste. The development of such
diversely-formed insects as the offspring of the unmodified females
which show none of their peculiarities raises many points of difficulty
for students in heredity. It is thought that the differences are, in
part at least, due to differences in the nature of the food supplied to
larvae, which are apparently all alike. But the ovaries of worker ants
are in some cases sufficiently developed for the production of eggs,
which may give rise parthenogenetically to male, queen or worker
offspring.

_Food._--Different kinds of ants vary greatly in the substances which
they use for food. Honey forms the staple nourishment of many ants, some
of the workers seeking nectar from flowers, working it up into honey
within their stomachs and regurgitating it so as to feed their comrades
within the nest, who, in their turn, pass it on to the grubs. A curious
specialization of certain workers in connexion with the transference of
honey has been demonstrated by H.C. McCook in the American genus
_Myrmecocystus_, and by later observers in Australian and African
species of _Plagiolepis_ and allied genera. The workers in question
remain within the nest, suspended by their feet, and serve as living
honey-pots for the colony, becoming so distended by the supplies of
honey poured into their mouths by their foraging comrades that their
abdomens become sub-globular, the pale intersegmental membrane being
tightly stretched between the widely-separated dark sclerites. The
"nurse" workers in the nest can then draw their supplies from these
"honey-pots." Very many ants live by preying upon various insects, such
as the British "red ants" with well-developed stings (_Myrmica rubra_),
and the notorious "driver ants" of Africa and America, the old-world
species of which belong to _Dorylus_ and allied genera, and the
new-world species to _Eciton_ (fig. 2, _2, 3_). In these ants the
difference between the large, heavy, winged males and females, and the
small, long-legged, active workers, is so great, that various forms of
the same species have been often referred to distinct genera; in
_Eciton_, for example, the female has a single petiolate abdominal
segment, the worker two. The workers of these ants range over the
country in large armies, killing and carrying off all the insects and
spiders that they find and sometimes attacking vertebrates. They have
been known to enter human dwellings, removing all the verminous insects
contained therein. These driver ants shelter in temporary nests made in
hollow trees or similar situations, where the insects may be seen,
according to T. Belt, "clustered together in a dense mass like a great
swarm of bees hanging from the roof."

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Leaf-cutting and Foraging Ants. 1. _Atta
cephalus_; 2. _Eciton drepanophora_; 3. _Eciton erratica_.]

The harvesting habits of certain ants have long been known, the
subterranean store-houses of Mediterranean species of _Aphaenogaster_
having been described by J.T. Moggridge and A. Forel, and the complex
industries of the Texan _Pogonomyrmex barbatus_ by H.C. McCook and W.M.
Wheeler. The colonies of _Aphaenogaster_ occupy nests extending over an
area of fifty to a hundred square yards several feet below the surface
of the ground. Into these underground chambers the ants carry seeds of
grasses and other plants of which they accumulate large stores. The
species of _Pogonomyrmex_ strip the husks from the seeds and carry them
out of the nest, making a refuse heap near the entrance. The seeds are
harvested from various grasses, especially from _Aristida oligantha_, a
species known as "ant rice," which often grows in quantity close to the
site selected for the nest, but the statement that the ants deliberately
sow this grass is an error, due, according to Wheeler, to the sprouting
of germinating seeds which the ants have turned out of their
store-chambers.

Perhaps no ants have such remarkable habits as those of the genus
_Atta_,--the leaf-cutting ants of tropical America (fig. 2, 1). There
are several forms of worker in these species, some with enormous heads,
which remain in the underground nests, while their smaller comrades
scour the country in search of suitable trees, which they ascend, biting
off small circular pieces from the leaves, and carrying them off to the
nests. Their labour often results in the complete defoliation of the
tree. The tracks along which the ants carry the leaves to their nests
are often in part subterranean. H.C. McCook describes an almost straight
tunnel, nearly 450 ft. long, made by _Atta fervens_.

Within the nest, the leaves are cut into very minute fragments and
gathered into small spherical heaps forming a spongy mass,
which--according to the researches of A. Möller--serves as the
substratum for a special fungus (_Rozites gongylophora_), the staple
food of the ants. The insects cultivate their fungus, weeding out mould
and bacterial growths, and causing the appearance, on the surface of
their "mushroom garden," of numerous small white bodies formed by
swollen ends of the fungus hyphae. When the fungus is grown elsewhere
than in the ants' nest it produces gonidia instead of the white masses
on which the ants feed, hence it seems that these masses are indeed
produced as the result of some unknown cultural process. Other genera of
South American ants--_Apterostigma_ and _Cyphomyrmex_--make similar
fungal cultivations, but they use wood, grain or dung as the substratum
instead of leaf fragments. Each kind of ant is so addicted to its own
particular fungal food that it refuses disdainfully, even when hungry,
the produce of an alien nest.

_Guests of Ants._--Many ants feed largely and some almost entirely on the
saccharine secretions of other insects, the best known of which are the
Aphides (plant-lice or "green-fly"). This consideration leads us to one
of the most remarkable and fascinating features of ant-communities--the
presence in the nests of insects and other small arthropods, which are
tended and cared for by the ants as their "guests," rendering to the ants
in return the sweet food which they desire. The relation between ants and
aphids has often been compared to that between men and milch cattle. Sir
J. Lubbock (Lord Avebury) states that the common British yellow ants
(_Lasius flavus_) collect flocks of root-feeding aphids in their
underground nests, protect them, build earthen shelters over them, and
take the greatest care of their eggs. Other ants, such as the British
black garden species (_L. niger_), go after the aphids that frequent the
shoots of plants. Many species of aphid migrate from one plant to another
at certain stages in their life-cycle when their numbers have very
largely increased, and F.M. Webster has observed ants, foreseeing this
emigration, to carry aphids from apple trees to grasses. It has been
shown by M. Büsgen that the sweet secretion (honey-dew) of the aphids is
not derived, as generally believed, from the paired cornicles on the
fifth abdominal segment, but from the intestine, whence it exudes in
drops and is swallowed by the ants.

Besides the aphids, other insects, such as scale insects (_Coccidae_),
caterpillars of blue butterflies (_Lycaenidae_), and numerous beetles,
furnish the ants with nutrient secretions. The number of species of
beetles that inhabit ants' nests is almost incredibly large, and most of
these are never found elsewhere, being blind, helpless and dependent on
the ants' care for protection and food; these beetles belong for the
most part to the families _Pselaphidae, Paussidae_ and _Staphylinidae_.
Spring-tails and bristle-tails (order _Aptera_) of several species also
frequent ants' nests. While some of these "guest" insects produce
secretions that furnish the ants with food, some seem to be useless
inmates of the nest, obtaining food from the ants and giving nothing in
return. Others again play the part of thieves in the ant society; C.
Janet observed a small bristle-tail (_Lepismima_) to lurk beneath the
heads of two Lasius workers, while one passed food to the other, in
order to steal the drop of nourishment and to make off with it. The same
naturalist describes the association with Lasius of small mites
(_Antennophorus_) which are carried about by the worker ants, one of
which may have a mite beneath her mouth, and another on either side of
her abdomen. On patting their carrier or some passing ant, the mites are
supplied with food, no service being rendered by them in return for the
ants' care. Perhaps the ants derive from these seemingly useless guests
the same satisfaction as we obtain by keeping pet animals. Recent
advance in our knowledge of the guests and associates of ants is due
principally to E. Wasmann, who has compiled a list of nearly 1500
species of insects, arachnids and crustaceans, inhabiting ants' nests.
The warmth, shelter and abundant food in the nests, due both to the
fresh supplies brought in by the ants and to the large amount of waste
matter that accumulates, must prove strongly attractive to the various
"guests." Some of the inmates of ants' nests are here for the purpose of
preying upon the ants or their larvae, so that we find all kinds of
relations between the owners of the nests and their companions, from
mutual benefit to active hostility.

Among these associations or guests other species of ants are not
wanting. For example, a minute species (_Solenopsis fugax_) lives in a
compound nest with various species of _Formica_, forming narrow
galleries which open into the larger galleries of its host. The
_Solenopsis_ can make its way into the territory of the _Formica_ to
steal the larvae which serve it as food, but the _Formica_ is too large
to pursue the thief when it returns to its own galleries.

_Slaves._--Several species of ants are found in association with another
species which stands to them in the relation of slave to master.
_Formica sanguinea_ is a well-known European slave-making ant that
inhabits England; its workers raid the nests of _F. fusca_ and other
species, and carry off to their own nests pupae from which workers are
developed that live contentedly as slaves of their captors. _F.
sanguinea_ can live either with or without slaves, but another European
ant (_Polyergus rufescens_) is so dependent on its slaves--various
species of _Formica_--that its workers are themselves unable to feed the
larvae. The remarkable genus _Anergates_ has no workers, and its
wingless males and females are served by communities of _Tetramorium
cespitum_ (fig. 3).

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Ant, _Tetramorium cespitum_ (Linn.), a, Female;
b, female after loss of wings; c, male; d, worker; e, larva; g, pupa; f,
head of larva more highly magnified. After Marlatt, _Bull_. 4 (n.s.)
_Div. Ent. U.S. Dept. Agriculture_]

_Senses and Intelligence of Ants._--That ants possess highly developed
senses and the power of communicating with one another has long been
known to students of their habits; the researches of P. Huber and Sir J.
Lubbock (Lord Avebury) on these subjects are familiar to all
naturalists. The insects are guided by light, being very sensitive to
ultra-violet rays, and also by scent and hearing. Recent experiments by
A.M. Fielde show that an ant follows her own old track by a scent
exercised by the tenth segment of the feeler, recognizes other inmates
of her nest by a sense of smell resident in the eleventh segment, is
guided to the eggs, maggots and pupae, which she has to tend, by
sensation through the eighth and ninth segments, and appreciates the
general smell of the nest itself by means of organs in the twelfth
segment. Lubbock's experiments of inducing ants to seek objects that had
been removed show that they are guided by scent rather than by sight,
and that any disturbance of their surroundings often causes great
uncertainty in their actions. Ants invite one another to work, or ask
for food from one another, by means of pats with the feelers; and they
respond to the solicitations of their guest--beetles or mites, who ask
for food by patting the ants with their feet. In all probability the
actions of ants are for the most part instinctive or reflex, and some
observers, such as A. Bethe, deny them all claim to psychical qualities.
But it seems impossible to doubt that in many cases ants behave in a
manner that must be considered intelligent, that they can learn by
experience and that they possess memory. Lubbock goes so far as to
conclude the account of his experiments with the remark that "It is
difficult altogether to deny them the gift of reason ... their mental
powers differ from those of men, not so much in kind as in degree."
Wasmann considers that ants are neither miniature human beings nor mere
reflex automata, and most students of their habits will probably accept
this intermediate position as the most satisfactory. C.L. Morgan sums up
a discussion on Lubbock's experiments in which the ants failed to
utilize particles of earth for bridge-making, with the suggestive remark
that "What these valuable experiments seem to show is that the ant,
probably the most intelligent of all insects, has no claim to be
regarded as a rational being." Nevertheless, ants can teach "rational
beings" many valuable lessons.

  BIBLIOGRAPHY.--The literature on ants is so vast that it is only
  possible to refer the reader to a few of the most important works on
  the family. Pierre Huber's _Traité des moeurs des fourmis indigènes_
  (Genève, 1810) is the most famous of the older memoirs. H.W. Bates, _A
  Naturalist on the Amazons_; T. Belt, _A Naturalist in Nicaragua_; H.C.
  McCook, _Agricultural Ant of Texas_ (Philadelphia, 1880); and A.
  Moller's paper in _Botan. Mitt, aus den Tropen_, (1893), contain
  classical observations on American species. Sir J. Lubbock's (Lord
  Avebury) _Ants, Bees and Wasps_ (London 1882), dealing with British
  and European species, has been followed by numerous important papers
  by A. Forel and C. Emery in various Swiss and German periodicals, and
  especially by C. Janet in his _Êtudes sur les fourmis, les guêpes et
  les abeilles_ (Paris, &c., 1893-1904). Forel (_Ann. Soc. Ent. Belg._
  xlvii., 1893, _Journ. Bomnay N.H. Soc._ 1900-1903, and _Biologia Cent.
  Americana_) and Emery (_Zool. Jahrb. Syst._ viii., 1896) have written
  on the classification of the _Formicidae_. Among recent American
  writers on habit may be mentioned W.M. Wheeler (_American Naturalist_,
  1900-1902) and A.M. Fielde (_Proc. Acad. Sci. Philadelphia_, 1901); E.
  Wasmann (_Kritisches Verzeichniss der myrmecophilen und termitophilen
  Arthropoden_, Berlin, 1894, and _3^me Congrès Intern. Zool._ 1895) is
  the great authority on ant-guests and associates. D. Sharp's general
  account of ants in the _Cambridge Nat. Hist_. (vol. vi., 1898) is
  excellent. For discussions on intelligence see A. Bethe, _Journ. f. d.
  ges. Physiol._ lxx. (1898); Wasmann, _Die psychischen Fahigkeiten der
  Ameisen_ (Stuttgart, 1899); C. Ll. Morgan, _Animal Behaviour_ (London,
  1900.)     (G. H. C.)