ANTANÀNARÌVO, i.e. "town of a thousand" (Fr. spelling _Tananarive_), the
capital of Madagascar, situated centrally as regards the length of the
island, but only about 90 m. distant from the eastern coast, in 18° 55'
S., 47° 30' E. It is 135 m. W.S.W. of Tamatave, the principal seaport of
the island, with which it is connected by railway, and for about 60 m.
along the coast lagoons, a service of small steamers. The city occupies
a commanding position, being chiefly built on the summit and slopes of a
long and narrow rocky ridge, which extends north and south for about 2½
m., dividing to the north in a Y-shape, and rising at its highest point
to 690 ft. above the extensive rice plain to the west, which is itself
4060 ft. above sea-level. For long only the principal village of the
Hova chiefs, Antananarivo advanced in importance as those chiefs made
themselves sovereigns of the greater part of Madagascar, until it became
a town of some 80,000 inhabitants. Until 1869 all buildings within the
city proper were of wood or rush, but even then it possessed several
timber palaces of considerable size, the largest being 120 ft. high.
These crown the summit of the central portion of the ridge; and the
largest palace, with its lofty roof and towers, is the most conspicuous
object from every point of view. Since the introduction of stone and
brick, the whole city has been rebuilt and now contains numerous
structures of some architectural pretension, the royal palaces, the
houses formerly belonging to the prime minister and nobles, the French
residency, the Anglican and Roman Catholic cathedrals, several stone
churches, as well as others of brick, colleges, schools, hospitals,
courts of justice and other government buildings, and hundreds of good
dwelling-houses. Since the French conquest in 1895 good roads have been
constructed throughout the city, broad flights of steps connect places
too steep for the formation of carriage roads, and the central space,
called Andohalo, has become a handsome _place_, with walks and terraces,
flower-beds and trees. A small park has been laid out near the
residency, and the planting of trees and the formation of gardens in
various parts of the city give it a bright and attractive appearance.
Water is obtained from springs at the foot of the hill, but it is
proposed to bring an abundant supply from the river Ikopa, which skirts
the capital to the south and west. The population, including that of the
suburbs, is 69,000 (1907). The city is guarded by two forts built on
hills to the east and south-west respectively. Including an Anglican and
a Roman Catholic cathedral, there are about fifty churches in the city
and its suburbs, as well as a Mahommedan mosque.     (J. Si.*)