ANTHROPOMORPHISM (Gr. [Greek: anthropos], man, [Greek: morphae], form),
the attribution (a) of a human body, or (b) of human qualities
generally, to God or the gods. The word anthropomorphism is a modern
coinage (possibly from 18th century French). The _New English
Dictionary_ is misled by the 1866 reprint of Paul Bayne on Ephesians
when it quotes "anthropomorphist" as 17th century English. Seventeenth
century editions print "anthropomorphits," i.e. anthropomorphites, in
sense (a). The older abstract term is "anthropopathy," literally
"attributing human feelings," in sense (b).

Early religion, among its many objects of worship, includes beasts (see
ANIMAL-WORSHIP), considered, in the more refined theology of the later
Greeks and Romans, as metamorphoses of the great gods. Similarly we find
"therianthropic" forms--half animal, half human--in Egypt or
Assyria-Babylonia. In contrast with these, it is considered one of the
glories of the Olympian mythology of Greece that it believed in happy
manlike beings (though exempt from death, and using special rarefied
foods, &c.), and celebrated them in statues of the most exquisite art.
Israel shows us animal images, doubtless of a ruder sort, when Yahweh is
worshipped in the northern kingdom under the image of a steer. (Some
scholars think the title "mighty one of Jacob," Psalm cxxxii., 2, 5, _et
al_., [Hebrew: abir] as if from [Hebrew: avir] is really "steer"
[Hebrew: abir] "of Jacob.") But the higher religion of Israel inclined
to morality more than to art, and forbade image worship altogether. This
prepared the way for the conception of God as an immaterial Spirit. True
mythical anthropomorphisms occur in early parts of the Old Testament
(e.g. Genesis iii. 8, cf. vi. 2), though in the majority of Old
Testament passages such expressions are merely verbal (e.g. Isaiah lix.
1). In the Christian Church (and again in early Mahommedanism) simple
minds believed in the corporeal nature of God. Gibbon and other writers
quote from John Cassian the tale of the poor monk, who, being convinced
of his error, burst into tears, exclaiming, "You have taken away my God!
I have none now whom I can worship!" According to a fragment of Origen
(on Genesis i. 26), Melito of Sardis shared this belief. Many have
thought Melito's work, [Greek: peri ensomatou theou], must have been a
treatise on the Incarnation; but it is hard to think that Origen could
blunder so. Epiphanius tells of Audaeus of Mesopotamia and his
followers, Puritan sectaries in the 4th century, who were orthodox
except for this belief and for Quartodecimanism (see EASTER).
Tertullian, who is sometimes called an anthropomorphist, stood for the
Stoical doctrine, that all reality, even the divine, is in a sense
material.

The reaction against anthropomorphism begins in Greek philosophy with
the satirical spirit of Xenophanes (540 B.C.), who puts the case as
broadly as any. The "greatest God" resembles man "neither in form nor in
mind." In Judaism--unless we should refer to the prophets' polemic
against images--a reaction is due to the introduction of the codified
law. God seemed to grow more remote. The old sacred name Yahweh is never
pronounced; even "God" is avoided for allusive titles like "heaven" or
"place." Still, amid all this, the God of Judaism remains a personal,
almost a limited, being. In Philo we see Jewish scruples uniting with
others drawn from Greek philosophy. For, though the quarrel with popular
anthropomorphism was patched up, and the gods of the Pantheon were
described by Stoics and Epicureans as manlike in form, philosophy
nevertheless tended to highly abstract conceptions of supreme, or real,
deity. Philo followed out the line of this tradition in teaching that
God cannot be named. How much exactly he meant is disputed. The same
inheritance of Greek philosophy appears in the Christian fathers,
especially Origen. He names and condemns the "anthropomorphites," who
ascribe a human body to God (on Romans i., _sub fin_.; Rufinus' Latin
version). In Arabian philosophy the reaction sought to deny that God had
any attributes. And, under the influence of Mahommedan Aristotelianism,
the same paralysing speculation found entrance among the learned Jews of
Spain (see MAIMONIDES).

Till modern times the philosophical reaction was not carried out with
full vigour. Spinoza (_Ethics_, i. 15 and 17), representing here as
elsewhere both a Jewish inheritance and a philosophical, but advancing
further, sweeps away all community between God and man. So later J.G.
Fichte and Matthew Arnold ("a magnified and non-natural
man"),--strangely, in view of their strong belief in an objective moral
order. For the use of the _word_ "anthropomorphic," or kindred forms, in
this new spirit of condemnation for all conceptions of God as
manlike--sense (b) noted above--see J.J. Rousseau in _Émile_ iv. (cited
by Littré),--_Nous sommes pour la plupart de vrais anthropomorphites_.
Rousseau is here speaking of the language of Christian theology,--a
divine Spirit: divine Persons. At the present day this usage is
universal. What it means on the lips of pantheists is plain. But when
theists charge one another with "anthropomorphism," in order to rebuke
what they deem unduly manlike conceptions of God, they stand on slippery
ground. All theism implies the assertion of kinship between man,
especially in his moral being, and God. As a brilliant theologian, B.
Duhm, has said, physiomorphism is the enemy of Christian faith, not
anthropomorphism.

The latest extension of the word, proposed in the interests of
philosophy or psychology, uses it of the principle according to which
man is said to interpret all things (not God merely) through himself.
Common-sense intuitionalism would deny that man does this, attributing
to him immediate knowledge of reality. And idealism in all its forms
would say that man, interpreting through his reason, does rightly, and
reaches truth. Even here then the use of the word is not colourless. It
implies blame. It is the symptom of a philosophy which confines
knowledge within narrow limits, and which, when held by Christians (e.g.
Peter Browne, or H.L. Mansel), believes only in an "analogical"
knowledge of God.     (R. Ma.)