ANTHRAX (the Greek for "coal," or "carbuncle," so called by the ancients
because they regarded it as burning like coal; cf. the French equivalent
_charbon_; also known as _fièvre charbonneuse, Milzbrand_, splenic
fever, and malignant pustule), an acute, specific, infectious, virulent
disease, caused by the _Bacillus anthracis_, in animals, chiefly cattle,
sheep and horses, and frequently occurring in workers in the wool or
hair, as well as in those handling the hides or carcases, of beasts
which have been affected.

_Animals._--As affecting wild as well as domesticated animals and man,
anthrax has been widely diffused in one or more of its forms, over the
surface of the globe. It at times decimates the reindeer herds in
Lapland and the Polar regions, and is only too well known in the tropics
and in temperate latitudes. It has been observed and described in
Russia, Siberia, Central Asia, China, Cochin-China, Egypt, West Indies,
Peru, Paraguay, Brazil, Mexico, and other parts of North and South
America, in Australia, and on different parts of the African continent,
while for other European countries the writings which have been
published with regard to its nature, its peculiar characteristics, and
the injury it inflicts are innumerable. Countries in which are extensive
marshes, or the subsoil of which is tenacious or impermeable, are
usually those most frequently and seriously visited. Thus there have
been regions notorious for its prevalence, such as the marshes of
Sologne, Dombes and Bresse in France; certain parts of Germany, Hungary
and Poland; in Spain the half-submerged valleys and the maritime coasts
of Catalonia, as well as the Romagna and other marshy districts of
Italy; while it is epizootic, and even panzootic, in the swampy regions
of Esthonia, Livonia, Courland, and especially of Siberia, where it is
known as the _Sibirskaja jaswa_ (Siberian boil-plague). The records of
anthrax go back to a very ancient date. It is supposed to be the murrain
of Exodus. Classical writers allude to anthrax as if it were the only
cattle disease worthy of mention (see Virgil, _Georg._ iii.). It figures
largely in the history of the early and middle ages as a devastating
pestilence attacking animals, and through them mankind; the oldest
Anglo-Saxon manuscripts contain many fantastic recipes, leechdoms,
charms and incantations for the prevention or cure of the "blacan
blezene" (black blain) and the relief of the "elfshot" creatures. In the
18th and 19th centuries it sometimes spread like an epizootic over the
whole of Europe, from Siberia to France. It was in this malady that
disease-producing germs (_bacteria_) were first discovered, in 1840, by
Pollender of Wipperfürth, and, independently, by veterinary surgeon
Brauell of Dorpat, and their real character afterwards verified by C.J.
Davaine (1812-1882) of Alfort in 1863; and it was in their experiments
with this disease that Toussaint, Pasteur and J.B. Chauveau first showed
how to make the morbific poison its own antidote. (See VIVISECTION.)

The symptoms vary with the species of animal, the mode of infection, and
the seat of the primary lesion, internal or external. In all its forms
anthrax is an inoculable disease, transmission being surely and promptly
effected by this means, and it may be conveyed to nearly all animals by
inoculation of a wound of the skin or through the digestive organs.
Cattle, sheep and horses nearly always owe their infection to spores or
bacilli ingested with their food or water, and pigs usually contract the
disease by eating the flesh of animals dead of anthrax.

Internal anthrax, of cattle and sheep, exhibits no premonitory symptoms
that can be relied on. Generally the first indication of an outbreak is
the sudden death of one or more of the herd or flock. Animals which do
not die at once may be noticed to stagger and tremble; the breathing
becomes hurried and the pulse very rapid, while the heart beats
violently; the internal temperature of the body is high, 104° to 106°
F.; blood oozes from the nose, mouth and anus, the visible mucous
membranes are dusky or almost black. The animal becomes weak and
listless, the temperature falls and death supervenes in a few hours,
being immediately preceded by delirium, convulsions or coma. While death
is usually rapid or sudden when the malady is general, constituting what
is designated splenic apoplexy, internal anthrax in cattle is not
invariably fatal. In some cases the animal rallies from a first attack
and gradually recovers.

In the external or localized form, marked by the formation of carbuncles
before general infection takes place, death may not occur for several
days. The carbuncles may appear in any part of the body, being preceded
or accompanied by fever. They are developed in the subcutaneous
connective tissue where this is loose and plentiful, in the interstices
of the muscles, lymphatic glands, in the mucous membranes of the mouth
and tongue (glossanthrax of cattle), pharynx and larynx (_anthrax
angina_ of horses and pigs), and the rectum. They begin as small
circumscribed swellings which are warm, slightly painful and oedematous.
In from two to eight hours they attain a considerable size, are cold,
painless and gangrenous, and when they are incised a quantity of a
blood-stained gelatinous exudate escapes. When the swellings have
attained certain proportions symptoms of general infection appear, and,
running their course with great rapidity, cause death in a few hours.
Anthrax of the horse usually begins as an affection of the throat or
bowel. In the former there is rapid obstructive oedema of the mucous
membrane of the pharynx and larynx with swelling of the throat and neck,
fever, salivation, difficulty in swallowing, noisy breathing, frothy
discharge from the nose and threatening suffocation. General invasion
soon ensues, and the horse may die in from four to sixteen hours. The
intestinal form is marked by high temperature, great prostration, small
thready pulse, tumultuous action of the heart, laboured breathing and
symptoms of abdominal pain with straining and diarrhoea. When moved the
horse staggers and trembles. Profuse sweating, a falling temperature and
cyanotic mucous membranes indicate the approach of a fatal termination.

In splenic fever or splenic apoplexy, the most marked alterations
observed after death are--the effects of rapid decomposition, evidenced
by the foul odour, disengagement of gas beneath the skin and in the
tissues and cavities of the body, yellow or yellowish-red gelatinous
exudation into and between the muscles, effusion of citron or
rust-coloured fluid in various cavities, extravasations of blood and
local congestions throughout the body, the blood in the vessels
generally being very dark and tar-like. The most notable feature,
however, in the majority of cases is the enormous enlargement of the
spleen, which is engorged with blood to such an extent that it often
ruptures, while its tissue is changed into a violet or black fluid mass.

The bacillus of anthrax, under certain conditions, retains its vitality
for a long time, and rapidly grows when it finds a suitable field in
which to develop, its mode of multiplication being by scission and the
formation of spores, and depending, to a great extent at least, on the
presence of oxygen. The morbid action of the bacillus is indeed said to
be due to its affinity for oxygen; by depriving the red corpuscles of
the blood of that most essential gas, it renders the vital fluid unfit
to sustain life. Albert Hoffa and others assert that the fatal lesions
are produced by the poisonous action of the toxins formed by the bacilli
and not by the blocking up of the minute blood-vessels, or the
abstraction of oxygen from the blood by the bacilli.

It was by the cultivation of this micro-organism, or attenuation of the
virus, that Pasteur was enabled to produce a prophylactic remedy for
anthrax. His discovery was first made with regard to the cholera of
fowls, a most destructive disorder which annually carries off great
numbers of poultry. Pasteur produced his inoculation material by the
cultivation of the bacilli at a temperature of 42° C. in oxygen. Two
vaccines are required. The first or weak vaccine is obtained by
incubating a bouillon culture for twenty-four days at 42° C., and the
second or less attenuated vaccine by incubating a bouillon culture, at
the same temperature, for twelve days. Pasteur's method of protective
inoculation comprises two inoculations with an interval of twelve days
between them. Immunity, established in about fifteen days after the
injection of the second vaccine, lasts from nine months to a year.

Toussaint had, previous to Pasteur, attenuated the virus of anthrax by
the action of heat; and Chauveau subsequently corroborated by numerous
experiments the value of Toussaint's method, demonstrating that,
according to the degree of heat to which the virus is subjected, so is
its inocuousness when transferred to a healthy creature. In outbreaks of
anthrax on farms where many animals are exposed to infection immediate
temporary protection can be conferred by the injection of anthrax serum.

_Human Beings._--For many years cases of sudden death had been observed
to occur from time to time among healthy men engaged in woollen
manufactories, particularly in the work of sorting or combing wool. In
some instances death appeared to be due to the direct inoculation of
some poisonous material into the body, for a form of malignant pustule
was observed upon the skin; but, on the other hand, in not a few cases
without any external manifestation, symptoms of blood-poisoning, often
proving rapidly fatal, suggested the probability of other channels for
the introduction of the disease. In 1880 the occurrence of several such
cases among woolsorters at Bradford, reported by Dr J.H. Bell of that
town, led to an official inquiry in England by the Local Government
Board, and an elaborate investigation into the pathology of what was
then called "woolsorters' disease" was at the same time conducted at the
Brown Institution, London, by Professor W.S. Greenfield. Among the
results of this inquiry it was ascertained: (1) that the disease
appeared to be identical with that occurring among sheep and cattle; (2)
that in the blood and tissues of the body was found in abundance, as in
the disease in animals, the _Bacillus anthracis_, and (3) that the
skins, hair, wool, &c., of animals dying of anthrax retain this
infecting organism, which, under certain conditions, finds ready access
to the bodies of the workers.

Two well-marked forms of this disease in man are recognized, "external
anthrax" and "internal anthrax." In external anthrax the infecting agent
is accidentally inoculated into some portion of skin, the seat of a
slight abrasion, often the hand, arm or face. A minute swelling soon
appears at the part, and develops into a vesicle containing serum or
bloody matter, and varying in size, but seldom larger than a shilling.
This vesicle speedily bursts and leaves an ulcerated or sloughing
surface, round about which are numerous smaller vesicles which undergo
similar changes, and the whole affected part becomes hard and tender,
while the surrounding surface participates in the inflammatory action,
and the neighbouring lymphatic glands are also inflamed. This condition,
termed "malignant pustule," is frequently accompanied with severe
constitutional disturbance, in the form of fever, delirium,
perspirations, together with great prostration and a tendency to death
from septicaemia, although on the other hand recovery is not uncommon.
It was repeatedly found that the matter taken from the vesicle during
the progress of the disease, as well as the blood in the body after
death, contained the _Bacillus anthracis_, and when inoculated into
small animals produced rapid death, with all the symptoms and
post-mortem appearances characteristic of che disease as known to affect
them.

In internal anthrax there is no visible local manifestation of the
disease, and the spores or bacilli appear to gain access to the system
from the air charged with them, as in rooms where the contaminated wool
or hair is unpacked, or again during the process of sorting. The
symptoms usually observed are those of rapid physical prostration, with
a small pulse, somewhat lowered temperature (rarely fever), and
quickened breathing. Examination of the chest reveals inflammation of
the lungs and pleura. In some cases death takes place by collapse in
less than one day, while in others the fatal issue is postponed for
three or four days, and is preceded by symptoms of blood-poisoning,
including rigors, perspirations, extreme exhaustion, &c. In some cases
of internal anthrax the symptoms are more intestinal than pulmonary, and
consist in severe exhausting diarrhoea, with vomiting and rapid sinking.
Recovery from the internal variety, although not unknown, is more rare
than from the external, and its most striking phenomena are its sudden
onset in the midst of apparent health, the rapid development of physical
prostration, and its tendency to a fatal termination despite treatment.
The post-mortem appearances in internal anthrax are such as are usually
observed in septicaemia, but in addition evidence of extensive
inflammation of the lungs, pleura and bronchial glands has in most cases
been met with. The blood and other fluids and the diseased tissues are
found loaded with the _Bacillus anthracis_.

Treatment in this disease appears to be of but little avail, except as
regards the external form, where the malignant pustule may be excised or
dealt with early by strong caustics to destroy the affected textures.
For the relief of the general constitutional symptoms, quinine,
stimulants and strong nourishment appear to be the only available means.
An anti-anthrax serum has also been tried. As preventive measures in
woollen manufactories, the disinfection of suspicious material, or the
wetting of it before handling, is recommended as lessening the risk to
the workers.     (J. Mac.)