ANTHOLOGY. The term "anthology," literally denoting a garland or
collection of flowers, is figuratively applied to any selection of
literary beauties, and especially to that great body of fugitive poetry,
comprehending about 4500 pieces, by upwards of 300 writers, which is
commonly known as the _Greek Anthology_.

_Literary History of the Greek Anthology._--The art of occasional poetry
had been cultivated in Greece from an early period,--less, however, as
the vehicle of personal feeling, than as the recognized commemoration of
remarkable individuals or events, on sepulchral monuments and votive
offerings: Such compositions were termed epigrams, i.e. inscriptions.
The modern use of the word is a departure from the original sense, which
simply indicated that the composition was intended to be engraved or
inscribed. Such a composition must necessarily be brief, and the
restraints attendant upon its publication concurred with the simplicity
of Greek taste in prescribing conciseness of expression, pregnancy of
meaning, purity of diction and singleness of thought, as the
indispensable conditions of excellence in the epigrammatic style. The
term was soon extended to any piece by which these conditions were
fulfilled. The transition from the monumental to the purely literary
character of the epigram was favoured by the exhaustion of more lofty
forms of poetry, the general increase, from the general diffusion of
culture, of accomplished writers and tasteful readers, but, above all,
by the changed political circumstances of the times, which induced many
who would otherwise have engaged in public affairs to addict themselves
to literary pursuits. These causes came into full operation during the
Alexandrian era, in which we find every description of epigrammatic
composition perfectly developed. About 60 B.C., the sophist and poet,
Meleager of Gadara, undertook to combine the choicest effusions of his
predecessors into a single body of fugitive poetry. Collections of
monumental inscriptions, or of poems on particular subjects, had
previously been formed by Polemon Periegetes and others; but Meleager
first gave the principle a comprehensive application. His selection,
compiled from forty-six of his predecessors, and including numerous
contributions of his own, was entitled _The Garland_ ([Greek:
Stephanos]); and in an introductory poem each poet is compared to some
flower, fancifully deemed appropriate to his genius. The arrangement of
his collection was alphabetical, according to the initial letter of each
epigram.

In the age of the emperor Tiberius (or Trajan, according to others) the
work of Meleager was continued by another epigrammatist, Philippus of
Thessalonica, who first employed the term anthology. His collection,
which included the compositions of thirteen writers subsequent to
Meleager, was also arranged alphabetically, and contained an
introductory poem. It was of inferior quality to Meleager's. Somewhat
later, under Hadrian, another supplement was formed by the sophist
Diogenianus of Heracleia (2nd century A.D.), and Strato of Sardis
compiled his elegant but tainted [Greek: Mousa Paidikê] (Musa Puerilis)
from his productions and those of earlier writers. No further collection
from various sources is recorded until the time of Justinian, when
epigrammatic writing, especially of an amatory character, experienced a
great revival at the hands of Agathias of Myrina, the historian, Paulus
Silentiarius, and their circle. Their ingenious but mannered productions
were collected by Agathias into a new anthology, entitled _The Circle_
([Greek: Kyklos]); it was the first to be divided into books, and
arranged with reference to the subjects of the pieces.

These and other collections made during the middle ages are now lost.
The partial incorporation of them into a single body, classified
according to the contents in 15 books, was the work of a certain
Constantinus Cephalas, whose name alone is preserved in the single MS.
of his compilation extant, but who probably lived during the temporary
revival of letters under Constantine Porphyrogenitus, at the beginning
of the 10th century. He appears to have merely made excerpts from the
existing anthologies, with the addition of selections from Lucillius,
Palladas, and other epigrammatists, whose compositions had been
published separately. His arrangement, to which we shall have to recur,
is founded on a principle of classification, and nearly corresponds to
that adopted by Agathias. His principle of selection is unknown; it is
only certain that while he omitted much that he should have retained, he
has preserved much that would otherwise have perished. The extent of our
obligations may be ascertained by a comparison between his anthology and
that of the next editor, the monk Maximus Planudes (A.D. 1320), who has
not merely grievously mutilated the anthology of Cephalas by omissions,
but has disfigured it by interpolating verses of his own. We are,
however, indebted to him for the preservation of the epigrams on works
of art, which seem to have been accidentally omitted from our only
transcript of Cephalas.

  The Planudean (in seven books) was the only recension of the anthology
  known at the revival of classical literature, and was first published
  at Florence, by Janus Lascaris, in 1494. It long continued to be the
  only accessible collection, for although the Palatine MS., the sole
  extant copy of the anthology of Cephalas, was discovered in the
  Palatine library at Heidelberg, and copied by Saumaise (Salmasius) in
  1606, it was not published until 1776, when it was included in
  Brunck's _Analecta Veterum Poetarum Graecorum_. The MS. itself had
  frequently changed its quarters. In 1623, having been taken in the
  sack of Heidelberg in the Thirty Years' War, it was sent with the rest
  of the Palatine Library to Rome as a present from Maximilian I. of
  Bavaria to Gregory XV., who had it divided into two parts, the first
  of which was by far the larger; thence it was taken to Paris in 1797.
  In 1816 it went back to Heidelberg, but in an incomplete state, the
  second part remaining at Paris. It is now represented at Heidelberg by
  a photographic facsimile. Brunck's edition was superseded by the
  standard one of Friedrich Jacobs (1794-1814, 13 vols.), the text of
  which was reprinted in a more convenient form in 1813-1817, and
  occupies three pocket volumes in the Tauchnitz series of the classics.
  The best edition for general purposes is perhaps that of Dubner in
  Didot's _Bibliotheca_ (1864-1872), which contains the Palatine
  Anthology, the epigrams of the Planudean Anthology not comprised in
  the former, an appendix of pieces derived from other sources, copious
  notes selected from all quarters, a literal Latin prose translation by
  Boissonade, Bothe, and Lapaume and the metrical Latin versions of Hugo
  Grotius. A third volume, edited by E. Cougny, was published in 1890.
  The best edition of the Planudean Anthology is the splendid one by van
  Bosch and van Lennep (1795-1822). There is also a complete edition of
  the text by Stadlmuller in the Teubner series.

_Arrangement._--The Palatine MS., the archetype of the present text, was
transcribed by different persons at different times, and the actual
arrangement of the collection does not correspond with that signalized
in the index. It is as follows: Book 1. Christian epigrams; 2.
Christodorus's description of certain statues; 3. Inscriptions in the
temple at Cyzicus; 4. The prefaces of Meleager, Philippus, and Agathias
to their respective collections; 5. Amatory epigrams; 6. Votive
inscriptions; 7. Epitaphs; 8. The epigrams of Gregory of Nazianzus; 9.
Rhetorical and illustrative epigrams; 10. Ethical pieces; 11. Humorous
and convivial; 12. Strata's Musa Puerilis; 13. Metrical curiosities; 14.
Puzzles, enigmas, oracles; 15. Miscellanies. The epigrams on works of
art, as already stated, are missing from the _Codex Palatinus_, and must
be sought in an appendix of epigrams only occurring in the Planudean
Anthology. The epigrams hitherto recovered from ancient monuments and
similar sources form appendices in the second and third volumes of
Dübner's edition.

_Style and Value._--One of the principal claims of the Anthology to
attention is derived from its continuity, its existence as a living and
growing body of poetry throughout all the vicissitudes of Greek
civilization. More ambitious descriptions of composition speedily ran
their course, and having attained their complete development became
extinct or at best lingered only in feeble or conventional imitations.
The humbler strains of the epigrammatic muse, on the other hand,
remained ever fresh and animated, ever in intimate union with the spirit
of the generation that gave them birth. To peruse the entire collection,
accordingly, is as it were to assist at the disinterment of an ancient
city, where generation has succeeded generation on the same site, and
each stratum of soil enshrines the vestiges of a distinct epoch, but
where all epochs, nevertheless, combine to constitute an organic whole,
and the transition from one to the other is hardly perceptible. Four
stages may be indicated:--1. The Hellenic proper, of which Simonides of
Ceos (c. 556-469 B.C.), the author of most of the sepulchral
inscriptions on those who fell in the Persian wars, is the
characteristic representative. This is characterized by a simple dignity
of phrase, which to a modern taste almost verges upon baldness, by a
crystalline transparency of diction, and by an absolute fidelity to the
original conception of the epigram. Nearly all the pieces of this era
are actual _bona fide_ inscriptions or addresses to real personages,
whether living or deceased; narratives, literary exercises, and sports
of fancy are exceedingly rare. 2. The epigram received a great
development in its second or Alexandrian era, when its range was so
extended as to include anecdote, satire, and amorous longing; when
epitaphs and votive inscriptions were composed on imaginary persons and
things, and men of taste successfully attempted the same subjects in
mutual emulation, or sat down to compose verses as displays of their
ingenuity. The result was a great gain in richness of style and general
interest, counterbalanced by a falling off in purity of diction and
sincerity of treatment. The modification--a perfectly legitimate one,
the resources of the old style being exhausted--had its real source in
the transformation of political life, but may be said to commence with
and to find its best representative in the playful and elegant Leonidas
of Tarentum, a contemporary of Pyrrhus, and to close with Antipater of
Sidon, about 140 B.C. (or later). It should be noticed, however, that
Callimachus, one of the most distinguished of the Alexandrian poets,
affects the sternest simplicity in his epigrams, and copies the
austerity of Simonides with as much success as an imitator can expect.
3. By a slight additional modification in the same direction, the
Alexandrian passes into what, for the sake of preserving the parallelism
with eras of Greek prose literature, we may call the Roman style,
although the peculiarities of its principal representative are decidedly
Oriental. Meleager of Gadara was a Syrian; his taste was less severe,
and his temperament more fervent than those of his Greek predecessors;
his pieces are usually erotic, and their glowing imagery sometimes
reminds us of the Song of Solomon. The luxuriance of his fancy
occasionally betrays him into far-fetched conceits, and the lavishness
of his epithets is only redeemed by their exquisite felicity. Yet his
effusions are manifestly the offspring of genuine feeling, and his
epitaph on himself indicates a great advance on the exclusiveness of
antique Greek patriotism, and is perhaps the first clear enunciation of
the spirit of universal humanity characteristic of the later Stoic
philosophy. His gaiety and licentiousness are imitated and exaggerated
by his somewhat later contemporary, the Epicurean Philodemus, perhaps
the liveliest of all the epigrammatists; his fancy reappears with
diminished brilliancy in Philodemus's contemporary, Zonas, in
Crinagoras, who wrote under Augustus, and in Marcus Argentarius, of
uncertain date; his peculiar gorgeousness of colouring remains entirely
his own. At a later period of the empire another _genre_, hitherto
comparatively in abeyance, was developed, the satirical. Lucillius, who
flourished under Nero, and Lucian, more renowned in other fields of
literature, display a remarkable talent for shrewd, caustic epigram,
frequently embodying moral reflexions of great cogency, often lashing
vice and folly with signal effect, but not seldom indulging in mere
trivialities, or deformed by scoffs at personal blemishes. This style of
composition is not properly Greek, but Roman; it answers to the modern
definition of epigram, and has hence attained a celebrity in excess of
its deserts. It is remarkable, however, as an almost solitary example of
direct Latin influence on Greek literature. The same style obtains with
Palladas, an Alexandrian grammarian of the 4th century, the last of the
strictly classical epigrammatists, and the first to be guilty of
downright bad taste. His better pieces, however, are characterized by an
austere ethical impressiveness, and his literary position is very
interesting as that of an indignant but despairing opponent of
Christianity. 4. The fourth or Byzantine style of epigrammatic
composition was cultivated by the _beaux-esprits_ of the court of
Justinian. To a great extent this is merely imitative, but the
circumstances of the period operated so as to produce a species of
originality. The peculiarly ornate and _recherché_ diction of Agathias
and his compeers is not a merit in itself, but, applied for the first
time, it has the effect of revivifying an old form, and many of their
new locutions are actual enrichments of the language. The writers,
moreover, were men of genuine poetical feeling, ingenious in invention,
and capable of expressing emotion with energy and liveliness; the
colouring of their pieces is sometimes highly dramatic.

It would be hard to exaggerate the substantial value of the Anthology,
whether as a storehouse of facts bearing on antique manners, customs and
ideas, or as one among the influences which have contributed to mould
the literature of the modern world. The multitudinous votive
inscriptions, serious and sportive, connote the phases of Greek
religious sentiment, from pious awe to irreverent familiarity and
sarcastic scepticism; the moral tone of the nation at various periods is
mirrored with corresponding fidelity; the sepulchral inscriptions admit
us into the inmost sanctuary of family affection, and reveal a depth
and tenderness of feeling beyond the province of the historian to
depict, which we should not have surmised even from the dramatists; the
general tendency of the collection is to display antiquity on its most
human side, and to mitigate those contrasts with the modern world which
more ambitious modes of composition force into relief. The constant
reference to the details of private life renders the Anthology an
inexhaustible treasury for the student of archaeology; art, industry and
costume receive their fullest illustration from its pages. Its influence
on European literatures will be appreciated in proportion to the
inquirer's knowledge of each. The further his researches extend, the
greater will be his astonishment at the extent to which the Anthology
has been laid under contribution for thoughts which have become
household words in all cultivated languages, and at the beneficial
effect of the imitation of its brevity, simplicity, and absolute verbal
accuracy upon the undisciplined luxuriance of modern genius.

  _Translations, Imitations, &c._--The best versions of the Anthology
  ever made are the Latin renderings of select epigrams by Hugo Grotius.
  They have not been printed separately, but will be found in Bosch and
  Lennep's edition of the Planudean _Anthology_, in the Didot edition,
  and in Dr Wellesley's _Anthologia Polyglotta_. The number of more or
  less professed imitations in modern languages is infinite, that of
  actual translations less considerable. French and Italian, indeed, are
  ill adapted to this purpose, from their incapacity of approximating to
  the form of the original, and their poets have usually contented
  themselves with paraphrases or imitations, often exceedingly
  felicitous. F.D. Dehèque's French prose translation, however (1863),
  is most excellent and valuable. The German language alone admits of
  the preservation of the original metre--a circumstance advantageous to
  the German translators, Herder and Jacobs, who have not, however,
  compensated the loss inevitably consequent upon a change of idiom by
  any added beauties of their own. Though unfitted to reproduce the
  precise form, the English language, from its superior terseness, is
  better adapted to preserve the spirit of the original than the German;
  and the comparative ill success of many English translators must be
  chiefly attributed to the extremely low standard of fidelity and
  brevity observed by them. Bland, Merivale, and their associates
  (1806-1813), are often intolerably diffuse and feeble, from want, not
  of ability, but of taking pains. Archdeacon Wrangham's too rare
  versions are much more spirited; and John Sterling's translations of
  the inscriptions of Simonides deserve high praise. Professor Wilson
  (_Blackwood's Magazine_, 1833-1835) collected and commented upon the
  labours of these and other translators, with his accustomed critical
  insight and exuberant geniality, but damaged his essay by burdening it
  with the indifferent attempts of William Hay. In 1849 Dr Wellesley,
  principal of New Inn Hall, Oxford, published his _Anthologia
  Polyglotta_, a most valuable collection of the best translations and
  imitations in all languages, with the original text. In this appeared
  some admirable versions by Goldwin Smith and Dean Merivale, which,
  with the other English renderings extant at the time, will be found
  accompanying the literal prose translation of the _Public School
  Selections_, executed by the Rev. George Burges for Bohn's Classical
  Library (1854). This is a useful volume, but the editor's notes are
  worthless. In 1864 Major R.G. Macgregor published an almost complete
  translation of the Anthology, a work whose stupendous industry and
  fidelity almost redeem the general mediocrity of the execution.
  _Idylls and Epigrams_, by R. Garnett (1869, reprinted 1892 in the
  Cameo series), includes about 140 translations or imitations, with
  some original compositions in the same style. Recent translations
  (selections) are: J.W. Mackail, _Select Epigrams from the Greek
  Anthology_ (with text, introduction, notes, and prose translation),
  1890, revised 1906, a most charming volume; Graham R. Tomson (Mrs
  Marriott Watson), _Selections from the Greek Anthology_ (1889); W.H.D.
  Rouse, _Echo of Greek Song_ (1899); L.C. Perry, _From the Garden of
  Hellas_ (New York, 1891); W.R. Paton, _Love Epigrams_ (1898). An
  agreeable little volume on the Anthology, by Lord Neaves, is one of
  Collins's series of _Ancient Classics for Modern Readers_. The earl of
  Cromer, with all the cares of Egyptian administration upon him, found
  time to translate and publish an elegant volume of selections (1903).
  Two critical contributions to the subject should be noticed, the Rev.
  James Davies's essay on Epigrams in the _Quarterly Review_ (vol.
  cxvii.), especially valuable for its lucid illustration of the
  distinction between Greek and Latin epigram; and the brilliant
  disquisition in J.A. Symonds's _Studies of the Greek Poets_ (1873; 3rd
  ed., 1893).

_Latin Anthology._--The _Latin Anthology_ is the appellation bestowed
upon a collection of fugitive Latin verse, from the age of Ennius to
about A.D. 1000, formed by Peter Burmann the Younger. Nothing
corresponding to the Greek anthology is known to have existed among the
Romans, though professional epigrammatists like Martial published their
volumes on their own account, and detached sayings were excerpted from
authors like Ennius and Publius Syrus, while the _Priapeïa_ were
probably but one among many collections on special subjects. The first
general collection of scattered pieces made by a modern scholar was
Scaliger's _Catalecta veterum Poetarum_ (1573), succeeded by the more
ample one of Pithoeus, _Epigrammata et Poemata e Codicibus et Lapidibus
collecta_ (1590). Numerous additions, principally from inscriptions,
continued to be made, and in 1759-1773 Burmann digested the whole into
his _Anthologia veterum Latinorum Epigrammatum et Poematum_. This,
occasionally reprinted, was the standard edition until 1869, when
Alexander Riese commenced a new and more critical recension, from which
many pieces improperly inserted by Burmann are rejected, and his
classified arrangement is discarded for one according to the sources
whence the poems have been derived. The first volume contains those
found in MSS., in the order of the importance of these documents; those
furnished by inscriptions following. The first volume (in two parts)
appeared in 1869-1870, a second edition of the first part in 1894, and
the second volume, _Carmina Epigraphica_ (in two parts), in 1895-1897,
edited by F. Bücheler. An _Anthologiae Latinae Supplementa_, in the same
series, followed. Having been formed by scholars actuated by no
aesthetic principles of selection, but solely intent on preserving
everything they could find, the Latin anthology is much more
heterogeneous than the Greek, and unspeakably inferior. The really
beautiful poems of Petronius and Apuleius are more properly inserted in
the collected editions of their writings, and more than half the
remainder consists of the frigid conceits of pedantic professional
exercises of grammarians of a very late period of the empire, relieved
by an occasional gem, such as the apostrophe of the dying Hadrian to his
spirit, or the epithalamium of Gallienus. The collection is also, for
the most part, too recent in date, and too exclusively literary in
character, to add much to our knowledge of classical antiquity. The
epitaphs are interesting, but the genuineness of many of them is very
questionable.     (R. G.)