ANTHONY OF PADUA, SAINT (1195-1231), the most celebrated of the
followers of Saint Francis of Assisi, was born at Lisbon on the 15th of
August 1195. In his fifteenth year he entered the Augustinian order, and
subsequently joined the Franciscans in 1220. He wished to devote himself
to missionary labours in North Africa, but the ship in which he sailed
was cast by a storm on the coast of Sicily, whence he made his way to
Italy. He taught theology at Bologna, Toulouse, Montpellier and Padua,
and won a great reputation as a preacher throughout Italy. He was the
leader of the rigorous party in the Franciscan order against the
mitigations introduced by the general Elias. His death took place at the
convent of Ara Coeli, near Padua, on the 13th of June 1231. He was
canonized by Gregory IX. in the following year, and his festival is kept
on the 13th of June. He is regarded as the patron saint of Padua and of
Portugal, and is appealed to by devout clients for finding lost objects.
The meagre accounts of his life which we possess have been supplemented
by numerous popular legends, which represent him as a continuous worker
of miracles, and describe his marvellous eloquence by pictures of fishes
leaping out of the water to hear him. There are many confraternities
established in his honour throughout Christendom, and the number of
"pious" biographies devoted to him would fill many volumes.

  The most trustworthy modern works are by A. Lepître, _St Antoine de
  Padoue_ (Paris, 1902, in _Les Saints_ series: good bibliography; Eng.
  trans. by Edith Guest, London, 1902), and by Léopold de Chérancé, _St
  Antoine de Padoue_ (Paris, 1895; Eng. trans., London, 1896). His
  works, consisting of sermons and a mystical commentary on the Bible,
  were published in an appendix to those of St Francis, in the _Annales
  Minorum_ of Luke Wadding (Antwerp, 1623), and are also reproduced by
  Horoy, _Medii aevi bibliotheca patristica_ (1880, vi. pp. 555 et
  sqq.); see art. "Antonius von Padua" in Herzog-Hauck,
  _Realencyklopadie_.