ANTHRAQUINONE, C14H8O2, an important derivative of anthracene, first
prepared in 1834 by A. Laurent. It is prepared commercially from
anthracene by stirring a sludge of anthracene and water in horizontal
cylinders with a mixture of sodium bichromate and caustic soda. This
suspension is then run through a conical mill in order to remove all
grit, the cones of the mill fitting so tightly that water cannot pass
through unless the mill is running; the speed of the mill when working
is about 3000 revolutions per minute. After this treatment, the mixture
is run into lead-lined vats and treated with sulphuric acid, steam is
blown through the mixture in order to bring it to the boil, and the
anthracene is rapidly oxidized to anthraquinone. When the oxidation is
complete, the anthraquinone is separated in a filter press, washed and
heated to 120° C. with commercial oil of vitriol, using about 2½ parts
of vitriol to 1 of anthraquinone. It is then removed to lead-lined tanks
and again washed with water and dried; the product obtained contains
about 95% of anthraquinone. It may be purified by sublimation. Various
synthetic processes have been used for the preparation of anthraquinone.
A. Behr and W.A. v. Dorp (_Ber._, 1874, 7, p. 578) obtained orthobenzoyl
benzoic acid by heating phthalic anhydride with benzene in the presence
of aluminium chloride. This compound on heating with phosphoric
anhydride loses water and yields anthraquinone,

       /CO\   C6H6     /CO·C6H6         /CO\
  C6H4<    >O ->  C6H4<         -> C6H4<    >C6H4.
       \CO/            \COOH            \CO/

It may be prepared in a similar manner by heating phthalyl chloride with
benzene in the presence of aluminium chloride. Dioxy- and
tetraoxy-anthraquinones are obtained when meta-oxy- and
dimeta-dioxy-benzoic acids are heated with concentrated sulphuric acid.

Anthraquinone crystallizes in yellow needles or prisms, which melt at
277° C. It is soluble in hot benzene, sublimes easily, and is very
stable towards oxidizing agents. On the other hand, it is readily
attacked by reducing agents. With zinc dust in presence of caustic soda
it yields the secondary alcohol oxan-thranol, C6H4 : CO·CHOH : C6H4,
with tin and hydrochloric acid, the phenolic compound anthranol, C6H4 :
CO·C(OH) : C6H4; and with hydriodic acid at 150° C. or on distillation
with zinc dust, the hydrocarbon anthracene, C14H10. When fused with
caustic potash, it gives benzoic acid. It behaves more as a ketone than
as a quinone, since with hydroxylamine it yields an oxime, and on
reduction with zinc dust and caustic soda it yields a secondary alcohol,
whilst it cannot be reduced by means of sulphurous acid. Various
sulphonic acids of anthraquinone are known, as well as oxy-derivatives,
for the preparation and properties of which see ALIZARIN.