ANTHONY, SAINT, the first Christian monk, was born in Egypt about 250.
At the age of twenty he began to practise an ascetical life in the
neighbourhood of his native place, and after fifteen years of this life
he withdrew into solitude to a mountain by the Nile, called Pispir, now
Der el Memun, opposite Arsinoë in the Fayum. Here he lived strictly
enclosed in an old fort for twenty years. At last in the early years of
the 4th century he emerged from his retreat and set himself to organize
the monastic life of the crowds of monks who had followed him and taken
up their abode in the caves around him. After a time, again in pursuit
of more complete solitude, he withdrew to the mountain by the Red Sea,
where now stands the monastery that bears his name (Der Mar Antonios).
Here he died about the middle of the 4th century. His _Life_ states that
on two occasions he went to Alexandria, to strengthen the Christians in
the Diocletian persecution and to preach against Arianism. Anthony is
recognized as the first Christian monk and the first organizer and
father of Christian monachism (see MONASTICISM). Certain letters and
sermons are attributed to him, but their authenticity is more than
doubtful. The monastic rule which bears his name was not written by him,
but was compiled out of these writings and out of discourses and
utterances put into his mouth in the _Life_ and the _Apophthegmata
Patrum_. According to this rule live a number of Coptic Syrian and
Armenian monks to this day. The chief source of information about St
Anthony is the _Life_, attributed to St Athanasius. This attribution, as
also the historical character of the book, and even the very existence
of St Anthony, were questioned and denied by the sceptical criticism of
thirty years ago; but such doubts are no longer entertained by critical
scholars.

  The Greek _Vita_ is among the works of St Athanasius; the almost
  contemporary Latin translation is among Rosweyd's _Vitae Patrum_
  (Migne, _Patrol. Lat_. lxxiii.); an English translation is in the
  Athanasius volume of the "Nicene and Post-Nicene Library." Accounts of
  St Anthony are given by Card. Newman, _Church of the Fathers_
  (Historical Sketches) and Alban Butler, _Lives of the Saints_ (Jan.
  17). Discussions of the historical and critical questions raised will
  be found in E.C. Butler's _Lausiac History of Palladius_ (1898, 1904),
  Part I. pp. 197, 215-228; Part II. pp. ix.-xii.     (E. C. B.)