ANTHRACITE (Gr. [Greek: anthrax], coal), a term applied to those
varieties of coal which do not give off tarry or other hydrocarbon
vapours when heated below their point of ignition; or, in other words,
which burn with a smokeless and nearly non-luminous flame. Other terms
having the same meaning are, "stone coal" (not to be confounded with the
German _Steinkohle_) or "blind coal" in Scotland, and "Kilkenny coal" in
Ireland. The imperfect anthracite of north Devon, which however is only
used as a pigment, is known as _culm_, the same term being used in
geological classification to distinguish the strata in which it is
found, and similar strata in the Rhenish hill countries which are known
as the Culm Measures. In America, culm is used as an equivalent for
waste or slack in anthracite mining.

Physically, anthracite differs from ordinary bituminous coal by its
greater hardness, higher density, 1.3-1.4, and lustre, the latter being
often semi-metallic with a somewhat brownish reflection. It is also free
from included soft or fibrous notches and does not soil the fingers when
rubbed. Structurally it shows some alteration by the development of
secondary divisional planes and fissures so that the original
stratification lines are not always easily seen. The thermal
conductivity is also higher, a lump of anthracite feeling perceptibly
colder when held in the warm hand than a similar lump of bituminous coal
at the same temperature. The chemical composition of some typical
anthracites is given in the article COAL.

Anthracite may be considered to be a transition stage between ordinary
bituminous coal and graphite, produced by the more or less complete
elimination of the volatile constituents of the former; and it is found
most abundantly in areas that have been subjected to considerable
earth-movements, such as the flanks of great mountain ranges. The
largest and most important anthracite region, that of the north-eastern
portion of the Pennsylvania coal-field, is a good example of this; the
highly contorted strata of the Appalachian region produce anthracite
exclusively, while in the western portion of the same basin on the Ohio
and its tributaries, where the strata are undisturbed, free-burning and
coking coals, rich in volatile matter, prevail. In the same way the
anthracite region of South Wales is confined to the contorted portion
west of Swansea and Llanelly, the central and eastern portions
producing steam, coking and house coals.

Anthracites of newer, tertiary or cretaceous age, are found in the
Crow's Nest part of the Rocky Mountains in Canada, and at various points
in the Andes in Peru.

The principal use of anthracite is as a smokeless fuel. In the eastern
United States, it is largely employed as domestic fuel, usually in close
stoves or furnaces, as well as for steam purposes, since, unlike that
from South Wales, it does not decrepitate when heated, or at least not
to the same extent. For proper use, however, it is necessary that the
fuel should be supplied in pieces as nearly uniform in size as possible,
a condition that has led to the development of the breaker which is so
characteristic a feature in American anthracite mining (see COAL). The
large coal as raised from the mine is passed through breakers with
toothed rolls to reduce the lumps to smaller pieces, which are separated
into different sizes by a system of graduated sieves, placed in
descending order. Each size can be perfectly well burnt alone on an
appropriate grate, if kept free from larger or smaller admixtures. The
common American classification is as follows:--

Lump, steamboat, egg and stove coals, the latter in two or three sizes,
all three being above 1½ in. size on round-hole screens.

  Chestnut      below 1½ inch     above 7/8 inch.
  Pea             "   7/8  "        "   9/16  "
  Buckwheat       "   9/16 "        "   3/8   "
  Rice            "   3/8  "        "   3/16  "
  Barley          "   3/16 "        "   3/32  "

From the pea size downwards the principal use is for steam purposes. In
South Wales a less elaborate classification is adopted; but great care
is exercised in hand-picking and cleaning the coal from included
particles of pyrites in the higher qualities known as best malting
coals, which are used for kiln-drying malt and hops.

Formerly, anthracite was largely used, both in America and South Wales,
as blast-furnace fuel for iron smelting, but for this purpose it has
been largely superseded by coke in the former country and entirely in
the latter. An important application has, however, been developed in the
extended use of internal combustion motors driven by the so-called
"mixed," "poor," "semi-water" or "Dowson gas" produced by the
gasification of anthracite with air and a small proportion of steam.
This is probably the most economical method of obtaining power known;
with an engine as small as 15 horse-power the expenditure of fuel is at
the rate of only 1 lb per horse-power hour, and with larger engines it
is proportionately less. Large quantities of anthracite for power
purposes are now exported from South Wales to France, Switzerland and
parts of Germany. (H. B.)