ANTHOZOA (i.e. "flower-animals"), the zoological name for a class of
marine polyps forming "coral" (q.v.). Although corals have been familiar
objects since the days of antiquity, and the variety known as the
precious red coral has been for a long time an article of commerce in
the Mediterranean, it was only in the 18th century that their true
nature and structure came to be understood. By the ancients and the
earlier naturalists of the Christian era they were regarded either as
petrifactions or as plants, and many supposed that they occupied a
position midway between minerals and plants. The discovery of the animal
nature of red coral is due to J.A. de Peyssonel, a native of Marseilles,
who obtained living specimens from the coral fishers on the coast of
Barbary and kept them alive in aquaria. He was thus able to see that the
so-called "flowers of coral" were in fact nothing else than minute
polyps resembling sea-anemones. His discovery, made in 1727, was
rejected by the Academy of Sciences of France, but eventually found
acceptance at the hands of the Royal Society of London, and was
published by that body in 1751. The structure and classification of
polyps, however, were at that time very imperfectly understood, and it
was fully a century before the true anatomical characters and systematic
position of corals were placed on a secure basis.

The hard calcareous substance to which the name coral is applied is the
supporting skeleton of certain members of the _Anthozoa_, one of the
classes of the phylum Coelentera. The most familiar Anthozoan is the
common sea-anemone, _Actinia equina_, L., and it will serve, although it
does not form a skeleton or _corallum_, as a good example of the
structure of a typical Anthozoan polyp or zooid. The individual animal
or zooid of _Actinia equina_ has the form of a column fixed by one
extremity, called the _base_, to a rock or other object, and bearing at
the opposite extremity a crown of _tentacles_. The tentacles surround an
area known as the _peristome_, in the middle of which there is an
elongated mouth-opening surrounded by tumid lips. The mouth does not
open directly into the general cavity of the body, as is the case in a
hydrozoan polyp, but into a short tube called the _stomodaeum_, which in
its turn opens below into the general body-cavity or _coelenteron_. In
Actinia and its allies, and most generally, though not invariably, in
Anthozoa, the stomodaeum is not circular, but is compressed from side to
side so as to be oval or slit-like in transverse section. At each end of
the oval there is a groove lined by specially long vibratile cilia.
These grooves are known as the _sulcus_ and _sulculus_, and will be more
particularly described hereafter. The elongation of the mouth and
stomodaeum confer a bilateral symmetry on the body of the zooid, which
is extended to other organs of the body. In Actinia, as in all Anthozoan
zooids, the coelenteron is not a simple cavity, as in a Hydroid, but is
divided by a number of radial folds or curtains of soft tissue into a
corresponding number of radial chambers. These radial folds are known as
_mesenteries_, and their position and relations may be understood by
reference to figs. 1 and 2. Each mesentery is attached by its upper
margin to the peristome, by its outer margin to the body-wall, and by
its lower margin to the basal disk. A certain number of mesenteries,
known as complete mesenteries, are attached by the upper parts of their
internal margins to the stomodaeum, but below this level their edges
hang in the coelenteron. Other mesenteries, called incomplete, are not
attached to the stomodaeum, and their internal margins are free from the
peristome to the basal disk. The lower part of the free edge of every
mesentery, whether complete or incomplete, is thrown into numerous
puckers or folds, and is furnished with a glandular thickening known as
a _mesenterial filament_. The reproductive organs or gonads are borne
on the mesenteries, the germinal cells being derived from the inner
layer or endoderm.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Diagrammatic longitudinal section of an Anthozoan
zooid,

  m, Mesentery.             s, Stoma.
  t, Tentacles.             lm, Longitudinal muscle.
  st, Stomodaeum.           d, Diagonal Muscle.
  sc, Sulcus.               go, Gonads.
  r, Rotteken's muscle.]

In common with all Coelenterate animals, the walls of the columnar body
and also the tentacles and peristome of Actinia are composed of three
layers of tissue. The external layer, or ectoderm, is made up of cells,
and contains also muscular and nervous elements. The preponderating
elements of the ectodermic layer are elongated columnar cells, each
containing a nucleus, and bearing cilia at their free extremities.
Packed in among these are _gland cells, sense cells_, and _cnidoblasts_.
The last-named are specially numerous on the tentacles and on some other
regions of the body, and produce the well-known "thread cells," or
_nematocysts_, so characteristic of the Coelentera. The inner layer or
endoderm is also a cellular layer, and is chiefly made up of columnar
cells, each bearing a cilium at its free extremity and terminating
internally in a long muscular fibre. Such cells, made up of epithelial
and muscular components, are known as epithelio-muscular or
myo-epithelial cells. In Actinians the epithelio-muscular cells of the
endoderm are crowded with yellow spherical bodies, which are unicellular
plants or Algae, living symbiotically in the tissues of the zooid. The
endoderm contains in addition gland cells and nervous elements. The
middle layer or mesogloea is not originally a cellular layer, but a
gelatinoid structureless substance, secreted by the two cellular layers.
In the course of development, however, cells from the ectoderm and
endoderm may migrate into it. In _Actinia equina_ the mesogloea consists
of fine fibres imbedded in a homogeneous matrix, and between the fibres
are minute branched or spindle-shaped cells. For further details of the
structure of Actinians, the reader should consult the work of O. and R.
Hertwig.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--1, Portion of epithelium from the tentacle of an
Actinian, showing three supporting cells and one sense cell (sc); 2, a
cnidoblast with enclosed nematocyst from the same specimen; 3 and 4 two
forms of gland cell from the stomodaeum; 5a, 5b, epithelio-muscular
cells from the tentacle in different states of contraction; 5c, an
epithelio-muscular cell from the endoderm, containing a symbiotic
zooxanthella; 6, a ganglion cell from the ectoderm of the peristome.
(After O. and R. Hertwig.)]

The Anthozoa are divisible into two sub-classes, sharply marked off from
one another by definite anatomical characters. These are the ALCYONARIA
and the ZOANTHARIA. To the first-named belong the precious red coral and
its allies, the sea-fans or Gorgoniae, to the second belong the white or
Madreporarian corals.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--An expanded Alcyonarian zooid, showing the mouth
surrounded by eight pinnate tentacles. st, Stomodaeum in the the centre
of the transparent body; m, mesenteries; asm, asulcar mesenteries; B,
spicules, enlarged.]

  Alcyonaria.--In this sub-class the zooid has very constant anatomical
  characters, differing in some important respects from the Actinian
  zooid, which has been taken as a type. There is only one ciliated
  groove, the sulcus, in the stomodaeum. There are always eight
  tentacles, which are hollow and fringed on their sides, with hollow
  projections or pinnae; and always eight mesenteries, all of which are
  complete, i.e. inserted on the stomodaeum. The mesenteries are
  provided with well-developed longitudinal retractor muscles, supported
  on longitudinal folds or plaits of the mesogloea, so that in
  cross-section they have a branched appearance. These _muscle-banners_,
  as they are called, have a highly characteristic arrangement; they are
  all situated on those faces of the mesenteries which look towards the
  sulcus. (fig. 4). Each mesentery has a filament; but two of them,
  namely, the pair farthest from the sulcus, are longer than the rest,
  and have a different form of filament. It has been shown that these
  asulcar filaments are derived from the ectoderm, the remainder from
  the endoderm. The only exceptions to this structure are found in the
  arrested or modified zooids, which occur in many of the colonial
  Alcyonaria. In these the tentacles are stunted or suppressed and the
  mesenteries are ill-developed, but the sulcus is unusually large and
  has long cilia. Such modified zooids are called siphonozooids, their
  function being to drive currents of fluid through the canal-systems of
  the colonies to which they belong. With very few exceptions a
  calcareous skeleton is present in all Alcyonaria; it usually consists
  of spicules of carbonate of lime, each spicule being formed within an
  ectodermic cell (fig. 3, B). Most commonly the spicule-forming cells
  pass out of the ectoderm and are imbedded in the mesogloea, where they
  may remain separate from one another or may be fused together to form
  a strong mass. In addition to the spicular skeleton an organic horny
  skeleton is frequently present, either in the form of a horny external
  investment (_Cornularia_), or an internal axis (_Gorgonia_), or it may
  form a matrix in which spicules are imbedded (_Keroeides, Meistodes_).

  [Illustration: FIG. 4.--Transverse section of an Alcyonarian zooid mm,
  Mesenteries; mb, muscle banners; sc, sulcus; st, stomodaeum.]

  Nearly all the Alcyonaria are colonial. Four solitary species have
  been described, viz. _Haimea funebris_ and _H. hyalina, Hartea
  elegans_, and _Monoxenia Darwinii_; but it is doubtful whether these
  are not the young forms of colonies. For the present the solitary
  forms may be placed in a grade, _Protal-cyonacea_, and the colonial
  forms may be grouped in another grade, _Synalcyonacea_. Every
  Alcyonarian colony is developed by budding from a single parent zooid.
  The buds are not direct outgrowths of the body-wall, but are formed on
  the courses of hollow out growths of the base or body-wall, called
  _solenia_. These form a more or less complicated canal system, lined
  by endoderm, and communicating with the cavities of the zooids. The
  most simple form of budding is found in the genus _Cornularia_, in
  which the mother zooid gives off from its base one or more simple
  radiciform outgrowths. Each outgrowth contains a single tube or
  solenium, and at a longer or shorter distance from the mother zooid a
  daughter zooid is formed as a bud. This gives off new outgrowths, and
  these, branching and anastomosing with one another, may form a
  network, adhering to stones, corals, or other objects, from which
  zooids arise at intervals. In _Clavularia_ and its allies each
  outgrowth contains several solenia, and the outgrowths may take the
  form of flat expansions, composed of a number of solenial tubes felted
  together to form a lamellar surface of attachment. Such outgrowths are
  called _stolons_, and a stolon may be simple, i.e. contain only one
  solenium, as in _Cornularia_, or may be complex and built up of many
  solenia, as in _Clavularia_. Further complications arise when the
  lower walls of the mother zooid become thickened and interpenetrated
  with solenia, from which buds are developed, so that lobose, tufted,
  or branched colonies are formed. The chief orders of the Synalcyonacea
  are founded upon the different architectural features of colonies
  produced by different modes of budding. We recognize six orders--the
  STOLONIFERA, ALCYONACEA, PSEUDAXONIA, AXIFERA, STELECHOTOKEA, and
  CORNOTHECALIA.

  [Illustration: FIG. 5.

  A. Skeleton of a young colony of _Tubipora purpurea_. st, Stolon; p,
  platform.

  B. Diagrammatic longitudinal section of a corallite, showing two
  platforms, p and cup-shaped tabulae, t. (After S.J. Hickson.)]

  In the order STOLONIRERA the zooids spring at intervals from branching
  or lamellar stolons, and are usually free from one another, except at
  their bases, but in some cases horizontal solenia arising at various
  heights from the body-wall may place the more distal portions of the
  zooids in communication with one another. In the genus _Tubipora_
  these horizontal solenia unite to form a series of horizontal
  platforms (fig. 5). The order comprises the families _Cornulamdae,
  Syringopordae, Tubipondae_, and _Favositidae_. In the first-named, the
  zooids are united only by their bases and the skeleton consists of
  loose spicules. In the _Tubipondae_ the spicules of the proximal part
  of the body-wall are fused together to form a firm tube, the
  corallite, into which the distal part of the zooid can be retracted.
  The corallites are connected at intervals by horizontal platforms
  containing solenia, and at the level of each platform the cavity of
  the corallite is divided by a transverse calcareous partition, either
  flat or cup-shaped, called a _tabula_. Formerly all corals in which
  tabulae are present were classed together as Tabulata, but Tubipora is
  an undoubted Alcyonarian with a lamellar stolon, and the structure of
  the fossil genus Syringopora, which has vertical corallites united by
  horizontal solenia, clearly shows its affinity to Tubipora. The
  Favositidae, a fossil family from the Silurian and Devonian, have a
  massive corallum composed of numerous polygonal corallites closely
  packed together. The cavities of adjacent corallites communicate by
  means of numerous perforations, which appear to represent solenia, and
  numerous transverse tabulae are also present. In _Favosites
  hemisphaerica_ a number of radial spines, projecting into the cavity
  of the corallite, give it the appearance of a madreporarian coral.

  [Illustration: FIG. 6.--Portion of a colony of _Coralinum rubrum_,
  showing expanded and contracted zooids. In the lower part of the
  figure the cortex has been cut away to show the _axis_, ax, and the
  longitudinal canals, lc, surrounding it.]

  In the order ALCYONACEA the colony consists of bunches of elongate
  cylindrical zooids, whose proximal portions are united by solenia and
  compacted, by fusion of their own walls and those of the solenia, into
  a fleshy mass called the coenenchyma. Thus the coenenchyma forms a
  stem, sometimes branched, from the surface of which the free portions
  of the zooids project. The skeleton of the Alcyonacea consists of
  separate calcareous spicules, which are often, especially in the
  Nephthyidae, so abundant and so closely interlocked as to form a
  tolerably firm and hard armour. The order comprises the families
  _Xeniidae, Alcyonidae_ and _Nephthyidae_. _Alcyonium digitatum_, a
  pink digitate form popularly known as "dead men's fingers," is common
  in 10-20 fathoms of water off the English coasts.

  [Illustration: FIG. 7.--The sea-fan (_Gorgonia cavolinii_).]

  In the order PSEUDAXONIA the colonies are upright and branched,
  consisting of a number of short zooids whose proximal ends are
  imbedded in a coenenchyma containing numerous ramifying solenia and
  spicules. The coenenchyma is further differentiated into a medullary
  portion and a cortex. The latter contains the proximal moieties of the
  zooids and numerous but separate spicules. The medullary portion is
  densely crowded with spicules of different shape from those in the
  cortex, and in some forms the spicules are cemented together to form a
  hard supporting axis. There are four families of Pseudaxonia--the
  _Briareidae, Sclerogorgidae, Melitodidae_, and _Corallidae_. In the
  first-named the medulla is penetrated by solenia and forms an
  indistinct axis; in the remainder the medulla is devoid of solenia,
  and in the _Melitodidae_ and _Corallidae_ it forms a dense axis, which
  in the _Melitodidae_ consists of alternate calcareous and horny
  joints. The precious red coral of commerce, _Corallium rubrum_ (fig.
  6), a member of the family _Corallidae_, is found at depths varying
  from 15 to 120 fathoms the Mediterranean Sea, chiefly on the African
  coast. It owes its commercial value to the beauty of its hard red
  calcareous axis which in life is covered by a cortex in which the
  proximal moieties of the zooids are imbedded. _Corallium rubrum_ has
  been the subject of a beautifully-illustrated memoir by de
  Lacaze-Duthiers, which should be consulted for details of anatomy.

  The AXIFERA comprise those corals that have a horny or calcified axis,
  which in position corresponds to the axis of the Pscudaxonia, but,
  unlike it, is never formed of fused spicules; the most familiar
  example is the pink sea-fan, _Gorgonia cavolinii_, which is found in
  abundance in 10-25 fathoms of water off the English coasts (fig. 7).
  In this order the axis is formed as an ingrowth of the ectoderm of the
  base of the mother zooid of the colony, the cavity of the ingrowth
  being filled by a horny substance secreted by the ectoderm. In
  _Gorgonia_ the axis remains horny throughout life, but in many forms
  it is further strengthened by a deposit of calcareous matter In the
  family _Isidinae_ the axis consists of alternate segments of horny and
  calcareous substance, the latter being amorphous. The order contains
  six families--the _Dasygorgidae, Isidae, Primnoidae, Muriceidae,
  Plexauridae_, and _Gorgoniaae_.

  [Illustration: FIG. 8.

  A. Colony of _Pennatula phosphorea_ from the metarachidial aspect. p,
  The peduncle.

  B. Section of the rachis bearing a single pinna, a, Axis; b,
  metarachidial; c, prorachidial; d, pararachidial stem canals.]

  In the order STELECHOTOKEA the colony consists of a stem formed by a
  greatly-elongated mother zooid, and the daughter zooids are borne as
  lateral buds on the stem. In the section _Asiphonacea_ the colonies
  are upright and branched, springing from membranous or ramifying
  stolons. They resemble and are closely allied to certain families of
  the Cornulariidae, differing from them only in mode of budding and in
  the dispostion of the daughter zooids round a central, much-elongated
  mother zooid. The section contains two families, the _Telestidae_ and
  the _Coelogorgidae_. The second section comprises the _Pennatulacea_
  or sea-pens, which are remarkable from the fact that the colony is not
  fixed by the base to a rock or other object, but is imbedded in sand
  or mud by the proximal portion of the stem known as the peduncle. In
  the typical genus, Pennatula (fig. 8), the colony looks like a feather
  having a stem divisible into an upper moiety or rachis, bearing
  lateral central leaflets (pinnae), and a lower peduncle, which is
  sterile and imbedded in sand or mud. The stem represents a greatly
  enlarged and elongated mother zooid. It is divided longitudinally by a
  partition separating a so-called "ventral" or prorachidial canal from
  a so-called "dorsal" or metarachidial canal. A rod-like supporting
  axis of peculiar texture is developed in the longitudinal partition,
  and a longitudinal canal is hollowed out on either side of the axis in
  the substance of the longitudinal partition, so that there are four
  stem-canals in all. The prorachidial and metarachidial aspects of the
  rachis are sterile, but the sides or pararachides bear numerous
  daughter zooids of two kinds--(1) fully-formed autozooids, (2) small
  stunted siphonozooids. The pinnae are formed by the elongated
  autozooids, whose proximal portions are fused together to form a
  leaf-like expansion, from the upper edge of which the distal
  extremities of the zooids project. The siphonozooids are very numerous
  and lie between the bases at the pinnae on the pararachides; they
  extend also on the prorachidial and metarachidial surfaces. The
  calcareous skeleton of the Pennatulacea consists of scattered
  spicules, but in one species, _Protocaulon molle_, spicules are
  absent. Although of great interest the Pennatulacea do not form an
  enduring skeleton or "coral," and need not be considered in detail in
  this place.

  [Illustration: FIG. 9.

  A, Portion of the surface of a colony of _Heliopora coerulea_
  magnified, showing two calices and the surrounding coenenchymal tubes.

  B, Single zooid with the adjacent soft tissues as seen after removal
  of the skeleton by decalcification. Z¹, the distal, and Z², the
  proximal or intracalicular portion of the zooid; ec, ectoderm; ct,
  coenenchymal tubes; sp, superficial network of solenia.]

  The order COENOTHECALIA is represented by a single living species,
  _Heliopora coerulea_, which differs from all recent Alcyonaria in the
  fact that its skeleton is not composed of spicules, but is formed as a
  secretion from a layer of cells called calicoblasts, which originate
  from the ectoderm. The corallum of Heliopora is of a blue colour, and
  has the form of broad, upright, lobed, or digitate masses flattened
  from side to side. The surfaces are pitted all over with perforations
  of two kinds, viz. larger star-shaped cavities, called _calices_, in
  which the zooids are lodged, and very numerous smaller round or
  polygonal apertures, which in life contain as many short unbranched
  tubes, known as the _coenenchymal tubes_ (fig. 9, A). The walls of the
  calices and coenenchymal tubes are formed of flat plates of calcite,
  which are so disposed that the walls of one tube enter into the
  composition of the walls of adjacent tubes, and the walls of the
  calices are formed by the walls of adjacent coenenchymal tubes. Thus
  the architecture of the Helioporid colony differs entirely from such
  forms as Tubipora or Favosites, in which each corallite has its own
  distinct and proper wall. The cavities both of the calices and
  coenenchymal tubes of Heliopora are closed below by horizontal
  partitions or _tabulae_, hence the genus was formerly included in the
  group Tabulata, and was supposed to belong to the madreporarian
  corals, both because of its lamellar skeleton, which resembles that of
  a Madrepore, and because each calicle has from twelve to fifteen
  radial partitions or septa projecting into its cavity. The structure
  of the zooid of Heliopora, however, is that of a typical Alcyonarian,
  and the septa have only a resemblance to, but no real homology with,
  the similarly named structures in madreporarian corals. _Heliopora
  coerulea_ is found between tide-marks on the shore platforms of coral
  islands. The order was more abundantly represented in Palaeozoic times
  by the _Heliolitidae_ from the Upper and Lower Silurian and the
  Devonian, and by the _Thecidae_ from the Wenlock limestone. In
  _Heliolites porosus_ the colonies had the form of spheroidal masses;
  the calices were furnished with twelve pseudosepta, and the
  coenenchymal tubes were more or less regularly hexagonal.

  [Illustration with caption: FIG. 10.

  A, _Edwardsia claparedii_ (after A. Andres). Cap, capitulum; sc,
  scapus; ph, physa.

  B, Transverse section of the same, showing the arrangement of the
  mesenteries, s, Sulcus; sl, sulculus.

  C, Transverse section of _Halcampa_. d, d, Directive mesenteries; st,
  stomodaeum.]

  Zoantharia.--In this sub-class the arrangement of the mesenteries is
  subject to a great deal of variation, but all the types hitherto
  observed may be referred to a common plan, illustrated by the living
  genus _Edwardsia_ (fig. 10, A, B). This is a small solitary
  Zoantharian which lives embedded in sand. Its body is divisible into
  three portions, an upper _capitulum_ bearing the mouth and tentacles,
  a median _scapus_ covered by a friable cuticle, and a terminal physa
  which is rounded. Both capitulum and physa can be retracted within the
  scapus. There are from sixteen to thirty-two simple tentacles, but
  only eight mesenteries, all of which are complete. The stomodaeum is
  compressed laterally, and is furnished with two longitudinal grooves,
  a sulcus and a sulculus. The arrangement of the muscle-banners on the
  mesenteries is characteristic. On six of the mesenteries the
  muscle-banners have the same position as in the Alcyonaria, namely, on
  the sulcar faces; but in the two remaining mesenteries, namely, those
  which are attached on either side of the sulcus, the muscle-banners
  are on the opposite or sulcular faces. It is not known whether all the
  eight mesenteries of _Edwardsia_ are developed simultaneously or not,
  but in the youngest form which has been studied all the eight
  mesenteries were present, but only two of them, namely the
  sulco-laterals, bore mesenterial filaments, and so it is presumed that
  they are the first pair to be developed. In the common sea-anemone,
  _Actinia equina_ (which has already been quoted as a type of Anthozoan
  structure), the mesenteries are numerous and are arranged in cycles.
  The mesenteries of the first cycle are complete (i.e. are attached to
  the stomodaeum), are twelve in number, and arranged in couples,
  distinguishable by the position of the muscle-banners. In the four
  couples of mesenteries which are attached to the sides of the
  elongated stomodaeum the muscle-banners of each couple are turned
  towards one another, but in the sulcar and sulcular couples, known as
  the directive mesenteries, the muscle-banners are on the outer faces
  of the mesenteries, and so are turned away from one another (see fig.
  10, C). The space enclosed between two mesenteries of the same couple
  is called an _entocoele_; the space enclosed between two mesenteries
  of adjacent couples is called an _exocoele_. The second cycle of
  mesenteries consists of six couples, each formed in an exocoele of the
  primary cycle, and in each couple the muscle-banners are _vis-à-vis_.
  The third cycle comprises twelve couples, each formed in an exocoele
  between the primary and secondary couples and so on, it being a
  general rule (subject, however, to exceptions) that new mesenterial
  couples are always formed in the exocoeles, and not in the entocoeles.

  [Illustration: FIG. 11.--A, Diagram showing the sequence of
  mesenterial development in an Actinian. B, Diagrammatic transverse
  section of _Gonactinia prolifera_.]

  While the mesenterial couples belonging to the second and each
  successive cycle are formed simultaneously, those of the first cycle
  are formed in successive pairs, each member of a pair being placed on
  opposite sides of the stomodaeum. Hence the arrangement in six couples
  is a secondary and not a primary feature. In most Actinians the
  mesenteries appear in the following order:--At the time when the
  stomodaeum is formed, a single pair of mesenteries, marked I, I in the
  diagram (fig. 11, A), makes its appearance, dividing the coelenteric
  cavity into a smaller sulcar and a large sulcular chamber. The
  muscle-banners of this pair are placed on the sulcar faces of the
  mesenteries. Next, a pair of mesenteries, marked II, II in the
  diagram, is developed in the sulcular chamber, its muscle-banners
  facing the same way as those of I, I. The third pair is formed in the
  sulcar chamber, in close connexion with the sulcus, and in this case
  the muscle-banners are on the _sulcular_ faces. The fourth pair,
  having its muscle-banners on the sulcar faces, is developed at the
  opposite extremity of the stomodaeum in close connexion with the
  sulculus. There are now eight mesenteries present, having exactly the
  same arrangement as in Edwardsia. A pause in the development follows,
  during which no new mesenteries are formed, and then the six-rayed
  symmetry characteristic of a normal Actinian zooid is completed by the
  formation of the mesenteries V, V in the lateral chambers, and VI, VI
  in the sulco-lateral chambers, their muscle-banners being so disposed
  that they form couples respectively with II, II and I, I. In _Actinia
  equina_ the Edwardsia stage is arrived at somewhat differently. The
  mesenteries second in order of formation form the sulcular directives,
  those fourth in order of formation form with the fifth the
  sulculo-lateral couples of the adult.

  [Illustration: FIG. 12.

  A, Zoanthid colony, showing the expanded zooids.

  B, Diagram showing the arrangement of mesenteries in a young Zoanthid.

  C, Diagram showing the arrangement of mesenteries in an adult
  Zoanthid. 1, 2, 3, 4, Edwardsian mesenteries.]

  As far as the anatomy of the zooid is concerned, the majority of the
  stony or madreporarian corals agree exactly with the soft-bodied
  Actinians, such as _Actinia equina_, both in the number and
  arrangement of the adult mesenteries and in the order of development
  of the first cycle. The few exceptions will be dealt with later, but
  it may be stated here that even in these the first cycle of six
  couples of mesenteries is always formed, and in all the cases which
  have been examined the course of development described above is
  followed. There are, however, several groups of Zoantharia in which
  the mesenterial arrangement of the adult differs widely from that just
  described. But it is possible to refer all these cases with more or
  less certainty to the Edwardsian type.

  The order ZOANTHIDEA comprises a number of soft-bodied Zoantharians
  generally encrusted with sand. Externally they resemble ordinary
  sea-anemones, but there is only one ciliated groove, the sulcus, in
  the stomodaeum, and the mesenteries are arranged on a peculiar
  pattern. The first twelve mesenteries are disposed in couples, and do
  not differ from those of Actinia except in size. The mesenterial pairs
  I, II and III are attached to the stomodaeum, and are called
  macromesenteries (fig. 12, B), but IV, V and VI are much shorter, and
  are called micromesenteries. The subsequent development is peculiar to
  the group. New mesenteries are formed only in the sulco-lateral
  exocoeles. They are formed in couples, each couple consisting of a
  macromesentery and a micromesentery, disposed so that the former is
  nearest to the sulcar directives. The derivation of the Zoanthidea
  from an Edwardsia form is sufficiently obvious.

  The order CERIANTHIDEA comprises a few soft-bodied Zoantharians with
  rounded aboral extremities pierced by pores. They have two circlets of
  tentacles, a labial and a marginal, and there is only one ciliated
  groove in the stomodaeum, which appears to be the sulculus. The
  mesenteries are numerous, and the longitudinal muscles, though
  distinguishable, are so feebly developed that there are no
  muscle-banners. The larval forms of the type genus _Cerianthus_ float
  freely in the sea, and were once considered to belong to a separate
  genus, _Arachnactis_. In this larva four pairs of mesenteries having
  the typical Edwardsian arrangement are developed, but the fifth and
  sixth pairs, instead of forming couples with the first and second,
  arise in the sulcar chamber, the fifth pair inside the fourth, and the
  sixth pair inside the fifth. New mesenteries are continually added in
  the sulcar chamber, the seventh pair within the sixth, the eighth pair
  within the seventh, and so on (fig. 13). In the Cerianthidea, as in
  the Zoanthidea, much as the adult arrangement of mesenteries differs
  from that of Actinia, the derivation from an Edwardsia stock is
  obvious.

  [Illustration: FIG. 13.

  A, _Cerianthus solitarius_ (after A. Andres).

  B, Transverse section of the stomodaeum, showing the sulculus, sl, and
  the arrangement of the mesenteries.

  C, Oral aspect of _Arachnactis brachiolata_, the larva of
  _Cerianthus_, with seven tentacles.

  D, Transverse section of an older larva. The numerals indicate the
  order of development of the mesenteries.]

  The order ANTIPATHIDEA is a well-defined group whose affinities are
  more obscure. The type form, _Antipathes dichotoma_ (fig. 14), forms
  arborescent colonies consisting of numerous zooids arranged in a
  single series along one surface of a branched horny axis. Each zooid
  has six tentacles; the stomodaeum is elongate, but the sulcus and
  sulculus are very feebly represented. There are ten mesenteries in
  which the musculature is so little developed as to be almost
  indistinguishable. The sulcar and sulcular pairs of mesenteries are
  short, the sulco-lateral and sulculo-lateral pairs are a little
  longer, but the two transverse are very large and are the only
  mesenteries which bear gonads. As the development of the Antipathidea
  is unknown, it is impossible to say what is the sequence of the
  mesenterial development, but in _Leiopathes glaberrima_, a genus with
  twelve mesenteries, there are distinct indications of an Edwardsia
  stage.

  [Illustration: FIG. 14.

  A, Portion of a colony of _Antipathes dichotoma_.

  B, Single zooid and axis of the same magnified. m, Mouth; mf
  mesenterial filament; ax, axis.

  C, Transverse section through the oral cone of _Antipathella minor_,
  st, Stomodaeum; ov, ovary.]

  There are, in addition to these groups, several genera of Actinians
  whose mesenterial arrangement differs from the normal type. Of these
  perhaps the most interesting is _Gonactinia prolifera_ (fig. 11, B),
  with eight macromesenteries arranged on the Edwardsian plan. Two pairs
  of micromesenteries form couples with the first and second Edwardsian
  pairs, and in addition there is a couple of micromesenteries in each
  of the sulculo-lateral exocoeles. Only the first and second pairs of
  Edwardsian macromesenteries are fertile, i.e. bear gonads.

  The remaining forms, the ACTINIIDEA, are divisible into the
  Malacactiniae, or soft-bodied sea-anemones, which have already been
  described sufficiently in the course of this article, and the
  Scleractiniae (= Madreporaria) or true corals.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--Corallum of _Caryophyllia_; semi-diagrammatic.
th, Theca; c, costae; sp, septa; p, palus; col, columella.]

All recent corals, as has already been said, conform so closely to the
anatomy of normal Actinians that they cannot be classified apart from
them, except that they are distinguished by the possession of a
calcareous skeleton. This skeleton is largely composed of a number of
radiating plates or _septa_, and it differs both in origin and structure
from the calcareous skeleton of all Alcyonaria except Heliopora. It is
formed, not from fused spicules, but as a secretion of a special layer
of cells derived from the basal ectoderm, and known as _calicoblasts_.
The skeleton or corallum of a typical solitary coral--the common
Devonshire cup-coral _Caryophyllia smithii_ (fig. 15) is a good
example--exhibits the followings parts:--(1) The _basal plate_, between
the zooid and the surface of attachment. (2) The _septa_, radial plates
of calcite reaching from the periphery nearly or quite to the centre of
the coral-cup or calicle. (3) The _theca_ or wall, which in many corals
is not an independent structure, but is formed by the conjoined
thickened peripheral ends of the septa. (4) The _columella_, a structure
which occupies the centre of the calicle, and may arise from the basal
plate, when it is called essential, or may be formed by union of
trabecular offsets of the septa, when it is called unessential. (5) The
_costae_, longitudinal ribs or rows of spines on the outer surface of
the theca. True costae always correspond to the septa, and are in fact
the peripheral edges of the latter. (6) _Epitheca_, an offset of the
basal plate which surrounds the base of the theca in a ring-like manner,
and in some corals may take the place of a true theca. (7) _Pali_,
spinous or blade-like upgrowths from the bottom of the calicle, which
project between the inner edges of certain septa and the columella. In
addition to these parts the following structures may exist in
corals:--_Dissepiments_ are oblique calcareous partitions, stretching
from septum to septum, and closing the interseptal chambers below. The
whole system of dissepiments in any given calicle is often called
_endotheca_. _Synapticulae_ are calcareous bars uniting adjacent septa.
_Tabulae_ are stout horizontal partitions traversing the centre of the
calicle and dividing it into as many superimposed chambers. The septa in
recent corals always bear a definite relation to the mesenteries, being
found either in every entocoele or in every entocoele and exocoele.
Hence in corals in which there is only a single cycle of mesenteries the
septa are correspondingly few in number; where several cycles of
mesenteries are present the septa are correspondingly numerous. In some
cases--e.g. in some species of _Madrepora_--only two septa are fully
developed, the remainder being very feebly represented.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Tangential section of a larva of _Astroides
calicularis_ which has fixed itself on a piece of cork. ec, Ectoderm;
en, endoderm; mg, mesogloea; m, m, mesenteries; s, septum; b, basal
plate formed of ellipsoids of carbonate of lime secreted by the basal
ectoderm; ep, epitheca. (After von Koch.)]

Though the corallum appears to live within the zooid, it is
morphologically external to it, as is best shown by its developmental
history. The larvae of corals are free swimming ciliated forms known as
planulae, and they do not acquire a corallum until they fix themselves.
A ring-shaped plate of calcite, secreted by the ectoderm, is then
formed, lying between the embryo and the surface of attachment. As the
mesenteries are formed, the endoderm of the basal disk lying above the
basal plate is raised up in the form of radiating folds. There may be
six of these folds, one in each entocoele of the primary cycle of
mesenteries, or there may be twelve, one in each exocoele and entocoele.
The ectoderm beneath each fold becomes detached from the surface of the
basal plate, and both it and the mesogloea are folded conformably with
the endoderm. The cells forming the limbs of the ectodermic folds
secrete nodules of calcite, and these, fusing together, give rise to six
(or twelve) vertical radial plates or septa. As growth proceeds new
septa are formed simultaneously with the new couples of secondary
mesenteries. In some corals, in which all the septa are entocoelic, each
new system is embraced by a mesenteric couple; in others, in which the
septa are both entocoelic and exocoelic, three septa are formed in every
chamber between two primary mesenterial couples, one in the entocoele of
the newly formed mesenterial couple of the secondary cycle, and one in
each exocoele between a primary and a secondary couple. These latter are
in turn embraced by the couples of the tertiary cycle of mesenteries,
and new septa are formed in the exocoeles on either side of them, and so
forth.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--Transverse section through a zooid of
_Cladocora_. The corallum shaded with dots, the mesogloea represented by
a thick line. Thirty-two septa are present, six in the entocoeles of the
primary cycle of mesenteries, I; six in the entocoeles of the secondary
cycle of mesenteries, II; four in the entocoeles of the tertiary cycle
of mesenteries, III, only four pairs of the latter being developed; and
sixteen in the entocoeles between the mesenterial pairs. D, D, Directive
mesenteries; st, stomodaeum. (After Duerden.)]

It is evident from an inspection of figs. 16 and 17 that every septum
is covered by a fold of endoderm, mesogloea, and ectoderm, and is in
fact pushed into the cavity of the zooid from without. The zooid then
is, as it were, moulded upon the corallum. When fully extended, the
upper part of the zooid projects for some distance out of the calicle,
and its wall is reflected for some distance over the lip of the latter,
forming a fold of soft tissue extending to a greater or less distance
over the theca, and containing in most cases a cavity continuous over
the lip of the calicle with the coelenteron. This fold of tissue is
known as the _edge-zone_ In some corals the septa are solid imperforate
plates of calcite, and their peripheral ends are either firmly welded
together, or are united by interstitial pieces so as to form imperforate
theca. In others the peripheral ends of the septa are united only by
bars or trabeculae, so that the theca is perforate, and in many such
perforate corals the septa themselves are pierced by numerous
perforations. In the former, which have been called aporose corals, the
only communication between the cavity of the edge-zone and the general
cavity of the zooid is by way of the lip of the calicle; in the latter,
or perforate corals, the theca is permeated by numerous branching and
anastomosing canals lined by endoderm, which place the cavity of the
edge-zone in communication with the general cavity of the zooid.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.

A, Schematic longitudinal section through a zooid and bud of _Stylophora
digitata_. In A, B, and C the thick black lines represent the soft
tissues; the corallum is dotted. s, Stomodaeum; c, c, coenosarc; col,
columella, T tabulae.

B, Similar section through a single zooid and bud of _Astroides
calicularis_.

C, Similar section through three corallites of _Lophohelia prolifera_.
ez, Edge-zone.

D, Diagram illustrating the process of budding by unequal division.

E, Section through a dividing calicle of _Mussa_, showing the union of
two septa in the plane of division and the origin of new septa at right
angles to them.

(C original; the rest after von Koch.)]

A large number of corals, both aporose and perforate, are colonial. The
colonies are produced by either budding or division. In the former case
the young daughter zooid, with its corallum, arises wholly outside the
cavity of the parent zooid, and the component parts of the young
corallum, septa, theca, columella, &c., are formed anew in every
individual produced. In division a vertical constriction divides a zooid
into two equal or unequal parts, and the several parts of the two corals
thus produced are severally derived from the corresponding parts of the
dividing corallum. In colonial corals a bud is always formed from the
edge-zone, and this bud develops into a new zooid with its corallum. The
cavity of the bud in an aporose coral (fig. 18, A, C) does not
communicate directly with that of the parent form, but through the
medium of the edge-zone. As growth proceeds, and parent and bud become
separated farther from one another, the edge-zone forms a sheet of soft
tissue, bridging over the space between the two, and resting upon
projecting spines of the corallum. This sheet of tissue is called the
_coenosarc_. Its lower surface is clothed with a layer of calicoblasts
which continue to secrete carbonate of lime, giving rise to a secondary
deposit which more or less fills up the spaces between the individual
coralla, and is distinguished as _coenenchyme_. This coenenchyme may be
scanty, or may be so abundant that the individual corallites produced by
budding seem to be immersed in it. Budding takes place in an analogous
manner in perforate corals (fig. 18, B), but the presence of the canal
system in the perforate theca leads to a modification of the process.
Buds arise from the edge-zone which already communicate with the cavity
of the zooid by the canals. As the buds develop the canal system becomes
much extended, and calcareous tissue is deposited between the network of
canals, the confluent edge-zones of mother zooid and bud forming a
coenosarc. As the process continues a number of calicles are formed,
imbedded in a spongy tissue in which the canals ramify, and it is
impossible to say where the theca of one corallite ends and that of
another begins. In the formation of colonies by division a constriction
at right angles to the long axis of the mouth involves first the mouth,
then the peristome, and finally the calyx itself, so that the previously
single corallite becomes divided into two (fig. 18, E). After division
the corallites continue to grow upwards, and their zooids may remain
united by a bridge of soft tissue or coenosarc. But in some cases, as
they grow farther apart, this continuity is broken, each corallite has
its own edge-zone, and internal continuity is also broken by the
formation of dissepiments within each calicle, all organic connexion
between the two zooids being eventually lost. Massive meandrine corals
are produced by continual repetition of a process of incomplete
division, involving the mouth and to some extent the peristome: the
calyx, however, does not divide, but elongates to form a characteristic
meandrine channel containing several zooid mouths.

Corals have been divided into _Aporosa_ and _Perforata_, according as
the theca and septa are compact and solid, or are perforated by pores
containing canals lined by endoderm. The division is in many respects
convenient for descriptive purposes, but recent researches show that it
does not accurately represent the relationships of the different
families. Various attempts have been made to classify corals according
to the arrangement of the septa, the characters of the theca, the
microscopic structure of the corallum, and the anatomy of the soft
parts. The last-named method has proved little more than that there is a
remarkable similarity between the zooids of all recent corals, the
differences which have been brought to light being for the most part
secondary and valueless for classificatory purposes. On the other hand,
the study of the anatomy and development of the zooids has thrown much
light upon the manner in which the corallum is formed, and it is now
possible to infer the structure of the soft parts from a microscopical
examination of the septa, theca, &c., with the result that unexpected
relationships have been shown to exist between corals previously
supposed to stand far apart. This has been particularly the case with
the group of Palaeozoic corals formerly classed together as _Rugosa_. In
many of these so-called rugose forms the septa have a characteristic
arrangement, differing from that of recent corals chiefly in the fact
that they show a tetrameral instead of a hexameral symmetry. Thus in the
family _Stauridae_ there are four chief septa whose inner ends unite in
the middle of the calicle to form a false columella, and in the
_Zaphrentidae_ there are many instances of an arrangement, such as that
depicted in fig. 19, which represents the septal arrangement of
_Streptelasma corniculum_ from the lower Silurian. In this coral the
calicle is divided into quadrants by four principal septa, the _main
septum, counter septum_, and two _alar septa_. The remaining septa are
so disposed that in the quadrants abutting on the chief septum they
converge towards that septum, whilst in the other quadrants they
converge towards the alar septa. The secondary septa show a regular
gradation in size, and, assuming that the smallest were the most
recently formed, it will be noticed that in the chief quadrants the
youngest septa lie nearest to the main septum; in the other quadrants
the youngest septa lie nearest to the alar septa. This arrangement,
however, is by no means characteristic even of the Zaphrentidae, and in
the family _Cyathophyllidae_ most of the genera exhibit a radial
symmetry in which no trace of the bilateral arrangement described above
is recognizable, and indeed in the genus _Cyathophyllum_ itself a radial
arrangement is the rule. The connexion between the Cyathophyllidae and
modern Astraeidae is shown by _Moseleya latistellata_, a living
reef-building coral from Torres Strait. The general structure of this
coral leaves no doubt that it is closely allied to the Astraeidae, but
in the young calicles a tetrameral symmetry is indicated by the presence
of four large septa placed at right angles to one another. Again, in the
family _Amphiastraeidae_ there is commonly a single septum much larger
than the rest, and it has been shown that in the young calicles, e.g. of
_Thecidiosmilia_, two septa, corresponding to the main- and
counter-septa of Streptelasma, are first formed, then two alar septa,
and afterwards the remaining septa, the latter taking on a generally
radial arrangement, though the original bilaterality is marked by the
preponderance of the main septum. As the microscopic character of the
corallum of these extinct forms agrees with that of recent corals, it
may be assumed that the anatomy of the soft parts also was similar, and
the tetrameral arrangement, when present, may obviously be referred to a
stage when only the first two pairs of Edwardsian mesenteries were
present and septa were formed in the intervals between them.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--Diagram of the arrangement of the septa in a
Zaphrentid coral. m, Main septum; c, counter septum; t, t, alar septa.]

Space forbids a discussion of the proposals to classify corals after the
minute structure of their coralla, but it will suffice to say that it
has been shown that the septa of all corals are built up of a number of
curved bars called trabeculae, each of which is composed of a number of
nodes. In many secondary corals (_Cyclolites, Thamnastraea_) the
trabeculae are so far separate that the individual bars are easily
recognizable, and each looks something like a bamboo owing to the
thickening of the two ends of each node. The trabeculae are united
together by these thickened internodes, and the result is a fenestrated
septum, which in older septa may become solid and aporose by continual
deposit of calcite in the fenestrae. Each node of a trabecula may be
simple, i.e. have only one centre of calcification, or may be compound.
The septa of modern perforate corals are shown to have a structure
nearly identical with that of the secondary forms, but the trabeculae
and their nodes are only apparent on microscopical examination. The
aporose corals, too, have a practically identical structure, their
compactness being due to the union of the trabeculae throughout their
entire lengths instead of at intervals, as in the Perforata. Further,
the trabeculae may be evenly spaced throughout the septum, or may be
grouped together, and this feature is probably of value in estimating
the affinities of corals. (For an account of coral formations see
CORAL-REEFS.)

In the present state of our knowledge the Zoantharia in which a primary
cycle of six couples of mesenteries is (or may be inferred to be)
completed by the addition of two pairs to the eight Edwardsian
mesenteries, and succeeding cycles are formed in the exocoeles of the
pre-existing mesenterial cycles, may be classed in an order ACTINIIDEA,
and this may be divided into the suborders _Malacactiniae_, comprising
the soft-bodied Actinians, such as _Actinia, Sagartia, Bunodes_, &c.,
and the _Scleractiniae_, comprising the corals. The Scleractiniae may
best be divided into groups of families which appear to be most closely
related to one another, but it should not be forgotten that there is
great reason to believe that many if not most of the extinct corals must
have differed from modern Actiniidea in mesenterial characters, and may
have only possessed Edwardsian mesenteries, or even have possessed only
four mesenteries, in this respect showing close affinities to the
Stauromedusae. Moreover, there are some modern corals in which the
secondary cycle of mesenteries departs from the Actinian plan. For
example, J.E. Duerden has shown that in _Porites_ the ordinary zooids
possess only six couples of mesenteries arranged on the Actinian plan.
But some zooids grow to a larger size and develop a number of additional
mesenteries, which arise either in the sulcar or the sulcular entocoele,
much in the same manner as in Cerianthus. Bearing this in mind, the
following arrangement may be taken to represent the most recent
knowledge of coral structure:--

    GROUP A.

  Family I. ZAPHRENTIDAE.--Solitary Palaeozoic corals with an epithecal
  wall. Septa numerous, arranged pinnately with regard to four principal
  septa. Tabulae present. One or more pits or fossulae present in the
  calicle. Typical genera--_Zaphrentis_, Raf. _Amplexus_, M. Edw. and H.
  _Streptelasma_, Hall. _Omphyma_, Raf.

  Family 2. TURBINOLIDAE.--Solitary, rarely colonial corals, with
  radially arranged septa and without tabulae. Typical
  genera--_Flabellum_, Lesson. _Turbinolia_, M. Edw. and H.
  _Caryophyllia_, Lamarck. _Sphenotrochus_, Moseley, &c.

  Family 3. AMPHIASTRAEIDAE.--Mainly colonial, rarely solitary corals,
  with radial septa, but bilateral arrangement indicated by persistence
  of a main septum. Typical genera--_Amphiastraea_, Étallon.
  _Thecidiosmilia_.

  Family 4. STYLINIDAE.--Colonial corals allied to the Amphiastraeidae,
  but with radially symmetrical septa arranged in cycles. Typical
  genera--_Stylina_, Lamarck (Jurassic). _Convexastraea_, D'Orb.
  (Jurassic). _Isastraea_, M. Edw. and H.(Jurassic). Ogilvie refers the
  modern genus _Galaxea_ to this family.

    GROUP B.

  Family 5. OCULINIDAE.--Branching or massive aporose corals, the
  calices projecting above the level of a compact coenenchyme formed
  from the coenosarc which covers the exterior of the corallum. Typical
  genera--_Lophohelia_, M. Edw. and H. _Oculina_, M. Edw. and H.

  Family 6. POCILLOPORIDAE.--Colonial branching aporose corals, with
  small calices sunk in the coenenchyme. Tabulae present, and two larger
  septa, an axial and abaxial, are always present, with traces of ten
  smaller septa. Typical genera--_Pocillopora_, Lamarck. _Seriatopora_,
  Lamarck.

  Family 7. MADREPORIDAE.--Colonial branching or palmate perforate
  corals, with abundant trabecular coenenchyme. Theca porous; septa
  compact and reduced in number. Typical genera--_Madrepora_, Linn.
  _Turbinaria_, Oken. _Montipora_, Quoy and G.

  Family 8. PORITIDAE.--Incrusting or massive colonial perforate corals;
  calices usually in contact by their edges, sometimes disjunct and
  immersed in coenenchyme. Theca and septa perforate. Typical
  genera--_Porites_, M. Edw. and H. _Goniopora_, Quoy and G.
  _Rhodaraea_, M. Edw. and H.

    GROUP C.

  Family 9. CYATHOPHYLLIDAE.--Solitary and colonial aporose corals.
  Tabulae and vesicular endotheca present. Septa numerous, generally
  radial, seldom pinnate. Typical genera--_Cyathophyllum_, Goldfuss
  (Devonian and Carboniferous). _Moseleya_, Quelch (recent).

  Family 10. ASTRAEIDAE.--Aporpse, mainly colonial corals, massive,
  branching, or maeandroid. Septa radial; dissepiments present; an
  epitheca surrounds the base of massive or maeandroid forms, but only
  surrounds individual corallites in simple or branching forms. Typical
  genera--_Goniastraea_, M. Edw. and H. _Heliastraea_, M. Edw. and H.
  _Maeandrina_, Lam. _Coeloria_, M. Edw. and H. _Favia_, Oken.

  Family 11. FUNGIDAE.--Solitary and colonial corals, with numerous
  radial septa united by synapticulae. Typical genera--_Lophoseris_, M.
  Edw. and H. _Thamnastraea_, Le Sauvage. _Leptophyllia_, Reuss
  (Jurassic and Cretaceous). _Fungia_, Dana. _Siderastraea_, Blainv.

    GROUP D.

  Family 12. EUPSAMMIDAE.--Solitary or colonial perforate corals,
  branching, massive, or encrusting. Septa radial; the primary septa
  usually compact, the remainder perforate. Theca perforate. Synapticula
  present in some genera. Typical genera--_Stephanophyllia_, Michelin.
  _Eupsammia_, M. Edw. and H. _Astroides_, Blainv. _Rhodopsammia_, M.
  Edw. and H. _Dendrophyllia_, M. Edw. and H.

    GROUP E.

  Family 13. CYSTIPHYLLIDAE.--Solitary corals with rudimentary septa,
  and the calicle filled with vesicular endotheca.
  Genera--_Cystiphyllum_, Lonsdale (Silurian and Devonian).
  _Goniophyllum_, M. Edw. and H. (In this Silurian genus the calyx is
  provided with a movable operculum, consisting of four paired
  triangular pieces, the bases of each being attached to the sides of
  the calyx, and their apices meeting in the middle when the operculum
  is closed). _Calcecla_, Lam. (In this Devonian genus there is a single
  semicircular operculum furnished with a stout median septum and
  numerous feebly developed secondary septa. The calyx is triangular in
  section, pointed below, and the operculum is attached to it by
  hinge-like teeth.)

  AUTHORITIES.--The following list contains only the names of the more
  important and more general works on the structure and classification
  of corals and on coral reefs. For a fuller bibliography the works
  marked with an asterisk should be consulted: * A. Andres, _Fauna und
  Flora des Golfes von Neapel_, ix. (1884); H.M. Bernard, "Catalogue of
  Madreporarian Corals" in Brit. Museum, ii. (1896), iii. (1897); * G.C.
  Bourne, "Anthozoa," in E. Ray Lankester's _Treatise on Zoology_, vol.
  ii. (London, 1900); G. Brook, "_Challenger_ Reports," _Zoology_,
  xxxii. (1899) (_Antipatharia_); "Cat. Madrep. Corals," Brit. Museum,
  i. (1893); D.C. Danielssen, "Report Norwegian North Atlantic Exploring
  Expedition," _Zoology_, xix. (1890); J.E. Duerden, "Some Results on
  the Morphology and Development of Recent and Fossil Corals," _Rep.
  Brit. Association_, 1903, pp. 684-685; "The Morphology of the
  Madreporaria," _Biol. Bullet_, vii. pp. 79-104; P.M. Duncan, _Journ.
  Linnean Soc._ xviii. (1885); P.H. Gosse, _Actinologia britannica_
  (London, 1860); O. and R. Hertwig, _Die Actinien_ (Jena, 1879); R.
  Hertwig, "_Challenger_ Reports," _Zoology_, vi. (1882) and xxvi.
  (1888); * C.B. Klunzinger, _Die Korallthiere des Rothen Meeres_
  (Berlin, 1877); * G. von Koch, _Fauna und Flora des Golfes van
  Neapel_, xv. (1887); _Mitth. Zool. Stat. Neapel_, ii. (1882) and xii.
  (1897); _Palaeontographica_, xxix. (1883); (also many papers in the
  _Morphol. Jahrbuch_ from 1878 to 1898); F. Koby, "Polypiers
  jurassiques de la Suisse," _Mem. Soc. Palaeont. Suisse_, vii.-xvi.
  (1880-1889); A. von Kölliker, "Die Pennatuliden," _Abh. d. Senck.
  Naturf. Gesell_. vii.; * "_Challenger_ Reports," _Zoology_, i.
  _Pennatulidae_ (1880); Koren and Danielssen, _Norske Nordhaus Exped.,
  Alcyonida_ (1887); H. de Lacaze-Duthiers, _Hist. nat. du corail_
  (Paris, 1864); H. Milne-Edwards and J. Haime, _Hist. nat. des
  coralliaires_ (Paris, 1857); H.N. Moseley, "_Challenger_ Reports,"
  _Zoology_, ii. (1881); H.A. Nicholson, _Palaeozoic Tabulate Corals_
  (Edinburgh, 1879); M.M. Ogilvie, _Phil. Transactions_, clxxxvii.
  (1896); E. Pratz, _Palaeontographica_, xxix. (1882); J.J. Quelch,
  "_Challenger_ Reports," _Zoology_, xvi. (1886); * P.S. Wright and Th.
  Studer, "_Challenger_ Reports," _Zoology_, xxxi. (1889).
       (G. C. B.)