ANTIETAM, the name of a Maryland creek, near which, on the 16th-17th of
September 1862, was fought the battle of Antietam or Sharpsburg (see
AMERICAN CIVIL WAR), between the Federals under McClellan and the
Confederates commanded by Lee. General McClellan had captured the passes
of South Mountain farther east on the 14th, and his Army of the Potomac
marched to meet Lee's forces which, hitherto divided, had, by the 16th,
successfully concentrated between the Antietam and the Potomac. The
Confederate Army of Northern Virginia occupied a position which, in
relation to the surrounding country, may be compared to the string of a
bow in the act of being drawn, Lee's left wing forming the upper half of
the string, his right the lower, and the Potomac in his rear the bow
itself. The town of Sharpsburg represents the fingers of the archer
drawing the bow. The right wing of the position was covered by the
Antietam as it approaches the Potomac, the upper course of that stream
formed no part of the battlefield. Generals Longstreet and Jackson
commanded the right and left wings. The division of A.P. Hill was at
Harper's Ferry, but had received orders to rejoin Lee. McClellan's
troops appeared late on the 16th, and Hooker was immediately sent across
the upper Antietam. He had a sharp fight with Jackson's men, but night
soon put an end to the contest. Early on the 19th the corps of Sumner
and Mansfield followed Hooker across the upper stream whilst McClellan's
left wing (Burnside's corps) drew up opposite Lee's extreme right. The
Federal leader intended to hold back his centre whilst these two forces
were rolling up Lee's wings. The battle began with a furious assault on
the extreme right by Hooker's corps. After a very severe struggle he was
repulsed with the loss of a quarter of his men, Jackson's divisions
suffering even more severely and losing nearly all their generals and
colonels. It was only the arrival of Hood and D.H. Hill which enabled
Stonewall Jackson's corps to hold its ground, and had the other Federal
corps been at hand to support Hooker the result might have been very
different. Mansfield next attacked farther to the left and with better
fortune. Mansfield was killed, but his successor led the corps well, and
after heavy fighting Hood and D.H. Hill were driven back. Again want of
support checked the Federals and the fight became stationary, both sides
losing many men. Sumner now came into action, and overhaste involved him
in a catastrophe, his troops being attacked in front and flank and
driven back in great confusion with nearly half their number killed and
wounded; and their retreat involved the gallant remnants of Mansfield's
corps. Soon afterwards the Federal divisions of French and Richardson
attacked D.H. Hill, whose men were now exhausted by continuous fighting.
Here occurred the fighting in the "Bloody Lane," north of Sharpsburg
which French and Richardson eventually carried. Opposed as they were by
D.H. Hill, whose men had fought the battle of South Mountain and had
already been three times engaged _à fond_ on this day, proper support
must have enabled the Federals to crush Lee's centre, but Franklin and
Porter in reserve were not allowed by McClellan to move forward and the
opportunity passed. Burnside, on the southern wing, had received his
orders late, and acted on them still later. The battle was over on the
right before he fired a shot, and Lee had been able to use nearly all
his right wing troops to support Jackson. At last Burnside moved
forward, and, after a brilliant defence by the handful of men left to
oppose him, forced the Antietam and began to roll up Lee's right, only
to be attacked in rear himself by A.P. Hill's troops newly arrived from
Harper's Ferry. The repulse of Burnside ended the battle. Pressure was
brought to bear on McClellan to renew the fight, but he refused and Lee
retired across the Potomac unmolested. The Army of the Potomac had lost
11,832 men out of 46,000 engaged; the cavalry and two corps in reserve
had only lost 578. Lee's 31,200 men lost over 8000 of their number.

  See the bibliography appended to AMERICAN CIVIL WAR, and also General
  Palfrey's _Antietam and Fredericksburg_.