ANTIPATER (398?-319 B.C.), Macedonian general, and regent of Macedonia
during Alexander's Eastern expedition (334-323). He had previously (346)
been sent as ambassador by Philip to Athens and negotiated peace after
the battle of Chaeroneia (338). About 332 he set out against the
rebellious tribes of Thrace; but before this insurrection was quelled,
the Spartan king Agis had risen against Macedonia. Having settled
affairs in Thrace as well as he could, Antipater hastened to the south,
and in a battle near Megalopolis (331) gained a complete victory over
the insurgents (Diodorus xvii. 62). His regency was greatly troubled by
the ambition of Olympias, mother of Alexander, and he was nominally
superseded by Craterus. But, on the death of Alexander in 323, he was,
by the first partition of the empire, left in command of Macedonia, and
in the Lamian War, at the battle of Crannon (322), crushed the Greeks
who had attempted to re-assert their independence. Later in the same
year he and Craterus were engaged in a war against the Aetolians, when
the news arrived from Asia which induced Antipater to conclude peace
with them; for Antigonus reported that Perdiccas contemplated making
himself sole master of the empire. Antipater and Craterus accordingly
prepared for war against Perdiccas, and allied themselves with Ptolemy,
the governor of Egypt. Antipater crossed over into Asia in 321; and
while still in Syria, he received information that Perdiccas had been
murdered by his own soldiers. Craterus fell in battle against Eumenes
(Diodorus xviii. 25-39). Antipater, now sole regent, made several new
regulations, and having quelled a mutiny of his troops and commissioned
Antigonus to continue the war against Eumenes and the other partisans of
Perdiccas, returned to Macedonia, where he arrived in 320 (Justin xiii.
6). Soon after he was seized by an illness which terminated his active
career, 319. Passing over his son Cassander, he appointed the aged
Polyperchon regent, a measure which gave rise to much confusion and
ill-feeling (Diodorus xvii., xviii).