ANTIGUA, an island in the British West Indies, forming, with Barbuda and
Redonda, one of the five presidencies in the colony of the Leeward
Islands. It lies 50 m. E. of St Kitts, in 17° 6' N. and 61° 45' W., and
is 54 m. in circumference, with an area of 108 sq. m. The surface is
comparatively flat, and there is no central range of mountains as in
most other West Indian islands, but among the hills in the south-west an
elevation of 1328 ft. is attained. Owing to the absence of rivers, the
paucity of springs, and the almost complete deforestation, Antigua is
subject to frequent droughts, and although the average rainfall is 45.6
in., the variations from year to year are great. The dryness of the air
proves very beneficial to persons suffering from pulmonary complaints.
The high rocky coast is much indented by bays and arms of the sea,
several of which form excellent harbours, that of St John being safe and
commodious, but inferior to English Harbour, which, although little
frequented, is capable of receiving vessels of the largest size. The
soil, especially in the interior, is very fertile. Sugar and pineapples
are the chief products for export, but sweet potatoes, yams, maize and
guinea corn are grown for local consumption. Antigua is the residence of
the governor of the Leeward Islands, and the meeting place of the
general legislative council, but there is also a local legislative
council of 16 members, half official and half unofficial. Until 1898,
when the Crown Colony system was adopted, the legislative council was
partly elected, partly nominated. Elementary education is compulsory.
Agricultural training is given under government control, and the
Cambridge local examinations and those of the University of London are
held annually. Antigua is the see of a bishop of the Church of England,
the members of which predominate here, but Moravians and Wesleyans are
numerous. There is a small volunteer defence force. The island has
direct steam communication with Great Britain, the United States and
Canada, and is also served by the submarine cable. The three chief towns
are St John, Falmouth and Parham. St John (pop. about 10,000), the
capital, situated on the north-west, is an exceedingly picturesque town,
built on an eminence overlooking one of the most beautiful harbours in
the West Indies. Although both Falmouth and Parham have good harbours,
most of the produce of the island finds its way to St John for shipment.
The trade is chiefly with the United States, and the main exports are
sugar, molasses, logwood, tamarinds, turtles, and pineapples. The
cultivation of cotton has been introduced with success, and this also is
exported. The dependent islands of Barbuda and Redonda have an area of
62 sq. m. Pop. of Antigua (1901), 34,178; of the presidency, 35,073.

Antigua was discovered in 1493 by Columbus, who is said to have named it
after a church in Seville, called Santa Maria la Antigua. It remained,
however, uninhabited until 1632, when a body of English settlers took
possession of it, and in 1663 another settlement of the same nation was
effected under the direction of Lord Willoughby, to whom the entire
island was granted by Charles II. It was ravaged by the French in 1666,
but was soon after reconquered by the British and formally restored to
them by the treaty of Breda. Since then it has been a British
possession.