ANTIUM (mod. _Anzio_), an ancient Volscian city on the coast of Latium,
about 33 m. S. of Rome. The legends as to its foundation, and the
accounts of its early relations with Rome, are untrustworthy; but Livy's
account of wars between Antium and Rome, early in the 4th century B.C.,
may perhaps be accepted. Antium is named with Ardea, Laurentum and
Circeii, as under Roman protection, in the treaty with Carthage in 348
B.C. In 341 it lost its independence after a rising with the rest of
Latium against Rome, and the beaks (_rostra_) of the six captured
Antiatine ships decorated and gave their name to the orators' tribunal
in the Roman Forum. At the end of the Republican period it became a
resort of wealthy Romans, and the Julian and Claudian emperors
frequently visited it; both Caligula and Nero were born there. The
latter founded a colony of veterans and built a new harbour, the
projecting moles of which are still extant. In the middle ages it was
deserted in favour of Nettuno: at the end of the 17th century Innocent
XII. and Clement XI. restored the harbour, not on the old site but to
the east of it, with the opening to the east, a mistake which leads to
its being frequently silted up; it has a depth of about 15 ft. Remains
of Roman villas are conspicuous all along the shore, both to the east
and to the north-west of the town. That of Nero cannot be certainly
identified, but is generally placed at the so-called Arco Muto, where
remains of a theatre (discovered in 1712 and covered up again) also
exist. Many works of art have been found. Of the famous temple of
Fortune (Horace, _Od_. i. 35) no remains are known. The sea is
encroaching slightly at Anzio, but some miles farther north-west the old
Roman coast-line now lies slightly inland (see TIBER). The Volscian city
stood on higher ground and somewhat away from the shore, though it
extended down to it. It was defended by a deep ditch, which can still be
traced, and by walls, a portion of which, on the eastern side,
constructed of rectangular blocks of tufa, was brought to light in 1897.
The modern place is a summer resort and has several villas, among them
the Villa Borghese.

  See A. Nibby, _Dintorni di Roma_, i. 181; _Notizie degli scavi,
  passim_.     (T. As.)