ANTIGONE, (1) in Greek legend, daughter of Oedipus and Iocaste
(Jocasta), or, according to the older story, of Euryganeia. When her
father, on discovering that Iocaste, the mother of his children, was
also his own mother, put his eyes out and resigned the throne of Thebes,
she accompanied him into exile at Colonus. After his death she returned
to Thebes, where Haemon, the son of Creon, king of Thebes, became
enamoured of her. When her brothers Eteocles and Polyneices had slain
each other in single combat, she buried Polyneices, although Creon had
forbidden it. As a punishment she was sentenced to be buried alive in a
vault, where she hanged herself, and Haemon killed himself in despair.
Her character and these incidents of her life presented an attractive
subject to the Greek tragic poets, especially Sophocles in the
_Antigone_ and _Oedipus at Colonus_, and Euripides, whose _Antigone_,
though now lost, is partly known from extracts incidentally preserved in
later writers, and from passages in his _Phoenissae_. In the order of
the events, at least, Sophocles departed from the original legend,
according to which the burial of Polyneices took place while Oedipus was
yet in Thebes, not after he had died at Colonus. Again, in regard to
Antigone's tragic end Sophocles differs from Euripides, according to
whom the calamity was averted by the intercession of Dionysus and was
followed by the marriage of Antigone and Haemon. In Hyginus's version of
the legend, founded apparently on a tragedy by some follower of
Euripides, Antigone, on being handed over by Creon to her lover Haemon
to be slain, was secretly carried off by him, and concealed in a
shepherd's hut, where she bore him a son Maeon. When the boy grew up, he
went to some funeral games at Thebes, and was recognized by the mark of
a dragon on his body. This led to the discovery that Antigone was still
alive. Heracles pleaded in vain with Creon for Haemon, who slew both
Antigone and himself, to escape his father's vengeance. On a painted
vase the scene of the intercession of Heracles is represented
(Heydermann, _Über eine nacheuripideische Antigone_, 1868). Antigone
placing the body of Polyneices on the funeral pile occurs on a
sarcophagus in the villa Pamfili in Rome, and is mentioned in the
description of an ancient painting by Philostratus (_Imag._ ii. 29), who
states that the flames consuming the two brothers burnt apart,
indicating their unalterable hatred, even in death.

(2) A second Antigone was the daughter of Eurytion, king of Phthia, and
wife of Peleus. Her husband, having accidentally killed Eurytion in the
Calydonian boar hunt, fled and obtained expiation from Acastus, whose
wife made advances to Peleus. Finding that her affection was not
returned, she falsely accused Peleus of infidelity to his wife, who
thereupon hanged herself (Apollodorus, iii. 13).