ANTIMONY (symbol Sb, atomic weight 120.2), one of the metallic chemical
elements, included in the same natural family of the elements as
nitrogen, phosphorus, arsenic, and bismuth. Antimony, in the form of its
sulphide, has been known from very early times, more especially in
Eastern countries, reference to it being made in the Old Testament. The
Arabic name for the naturally occurring stibnite is "kohl"; Dioscorides
mentions it under the term [Greek: stimmi], Pliny as _stibium_; and
Geber as _antimonium_. By the German writers it is called _Speissglanz_.
Basil Valentine alludes to it in his _Triumphal Car of Antimony_ (circa
1600), and at a later date describes the preparation of the metal.

Native mineral antimony is occasionally found, and as such was first
recognized in 1748. It usually occurs as lamellar or glanular masses,
with a tin-white colour and metallic lustre, in limestone or in mineral
veins often in association with ores of silver. Distinct crystals are
rarely met with; these are rhombohedral and isomorphous with arsenic and
bismuth; they have a perfect cleavage parallel to the basal plane, c
(111), and are sometimes twinned on a rhombohedral plane, e (110).
Hardness 3-3½ specific gravity 6.63-6.72. Sala in Sweden, Allemont in
Dauphine, and Sarawak in Borneo may be mentioned as some of the
localities for this mineral.

Antimony, however, occurs chiefly as the sulphide, stibnite; to a much
smaller extent it occurs in combination with other metallic sulphides in
the minerals wolfsbergite, boulangerite, bournonite, pyrargyrite, &c.
For the preparation of metallic antimony the crude stibnite is first
liquated, to free it from earthy and siliceous matter, and is then
roasted in order to convert it into oxide. After oxidation, the product
is reduced by heating with carbon, care being taken to prevent any loss
through volatilization, by covering the mass with a layer of some
protective substance such as potash, soda or glauber salt, which also
aids the refining. For rich ores the method of roasting the sulphide
with metallic iron is sometimes employed; carbon and salt or sodium
sulphate being used to slag the iron. Electrolytic methods, in which a
solution of antimony sulphide in sodium sulphide is used as the
electrolyte, have been proposed (see German Patent 67973, and also
Borcher's _Electro-Metallurgie_), but do not yet appear to have been
used on the large scale.

Antimony combines readily with many other metals to form alloys, some of
which find extensive application in the arts. Type-metal is an alloy of
lead with antimony and tin, to which occasionally a small quantity of
copper or zinc is added. The presence of the antimony in this alloy
gives to it hardness, and the property of expanding on solidification,
thus allowing a sharp cast of the letter to be taken. An alloy of tin
and antimony forms the basis of Britannia-metal, small quantities of
copper, lead, zinc or bismuth being added. It is a white metal of bluish
tint and is malleable and ductile. For the linings of brasses, various
white metals are used, these being alloys of copper, antimony and tin,
and occasionally lead.

Antimony is a silvery white, crystalline, brittle metal, and has a high
lustre. Its specific gravity varies from 6.7 to 6.86; it melts at 432°
C. (Dalton), and boils between 1090-1600° C. (T. Carnelley), or above
1300° (V. Meyer). Its specific heat is 0.0523 (H. Kopp). The vapour
density of antimony at 1572° C. is 10.74, and at 1640° C. 9.78 (V.
Meyer, _Berichte_, 1889, 22, p. 725), so that the antimony molecule is
less complex than the molecules of the elements phosphorus and arsenic.
An amorphous modification of antimony can be prepared by heating the
metal in a stream of nitrogen, when it condenses in the cool part of the
apparatus as a grey powder of specific gravity 6.22, melting at 614° C.
and containing 98-99% of antimony (F. Herard, _Comptes Rendus_, 1888,
cvii. 420).

Another form of the metal, known as explosive antimony, was discovered
by G. Gore (_Phil. Trans._, 1858, p. 185; 1859, p. 797; 1862, p. 623),
on electrolysing a solution of antimony trichloride in hydrochloric
acid, using a positive pole of antimony and a negative pole of copper or
platinum wire. It has a specific gravity of 5.78 and always contains
some unaltered antimony trichloride (from 6 to 20%, G. Gore). It is very
unstable, a scratch causing it instantaneously to pass into the stable
form with explosive violence and the development of much heat. Similar
phenomena are exhibited in the electrolysis of solutions of antimony
tribromide and tri-iodide, the product obtained from the tribromide
having a specific gravity of 5.4, and containing 18-20% of antimony
tribromide, whilst that from the tri-iodide has a specific gravity of
5.2-5.8 and contains about 22% of hydriodic acid and antimony
tri-iodide.

The atomic weight of antimony has been determined by the analysis of the
chloride, bromide and iodide. J.P. Cooke (_Proc. Amer. Acad._, 1878,
xiii. i) and J. Bongartz (_Berichte_, 1883, 16, p. 1942) obtained the
value 120, whilst F. Pfeiffer (_Ann. Chim. et Phys._ ccix. 173) obtained
the value 121 from the electrolysis of the chloride.

Pure antimony is quite permanent in air at ordinary temperatures, but
when heated in air or oxygen it burns, forming the trioxide. It
decomposes steam at a red heat, and burns (especially when finely
powdered) in chlorine. Dilute hydrochloric acid is without action on it,
but on warming with the concentrated acid, antimony trichloride is
formed; it dissolves in warm concentrated sulphuric acid, the sulphate
Sb2(SO4)3 being formed. Nitric acid oxidizes antimony either to the
trioxide Sb4O6 or the pentoxide Sb2O5, the product obtained depending on
the temperature and concentration of the acid. It combines directly with
sulphur and phosphorus, and is readily oxidized when heated with
metallic oxides (such as litharge, mercuric oxide, manganese dioxide,
&c.). Antimony and its salts may be readily detected by the orange
precipitate of antimony sulphide which is produced when sulphuretted
hydrogen is passed through their acid solutions, and also by the Marsh
test (see ARSENIC); in this latter case the black stain produced is not
soluble in bleaching powder solution. Antimony compounds when heated on
charcoal with sodium carbonate in the reducing flame give brittle beads
of metallic antimony, and a white incrustation of the oxide. The
antimonious compounds are decomposed on addition of water, with
formation of basic salts.

Antimony may be estimated quantitatively by conversion into the
sulphide; the precipitate obtained is dried at 100° C. and heated in a
current of carbon dioxide, or it may be converted into the tetroxide by
nitric acid.

Antimony, like phosphorus and arsenic, combines directly with hydrogen.
The compound formed, antimoniuretted hydrogen or stibine, SbH3, may also
be prepared by the action of hydrochloric acid on an alloy of antimony
and zinc, or by the action of nascent hydrogen on antimony compounds. As
prepared by these methods it contains a relatively large amount of
hydrogen, from which it can be freed by passing through a tube immersed
in liquid air, when it condenses to a white solid. It is a poisonous
colourless gas, with a characteristic offensive smell. In its general
behaviour it resembles arsine, burning with a violet flame and being
decomposed by heat into its constituent elements. When passed into
silver nitrate solution it gives a black precipitate of silver
antimonide, SbAg3. It is decomposed by the halogen elements and also by
sulphuretted hydrogen. All three hydrogen atoms are replaceable by
organic radicals and the resulting compounds combine with compounds of
the type RCl, RBr and RI to form stibonium compounds.

  There are three known oxides of antimony, the trioxide Sb4O6 which is
  capable of combining with both acids and bases to form salts, the
  tetroxide Sb2O4 and the pentoxide Sb2O5. Antimony trioxide occurs as
  the minerals valentinite and senarmontite, and can be artificially
  prepared by burning antimony in air; by heating the metal in steam to
  a bright red heat; by oxidizing melted antimony with litharge; by
  decomposing antimony trichloride with an aqueous solution of sodium
  carbonate, or by the action of dilute nitric acid on the metal. It is
  a white powder, almost insoluble in water, and when volatilized,
  condenses in two crystalline forms, either octahedral or prismatic. It
  is insoluble in sulphuric and nitric acids, but is readily soluble in
  hydrochloric and tartaric acids and in solutions of the caustic
  alkalies. On strongly heating in air it is converted into the
  tetroxide. The corresponding hydroxide, orthoantimonious acid,
  Sb(OH)3, can be obtained in a somewhat impure form by precipitating
  tartar emetic with dilute sulphuric acid; or better by decomposing
  antimonyl tartaric acid with sulphuric acid and drying the
  precipitated white powder at 100° C. Antimony tetroxide is formed by
  strongly heating either the trioxide or pentoxide. It is a nonvolatile
  white powder, and has a specific gravity of 6.6952; it is insoluble in
  water and almost so in acids--concentrated hydrochloric acid
  dissolving a small quantity. It is decomposed by a hot solution of
  potassium bitartrate. Antimony pentoxide is obtained by repeatedly
  evaporating antimony with nitric acid and heating the resulting
  antimonic acid to a temperature not above 275° C.; by heating antimony
  with red mercuric oxide until the mass becomes yellow (J. Berzelius);
  or by evaporating antimony trichloride to dryness with nitric acid. It
  is a pale yellow powder (of specific gravity 6.5), which on being
  heated strongly gives up oxygen and forms the tetroxide. It is
  insoluble in water, but dissolves slowly in hydrochloric acid. It
  possesses a feeble acid character, giving metantimoniates when heated
  with alkaline carbonates.

  Orthoantimonic acid, H3SbO4, is obtained by the decomposition of its
  potassium salt with nitric acid (A. Geuther); or by the addition of
  water to the pentachloride, the precipitate formed being dried over
  sulphuric acid (P. Conrad, _Chem. News_, 1879, xl. 198). It is a white
  powder almost insoluble in water and nitric acid, and when heated, is
  first converted into metantimonic acid, HSbO3, and then into the
  pentoxide Sb2O5. Pyroantimonic acid, H4Sb2O7 (the metantimonic acid of
  E. Frémy), is obtained by decomposing antimony pentachloride with hot
  water, and drying the precipitate so obtained at 100° C. It is a white
  powder which is more soluble in water and acids than orthoantimonic
  acid. It forms two series of salts, of the types M2H2Sb2O7 and
  M4Sb2O7. Metantimonic acid, HSbO3, can be obtained by heating
  orthoantimonic acid to 175° C., or by long fusion of antimony with
  antimony sulphide and nitre. The fused mass is extracted with water,
  nitric acid is added to the solution, and the precipitate obtained
  washed with water (J. Berzelius). It is a white powder almost
  insoluble in water. On standing with water for some time it is slowly
  converted into the ortho-acid.

  Compounds of antimony with all the halogen elements are known, one
  atom of the metal combining with three or five atoms of the halogen,
  except in the case of bromine, where only the tribromide is known. The
  majority of these halide compounds are decomposed by water, with the
  formation of basic salts. Antimony trichloride ("Butter of Antimony"),
  SbCl3, is obtained by burning the metal in chlorine; by distilling
  antimony with excess of mercuric chloride; and by fractional
  distillation of antimony tetroxide or trisulphide in hydrochloric acid
  solution. It is a colourless deliquescent solid of specific gravity
  3.06; it melts at 73.2° C. (H. Kopp) to a colourless oil; and boils at
  223° (H. Capitaine). It is soluble in alcohol and in carbon
  bisulphide, and also in a small quantity of water; but with an excess
  of water it gives a precipitate of various oxychlorides, known as
  powder of algaroth (q.v.). These precipitated oxychlorides on
  continued boiling with water lose all their chlorine and ultimately
  give a residue of antimony trioxide. It combines with chlorides of the
  alkali metals to form double salts, and also with barium, calcium,
  strontium, and magnesium chlorides. Antimony pentachloride, SbCl5 is
  prepared by heating the trichloride in a current of chlorine. It is a
  nearly colourless fuming liquid of unpleasant smell, which can be
  solidified to a mass of crystals melting at -6°C. It dissociates into
  the trichloride and chlorine when heated. It combines with water,
  forming the hydrates SbCl5·H2O and SbCl5·4H2O; it also combines with
  phosphorus oxychloride, hydrocyanic acid, and cyanogen chloride. In
  chloroform solution it combines with anhydrous oxalic acid to form a
  compound, Sb2Cl8(C2O4), which is to be considered as
  tetra-chlorstibonium oxalate

    COOSbCl4
    |
    COOSbCl4

  (R. Anschütz and Evans, _Annalen_, 1887, ccxxxix. 235). Antimonyl
  chloride, SbOCl, is produced by the decomposition of one part of the
  trichloride with four parts of water. Prepared in this way it contains
  a small quantity of the unaltered chloride, which can be removed by
  ether or carbon bisulphide. It is a white powder insoluble in water,
  alcohol and ether. On heating, it is converted into the oxychloride
  Sb4O5Cl2 (Sb2O3·SbOCl). Antimony oxychloride, SbOCl3, is formed by
  addition of the calculated quantity of water to ice-cooled antimony
  pentachloride, SbCl5 + H2O = SbOCl3 + 2HCl. It forms a yellowish
  crystalline precipitate which in moist air goes to a thick liquid.
  Compounds of composition, SbOCl3·2SbCl5 and SbO2Cl·2SbOCl3, have also
  been described (W.C. Williams, _Chem. News_. 1871, xxiv. 234).

  Antimony tribromide, SbBr3, and tri-iodide, SbI3, may be prepared by
  the action of antimony on solutions of bromine or iodine in carbon
  bisulphide. The tribromide is a colourless crystalline mass of
  specific gravity 4.148 (23°), melting at 90° to 94° C. and boiling at
  275.4° C. (H. Kopp). The tri-iodide forms red-coloured crystals of
  specific gravity 4.848 (26°), melting at 165° to 167° C. and boiling
  at 401° C. By the action of water they give oxybromides and oxyiodides
  SbOBr, Sb4O5Br2, SbOI. Antimony penta-iodide, SbI5, is formed by
  heating antimony with excess of iodine, in a sealed tube, to a
  temperature not above 130°C. It forms a dark brown crystalline mass,
  melting at 78° to 79° C., and is easily dissociated on heating.
  Antimony trifluoride, SbF3, is obtained by dissolving the trioxide in
  aqueous hydrofluoric acid or by distilling antimony with mercuric
  fluoride. By rapid evaporation of its solution it may be obtained in
  small prisms. The pentafluoride SbF5 results when metantimonic acid is
  dissolved in hydrofluoric acid, and the solution is evaporated. It
  forms an amorphous gummy mass, which is decomposed by heat.
  Oxyfluorides of composition SbOF and SbOF3 are known.

  Two sulphides of antimony are definitely known, the trisulphide Sb2S3
  and the pentasulphide Sb2S5; a third, the tetrasulphide Sb2S4, has
  also been described, but its existence is doubtful. Antimony
  trisulphide, Sb2S3, occurs as the mineral antimonite or stibnite, from
  which the commercial product is obtained by a process of liquation.
  The amorphous variety may be obtained from the crystalline form by
  dissolving it in caustic potash or soda or in solutions of alkaline
  sulphides, and precipitating the hot solution by dilute sulphuric
  acid. The precipitate is then washed with water and dried at 100° C.,
  by which treatment it is obtained in the anhydrous form. On
  precipitating antimony trichloride or tartar emetic in acid solution
  with sulphuretted hydrogen, an orange-red precipitate of the hydrated
  sulphide is obtained, which turns black on being heated to 200° C The
  trisulphide heated in a current of hydrogen is reduced to the metallic
  state; it burns in air forming the tetroxide, and is soluble in
  concentrated hydrochloric acid, in solutions of the caustic alkalis,
  and in alkaline sulphides. By the union of antimony trisulphide with
  basic sulphides, livers of antimony are obtained. These substances are
  usually prepared by fusing their components together, and are dark
  powders which are less soluble in water the more antimony they
  contain. These thioantimonites are used in the vulcanizing of rubber
  and in the preparation of matches. Antimony pentasulphide, Sb2S5, is
  prepared by precipitating a solution of the pentachloride with
  sulphuretted hydrogen, by decomposing "Schlippe's salt" (q.v.) with an
  acid, or by passing sulphuretted hydrogen into water containing
  antimonic acid. It forms a fine dark orange powder, insoluble in
  water, but readily soluble in aqueous solutions of the caustic alkalis
  and alkaline carbonates. On heating in absence of air, it decomposes
  into the trisulphide and sulphur.

  An antimony phosphide and arsenide are known, as is also a
  thiophosphate, SbPS4, which is prepared by heating together antimony
  trichloride and phosphorus pentasulphide.

  Many organic compounds containing antimony are known. By distilling an
  alloy of antimony and sodium with mythyl iodide, mixed with sand,
  trimethyl stibine, Sb(CH3)3, is obtained; this combines with excess of
  methyl iodide to form tetramethyl stibonium iodide, Sb(CH3)4I. From
  this iodide the trimethyl stibine may be obtained by distillation with
  an alloy of potassium and antimony in a current of carbon dioxide. It
  is a colourless liquid, slightly soluble in water, and is
  spontaneously inflammable. The stibonium iodide on treatment with
  moist silver oxide gives the corresponding tetramethyl stibonium
  hydroxide, Sb(CH3)4OH, which forms deliquescent crystals, of alkaline
  reaction, and absorbs carbon dioxide readily. On distilling trimethyl
  stibine with zinc methyl, antimony tetra-methyl and penta-methyl are
  formed. Corresponding antimony compounds containing the ethyl group
  are known, as is also a tri-phenyl stibine, Sb(C6H5)3, which is
  prepared from antimony trichloride, sodium and monochlorbenzene. See
  Chung Yu Wang, _Antimony_ (1909).

_Antimony in Medicine._--So far back as Basil Valentine and Paracelsus,
antimonial preparations were in great vogue as medicinal agents, and
came to be so much abused that a prohibition was placed upon their
employment by the Paris parlement in 1566. Metallic antimony was
utilized to make goblets in which wine was allowed to stand so as to
acquire emetic properties, and "everlasting" pills of the metal,
supposed to act by contact merely, were administered and recovered for
future use after they had fulfilled their purpose. Antimony compounds
act as irritants both externally and internally. Tartar emetic (antimony
tartrate) when swallowed, acts directly on the wall of the stomach,
producing vomiting, and after absorption continues this effect by its
action on the medulla. It is a powerful cardiac depressant, diminishing
both the force and frequency of the heart's beat. It depresses
respiration, and in large doses lowers temperature. It depresses the
nervous system, especially the spinal cord. It is excreted by all the
secretions and excretions of the body. Thus as it passes out by the
bronchial mucous membrane it increases the amount of secretion and so
acts as an expectorant. On the skin its action is that of a diaphoretic,
and being also excreted by the bile it acts slightly as a cholagogue.
Summed up, its action is that of an irritant, and a cardiac and nervous
depressant. But on account of this depressant action it is to be avoided
for women and children and rarely used for men.

_Toxicology._--Antimony is one of the "protoplasmic" poisons, directly
lethal to all living matter. In acute poisoning by it the symptoms are
almost identical with those of arsenical poisoning, which is much
commoner (See ARSENIC). The post-mortem appearances are also very
similar, but the gastro-intestinal irritation is much less marked and
inflammation of the lungs is more commonly seen. If the patient is not
already vomiting freely the treatment is to use the stomach-pump, or
give sulphate of zinc (gr. 10-30) by the mouth or apomorphine (gr.
1/20-1/10) subcutaneously. Frequent doses of a teaspoonful of tannin
dissolved in water should be administered, together with strong tea and
coffee and mucilaginous fluids. Stimulants may be given subcutaneously,
and the patient should be placed in bed between warm blankets with
hot-water bottles. Chronic poisoning by antimony is very rare, but
resembles in essentials chronic poisoning by arsenic. In its
medico-legal aspects antimonial poisoning is of little and lessening
importance.