ANTI-FEDERALISTS, the name given in the political history of the United
States to those who, after the formation of the federal Constitution of
1787, opposed its ratification by the people of the several states. The
"party" (though it was never regularly organized as such) was composed of
states rights, particularistic, individualistic and radical democratic
elements; that is, of those persons who thought that a stronger
government threatened the sovereignty and prestige of the states, or the
special interests, individual or commercial, of localities, or the
liberties of individuals, or who fancied they saw in the government
proposed a new centralized, disguised "monarchic" power that would only
replace the cast-off despotism of Great Britain. In every state the
opposition to the Constitution was strong, and in two--North Carolina and
Rhode Island--it prevented ratification until the definite establishment
of the new government practically forced their adhesion. The
individualistic was the strongest element of opposition; the necessity,
or at least the desirability, of a bill of rights was almost universally
felt. Instead of accepting the Constitution upon the condition of
amendments,--in which way they might very likely have secured large
concessions,--the Anti-Federalists stood for unconditional rejection, and
public opinion, which went against them, proved that for all its
shortcomings the Constitution was regarded as preferable to the Articles
of Confederation. After the inauguration of the new government, the
composition of the Anti-Federalist party changed. The Federalist (q.v.)
party gradually showed broad-construction, nationalistic tendencies; the
Anti-Federalist party became a strict-construction party and advocated
popular rights against the asserted aristocratic, centralizing tendencies
of its opponent, and gradually was transformed into the
Democratic-Republican party, mustered and led by Thomas Jefferson, who,
however, had approved the ratification of the Constitution and was not,
therefore, an Anti-Federalist in the original sense of that term.

  See O.G. Libby, _Geographical Distribution of the Vote ... on the
  Federal Constitution, 1787-1788_ (University of Wisconsin, Bulletin,
  1894); S.B. Harding, _Contest over the Ratification of the Federal
  Constitution in ... Massachusetts_ (Harvard University Studies, New
  York, 1896); and authorities on political and constitutional history
  in the article UNITED STATES.