ANTIPODES (Gr. [Greek: anti], opposed to, and [Greek: podes], feet), a
term applied strictly to any two peoples or places on opposite sides of
the earth, so situated that a line drawn from the one to the other
passes through the centre of the globe and forms a true diameter. Any
two places having this relation--as London and, approximately, Antipodes
Island, near New Zealand--must be distant from each other by 180° of
longitude, and the one must be as many degrees to the north of the
equator as the other is to the south, in other words, the latitudes are
numerically equal, but one is _north_ and the other _south_. Noon at the
one place is midnight at the other, the longest day corresponds to the
shortest, and mid-winter is contemporaneous with midsummer. In the
calculation of days and nights, midnight on the one side may be regarded
as corresponding to the noon either of the _previous_ or of the
_following_ day. If a voyager sail eastward, and thus anticipate the
sun, his dating will be twelve hours in advance, while the reckoning of
another who has been sailing westward will be as much in arrear. There
will thus be a difference of twenty-four hours between the two when they
meet. To avoid the confusion of dates which would thus arise, it is
necessary to determine a meridian at which dates should be brought into
agreement, i.e. a line the crossing of which would involve the changing
of the name of the day either forwards, when proceeding westwards, or
backwards, when proceeding eastwards. Mariners have generally adopted
the meridian 180° from Greenwich, situated in the Pacific Ocean, as a
convenient line for co-ordinating dates. The so-called "International
Date Line," which is, however, practically only due to American
initiative, is designed to remove certain objections to the meridian of
180° W., the most important of which is that groups of islands lying
about this meridian differ in date by a day although only a few miles
apart. Several forms have been suggested; these generally agree in
retaining the meridian of 180° in the mid Pacific, with a bend in the
north in order to make the Aleutian Islands and Alaska of the same time
as America, and also in the south so as to bring certain of the South
Sea islands into line with Australia and New Zealand.