ANTIOCH. There were sixteen cities known to have been founded under this
name by Hellenistic monarchs; and at least twelve others were renamed
Antioch. But by far the most famous and important in the list was
[Greek: Antiocheia ê epi Daphnae] (mod. _Antakia_), situated on the left
bank of the Orontes, about 20 m. from the sea and its port, Seleucia of
Pieria (_Suedia_). Founded as a Greek city in 300 B.C. by Seleucus
Nicator, as soon as he had assured his grip upon western Asia by the
victory of Ipsus (301), it was destined to rival Alexandria in Egypt as
the chief city of the nearer East, and to be the cradle of gentile
Christianity. The geographical character of the district north and
north-east of the elbow of Orontes makes it the natural centre of Syria,
so long as that country is held by a western power; and only Asiatic,
and especially Arab, dynasties have neglected it for the oasis of
Damascus. The two easiest routes from the Mediterranean, lying through
the Orontes gorge and the Beilan Pass, converge in the plain of the
Antioch Lake (_Balük Geut_ or _El Bahr_) and are met there by (1) the
road from the Amanic Gates (Baghche Pass) and western Commagene, which
descends the valley of the Kara Su, (2) the roads from eastern Commagene
and the Euphratean crossings at Samosata (Samsat) and Apamea Zeugma
(Birejik), which descend the valleys of the Afrin and the Kuwaik, and
(3) the road from the Euphratean ford at Thapsacus, which skirts the
fringe of the Syrian steppe. Travellers by all these roads must proceed
south by the single route of the Orontes valley. Alexander is said to
have camped on the site of Antioch, and dedicated an altar to Zeus
Bottiaeus, which lay in the north-west of the future city. But the first
western sovereign practically to recognize the importance of the
district was Antigonus, who began to build a city, Antigonia, on the
Kara Su a few miles north of the situation of Antioch; but, on his
defeat, he left it to serve as a quarry for his rival Seleucus. The
latter is said to have appealed to augury to determine the exact site of
his projected foundation; but less fantastic considerations went far to
settle it. To build south of the river, and on and under the last east
spur of Casius, was to have security against invasion from the north,
and command of the abundant waters of the mountain. One torrent, the
Onopniktes ("donkey-drowner"), flowed through the new city, and many
other streams came down a few miles west into the beautiful suburb of
Daphne. The site appears not to have been found wholly uninhabited. A
settlement, _Meroe_, boasting a shrine of Anait, called by the Greeks
the "Persian Artemis," had long been located there, and was ultimately
included in the eastern suburbs of the new city; and there seems to have
been a village on the spur (Mt. Silpius), of which we hear in late
authors under the name _Io_, or _Iopolis_. This name was always adduced
as evidence by Antiochenes (e.g. Libanius) anxious to affiliate
themselves to the Attic Ionians--an anxiety which is illustrated by the
Athenian types used on the city's coins. At any rate, Io may have been a
small early colony of trading Greeks (_Javan_). John Malalas mentions
also a village, Bottia, in the plain by the river.

The original city of Seleucus was laid out in imitation of the
"gridiron" plan of Alexandria by the architect, Xenarius. Libanius
describes the first building and arrangement of this city (i. p. 300.
17). The citadel was on Mt. Silpius and the city lay mainly on the low
ground to the north, fringing the river. Two great colonnaded streets
intersected in the centre. Shortly afterwards a second quarter was laid
out, probably on the east and by Antiochus I., which, from an expression
of Strabo, appears to have been the native, as contrasted with the
Greek, town. It was enclosed by a wall of its own. In the Orontes, north
of the city, lay a large island, and on this Seleucus II. Callinicus
began a third walled "city," which was finished by Antiochus III. A
fourth and last quarter was added by Antiochus IV. Epiphanes (175-164
B.C.); and thenceforth Antioch was known as _Tetrapolis_. From west to
east the whole was about 4 m. in diameter and little less from north to
south, this area including many large gardens. Of its population in the
Greek period we know nothing. In the 4th century A.D. it was about
200,000 according to Chrysostom, who probably did not reckon slaves.
About 4 m. west and beyond the suburb, Heraclea, lay the paradise of
Daphne, a park of woods and waters, in the midst of which rose a great
temple to the Pythian Apollo, founded by Seleucus I. and enriched with a
cult-statue of the god, as Musagetes, by Bryaxis. A companion sanctuary
of Hecate was constructed underground by Diocletian. The beauty and the
lax morals of Daphne were celebrated all over the western world; and
indeed Antioch as a whole shared in both these titles to fame. Its
amenities awoke both the enthusiasm and the scorn of many writers of
antiquity.

Antioch became the capital and court-city of the western Seleucid empire
under Antiochus I., its counterpart in the east being Seleucia-on-Tigris;
but its paramount importance dates from the battle of Ancyra (240 B.C.),
which shifted the Seleucid centre of gravity from Asia Minor, and led
indirectly to the rise of Pergamum. Thenceforward the Seleucids resided
at Antioch and treated it as their capital _par excellence_. We know
little of it in the Greek period, apart from Syria (q.v.), all our
information coming from authors of the late Roman time. Among its great
Greek buildings we hear only of the theatre, of which substructures still
remain on the flank of Silpius, and of the royal palace, probably
situated on the island. It enjoyed a great reputation for letters and the
arts (Cicero _pro Archia_, 3); but the only names of distinction in these
pursuits during the Seleucid period, that have come down to us, are
Apollophanes, the Stoic, and one Phoebus, a writer on dreams. The mass of
the population seems to have been only superficially Hellenic, and to
have spoken Aramaic in non-official life. The nicknames which they gave
to their later kings were Aramaic; and, except Apollo and Daphne, the
great divinities of north Syria seem to have remained essentially native,
such as the "Persian Artemis" of Meroe and Atargatis of Hierapolis
Bambyce. We may infer, from its epithet, "Golden," that the external
appearance of Antioch was magnificent; but the city needed constant
restoration owing to the seismic disturbances to which the district has
always been peculiarly liable. The first great earthquake is said by the
native chronicler John Malalas, who tells us most that we know of the
city, to have occurred in 148 B.C., and to have done immense damage. The
inhabitants were turbulent, fickle and notoriously dissolute. In the many
dissensions of the Seleucid house they took violent part, and frequently
rose in rebellion, for example against Alexander Balas in 147 B.C., and
Demetrius II. in 129. The latter, enlisting a body of Jews, punished his
capital with fire and sword. In the last struggles of the Seleucid house,
Antioch turned definitely against its feeble rulers, invited Tigranes of
Armenia to occupy the city in 83, tried to unseat Antiochus XIII. in 65,
and petitioned Rome against his restoration in the following year. Its
wish prevailed, and it passed with Syria to the Roman Republic in 64
B.C., but remained a _civitas libera_.

The Romans both felt and expressed boundless contempt for the hybrid
Antiochenes; but their emperors favoured the city from the first, seeing
in it a more suitable capital for the eastern part of the empire than
Alexandria could ever be, thanks to the isolated position of Egypt. To a
certain extent they tried to make it an eastern Rome. Caesar visited it
in 47 B.C., and confirmed its freedom. A great temple to Jupiter
Capitolinus rose on Silpius, probably at the instance of Octavian, whose
cause the city had espoused. A forum of Roman type was laid out.
Tiberius built two long colonnades on the south towards Silpius. Agrippa
and Tiberius enlarged the theatre, and Trajan finished their work.
Antoninus Pius paved the great east to west artery with granite. A
circus, other colonnades and great numbers of baths were built, and new
aqueducts to supply them bore the names of Caesars, the finest being the
work of Hadrian. The Roman client, King Herod, erected a long _stoa_ on
the east, and Agrippa encouraged the growth of a new suburb south of
this. Under the empire we chiefly hear of the earthquakes which shook
Antioch. One, in A.D. 37, caused the emperor Caligula to send two
senators to report on the condition of the city. Another followed in the
next reign; and in 115, during Trajan's sojourn in the place with his
army of Parthia, the whole site was convulsed, the landscape altered,
and the emperor himself forced to take shelter in the circus for several
days. He and his successor restored the city; but in 526, after minor
shocks, the calamity returned in a terrible form, and thousands of lives
were lost, largely those of Christians gathered to a great church
assembly. We hear also of especially terrific earthquakes on the 29th of
November 528 and the 31st of October 588.

At Antioch Germanicus died in A.D. 19, and his body was burnt in the
forum. Titus set up the Cherubim, captured from the Jewish temple, over
one of the gates. Commodus had Olympic games celebrated at Antioch, and
in A.D. 266 the town was suddenly raided by the Persians, who slew many
in the theatre. In 387 there was a great sedition caused by a new tax
levied by order of Theodosius, and the city was punished by the loss of
its metropolitan status. Zeno, who renamed it Theopolis, restored many
of its public buildings just before the great earthquake of 526, whose
destructive work was completed by the Persian Chosroes twelve years
later. Justinian made an effort to revive it, and Procopius describes
his repairing of the walls; but its glory was past.

The chief interest of Antioch under the empire lies in its relation to
Christianity. Evangelized perhaps by Peter, according to the tradition
upon which the Antiochene patriarchate still rests its claim for primacy
(cf. Acts xi.), and certainly by Barnabas and Saul, its converts were
the first to be called "Christians." They multiplied exceedingly, and by
the time of Theodosius were reckoned by Chrysostom at about 100,000
souls. Between 252 and 300 A.D. ten assemblies of the church were held
at Antioch and it became the residence of the patriarch of Asia. When
Julian visited the place in 362 the impudent population railed at him
for his favour to Jewish and pagan rites, and to revenge itself for the
closing of its great church of Constantine, burned down the temple of
Apollo in Daphne. The emperor's rough and severe habits and his rigid
administration prompted Antiochene lampoons, to which he replied in the
curious satiric _apologia_, still extant, which he called _Misopogon_.
His successor, Valens, who endowed Antioch with a new forum having a
statue of Valentinian on a central column, reopened the great church,
which stood till the sack of Chosroes in 538. Antioch gave its name to a
certain school of Christian thought, distinguished by literal
interpretation of the Scriptures and insistence on the human limitations
of Jesus. Diodorus of Tarsus and Theodore of Mopsuestia were the leaders
of this school. The principal local saint was Simeon Stylites, who
performed his penance on a hill some 40 m. east. His body was brought to
the city and buried in a building erected under the emperor Leo. In A.D.
635, during the reign of Heraclius, Antioch passed into Saracen hands,
and decayed apace for more than 300 years; but in 969 it was recovered
for Byzantium by Michael Burza and Peter the Eunuch. In 1084 the Seljuk
Turks captured it but held it only fourteen years, yielding place to the
crusaders, who besieged it for nine months, enduring frightful
sufferings. Being at last betrayed, it was given to Bohemund, prince of
Tarentum, and it remained the capital of a Latin principality for nearly
two centuries. It fell at last to the Egyptian, Bibars, in 1268, after a
great destruction and slaughter, from which it never revived. Little
remains now of the ancient city, except colossal ruins of aqueducts and
part of the Roman walls, which are used as quarries for modern Antakia;
but no scientific examination of the site has been made. A statue in the
Vatican and a silver statuette in the British Museum perpetuate the type
of its great effigy of the civic Fortune of Antioch--a majestic seated
figure, with Orontes as a youth issuing from under her feet.

ANTAKIA, the modern town, is still of considerable importance. Pop.
about 25,000, including Ansarieh, Jews, and a large body of Christians
of several denominations about 8000 strong. Though superseded by Aleppo
(q.v.) as capital of N. Syria, it is still the centre of a large
district, growing in wealth and productiveness with the draining of its
central lake, undertaken by a French company. The principal cultures are
tobacco, maize and cotton, and the mulberry for silk production.
Liquorice also is collected and exported. In 1822 (as in 1872) Antakia
suffered by earthquake, and when Ibrahim Pasha made it his headquarters
in 1835, it had only some 5000 inhabitants. Its hopes, based on a
Euphrates valley railway, which was to have started from its port of
Suedia (Seleucia), were doomed to disappointment, and it has suffered
repeatedly from visitations of cholera; but it has nevertheless grown
rapidly and will resume much of its old importance when a railway is
made down the lower Orontes valley. It is a centre of American mission
enterprise, and has a British vice-consul.

  See C.O. Miiller, _Antiquitates Antiochenae_ (1839); A. Freund,
  _Beiträge zur antiochenischen ... Stadtchronik_ (1882); R. Forster, in
  _Jahrbuch_ of Berlin Arch. Institute, xii. (1897). Also authorities
  for SYRIA.     (D. G. H.)

SYNODS OF ANTIOCH. Beginning with three synods convened between 264 and
269 in the matter of Paul of Samosata, more than thirty councils were
held in Antioch in ancient times. Most of these dealt with phases of the
Arian and of the Christological controversies. The most celebrated took
place in the summer of 341 at the dedication of the golden Basilica, and
is therefore called _in encaeniis_ ([Greek: en egkainiois]), _in
dedicatione_. Nearly a hundred bishops were present, all from the
Orient, but the bishop of Rome was not represented. The emperor
Constantius attended in person. The council approved three creeds (Hahn,
§§ 153-155). Whether or no the so-called "fourth formula" (Hahn, § 156)
is to be ascribed to a continuation of this synod or to a subsequent but
distinct assembly of the same year, its aim is like that of the first
three; while repudiating certain Arian formulas it avoids the Athanasian
shibboleth "homoousios." The somewhat colourless compromise doubtless
proceeded from the party of Eusebius of Nicomedia, and proved not
inacceptable to the more nearly orthodox members of the synod. The
twenty-five canons adopted regulate the so-called metropolitan
constitution of the church. Ecclesiastical power is vested chiefly in
the metropolitan (later called archbishop), and the semi-annual
provincial synod (cf. Nicaea, canon 5), which he summons and over which
he presides. Consequently the powers of country bishops (_chorepiscopi_)
are curtailed, and direct recourse to the emperor is forbidden. The
sentence of one judicatory is to be respected by other judicatories of
equal rank; re-trial may take place only before that authority to whom
appeal regularly lies (see canons 3, 4, 6). Without due invitation, a
bishop may not ordain, or in any other way interfere with affairs lying
outside his proper territory; nor may he appoint his own successor.
Penalties are set on the refusal to celebrate Easter in accordance with
the Nicene decree, as well as on leaving a church before the service of
the Eucharist is completed. The numerous objections made by eminent
scholars in past centuries to the ascription of these twenty-five canons
to the synod _in encaeniis_ have been elaborately stated and probably
refuted by Hefele. The canons formed part of the _Codex canonum_ used at
Chalcedon in 451 and passed over into the later collections of East and
West.

  The canons are printed in Greek by Mansi ii. 1307 ff., Bruns i. 80
  ff., Lauchert 43 ff., and translated by Hefele, _Councils_, ii. 67 ff.
  and by H.R. Percival in the _Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers_, 2nd
  series, xiv. 108 ff. The four dogmatic formulas are given by G. Ludwig
  Hahn, _Bibliothek der Symbole_, 3rd edition (Breslau, 1897), 183 ff.;
  for translations compare the _Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers_, 2nd
  series, iv. 461 ff., ii. 39 ff., ix. 12, ii. 44, and Hefele, ii. 76
  ff. For full titles see COUNCILS.     (W. W. R.*)