ANTISEPTICS (Gr. [Greek: anti], against, and [Greek: saeptikos],
putrefactive), the name given to substances which are used for the
prevention of bacterial development in animal or vegetable matter. Some
are true germicides, capable of destroying the bacteria, whilst others
merely prevent or inhibit their growth. The antiseptic method of
treating wounds (see SURGERY) was introduced by Lord Lister, and was an
outcome of Pasteur's germ theory of putrefaction. For the growth of
bacteria there must be a certain food supply, moisture, in most cases
oxygen, and a certain minimum temperature (see BACTERIOLOGY). These
conditions have been specially studied and applied in connexion with the
preserving of food (see FOOD PRESERVATION) and in the ancient practice
of embalming the dead, which is the earliest illustration of the
systematic use of antiseptics (see EMBALMING). In early inquiries a
great point was made of the prevention of putrefaction, and work was
done in the way of finding how much of an agent must be added to a given
solution, in order that the bacteria accidentally present might not
develop. But for various reasons this was an inexact method, and to-day
an antiseptic is judged by its effects on pure cultures of definite
pathogenic microbes, and on their vegetative and spore forms. Their
standardization has been effected in many instances, and a water
solution of carbolic acid of a certain fixed strength is now taken as
the standard with which other antiseptics are compared. The more
important of those in use to-day are carbolic acid, the perchloride and
biniodide of mercury, iodoform, formalin, salicylic acid, &c. Carbolic
acid is germicidal in strong solution, inhibitory in weaker ones. The
so-called "pure" acid is applied to infected living tissues, especially
to tuberculous sinuses or wounds, after scraping them, in order to
destroy any part of the tuberculous material still remaining. A solution
of 1 in 20 is used to sterilize instruments before an operation, and
towels or lint to be used for the patient. Care must always be taken to
avoid absorption (see CARBOLIC ACID). The perchloride of mercury is
another very powerful antiseptic used in solutions of strength 1 in
2000, 1 in 1000 and 1 in 500. This or the biniodide of mercury is the
last antiseptic applied to the surgeon's and assistants' hands before an
operation begins. They are not, however, to be used in the disinfection
of instruments, nor where any large abraded surface would favour
absorption. Boracic acid receives no mention here; though it is
popularly known as an antiseptic, it is in reality only a soothing
fluid, and bacteria will flourish comfortably in contact with it. Of the
dry antiseptics iodoform is constantly used in septic or tuberculous
wounds, and it appears to have an inhibitory action on _Bacillus
tuberculosis_. Its power depends on the fact that it is slowly
decomposed by the tissues, and free iodine given off. Among the more
recently introduced antiseptics, chinosol, a yellow substance freely
soluble in water, and lysol, another coal-tar derivative, are much used.
But every antiseptic, however good, is more or less toxic and irritating
to a wounded surface. Hence it is that the "antiseptic" method has been
replaced in the surgery of to-day by the "aseptic" method (see SURGERY),
which relies on keeping free from the invasion of bacteria rather than
destroying them when present.