ANTONIUS, the name of a large number of prominent citizens of ancient
Rome, of the gens Antonia. Antonius the triumvir claimed that his family
was descended from Anton, son of Heracles. Of the Antonii the following
are important.

1. MARCUS ANTONIUS (143-87 B.C.), one of the most distinguished Roman
orators of his time, was quaestor in 113, and praetor in 102 with
proconsular powers, the province of Cilicia being assigned to him. Here
he was so successful against the pirates that a naval triumph was
awarded him. He was consul in 99, censor 97, and held a command in the
Marsic War in 90. An adherent of Sulla, he was put to death by Marius
and Cinna when they obtained possession of Rome (87). Antonius's
reputation for eloquence rests on the authority of Cicero, none of his
orations being extant. He is one of the chief speakers in Cicero's _De
Oratore_.

  Velleius Paterculus ii. 22; Appian, _Bell. Civ._ i. 72; Dio Cassius
  xlv. 47; Plutarch, _Marius_, 44; Cicero, _Orator_, 5, _Brutus_, 37;
  Quintilian, _Instit._ iii. 1, 19; O. Enderlein, _De M. Antonio
  oratore_ (Leipzig, 1882).

2. MARCUS ANTONIUS, nicknamed CRETICUS in derision, elder son of Marcus
Antonius, the "orator," and father of the triumvir. He was praetor in 74
B.C., and received an extraordinary command (similar to that bestowed
upon Pompey by the Gabinian law) to clear the sea of pirates, and
thereby assist the operations against Mithradates VI. He failed in the
task, and made himself unpopular by plundering the provinces (Sallust,
_Hist._ iii., fragments ed. B. Maurenbrecher, p. 108; Velleius
Paterculus ii. 31; Cicero, _In Verrem_, iii. 91). He attacked the
Cretans, who had made an alliance with the pirates, but was totally
defeated, most of his ships being sunk. Diodorus Siculus (xl. 1) states
that he only saved himself by a disgraceful treaty. He died soon
afterwards (72-71) in Crete. All authorities are agreed as to his
avarice and incompetence.

3. GAIUS ANTONIUS, nicknamed HYBRIDA from his half-savage disposition
(Pliny, _Nat. Hist._ viii. 213), second son of Marcus Antonius, the
"orator," and uncle of the triumvir. He was one of Sulla's lieutenants
in the Mithradatic War, and, after Sulla's return, remained in Greece to
plunder with a force of cavalry. In 76 he was tried for his
malpractices, but escaped punishment; six years later he was removed
from the senate by the censors, but soon afterwards reinstated. In spite
of his bad reputation, he was elected tribune in 71, praetor in 66, and
consul with Cicero in 63. He secretly supported Catiline, but Cicero won
him over by promising him the rich province of Macedonia. On the
outbreak of the Catilinarian conspiracy, Antonius was obliged to lead an
army into Etruria, but handed over the command on the day of battle to
Marcus Petreius on the ground of ill-health. He then went to Macedonia,
where he made himself so detested by his oppression and extortions that
he left the province, and was accused in Rome (59) both of having taken
part in the conspiracy and of extortion in his province. It was said
that Cicero had agreed with Antonius to share his plunder. Cicero's
defence of Antonius two years before in view of a proposal for his
recall, and also on the occasion of his trial, increased the suspicion.
In spite of Cicero's eloquence, Antonius was condemned, and went into
exile at Cephallenia. He seems to have been recalled by Caesar, since he
was present at a meeting of the senate in 44, and was censor in 42.

  Cicero, _In Cat._ iii. 6, _pro Flacco_, 38; Plutarch, _Cicero_, 12;
  Dio Cassius xxxvii. 39, 40; xxxviii. 10. On his trial see article in
  Pauly-Wissowa's _Realencyclopadie_.

4. MARCUS ANTONIUS, commonly called MARK ANTONY, the Triumvir, grandson
of Antonius the "orator" and son of Antonius Creticus, related on his
mother's side to Julius Caesar, was born about 83 B.C. Under the
influence of his stepfather, Cornelius Lentulus Sura, he spent a
profligate youth. For a time he co-operated with P. Clodius Pulcher,
probably out of hostility to Cicero, who had caused Lentulus Sura to be
put to death as a Catilinarian; the connexion was severed by a
disagreement arising from his relations with Clodius's wife, Fulvia. In
58 he fled to Greece to escape his creditors. After a short time spent
in attendance on the philosophers at Athens, he was summoned by Aulus
Gabinius, governor of Syria, to take part in the campaigns against
Aristobulus in Palestine, and in support of Ptolemy Auletes in Egypt. In
54 he was with Caesar in Gaul. Raised by Caesar's influence to the
offices of quaestor, augur, and tribune of the plebs, he supported the
cause of his patron with great energy, and was expelled from the
senate-house when the Civil War broke out. Deputy-governor of Italy
during Caesar's absence in Spain (49), second in command in the decisive
battle of Pharsalus (48), and again deputy-governor of Italy while
Caesar was in Africa (47), Antony was second only to the dictator, and
seized the opportunity of indulging in the most extravagant excesses,
depicted by Cicero in the _Philippics_. In 46 he seems to have taken
offence because Caesar insisted on payment for the property of Pompey
which Antony professedly had purchased, but had in fact simply
appropriated. The estrangement was not of long continuance; for we find
Antony meeting the dictator at Narbo the following year, and rejecting
the suggestion of Trebonius that he should join in the conspiracy that
was already on foot. In 44 he was consul with Caesar, and seconded his
ambition by the famous offer of the crown at the festival of Lupercalia
(February 15). After the murder of Caesar on the 15th of March, Antony
conceived the idea of making himself sole ruler. At first he seemed
disposed to treat the conspirators leniently, but at the same time he so
roused the people against them by the publication of Caesar's will and
by his eloquent funeral oration, that they were obliged to leave the
city. He surrounded himself with a bodyguard of Caesar's veterans, and
forced the senate to transfer to him the province of Cisalpine Gaul,
which was then administered by Decimus Junius Brutus, one of the
conspirators. Brutus refused to surrender the province, and Antony set
out to attack him in October 44, But at this time Octavian, whom Caesar
had adopted as his son, arrived from Illyria, and claimed the
inheritance of his "father." Octavian obtained the support of the senate
and of Cicero; and the veteran troops of the dictator flocked to his
standard. Antony was denounced as a public enemy, and Octavian was
entrusted with the command of the war against him. Antony was defeated
at Mutina (43) where he was besieging Brutus. The consuls Aulus Hirtius
and C. Vibius Pansa, however, fell in the battle, and the senate became
suspicious of Octavian, who, irritated at the refusal of a triumph and
the appointment of Brutus to the command over his head, entered Rome at
the head of his troops, and forced the senate to bestow the consulship
upon him (August 19th). Meanwhile, Antony escaped to Cisalpine Gaul,
effected a junction with Lepidus and marched towards Rome with a large
force of infantry and cavalry. Octavian betrayed his party, and came to
terms with Antony and Lepidus. The three leaders met at Bononia and
adopted the title of _Triumviri reipublicae constituendae_ as joint
rulers. Gaul was to belong to Antony, Spain to Lepidus, and Africa,
Sardinia and Sicily to Octavian. The arrangement was to last for five
years. A reign of terror followed; proscriptions, confiscations, and
executions became general; some of the noblest citizens were put to
death, and Cicero fell a victim to Antony's revenge. In the following
year (42) Antony and Octavian proceeded against the conspirators Cassius
and Brutus, and by the two battles of Philippi annihilated the
senatorial and republican parties. Antony proceeded to Greece, and
thence to Asia Minor, to procure money for his veterans and complete the
subjugation of the eastern provinces. On his passage through Cilicia in
41 he fell a victim to the charms of Cleopatra, in whose company he
spent the winter at Alexandria. At length he was aroused by the Parthian
invasion of Syria and the report of an outbreak between Fulvia his wife
and Lucius his brother on the one hand and Octavian on the other. On
arriving in Italy he found that Octavian was already victorious; on the
death of Fulvia, a reconciliation was effected between the triumvirs,
and cemented by the marriage of Antony with Octavia, the sister of his
colleague. A new division of the Roman world was made at Brundusium,
Lepidus receiving Africa, Octavian the west, and Antony the east.
Returning to his province Antony made several attempts to subdue the
Parthians, without any decided success. In 39 he visited Athens, where
he behaved in a most extravagant manner, assuming the attributes of the
god Dionysus. In 37 he crossed over to Italy, and renewed the
triumvirate for five years at a meeting with Octavian. Returning to
Syria, he resumed relations with Cleopatra. His treatment of Octavia,
her brother's desire to get rid of him, and the manner in which he
disposed of kingdoms and provinces in favour of Cleopatra alienated his
supporters. In 32 the senate deprived him of his powers and declared war
against Cleopatra. After two years spent in preparations, Antony was
defeated at the battle of Actium (2nd September 31). Once more he sought
refuge in the society of Cleopatra, who had escaped with sixty ships to
Egypt. He was pursued by his enemies and his troops abandoned him.
Thereupon he committed suicide in the mistaken belief that Cleopatra had
already done so (30 B.C.). Antony had been married in succession to
Fadia, Antonia, Fulvia and Octavia, and left behind him a number of
children.

  See ROME, _History_, II. "The Republic" (_ad fin._); Caesar, _De Bella
  Gallico, De Bella Civili_; Plutarch, Lives of _Antony, Brutus, Cicero,
  Caesar_; Cicero, _Letters_ (ed. Tyrrell and Purser) and _Philippics_;
  Appian, _Bell. Civ._ i.-v.; Dio Cassius xli.-liii. In addition to the
  standard histories, see V. Gardthausen, _Augustus und seine Zeit_
  (Leipzig, 1891-1904); W. Drumann, _Geschichte Roms_ (2nd ed. P.
  Groebe, 1899), i. pp. 46-384; article by Groebe in Pauly-Wissowa's
  _Realencyclopadie_; and a short but vivid sketch by de Quincey in his
  _Essay on the Caesars_.

5. LUCIUS ANTONIUS, youngest son of Marcus Antonius Creticus, and
brother of the triumvir. In 44, as tribune of the people, he brought
forward a law authorizing Caesar to nominate the chief magistrates
during his absence from Rome. After the murder of Caesar, he supported
his brother Marcus. He proposed an agrarian law in favour of the people
and Caesar's veterans, and took part in the operations at Mutina (43).
In 41 he was consul, and had a dispute with Octavian, which led to the
so-called Perusian War, in which he was supported by Fulvia (Mark
Antony's wife), who was anxious to recall her husband from Cleopatra's
court. Later, observing the bitter feelings that had been evoked by the
distribution of land among the veterans of Caesar, Antonius and Fulvia
changed their attitude, and stood forward as the defenders of those who
had suffered from its operation. Antonius marched on Rome, drove out
Lepidus, and promised the people that the triumvirate should be
abolished. On the approach of Octavian, he retired to Perusia in
Etruria, where he was besieged by three armies, and compelled to
surrender (winter of 41). His life was spared, and he was sent by
Octavian to Spain as governor. Nothing is known of the circumstances or
date of his death. Cicero, in his _Philippics_, actuated in great
measure by personal animosity, gives a highly unfavourable view of his
character.

  Appian, _Bellum Civile_, v. 14 ff.; Dio Cassius xlviii. 5-14.

6. GAIUS ANTONIUS, second son of Marcus Antonius Creticus, and brother
of the triumvir. In 49 he was legate of Caesar and, with P. Cornelius
Dolabella, was entrusted with the defence of Illyricum against the
Pompeians. Dolabella's fleet was destroyed; Antonius was shut up in the
island of Curicta and forced to surrender. In 44 he was city praetor,
his brothers Marcus and Lucius being consul and tribune respectively in
the same year. Gaius was appointed to the province of Macedonia, but on
his way thither fell into the hands of M. Junius Brutus on the coast of
Illyria. Brutus at first treated him generously, but ultimately put him
to death (42).

  Plutarch, _Brutus_, 28; Dio Cassius xlvii. 21-24. On the whole family,
  see the articles in Pauly-Wissowa's _Realencyclopadie_, i. pt. 2
  (1894).