ANTONIO, known as "THE PRIOR OF CRATO" (1531-1595), claimant of the
throne of Portugal, was the natural son of Louis (Luis), duke of Beja,
by Yolande (Violante) Gomez, a Jewess, who is said to have died a nun.
His father was a younger son of Emanuel, king of Portugal (1495-1521).
Antonio was educated at Coimbra, and was placed in the order of St John.
He was endowed with the wealthy priory of Crato. Little is known of his
life till 1578. In that year he accompanied King Sebastian (1557-1578)
in his invasion of Morocco, and was taken prisoner by the Moors at the
battle of Alcazar-Kebir, in which the king was slain. Antonio is said to
have secured his release on easy terms by a fiction. He was asked the
meaning of the cross of St John which he wore on his doublet, and
replied that it was the sign of a small benefice which he held from the
pope, and would lose if he were not back by the 1st of January. His
captor, believing him to be a poor man, allowed him to escape for a
small ransom. On his return to Portugal he found that his uncle, the
cardinal Henry, only surviving son of King John III. (1521-1557), had
been recognized as king. The cardinal was old, and was the last
legitimate male representative of the royal line (see PORTUGAL:
_History_). The succession was claimed by Philip II. of Spain. Antonio,
relying on the popular hostility to a Spanish ruler, presented himself
as a candidate. He had endeavoured to prove that his father and mother
had been married after his birth. There was, however, no evidence of the
marriage. Antonio's claim, which was inferior not only to that of Philip
II., but to that of the duchess of Braganza, was not supported by the
nobles or gentry. His partisans were drawn exclusively from the inferior
clergy, the peasants and workmen. The prior endeavoured to resist the
army which Philip II. marched into Portugal to enforce his pretensions,
but was easily routed by the duke of Alva, the Spanish commander, at
Alcantara, on the 25th of August 1580. At the close of the year, or in
the first days of 1581, he fled to France carrying with him the crown
jewels, which included many valuable diamonds. He was well received by
Catherine de' Medici, who had a claim of her own on the crown of
Portugal, and looked upon him as a convenient instrument to be used
against Philip II. By promising to cede the Portuguese colony of Brazil
to her, and by the sale of part of his jewels, Antonio secured means to
fit out a fleet manned by Portuguese exiles and French and English
adventurers. As the Spaniards had not yet occupied the Azores he sailed
to them, but was utterly defeated at sea by the marquis of Santa Cruz
off Saint Michael's on the 27th of July 1582. He now returned to France,
and lived for a time at Ruel near Paris. Peril from the assassins
employed by Philip II. to remove him drove Antonio from one refuge to
another, and he finally came to England. Elizabeth favoured him for much
the same reasons as Catherine de' Medici. In 1589, the year after the
Armada, he accompanied an English expedition under the command of Drake
and Norris to the coast of Spain and Portugal. The force consisted
partly of the queen's ships, and in part of privateers who went in
search of booty. Antonio, with all the credulity of an exile, believed
that his presence would provoke a general rising against Philip II., but
none took place, and the expedition was a costly failure. In 1590 the
pretender left England and returned to France, where he fell into
poverty. His remaining diamonds were disposed of by degrees. The last
and finest was acquired by M. de Sancy, from whom it was purchased by
Sully and included in the jewels of the crown. During his last days he
lived as a private gentleman on a small pension given him by Henry IV.,
and he died in Paris on the 26th of August 1595. He left two
illegitimate sons, and his descendants can be traced till 1687. In
addition to papers published to defend his claims Antonio was the author
of the _Panegyrus Alphonsi Lusitanorum Regis_ (Coimbra, 1550), and of a
cento of the Psalms, _Psalmi Confessionales_ (Paris 1592), which was
translated into English under the title of _The Royal Penitent_ by
Francis Chamberleyn (London, 1659), and into German as _Heilige
Betrachtungen_ (Marburg, 1677).

  AUTHORITIES.--Antonio is frequently mentioned in the French, English,
  and Spanish state papers of the time. A life of him, attributed to
  Gomes Vasconcellos de Figueredo, was published in a French translation
  by Mme de Sainctonge at Amsterdam (1696). A modern account of him, _Un
  prétendant portugais au XVI. siècle_, by E. Fournier (Paris, 1852), is
  based on authentic sources. See also _Dom Antonio Prior de
  Crato--notas de bibliographia_, by J. de Aranjo (Lisbon, 1897).
       (D. H.)