ANTONINUS PIUS [TITUS AURELIUS FULVUS BOIONIUS ARRIUS ANTONINUS], (A.D.
86-161), Roman emperor A.D. 138-161, the son of Aurelius Fulvus, a Roman
consul whose family had originally belonged to Nemausus (Nîmes), was born
near Lanuvium on the 19th of September 86. After the death of his father,
he was brought up under the care of Arrius Antoninus, his maternal
grandfather, a man of integrity and culture, and on terms of friendship
with the younger Pliny. Having filled with more than usual success the
offices of quaestor and praetor, he obtained the consulship in 120; he
was next chosen one of the four consulars for Italy, and greatly
increased his reputation by his conduct as proconsul of Asia. He acquired
much influence with the emperor Hadrian, who adopted him as his son and
successor on the 25th of February 138, after the death of his first
adopted son Aelius Verus, on condition that he himself adopted Marcus
Annius Verus, his wife's brother's son, and Lucius, son of Aelius Verus,
afterwards the emperors Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Aelius Verus
(colleague of Marcus Aurelius). A few months afterwards, on Hadrian's
death, he was enthusiastically welcomed to the throne by the Roman
people, who, for once, were not disappointed in their anticipation of a
happy reign. For Antoninus came to his new office with simple tastes,
kindly disposition, extensive experience, a well-trained intelligence and
the sincerest desire for the welfare of his subjects. Instead of
plundering to support his prodigality, he emptied his private treasury to
assist distressed provinces and cities, and everywhere exercised rigid
economy (hence the nickname [Greek: kuminopristaes], "cummin-splitter").
Instead of exaggerating into treason whatever was susceptible of
unfavourable interpretation, he turned the very conspiracies that were
formed against him into opportunities of signalizing his clemency.
Instead of stirring up persecution against the Christians, he extended to
them the strong hand of his protection throughout the empire. Rather than
give occasion to that oppression which he regarded as inseparable from an
emperor's progress through his dominions, he was content to spend all the
years of his reign in Rome, or its neighbourhood. Under his patronage the
science of jurisprudence was cultivated by men of high ability, and a
number of humane and equitable enactments were passed in his name. Of the
public transactions of this period we have but scant information, but, to
judge by what we possess, those twenty-two years were not remarkably
eventful. One of his first acts was to persuade the senate to grant
divine honours to Hadrian, which they had at first refused; this gained
him the title of Pius (dutiful in affection). He built temples, theatres,
and mausoleums, promoted the arts and sciences, and bestowed honours and
salaries upon the teachers of rhetoric and philosophy. His reign was
comparatively peaceful. Insurrections amongst the Moors, Jews, and
Brigantes in Britain were easily put down. The one military result which
is of interest to us now is the building in Britain of the wall of
Antoninus from the Forth to the Clyde. In his domestic relations
Antoninus was not so fortunate. His wife, Faustina, has almost become a
byword for her lack of womanly virtue; but she seems to have kept her
hold on his affections to the last. On her death he honoured her memory
by the foundation of a charity for orphan girls, who bore the name of
_Alimentariae Faustinianae_. He had by her two sons and two daughters;
but they all died before his elevation to the throne, except Annia
Faustina, who became the wife of Marcus Aurelius. Antoninus died of fever
at Lorium in Etruria, about 12 m. from Rome, on the 7th of March 161,
giving the keynote to his life in the last word that he uttered when the
tribune of the night-watch came to ask the password--_aequanimitas_.

  The only account of his life handed down to us is that of Julius
  Capitolinus, one of the _Scriptores Historiae Augustae_. See
  Bossart-Mueller, _Zur Geschichte des Kaisers A._ (1868); Lacour-Gayet,
  _A. le Pieux et son Temps_ (1888); Bryant, _The Reign of Antonine_
  (Cambridge Historical Essays, 1895); P.B. Watson, _Marcus Aurelius
  Antoninus_ (London, 1884), chap. ii.