ANTONELLI, GIACOMO (1806-1876), Italian cardinal, was born at Sonnino on
the 2nd of April 1806. He was educated for the priesthood, but, after
taking minor orders, gave up the idea of becoming a priest, and chose an
administrative career. Created secular prelate, he was sent as apostolic
delegate to Viterbo, where he early manifested his reactionary
tendencies in an attempt to stamp out Liberalism. Recalled to Rome in
1841, he entered the office of the papal secretary of state, but four
years later was appointed pontifical treasurer-general. Created cardinal
(11th June 1847), he was chosen by Pius IX. to preside over the council
of state entrusted with the drafting of the constitution. On the 10th of
March 1848 Antonelli became premier of the first constitutional ministry
of Pius IX., a capacity in which he displayed consummate duplicity. Upon
the fall of his cabinet Antonelli created for himself the governorship
of the sacred palaces in order to retain constant access to and
influence over the pope. After the assassination of Pellegrino Rossi
(15th November 1848) he arranged the flight of Pius IX. to Gaeta, where
he was appointed secretary of state. Notwithstanding promises to the
powers, he restored absolute government upon returning to Rome (12th
April 1850) and violated the conditions of the surrender by wholesale
imprisonment of Liberals. In 1855 he narrowly escaped assassination. As
ally of the Bourbons of Naples, from whom he had received an annual
subsidy, he attempted, after 1860, to facilitate their restoration by
fomenting brigandage on the Neapolitan frontier. To the overtures of
Ricasoli in 1861, Pius IX., at Antonelli's suggestion, replied with the
famous "_Non possumus_," but subsequently (1867) accepted, too late,
Ricasoli's proposal concerning ecclesiastical property. After the
September Convention (1864) Antonelli organized the Legion of Antibes to
replace French troops in Rome, and in 1867 secured French aid against
Garibaldi's invasion of papal territory. Upon the reoccupation of Rome
by the French after Mentana, Antonelli again ruled supreme, but upon the
entry of the Italians in 1870 was obliged to restrict his activity to
the management of foreign relations. He wrote, with papal approval, the
letter requesting the Italians to occupy the Leonine city, and obtained
from the Italians payment of the Peter's pence (5,000,000 lire)
remaining in the papal exchequer, as well as 50,000 scudi--the first and
only instalment of the Italian allowance (subsequently fixed by the Law
of Guarantees, March 21, 1871) ever accepted by the Holy See. At
Antonelli's death the Vatican finances were found to be in disorder,
with a deficit of 45,000,000 lire. His personal fortune, accumulated
during office, was considerable, and was bequeathed almost entirely to
members of his family. To the Church he left little and to the pope only
a trifling souvenir. From 1850 until his death he interfered little in
affairs of dogma and church discipline, although he addressed to the
powers circulars enclosing the Syllabus (1864) and the acts of the
Vatican Council (1870). His activity was devoted almost exclusively to
the struggle between the papacy and the Italian _Risorgimento_, the
history of which is comprehensible only when the influence exercised by
his unscrupulous, grasping and sinister personality is fully taken into
account. He died on the 6th of November 1876.