ANTRAIGUES, EMMANUEL HENRI LOUIS ALEXANDRE DE LAUNAY, COMTE D' (c.
1755-1812), French publicist and political adventurer, was a nephew of
François Emmanuel de Saint-Priest (1735-1821), one of the last ministers
of Louis XVI. He was a cavalry captain, but, having little taste for the
army, left it and travelled extensively, especially in the East. On his
return to Paris, he sought the society of philosophers and artists,
visited Voltaire at Ferney for three months, but was more attracted by
J.J. Rousseau, with whom he became somewhat intimate. He published a
_Mémoire sur les états-généraux_, supported the Revolution
enthusiastically when it broke out, was elected deputy, and took the
oath to the constitution; but he suddenly changed his mind completely,
became a defender of the monarchy and emigrated in 1790. He was the
secret agent of the comte de Provence (Louis XVIII.) at different courts
of Europe, and at the same time received money from the courts he
visited. He published a number of pamphlets, _Des monstres ravagent
partout_, _Point d'accommodement_, &c. At Venice, where he was attaché
to the Russian legation, he was arrested in 1797, but escaped to Russia.
Sent as Russian attaché to Dresden, he published a violent pamphlet
against Napoleon I., and was expelled by the Saxon government. He then
went to London, and it was universally believed that he betrayed the
secret articles of the treaty of Tilsit to the British cabinet, but his
recent biographer, Pingaud, contests this. In 1812 he and his wife
Madame Saint-Huberty, an operatic singer, were assassinated by an
Italian servant whom they had dismissed. It has never been known whether
the murder was committed from private or political motives.

  See H. Vaschalde, _Notice bibliographique sur Louis Alexandre de
  Launay, comte d'Antraigues, sa vie et ses oeuvres_; Léonce Pingaud,
  _Un Agent secret sous la révolution et l'empire, le comte
  d'Antraigues_ (Paris, 1893); Édouard de Goncourt, _La Saint-Huberty et
  l'opéra au XVIII^e siècle_.