ANTRIM, a county in the north-east corner of Ireland, in the province of
Ulster. It is bounded N. and E. by the narrow seas separating Ireland
from Scotland, the Atlantic Ocean and Irish Sea, S. by Belfast Lough and
the Lagan river dividing it from the county Down, W. by Lough Neagh,
dividing it from the counties Armagh and Tyrone, and by county
Londonderry, the boundary with which is the river Bann.

The area is 751,965 acres or about 1175 sq. m. A large portion of the
county is hilly, especially in the east, where the highest elevations
are attained, though these are nowhere great. The range runs north and
south, and, following this direction the highest points are Knocklayd
(1695 ft.), Slieveanorra (1676), Trostan (1817), Slemish (1457), and
Divis (1567). The inland slope is gradual, but on the northern shore the
range terminates in abrupt and almost perpendicular declivities, and
here, consequently, some of the finest coast scenery in the island is
found, widely differing, with its unbroken lines of cliffs, from the
indented coast-line of the west. The most remarkable cliffs are those
formed of perpendicular basaltic columns, extending for many miles, and
most strikingly displayed in Fair Head and the celebrated Giant's
Causeway. From the eastern coast the hills rise instantly but less
abruptly, and the indentations are wider and deeper. On both coasts
there are several frequented watering-places, of which may be mentioned
on the north Portrush (with well-known golf links), Port Ballintrae and
Ballycastle; on the east Cushendun, Cushendall and Milltown on Red Bay,
Carn Lough and Glenarm, Larne, and Whitehead on Belfast Lough. All are
somewhat exposed to the easterly winds prevalent in spring. The only
island of size is Rathlin, off Ballycastle, 6½ m. in length by 1½ in
breadth, 7 m. from the coast, and of similar basaltic and limestone
formation to that of the mainland. It is partially arable, and supports
a small population. The so-called Island Magee is a peninsula separating
Larne Lough from the Irish Channel.

The valleys of the Bann and Lagan, with the intervening shores of Lough
Neagh, form the fertile lowlands. These two rivers, both rising in
county Down, are the only ones of importance. The latter flows to
Belfast Lough, the former drains Lough Neagh, which is fed by a number
of smaller streams, among them the Crumlin, whose waters have petrifying
powers. The fisheries of the Bann and of Lough Neagh (especially for
salmon) are of value both commercially and to sportsmen, the small town
of Toome, at the outflow of the river, being the centre. Immediately
below this point lies Lough Beg, the "Small Lake," about 15 ft. lower
than Lough Neagh, which it excels in the pleasant scenery of its banks.
The smaller streams are of great use in working machinery.

_Geology._--On entering the county at the south, a scarped barrier of
hills is seen beyond the Lagan valley, marking the edge of the basaltic
plateaus, and running almost continuously round the coast to Red Bay.
Below it, Triassic beds are exposed from Lisburn to Island Magee, giving
sections of red sands and marls. Above these, marine Rhaetic beds appear
at intervals, notably near Larne, where they are succeeded by Lower Lias
shales and limestones. At Portrush, the Lower Lias is seen on the shore,
crowded with ammonites, but silicified and metamorphosed by invading
dolerite. The next deposits, as the scarps are approached, are
greensands of "Selbornian" age, succeeded by Cenomanian, and locally by
Turonian, sands. The Senonian series is represented by the White
Limestone, a hardened chalk with flints, which is often glauconitic and
conglomeratic at the base. Denudation in earliest Eocene times has
produced flint gravels above the chalk, and an ancient stream deposit of
chalk pebbles occurs at Ballycastle. The volcanic fissures that allowed
of the upwelling of basalt are represented by numerous dykes, many
cutting the earlier lava-flows as well as all the beds below them. The
accumulations of lava gave rise to the plateaus which form almost the
whole interior of the county. In a quiet interval, the Lower Eocene
plant-beds of Glenarm and Ballypalady were formed in lakes, where
iron-ores also accumulated. Rhyolites were erupted locally near Tardree,
Ballymena and Glenarm. The later basalts are especially marked by
columnar jointing, which determines the famous structures of the Giant's
Causeway and the coast near Bengore Head. Volcanic necks may be
recognized at Carrick-a-rede, in the intrusive mass of dolerite at
Slemish, at Carnmoney near Belfast, and a few other points. Fair Head is
formed of intrusive dolerite, presenting a superb columnar seaward face.
Faulting, probably in Pliocene times, lowered the basaltic plateaus to
form the basin of Lough Neagh, leaving the eastern scarp at heights
ranging up to 1800 ft. The glens of Antrim are deep notches cut by
seaward-running streams through the basalt scarp, their floors being
formed of Triassic or older rocks. Unlike most Irish counties, Antrim
owes its principal features to rocks of Mesozoic and Cainozoic age. At
Cushendun, however, a coarse conglomerate is believed to be Devonian,
while Lower Carboniferous Sandstones, with several coal-seams, form a
small productive basin at Ballycastle. The dolerite of Fair Head sends
off sheets along the bedding-planes of these carboniferous strata.
"Dalradian" schists and gneisses, with some dark limestones, come out in
the north-east of the county, forming a moorland-region between
Cushendun and Ballycastle. The dome of Knocklayd, capped by an outlier
of chalk and basalt, consists mostly of this far more ancient series.
Glacial gravels are well seen near Antrim town, and as drumlins between
Ballymena and Ballycastle. The drift-phenomena connected with the flow
of ice from Scotland are of special interest. Recently elevated marine
clays, of post-glacial date, fringe the south-eastern coast, while
gravels with marine shells, side by side with flint implements chipped
by early man, have been lifted some 20 ft. above sea-level near Larne.

Rock-salt some 80 ft. thick is mined in the Trias near Carrickfergus.
The Keuper clays yield material for bricks. Bauxite, probably derived
from the decay of lavas, is found between Glenarm and Broughshane,
associated with brown and red pisolitic iron-ores; both these materials
are worked commercially. Bauxite occurs also near Ballintoy. The
Ballycastle coal is raised and sold locally.

_Industries._--The climate is very temperate. The soil varies greatly
according to the district, being in some cases a rich loam, in others a
chalky marl, and elsewhere showing a coating of peat. The proportion of
barren land to the total area is roughly as 1 to 9; and of tillage to
pasture as 2 to 3. Tillage is therefore, relatively to other counties,
well advanced, and oats and potatoes are largely, though decreasingly,
cultivated. Flax is a less important crop than formerly. The numbers of
cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry are generally increasing. Dutch,
Ayrshire and other breeds are used to improve the breed of cattle by
crossing. Little natural wood remains in the county, but plantations
flourish on the great estates, and orchards have proved successful.

The linen manufacture is the most important industry. Cotton-spinning by
jennies was first introduced by Robert Joy and Thomas M'Cabe of Belfast
in 1777; and an estimate made twenty-three years later showed upwards of
27,000 hands employed in this industry within 10 m. of Belfast, which
remains the centre for it. Women are employed in the working of patterns
on muslin. There are several paper-mills at Bushmills in the north;
whisky-distilling is carried on; and there are valuable sea-fisheries
divided between the district of Ballycastle and Carrickfergus, while the
former is the headquarters of a salmon-fishery district. The workings at
the Ballycastle collieries are probably the oldest in Ireland. In 1770
the miners accidentally discovered a complete gallery, which has been
driven many hundred yards into the bed of coal, branching into
thirty-six chambers dressed quite square, and in a workman-like manner.
No tradition of the mine having been formerly worked remained in the
neighbourhood. The coal of some of the beds is bituminous, and of others
anthracite.

_Communications._--Except that the Great Northern railway line from
Belfast to the south and west runs for a short distance close to the
southern boundary of the county, with a branch from Lisburn to the town
of Antrim, the principal lines of communication are those of the
Northern Counties system, under the control of the Midland railway of
England. The chief routes are:--Belfast, Antrim, Ballymena (and thence
to Coleraine and Londonderry); a line diverging from this at White Abbey
to Carrickfergus and Larne, the port for Stranraer in Scotland; branches
from Ballymena to Larne and to Parkmore; and from Coleraine to Portrush.
The Ballycastle railway runs from Ballymoney to Ballycastle on the north
coast; and the Giant's Causeway and Portrush is an electric railway (the
first to be worked in the United Kingdom). The Lagan Canal connects
Lough Neagh with Belfast Lough.

_Population and Administration._--The population in 1891 was 208,010,
and in 1901, 196,090. The county is among those least seriously affected
by emigration. Of the total about 50% are Presbyterians, about 20% each
Protestant Episcopalians and Roman Catholics; Antrim being one of the
most decidedly Protestant counties in Ireland. Of the Presbyterians the
greater part are in connexion with the General Synod of Ulster, and the
other are Remonstrants, who separated from the Synod in 1829, or United
Presbyterians. The principal towns are Antrim (pop. 1826), Ballymena
(10,886), Ballymoney (2952), Carrickfergus (4208), Larne (6670), Lisburn
(11,461) and Portrush (1941). Belfast though constituting a separate
county ranks as the metropolis of the district. Ballyclare, Bushmills,
Crumlin, Portglenone and Randalstown are among the lesser towns. Belfast
and Larne are the chief ports. The county comprises 14 baronies and 79
civil parishes and parts of parishes. The constabulary force has its
headquarters at Ballymena. The assize town is Belfast, and quarter
sessions are held at Ballymena, Ballymoney, Belfast, Larne and Lisburn.
The county is divided between the Protestant dioceses of Derry and Down,
and the Roman Catholic dioceses of Down and Connor, and Dromore. It is
divided into north, mid, east and south parliamentary divisions, each
returning one member.

_History and Antiquities._--At what date the county of Antrim was formed
is not known, but it appears that a certain district bore this name
before the reign of Edward II. (early 14th century), and when the
shiring of Ulster was undertaken by Sir John Perrot in the 16th century,
Antrim and Down were already recognized divisions, in contradistinction
to the remainder of the province. The earliest known inhabitants were of
Celtic origin, and the names of the townlands or subdivisions, supposed
to have been made in the 13th century, are pure Celtic. Antrim was
exposed to the inroads of the Danes, and also of the northern Scots, who
ultimately effected permanent settlements. The antiquities of the county
consist of cairns, mounts or forts, remains of ecclesiastical and
military structures, and round towers. The principal cairns are: one on
Colin mountain, near Lisburn; one on Slieve True, near Carrickfergus;
and two on Colinward. The cromlechs most worthy of notice are: one near
Cairngrainey, to the north-east of the old road from Belfast to
Templepatrick; the large cromlech at Mount Druid, near Ballintoy; and
one at the northern extremity of Island Magee. The mounts, forts and
intrenchments are very numerous. There are three round towers: one at
Antrim, one at Armoy, and one on Ram Island in Lough Neagh, only that at
Antrim being perfect. There are some remains of the ecclesiastic
establishments at Bonamargy, where the earls of Antrim are buried,
Kells, Glenarm, Glynn, Muckamore and White Abbey. The noble castle of
Carrickfergus is the only one in perfect preservation. There are,
however, remains of other ancient castles, as Olderfleet, Cam's,
Shane's, Glenarm, Garron Tower, Redbay, &c., but the most interesting of
all is the castle of Dunluce, remarkable for its great extent and
romantic situation. Mount Slemish, about 8 m. east of Ballymena, is
notable as being the scene of St Patrick's early life. Island Magee had,
besides antiquarian remains, a notoriety as a home of witchcraft, and
was the scene of an act of reprisal for the much-disputed massacre of
Protestants about 1641, by the soldiery of Carrickfergus.