APATITE, a widely distributed mineral, which, when found in large
masses, is of considerable economic value as a phosphate. As a mineral
species it was first recognized by A.G. Werner in 1786 and named by him
from the Greek [Greek: apatan], to deceive, because it had previously
been mistaken for other minerals, such as beryl, tourmaline, chrysolite,
amethyst, &c. Although long known to consist mainly of calcium
phosphate, it was not until 1827 that G. Rose found that fluorine or
chlorine is an essential constituent. Two chemical varieties of apatite
are to be distinguished, namely a fluor-apatite, (CaF)Ca4P3O12, and a
chlor-apatite, (CaCl)Ca4P3O12: the former, which is much the commoner,
contains 42.3% of phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5) and 3.8% fluorine, and the
latter 4.10 P2O5 and 6.8% chlorine. Fluorine and chlorine replace each
other in indefinite proportions, and they may also be in part replaced
by hydroxyl, so that the general formula becomes [Ca (F, Cl, OH)]
Ca4P3O12, in which the univalent group Ca(F, Cl, OH) takes the place of
one hydrogen atom in orthophosphoric acid H3PO4. The formula is
sometimes written in the form 3Ca3(PO4)2 + CaF2. Mangan-apatite is a
variety in which calcium is largely replaced by manganese (up to 10%
MnO). Cerium, didymium, yttrium, &c., oxides may also sometimes be
present, in amounts up to 5%.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Apatite frequently occurs as beautifully developed crystals, sometimes a
foot or more in length, belonging to that division of the hexagonal
system in which there is pyramidal hemi-hedrism. In this type of
symmetry, of which apatite is the best example, there is only one plane
of symmetry, which is perpendicular to the hexad axis. The arrangement
of the pyramidal faces n and u in fig. 2 show the hemihedral character
and absence of the full number of planes and axes of symmetry. Fig. 2
represents a highly modified crystal from St Gotthard; a more common
form is shown in fig. 1, which is bounded by the hexagonal prism m,
hexagonal bipyramid x and basal pinacoid c.

In its general appearance, apatite exhibits wide variations. Crystals
may be colourless and transparent or white and opaque, but are often
coloured, usually some shade of green or brown, occasionally violet,
sky-blue, yellow, &c. The lustre is vitreous, inclining to sub-resinous.
There is an imperfect cleavage parallel to the basal pinacoid, and the
fracture is conchoidal. Hardness 5, specific gravity 3.2.

Yellowish-green prismatic crystals from Jumilla in Murcia in Spain have
long been known under the name asparagus-stone. Lazurapatite is a
sky-blue variety found as crystals with lapis-lazuli in Siberia; and
moroxite is the name given to dull greenish-blue crystals from Norway
and Canada. Francolite, from Wheal Franco, near Tavistock in Devonshire,
and also from several Cornish mines, occurs as crystallized stalactitic
masses. In addition to these crystallized varieties, there are massive
varieties, fibrous, concretionary, stalactitic, or earthy in form, which
are included together under the name phosphorite (q.v.), and it is these
massive varieties, together with various rock-phosphates (phosphatic
nodules, coprolites, guano, &c.) which are of such great economic
importance: crystallized apatite is mined for phosphates only in Norway
and Canada.

With regard to its mode of occurrence, apatite is found under a variety
of conditions. In igneous rocks of all kinds it is invariably present in
small amounts as minute acicular crystals, and was one of the first
constituents of the rock to crystallize out from the magma. The
extensive deposits of chlor-apatite near Kragerö and Bamle, near Brevik,
in southern Norway, are in connexion with gabbro, the felspar of which
has been altered, by emanations containing chlorine, to scapolite, and
titanium minerals have been developed. The apatite occurring in
connexion with granite and veins of tin-stone is, on the other hand, a
fluor-apatite, and, like the other fluorine-bearing minerals
characteristic of tin-veins, doubtless owes its origin to the emanations
of tin fluoride which gave rise to the tin-ore. Special mention may be
here made of the beautiful violet crystals of fluor-apatite which occur
in the veins of tin-ore in the Erzgebirge, and of the brilliant
bluish-green crystals encrusting cavities in the granite of Luxullian in
Cornwall. Another common mode of occurrence of apatite is in metamorphic
crystalline rocks, especially in crystalline limestones: in eastern
Canada extensive beds of apatite occur in the limestones associated with
the Laurentian gneisses. Still another mode of occurrence is presented
by beautifully developed and transparent crystals found with crystals of
felspar and quartz lining the crevices in the gneiss of the Alps.
Crystallized apatite is also occasionally found in metalliferous veins,
other than those of tin, and in beds of iron ore; whilst if the massive
varieties (phosphorite) be considered many other modes of occurrence
might be cited.     (L. J. S.)