APENNINES (Gr. [Greek: Apenninos], Lat. _Appenninus_--in both cases used
in the singular), a range of mountains traversing the entire peninsula
of Italy, and forming, as it were, the backbone of the country. The name
is probably derived from the Celtic _pen_, a mountain top: it originally
belonged to the northern portion of the chain, from the Maritime Alps to
Ancona; and Polybius is probably the first writer who applied it to the
whole chain, making, indeed, no distinction between the Apennines and
the Maritime Alps, and extending the former name as far as Marseilles.
Classical authors do not differentiate the various parts of the chain,
but use the name as a general name for the whole. The total length is
some 800 m. and the maximum width 70 to 80 m.

_Divisions._--Modern geographers divide the range into three parts,
northern, central and southern.

1. The northern Apennines are generally distinguished (though there is
no real solution of continuity) from the Maritime Alps at the Bocchetta
dell' Altare, some 5 m. W. of Savona on the high road to Turin.[1] They
again are divided into three parts--the Ligurian, Tuscan and Umbrian
Apennines. The Ligurian Apennines extend as far as the pass of La Cisa
in the upper valley of the Magra (anc. _Macra_) above Spezia; at first
they follow the curve of the Gulf of Genoa, and then run east-south-east
parallel to the coast. On the north and north-east lie the broad plains
of Piedmont and Lombardy, traversed by the Po, the chief tributaries of
which from the Ligurian Apennines are the Scrivia (_Olumbria_), Trebbia
(_Trebia_) and Taro (_Tarus_). The Tanaro (_Tanarus_), though largely
fed by tributaries from the Ligurian Apennines, itself rises in the
Maritime Alps, while the rivers on the south and south-west of the range
are short and unimportant. The south side of the range rises steeply
from the sea, leaving practically no coast strip: its slopes are
sheltered and therefore fertile and highly cultivated, and the coast
towns are favourite winter resorts (see RIVIERA). The highest point (the
Monte Bue) reaches 5915 ft. The range is crossed by several
railways--the line from Savona to Turin (with a branch at Ceva for
Acqui), that from Genoa to Ovada and Acqui, the main lines from Genoa to
Novi, the junction for Turin and Milan (both of which[2] pass under the
Monte dei Giovi, the ancient Mons loventius, by which the ancient Via
Postumia ran from Genua to Dertona), and that from Spezia to Parma under
the pass of La Cisa.[3] All these traverse the ridge by long
tunnels--that on the new line from Genoa to Honco is upwards of 5 m. in
length.

The Tuscan Apennines extend from the pass of La Cisa to the sources of
the Tiber. The main chain continues to run in an east-south-east
direction, but traverses the peninsula, the west coast meanwhile turning
almost due south. From the northern slopes many rivers and streams run
north and north-north-east into the Po, the Secchia (_Secia_) and Panaro
(_Scultenna_) being among the most important, while farther east most of
the rivers are tributaries of the Reno (anc. _Rhenus_). Other small
streams, e.g. the Ronco (_Bedesis_) and Montone (_Utis_), which flow
into the sea together east of Ravenna, were also tributaries of the Po;
and the Savio (_Sapis_) and the Rubicon seem to be the only streams from
this side of the Tuscan Apennines that ran directly into the sea in
Roman days. From the south-west side of the main range the Arno (q.v.)
and Serchio run into the Mediterranean. This section of the Apennines is
crossed by two railways, from Pistoia to Bologna and from Florence to
Faenza, and by several good high roads, of which the direct road from
Florence to Bologna over the Futa pass is of Roman origin; and certain
places in it are favourite summer resorts. The highest point of the
chain is Monte Cimone (7103 ft.). The so-called Alpi Apuane (the
_Apuani_ were an ancient people of Liguria), a detached chain south-west
of the valley of the Serchio, rise to a maximum height of 6100 ft. They
contain the famous marble quarries of Carrara. The greater part of
Tuscany, however, is taken up by lower hills, which form no part of the
Apennines, being divided from the main chain by the valleys of the Arno,
Chiana (_Clanis_) and Paglia (_Pallia_), Towards the west they are rich
in minerals and chemicals, which the Apennines proper do not produce.

The Umbrian Apennines extend from the sources of the Tiber to (or
perhaps rather beyond) the pass of Scheggia near Cagli, where the
ancient Via Flaminia crosses the range. The highest point is the Monte
Nerone (5010 ft.). The chief river is the Tiber itself: the others,
among which the Foglia (_Pisaurus_), Metauro (_Metaurus_) and Esino[4]
may be mentioned, run north-east into the Adriatic, which is some 30 m.
from the highest points of the chain. This portion of the range is
crossed near its southern termination by a railway from Foligno to
Ancona (which at Fabriano has a branch to Macerata and Porto Civitanova,
on the Adriatic coast railway), which may perhaps be conveniently
regarded as its boundary.[5] By some geographers, indeed, it is treated
as a part of the central Apennines.

2. The central Apennines are the most extensive portion of the chain,
and stretch as far as the valley of the Sangro (_Sangrus_). To the north
are the Monti Sibillini, the highest point of which is the Monte Vettore
(8128 ft.). Farther south three parallel chains may be traced, the
westernmost of which (the Monti Sabini) culminates to the south in the
Monte Viglio (7075 ft.), the central chain in the Monte Terminillo (7260
ft.), and farther south in the Monte Velino (8160 ft.), and the eastern
in the Gran Sasso d'Italia (9560 ft.), the highest summit of the
Apennines, and the Maiella group (Monte Amaro, 9170 ft.). Between the
western and central ranges are the plain of Rieti, the valley of the
Salto (_Himella_), and the Lago Fucino; while between the central and
eastern ranges are the valleys of Aquila and Sulmona. The chief rivers
on the west are the Nera (_Nar_), with its tributaries the Velino
(_Velinus_) and Salto, and the Anio, both of which fall into the Tiber.
On the east there is at first a succession of small rivers which flow
into the Adriatic, from which the highest points of the chain are some
25 m. distant, such as the Potenza (_Flosis_), Chienti (_Cluentus_),
Tenna (_Tinna_), Tronto (_Truentus_), Tordino (_Helvinus_), Vomano
(_Vomanus_), &c. The Pescara (_Aternus_), which receives the Aterno from
the north-west and the Gizio from the south-east, is more important; and
so is the Sangro.

The central Apennines are crossed by the railway from Rome to
Castelammare Adriatico via Avezzano and Sulmona: the railway from Orte
to Terni (and thence to Foligno) follows the Nera valley; while from
Terni a line ascends to the plain of Rieti, and thence crosses the
central chain to Aquila, whence it follows the valley of the Aterno to
Sulmona. In ancient times the Via Salaria, Via Caecilia and Via
Valeria-Claudia all ran from Rome to the Adriatic coast. The volcanic
mountains of the province of Rome are separated from the Apennines by
the Tiber valley, and the Monti Lepini, or Volscian mountains, by the
valleys of the Sacco and Liri.

3. In the southern Apennines, to the south of the Sangro valley, the
three parallel chains are broken up into smaller groups; among them may
be named the Matese, the highest point of which is the Monte Miletto
(6725 ft.). The chief rivers on the south-west are the Liri or
Garigliano (anc. _Liris_) with its tributary the Sacco (_Trerus_), the
Volturno (_Volturnus_), Sebeto (_Sabatus_), Sarno (_Sarnus_), on the
north the Trigno (_Trinius_), Biferno (_Tifernus_), and Fortore
(_Frento_). The promontory of Monte Gargano, on the east, is completely
isolated, and so are the volcanic groups near Naples. The district is
traversed from north-west to south-east by the railway from Sulmona to
Benevento and on to Avellino, and from south-west to north-east by the
railways from Caianello via Isernia to Campobasso and Termoli, from
Caserta to Benevento and Foggia, and from Nocera and Avellino to
Rocchetta S. Antonio, the junction for Foggia, Spinazzola (for Barletta,
Bari, and Taranto) and Potenza. Roman roads followed the same lines as
the railways: the Via Appia ran from Capua to Benevento, whence the
older road went to Venosa and Taranto and so to Brindisi, while the Via
Traiana ran nearly to Foggia and thence to Bari.

The valley of the Ofanto (_Aufidus_), which runs into the Adriatic close
to Barletta, marks the northern termination of the first range of the
Lucanian Apennines (now Basilicata), which runs from east to west, while
south of the valleys of the Sele (on the west) and Basiento (on the
east)-which form the line followed by the railway from Battipaglia via
Potenza to Metaponto--the second range begins to run due north and south
as far as the plain of Sibari (_Sybaris_). The highest point is the
Monte Pollino (7325 ft.). The chief rivers are the Sele
(_Silarus_)--joined by the Negro (_Tanager_) and Calore (_Calor_)--on
the west, and the Bradano (_Bradanus_), Basiento (_Casuentus_), Agri
(_Aciris_), Sinni (_Siris_) on the east, which flow into the gulf of
Taranto; to the south of the last-named river there are only unimportant
streams flowing into the sea east and west, inasmuch as here the width
of the peninsula diminishes to some 40 m. The railway running south from
Sicignano to Lagonegro, ascending the valley of the Negro, is planned to
extend to Cosenza, along the line followed by the ancient Via Popilia,
which beyond Cosenza reached the west coast at Terina and thence
followed it to Reggio. The Via Herculia, a branch of the Via Traiana,
ran from Aequum Tuticum to the ancient Nerulum. At the narrowest point
the plain of Sibari, through which the rivers Coscile (_Sybaris_) and
Crati (_Crathis_) flow to the sea, occurs on the east coast, extending
halfway across the peninsula. Here the limestone Apennines proper cease
and the granite mountains of Calabria (anc. _Bruttii_) begin. The first
group extends as far as the isthmus formed by the gulfs of S. Eufemia
and Squillace; it is known as the Sila, and the highest point reached is
6330 ft. (the Botte Donato). The forests which covered it in ancient
times supplied the Greeks and Sicilians with timber for shipbuilding.
The railway from S. Eufemia to Catanzaro and Catanzaro Marina crosses
the isthmus, and an ancient road may have run from Squillace to
Monteleone. The second group extends to the south end of the Italian
peninsula, culminating in the Aspromonte (6420 ft.) to the east of
Reggio di Calabria. In both groups the rivers are quite unimportant.

_Character_.--The Apennines are to some extent clothed with forests,
though these were probably more extensive in classical times (Pliny
mentions especially pine, oak and beech woods, _Hist. Nat_. xvi. 177);
they have indeed been greatly reduced in comparatively modern times by
indiscriminate timber-felling, and though serious attempts at
reafforestation have been made by the government, much remains to be
done. They also furnish considerable summer pastures, especially in the
Abruzzi: Pliny (_Hist. Nat_. xi. 240) praises the cheese of the
Apennines. In the forests wolves were frequent, and still are found, the
flocks being protected against them by large sheep-dogs; bears, however,
which were known in Roman times, have almost entirely disappeared. Nor
are the wild goats called _rotae_, spoken of by Varro (_R. R._ II. i.
5), which may have been either chamois or steinbock, to be found.
Brigandage appears to have been prevalent in Roman times in the remoter
parts of the Apennines, as it was until recently: an inscription found
near the Furlo pass was set up in A.D. 246 by an _evocatus Augusti_ (a
member of a picked corps) on special police duty with a detachment of
twenty men from the Ravenna fleet (G. Henzen in _Römische Mitteilungen_,
1887, 14). Snow lies on the highest peaks of the Apennines for almost
the whole year. The range produces no minerals, but there are a
considerable number of good mineral springs, some of which are thermal
(such as Bagni di Lucca, Monte Catini, Monsummano, Porretta, Telese,
&c.), while others are cool (such as Nocera, Sangemini, Cinciano, &c.),
the water of which is both drunk on the spot and sold as table water
elsewhere.     (T. As.)

_Geology_.--The Apennines are the continuation of the Alpine chain, but
the individual zones of the Alps cannot be traced into the Apennines.
The zone of the Brianconnais (see ALPS) may be followed as far as the
Gulf of Genoa, but scarcely beyond, unless it is represented by the
Trias and older beds of the Apuan Alps. The inner zone of crystalline
and schistose rocks which forms the main chain of the Alps, is absent in
the Apennines except towards the southern end. The Apennines, indeed,
consist almost entirely of Mesozoic and Tertiary beds, like the outer
zones of the Alps. Remnants of a former inner zone of more ancient rocks
may be seen in the Apuan Alps, in the islands off the Tuscan coast; in
the Catena Metallifera, Cape Circeo and the island of Zannone, as well
as in the Calabrian peninsula. These remnants lie at a comparatively low
level, and excepting the Apuan Alps and the Calabrian peninsula they do
not now form any part of the Apennine chain. But that in Tertiary times
there was a high interior zone of crystalline rocks is indicated by the
character of the Eocene beds in the southern Apennines. These are formed
to a large extent of thick conglomerates which are full of pebbles and
boulders of granite and schist. Many of the boulders are of considerable
size and they are often still angular. There is now no crystalline
region from which they could reach their present position; and this and
other considerations have led the followers of E. Suess to conclude that
even in Tertiary times a large land mass consisting of ancient rocks
occupied the space which is now covered by the southern portion of the
Tyrrhenian Sea. This old land mass has been called Tyrrhenis, and
probably extended from Sicily into Latium and as far west as Sardinia.
On the Italian border of this land there was raised a mountain chain
with an inner crystalline zone and an outer zone of Mesozoic and
Tertiary beds. Subsequent faulting has caused the subsidence of the
greater part of Tyrrhenis, including nearly the whole of the inner zone
of the mountain chain, and has left only the outer zones standing as the
present Apennines.

Be this as it may, the Apennines, excepting in Calabria, are formed
chiefly of Triassic, Jurassic, Cretaceous, Eocene and Miocene beds. In
the south the deposits, from the Trias to the middle Eocene, consist
mainly of limestones, and were laid down, with a few slight
interruptions, upon a quietly subsiding sea-floor. In the later part of
the Eocene period began the folding which gave rise to the existing
chain. The sea grew shallow, the deposits became conglomeratic and
shaly, volcanic eruptions began, and the present folds of the Apennines
were initiated. The folding and consequent elevation went on until the
close of the Miocene period when a considerable subsidence took place
and the Pliocene sea overspread the lower portions of the range.
Subsequent elevation, without folding, has raised these Pliocene
deposits to a considerable height--in some cases over 3000 ft. and they
now lie almost undisturbed upon the older folded beds. This last
elevation led to the formation of numerous lakes which are now filled up
by Pleistocene deposits. Both volcanic eruptions and movements of
elevation and depression continue to the present day on the shores of
the Tyrrhenian Sea. In the northern Apennines the elevation of the sea
floor appears to have begun at an earlier period, for the Upper
Cretaceous of that part of the chain consists largely of sandstones and
conglomerates. In Calabria the chain consists chiefly of crystalline and
schistose rocks; it is the Mesozoic and Tertiary zone which has here
been sunk beneath the sea. Similar rocks are found beneath the Trias
farther north, in some of the valleys of Basilicata. Glaciers no longer
exist in the Apennines, but Post-Pliocene moraines have been observed in
Basilicata.

  REFERENCES.--G. de Lorenzo, "Studi di geologia nell' Appennino
  Meridionale," _Atti d. R. Accad. d. Sci, Fis. e Mat._, Napoli, ser. 2,
  vol. viii., no. 7 (1896); F. Sacco, "L' Appennino settentrionale,"
  _Boll. Soc. geol. Ital._ (1893-1899).     (P. La.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The ancient Via Aemilia, built in 109 B.C., led over this pass,
    but originally turned east to Dertona (mod. _Tortona_).

  [2] There are two separate lines from Sampierdarena to Ronco.

  [3] This pass was also traversed by a nameless Roman road.

  [4] This river (anc. Aesis) was the boundary of Italy proper in the
    3rd and 2nd centuries B.C.

  [5] The Monte Conero, to the south of Ancona, was originally an
    island of the Pliocene sea.