APHRAATES (a Greek form of the Persian name Aphrahat or Pharhadh), a
Syriac writer belonging to the middle of the 4th century A.D., who
composed a series of twenty-three expositions or homilies on points of
Christian doctrine and practice. The first ten were written in 337, the
following twelve in 344, and the last in 345.[1] The author was early
known as _hakkima pharsaya_ ("the Persian sage"), was a subject of Sapor
II., and was probably of heathen parentage and himself a convert from
heathenism. He seems at some time in his life to have assumed the name
of Jacob, and is so entitled in the colophon to a MS. of A.D. 512 which
contains twelve of his homilies. Hence he was already by Gennadius of
Marseilles (before 496) confused with Jacob, bishop of Nisibis; and the
ancient Armenian version of nineteen of the homilies has been published
under this latter name. But (1) Jacob of Nisibis, who attended the
council of Nicaea, died in 338; and (2) our author, being a Persian
subject, cannot have lived at Nisibis, which became Persian only by
Jovian's treaty of 363. That his name was Aphrahat or Pharhadh we learn
from comparatively late writers--Bar Bahlul (10th century), Elias of
Nisibis (11th), Bar-Hebraeus, and 'Abhd-isho'. George, bishop of the
Arabs, writing in A.D. 714 to a friend who had sent him a series of
questions about the "Persian sage," confesses ignorance of his name,
home and rank, but infers from his homilies that he was a monk, and of
high esteem among the clergy. The fact that in 344 he was selected to
draw up a circular letter from a council of bishops and other clergy to
the churches of Seleucia and Ctesiphon and elsewhere--included in our
collection as homily 14--is held by Dr W. Wright and others to prove
that he was a bishop. According to a marginal note in a 14th-century MS.
(B.M. Orient. 1017), he was "bishop of Mar Mattai," a famous monastery
near Mosul, but it is unlikely that this institution existed so early.
The homilies of Aphraates are intended to form, as Professor Burkitt has
shown, "a full and ordered exposition of the Christian faith." The
standpoint is that of the Syriac-speaking church, before it was touched
by the Arian controversy. Beginning with faith as the foundation, the
writer proceeds to build up the Structure of doctrine and duty. The
first ten homilies, which form one division completed in 337, are
without polemical reference; their subjects are faith, love, fasting,
prayer, wars (a somewhat mysterious setting forth of the conflict
between Rome and Persia under the imagery of Daniel), the sons of the
covenant (monks or ascetics), penitents, the resurrection, humility,
pastors. Those numbered 11-22, written in 344, are almost all directed
against the Jews; the subjects are circumcision, passover, the sabbath,
persuasion (the encyclical letter referred to above), distinction of
meats, the substitution of the Gentiles for the Jews, that Christ is the
Son of God, virginity and holiness, whether the Jews have been finally
rejected or are yet to be restored, provision for the poor, persecution,
death and the last times. The 23rd homily, on the "grape kernel" (Is.
lxv. 8), written in 344, forms an appendix on the Messianic fulfilment
of prophecy, together with a treatment of the chronology from Adam to
Christ. Aphraates impresses a reader favourably by his moral
earnestness, his guilelessness, his moderation in controversy, the
simplicity of his style and language, his saturation with the ideas and
words of Scripture. On the other hand, he is full of cumbrous
repetition, he lacks precision in argument and is prone to digression,
his quotations from Scripture are often inappropriate, and he is greatly
influenced by Jewish exegesis. He is particularly fond of arguments
about numbers. How wholly he and his surroundings were untouched by the
Arian conflict may be judged from the 17th homily--"that Christ is the
Son of God." He argues that, as the name "God" or "Son of God" was given
in the O.T. to men who were worthy, and as God does not withhold from
men a share in His attributes--such as sovereignty and fatherhood--it
was fitting that Christ who has wrought salvation for mankind should
obtain this highest name. From the frequency of his quotations,
Aphraates is a specially important witness to the form in which the
Gospels were read in the Syriac church in his day; Zahn and others have
shown that he--mainly at least--used the _Diatessaron_. Finally, he
bears important contemporary witness to the sufferings of the Christian
church in Persia under Sapor (Shapur) II. as well as the moral evils
which had infected the church, to the sympathy of Persian Christians
with the cause of the Roman empire, to the condition of early monastic
institutions, to the practice of the Syriac church in regard to Easter,
&c.

  Editions by W. Wright (London, 1869), and J. Parisot (with Latin
  translation, Paris, 1894); the ancient Armenian version of 19 homilies
  edited, translated into Latin, and annotated by Antonelli (Rome,
  1756). Besides translations of particular homilies by G. Bickell and
  E.W. Budge, the whole have been translated by G. Bert (Leipzig, 1888).
  Cf. also C.J.F. Sasse, _Proleg, in Aphr. Sapientis Persae sermones
  homileticos_ (Leipzig, 1879); J. Forget, _De Vita et Scriptis
  Aphraatis_ (Louvain, 1882); F.C. Burkitt, _Early Eastern Christianity_
  (London, 1904); J. Labourt, _Le Christianisme dans l'empire perse_
  (Paris, 1904); J. Zahn, _Forschungen_ I.; "Aphraates and the
  Diatessaron," vol. ii. pp. 180-186 of Burkitt's _Evangelion
  Da-Mepharreshe_ (Cambridge, 1904); articles on "Aphraates and
  Monasticism," by R.H. Connolly and Burkitt in _Journal of Theological
  Studies_ (1905) pp. 522-539; (1906) pp. 10-15.     (N. M.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] Hom. 1-22 begin with the letters of the Syriac alphabet in
    succession. Their present order in the Syriac MSS. is therefore
    right. The ancient Armenian version, published by Antonelli in 1756,
    has only 19 of the homilies, and those in a somewhat different order.