APIS or HAPIS, the sacred bull of Memphis, in Egyptian _Hp, Hope, Hope_.
By Manetho his worship is said to have been instituted by Kaiechos of
the Second Dynasty. Hape is named on very early monuments, but little is
known of the divine animal before the New Kingdom. He was entitled "the
renewal of the life" of the Memphite god Ptah: but after death he became
Osorapis, i.e. the Osiris Apis, just as dead men were assimilated to
Osiris, the king of the underworld. This Osorapis was identified with
Serapis, and may well be really identical with him (see SERAPIS): and
Greek writers make the Apis an incarnation of Osiris, ignoring the
connexion with Ptah. Apis was the most important of all the sacred
animals in Egypt, and, like the others, its importance increased as time
went on. Greek and Roman authors have much to say about Apis, the marks
by which the black bull-calf was recognized, the manner of his
conception by a ray from heaven, his house at Memphis with court for
disporting himself, the mode of prognostication from his actions, the
mourning at his death, his costly burial and the rejoicings throughout
the country when a new Apis was found. Mariette's excavation of the
Serapeum at Memphis revealed the tombs of over sixty animals, ranging
from the time of Amenophis III. to that of Ptolemy Alexander. At first
each animal was buried in a separate tomb with a chapel built above it.
Khamuis, the priestly son of Rameses II. (c. 1300 B.C.), excavated a
great gallery to be lined with the tomb chambers; another similar
gallery was added by Psammetichus I. The careful statement of the ages
of the animals in the later instances, with the regnal dates for their
birth, enthronization and death have thrown much light on the chronology
from the XXIInd dynasty onwards. The name of the mother-cow and the
place of birth are often recorded. The sarcophagi are of immense size,
and the burial must have entailed enormous expense. It is therefore
remarkable that the priests contrived to bury one of the animals in the
fourth year of Cambyses.

  See Jablonski, _Pantheon_, ii.; Budge, _Gods of the Egyptians_, ii.
  350; Mariette-Maspero, _Le Sérapéum de Memphis_.     (F. Ll. G.)