APLITE, in petrology, the name given to intrusive rock in which quartz
and felspar are the dominant minerals. Aplites are usually very
fine-grained, white, grey or flesh-coloured, and their constituents are
visible only with the help of a magnifying lens. Dykes and threads of
aplite are very frequently to be observed traversing granitic bosses;
they occur also, though in less numbers, in syenites, diorites,
quartz-diabases and gabbros. Without doubt they have usually a genetic
affinity to the rocks they intersect. The aplites of granite areas, for
example, are the last part of the magma to crystallize, and correspond
in composition to the quartzo-felspathic aggregates which fill up the
interspaces between the early minerals in the main body of the rock.
They bear a considerable resemblance to the eutectic mixtures which are
formed on the cooling of solutions of mineral salts, and remain liquid
till the excess of either of the components has separated out, finally
solidifying _en masse_ when the proper proportions of the constituents
and a suitable temperature are reached. The essential components of the
aplites are quartz and alkali felspar (the latter usually orthoclase or
microperthite). Crystallization has been apparently rapid (as the rocks
are so fine-grained), and the ingredients have solidified almost at the
same time. Hence their crystals are rather imperfect and fit closely to
one another in a sort of fine mosaic of nearly equi-dimensional grains.
Porphyritic felspars occur occasionally and quartz more seldom; but the
relation of the aplites to quartz-porphyries, granophyres and felsites
is very close, as all these rocks have nearly the same chemical
composition. Yet the aplites associated with diorites and
quartz-diabases differ in minor respects from the common aplites, which
accompany granites. The accessory minerals of these rocks are
principally oligoclase, muscovite, apatite and zircon. Biotite and all
ferromagnesian minerals rarely appear in them, and never are in
considerable amount. Riebeckite-granites (paisanites) have close
affinities to aplites, shown especially in the prevalence of alkali
felspars. Tourmaline also occurs in some aplites. The rocks of this
group are very frequent in all areas where masses of granite are known.
They form dykes and irregular veins which may be only a few inches or
many feet in diameter. Less frequently aplite forms stocks or bosses, or
occupies the edges or irregular portions of the interior of outcrops of
granite. The syenite-aplites consist mainly of alkali felspar; the
diorite-aplites of plagioclase; there are nepheline-bearing aplites
which intersect some elaeolite-syenites. In all cases they bear the same
relation to the parent masses. By increase of quartz aplites pass
gradually, in a few localities, through highly quartzose modifications
(beresite, &c.) into quartz veins. (J. S. F.)