APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE. The Apocalyptic literature of Judaism and
Christianity embraces a considerable period, from the centuries
following the exile down to the close of the middle ages. In the present
survey we shall limit ourselves to the great formative periods in this
literature--in Judaism to 200 B.C. to A.D. 100, and in Christianity to
A.D. 50 to 350 or thereabouts.

The transition from prophecy to apocalyptic ([Greek: apokalyptein], to
reveal something hidden) was gradual and already accomplished within the
limits of the Old Testament. Beginning in the bosom of prophecy, and
steadily differentiating itself from it in its successive developments,
it never came to stand in absolute contrast to it. Apocalyptical
elements disclose themselves in the prophetical books of Ezekiel, Joel,
Zechariah, while in Isaiah xxiv.-xxvii. and xxxiii. we find
well-developed apocalypses; but it is not until we come to Daniel that
we have a fully matured and classical example of this class of
literature. The way, however, had in an especial degree been prepared
for the apocalyptic type of thought and literature by Ezekiel, for with
him the word of God had become identical with a written book (ii. 9-iii.
3) by the eating of which he learnt the will of God, just as primitive
man conceived that the eating of the tree in Paradise imparted spiritual
knowledge. When the divine word is thus conceived as a written message,
the sole office of the prophet is to communicate what is written. Thus
the human element is reduced to zero, and the conception of prophecy
becomes mechanical. And as the personal element disappears in the
conception of the prophetic calling, so it tends to disappear in the
prophetic view of history, and the future comes to be conceived not as
the organic result of the present under the divine guidance, but as
mechanically determined from the beginning in the counsels of God, and
arranged under artificial categories of time. This is essentially the
apocalyptic conception of history, and Ezekiel may be justly represented
as in certain essential aspects its founder in Israel.

We shall now consider (I.) Apocalyptic, its origin and general
characteristics; (II.) Old Testament Apocalyptic; (III.) New Testament
Apocalyptic.

I. APOCALYPTIC--ITS ORIGIN AND GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS

i. _Sources of Apocalyptic._--The origin of Apocalyptic is to be sought
in (a) unfulfilled prophecy and in (b) traditional elements drawn from
various sources.

(a) The origin of Apocalyptic is to be sought in _unfulfilled prophecy_.
That certain prophecies relating to the coming kingdom of God had
clearly not been fulfilled was a matter of religious difficulty to the
returned exiles from Babylon. The judgments predicted by the pre-exilic
prophets had indeed been executed to the letter, but where were the
promised glories of the renewed kingdom and Israel's unquestioned
sovereignty over the nations of the earth? One such unfulfilled prophecy
Ezekiel takes up and reinterprets in such a way as to show that its
fulfilment is still to come. The prophets Jeremiah (iv.-vi.) and
Zephaniah had foretold the invasion of Judah by a mighty people from the
north. But as this northern foe had failed to appear Ezekiel re-edited
this prophecy in a new form as a final assault of Gog and his hosts on
Jerusalem, and thus established a permanent dogma in Jewish apocalyptic,
which in due course passed over into Christian.

But the non-fulfilment of prophecies relating to this or that individual
event or people served to popularize the methods of apocalyptic in a
very slight degree in comparison with the non-fulfilment of the greatest
of all prophecies--the advent of the Messianic kingdom. Thus, though
Jeremiah had promised that after seventy years (xxv. 11., xxix. 10)
Israel should be restored to their own land (xxiv. 5, 6), and then enjoy
the blessings of the Messianic kingdom under the Messianic king (xxiii.
5, 6), this period passed by and things remained as of old. Haggai and
Zechariah explained the delay by the failure of Judah to rebuild the
temple, and so generation after generation the hope of the kingdom
persisted, sustained most probably by ever-fresh reinterpretations of
ancient prophecy, till in the first half of the 2nd century the delay is
explained in the Books of Daniel and Enoch as due not to man's
shortcomings but to the counsels of God. The 70 years of Jeremiah are
interpreted by the angel in Daniel (ix. 25-27) as 70 weeks of years, of
which 69½ have already expired, while the writer of Enoch (lxxxv.-xc.)
interprets the 70 years of Jeremiah as the 70 successive reigns of the
70 angelic patrons of the nations, which are to come to a close in his
own generation.

But the above periods came and passed by, and again the expectations of
the Jews were disappointed. Presently the Greek empire of the East was
overthrown by Rome, and in due course this new phenomenon, so full of
meaning for the Jews, called forth a new interpretation of Daniel. The
fourth and last empire which, according to Daniel vii. 10-25, was to be
Greek, was now declared to be Roman by the Apocalypse of Baruch
(xxxvi.-xl.) and 4 Ezra (x. 60-xii. 35). Once more such ideas as those
of "the day of Yahweh" and the "new heavens and a new earth" were
constantly re-edited with fresh nuances in conformity with their new
settings. Thus the inner development of Jewish apocalyptic was always
conditioned by the historical experiences of the nation.

(b) Another source of apocalyptic was _primitive mythological and
cosmological traditions_, in which the eye of the seer could see the
secrets of the future no less surely than those of the past. Thus the
six days of the world's creation, followed by a seventh of rest, were
regarded as at once a history of the past and a forecasting of the
future. As the world was made in six days its history would be
accomplished in six thousand years, since each day with God was as a
thousand years and a thousand years as one day; and as the six days of
creation were followed by one of rest, so the six thousand years of the
world's history would be followed by a rest of a thousand years (2 Enoch
xxxii. 2-xxxiii. 2). Of primitive mythological traditions we might
mention the primeval serpent, leviathan, behemoth, while to ideas native
to or familiar in apocalyptic belong those of the seven archangels, the
angelic patrons of the nations (Deut. xxxii. 8, in LXX.; Isaiah xxiv.
21; Dan. x. 13, 20, &c.), the mountain of God in the north (Isaiah xiv.
13; Ezek. i. 4, &c.), the garden of Eden.

ii. _Object and Contents of Apocalyptic._--The object of this literature
in general was to solve the difficulties connected with the
righteousness of God and the suffering condition of His righteous
servants on earth. The righteousness of God postulated according to the
law the temporal prosperity of the righteous and the _temporal_
prosperity of necessity; for as yet there was no promise of life or
recompense beyond the grave. But this connexion was not found to obtain
as a rule in life, and the difficulties arising from this conflict
between promise and experience centred round the lot of the righteous as
a community and the lot of the righteous man as an individual. Old
Testament prophecy had addressed itself to both these problems, though
it was hardly conscious of the claims of the latter. It concerned itself
essentially with the present, and with the future only as growing
organically out of the present. It taught the absolute need of personal
and national righteousness, and foretold the ultimate blessedness of the
righteous nation on the present earth. But its views were not systematic
and comprehensive in regard to the nations in general, while as regards
the individual it held that God's service here was its own and adequate
reward, and saw no need of postulating another world to set right the
evils of this. But later, with the growing claims of the individual and
the acknowledgment of these in the religious and intellectual life, both
problems, and especially the latter, pressed themselves irresistibly on
the notice of religious thinkers, and made it impossible for any
conception of the divine rule and righteousness to gain acceptance,
which did not render adequate satisfaction to the claims of both
problems. To render such satisfaction was the task undertaken by
apocalyptic, as well as to vindicate the righteousness of God alike in
respect of the individual and of the nation. To justify their contention
they sketched in outline the history of the world and mankind, the
origin of evil and its course, and the final consummation of all things.
Thus they presented in fact a theodicy, a rudimentary philosophy of
religion. The righteous as a nation should yet possess the earth, even
in this world the faithful community should attain its rights in an
eternal Messianic kingdom on earth, or else in temporary blessedness
here and eternal blessedness hereafter. So far as regards the righteous
community. It was, however, in regard to the destiny of the individual
that apocalyptic rendered its chief service. Though the individual might
perish amid the disorders of this world, he would not fail, apocalyptic
taught, to attain through resurrection the recompense that was his due
in the Messianic kingdom or in heaven itself. Apocalyptic thus forms the
indispensable preparation for the religion of the New Testament.

iii. _Form of Apocalyptic._--The form of apocalyptic is a literary form;
for we cannot suppose that the writers experienced the voluminous and
detailed visions we find in their books. On the other hand the reality
of the visions is to some extent guaranteed by the writer's intense
earnestness and by his manifest belief in the divine origin of his
message. But the difficulty of regarding the visions as actual
experiences, or as in any sense actual, is intensified, when full
account is taken of the artifices of the writer; for the major part of
his visions consists of what is to him really past history dressed up in
the guise of prediction. Moreover, the writer no doubt intended that his
reader should take the accuracy of the prediction (?) already
accomplished to be a guarantee for the accuracy of that which was still
unrealized. How, then, it may well be asked, can this be consistent with
reality of visionary experience? Are we not here obliged to assume that
the visions are a literary invention and nothing more?

However we may explain the inconsistency, we are precluded by the moral
earnestness of the writer from assuming the visions to be pure
inventions. But the inconsistency has in part been explained by Gunkel,
who has rightly emphasized that the writer did not freely invent his
materials but derived them in the main from tradition, as he held that
these mysterious traditions of his people were, if rightly expounded,
forecasts of the time to come. Furthermore, the visionary who is found
at most periods of great spiritual excitement was forced by the
prejudice of his time, which refused to acknowledge any inspiration in
the present, to ascribe his visionary experiences and reinterpretations
of the mysterious traditions of his people to some heroic figure of the
past. Moreover, there will always be a difficulty in determining what
belongs to his actual vision and what to the literary skill or free
invention of the author, seeing that the visionary must be dependent on
memory and past experience for the forms and much of the matter of the
actual vision.

iv. _Apocalyptic as distinguished from Prophecy._--We have already dwelt
on certain notable differences between apocalyptic and prophecy; but
there are certain others that call for attention.

(a) _In the Nature of its Message._--The message of the prophets was
primarily a preaching of repentance and righteousness if the nation
would escape judgment; the message of the apocalyptic writers was of
patience and trust for that deliverance and reward were sure to come.

(b) _By its dualistic Theology._--Prophecy believes that this world is
God's world and that in this world His goodness and truth will yet be
vindicated. Hence the prophet prophesies of a definite future arising
out of and organically connected with the present. The apocalyptic
writer on the other hand despairs of the present, and directs his hopes
absolutely to the future, to a new world standing in essential
opposition to the present. (_Non fecit Altissimus unum saeculum sed
duo_, 4 Ezra vii. 50.) Here we have essentially a dualistic principle,
which, though it can largely be accounted for by the interaction of
certain inner tendencies and outward sorrowful experience on the part of
Judaism, may ultimately be derived from Mazdean influences. This
principle, which shows itself clearly at first in the conception that
the various nations are under angelic rulers, who are in a greater or
less degree in rebellion against God, as in Daniel and Enoch, grows in
strength with each succeeding age, till at last Satan is conceived as
"the ruler of this world" (John xii. 31) or "the god of this age" (2
Cor. iv. 4). Under the guidance of such a principle the writer naturally
expected the world's culmination in evil to be the immediate precursor
of God's intervention on behalf of the righteous, and every fresh growth
in evil to be an additional sign that the time was at hand. The natural
concomitant in conduct of such a belief is an uncompromising asceticism.
He that would live to the next world must shun this. Visions are
vouchsafed only to those who to prayer have added fasting.

(c) _By pseudonymous Authorship._--We have already touched on this
characteristic of apocalyptic. The prophet stood in direct relations
with his people; his prophecy was first spoken and afterwards written.
The apocalyptic writer could obtain no hearing from his contemporaries,
who held that, though God spoke in the past, "there was no more any
prophet." This pessimism and want of faith limited and defined the form
in which religious enthusiasm should manifest itself, and prescribed as
a condition of successful effort the adoption of pseudonymous
authorship. The apocalyptic writer, therefore, professedly addressed his
book to future generations. Generally directions as to the hiding and
sealing of the book (Dan. xii. 4, 9; 1 Enoch i. 4; Ass. Mos. i. 16-18)
were given in the text in order to explain its publication so long after
the date of its professed period. Moreover, there was a sense in which
such books were not wholly pseudonymous. Their writers were students of
ancient prophecy and apocalyptical tradition, and, though they might
recast and reinterpret them, they could not regard them as their own
inventions. Each fresh apocalypse would in the eyes of its writer be in
some degree but a fresh edition of the traditions naturally attaching
themselves to great names in Israel's past, and thus the books named
respectively Enoch, Noah, Ezra would to some slight extent be not
pseudonymous.

(d) _By its comprehensive and deterministic Conception of
History._--Apocalyptic took an indefinitely wider view of the world's
history than prophecy. Thus, whereas prophecy had to deal with temporary
reverses at the hands of some heathen power, apocalyptic arose at a time
when Israel had been subject for generations to the sway of one or other
of the great world-powers. Hence to harmonize such difficulties with
belief in God's righteousness, it had to take account of the rôle of
such empires in the counsels of God, the rise, duration and downfall of
each in turn, till finally the lordship of the world passed into the
hands of Israel, or the final judgment arrived. These events belonged in
the main to the past, but the writer represented them as still in the
future, arranged under certain artificial categories of time definitely
determined from the beginning in the counsels of God and revealed by Him
to His servants the prophets. Determinism thus became a leading
characteristic of Jewish apocalyptic, and its conception of history
became severely mechanical.

II. OLD TESTAMENT APOCALYPTIC

i. Canonical:--

  Isaiah xxiv.-xxvii.; xxxiii.; xxxiv.-xxxv.
  (Jeremiah xxxiii. 14-26?)
  Ezekiel ii. 8; xxxviii.-xxxix.
  Joel iii. 9-17.
  Zech. xii--xiv.
  Daniel.

We cannot enter here into a discussion of the above passages and
books.[1] All are probably pseudepigraphic except the passages from
Ezekiel and Joel. Of the remaining passages and books Daniel belongs
unquestionably to the Maccabean period, and the rest possibly to the
same period. Isaiah xxxiii. was probably written about 163 B.C. (Duhm
and Marti); Zech. xii.-xiv. about 160 B.C., Isaiah xxiv.-xxvii. about
128 B.C., and xxxiv.-xxxv. sometime in the reign of John Hyrcanus.
Jeremiah xxxiii. 14-26 is assigned by Marti to Maccabean times, but this
is highly questionable.

ii. Extra-canonical:--

(a) _Palestinian_:--

    (200-100 B.C.)
  Book of Noah.
  1 Enoch vi.-xxxvi.; lxxii.-xc.
  Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs.

    (100 B.C. to 1 B.C.)
  1 Enoch i.-v.; xxxvii.-lxxi.; xci.-civ.
  Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs, i.e. T. Lev. x., xiv.-xvi., T. Jud.
    xxi. 6-xxiii, T. Zeb. ix., T. Dan. v. 6, 7.
  Psalms of Solomon.

    (A.D. 1-100 and later.)
  Assumption of Moses.
  Apocalypse of Baruch.
  4 Ezra.
  Greek Apocalypse of Baruch.
  Apocalypse of Zephaniah.
  Apocalypse of Abraham.
  Prayer of Joseph.
  Book of Eldad and Modad.
  Apocalypse of Elijah.

(b) _Hellenistic_:--

  2 Enoch.
  Oracles of Hystaspes.
  Testament of Job.
  Testaments of the III. Patriarchs.
  Sibylline Oracles (excluding Christian portions).

_Book of Noah._--Though this book has not come down to us independently,
it has in large measure been incorporated in the Ethiopic Book of Enoch,
and can in part be reconstructed from it. The Book of Noah is mentioned
in Jubilees x. 13, xxi. 10. Chapters lx., lxv.-lxix. 25 of the Ethiopic
Enoch are without question derived from it. Thus lx. 1 runs: "In the
year 500, in the seventh month ... in the life of Enoch." Here the
editor simply changed the name Noah in the context before him into
Enoch, for the statement is based on Gen. v. 32, and Enoch lived only
365 years. Chapters vi.-xi. are clearly from the same source; for they
make no reference to Enoch, but bring forward Noah (x. 1) and treat of
the sin of the angels that led to the flood, and of their temporal and
eternal punishment. This section is compounded of the Semjaza and Azazel
myths, and in its present composite form is already presupposed by 1
Enoch lxxxviii.-xc. Hence these chapters are earlier than 166 B.C.
Chapters cvi.-cvii. of the same book are probably from the same source;
likewise liv. 7-lv. 2, and Jubilees vii. 20-39, x. 1-15. In the former
passage of Jubilees the subject-matter leads to this identification, as
well as the fact that Noah is represented as speaking in the first
person, although throughout Jubilees it is the angel that speaks.
Possibly Eth. En. xli. 3-8, xliii.-xliv., lix. are from the same work.
The book may have opened with Eth. En. cvi.-cvii. On these chapters may
have followed Eth. En. vi.-xi., lxv.-lxix. 25, lx., xli. 3-8,
xliii.-xliv., liv. 7-lv. 2; Jubilees vii. 26-39, x. 1-15.

The Hebrew Book of Noah, a later work, is printed in Jellinek's _Bet
ha-Midrasch_, iii. 155-156, and translated into German in Rönsch, _Das
Buch der Jubiläen_, 385-387. It is based on the part of the above Book
of Noah which is preserved in the _Book of Jubilees_. The portion of
this Hebrew work which is derived from the older work is reprinted in
Charles's _Ethiopic Version of the Hebrew Book of Jubilees_, p. 179.

_1 Enoch, or the Ethiopic Book of Enoch._--This is the most important of
all the apocryphal writings for the history of religious thought. Like
the Pentateuch, the Psalms, the Megilloth and the Pirke Aboth, this work
was divided into five parts, which, as we shall notice presently, spring
from five different sources. Originally written partly in Aramaic (i.e.
vi.-xxxvi.) and partly in Hebrew (i.-vi., xxxvii.-cviii.), it was
translated into Greek, and from Greek into Ethiopic and possibly Latin.
Only one-fifth of the Greek version in two forms survives. The various
elements of the book were written by different authors at different
dates, vi.-xxxvi. was written before 166 B.C., lxxii.-lxxxii. before the
_Book of Jubilees_, i.e. before 120 B.C. or thereabouts, lxxxiii.-xc.
about 166 B.C., i.-v., xci.-civ. before 95 B.C., and xxxvii.-lxxi.
before 64 B.C. There are many interpolations drawn mainly from the Book
of Noah.

_Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs._--This book, in some respects the
most important of Old Testament apocryphs, has only recently come into
its own. Till a few years ago, owing to Christian interpolations, it was
taken to be a Christian apocryph, written originally in Greek in the 2nd
century A.D. Now it is acknowledged by Christian and Jewish scholars
alike to have been written in Hebrew in the 2nd century B.C. From Hebrew
it was translated into Greek and from Greek into Armenian and Slavonic.
The versions have come down in their entirety, and small portions of the
Hebrew text have been recovered from later Jewish writings. The
Testaments were written about the same date as the _Book of Jubilees_.
These two books form the only Apology in Jewish literature for the
religious and civil hegemony of the Maccabees from the Pharisaic
standpoint. To the Jewish interpolation of the 1st century B.C. (about
60-40), i.e. T. Lev. x., xiv.-xvi.; T. Jud. xxii.-xxiii., &c., a large
interest attaches; for these, like I Enoch xci.-civ. and the Psalms of
Solomon, constitute an unmeasured attack on every office--prophetic,
priestly and kingly--administered by the Maccabees. The ethical
character of the book is of the highest type, and its profound influence
on the writers of the New Testament is yet to be appreciated. (See
TESTAMENTS OF THE XII. PATRIARCHS.)

_Psalms of Solomon._--These psalms, in all eighteen, enjoyed but small
consideration in early times, for only six direct references to them are
found in early literature. Their ascription to Solomon is due solely to
the copyists or translators, for no such claim is made in any of the
psalms. On the whole, Ryle and James are no doubt right in assigning
70-40 B.C. as the limits within which the psalms were written. The
authors were Pharisees. They divide their countrymen into two
classes--"the righteous," ii. 38-39, iii. 3-5, 7, 8, &c., and "the
sinners," ii. 38, iii. 13, iv. 9, &c.; "the saints," iii. 10, &c., and
"the transgressors," iv. II, &c. The former are the Pharisees; the
latter the Sadducees. They protest against the Asmonaean house for
usurping the throne of David, and laying violent hands on the high
priesthood (xvii. 5, 6, 8), and proclaim the coming of the Messiah, the
Son of David, who is to set all things right and establish the supremacy
of Israel. Pss. xvii.-xviii. and i.-xvi. cannot be assigned to the same
authorship. The hopes of the Messiah are confined to the former, and a
somewhat different eschatology underlies the two works. Since the Psalms
were written in Hebrew, and intended for public worship in the
synagogues, it is most probable that they were composed in Palestine.
(See SOLOMON, THE PSALMS OF.)

_The Assumption of Moses_.--This book was lost for many centuries till a
large fragment of it was discovered by Ceriani in 1861 (_Monumenta
Sacra_, I. i. 55-64) from a palimpsest of the 6th century. Very little
was known about the contents of this book prior to this discovery. The
present book is possibly the long-lost [Greek: Diathêke Mouseos]
mentioned in some ancient lists, for it never speaks of the assumption
of Moses, but always of his natural death. About a half of the original
Testament is preserved in the Latin version. The latter half probably
dealt with questions about the creation. With this "Testament" the
"Assumption," to which almost all the patristic references and that of
Jude are made, was subsequently edited. The book was written between 4
B.C. and A.D. 7. As for the author, he was no Essene, for he recognizes
animal sacrifices and cherishes the Messianic hope; he was not a
Sadducee, for he looks forward to the establishment of the Messianic
kingdom (x.); nor a Zealot, for the quietistic ideal is upheld (ix.),
and the kingdom is established by God Himself (x.). He is therefore a
Chasid of the ancient type, and glorifies the ideals which were
cherished by the old Pharisaic party, but which were now being fast
disowned in favour of a more active role in the political life of the
nation. He pours his most scathing invectives on the Sadducees, who are
described in vii. in terms that recall the anti-Sadducean Psalms of
Solomon. His object, therefore, is to protest against the growing
secularization of the Pharisaic party through its adoption of popular
Messianic beliefs and political ideals. (See also MOSES, ASSUMPTION OF.)

_Apocalypse of Baruch--The Syriac._--This apocalypse has survived only
in the Syriac version. The Syriac is a translation from the Greek, and
the Greek in turn from the Hebrew. The book treats of the Messiah and
the Messianic kingdom, the woes of Israel in the past and the
destruction of Jerusalem in the present, as well as of theological
questions relating to original sin, free will, works, &c. The views
expressed on several of these subjects are often conflicting. We must,
therefore, assume a number of independent sources put together by an
editor or else that the book is on the whole the work of one author who
made use of independent writings but failed to blend them into one
harmonious whole. In its present form the book was written soon after
A.D. 70. For fuller treatment see BARUCH.

_4 Ezra._--This apocryph is variously named. In the first Arabic and
Ethiopic versions it is called I Ezra; in some Latin MSS. and in the
English authorized version it is 2 Ezra, and in the Armenian 3 Ezra.
With the majority of the Latin MSS. we designate the book 4 Ezra. In its
fullest form this apocryph consists of sixteen chapters, but i.-ii. and
xv.-xvi. are of different authorship from each other and from the main
work iii.-xiv. The book was written originally in Hebrew. There are
Latin, Syriac, Ethiopic, Arabic (two), and Armenian versions. The Greek
version is lost. This apocalypse is of very great importance, on account
of its very full treatment of the theological questions rife in the
latter half of the 1st century of the Christian era. The book, even if
written by one author, was based on a variety of already existing works.
It springs from the same school of thought as the _Apocalypse of
Baruch_, and its affinities with the latter are so numerous and profound
that scholars have not yet come to any consensus as to the relative
priority of either. In its present form it was composed A.D. 80-100. For
fuller treatment see EZRA.

_Apocalypse of Baruch--The Greek._--This work is referred to by Origen
(_de Princip._ II. iii. 6): "Denique etiam Baruch prophetae librum in
assertionis hujus' testimonium vocant, quod ibi de septem mundis vel
caelis evidentius indicatur." This book survives in two forms in
Slavonic and Greek. The former was translated by Bonwetsch in 1896, in
the _Nachrichten von der königl. Ges. der Wiss. zu, Gott_. pp. 91-101;
the latter by James in 1897 in _Anecdota_, ii. 84-94, with an elaborate
introduction (pp. li.-lxxi.). The Slavonic is only of secondary value,
as it is merely an abbreviated form of the Greek. Even the Greek cannot
claim to be the original work, but only to be a recension of it; for,
whereas Origen states that this apocalypse contained an account of the
seven heavens, the existing Greek work describes only five, and the
Slavonic only two. As the original, work presupposes 2 Enoch and the
Syriac _Apocalypse of Baruch_ and was known to Origen, it was written
between A.D. 80 and 200, and nearer the earlier date than the later, as
it would otherwise be hard to understand how it came to circulate among
Christians. The superscription shows points of connexion with the _Rest
of the Words of Baruch_, but little weight can be attached to the fact,
since titles and superscriptions were so frequently transformed and
expanded in ancient times. As James and Kohler have pointed out, part of
section 4 on the Vine is a Christian addition. A German translation of
the Greek appears in Kautzsch's _Apok. u. Pseud_, ii. 448-457, and a
strong article by Kohler on the Jewish authorship of the book in the
_Jewish Encyclopedia_, ii. 549-551. (See BARUCH.)

_Apocalypse of Abraham._--This book is found only in the Slavonic
(edited by Bonwetsch, _Studien zur Geschichte d. Theologie und Kirche_,
1897), a translation from the Greek. It is of Jewish origin, but in part
worked over by a Christian reviser. The first part treats of Abraham's
conversion, and the second forms an apocalyptic expansion of Gen. xv.
This book was possibly known to the author of the _Clem. Recognitions_,
i. 32, a passage, however, which may refer to Jubilees. It is most
probably distinct from the [Greek: Apokalepsis Abraam] used by the
gnostic Sethites (Epiphanius, _Haer_. xxxix. 5), which was very
heretical. On the other hand, it is probably identical with the
apocryphal book [Greek: Abraam] mentioned in the Stichometry of
Nicephorus, and the Synopsis Athanasii, together with the Apocalypses of
Enoch, &c.

_Lost Apocalypses: Prayer of Joseph._--The _Prayer of Joseph_ is quoted
by Origen [_In Joann._ II. xxv, (Lommatzsch, i. 147, 148); _in Gen._
III. ix. (Lommatzsch, viii. 30-31)]. The fragments in Origen represent
Jacob as speaking and claiming to be "the first servant in God's
presence," "the first-begotten of every creature animated by God," and
declaring that the angel who wrestled with Jacob (and was identified by
Christians with Christ) was only eighth in rank. The work was obviously
anti-Christian. (See Schürer³, iii. 265-266.)

_Book of Eldad and Modad._--This book was written in the name of the two
prophets mentioned in Num. xi. 26-29. It consisted, according to the
Targ. Jon. on Num. xi. 26-20, mainly of prophecies on Magog's last
attack on Israel. The Shepherd of Hermas quotes it _Vis._ ii. 3. (See
Marshall in Hastings' _Bible Dictionary_, i. 677.)

_Apocalypse of Elijah._--This apocalypse is mentioned in two of the
lists of books. Origen, Ambrosiaster, and Euthalius ascribe to it I Cor.
ii. 9. If they are right, the apocalypse is pre-Pauline. The peculiar
form in which I Cor. ii. 9 appears in Clemens Alex. _Protrept._ x. 94,
and the _Const. Apost._ vii. 32, shows that both have the same source,
probably this apocalypse. Epiphanius (_Haer._ xlii., ed. Oehler, vol.
ii. 678) ascribes to this work Eph. v. 14. Isr. Lévi (_Revue des études
juives_, 1880, i. 108 sqq.) argues for the existence of a Hebrew
apocalypse of Elijah from two Talmudic passages. A late work of this
name has been published by Jellinek, _Bet ha-Midrasch_, 1855, iii.
65-68, and Buttenwieser in 1897. Zahn, _Gesch. des N.T. Kanons_, ii.
801-810, assigns this apocalypse to the 2nd century A.D. (See Schürer³,
iii. 267-271.)

_Apocalypse of Zephaniah._--Apart from two of the lists this work is
known to us in its original form only through a citation in Clem. Alex.
_Strom._ v. II, 77. A Christian revision of it is probably preserved in
the two dialects of Coptic. Of these the Akhmim text is the original of
the Sahidic. These texts and their translations have been edited by
Steindorff, _Die Apokalypse des Elias, eine unbekannte Apokalypse und
Bruchstucke der Sophonias-Apokalypse_ (1809). As Schürer (_Theol.
Literaturzeitung_, 1899, No. I. 4-8) has shown, these fragments belong
most probably to the Zephaniah apocalypse. They give descriptions of
heaven and hell, and predictions of the Antichrist. In their present
form these Christianized fragments are not earlier than the 3rd century.
(See Schürer, _Gesch. des jüd. Volkes³_, iii. 271-273.)

2 _Enoch_, or the _Slavonic Enoch_, or the _Book of the Secrets of
Enoch._--This new fragment of the Enochic literature was recently
brought to light through five MSS. discovered in Russia and Servia. The
book in its present form was written before A.D. 70 in Greek by an
orthodox Hellenistic Jew, who lived in Egypt. For a fuller account see
ENOCH.

_Oracles of Hystaspes._--See under _N. T. Apocalypses_, below.

_Testament of Job._--This book was first printed from one MS. by Mai,
_Script. Vet. Nov. Coll._ (1833), VII. i. 180, and translated into
French in Migne's _Dict. des Apocryphes_, ii. 403. An excellent edition
from two MSS. is given by M.R. James, _Apocrypha Anecdota_, ii. pp.
lxxii.-cii., 104-137, who holds that the book in its present form was
written by a Christian Jew in Egypt on the basis of a Hebrew Midrash on
Job in the 2nd or 3rd century A.D. Kohler (_Kohut Memorial Volume_,
1897, pp. 264-338) has given good grounds for regarding the whole work,
with the exception of some interpolations, as "one of the most
remarkable productions of the pre-Christian era, explicable only when
viewed in the light of Hasidean practice." See _Jewish Encycl._ vii.
200-202.

_Testaments of the III. Patriarchs._--For an account of these three
Testaments (referred to in the _Apost. Const._ vi. 16), the first of
which only is preserved in the Greek and is assigned by James to the 2nd
century A.D., see that scholar's "Testament of Abraham," _Texts and
Studies_, ii. 2 (1892), which appears in two recensions from six and
three MSS. respectively, and Vassiliev's _Anecdota Graeco-Byzantina_,
(1893), pp. 292-308, from one MS. already used by James. This work was
written in Egypt, according to James, and survives also in Slavonic,
Rumanian, Ethiopic, and Arabic versions. It deals with Abraham's
reluctance to die and the means by which his death was brought about.
James holds that this book is referred to by Origen (_Hom. in Luc._
xxxv.), but this is denied by Schürer, who also questions its Jewish
origin. With the exception of chaps. x.-xi., it is really a legend and
not an apocalypse. An English translation of James's texts will be found
in the _Ante-Nicene Christian Library_ (Clark, 1897), pp. 185-201. The
Testaments of Isaac and Jacob are still preserved in Arabic and Ethiopic
(see James, _op. cit._ 140-161). See TESTAMENTS OF THE III. PATRIARCHS.

_Sibylline Oracles._--Of the books which have come down to us the main
part is Jewish, and was written at various dates, iii. 97-829, iv.-v.
are decidedly of Jewish authorship, and probably xi.-xii., xiv. and
parts of i.-ii. The oldest portions are in iii., and belong to the 2nd
century B.C.

III. NEW TESTAMENT APOCALYPTIC

When we pass from Jewish literature to that of the New Testament, we
enter into a new and larger atmosphere at once recalling and
transcending what had been best in the prophetic periods of the past.
Again the heavens had opened and the divine teaching come to mankind, no
longer merely in books bearing the names of ancient patriarchs, but on
the lips of living men, who had taken courage to appear in person as
God's messengers before His people. But though Christianity was in
spirit the descendant of ancient Jewish prophecy, it was no less truly
the child of that Judaism which had expressed its highest aspirations
and ideals in pseudepigraphic and apocalyptic literature. Hence we shall
not be surprised to find that the two tendencies are fully represented
in primitive Christianity, and, still more strange as it may appear,
that New Testament apocalyptic found a more ready hearing amid the
stress and storm of the 1st century than the prophetic side of
Christianity, and that the type of the forerunner on the side of its
declared asceticism appealed more readily to primitive Christianity than
that of Him who came "eating and drinking," declaring both worlds good
and both God's.

Early Christianity had thus naturally a special fondness for this class
of literature. It was Christianity that preserved Jewish apocalyptic,
when it was abandoned by Judaism as it sank into Rabbinism, and gave it
a Christian character either by a forcible exegesis or by a systematic
process of interpolation. Moreover, it cultivated this form of
literature and made it the vehicle of its own ideas. Though apocalyptic
served its purpose in the opening centuries of the Christian era, it
must be confessed that in _many_ of its aspects its office is
transitory, as they belong not to the essence of Christian thought. When
once it had taught men that the next world was God's world, though it
did so at the cost of relinquishing the present to Satan, it had
achieved its real task, and the time had come for it to quit the stage
of history, when Christianity appeared as the heir of this true
spiritual achievement. But Christianity was no less assuredly the heir
of ancient prophecy, and thus as spiritual representative of what was
true in prophecy and apocalyptic; its essential teaching was as that of
its Founder that both worlds were of God and that both should be made
God's.

(i.) Canonical:--
  Apocalypse in Mark xiii. (Matthew xxiv., Luke xxi.).
  2 Thessalonians ii.
  Revelation.

(ii.) Extra-Canonical:--
  Apocalypse of Peter.
  Testament of Hezekiah.
  Testament of Abraham.
  Oracles of Hystaspes.
  Vision of Isaiah.
  Shepherd of Hermas.
  5 Ezra.
  6 Ezra.
  Christian Sibyllines.
  Apocalypses of Paul, Thomas and Stephen.
  Apocalypses of Esdras, Paul, John, Peter, The Virgin, Sedrach,  Daniel.
  Revelations of Bartholomew.
  Questions of Bartholomew.

_Apocalypse in Mark xiii._--According to the teaching of the Gospels the
second advent was to take the world by surprise. Only one passage (Mark
xiii. = Matt. xxiv. = Luke xxi.) conflicts with this view, and is
therefore suspicious. This represents the second advent as heralded by a
succession of signs which are unmistakable precursors of its appearance,
such as wars, earthquakes, famines, the destruction of Jerusalem and the
like. Our suspicion is justified by a further examination of Mark xiii.
For the words "let him that _readeth_ understand" (ver. 14) indicate
that the prediction referred to appeared first not in a spoken address
but in a written form, as was characteristic of apocalypses. Again, in
ver. 30, it is declared that this generation shall not pass away until
all these things be fulfilled, whereas in 32 we have an undoubted
declaration of Christ "Of that day or of that hour knoweth no one, not
even the angels in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father." On these
and other grounds verses 7, 8, 14-20, 24-27, 30, 31 should be removed
from their present context. Taken together they constitute a Christian
adaptation of an originally Jewish work, written A.D. 67-68, during the
troubles preceding the fall of Jerusalem. The apocalypse consists of
three Acts: Act i. consisting of verses 7, 8, enumerating the woes
heralding the parusia, Act ii. describing the actual tribulation, and
Act iii. the parusia itself. (See Wendt, _Lehre Jesu_, i. 12-21;
Charles, _Eschatology_, 325 sqq.; H.S. Holtzmann, _N. T. Theol._ 1-325
sqq. with literature there given.)

_2 Thessalonians ii._--The earliest form of Pauline eschatology is
essentially Jewish. He starts from the fundamental thought of Jewish
apocalyptic that the end of the world will be brought about by the
direct intervention of God when evil has reached its climax. The
manifestation of evil culminates in the Antichrist whose parusia (2
Thess. ii. 9) is the Satanic counterfeit of that of the true Messiah.
But the climax of evil is the immediate herald of its destruction; for
thereupon Christ will descend from heaven and destroy the Antichrist
(ii. 8). Nowhere in his later epistles does this forecast of the future
reappear. Rather under the influence of the great formative Christian
conceptions he parted gradually with the eschatology he had inherited
from Judaism, and entered on a progressive development, in the course of
which the heterogeneous elements were for the most part silently
dropped.

_Revelation._--Since this book is discussed separately we shall content
ourselves here with indicating a few of the conclusions now generally
accepted. The apocalypse was written about A.D. 96. Its object, like
other Jewish apocalypses, was to encourage faith under persecution; its
burden is not a call to repentance but a promise of deliverance. It is
derived from one author, who has made free use of a variety of elements,
some of which are Jewish and consort but ill with their new context. The
question of the pseudonymity of the book is still an open one.

_Apocalypse of Peter._--Till 1892 only some five or more fragments of
this book were known to exist. These are preserved in Clem. Alex. and in
Macarius Magnes (see Hilgenfeld, _N. T. extra Can._ iv. 74 sqq.; Zahn,
_Gesch. Kanons_ ii. 818-819). It is mentioned in the Muratorian Canon,
and according to Eusebius (_H.E._ vi. 14. i) was commented on by Clement
of Alexandria. In the fragment found at Akhmim there is a prediction of
the last things, and a vision of the abode and blessedness of the
righteous, and of the abode and torments of the wicked.

_Testament of Hezekiah._--This writing is fragmentary, and has been
preserved merely as a constituent of the Ascension of Isaiah. To it
belongs iii. 13b-iv. 18 of that book. It is found under the above name,
[Greek: Diathêkê Ezekion], only in Cedrenus i. 120-121, who quotes
partially iv. 12. 14 and refers to iv. 15-18. For a full account see
ISAIAH, ASCENSION OF.

_Testament of Abraham._--This work in two recensions was first published
by James, _Texts and Studies_, ii. 2. Its editor is of opinion that it
was written by a Jewish Christian in Egypt in the 2nd century A.D., but
that it embodies legends of an earlier date, and that it received its
present form in the 9th or 10th century. It treats of Michael being sent
to announce to Abraham his death: of the tree speaking with a human
voice (iii.), Michael's sojourn with Abraham (iv.-v.) and Sarah's
recognition of him as one of the three angels, Abraham's refusal to die
(vii.), and the vision of judgment (x.-xx.).

_Oracles of Hystaspes._--This eschatological work ([Greek: Chrêseis
Hystaspon]: so named by the anonymous 5th-century writer in Buresch,
_Klaros_, 1889, p. 95) is mentioned in conjunction with the Sibyllines
by Justin (_Apol._ i. 20), Clement of Alexandria (_Strom._ vi. 5), and
Lactantius (_Inst._ VII. xv. 19; xviii. 2-3). According to Lactantius,
it prophesied the overthrow of Rome and the advent of Zeus to help the
godly and destroy the wicked, but omitted all reference to the sending
of the Son of God. According to Justin, it prophesied the destruction of
the world by fire. According to the _Apocryph of Paul_, cited by
Clement, Hystaspes foretold the conflict of the Messiah with many kings
and His advent. Finally, an unknown 5th-century writer (see Buresch,
_Klaros_, 1889, pp. 87-126) says that the _Oracles of Hystaspes_ dealt
with the incarnation of the Saviour. The work referred to in the last
two writers has Christian elements, which were absent from it in
Lactantius's copy. The lost oracles were therefore in all probability
originally Jewish, and subsequently re-edited by a Christian.

_Vision of Isaiah._--This writing has been preserved in its entirety in
the _Ascension of Isaiah_, of which it constitutes chaps, vi.-xi. Before
its incorporation in the latter work it circulated independently in
Greek. There are independent versions of these chapters in Latin and
Slavonic. (See ISAIAH, ASCENSION OF.)

_Shepherd of Hermas._--In the latter half of the 2nd century this book
enjoyed a respect bordering on that paid to the writings of the New
Testament. Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria and Origen quote it as
Scripture, though in Africa it was not held in such high consideration,
as Tertullian speaks slightingly of it. The writer belongs really to the
prophetic and not to the apocalyptic school. His book is divided into
three parts containing visions, commands, similitudes. In incidental
allusions he lets us know that he had been engaged in trade, that his
wife was a termagant, and that his children were ill brought up. Various
views have been held as to the identity of the author. Thus some have
made him out to be the Hermas to whom salutation is sent at the end of
the Epistle to the Romans, others that he was the brother of Pius,
bishop of Rome in the middle of the 2nd century, and others that he was
a contemporary of Clement, bishop of Rome at the close of the ist
century. Zahn fixes the date at 97, Salmon a few years later, Lipsius
142. The literature of this book (see HERMAS, SHEPHERD OF) is very
extensive. Among the chief editions are those of Zahn, _Der Hirt des
Hermas_ (1868); Gebhardt and Harnack, _Patres Apostolici_ (1877, with
full bibliographical material); Funk, _Patres Apost._ (1878). Further
see Harnack, _Gesch. d. altchristl. Literatur_, i. 49-58; II. i.
257-267, 437 f.

_5 Ezra._--This book, which constitutes in the later MSS. the first two
chapters to 4 Ezra, falls obviously into two parts. The first (i. 5-ii.
9) contains a strong attack on the Jews whom it regards as the people of
God; the second (ii. 10-47) addresses itself to the Christians as God's
people and promises them the heavenly kingdom. It is not improbable that
these chapters are based on an earlier Jewish writing. In its present
form it may have been written before A.D. 200, though James and other
scholars assign it to the 3rd century. Its tone is strongly anti-Jewish.
The style is very vigorous and the materials of a strongly apocalyptic
character. See Hilgenfeld, _Messias Judaeorum_ (1869); James in Bensly's
edition of 4 Ezra, pp. xxxviii.-lxxx.; Weinel in Hennecke's _N.T.
Apokryphen_, 331-336.

_6 Ezra._--This work consists of chapters xv.-xvi. of 4 Ezra. It may
have been written as an appendix to 4 Ezra, as it has no proper
introduction. Its contents relate to the destruction of the world
through war and natural catastrophes--for the heathen a source of menace
and fear, but for the persecuted people of God one of admonition and
comfort. There is nothing specifically Christian in the book, which
represents a persecution which extends over the whole eastern part of
the Empire. Moreover, the idiom is particularly Semitic. Thus we have
xv. 8 _nec sustinebo in his quae inique exercent_, that is [Hebrew:
nasa be]: in 9 _vindicans vindicabo_: in 22 _non parcet dextera mea
super peccatores_ = [Greek: pheisetai] ... [Greek: epi] = [Hebrew: al]
... [Hebrew: yahmol]. In verses 9, 19 the manifest corruptions may be
explicable from a Semitic background. There are other Hebraisms in the
text. It is true that these might have been due to the writer's
borrowings from earlier Greek works ultimately of Hebrew origin. The
date of the book is also quite uncertain, though several scholars have
ascribed it to the 3rd century.

_Christian Sibyllines._--Critics are still at variance as to the extent
of the Christian Sibyllines. It is practically agreed that vi.-viii. are
of Christian origin. As for i.-ii., xi.-xiv. most writers are in favour
of Christian authorship; but not so Geffcken (ed. _Sibyll._, 1902), who
strongly insists on the Jewish origin of large sections of these books.

_Apocalypses of Paul, Thomas and Stephen._--These are mentioned in the
Gelasian decree. The first may possibly be the [Greek: Anabagikon
Paulou] mentioned by Epiphanius (_Haer_. xxxviii. 2) as current among
the Cainites. It is not to be confounded with the apocalypse mentioned
two sections later.

_Apocalypse of Esdras._--This Greek production resembles the more
ancient fourth book of Esdras in some respects. The prophet is perplexed
about the mysteries of life, and questions God respecting them. The
punishment of the wicked especially occupies his thoughts. Since they
have sinned in consequence of Adam's fall, their fate is considered
worse than that of the irrational creation. The description of the
tortures suffered in the infernal regions is tolerably minute. At last
the prophet consents to give up his spirit to God, who has prepared for
him a crown of immortality. The book is a poor imitation of the ancient
Jewish one. It may belong, however, to the 2nd or 3rd centuries of the
Christian era. See Tischendorf, _Apocalypses Apocryphae_, pp. 24-33.

_Apocalypse of Paul._--This work (referred to by Augustine, _Tractat. in
Joan._ 98) contains a description of the things which the apostle saw in
heaven and hell. The text, as first published in the original Greek by
Tischendorf (_Apocalypses Apocr._ 34-69), consists of fifty-one
chapters, but is imperfect. Internal evidence assigns it to the time of
Theodosius, i.e. about A.D. 388. Where the author lived is uncertain. Dr
Perkins found a Syriac MS. of this apocalypse, which he translated into
English, and printed in the _Journal of the American Oriental Society_,
1864, vol. viii. This was republished by Tischendorf below the Greek
version in the above work. In 1893 the Latin version from one MS. was
edited by M.R. James, _Texts and Studies_, ii. 1-42, who shows that the
Latin version is the completest of the three, and that the Greek in its
present form is abbreviated.

_Apocalypse of John_ (Tischendorf, _Apocalypses Apocr._ 70 sqq.)
contains a description of the future state, the general resurrection and
judgment, with an account of the punishment of the wicked, as well as
the bliss of the righteous. It appears to be the work of a Jewish
Christian. The date is late, for the writer speaks of the "venerable and
holy images," as well as "the glorious and precious crosses and the
sacred things of the churches" (xiv.), which points to the 5th century,
when such things were first introduced into churches. It is a feeble
imitation of the canonical apocalypse.

_Arabic Apocalypse of Peter_ contains a narrative of events from the
foundation of the world till the second advent of Christ. The book is
said to have been written by Clement, Peter's disciple. This Arabic work
has not been printed, but a summary of the contents is given by Nicoll
in his catalogue of the Oriental MSS. belonging to the Bodleian (p. 49,
xlviii.). There are eighty-eight chapters. It is a late production; for
Ishmaelites are spoken of, the Crusades, and the taking of Jerusalem.
See Tischendorf, _Apocalypses Apocr._ pp. xx.-xxiv.

_The Apocalypse of the Virgin_, containing her descent into hell, is not
published entire, but only several portions of it from Greek MSS. in
different libraries, by Tischendorf in his _Apocalypses Apocryphae_, pp.
95 sqq.; James, _Texts and Studies_, ii. 3. 109-126.

_Apocalypse of Sedrach._--This late apocalypse, which M.R. James assigns
to the 10th or 11th century, deals with the subject of intercession for
sinners and Sedrach's unwillingness to die. See James, _Texts and
Studies_, ii. 3. 127-137.

_Apocalypse of Daniel._--See Vassiliev's _Anecdota Graeco-Byzantina_
(Moscow, 1893), pp. 38-44; _Uncanonical Books of the Old Testament_
(Venice, 1901), pp. 237 sqq., 387 sqq.

_The Revelations of Bartholomew._--Dulaurier published from a Parisian
Sahidic MS., subjoining a French translation, what is termed a fragment
of the apocryphal revelations of St Bartholomew (_Fragment des
révélations apocryphes de Saint Barthélemy, &c._, Paris, 1835), and of
the history of the religious communities founded by St Pachomius. After
narrating the pardon obtained by Adam, it is said that the Son ascending
from Olivet prays the Father on behalf of His apostles; who consequently
receive consecration from the Father, together with the Son and Holy
Spirit--Peter being made archbishop of the universe. The late date of
the production is obvious.

_Questions of St Bartholomew._--See Vassiliev, _Anec. Graeco-Byzantina_
(1893), pp. 10-22. The introduction, which is wanting in the Greek MS.,
has been supplied by a Latin translation from the Slavonic version (see
pp. vii.-ix.). The book contains disclosures by Christ, the Virgin and
Beliar and much of the subject-matter is ancient. (R. H. C.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] See the separate headings for the various apocalyptic books
    mentioned in this article.