APOLLINARIS, "the Younger" (d. A.D. 390), bishop of Laodicea in Syria.
He collaborated with his father Apollinaris the Elder in reproducing the
Old Testament in the form of Homeric and Pindaric poetry, and the New
after the fashion of Platonic dialogues, when the emperor Julian had
forbidden Christians to teach the classics. He is best known, however,
as a warm opponent of Arianism, whose eagerness to emphasize the deity
of Christ and the unity of His person led him so far as a denial of the
existence of a rational human soul ([Greek: nous]) in Christ's human
nature, this being replaced in Him by a prevailing principle of
holiness, to wit the Logos, so that His body was a glorified and
spiritualized form of humanity. Over against this the orthodox or
Catholic position maintained that Christ assumed human nature in its
entirety including the [Greek: nous], for only so could He be example
and redeemer. It was held that the system of Apollinaris was really
Docetism (see DOCETAE), that if the Godhood without constraint swayed
the manhood there was no possibility of real human probation or of real
advance in Christ's manhood. The position was accordingly condemned by
several synods and in particular by that of Constantinople (A.D. 381).
This did not prevent its having a considerable following, which after
Apollinaris's death divided into two sects, the more conservative taking
its name (Vitalians) from Vitalis, bishop of Antioch, the other
(Polemeans) adding the further assertion that the two natures were so
blended that even the body of Christ was a fit object of adoration. The
whole Apollinarian type of thought persisted in what was later the
Monophysite (q.v.) school.

  Although Apollinaris was a prolific writer, scarcely anything has
  survived under his own name. But a number of his writings are
  concealed under the names of orthodox Fathers, e.g. [Greek: He kata
  meros pistis], long ascribed to Gregory Thaumaturgus. These have been
  collected and edited by Hans Lietzmann.

  He must be distinguished from the bishop of Hierapolis who bore the
  same name, and who wrote one of the early Christian "Apologies" (c.
  170). See A. Harnack, _History of Dogma_, vols. iii. and iv. _passim_;
  R.L. Ottley, _The Doctrine of the Incarnation_; G. Voisin,
  _L'Apollinarisme_ (Louvain, 1901); H. Lietzmann, _Apollinaris von
  Laodicea und seine Schule_ (Tubingen, 1905).