APOLLINARIS SIDONIUS, CAIUS SOLLIUS (c. 430-487 or 488), Christian
writer and bishop, was born in Lyons about A.D. 430. Belonging to a
noble family, he was educated under the best masters, and particularly
excelled in poetry and polite literature. He married (about 452)
Papianilla, the daughter of Avitus, who was consul and afterwards
emperor. But Majorianus, in the year 457, having deprived Avitus of the
empire and taken the city of Lyons, Apollinaris fell into the hands of
the enemy. The reputation of his learning led Majorianus to treat him
with the greatest respect. In return Apollinaris composed a panegyric in
his honour (as he had previously done for Avitus), which won for him a
statue at Rome and the title of count. In 467 the emperor Anthemius
rewarded him for the panegyric which he had written in honour of him by
raising him to the post of prefect of Rome, and afterwards to the
dignity of a patrician and senator. In 472, more for his political than
for his theological abilities, he was chosen to succeed Eparchius in the
bishopric of Arverna (Clermont). On the capture of that city by the
Goths in 474 he was imprisoned, as he had taken an active part in its
defence; but he was afterwards restored by Euric, king of the Goths, and
continued to govern his bishopric as before. He died in A.D. 487 or 488.
His extant works are his _Panegyrics_ on different emperors (in which he
draws largely upon Statius, Ausonius and Claudian); and nine books of
_Letters_ and _Poems_, whose chief value consists in the light they shed
on the political and literary history of the 5th century. The _Letters_,
which are very stilted, also reveal Apollinaris as a man of genial
temper, fond of good living and of pleasure. The best edition is that in
the _Monumenta Germaniae Historica_ (Berlin, 1887), which gives a survey
of the manuscripts.

  Apollinaris Sidonius (the names are commonly inverted by the French)
  is the subject of numerous monographs, historical and literary. See,
  for bibliography, A. Molinier, _Sources de l'histoire de France_, no.
  136 (vol. i.). S. Dill, _Roman Society in the Fifth Century_, and T.
  Hodgkin, _Italy and her Invaders_ (vol. vii.), contain interesting
  sections on Apollinaris. See also Teuffel and Ebert's histories of
  Latin literature.