BANNOCKBURN, a town of Stirlingshire, Scotland. Pop. (1901) 2444. It is
situated on the "burn" from which its name is derived, the Bannock (Gaelic,
_ban oc_, "white, shining stream"), a right-hand affluent of the Forth,
which was once a considerable river. The town lies 2¼ m. S.S.E. of Stirling
by the Caledonian railway, and now has thriving manufactures of woollens
(chiefly tweeds, carpets and tartans) and leather, though at the beginning
of the 19th century it was only a village. The Bore Stone, in which Bruce
planted his standard before the battle in which he defeated Edward II. in
1314 (see below), is preserved by an iron grating. A mile to the west is
the Gillies' Hill, now finely wooded, over which the Scots' camp-followers
appeared to complete the discomfiture of the English, to which event it
owes its name. Bannockburn House was Prince Charles Edward's headquarters
in January 1746 before the fight at Falkirk.

The famous battle of Bannockburn (24th June 1314) was fought for the relief
of Stirling Castle, which was besieged by the Scottish forces under Robert
Bruce. The English governor of Stirling had promised that, if he were not
relieved by that date, he would surrender the castle, and Edward II.
hastily collected an army in the northern and midland counties of England.
Bruce made no attempt to defend the border, and selected his defensive
position on the Bannock Burn, 2½ m. S. of Stirling. His front was covered
by the marshy bed of the stream, his left flank by its northerly bend
towards the Forth, his right by a group of woods, behind which, until the
English army appeared, the Scots concealed themselves. Two corps were left
in the open in observation, one at St Ninian's to watch the lower course of
the burn, one to guard the point at which the Falkirk-Stirling road crosses
the burn. On the 23rd the van of the army of Edward, which numbered about
60,000 against the 40,000 of the Scots, appeared to the south of the burn
and at once despatched two bodies of men towards Stirling, the first by the
direct road, the other over the lower Bannock Burn near its junction with
the Forth. The former was met by the Scottish outpost on the road, and here
occurred the famous single combat in which Robert Bruce, though not fully
armed for battle, killed Sir Henry Bohun. The English corps which took the
other route was met and after a severe struggle defeated by the second
Scottish outpost near St Ninian's. The English army assembled for battle on
the following day. Early on St John's day the Scottish army took up its
assigned positions. Three corps of pikemen in solid masses formed the first
line, which was kept out of sight behind the crest until the enemy advanced
in earnest. A line of "pottes" (military pits) had been previously dug to
give additional protection to the front, which extended for about one mile
from wing to wing. The reserve under Bruce consisted of a corps of pikemen
and a squadron of 500 chosen men-at-arms under Sir Robert Keith, the
marischal of Scotland. The line of the defenders was unusually dense;
Edward, in forming up on an equal front with greatly superior numbers,
found his army almost hopelessly cramped. The attacking army was formed in
an unwieldy mass of ten "battles," each consisting of horse and foot, and
the whole formed in three lines each of three "battles," with the tenth
"battle" as a reserve in rear. In this order the English moved down into
the valley for a direct attack, the cavalry of each "battle" in first line,
the foot in second. Ignoring the lesson of Falkirk (_q.v._), the mounted
men rode through the morass and up the slope, which was now crowned by the
three great masses of the Scottish pikemen. The attack of the English
failed to make any gap in the line of defence, many knights and men-at-arms
were injured by falling into the pits, and the battle became a _mêlée_, the
Scots, with better fortune than at Falkirk and Flodden, presenting always
an impenetrable hedge of spears, the English, too stubborn to draw off,
constantly trying in vain to break it down. So great was the press that the
"battles" of the second line which followed the first were unable to reach
the front and stood on the slope, powerless to take part in the battle on
the crest. The advance of the third English line only made matters worse,
and the sole attempt to deploy the archers was crushed with great slaughter
by the charge of Keith's mounted men. Bruce threw his infantry reserve into
the battle, the arrows of the English archers wounded the men-at-arms of
their own side, and the remnants of the leading line were tired and
disheartened when the final impetus to their rout was given by the historic
charge of the "gillies," some thousands of Scottish camp-followers who
suddenly emerged from the woods, blowing horns, waving such weapons as they
possessed, and holding aloft [v.03 p.0355] improvised banners. Their cries
of "slay, slay!" seemed to the wearied English to betoken the advance of a
great reserve, and in a few minutes the whole English army broke and fled
in disorder down the slope. Many perished in the burn, and the demoralized
fugitives were hunted by the peasantry until they re-crossed the English
border. One earl, forty-two barons and bannerets, two hundred knights,
seven hundred esquires and probably 10,000 foot were killed in the battle
and the pursuit. One earl, twenty-two barons and bannerets and sixty-eight
knights fell into the hands of the victors, whose total loss of 4000 men
included, it is said, only two knights.

See J. E. Shearer, _Fact and Fiction in the Story of Bannockburn_ (1909).