BANNU, a town and district of British India, in the Derajat division of the
North-West Frontier Province. The town (also called Edwardesabad and
Dhulipnagar) lies in the north-west corner of the district, in the valley
of the Kurram river. Pop. (1901) 14,300. It forms the base for all punitive
expeditions to the Tochi Valley and Waziri frontier.

The district of Bannu, which only consists of the Bannu and Marwat tahsils
since the constitution of the North-West Frontier Province in 1901,
contains an area of 1680 sq. m. lying north of the Indus. The cis-Indus
portions of Bannu and Dera Ismail Khan now comprises the new Punjab
district of Mianwali. In addition to the Indus the other streams flowing
through the district are the Kurram (which falls into the Indus) and its
tributary the Gambila. The valley of Bannu proper, stretching to the foot
of the frontier hills, forms an irregular oval, measuring 60 m. from north
to south and about 40 m. from east to west. In 1901 the population was
231,485, of whom the great majority were Mahommedans. The principal tribes
inhabiting the district are: (1) Waziri Pathans, recent immigrants from the
hills, for the most part peaceable and good cultivators; (2) Marwats, a
Pathan race, inhabiting the lower and more sandy portions of the Bannu
valley; (3) Bannuchis, a mongrel Afghan tribe of bad physique and mean
vices. The inhabitants of this district have always been very independent
and stubbornly resisted the Afghan and Sikh predecessors of the British.
After the annexation of the Punjab the valley was administered by Herbert
Edwardes so thoroughly that it became a source of strength instead of
weakness during the Mutiny. The inhabitants of the valley itself are now
peaceful, but it is always subject to incursion from the Waziri tribes in
the Tochi valley and the neighbouring hills. Salt is quarried on government
account at Kalabagh and alum is largely obtained in the same neighbourhood.
The chief export is wheat. A military road leads from Bannu town towards
Dera Ismail Khan. The Indus, which is nowhere bridged within the district,
is navigable for native boats throughout its course of 76 m. The chief
frontier tribes on the border are the Waziris, Battannis and Dawaris. All
these are described under their separate names.