BANSWARA (literally "the forest country"), a rajput feudatory state in
Rajputana, India. It borders on Gujarat and is bounded on the N. by the
native states of Dungarpur and Udaipur or Mewar; on the N.E. and E. by
Partabgarh; on the S. by the dominions of Holkar and the state of Jabua and
on the W. by the state of Rewa Kantha. Banswara state is about 45 m. in
length from N. to S., and 33 m. in breadth from E. to W., and has an area
of 1946 sq. m. The population in 1901 was 165,350. The Mahi is the only
river in the state and great scarcity of water occurs in the dry season.
The Banswara chief belongs to the family of Udaipur. During the vigour of
the Delhi empire Banswara formed one of its dependencies; on its decline
the state passed under the Mahrattas. Wearied out by their oppressions, its
chief in 1812 petitioned for English protection, on the condition of his
state becoming tributary on the expulsion of the Mahrattas. The treaty of
1818 gave effect to this arrangement, Britain guaranteeing the prince
against external enemies and refractory chiefs; he, on his part, pledging
himself to be guided by her representative in the administration of his
state. The chief is assisted in the administration by a _hamdar_ or
minister. The estimated gross revenue is £17,000 and the tribute £2500. The
custom of suttee, or widow-burning, has long been abolished in the state,
but the people retain all their superstitions regarding witches and
sorcery; and as late as 1870, a Bhil woman, about eighty years old, was
swung to death at Kushalgarh on an accusation of witchcraft. The
perpetrators of the crime were sentenced to five years' rigorous
imprisonment, but they had the sympathy of the people on their side. The
chief town is Banswara, situated about 8 m. W. of the Mahi river,
surrounded by an old disused rampart and adorned by various Hindu temples,
with the battlements of the chief's palace overlooking it. Its population
in 1901 was 7038. The petty state of Kushalgarh is feudatory to Banswara.