BAPTISTS, a body of Christians, distinguished, as their name imports, from
other denominations by the view they hold respecting the ordinance of
baptism (_q.v._). This distinctive view, common and peculiar to all
Baptists, is that baptism should be administered to believers only. The
mode of administration of the ordinance has not always been the same, and
some Baptists (_e.g._ the Mennonites) still practise baptism by pouring or
sprinkling, but among those who will here be styled _modern_ Baptists, the
mode of administration is also distinctive, to wit, immersion. It should,
however, be borne in mind that immersion is not peculiar to the modern
Baptists. It has always been recognized by Paedobaptists as a legitimate
mode, and is still practised to the exclusion of other modes by a very
large proportion of paedobaptist Christendom (_e.g._ the Orthodox Eastern
Church). We shall distinguish here between two main groups of Baptists in
Europe; the Anabaptists, now practically extinct, and the modern Baptists
whose churches are in nearly every European country and in all other
countries where white men reside.

I. THE ANABAPTISTS

The great spiritual movement of the 15th and 16th centuries had for its
most general characteristic, revolt against authority. This showed itself
not merely in the anti-papal reformation of Luther, but also in the
anti-feudal rising of the peasants and in a variety of anti-ecclesiastical
movements within the reformation areas themselves. One of the most notable
of these radical anti-ecclesiastical movements was that of the Zwickau
prophets, (Marcus Stübner, Nikolaus Storch and Thomas Münzer): the most
vigorous and notorious that of the Münster Anabaptists. Although they have
been called the "harbingers" of the Anabaptists, the characteristic
teaching of the Zwickau prophets was not Anabaptism. (See, however,
ANABAPTISTS.) For although Münzer repudiated infant baptism in theory, he
did not relinquish its practice, nor did he insist on the re-baptism of
believers. The characteristic teaching of the Zwickau movement, so closely
linked with the peasant rising, was the great emphasis laid upon the "inner
word." Divine revelation, said Münzer, was not received from the church,
nor from preaching, least of all from the dead letter of the Bible; it was
received solely and directly from the Spirit of God. It is this daring
faith in divine illumination that brings the Zwickau teachers most nearly
into touch with the Anabaptists. But if they are not typical of Anabaptism,
still less are the later representatives of the movement in the last sad
months at Münster.

The beginnings of the Anabaptist movement proper were in [v.03 p.0371]
Zürich, where Wilheld Reubli (1480-1554), Konrad Grebel (d. 1526), Felix
Manz (d. 1527) and Simon Strumpf separated from Zwingli and proposed to
form a separate church. They repudiated the use of force, advocated a
scriptural communism of goods, and asserted that Christians must always
exercise love and patience towards each other and so be independent of
worldly tribunals. But their most radical doctrine was the rejection of
infant baptism as unscriptural. They rapidly gained adherents, among whom
was Hans Brödli, pastor of Zollikon. Their refusal, however, to baptize
infants, and the formation of a separate church as the outcome of this
refusal, brought upon them the condemnation of Zwingli, and a number of
them were banished. This act of banishment, however, drove Jörg Blaurock,
Konrad Grebel and others to take the step which definitely instituted
"Anabaptism": they baptized one another and then partook of the Lord's
Supper together. This step took them much farther than the repudiation of
paedobaptism. It formed a new religious community, which sought to fashion
itself on the model of primitive Christianity, rejecting all tradition and
accretions later than New Testament records. Its members claimed to get
back to the simple church founded on brotherly love. The result was that
their numbers grew with astonishing rapidity, and scholarly saints like
Balthasar Hubmaier (_ca._ 1480-1528) and Hans Denck (_ca._ 1495-1527)
joined them. Hubmaier brought no new adherents with him, and in 1525
himself baptized 300 converts. This baptism, however, was not immersion.
Blaurock and Grebel baptized each other, and many adherents, kneeling
together in an ordinary room. Hubmaier baptized his 300 from one bucket.
The mode was sprinkling or pouring. In all this the Anabaptists had
maintained one central article of faith that linked them to the Zwickau
prophets, belief in conscience, religious feeling, or inner light, as the
sole true beginning or ground of religion; and one other article, held with
equal vigour and sincerity, that true Christians are like sheep among
wolves, and must on no account defend themselves from their enemies or take
vengeance for wrong done. Very soon this their faith was put to fiery test.
Not only were Catholics and Protestants opposed to them on doctrinal
grounds, but the secular powers, fearing that the new teaching was
potentially as revolutionary as Münzer's radicalism had been, soon
instituted a persecution of the Anabaptists. On the 7th of March 1526 the
Zürich Rath issued an edict threatening all who were baptized anew with
death by drowning, and in 1529 the emperor Charles V., at the diet of
Spires, ordered Anabaptists to be put to death with fire and sword without
even the form of ecclesiastical trial. A cruel persecution arose. Manz was
drowned at Zürich and Michael Sattler (_ca._ 1495-1527) burned to death
after torture in 1527; Hubmaier was burned in 1528 and Blaurock in 1529,
and Sebastian Franck (1499-1542) asserts that the number of slain was in
1530 already about 2000.

Two results followed from this persecution. First, the development of a
self-contained and homogeneous community was made impossible. No
opportunity for the adoption of any common confession was given. Only a few
great doctrines are seen to have been generally held by Anabaptists--such
as the baptism of believers only, the rejection of the Lutheran doctrine of
justification by faith as onesided and the simple practice of the breaking
of bread. This last, the Anabaptist doctrine of the Lord's Supper, was to
the effect that brothers and sisters in Christ should partake in
remembrance of the death of Christ, and that they should thereby renew the
bond of brotherly love as the basis of neighbourly life. In the second
place, the persecution deprived the Anabaptists of the noble leaders who
had preached non-resistance and at the same time provoked others to an
attitude of vengeance which culminated in the horrors of Münster. For
Melchior Hofmann (_ca._ 1498-1543 or 1544) having taken the Anabaptist
teaching to Holland, there arose in Haarlem a preacher of vengeance, Jan
Matthisson or Matthyszoon (Matthys) (d. 1534) by name, who, prophesying a
speedy end of the world and establishment of the kingdom of heaven,
obtained many adherents, and despatched Boekebinder and de Kniper to
Münster. Here the attempt was made to realise Matthisson's ideals. All who
did not embrace Anabaptism were driven from Münster (1533), and Bernt
Knipperdolling (_ca._ 1495-1536) became burgomaster. The town was now
besieged and Matthisson was killed early in 1534. John (Johann Bockelson)
of Leiden (1510-1536) took his place and the town became the scene of the
grossest licence and cruelty, until in 1535 it was taken by the besieging
bishop. Unhappily the Anabaptists have always been remembered by the crimes
of John of Leiden and the revelry of Münster. They should really be known
by the teaching and martyrdom of Blaurock, Grebel and Hubmaier, and by the
gentle learning and piety of Hans Denck--of whom, with many hundred others,
"the world was not worthy."

For the teaching of the Anabaptists, see ANABAPTISTS.

Reference has already been made to the reason why a common Anabaptist
confession was never made public. Probably, however, the earliest
confession of faith of any Baptist community is that given by Zwingli in
the second part of his _Elenchus contra Catabaptistas_, published in 1527.
Zwingli professes to give it entire, translating it, as he says, _ad
verbum_ into Latin. Whatever opinion may be held as to the orthodoxy of the
seven articles of the Anabaptists, the vehemence with which they were
opposed, and the epithets of abuse which were heaped upon the unfortunate
sect that maintained them, cannot fail to astonish those used to
toleration. Zwingli, who details these articles, as he says, that the world
may see that they are "fanatical, stolid, audacious, impious," can scarcely
be acquitted of unfairness in joining together two of them,--the fourth and
fifth,--thus making the article treat "of the avoiding of abominable
pastors in the church" (_Super devitatione abominabilium pastorum in
Ecclesia_), though there is nothing about pastors in the fourth article,
and nothing about abominations in the fifth, and though in a marginal note
he himself explains that the first two copies that were sent him read as he
does, but the other copies make two articles, as in fact they evidently
are. It is strange that the Protestant Council of Zürich, which had
scarcely won its own liberty, and was still in dread of the persecution of
the Romanists, should pass the decree which instituted the cruel
persecution of the Anabaptists.

After Münster had fallen the harassed remnants of the Anabaptists were
gathered together under Menno Simonis, who joined them in 1537. His
moderation and piety held in check the turbulence of the more fanatical
amongst them. He died in 1561 after a life passed amidst continual dangers
and conflicts. His name remains as the designation of the Mennonites
(_q.v._), who eventually settled in the Netherlands under the protection of
William the Silent, prince of Orange.

Of the introduction of Anabaptist views into England we have no certain
knowledge. Fox relates that "the registers of London make mention of
certain Dutchmen counted for Anabaptists, of whom ten were put to death in
sundry places in the realm, _anno 1535_; other ten repented and were
saved." In 1536 King Henry VIII. issued a proclamation together with
articles concerning faith agreed upon by Convocation, in which the clergy
are told to instruct the people that they ought to repute and take "the
Anabaptists' opinions for detestable heresies and to be utterly condemned."
Thomas Fuller (1608-1661) tells us from Stow's _Chronicles_ that, in the
year 1538, "four Anabaptists, three men and one woman, all Dutch, bare
faggots at Paul's Cross, and three days after a man and woman of their sect
was burnt in Smithfield." In the reign of Edward VI., after the return of
the exiles from Zürich, John Hooper (bishop of Gloucester and Worcester, d.
1555) writes to his friend Bullinger in 1549, that he reads "a public
lecture twice in the day to so numerous an audience that the church cannot
contain them," and adds, "the Anabaptists flock to the place and give me
much trouble." It would seem that at this time they were united together in
communities separate from the established Church. Latimer, in 1552, speaks
of them as segregating themselves from the company of other men. In the
sixth examination of John Philpot (1516-1555) in 1555 we are told that Lord
Riche said to him, "All heretics do boast of the Spirit of God, and every
one would have a church by himself, as Joan of Kent and the Anabaptists."
Philpot was imprisoned [v.03 p.0372] soon after Mary's accession in 1553;
and it is very pleasing to find, amidst the records of intense bitterness
and rancour which characterized these times, and with which Romanist and
Protestant alike assailed the persecuted Anabaptists, a letter of
Philpot's, to a friend of his, "prisoner the same time in Newgate," who
held the condemned opinions. His friend had written to ask his judgment
concerning the baptism of infants. Philpot in a long reply, whilst
maintaining the obligation of infant baptism, yet addresses his
correspondent as, "dear brother, saint, and fellow-prisoner for the truth
of Christ's gospel"; and at the close of his argument he says, "I beseech
thee, dear brother in the gospel, follow the steps of the faith of the
glorious martyrs in the primitive church, and of such as at this day follow
the same."

Many Anabaptist communities existed in England toward the end of the 16th
century, particularly in East Anglia, Kent and London. Their most notable
representative was Robert Cooke, but they were more notorious for heretical
views as to the Virgin Mary (see ANABAPTISTS) than for their
anti-paedobaptist position. It was for these views that Joan Boucher of
Kent was burnt in 1550. There is no doubt that these prepared the way for
the coming of the modern Baptists, but "the truth is that, while the
Anabaptists in England raised the question of baptism, they were almost
entirely a foreign importation, an alien element; and the rise of the
Baptist churches was wholly independent of them."

II. THE MODERN BAPTISTS

1. _Great Britain and Ireland._--If the Anabaptists of England were not the
progenitors of the modern Baptist church, we must look abroad for the
beginnings of that movement. Although there were doubtless many who held
Baptist views scattered among the Independent communities, it was not until
the time of John Smith or Smyth (d. 1612) that the modern Baptist movement
in England broke away from Brownism. Smyth was appointed preacher of the
city of Lincoln in 1600 as an ordained clergyman, but became a separatist
in 1605 or 1606, and, soon after, emigrated under stress of persecution
with the Gainsborough Independents to Amsterdam. With Thomas Helwys (_ca._
1560-_ca._ 1616) and Morton he joined the "Ancient" church there, but,
coming under Mennonite teaching in 1609, he separated from the
Independents, baptized himself (hence he is called the "Se-baptist"),
Helwys and others probably according to the Anabaptist or Mennonite fashion
of pouring. These then formed the first English Baptist Church which in
1611 published "a declaration of faith of English people remaining at
Amsterdam in Holland." The article relating to baptism is as
follows:--"That every church is to receive in all their members by baptism
upon the confession of their faith and sins, wrought by the preaching of
the gospel according to the primitive institution and practice. And
therefore churches constituted after any other manner, or of any other
persons, are not according to Christ's testament. That baptism or washing
with water is the outward manifestation of dying unto sin and walking in
newness of life; and therefore in no wise appertaineth to infants." They
held "that no church ought to challenge any prerogative over any other";
and that "the magistrate is not to meddle with religion, or matters of
conscience nor compel men to this or that form of religion." This is the
first known expression of absolute liberty of conscience in any confession
of faith.

Smyth died in Holland, but in 1612 Helwys returned to England with his
church and formed the first Baptist church worshipping on English soil. The
church met in Newgate Street, London, and was the origin of the "General"
Baptist denomination. Helwys and his followers were Arminians, repudiating
with heat the Calvinistic doctrine of predestination. They thus differed
from other Independents. "They also differed on the power of the magistrate
in matters of belief and conscience. It was, in short, from their little
dingy meeting house ... that there flashed out, first in England, the
absolute doctrine of Religious Liberty" (Prof. Masson). Leonard Busher, the
author of "Religious Peace: or a Plea for Liberty of Conscience," was a
member of this church.

The next great event in the history of the Baptists (though it should be
mentioned that the last execution for heresy in England by burning was that
of a Baptist, Edward Wightman, at Lichfield 1612) is the rise of the first
Calvinistic or Particular Baptist Church. This was the Jacob church in
Southwark, which numbered among its members John Lothropp or Lathrop (d.
1653), Praise-God Barbon (_ca._ 1596-1679), Henry Jessey (1601-1663),
Hanserd Knollys (_ca._ 1599-1691) and William Kiffin (1616-1701). It was
originally Independent but then became Baptist. From this six other
churches sprang, five of which were Baptist. Before the Jacob church,
however, had itself become Baptist, it dismissed from its membership a
group of its members (the church having grown beyond what was regarded as
proper limits) who, in 1633, became the first Particular Baptist Church.

Thus there were now in existence in England two sets of Baptists whose
origins were quite distinct and who never had any real intercourse as
churches. They differed in many respects. The General Baptists were
Arminian, owing to the influence of the Mennonite Anabaptists. The
Particular Baptists were Calvinist, springing as they did from the
Independents. But on the question of Baptism both groups, while they
utterly rejected the baptism of infants, were as yet unpledged to immersion
and rarely practised it. The development of their doctrine as to baptism
was marked along three lines of dispute:--(1) who is the proper
administrator of baptism? (2) who are the proper subjects? and (3) what is
the proper mode? Eventually agreement was reached, and in 1644 a Confession
of Faith was published in the names of the Particular Baptist churches of
London, now grown to seven, "commonly (though falsely) called Anabaptist."

The article on baptism is as follows:--"That baptism is an ordinance of the
New Testament given by Christ to be dispensed only upon persons professing
faith, or that are disciples, or taught, who, upon a profession of faith,
ought to be baptized." "The way and manner of dispensing this ordinance the
Scripture holds out to be dipping or plunging the whole body under water."
They further declare (particularly in order that they may avoid the charge
of being Anabaptists) that "a civil magistracy is an ordinance of God,"
which they are bound to obey. They speak of the "breathing time" which they
have had of late, and their hope that God would, as they say, "incline the
magistrates' hearts so for to tender our consciences as that we might be
protected by them from wrong, injury, oppression and molestation"; and then
they proceed: "But if God withhold the magistrates' allowance and
furtherance herein, yet we must, notwithstanding, proceed together in
Christian communion, not daring to give place to suspend our practice, but
to walk in obedience to Christ in the profession and holding forth this
faith before mentioned, even in the midst of all trials and afflictions,
not accounting our goods, lands, wives, children, fathers, mothers,
brethren, sisters, yea, and our own lives, dear unto us, so that we may
finish our course with joy; remembering always that we ought to obey God
rather than men." They end their confession thus: "If any take this that we
have said to be heresy, then do we with the apostle freely confess, that
after the way which they call heresy worship we the God of our fathers,
believing all things which are written in the Law and in the Prophets and
Apostles, desiring from our souls to disclaim all heresies and opinions
which are not after Christ, and to be stedfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord, as knowing our labour shall not be in vain in the
Lord." The "breathing time" was not of long continuance. Soon after the
Restoration (1660) the meetings of nonconformists were continually
disturbed and preachers were fined or imprisoned. One instance of these
persecutions will, perhaps, be more impressive than any general statements.
In the records of the Broadmead Baptist Church, Bristol, we find this
remark: "On the 29th of November 1685 our pastor, Brother Fownes, died in
Gloucester jail, having been kept there for two years and about nine months
a prisoner, unjustly and maliciously, for the testimony of Jesus and
preaching the gospel. He was a man of great learning, of a sound judgment,
an able preacher, having great knowledge in divinity, law, physic, &c.; a
bold and patient sufferer for the Lord Jesus and the gospel he preached."

[v.03 p.0373] With the Revolution of 1688, and the passing of the Act of
Toleration in 1689, the history of the persecution of Baptists, as well as
of other Protestant dissenters, ends. The removal of the remaining
disabilities such as those imposed by the Test and Corporation Acts
repealed in 1828, has no special bearing on Baptists more than on other
nonconformists. The ministers of the "three denominations of
dissenters,"--Presbyterians, Independents and Baptists,--resident in London
and the neighbourhood, had the privilege accorded to them of presenting on
proper occasions an address to the sovereign in state, a privilege which
they still enjoy under the name of "the General Body of Protestant
Dissenting Ministers of the three Denominations." The "General Body" was
not organized until 1727.

The Baptists, having had a double origin, continued for many years in two
sections--those who in accordance with Arminian views held the doctrine of
"General Redemption," and those who, agreeing with the Calvinistic theory,
held the doctrine of "Particular Redemption"; and hence they were known
respectively as General Baptists and Particular Baptists. In the 18th
century many of the General Baptists gradually adopted the Arian, or,
perhaps, the Socinian theory; whilst, on the other hand, the Calvinism of
the Particular Baptists in many of the churches became more rigid, and
approached or actually became Antinomianism. In 1770 the orthodox portion
of the General Baptists, mainly under the influence of Dan Taylor (b.
1738), formed themselves into a separate association, under the name of the
General Baptist New Connection, since which time the "Old Connection" has
gradually merged into the Unitarian denomination. By the beginning of the
19th century the New Connection numbered 40 churches and 3400 members. The
old General Baptists "still keep up a shadowy legal existence." Towards the
end of the 18th century many of the Particular Baptist churches became more
moderate in their Calvinism, a result largely attributable to the writings
of Andrew Fuller. Up to this time a great majority of the Baptists admitted
none either to membership or communion who were not baptized, the principal
exception being the churches in Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire, founded or
influenced by Bunyan, who maintained that difference of opinion in respect
to water baptism was no bar to communion. At the beginning of the 19th
century this question was the occasion of great and long-continued
discussion, in which the celebrated Robert Hall (1764-1831) took a
principal part. The practice of mixed communion gradually spread in the
denomination. Still more recently many Baptist churches have considered it
right to admit to full membership persons professing faith in Christ, who
do not agree with them respecting the ordinance of baptism. Such churches
justify their practice on the ground that they ought to grant to all their
fellow-Christians the same right of private judgment as they claim for
themselves. It may not be out of place here to correct the mistake, which
is by no means uncommon, that the terms Particular and General as applied
to Baptist congregations were intended to express this difference in their
practice, whereas these terms related, as has been already said, to the
difference in their doctrinal views. The difference now under consideration
is expressed by the terms "strict" and "open," according as communion (or
membership) is or is not confined to persons who, according to their view,
are baptized.

In 1891, largely under the influence of Dr John Clifford, a leading General
Baptist, the two denominations, General and Particular, were united, there
being now but one body called "The Baptist Union of Great Britain and
Ireland." This Union, however, is purely voluntary, and some Baptist
churches, a few of them prosperous and powerful, hold aloof from their
sister churches so far as organization is concerned.

There are other Baptist bodies outside the Baptist Union beside certain
isolated churches. Throughout England there are many "Strict" Baptist
churches which really form a separate denomination. For the most part they
are linked together according to geographical distribution in associations,
such as the "Metropolitan Association of Strict Baptist Churches," and the
"Suffolk and Norfolk Association of Particular Baptist Churches." In the
latter case the name "Particular" is preferred, but the association holds
aloof from other Baptist churches because its principles are "strict."
There is, however, no national Union. Indeed, the Strict Baptists are
themselves divided into the "Standard" and "Vessel" parties--names derived
from the "Gospel Standard" and "Earthen Vessel," the organs of the rival
groups.

The general characteristic of the Strict Baptists is their rigorous
adherence to a type of Calvinistic theology now generally obsolete, and
their insistence upon baptism as the condition of Christian communion.
Their loose organization makes it impossible to obtain accurate statistics,
but the number of their adherents is small. There is a strict Baptist
Missionary Society (founded 1860, refounded 1897) which conducts mission
work in South India. The income of this society was £1146 in 1905. It
comprises 730 church members and 72 pastors and workers.

The Baptists early felt the necessity of providing an educated ministry for
their congregations. Some of their leading pastors had been educated in one
or other of the English universities. Others had by their own efforts
obtained a large amount of learning, amongst whom Dr John Gill was eminent
for his knowledge of Hebrew, as shown in his _Exposition of the Holy
Scriptures_, a work in 9 vols. folio, 1746-1766. Edward Terrill, who died
in 1685, left a considerable part of his estate for the instruction of
young men desiring to be trained for the ministry, under the
superintendence of the pastor of the Broadmead Church, Bristol, of which he
was a member. Other bequests for the same purpose were made, and from the
year 1720 the Baptist Academy, as it was then called, received young men as
students for the ministry among the Baptists. In 1770 the Bristol Education
Society was formed to enlarge this academy; and about the year 1811 the
present Bristol Baptist College was erected. In the north of England a
similar education society was formed in 1804 at Bradford, Yorkshire, which
has since been removed to Rawdon, near Leeds. In London another college was
formed in 1810 at Stepney; it was removed to Regent's Park in 1856. The
Pastors' College in connexion with the Metropolitan Tabernacle was
instituted in 1856, and in 1866 the present Baptist College at Manchester
was instituted at Bury in the interests of the "Strict" Baptist views.
Besides these, which were voluntary colleges not under denominational
control, the General Baptists maintained a college since 1797, which, since
the amalgamation of the two Baptist bodies, has become also a voluntary
institution, though previously supported by the General Baptist
Association. It is called the "Midland Baptist College," and is situated in
Nottingham. There is also a Baptist theological college in Glasgow, and
there are two colleges in Wales and one in Ireland. The total number of
students in these institutions is about 210.

The Baptists were the first denomination of British Christians to undertake
in a systematic way that work of missions to the heathen, which became so
prominent a feature in the religious activity of the 19th century. As early
as the year 1784 the Northamptonshire Association of Baptist churches
resolved to recommend that the first Monday of every month should be set
apart for prayer for the spread of the gospel. Shortly after, in 1792, the
Baptist Missionary Society was formed at Kettering in Northamptonshire,
after a sermon on Isaiah lii. 2, 3, preached by William Carey (1761-1834),
the prime mover in the work, in which he urged two points: "Expect great
things from God; attempt great things for God." In the course of the
following year Carey sailed for India, where he was joined a few years
later by Marshman and Ward, and the mission was established at Serampore.
The great work of Dr Carey's life was the translation of the Bible into the
various languages and dialects of India. The society's operations are now
carried on, not only in the East, but in the West Indies, China, Africa
(chiefly on the Congo river), and Europe.

In regard to church government, the Baptists agree with the
Congregationalists that each separate church is complete in itself, and
has, therefore, power to choose its own ministers and to make such
regulations as it deems to be most in accordance with the purpose of its
existence, that is, the advancement of the kingdom of Christ. A
comparatively small section of the denomination maintain that a "plurality
of elders" or pastors is required for the complete organization of every
separate church. This is the distinctive peculiarity of those churches in
Scotland and the north of England which are known as _Scotch Baptists_. The
largest church of this section, consisting of approximately 500 members,
originated in Edinburgh in 1765, before which date only one Baptist
church--that of Keiss in Caithness, formed about 1750--appears to have
existed in Scotland. The greater number of the churches are united in
association voluntarily formed, all of them determined by geographical
limits. The associations, as well as the churches not in connexion with
them, are united together in the Baptist Union of Great Britain and
Ireland, formed in 1813 by the Particular Baptists. This union, however,
exerts no authoritative action over the separate churches. One important
part of the work of the union is the collection of information in which all
the churches are interested. In 1909 there were in the United Kingdom:
Baptist churches, 3046; chapels, 4124; sittings, 1,450,352; members,
424,008; Sunday school teachers, 58,687; Sunday scholars, 578,344; local
preachers, 5615; and pastors in charge, 2078.

At the beginning of the 20th century the Baptist Union collected a
"Twentieth Century Fund" of £250,000, which has largely assisted the
formation of new churches, and gives an indication of [v.03 p.0374] the
unity and virility of the denomination. A still stronger evidence to the
same effect was given by the Religious Census taken in 1904. While this
only applied to London, its results are valuable as showing the comparative
strength of the Baptist Church. These results are to the effect that in all
respects the Baptists come second to the Anglicans in the following three
particulars:--(1) Percentage of attendances at public worship contributed
by Baptists, 10.81 (London County), 10.70 (Greater London); (2) aggregate
of attendances, 54,597; (3) number of places of worship, 443.

2. _The Continent of Europe._--During the 19th century what we have called
the modern Baptist movement made its appearance in nearly every European
country. In Roman Catholic countries Baptist churches were formed by
missionaries coming from either England or America: work in France began in
1832, in Italy missions were started in 1866 (Spezia Mission) and in 1884
(Baptist Missionary Society, which also has a mission in Brittany), and in
Spain in 1888. In Protestant countries and in Russia the Baptist movement
began without missionary intervention from England or America. J. G. Oncken
(1800-1884) formed the first church in Hamburg in 1834, and thereafter
Baptist churches were formed in other countries as follows:--Denmark
(1839), Holland and Sweden (1848), Switzerland (1849), Norway (1860),
Austria and Rumania (1869), Hungary (1871), and Bulgaria (1884). Baptist
churches also began to be formed in Russia and Finland in the 'fifties and
'sixties.

3. _British Colonies._--In every colony the Baptists have a considerable
place. There are unions of Baptist churches in the following colonies:--New
South Wales, Victoria, S. Australia, Western Australia, Queensland, New
Zealand, Tasmania, Canada (four Unions) and S. Africa. The work in S.
Africa is assisted by the Baptist South African Missionary and Colonial Aid
Society, having its seat in London.

_The Baptist World Alliance_ was formed in 1905, when the first Baptist
World Congress was held in London. The preamble of the constitution of this
Alliance sufficiently indicates its nature: "Whereas, in the providence of
God, the time has come when it seems fitting more fully to manifest the
essential oneness in the Lord Jesus Christ, as their God and Saviour, of
the churches of the Baptist order and faith throughout the world, and to
promote the spirit of fellowship, service and co-operation among them,
while recognizing the independence of each particular church and not
assuming the functions of any existing organization, it is agreed to form a
Baptist alliance, extending over every part of the world." This alliance
does in fact include Baptists in every quarter of the globe, as will be
seen from the following statistics:--

                                  Churches.   Members.
  United States--
    National Baptist Convention    16,996    2,110,269
    Southern Baptist Convention    20,431    1,832,638
    "Disciples of Christ"          11,157    1,235,798
    Thirty-five Northern States     8,894      986,821
    Fourteen other Bodies           7,921      414,775
  Australasia                         270       23,253
  Canada                              985      103,062
  S. Africa                            52        4,865
  United Kingdom                    2,934      426,563
  Austria Hungary                      37        9,783
  Denmark                              29        3,954
  Finland                              43        2,301
  France                               28        2,278
  Germany                             180       32,462
  Italy                                53        1,375
  Mexico and Central America           58        1,820
  Netherlands                          22        1,413
  Norway                               39        2,849
  Rumania and Bulgaria                  5          374
  Russia and Poland[1]                131       24,136
  S. America                           63        3,641
  Spain                                 7          245
  Sweden                              567       43,305
  Switzerland                           8          796
  West Indies                         318       42,310
  Ceylon                               25        1,044
  China                               137       12,160
  India                             1,215      121,716
  Japan                                40        2,326
  Palestine                             1          106
  Philippines                           4          425
  Congo                                21        4,673
  West Africa                          10          629
                                   ------    ---------
                  Total            72,681    7,454,165
                                   ======    =========

In 1909 the comparative totals were roughly:--72,988 churches; 7,480,940
members. In both sets of figures the Disciples of Christ (U.S.A.) are
included.

LITERATURE.--Thomas Crosby, _The History of the English Baptists_ (4 vols.
London, 1738-1740); D. Masson, _Life of John Milton in Connexion with the
History of his Time_ (6 vols. 1859-1880, new ed. 1881, &c.); B. Evans, _The
Early English Baptists_, i. ii. (1862-1864); H. C. Vedder, _A Short History
of the Baptists_ (London, 1897); A. H. Newman, _A Manual of Church History_
(Philadelphia, 1900-1903); R. Heath, _Anabaptism_ (1895); C. Williams, _The
Principles and Practices of the Baptists_ (1903); E. C. Pike, _The Story of
the Anabaptists_ (1904); J. H. Shakespeare, _Baptist and Congregational
Pioneers_; J. G. Lehmann, _Geschichte der deutschen Baptisten_ (1896-1900);
G. Tumbült, _Die Wiedertäufer_ (Bielefeld, 1899); _The Baptist Handbook_
(annually); _The Baptist World Congress_, 1905; _The Religious Census of
London_ (1904).

(N. H. M.)

4. _United States of America._--The first Baptist Church in America was
that founded in the Providence settlement on Narragansett Bay under the
leadership of Roger Williams (_q.v._). Having been sentenced to banishment
(October 1635) by the Massachusetts Court because of his persistence in
advocating separatistic views deemed unsettling and dangerous, to escape
deportation to England he betook himself (January 1636) to the wilderness,
where he was hospitably entertained by the natives who gave him a tract of
land for a settlement. Having been joined by a few friends from
Massachusetts, Williams founded a commonwealth in which absolute religious
liberty was combined with civil democracy. In the firm conviction that
churches of Christ should be made up exclusively of regenerate members, the
baptism of infants appeared to him not only valueless but a perversion of a
Christian ordinance. About March 1639, with eleven others, he decided to
restore believers' baptism and to form a church of baptized believers.
Ezekiel Holliman, who had been with him at Plymouth and shared his
separatist views, first baptized Williams and Williams baptized the rest of
the company. Williams did not long continue to find satisfaction in the
step he had taken. Believing that the ordinances and apostolic church
organization had been lost in the general apostasy, he became convinced
that it was presumptuous for any man or company of men to undertake their
restoration without a special divine commission. He felt compelled to
withdraw from the church and to assume the position of a seeker. He
continued on friendly terms with the Baptists of Providence, and in his
writings he expressed the conviction that their practice came nearer than
that of other communities to the first practice of Christ.

In November 1637 John Clarke (1609-1676), a physician, of religious zeal
and theological acumen, arrived at Boston, where, instead of the religious
freedom he was seeking, he found the dominant party in the Antinomian
controversy on the point of banishing the Antinomian minority, including
Mrs Anne Hutchinson (_q.v._) and her family, John Wheelwright (_c._
1592-1679), and William Coddington (1601-1678). Whether from sympathy with
the persecuted or aversion to the persecutors, he cast in his lot with the
former and after two unsuccessful attempts at settlement assisted the
fugitives in forming a colony on the island of Aquidnek (Rhode Island),
procured from the Indians through the good offices of Williams. By 1641
there were, according to John Winthrop, "professed Anabaptists" on the
island, and Clarke was probably their leader. Robert Lenthall, who joined
the Newport company in 1640 when driven from Massachusetts, probably
brought with him antipaedobaptist convictions. Mrs Scott, sister of Mrs
Hutchinson, is thought to have been an aggressive antipaedobaptist when the
colony was founded. Mark Lucar, who was baptized by immersion in London in
January 1642 (N.S.) and was a member of a Baptist church there, reached
Newport about 1644. A few years later we find [v.03 p.0375] him associated
with Clarke as one of the most active members of the Newport church, and as
the date of the organization is uncertain, there is some reason to suspect
that he was a constituent member, and that as a baptized man he took the
initiative in baptizing and organizing. At any rate we have in Lucar an
interesting connecting link between early English and American Baptists.

The Providence church maintained a rather feeble existence after Williams's
withdrawal, with Thomas Olney (d. 1682), William Wickenden, Chad Brown (d.
1665) and Gregory Dexter as leading members. A schism occurred in 1652, the
last three with a majority of the members contending for general redemption
and for the laying on of hands as indispensable to fellowship, Olney, with
the minority, maintaining particular redemption and rejecting the laying on
of hands as an ordinance. Olney's party became extinct soon after his death
in 1682. The surviving church became involved in Socinianism and
Universalism, but maintained a somewhat vigorous life and, through
Wickenden and others, exerted considerable influence at Newport, in
Connecticut, New York and elsewhere. Dexter became, with Williams and
Clarke, a leading statesman in Rhode Island and Providence Plantations.

The Newport church extended its influence into Massachusetts, and in 1649
we find a group of Baptists at Rehoboth, with Obadiah Holmes as leader. The
intolerance of the authorities rendered the prosecution of the work
impracticable and these Massachusetts Baptists became members of the
Newport church. In 1651 Clarke, Holmes and Joseph Crandall of the Newport
church made a religious visit to Lynn, Mass. While holding a meeting in a
private house they were arrested and were compelled to attend the church
services of the standing order. For holding an unlawful meeting and
refusing to participate quietly in the public service they were fined,
imprisoned and otherwise maltreated. While in England on public business in
1652, Clarke published _Ill News from New England_, which contained an
impressive account of the proceedings against himself and his brethren at
Lynn, and an earnest and well-reasoned plea for liberty of conscience.

Henry Dunster (1612-1659), the first president of the college at Cambridge
(Harvard), had by 1653 become convinced that "visible believers only should
be baptized." Being unwilling to hold his views in abeyance, he
relinquished in 1654, under circumstances of considerable hardship, the
work that he greatly loved.

In 1663 John Myles (1621-1683), a Welsh Baptist who had been one of
Cromwell's Tryers, with his congregation, took refuge in Massachusetts from
the intolerance of the government of Charles II. They were allowed to
settle in Rehoboth, Mass., and even after they were discovered to be
Baptists they were allowed to remain on condition of establishing their
meeting-place at a considerable distance from that of the standing order.
Myles did much to promote the growth of the Baptist Church in
Massachusetts, and was of service to the denomination in Boston and
elsewhere. Thomas Gould of Charlestown seems to have been in close touch
with President Dunster and to have shared his antipaedobaptist views as
early as 1654. Some time before 1665 several English Baptists had settled
in the neighbourhood of Boston and several others had adopted Baptist
views. These, with Gould, were baptized (May 1665) and joined with those
who had been baptized in England in a church covenant. The church was
severely persecuted, the members being frequently imprisoned and fined and
denied the use of a building they had erected as a meeting-house. Long
after the Act of Toleration (1689) was in full force in England, the Boston
Baptists pleaded in vain for the privileges to which they were thereby
entitled, and it required the most earnest efforts of English Baptists and
other dissenters to gain for them a recognition of the right to exist. A
mandate from Charles II. (July 1679), in which the Massachusetts
authorities were sharply rebuked for denying to others the liberty to
secure which they themselves had gone into exile, had produced little
effect.

In 1682 William Screven (1629-1713) and Humphrey Churchwood, members of the
Boston church, gathered and organized, With the co-operation of the mother
church, a small congregation at Kittery, Me. Persecution led to migration,
Screven and some of the members making their way to South Carolina, where,
with a number of English Baptists of wealth and position, what became the
First Baptist church in Charleston, was organized (about 1684). This became
one of the most important of early Baptist centres, and through Screven's
efforts Baptist principles became widely disseminated throughout that
region. The withdrawal of members to form other churches in the
neighbourhood and the intrusion of Socinianism almost extinguished the
Charleston church about 1746.

A few Baptists of the general (Arminian) type appeared in Virginia from
1714 onward, and were organized and fostered by missionaries from the
English General Baptists. By 1727 they had invaded North Carolina and a
church was constituted there.

From 1643 onward antipaedobaptists from New England and elsewhere had
settled in the New Netherlands (New York). Lady Deborah Moody left
Massachusetts for the New Netherlands in 1643 because of her
antipaedobaptist views and on her way stopped at New Haven, where she won
to her principles Mrs Eaton, the wife of the governor, Theophilus Eaton.
She settled at Gravesend (now part of Brooklyn) having received from the
Dutch authorities a guarantee of religious liberty. Francis Doughty, an
English Baptist, who had spent some time in Rhode Island, laboured in this
region in 1656 and baptized a number of converts. This latter proceeding
led to his banishment. Later in the same year William Wickenden of
Providence evangelized and administered the ordinances at Flushing, but was
heavily fined and banished. From 1711 onward Valentine Wightman (1681-1747)
of Connecticut (General Baptist) made occasional missionary visits to New
York at the invitation of Nicolas Eyres, a business man who had adopted
Baptist views, and in 1714 baptized Eyres and several others, and assisted
them in organizing a church. The church was well-nigh wrecked (1730) by
debt incurred in the erection of a meeting-house. A number of Baptists
settled on Block Island about 1663. Some time before 1724 a Baptist church
(probably Arminian) was formed at Oyster Bay.

The Quaker colonies, with their large measure of religious liberty, early
attracted a considerable number of Baptists from New England, England and
Wales. About 1684 a Baptist church was founded at Cold Spring, Bucks
county, Pa., through the efforts of Thomas Dungan, an Irish Baptist
minister who had spent some time in Rhode Island. The Pennepek church was
formed in 1688 through the labours of Elias Keach, son of Benjamin Keach
(1640-1704), the famous English evangelist. Services were held in
Philadelphia under the auspices of the Pennepek church from 1687 onward,
but independent organization did not occur till 1698. Several Keithian
Quakers united with the church, which ultimately became possessed of the
Keithian meeting-house. Almost from the beginning general meetings had been
held by the churches of these colonies. In 1707 the Philadelphia
Association was formed as a delegated body "to consult about such things as
were wanting in the churches and to set them in order." From its inception
this body proved highly influential in promoting Baptist co-operation in
missionary and educational work, in efforts to supply the churches with
suitable ministers and to silence unworthy ones, and in maintaining sound
doctrine. Sabbatarianism appeared within the bounds of the association at
an early date and Seventh-day Baptist churches were formed (1705 onward).

The decades preceding the "Great Awakening" of 1740-1743 were a time of
religious declension. A Socinianized Arminianism had paralysed evangelistic
effort. The First Church, Providence, had long since become Arminian and
held aloof from the evangelism of Edwards, Whitefield and their coadjutors.
The First Church, Boston, had become Socinianized and discountenanced the
revival. The First Church, Newport, had been rent asunder by Arminianism,
and the nominally Calvinistic remnant had itself become divided on the
question of the laying on of hands and showed no sympathy with the Great
Awakening. The First Church, Charleston, had been wrecked by Socinianism.
The General (Six Principles) Baptists of Rhode Island and [v.03 p.0376]
Connecticut had increased their congregations and membership, and before
the beginning of the 18th century had inaugurated annual associational
meetings. But the fact that the Great Awakening in America was conducted on
Calvinistic principles was sufficient to prevent their hearty co-operation.
The churches of the Philadelphia Association were organized and engaged to
some extent in missionary endeavour, but they showed little interest in the
Edwards-Whitefield movement. And yet the Baptists ultimately profited by
the Great Awakening beyond almost any of the denominations. In many New
England communities a majority in the churches of the standing order
bitterly opposed the new evangelism, and those who came under its influence
felt constrained to organize "Separate" or "New Light" churches. These were
severely persecuted by the dominant party and were denied even the scanty
privileges that Baptists had succeeded in gaining. As the chief objection
of the "Separates" to the churches of the standing order was their refusal
to insist on personal regeneration as a term of membership, many of them
were led to feel that they were inconsistent in requiring regenerate
membership and yet administering baptism to unconscious infants. In several
cases entire "Separate" churches reached the conviction that the baptism of
infants was not only without Scriptural warrant but was a chief
corner-stone of state-churchism, and transformed themselves into Baptist
churches. In many cases a division of sentiment came to prevail on the
matter of infant-baptism, and for a while mutual toleration prevailed; but
mixed churches had their manifest disadvantages and separation ultimately
ensued.

Among the Baptist leaders gained from Congregationalism as a result of the
awakening was Isaac Backus (1724-1806), who became the New England champion
in the cause of religious liberty and equality, and the historian of his
denomination. To Daniel Marshall (d. 1784) and Shubael Stearns, "New Light"
evangelists who became Baptists, the spread of Baptist principles and the
multiplication of Baptist churches throughout the southern colonies were in
great measure due. The feeble Baptist cause in Virginia and North Carolina
had been considerably strengthened by missionaries from the churches of the
Philadelphia Association, including Benjamin Griffith, John Gano
(1727-1804), John Thomas, Benjamin Miller, Samuel Eaton, John Garrard and
David Thomas, and several churches, formed or reformed under their
influence, united with the association. In 1776 the Ketockton Association
was formed by this group of churches. The Virginia colonial government, in
earlier days cruelly intolerant, gave a limited toleration to Baptists of
this type; but the "Separate" Baptists were too enthusiastic and too much
alive to the evils of state control in religious matters to be willing to
take out licences for their meetings, and soon came into sharp conflict
with the authorities. Stearns was an evangelist of great power. With
Marshall, his brother-in-law, and about a dozen fellow-believers he settled
at Sandy Creek, North Carolina, and in a few years had built up a church
with a membership of more than six hundred. Marshall afterward organized
and ministered to a church at Abbott's Creek about 30 m. distant. From
these centres "Separate" Baptist influence spread throughout North and
South Carolina and across the Georgia border, Marshall himself finally
settling and forming a church at Kiokee, Georgia. From North Carolina as a
centre "Separate" Baptist influence permeated Virginia and extended into
Kentucky and Tennessee. The Sandy Creek Association came to embrace
churches in several colonies, and Stearns, desirous of preserving the
harmonious working of the churches that recognized his leadership, resisted
with vehemence all proposals for the formation of other associations.

From 1760 to 1770 the growth of the "Separate" Baptist body in Virginia and
the Carolinas was phenomenal. Evangelists like Samuel Harris
(1724-_c._1794) and John Waller (1741-1802) stirred whole communities and
established Baptist churches where the Baptist name had hitherto been
unknown. The Sandy Creek Association, with Stearns as leader, undertook to
"unfellowship ordinations, ministers and churches that acted
independently," and provoked such opposition that a division of the
association became necessary. The General Association of Virginia and the
Congaree Association of South Carolina now took their places side by side
with the Sandy Creek. The Virginia "Separate" Baptists had more than
doubled their numbers in the two years from May 1771 to May 1773. In 1774
some of the Virginia brethren became convinced that the apostolic office
was meant to be perpetuated and induced the association to appoint an
apostle. Samuel Harris was the unanimous choice and was solemnly ordained.
Waller and Elijah Craig (1743-1800) were made apostles soon afterward for
the northern district. This arrangement, soon abandoned, was no doubt
suggested by Methodist superintendency. In 1775 Methodist influence
appeared in the contention of two of the apostles and Jeremiah Walker for
universal redemption. Schism was narrowly averted by conciliatory
statements on both sides. As a means of preserving harmony the Philadelphia
Confession of Faith, a Calvinistic document, with provision against too
rigid a construction, was adopted and a step was thus taken toward
harmonizing with the "Regular" Baptists of the Philadelphia type. When the
General Association was sub-divided (1783), a General Committee, made up of
delegates from each district association, was constituted to consider
matters that might be for the good of the whole society. Its chief work was
to continue the agitation in which for some years the body had been
successfully engaged in favour of religious equality and the entire
separation of church and state. Since 1780 the "Separate" Baptists had had
the hearty co-operation of the "Regular" Baptists in their struggle for
religious liberty and equality. In 1787 the two bodies united and agreed to
drop the names "Separate" and "Regular." The success of the Baptists of
Virginia in securing step by step the abolition of everything that savoured
of religious oppression, involving at last the disestablishment and the
disendowment of the Episcopal Church, was due in part to the fact that
Virginia Baptists were among the foremost advocates of American
independence, while the Episcopal clergy were loyalists and had made
themselves obnoxious to the people by using the authority of Great Britain
in extorting their tithes from unwilling parishioners, and that they
secured the co-operation of free-thinking statesmen like Thomas Jefferson
and James Madison and, in most measures, that of the Presbyterians.

The Baptist cause in New England that had profited so largely from the
Great Awakening failed to reap a like harvest from the War of Independence.
The standing order in New England represented the patriotic and popular
party. Baptists lost favour by threatening to appeal to England for a
redress of their grievances at the very time when resistance to English
oppression was being determined upon. The result was slowness of growth and
failure to secure religious liberty. Though a large proportion of the New
England Baptists co-operated heartily in the cause of independence, the
denomination failed to win the popularity that comes from successful
leadership.

About 1762 the Philadelphia Association began to plan for the establishment
of a Baptist institution of learning that should serve the entire
denomination. Rhode Island was finally fixed upon, partly as the abode of
religious liberty and because of its intelligent, influential and
relatively wealthy Baptist constituency, the consequent likelihood of
procuring a charter from its legislature, and the probability that the
co-operation of other denominations in an institution under Baptist control
would be available. James Manning (1738-1791), who had just been graduated
from Princeton with high honours, was thought of as a suitable leader in
the enterprise, and was sent to Rhode Island (1763) to confer with leading
men, Baptist and other. As a result a charter was granted by the
legislature in 1764, and after a few years of preliminary work at Warren
(where the first degrees ever bestowed by a Baptist institution were
conferred in 1769), Providence was chosen as the home of the college
(1770). Here, with Manning as president and Hezekiah Smith (1737-1805), his
class-mate at Princeton, as financial agent and influential supporter, the
institution (since 1804 known as Brown University) was for many years the
only degree-conferring [v.03 p.0377] institution controlled by Baptists.
The Warren Association (1767) was organized under the influence of Manning
and Smith on the model of the Philadelphia, and became a chief agency for
the consolidation of denominational life, the promotion of denominational
education and the securing of religious liberty. Hezekiah Smith was a
highly successful evangelist, and through his labours scores of churches
were constituted in New England. As chaplain in the American Revolutionary
Army he also exerted a widespread influence.

The First Church, Charleston, which had become almost extinct through
Arminianism in 1746, entered upon a career of remarkable prosperity in 1749
under the leadership of Oliver Hart (1723-1795), formerly of the
Philadelphia Association. In 1751 the Charleston Association was formed,
also on the model of the Philadelphia, and proved an element of
denominational strength. The association raised funds for domestic
missionary work (1755 onward) and for the education of ministers (1756
onward). Brown University shared largely in the liberality of members of
this highly-cultivated and progressive body. Among the beneficiaries of the
education fund was Samuel Stillman (1737-1807), afterward the honoured
pastor of the Boston church. The most noted leader of the Baptists of South
Carolina during the four decades following the War of Independence was
Richard Furman (1755-1825), pastor of the First Church, Charleston. The
remarkable numerical progress of Baptists in South Carolina from 1787 to
1812 (from 1620 members to 11,325) was due to the "Separate" Baptist
movement under Stearns and Marshall far more than to the activity of the
churches of the Charleston Association. Both these types of Baptist life
permeated Georgia, the latter making its influence felt in Savannah,
Augusta and the more cultivated communities, the former evangelizing the
masses. Many negro slaves became Baptists in Virginia, the Carolinas and
Georgia. In most cases they became members of the churches of the white
Baptists; but in Richmond, Savannah and some other towns they were
encouraged to have churches of their own.

By 1812 there were in the United States 173,972 Baptist church members, the
denominational numerical strength having considerably more than doubled
since the beginning of the 19th century.

_Foreign Missions_.--Baptists in Boston and vicinity, Philadelphia and
Charleston, and a few other communities had from the beginning of the 19th
century taken a deep interest in the missionary work of William Carey, the
English missionary, and his coadjutors in India, and had contributed
liberally to its support. The conversion to Baptist views of Adoniram
Judson (_q.v._) and Luther Rice (1812), who had just been sent, with
others, by the newly-formed American Board of Commissioners for Foreign
Missions to open up missionary work in India, marks an epoch in American
Baptist history. Judson appealed to his American brethren to support him in
missionary work among the heathen, and Rice returned to America to organize
missionary societies to awaken interest in Judson's mission. In January
1813 there was formed in Boston "The Baptist Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel in India and other Foreign Parts." Other societies in the
Eastern, Middle and Southern states speedily followed. The desirability of
a national organization soon became manifest, and in May 1814 thirty-three
delegates, representing eleven states, met in Philadelphia and organized
the "General Missionary Convention of the Baptist Denomination in the
United States of America for Foreign Missions." As its meetings were to be
held every three years it came to be known as the "Triennial Convention." A
Board of Commissioners was appointed with headquarters in Philadelphia
(transferred in 1826 to Boston). The need of a larger supply of educated
ministers for home and for mission work alike soon came to be profoundly
felt, and resulted in the establishment of Columbian College, Washington
(now George Washington University), with its theological department (1821),
intended to be a national Baptist institution. Destitution on the frontiers
led the Triennial Convention to engage extensively in home mission work
(1817 onward), and in 1832 the American Baptist Home Mission Society was
constituted for the promotion of this work. The need of an organ for the
dissemination of information, and the quickening of interest in the
missionary and educational enterprises of the Triennial Convention, led
Rice to establish the _Latter Day Luminary_ (1816) and the _Columbian
Star_, a weekly journal (1822). From the first the attempt to rouse the
denomination to organized effort for the propagation of the gospel met with
much opposition, agents of the Convention being looked upon by the less
intelligent pastors and churches as highly-paid and irresponsible
collectors of money to be used they knew not how, or for purposes of which
they disapproved. The fact that Rice was unduly optimistic and allowed the
enterprises of the Convention to become almost hopelessly involved in debt,
and was constrained to use some of the fund collected for missions to meet
the exigencies of his educational and journalistic work, intensified the
hostility of those who had suspected from the beginning the good faith of
the agents and denied the scriptural authority of boards, paid agents, paid
missionaries, &c. So virulent became the opposition that in several states,
as Tennessee and Kentucky, the work of the Convention was for years
excluded, and a large majority in each association refused to receive into
their fellowship those who advocated or contributed to its objects.
Hyper-Calvinism, ignorance and avarice cooperated in making the very name
"missions" odious, ministerial education an impertinent human effort to
supplant a spirit-called and spirit-endowed ministry, Sunday-schools and
prayer-meetings as human institutions, the aim of which was to interfere
with the divine order, and the receiving of salaries for ministerial work
as serving God for hire or rather as serving self. To counteract this
influence, Baptist State Conventions were formed by the friends of missions
and education, only contributing churches, associations, missionary
societies and individuals being invited to membership (1821
onward--Massachusetts had effected state organization in 1802). These
became highly efficient in promoting foreign and domestic missions,
Sunday-school organization, denominational literature and education. Nearly
every state soon had its institutions of learning, which aspired to become
universities.

Before 1844 the sessions of the Triennial Convention had occasionally been
made unpleasant by harsh anti-slavery utterances by Northern members
against their Southern brethren and somewhat acrimonious rejoinders by the
latter. The controversy between Francis Wayland and Richard Fuller
(1804-1876) on the slavery question ultimately convinced the Southern
brethren that separate organization for missionary work was advisable. The
Southern Baptist Convention, with its Home and Foreign Missionary Boards,
and (later) its Sunday-school Board, was formed in 1845. Since then
Northern and Southern Baptists, though in perfect fellowship with each
other, have found it best to carry on their home and foreign missionary
work through separate boards and to have separate annual meetings. In 1905
a General Baptist Convention for America was formed for the promotion of
fellowship, comity and denominational _esprit de corps_, but this
organization is not to interfere with the sectional organizations or to
undertake any kind of administrative work.

Since 1845 Northern and Southern Baptists alike have greatly increased in
numbers, in missionary work, in educational institutions, in literary
activity and in everything that pertains to the equipment and organization
of a great religious denomination. Since 1812 they have increased in
numbers from less than 200,000 to more than 5,000,000. In 1812 American
Baptists had no theological seminary; in 1906 they had 11 with more than
100 instructors, 1300 students, and endowments and equipments valued at
about $7,000,000. In 1812 they had only one degree-conferring college with
a small faculty, a small student body and almost no endowment; in 1906 they
had more than 100 universities and colleges with endowment and equipment
valued at about $30,000,000, and an annual income of about $3,000,000. In
1812 the value of church property was small; in 1906 it was estimated at
$100,000,000. Then a single monthly magazine, with a circulation of a few
hundreds, was all that the denomination possessed in the way of periodical
literature; in 1906 its quarterlies, monthlies and weeklies were numbered
by hundreds. The denomination has a single publishing concern (the American
Baptist Publication Society) with an annual business of nearly $1,000,000
and assets of $1,750,000.

Baptists in the Dominion of Canada had their rise about the close of the
18th century in migrations from the United States. They have been
reinforced by considerable numbers of English, Welsh and Scottish Baptists.
They are divided into four sections:--those of the Maritime Provinces, with
their Convention, their Home and Foreign Mission Boards, an Education Board
and a Publication Board, and with McMaster University (Arts, Theological
and [v.03 p.0378] Academic departments) as its educational institution;
those of Manitoba and the North-west, with Brandon College as its
educational institution; and those of British Columbia. Canadian Baptists
numbered 120,000 in 1909, and are considered in the above general
estimates.

(A. H. N.)

[1] The figures for Russia include only the German-speaking Baptists. It
is impossible to ascertain the numbers of properly Russian Baptists.
Estimates have been made which vary from 60,000 to 100,000.