BAPTISTERY (_Baptisterium_, in the Greek Church [Greek: phôtistêrion]), the
separate hall or chapel, connected with the early Christian Church, in
which the catechumens were instructed and the sacrament of baptism
administered. The name baptistery is also given to a kind of chapel in a
large church, which serves the same purpose. The baptistery proper was
commonly a circular building, although sometimes it had eight and sometimes
twelve sides, and consisted of an ante-room ([Greek: proaulios oikos])
where the catechumens were instructed, and where before baptism they made
their confession of faith, and an inner apartment where the sacrament was
administered. In the inner apartment the principal object was the baptismal
font ([Greek: kolumbêthra], or _piscina_), in which those to be baptized
were immersed thrice. Three steps led down to the floor of the font, and
over it was suspended a gold or silver dove; while on the walls were
commonly pictures of the scenes in the life of John the Baptist. The font
was at first always of stone, but latterly metals were often used.
Baptisteries belong to a period of the church when great numbers of adult
catechumens were baptized, and when immersion was the rule. We find little
or no trace of them before Constantine made Christianity the state
religion, _i.e._ before the 4th century; and as early as the 6th century
the baptismal font was built in the porch of the church and then in the
church itself. After the 9th century few baptisteries were built, the most
noteworthy of later date being those at Pisa, Florence, Padua, Lucca and
Parma. Some of the older baptisteries were very large, so large that we
hear of councils and synods being held in them. It was necessary to make
them large, because in the early Church it was customary for the bishop to
baptize all the catechumens in his diocese (and so baptisteries are
commonly found attached to the cathedral and not to the parish churches),
and also because the rite was performed only thrice in the year. (See
BAPTISM.) During the months when there were no baptisms the baptistery
doors were sealed with the bishop's seal. Some baptisteries were divided
into two parts to separate the sexes; sometimes the church had two
baptisteries, one for each sex. A fireplace was often provided to warm the
neophytes after immersion. Though baptisteries were forbidden to be used as
burial-places by the council of Auxerre (578) they were not uncommonly used
as such. Many of the early archbishops of Canterbury were buried in the
baptistery there. Baptisteries, we find from the records of early councils,
were first built and used to correct the evils arising from the practice of
private baptism. As soon as Christianity made such progress that baptism
became the rule, and as soon as immersion gave place to sprinkling, the
ancient baptisteries were no longer necessary. They are still in general
use, however, in Florence and Pisa. The baptistery of the Lateran must be
the earliest ecclesiastical building still in use. A large part of it
remains as built by Constantine. The central area, where is the basin of
the font, is an octagon around which stand eight porphyry columns, with
marble capitals and entablature of classical form; outside these are an
ambulatory and outer walls forming a larger octagon. Attached to one side,
towards the Lateran basilica, is a fine porch with two noble porphyry
columns and richly carved capitals, bases and entablatures. The circular
church of Santa Costanza, also of the 4th century, served as a baptistery
and contained the tomb of the daughter of Constantine. This is a remarkably
perfect structure with a central dome, columns and mosaics of classical
fashion. Two side niches contain the earliest known mosaics of
distinctively Christian subjects. In one is represented Moses receiving the
Old Law, in the other Christ delivers to St Peter the New Law--a charter
sealed with the X P monogram.

Another baptistery of the earliest times has recently been excavated at
Aquileia. Ruins of an early baptistery have also been found at Salona. At
Ravenna exist two famous baptisteries encrusted with fine mosaics, one of
them built in the middle of the 5th century, and the other in the 6th. To
the latter date also belongs a large baptistery decorated with mosaics at
Naples.

In the East the metropolitan baptistery at Constantinople still stands at
the side of the mosque which was once the patriarchal church of St Sophia;
and many others, in Syria, have been made known to us by recent researches,
as also have some belonging to the churches of North Africa. In France the
most famous early baptistery is St Jean at Poitiers, and other early
examples exist at Riez, Fréjus and Aix. In England, a detached baptistery
is known to have been associated with the cathedral of Canterbury.

See Hefele's _Concilien_, _passim_; Du Cange, _Glossary_, article
"Baptisterium"; Eusebius, _Hist. Eccl._ x. 4; Bingham's _Antiquities of the
Christian Church_, book xi.

(W. R. L.)