BAR, CONFEDERATION OF, a famous confederation of the Polish nobles and
gentry formed at the little fortress of Bar in Podolia in 1768 to defend
the internal and external independence of Poland against the aggressions of
the Russian government as represented by her representative at Warsaw,
Prince Nicholas Repnin. The originators of this confederation were Adam
Krasinski, bishop of Kamenets, Osip Pulawski and Michael Krasinski. King
Stanislaus was at first inclined to mediate between the confederates and
Russia; but finding this impossible, sent a force against them under the
grand hetman Ksawery Branicki and two generals, who captured Bar.
Nevertheless, a simultaneous outbreak of a _jacquerie_ in Little-Russia
contributed to the extension of the confederation throughout the eastern
province of Poland and even in Lithuania. The confederates, thereupon,
appealed for help abroad and contributed to bring about a war between
Russia and Turkey. So serious indeed was the situation that Frederick II.
advised Catherine to come to terms with the confederates. Their bands under
Ignaty Malchewsky, Michael Pac and Prince Charles Radziwill ravaged the
land in every direction, won several engagements over the Russians, and at
last, utterly ignoring the king, sent envoys on their own account to the
principal European powers. In 1770 the Council of the Confederation was
transferred from its original seat in Silesia to Hungary, from whence it
conducted diplomatic negotiations with France, Austria and Turkey with the
view of forming a league against Russia. The court of Versailles sent
Dumouriez to act as commander-in-chief of the confederates, but neither as
a soldier nor as a politician did this adroit adventurer particularly
distinguish himself, and his account of his experiences is very unfair to
the confederates. Among other blunders, he pronounced King Stanislaus a
tyrant and a traitor at the very moment when he was about to accede to the
Confederation. The king thereupon reverted to the Russian faction and the
Confederation lost the confidence of Europe. Nevertheless, its army,
thoroughly reorganized by Dumouriez, gallantly maintained the hopeless
struggle for some years, and it was not till 1776 that the last traces of
it disappeared.

See Alexander Kraushar, _Prince Repnin in Poland_ (Pol.) (Warsaw, 1900);
F. A. Thesby de Belcour, _The Confederates of Bar_ (Pol.) (Cracow, 1895);
Charles François Dumouriez, _Mémoires et correspondance_ (Paris, 1834).

(R. N. B.)