BAR, THE. This term, as equivalent to the profession of barrister (_q.v._),
originated in the partition or bar dividing the English law-courts into two
parts, for the purpose of separating the members and officials of the court
from the prisoners or suitors, their advocates and the general public.
Theoretically, this division of the court is still maintained in England,
those who are entitled to sit within the bar including king's counsel,
barristers with patents of precedence, serjeants (till the order died out)
and solicitors, while the other members of the bar and the general public
remain without. Parties in civil suits who appear in person are allowed to
stand on the floor within the bar instead of, as formerly, appearing at the
bar itself. In criminal trials the accused still stands forward at the bar.
There is also a "bar" in parliament. In the House of Commons it remains
literally a bar--a long brass rod hidden in a tube from which it is pulled
out when required to mark the technical boundary of the House. Before it
appear those who are charged with having violated the privileges of the
House; below it also sit those members who have been returned at
bye-elections, to await their introduction to the House and the taking of
the oath of allegiance. In the House of Lords the place where Mr Speaker
and the members of the House of Commons stand when summoned by Black Rod is
called "the bar."

The "call to the bar" in England, by which a law student at one of the Inns
of Court is converted into a barrister, is dealt with under INNS OF COURT.
The exclusive privilege of calling to the bar belongs to those bodies,
which also exercise disciplinary power over their members; but it was
widely felt by members of the bar in recent years that the benchers or
governing body with their self-elected members did not keep a sufficiently
watchful eye on the minutiae of the profession. Consequently, in 1883, a
bar committee was formed for the purpose of dealing with all matters
relating to the profession, such as the criticizing of proposed legal
reforms, and the expression of opinions on matters of professional
etiquette, conduct and practice. In 1894 the committee was dissolved, and
succeeded by the general council of the bar, elected on a somewhat wider
basis. It is composed of a due proportion of king's counsel and outer
barristers elected by voting-papers sent to all barristers having an
address in the _Law List_ within the United Kingdom. Its expenses are paid
by contributions from the four Inns of Court. Its powers are not
disciplinary, but it would draw the attention of the benchers to any gross
violation of the professional etiquette of the bar.

Each state in America has its own bar, consisting of all attorneys-at-law
residing within it who have been admitted to practice in its courts.
Generally attorneys are admitted in one court to practice in all courts.
Each of the United States courts has a bar of its own. An attorney of a
state cannot practise in a court of the United States unless he has been
admitted to it, or to one of the same class in another district or circuit.
He cannot appear in the Supreme Court of the United States unless specially
admitted and sworn as an attorney of that court, which is done on motion in
case of any one who has practised for three years in the highest courts of
his state and is in good standing at its bar. In most of the states there
is a state bar association, and in some cities and counties local bar
associations. These consist of such members of its bar as desire thus to
associate, the object being to guard and advance the standards of the
profession. Some own valuable libraries. These associations have no
official recognition, but their influence is considerable in [v.03 p.0379]
recommending and shaping legislation respecting the judicial establishment
and procedure. They also serve a useful purpose in instituting or promoting
proceedings to discipline or expel unworthy attorneys from the bar. There
is an American Bar Association, founded in 1878, composed of over 3500
members of different states of like character and position. Some of these
associations publish annually a volume of transactions. The rights, duties
and liabilities of counsellor-at-law are stated under ATTORNEY. As members
of the bar of the state in which they practise they are subject to its laws
regulating such practice, _e.g._ in some states they are forbidden to
advertise for divorce cases (New York Penal Code [1902] § 148a) (1905,
_People_ v. _Taylor_ [Colorado], 75 Pac. Rep. 914). It is common throughout
the United States for lawyers to make contracts for "contingent fees,"
_i.e._ for a percentage of the amount recovered. Such contracts are not
champertous and are upheld by the courts, but will be set aside if an
unconscionable bargain be made with the client (_Deering_ v. _Scheyer_
[N.Y.], 58 App. D. 322). So also by the U.S. Supreme Court (_Wright_ v.
_Tebbets_, 91 U.S. 252; _Taylor_ v. _Benis_, 110 U.S. 42). The reason for
upholding such contracts is that otherwise poor persons would often fail of
securing or protecting their property or rights. In fact such contracts are
seldom set aside, though no doubt the practice is capable of abuse.