BAR-LE-DUC, a town of north-eastern France, capital of the department of
Meuse, 50 m. E.S.E. of Châlons-sur-Marne, on the main line of the Eastern
railway between that town and Nancy. Pop. (1906) 14,624. The lower, more
modern and busier part of the town extends along a narrow valley, shut in
by wooded or vine-clad hills, and is traversed throughout its length by the
Ornain, which is crossed by several bridges. It is limited towards the
north-east by the canal from the Marne to the Rhine, on the south-west by a
small arm of the Ornain, called the Canal des Usines, on the left bank of
which the upper town (Ville Haute) is situated. The Ville Haute, which is
reached by staircases and steep narrow thoroughfares, is intersected by a
long, quiet street, bordered by houses of the 15th, 16th and 17th
centuries. In this quarter are the remains (16th century) of the château of
the dukes of Bar, dismantled in 1670, the old clock-tower and the college,
built in the latter half of the 16th century. Its church of St Pierre (14th
and 15th centuries) contains a skilfully-carved effigy in white stone of a
half-decayed corpse, the work of Ligier Richier (1500-1572), a pupil of
Michelangelo--erected to the memory of René de Châlons (d. 1544). The lower
town contains the official buildings and two or three churches, but these
are of little interest. Among the statues of distinguished natives of the
town is one to Charles Nicolas Oudinot, whose house serves as the
hôtel-de-ville. Bar-le-Duc has tribunals of first instance and of commerce,
a board of trade arbitrators, a lycée, a training-college for girls, a
chamber of commerce, a branch of the Bank of France and an art museum. The
industries of the town include iron-founding and the manufacture of
machinery, corsets, hosiery, [v.03 p.0405] flannel goods, jam and
wall-paper, and brewing, cotton spinning and weaving, leather-dressing and
dyeing. Wine, timber and iron are important articles of commerce.

Bar-le-Duc was at one time the seat of the countship, later duchy, of Bar,
the history of which is given below. Though probably of ancient origin, the
town was unimportant till the 10th century when it became the residence of
the counts.

COUNTS AND DUKES OF BAR. In the middle of the 10th century the territory of
Bar (Barrois) formed a dependency of the Empire. In the 11th century its
lords were only counts by title; they belonged to the house of Mousson
(which also possessed the countships of Montbéliard and Ferrette), and
usually fought in the French ranks, while their neighbours, the dukes of
Lorraine, adhered to the German side. Theobald I., count of Bar, was an
ally of Philip Augustus, as was also his son Henry II., who distinguished
himself at the battle of Bouvines in 1214. But sometimes the counts of Bar
bore arms against France. In 1301 Henry III. having made an alliance with
Edward I. of England, whose daughter he had married, was vanquished by
Philip the Fair, who forced him to do homage for a part of Barrois,
situated west of the Meuse, which was called _Barrois mouvant_. In 1354
Robert, count of Bar, who had married the daughter of King John, was made
marquis of Pont-à-Mousson by the emperor Charles IV. and took the title of
duke of Bar. His successor, Edward III., was killed at Agincourt in 1415.
In 1419 Louis of Bar, brother of the last-named, a cardinal and bishop of
Châlons, gave the duchy of Bar to René of Anjou, the grandson of his sister
Yolande, who married Isabella, duchess of Lorraine. Yolande of Anjou, who
in 1444 had married Ferri of Lorraine, count of Vaudémont, became heiress
of Nicholas of Anjou, duke of Calabria and of Lorraine, in 1473, and of
René of Anjou, duke of Bar, in 1480; thus Lorraine, with Barrois added to
it, once more returned to the family of its ancient dukes. United with
Lorraine to France in 1634, Barrois remained, except for short intervals,
part of the royal domain. It was granted in 1738 to Stanislaus Leszczynski,
ex-king of Poland, and on his death in 1766 was once more attached to the
crown of France.

(M. P.*)