BARBAROSSA ("Redbeard"), the name given by the Christians to a family of
Turkish admirals and sea rovers of the 16th century,--Arouj and Khizr
(_alias_ Khair-ed-Din) and Hassan the son of Khair-ed-Din. As late as 1840,
Captain Walsin Esterhazy, author of a history of the Turkish rule in
Africa, ventured the guess that "Barbarossa" was simply a mispronunciation
of Bábá Arouj, and the supposition has been widely accepted. But the prefix
Bábá was not applied to Arouj by contemporaries. His name is given in
Spanish or Italian form as "Orux" or "Harrach" or "Ordiche." The
contemporary Arab chronicle published by S. Rang and F. Denis in 1837 says
explicitly that Barbarossa was the name applied by Christians to
Khair-ed-Din. It was no doubt a nickname given to the family on account of
their red or tawny beards (Lat. _barba_). The founder of the family was
Yakub, a Roumeliot, probably of Albanian blood, who settled in Mitylene
after its conquest by the Turks. He was a coasting trader and skipper, and
had four sons--Elias, Isaak, Arouj and Khizr, all said to have been born
after 1482. Khizr became a potter and Isaak a trader. Elias and Arouj took
to sea roving. In an action with a galley of the Knights of Saint John,
then established at Rhodes, Elias was killed and Arouj taken prisoner; the
latter was ransomed by a Turkish pasha and returned to the sea. For some
time he served the Mamelukes who still held Egypt. During the conflict
between the Mamelukes and the sultan Selim I., he considered it more
prudent to transfer himself to Tunis. The incessant conflicts among the
Berber princes of northern Africa gave him employment as a mercenary, which
he varied by piratical raids on the trade of the Christians. At Tunis he
was joined by Khizr, who took, or was endowed with, the name of
Khair-ed-Din. Isaak soon followed his brothers. Arouj and Khair-ed-Din
joined the exiled Moors of Granada in raids on the Spanish coast. They also
pushed their fortunes by fighting for, or murdering and supplanting, the
native African princes. Their headquarters were in the island of Jerba in
the Gulf of Gabes. They attempted in 1512 to take Bougie from the
Spaniards, but were beaten off, and Arouj lost an arm, shattered by an
arquebus shot. In 1514 they took Jijelli from the Genoese, and after a
second beating at Bougie in 1515 were called in by the natives of Cherchel
and Algiers to aid them against the Spaniards. They occupied the towns and
murdered the native ruler who called them in. The Spaniards still held the
little rocky island which gives Algiers its name and forms the harbour. In
1518 Arouj was drawn away to take part in a civil war in Tlemçen. He
promptly murdered the prince he came to support and seized the town for
himself. The rival party then called in the Spaniards, by whom Arouj was
expelled and slain while fleeing at the Rio Salado. Khair-ed-Din clung to
his possessions on the coast and appealed to the sultan Selim I. He was
named beylerbey by the sultan, and with him began the establishment of
Turkish rule in northern Africa. For years he was engaged in subduing the
native princes, and in carrying on warfare with the Christians. In 1519 he
repelled a Spanish attack on Algiers, but could not expel his enemies from
the island till 1529. As a combatant in the forefront of the war with the
Christians he became a great hero in Islam, and dreaded by its enemies
under his name of Barbarossa. In 1534 he seized Tunis, acting as capitan
pasha for the sultan Suleiman. The emperor Charles V. intervened on behalf
of the native prince, retook the town, and destroyed great part of
Barbarossa's fleet. The corsair retaliated by leading what remained of his
navy on a plundering raid to the Balearic Islands. During the remainder of
his life--till 1547--Barbarossa, though still beylerbey of northern Africa,
was mainly engaged as capitan pasha in co-operating with the armies of the
sultan Suleiman in the east. He was absent from Algiers when it was
attacked by Charles V. in 1541. In 1543-1544 he commanded the fleet which
Suleiman sent to the coast of Provence to support Francis I. Barbarossa
would not allow the bells of the Christian churches to be rung while his
fleet was at anchor in the ports. He plundered the coast of Italy on his
way back to Constantinople. When he died in his palace at Constantinople he
was succeeded as beylerbey of Africa by his son Hassan. Hassan Barbarossa,
like his father, spent most of his life in the Levant, but was occasionally
in Africa when the influence of his family was required to suppress the
disorders of the Turkish garrisons. He left it for the last time in 1567,
and is said by Hammer-Purgstall to have been present at Lepanto in 1571.
His last years are obscure.

AUTHORITIES.--_The History of the Ottoman Empire_, by Joseph von
Hammer-Purgstall (French translation J. J. Hellert, 1835-1843), contains
accounts of the Barbarossas, but requires to be corrected by other
authorities. See _La Fondation de la régence d'Alger, histoire des
Barberousse, chronique arabe du XVI^{_ème_} siècle_ published by Sander
Rang and Ferdinand Denis, Paris, 1837--for a curious Moslem version of
their story. H. D. de Grammont has collected later evidence in his
_Histoire d'Alger_ (Paris, 1887); and he discusses the origin of the name
in a paper contributed to the _Révue Africaine_, No. 171. Their campaigns
are told in a readable way with the advantage of technical knowledge by Ad.
Jurien de la Gravière in _Les Corsaires barbaresques et la marine de
Soliman le Grand_ (1887), and _Doria et Barberousse_ (1886). _The History
of the Maritime Wars of the Turks_, by Hajji Khalifa (translated by J.
Mitchell for the Oriental Translation Fund, 1831), is said to have been
founded on evidence collected by order of the sultan Suleiman.