BARBED WIRE, a protective variety of fencing, consisting usually of several
strands of wire twisted together with sharp spikes or points clinched or
fastened into the strands.

In the United States, barbed wire for fencing was originally suggested to
meet conditions existing in the western states, by reason of the large
cattle-raising industry in sections where timber was scarce. Prior to its
introduction, a No. 9 round or oval iron wire was popular on the frontier
of the United States and in South America, as a fencing material. Large
amounts were used annually for this purpose, but iron lacked strength, and
single wire strand was not fully satisfactory on account of stretching in
warm and contracting in cold weather, and of thus being broken. Cattle
would rub against a smooth fence, and this constant pressure loosened the
posts and broke the wire. To overcome this defect, ingenious people--the
most successful being farmers--set themselves to find a way by which wire
could be used and at the same time be free from destruction by the animals
it was intended to confine. This investigation resulted in the invention of
barbed wire. Soon after, automatic machinery was invented for rapidly and
cheaply placing the barb upon the smooth wire, so that the cost of barbed
wire is much less than the cost of smooth wire when it was in general use.
So immediately did barbed wire find favour with the farmers of the United
States, and, in fact, all over the world, that the manufacture of wire was
revolutionized.

The history of barbed wire fencing is of recent date. In the United
States--the real home of this industry--patents were taken out by Lucien B.
Smith, Kent, Ohio, in 1867; by William B. Hunt, of Scott, N.Y., at almost
the same time; and by Michael Kelly, of New York, a year later. The
practical beginning of the industry, however, was in the patents issued to
Joseph F. Glidden, De Kalb, Ill., 1874, on barbed fence wire, and during
the same year, to Joseph F. Glidden and Phineas W. Vaughan, for a machine
to manufacture the same. These inventions were the foundation of the system
of patents under which barbed wire has been protected and sold. The
development of the barbed wire industry would hardly have been possible
without steel. Iron wire, used for fencing prior to the introduction of
steel, was not suitable, seeing that iron does not possess sufficient
tensile strength and lacks homogeneity, qualities which Bessemer and
open-hearth steels possess in a high degree.

The advantages of galvanized barbed wire fencing are that it is almost
imperishable, is no burden on the posts; does not [v.03 p.0385] oppose the
wind with enough surface to rack the posts, thus allowing water to settle
around them and rot them; is economical, not only in the comparative
cheapness of its first cost but also in the amount of land covered by it;
and is effective as a barrier against all kinds of stock and a protection
against dogs and wild beasts. Cattle, once discovering what it is, will not
press against it, nor even go near it, and thus it becomes an effective
means of dividing the farmer's ranch into such fields as he may desire. It
is quickly and cheaply constructed, and has the advantage of freedom from
harbouring weeds. It affords no impediment to the view. A man can see
across his farm, and ascertain what is going on in every portion within the
scope of vision, as plainly as if there were no fences. It does not
contribute to the formation of snow drifts as do other kinds of efficient
fence. This makes it a favourite form of fencing for railroads and along
highways. Finally, barbed wire composed of two wires twisted together, once
firmly put in place, will retain its taut condition through many seasons
without repair. The fact of the wire being twisted allows it to adapt
itself to all the varying temperatures.

The introduction of barbed wire met with some opposition in America on
supposed humanitarian grounds, but ample and extended tests, both of the
economy and the humanity of the new material, silenced this objection. Now
no American farmer, especially in the west, ever thinks of putting any
other kind of fencing on his farm, unless it may be the new types of meshed
wire field fencing which have been coming so generally into use since 1899.
Generally speaking, the use of barbed wire fencing in other countries has
not been as extensive as in the western United States. While it has been
used on a comparatively large scale in Argentina and Australia, both these
countries use a much larger quantity of plain wire fence, and in Argentina
there is an important consumption of high-carbon oval fence wire of great
strength, which apparently forms the only kind of fence that meets the
conditions in a satisfactory manner.

It is interesting to note the largely increased demand for meshed wire
field fencing in the more thickly settled-portions of the United States,
and along the lines of railway. Beginning with 1899, there has been an
annual increase in this demand, owing to the scarcity and high cost of
labour, and the discontinuing of the building of rail fences. Meshed wire
is considered by many a better enclosure for small animals, like sheep and
hogs, than the barbed wire fence. Barbed wire has been popular with
railroads, but of late meshed wire fencing has been substituted with
advantage, the fabric being made of wires of larger diameter than formerly,
to insure greater stability. The popularity of barbed wire is best shown by
the following statistics:--

      APPROXIMATE PRODUCTION FOR THE UNITED STATES

  +-------+-------------------+----------------------------+
  | Year. | Tons barbed wire. | Tons meshed field fencing. |
  +-------+-------------------+----------------------------+
  | 1874  |               5   |                            |
  | 1875  |             300   |                            |
  | 1876  |           1,500   |                            |
  | 1877  |           7,000   |                            |
  | 1878  |          13,000   |                            |
  | 1879  |          25,000   |                            |
  | 1880  |          40,000   |                            |
  | 1890  |         125,000   |                            |
  | 1900  |         200,000   |             50,000         |
  | 1907  |         250,000   |            425,000         |
  +-------+-------------------+----------------------------+

Barbed wire is usually shipped to customers on wooden spools, each holding
approximately 100 lb or 80 to 100 rods. A hole is provided through the
centre of the spool for inserting a bar, on which the reel can revolve for
unwinding the wire as it is put up. After the wire is stretched in place,
it is attached to the wooden posts by means of galvanized steel wire
staples, ordinarily made from No. 9 wire. They are cut with a sharp, long,
diagonal point and can be easily driven into the posts. On account of the
rapid decay and destruction of wooden posts, steel posts have become
popular, as also have reinforced concrete posts, which add materially to
the durability of the fence. It is essential that barbed wire should be
stretched with great care. For this purpose a suitable barbed wire
stretcher is necessary.

Barbed wire fencing is now manufactured in various patterns. The general
process may be outlined briefly as follows:--The wire is made of soft
Bessemer or Siemens-Martin steel, and is drawn in the wire mill in the
usual way. Galvanizing is done by a continuous process. The coil of wire to
be galvanized is placed on a reel. The first end of the wire is led
longitudinally through an annealing medium--either red-hot lead or heated
fire-brick tubes--of sufficient length to soften the wire. From the
annealing furnace, the wire is fed longitudinally through a bath of
muriatic acid, which removes the scale, and from the acid, after a thorough
washing in water, the wire passes through a bath of spelter, heated
slightly above the melting point. After coming from the spelter and being
cooled by water, the wire is wound on suitable take-up blocks into finished
coils. From 30 to 60 wires are passing simultaneously in parallel lines
through this continuous galvanizing apparatus, thus insuring a large
output. The galvanizing gives the wire a bright finish and serves to
protect it from the corrosive action of the atmosphere. There is a
considerable demand for painted fencing, in the manufacture of which the
galvanizing is dispensed with, and the spools of finished barbed wire, as
they come from the barbing machine, are submerged in paint and dried. The
barbing and twisting together of the two longitudinal strand wires is done
by automatic machinery. A brief description of the manufacture of 2 and 4
point Glidden wire is as follows:--Two coils of wire on reels are placed
behind the machine, designed to form the main or strand wires of the fence.
One of the main wires passes through the machine longitudinally. One or two
coils of wire are placed on reels at either side of the machine for making
2 or 4 point wire respectively. These wires are fed into the machine at
right angles to the strand wire. At each movement of the feeding mechanism,
when fabricating 2 point wire, one cross wire is fed forward. A diagonal
cut forms a sharp point on the first end. The wire is again fed forward and
instantly wrapped firmly around one strand wire and cut off so as to leave
a sharp point on the incoming wire as before, while the bit of pointed wire
cut off remains as a double-pointed steel barb attached firmly to the
strand wire. This wire armed with barbs at regular intervals passes on
through a guide, where it is met by a second strand wire--a plain wire
without barbs. The duplex strand wires are attached to a take-up reel,
which is caused to revolve and take up the finished barbed wire
simultaneously and in unison with the barbing machine. In this way the
strand wires are loosely twisted into a 2-ply strand, armed with barbs
projecting at right angles in every direction.

When once started, the operation of barbed wire making is continuous and
rapid. The advantage of two strands is the automatic adjustment to changes
of temperature. When heat expands the strands, the twist simply loosens
without causing a sag, and when cold contracts them, the twist tightens,
all without materially altering the relative lengths of the combined wires.
A barbed wire machine produces from 2000 to 3000 lb of wire per day of ten
hours.

In some American states, the use of barbed wire is regulated by law, but as
a rule these laws apply to placing barbed wire on highways. Others prohibit
the use of barbed wire fencing to indicate the property line between
different owners, unless both agree to its use. In some states the use of
barbed wire is prohibited unless it has a top rail of lumber.

Barbed wire is also employed in connexion with "obstacles" in field
fortifications, especially in what are known as "high wire entanglements."
Pointed stakes or "pickets," 4 ft. high, are planted in rows and secured by
ordinary wire to holdfasts or pegs in the ground. Each picket is connected
to all around it, top and bottom, by lengths of barbed wire.

In England, where the use of barbed wire has also become common, the Barbed
Wire Act 1893 enacted that, where there is on any land adjoining a highway
within the county or district of a local authority, a fence which is made
with barbed wire (_i.e._ any wire with spikes or jagged projections), or in
which barbed wire has been placed, and where such barbed wire may probably
be injurious to persons or animals lawfully using the highway, the local
authority may require the occupier of the land to abate the nuisance by
serving notice in writing upon him. If the occupier fails to do so within
the specified time, the local authority may apply to a court of summary
jurisdiction, and such court, if satisfied that the barbed wire is a
nuisance, may by summary order direct the occupier to abate it, and on his
failure to comply with the order within a reasonable time, the local
authority may execute it and recover in a summary manner from the occupier
the expenses incurred.