BARBARY PIRATES. The coast population of northern Africa has in past ages
been addicted to piratical attacks on the shores of Europe opposite.
Throughout the decline of the Roman empire, the barbarian invasions, the
Mahommedan conquest and the middle ages, mere piracy always existed by the
side of the great strife of peoples and religions. In the course of the
14th century, when the native Berber dynasties were in decadence, piracy
became particularly flagrant. The town of Bougie was then the most
notorious haunt of these "skimmers of the sea." But the savage robber
powers which, to the disgrace of Europe, infested the commerce and the
coasts, not only of the Mediterranean but even for a time of the ocean; who
were not finally suppressed till the 19th century was well advanced; and
who are properly known as the Barbary pirates, arose in the 16th century,
attained their greatest height in the 17th, declined gradually throughout
the 18th and were extinguished about 1830. Isolated cases of piracy have
occurred on the Rif coast of Morocco even in our time, but the pirate
communities which lived by plunder and could live by no other resource,
vanished with the French conquest of Algiers in 1830. They are intimately
connected with the general history of northern Africa from about 1492 to
their end. The story of the establishment of Turkish rule in northern
Africa and of the revolutions of Morocco must be sought under the heads of
TURKEY, TRIPOLI, TUNISIA, ALGERIA and MOROCCO.

In dealing with the pirates, it will be sufficient to note a few leading
dates. The conquest of Granada in 1492 by the Catholic sovereigns of Spain
drove many Moors into exile. They revenged themselves by piratical attacks
on the Spanish coast. They had the help of Moslem adventurers from the
Levant, of whom the most successful were Arouj and his brother
Khair-ed-Din, natives of Mitylene, both of whom were known to the
Christians by the nickname of Barbarossa (_q.v._) or "Redbeard." Spain in
self-defence began to conquer the coast towns of Oran, Algiers and Tunis.
Arouj having fallen in battle with the Spaniards in 1518, his brother
Khair-ed-Din appealed to Selim, the sultan of Turkey, who sent him troops.
He drove the Spaniards in 1529 from the rocky island in front of Algiers,
where they had a fort, and was the founder of the Turkish power. From about
1518 till the death of Uluch Ali in 1587, Algiers was the main seat of
government of the beylerbeys of northern Africa, who ruled over Tripoli,
Tunisia and Algeria. From 1587 till 1659, they were ruled by Turkish
pashas, sent from Constantinople to govern for three years; but in the
latter year a military revolt in Algiers reduced the pashas to nonentities.
From 1659 onwards, these African cities, though nominally forming parts of
the Turkish empire, were in fact anarchical military republics which chose
their own rulers and lived by plunder.

It may be pointed out that during the first period (1518-1587) the
beylerbeys were admirals of the sultan, commanding great fleets and
conducting serious operations of war for political ends. They were
slave-hunters and their methods were ferocious, but their Christian enemies
were neither more humane nor more chivalrous. After 1587, plunder became
the sole object of their successors--plunder of the native tribes on land
and of all who went upon the sea. The maritime side of this long-lived
brigandage was conducted by the captains, or _reises_, who formed a class
or even a corporation. Cruisers were fitted out by capitalists and
commanded by the _reises_. Ten per cent of the value of the prizes was paid
to the treasury of the pasha or his successors, who bore the titles of Agha
or Dey or Bey. Bougie was the chief shipbuilding port and the timber was
mainly drawn from the country behind it. Until the 17th century the pirates
used galleys, but a Flemish renegade of the name of Simon Danser taught
them the advantage of using sailing ships. In this century, indeed, the
main strength of the pirates was supplied by renegades from all parts of
Christendom. An English gentleman of the distinguished Buckinghamshire
family of Verney was for a time among them at Algiers. This port was so
much the most formidable that the name of Algerine came to be used as
synonymous with Barbary pirate, but the same trade was carried on, though
with less energy, from Tripoli and Tunis--as also from towns in the empire
of Morocco, of which the most notorious was Salli. The introduction of
sailing ships gave increased scope to the activity of the pirates. While
the galleys, being unfit for the high seas, were confined to the
Mediterranean and the coast, the sailing vessels ranged into the Atlantic
as far as the Canaries or even to Iceland. In 1631 a Flemish renegade,
known as Murad Reis, sacked Baltimore in Ireland, and carried away a number
of captives who were seen in the slave-market of Algiers by the French
historian Pierre Dan.

The first half of the 17th century may be described as the flowering time
of the Barbary pirates. More than 20,000 captives were said to be
imprisoned in Algiers alone. The rich were allowed to redeem themselves,
but the poor were condemned to slavery. Their masters would not in many
cases allow them to secure freedom by professing Mahommedanism. A long list
might be given of people of good social position, not only Italians or
Spaniards, but German or English travellers in the south, who were captives
for a time. The chief sufferers were the inhabitants of the coasts of
Sicily, Naples and Spain. But all traders belonging to nations which did
not pay blackmail in order to secure immunity were liable to be taken at
sea. The payment of blackmail, disguised as presents or ransoms, did not
always secure safety with these faithless barbarians. The most powerful
states in Europe condescended to make payments to them and to tolerate
their insults. Religious orders--the Redemptionists and Lazarites--were
engaged in working for the redemption of captives and large legacies were
left for that purpose in many countries. The continued existence of this
African piracy was indeed a disgrace to Europe, for it was due to the
jealousies of the powers themselves. France encouraged them during her
rivalry with Spain; and when she had no further need of them they were
supported against her by Great Britain and Holland. In the 18th century
British public men were not ashamed to say that Barbary piracy was a useful
check on the competition of the weaker Mediterranean nations in the
carrying trade. When Lord Exmouth sailed to coerce Algiers in 1816, he
expressed doubts in a private letter whether the suppression of piracy
would be acceptable to the trading community. Every power was, indeed,
desirous to secure immunity for itself and more or less ready to compel
Tripoli, Tunis, Algiers, Salli and [v.03 p.0384] the rest to respect its
trade and its subjects. In 1655 the British admiral, Robert Blake, was sent
to teach them a lesson, and he gave the Tunisians a severe beating. A long
series of expeditions was undertaken by the British fleet during the reign
of Charles II., sometimes single-handed, sometimes in combination with the
Dutch. In 1682 and 1683 the French bombarded Algiers. On the second
occasion the Algerines blew the French consul from a gun during the action.
An extensive list of such punitive expeditions could be made out, down to
the American operations of 1801-5 and 1815. But in no case was the attack
pushed home, and it rarely happened that the aggrieved Christian state
refused in the end to make a money payment in order to secure peace. The
frequent wars among them gave the pirates numerous opportunities of
breaking their engagements, of which they never failed to take advantage.

After the general pacification of 1815, the suppression of African piracy
was universally felt to be a necessity. The insolence of a Tunisian
squadron which sacked Palma in the island of Sardinia and carried off 158
of its inhabitants, roused widespread indignation. Other influences were at
work to bring about their extinction. Great Britain had acquired Malta and
the Ionian Islands and had now many Mediterranean subjects. She was also
engaged in pressing the other European powers to join with her in the
suppression of the slave trade which the Barbary states practised on a
large scale and at the expense of Europe. The suppression of the trade was
one of the objects of the congress of Vienna. Great Britain was called on
to act for Europe, and in 1816 Lord Exmouth was sent to obtain treaties
from Tunis and Algiers. His first visit produced diplomatic documents and
promises and he sailed for England. While he was negotiating, a number of
British subjects had been brutally ill-treated at Bona, without his
knowledge. The British government sent him back to secure reparation, and
on the 27th of August, in combination with a Dutch squadron under Admiral
Van de Capellen, he administered a smashing bombardment to Algiers. The
lesson terrified the pirates both of that city and of Tunis into giving up
over 3000 prisoners and making fresh promises. But they were not reformed
and were not capable of reformation. Algiers renewed its piracies and
slave-taking, though on a smaller scale, and the measures to be taken with
it were discussed at the conference or congress of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818.
In 1824 another British fleet under Admiral Sir Harry Neal had again to
bombard Algiers. The great pirate city was not in fact thoroughly tamed
till its conquest by France in 1830.

AUTHORITIES.--The _Histoire d'Alger_ of H. D. de Grammont (Paris, 1887) is
based on original authorities. Sir R. L. Playfair's _Scourge of
Christendom_ (London, 1884) gives the history of the British consulate in
Algiers. The main authorities for the early history of the Barbary states
are:--Luis del Marmol Carvajal, _Descripcion de Africa_ (Granada, 1573);
Diego de Haedo, _Topographia e Historia General de Argel_ (Valladolid,
1612); and Père Pierre Dan, _Histoire de Barbarie et de ses corsaires_
(Paris, 1637). The readable treatises of Ad. Jurien de la Gravière, all
published in Paris, _Doria et Barberousse_ (1886), _Les Corsaires
barbaresques_ (1887), _Les Chevaliers de Malte_ (1887), and _La Guerre de
Chypre_ (1888), deal with the epoch of the beylerbeys and the regular wars.
For American work see Gardner Weld Allen, _Our Navy and the Barbary
Corsairs_ (New York, 1905).

(D. H.)