BARCELONA, formerly the capital of Catalonia, and since 1833 the capital of
the province of Barcelona in eastern Spain, in 41° 23' N. and 2° 11' E., on
the Mediterranean Sea, and at the head of railways from Madrid, Saragossa,
and Perpignan in France. Pop. (1900) 533,000. Barcelona is a flourishing
city and the principal seaport of Spain. It is built on the sloping edge of
a small plain between the rivers Besós, on the north, and Llobrégat, on the
south. Immediately to the south-west the fortified hills of Montjuich rise
to an altitude of 650 ft., while the view is bounded on the west by the
heights which culminate in Tibidabo (1745 ft.), and on the north-east by
the Montañas Matas. The greater part of the space thus enclosed is occupied
by comparatively modern suburbs and gardens of almost tropical luxuriance,
strongly contrasting with the huge factories and busy port of the original
city in their midst.

Barcelona was formerly surrounded by a strong line of ramparts, and
defended, or more correctly, overawed by a citadel on the north-east,
erected in 1715 by Philip V.; but these fortifications being felt as a
painful restriction on the natural development of the city, were, in spite
of the opposition of the central government, finally abolished by the local
authorities in 1845. The walls of the moat were utilized for the cellars of
the houses which soon occupied the site of the ramparts, and the ground,
which had been covered by the citadel, was laid out in gardens. A rapid
extension of the city to the north-west took place, and in 1860 an
elaborate plan for the laying out of new districts received the royal
sanction. Barcelona thus comprises an old town, still consisting for the
most part of irregular and narrow streets, and a new town built with all
the symmetry and precision of a premeditated scheme. The buildings of the
old town are chiefly of brick, from four to five storeys in height, with
flat roofs, and other oriental peculiarities; while in the new town hewn
stone is very largely employed, and the architecture is often of a modern
English style. To the east, on the tongue of land that helps to form the
port, lies the suburb of Barceloneta. It owes its origin to the marquis de
la Mina, who, about 1754, did much for the city, and is regularly laid out,
the houses being built of brick after a uniform pattern. The main street or
axis of the old town is the Rambla, which has a fine promenade planted with
plane-trees running down the middle, and contains the principal hotels and
theatres of the city. The most important suburbs are Grácia, Las Corts de
Sarriá, Horta, San Andrés de Palomar, San Gervasio de Cassolas, San Martin
de Provensals and Sans. Exclusive of these, the city contains about 334,000
inhabitants, an increase of nearly 150,000 since 1857. Large numbers of
immigrant artisans joined the population during the latter half of the 19th
century, attracted by the great development of industry. Barcelona is the
see of a bishop, and, like most Spanish towns, has a large number of
ecclesiastical buildings, though by no means so many as it once possessed.
No fewer than eighteen convents were still standing in 1873. The cathedral,
erected between 1298 and 1448 on Monte Taber, an oval hill which forms the
highest point of the Rambla, is one of the finest examples of Spanish
Gothic; although it is not designed on a great scale and some parts have
been freely modernized. It contains the early 14th-century tomb of Santa
Eulalia, the patron saint of the city, besides many other monuments of
artistic or historical interest. Its stained glass windows are among the
finest in Spain, and it possesses archives of great value. Santa Maria del
Mar, Santa Ana, Santos Justo y Pastor, San Pedro de las Puellas, and San
Pablo del Campo are all churches worthy of mention.

The educational institutions of Barcelona have from an early period been
numerous and important. The university (_Universidad Literaria_), which was
originally founded in 1430 by the magistracy of the city, and received a
bull of confirmation from Pope Nicholas V. in 1450, possessed at that time
four faculties and thirty-one chairs all endowed by the corporation. It was
suppressed in 1714, but restored in 1841, and now occupies an extensive
building in the new town. There are, besides, an academy of natural
sciences, a college of medicine and surgery--confirmed by a bull of
Benedict XIII. in 1400--an academy of fine arts, a normal school, a
theological seminary, an upper industrial school, an institution for the
education of deaf-mutes, a school of navigation and many minor
establishments. Gratuitous instruction of a very high order is afforded by
the Board of Trade to upwards of 2000 pupils. The principal charitable
foundations are the Casa de Caridad or house of charity, the hospital
general, dating from 1401, and the foundling hospital. The principal civic
and commercial buildings are the [v.03 p.0392] Casa Consistorial, a fine
Gothic hall (1369-1378), the Lonja or exchange (1383), and the Aduana or
custom-house (1792). At the seaward end of the Rambla is a large ancient
structure, the Atarazanas or Arsenals, which was finished about 1243, and
partly demolished in the 19th century to give a better view to the
promenade. Remains of the former royal state of Barcelona are found in the
Palacio Real of the kings of Aragon and the Palacio de la Reina. At the
highest part of the city, in the Calle del Paradis, are some magnificent
columns, and other Roman remains, which, however, are hidden by the
surrounding buildings. Means of public recreation are abundantly supplied.
There are many theatres, the two most important being the Teatro Principal,
and the Teatro del Liceo, a very fine building, originally erected in 1845
on the site of a convent of Trinitarian monks. The number of restaurants
and similar places of evening resort is very great, and there are several
public courts where the Basque game of pelota can be witnessed.

The so-called port of Barcelona was at first only an open beach, on the
east, slightly sheltered by the neighbouring hills, but at an early period
the advantage of some artificial protection was felt. In 1438 Don Alphonso
V. granted the magistracy a licence to build a mole; and in 1474 the Moll
de Santa Creu was officially begun. Long after this, however, travellers
speak of Barcelona as destitute of a harbour; and it is only in the 17th
century that satisfactory works were undertaken. Until modern times all the
included area was shut off from the open sea by a sand-bank, which rendered
the entrance of large vessels impossible. An extension of the former mole,
and the construction of another from the foot of Montjuich, have embraced a
portion of the sea outside of the bank, and a convenient shelter is thus
afforded for the heaviest battleships. From 1873 the work of extension and
improvement was carried on systematically, with the addition of new quays,
greater storage room, and better means for handling cargo. After thirty
years of steady development, further plans were approved in 1903. At this
time the port included an inner harbour, with a depth of 18 to 30 ft. at
low tide, and an outer harbour with a depth of 20 to 35 ft. In the
following year 8075 vessels of nearly 5,000,000 tons entered the port.
Barcelona is well supplied with inland communication by rail, and the
traffic of its streets is largely facilitated by tramway lines running from
the port as far as Grácia and the other chief suburbs.

Barcelona has long been the industrial and commercial centre of eastern
Spain--a pre-eminence which dates from the 12th and 13th centuries. It
received a temporary check from the disasters of the Spanish-American War
of 1898; but less than a year later it paid about £550,000 in industrial
and commercial taxes, or more than 11% of the whole amount thus collected
in the kingdom; and within five years it had become a port of regular call
for thirty-five important shipping companies. It also contained the head
offices of thirteen other lines, notably those of the Transatlantic Mail
Company, which possessed a fleet of twenty-five fine steamships. Trades and
industries give occupation to more than 150,000 hands of both sexes. The
spinning and weaving of wool, cotton and silk are the principal industries,
but the enterprising spirit of the Catalans has compelled them to try
almost every industry in which native capital could attempt to compete with
foreign, especially since the institution of the protectionist tariffs of
1892. The native manufacturers are quite able to compete in peninsular
markets with foreign rivals. This prosperity has been in part due to the
great development of means of communication around the city and in the four
Catalan provinces. Comestibles, raw materials, and combustibles form the
greater part of the imports, but this great manufactory also imports a
considerable quantity of foreign manufactured goods. The principal exports
are wines, cereals, olive-oil, cotton goods, soap, cigarette-paper,
furniture and barrels, boots, shoes and leather goods, and machinery.

Barcino, the ancient name of the city, is usually connected with that of
the Carthaginian Hamilcar Barca, its traditional founder in the 3rd century
B.C. After the Roman conquest, it received from Augustus (27 B.C.-A.D. 14)
the name of Julia Faventia (afterwards Augusta and Pia), with the status of
a Roman colony; and thenceforward it rapidly grew to be the leading mart of
the western Mediterranean, rivalling Tarraco (Tarragona) and Massilia
(Marseilles) as early as the 2nd century A.D. As its remains testify, the
Roman city occupied Monte Taber. The bishopric of Barcelona was founded in
343. In 415 and 531, the Visigoths chose Barcelona as their temporary
capital; in 540 and 599 church councils were held there. Barcinona or
Bardjaluna, as it was then called, was captured by the Moors in 713, and in
801 it passed, with the rest of Catalonia, under the dominion of the
Franks. From 874 the counts of Barcelona ruled as independent monarchs. But
the accession of larger resources due to the union between Catalonia and
Aragon in 1149, brought the city to the zenith of its fame and wealth. Its
merchant ships vied with those of Genoa, Venice and Ragusa, trading as far
west as the North Sea and the Baltic, and as far east as Alexandria. In
1258 James I. of Aragon empowered Barcelona to issue its famous _Consulado
del Mar_, a code of maritime law recognized as authoritative by many
European states. Consuls represented Barcelona at the principal commercial
centres on or near the Mediterranean; and the city was among the first
communities to adopt the practice of marine insurance. But the union of
Castile and Aragon in 1479 favoured other cities of Spain at the expense of
Barcelona, whose commercial supremacy was transferred to the ports of
western Spain by the discovery of America in 1492. The citizens attributed
their misfortunes to the "Castilian" government, and a strong party among
them favoured annexation by France. In 1640 Barcelona was the centre of the
Catalonian rebellion against Philip IV., and threw itself under French
protection. In 1652 it returned to its allegiance, but was captured by the
duke of Vendôme in 1697. At the peace of Ryswick, in the same year, it was
restored to the Spanish monarchy. During the War of the Succession
(1701-1714) Barcelona adhered to the house of Austria. The seizure of
Montjuich in 1705, and the subsequent capture of the city by the earl of
Peterborough, formed one of his most brilliant achievements. In 1714 it was
taken after an obstinate resistance by the duke of Berwick in the interests
of Philip V., and at the close of the war was reluctantly reconciled to the
Bourbon dynasty. In 1809 the French invaders of Spain obtained possession
of the fortress and kept the city in subjection until 1814. Since then it
has shared in most of the revolutionary movements that have swept over
Spain, and has frequently been distinguished by the violence of its civic
commotions. For the historic antagonism between the Catalans and the other
inhabitants of Spain was strengthened by the industrial development of
Barcelona. Among the enterprising and shrewd Catalans, who look upon their
rulers as reactionary, and reserve all their sympathies for the Provençal
neighbours whom they so nearly resemble in race, language and temperament,
French influence and republican ideals spread rapidly; taking the form
partly of powerful labour and socialist organizations, partly of less
reputable bodies, revolutionary and even anarchist. Strikes are very
common, seventy-three having occurred in such a year of comparative quiet
as 1903; but the causes of disturbance are almost as often political as
economic, and the annals of the city include a long list of revolutionary
riots and bomb outrages. A strange contrast is presented by the
co-existence of these turbulent elements with the more old-fashioned
Spanish society of Barcelona. Church festivals, civic and ecclesiastical
processions are almost as animated and picturesque as in Seville itself;
and many medieval customs continue to flourish side by side with the most
modern features of industrial life, giving to Barcelona a character
altogether unique among Spanish cities.

The literature relating to Barcelona is extensive. For a general
description of the city, see A. A. P. Arimon, _Barcelona antigua y
moderna_, two illustrated folio volumes (Madrid, 1850); and J. Artigas y
Feiner, _Guia itineraria de Barcelona_ (Barcelona, 1888). For the
antiquities, see S. Sampere, _Topografia antigua de Barcelona_ (1890). The
economic history of the city is dealt with by A. Capmany in his _Memorias
historicas sobra la marina, comercio, y artes de la antigua ciudad de
Barcelona_ (Madrid, 1779-1792); and, for its political history, the same
work should be consulted, together with _Historias e conquestas dels comtes
de Barcelona_, by T. Tomich (Barcelona, 1888), and the _Colecció de
documents inédits del Arxin [v.03 p.0393] municipal de la ciutat de
Barcelona_ (Barcelona, 1892). The spread of the revolutionary movement is
traced by M. Gil Maestre, in his _El Anarquismo en España, y el especial de
Barcelona_ (Madrid, 1897), and in his _La Criminalidad en Barcelona_
(Barcelona, 1886).