BARCLAY, JOHN (1582-1621), Scottish satirist and Latin poet, was born, on
the 28th of January 1582, at Pont-à-Mousson, where his father William
Barclay held the chair of civil law. His mother was a Frenchwoman of good
family. His early education was obtained at the Jesuit College. While
there, at the age of nineteen, he wrote a commentary on the _Thebaid_ of
Statius. In 1603 he crossed with his father to London. Barclay had
persistently maintained his Scottish nationality in his French
surroundings, and probably found in James's accession an opportunity which
he would not let slip. He did not remain long in England, where he is
supposed to have published the first part of his _Satyricon_, for in 1605
when a second edition of that book appeared in Paris, he was there, having
already spent some time in Angers, and being now the husband of a French
girl, Louise Debonaire. He returned to London with his wife in 1606, and
there published his _Sylvae_, a collection of Latin poems. In the following
year the second part of the _Satyricon_ appeared in Paris. Barclay remained
on in London till 1616. In 1609 he edited the _De Potestate Papae_, an
anti-papal treatise by his father, who had died in the preceding year, and
in 1611 he issued an _Apologia_ or "third part" of the _Satyricon_, in
answer to the attacks of the Jesuits and others who were probably
embittered by the tone of the earlier parts of the satire. A so-called
"fourth part," with the title of _Icon Animorum_, appeared in 1614. James
I. is said to have been attracted by his scholarship, but particulars of
this, or of his life in London generally, are not available. In 1616 he
went to Rome, for some reason unexplained, and there resided till his death
on the 15th of August 1621. He appears to have been on better terms with
the Church and notably with Bellarmine; for in 1617 he issued, from a press
at Cologne, a _Paraenesis ad Sectarios_, an attack on the position of
Protestantism. The literary effort of his closing years was his best-known
work the _Argenis_, completed about a fortnight before his death, which has
been said to have been hastened by poison. The romance was printed in Paris
in the same year.

Barclay's contemporary reputation as a writer was of the highest; by his
strict scholarship and graceful style he has deserved the praise of modern
students. The _Satyricon_, a severe satire on the Jesuits, is modelled on
Petronius and catches his lightness of touch, though it shows little or
nothing of the tone of its model, or of the unhesitating severity and
coarseness of the humanistic satire of Barclay's age. The _Argenis_ is a
long romance, with a monitory purpose on the dangers of political intrigue,
probably suggested to him by his experiences of the league in France, and
by the catholic plot in England after James's accession. The work has been
praised by all parties; and it enjoyed for more than a century after his
death a remarkable popularity. Most of the innumerable editions are
supplied with a key to the characters and names of the story. Thus
Aneroëtus is Clement VIII; _Arx non eversa_ is the Tower of London;
Hippophilus and Radirobanes are the names of the king of Spain; Hyanisbe is
Queen Elizabeth; Mergania, by an easy anagram, is Germany; Usinulca, by
another, is Calvin. The book is of historical importance in the development
of 17th century romance, including especially Fénelon's Télémaque. Ben
Jonson appears, from an entry at Stationers' Hall on the 2nd of October
1623, to have intended to make a translation. Barclay's shorter poems, in
two books, were printed in the _Delitiae Poetarum Scotorum_ (Amsterdam,
1637, i. pp. 76-136). In the dedication, to Prince Charles of England, he
refers to his earlier publication, the _Sylvae_.

The best account of Barclay is the preface by Jules Dukas in his
bibliography of the _Satyricon_ (Paris, 1889). This supersedes the life in
Bayle's _Dictionary_, which had been the sole authority. A "fifth part" of
the _Satyricon_ appears in most of the editions, by Alethophilus (Claude
Morisot). For the _Argenis_, see the dissertations by Léon Boucher (Paris,
1874), and Dupond (Paris, 1875). The _Icon Animorum_ was Englished by
Thomas May in 1631 (_The Mirrour of Mindes, or Barclay's Icon Animorum_).
Barclay's works have never been collected.