BARCLAY, ROBERT (1648-1690), one of the most eminent writers belonging to
the Society of Friends, or Quakers, was born in 1648 at Gordonstown in
Morayshire. His father had served under Gustavus Adolphus, and pursued a
somewhat tortuous course through the troubles of the civil war. Robert was
sent to finish his education in Paris, and it appears he was at one time
inclined to accept the Roman Catholic faith. In 1667, however, he followed
the example of his father, and joined the recently-formed Society of
Friends. In 1670 he married a Quaker lady, Christian Mollison of Aberdeen.
He was an ardent theological student, a man of warm feelings and
considerable mental powers, and he soon came prominently forward as the
leading apologist of the new doctrine, winning his spurs in a controversy
with one William Mitchell. The publication of fifteen _Theses Theologiae_
(1676) led to a public discussion in Aberdeen, each side claiming a
victory. The most prominent of the _Theses_ was that bearing on immediate
revelation, in which the superiority of this inner light to reason or
scripture is sharply stated. His greatest work, _An Apology for the True
Christian Divinity_, was published in Latin at Amsterdam in 1676, and was
an elaborate statement of the grounds for holding certain fundamental
positions laid down in the _Theses_. It was translated by its author into
English in 1678, and is "one of the most impressive theological writings of
the century." It breathes a large tolerance and is still perhaps the most
important manifesto of the Quaker Society. Barclay experienced to some
extent the persecutions inflicted on the new society, and was several times
thrown into prison. He travelled extensively in Europe (once with Penn and
George Fox), and had several interviews with Elizabeth, princess palatine.
In later years he had much influence with James II., who as duke of York
had given to twelve members of the society a patent of the province of East
New Jersey, Barclay being made governor (1682-88). He is said to have
visited James with a view to making terms of accommodation with William of
Orange, [v.03 p.0395] whose arrival was then imminent. He died on the 3rd
of October 1690.