BARCLAY, ALEXANDER (_c._ 1476-1552), British poet, was born about 1476. His
nationality is matter of dispute, but William Bulleyn, who was a native of
Ely, and probably knew him when he was in the monastery there, asserts that
he was born "beyonde the cold river of Twede"; moreover, the spelling of
his name and the occasional Scottish words in his vocabulary point to a
northern origin. His early life was spent at Croydon, but it is not certain
whether he was educated at Oxford or Cambridge. It may be presumed that he
took his degree, as he uses the title of "Syr" in his translation of
Sallust, and in his will he is called doctor of divinity. From the numerous
incidental references in his works, and from his knowledge of European
literature, it may be inferred that he spent some time abroad. Thomas
Cornish, suffragan bishop in the diocese of Bath and Wells, and provost of
Oriel College, Oxford, from 1493 to 1507, appointed him chaplain of the
college of St Mary Ottery, Devonshire. Here he translated Sebastian Brant's
_Ship of Fools_, and even introduced his neighbours into the satire:--

 "For if one can flatter, and beare a Hauke on his fist,
  He shall be parson of Honington or Cist."

The death of his patron in 1513 apparently put an end to his connexion with
the west, and he became a monk in the Benedictine monastery of Ely. In this
retreat he probably wrote his eclogues, but in 1520 "Maistre Barkleye, the
Blacke Monke and Poete" was desired to devise "histoires and convenient
raisons to florisshe the buildings and banquet house withal" at the meeting
between Henry VIII. and Francis I. at the Field of the Cloth of Gold. He at
length became a Franciscan monk of Canterbury. It is presumed that he
conformed with the change of religion, for he retained under Edward VI. the
livings of Great Baddow, Essex, and of Wokey, Somerset, which he had
received in 1546, and was presented in 1552 by the dean and chapter of
Canterbury to the rectory of All Hallows, Lombard Street, London. He died
shortly after this last preferment at Croydon, Surrey, where he was buried
on the 10th of June 1552. All the evidence in Barclay's own work goes to
prove that he was sincere in his reproof of contemporary follies and vice,
and the gross accusations which John Bale[1] brings against his moral
character may be put down to his hatred of Barclay's cloth.

The _Ship of Fools_ was as popular in its English dress as it had been in
Germany. It was the starting-point of a new satirical literature. In itself
a product of the medieval conception of the fool who figured so largely in
the Shrovetide and other pageants, it differs entirely from the general
allegorical satires of the preceding centuries. The figures are no longer
abstractions; they are concrete examples of the folly of the bibliophile
who collects books but learns nothing from them, of the evil judge who
takes bribes to favour the guilty, of the old fool whom time merely
strengthens in his folly, of those who are eager to follow the fashions, of
the priests who spend their time in church telling "gestes" of Robin Hood
and so forth. The spirit of the book reflects the general transition
between allegory and narrative, morality and drama. The _Narrenschiff_ of
Sebastian Brant was essentially German in conception and treatment, but his
hundred and thirteen types of fools possessed, nevertheless, universal
interest. It was in reality sins and vices, however, rather than follies
that came under his censure, and this didactic temper was reflected in
Barclay. The book appeared in 1494 with woodcuts said to have been devised
and perhaps partly executed by Brant himself. In these illustrations, which
gave an impulse to the production of "enblems" and were copied in the
English version, there appears a humour quite absent from the text. In the
Latin elegiacs of the _Stultifera Navis_ (1497) of Jacob Locher the book
was read throughout Europe. Barclay's _The Shyp of Folys of the Worlde_ was
first printed by Richard Pynson in 1509. He says he translated "oute of
Laten, Frenche, and Doche," but he seems to have been most familiar with
the Latin version. He used a good deal of freedom in his translation,
"sometyme addynge, sometyme detractinge and takinge away suche thinges as
semeth me necessary and superflue." The fools are given a local colour, and
Barclay appears as the unsparing satirist of the social evils of his time.
At the end of nearly every section he adds an _envoi_ of his own to drive
home the moral more surely. The poem is written in the ordinary Chaucerian
stanza, and in language which is more modern than the common literary
English of his day.

_Certayne Ecloges of Alexander Barclay, Priest_, written in his youth, were
probably printed as early as 1513, although the earliest extant edition is
that in John Cawood's reprint (1570) of the _Ship of Fools_. They form,
with the exception of Henryson's _Robin and Makyn_, the earliest examples
of the English pastoral. The first three eclogues, in the form of dialogues
between Coridon and Cornix, were borrowed from the _Miseriae Curialium_ of
Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini (Pope Pius II.), and contain an eulogy of John
Alcock, bishop of Ely, the founder of Jesus College, Cambridge. The fourth
is based on Mantuan's eclogue, _De consuetudine divitum erga poetas_, with
large additions. It contains the "Descrypcion of the towre of Virtue and
Honour," an elegy on Sir Edward Howard, lord high admiral of England, who
perished in the attack on the French fleet in the harbour of Brest in 1513.
The fifth, printed by Wynkyn de Worde, also without date, is entitled the
"Fyfte Eglog of Alexandre Barclay of the Cytezen and the uplondyshman" and
is also based on Mantuan. Two shepherds, Amintas and Faustus, discuss the
familiar theme of the respective merits of town and country life, and
relate a quaint fable of the origin of the different classes of society.
Barclay's pastorals contain many pictures of rustic life as he knew it. He
describes for instance the Sunday games in the village, football, and the
struggle for food at great feasts; [v.03 p.0394] but his eclogues were,
like his Italian models, also satires on social evils. The shepherds are
rustics of the Colin Clout type, and discuss the follies and corruptions
around them. Barclay had, however, no sympathy with the anti-clerical
diatribes of John Skelton, whom he more than once attacks. Bale mentions an
_Anti-Skeltonum_ which is lost. His other works are:--_The Castell of
Laboure_ (Wynkyn de Worde, 1506), from the French of Pierre Gringoire; the
_Introductory to write and to pronounce Frenche_ (Robert Copland, 1521);
_The Myrrour of Good Maners_ (Richard Pynson, not dated), a translation of
the _De quatuor virtutibus_ of Dominicus Mancinus; _Cronycle compyled in
Latyn_ by the renowned Sallust (Richard Pynson, no date), a translation of
the _Bellum Jugurthinum, The Lyfe of the glorious Martyr Saynt George_ (R.
Pynson, _c._ 1530). _The Lyfe of Saynte Thomas_, and _Haython's Cronycle_,
both printed by Pynson, are also attributed to Barclay, but on very
doubtful grounds.

See T. H. Jamieson's edition of the _Ship of Fools_ (Edinburgh, 1874),
which contains an account of the author and a bibliography of his works;
and J. W. Fairholt's edition of _The Cytezen and Uplondyshman_ (Percy Soc.
1847), which includes large extracts from the other eclogues; also
Zarncke's edition of Brant (Leipzig, 1854); and Dr Fedor Fraustadt, _Über
das Verhältnis von Barclays Ship of Fools zu den lateinischen,
französischen und deutschen Quellen_ (1894). A prose version of Locher's
_Stultifera Navis_, by Henry Watson, was printed by Wynkyn de Worde in
1518.

[1] _Script. Ill. Maj. Brit._ (1557, Cent. ix. No. 66).