BARDSEY (_i.e._ "Bards' Island": cf. Anglesey, "Angles' Island"; Welsh,
_Ynys Enlli_, "isle of the current"), an island at the northern extremity
of Cardigan Bay. The "sound" between Aberdaron point and the island is some
4 m. wide. Bardsey is included in Carnarvonshire, North Wales (but
traditionally in S. Wales). On the N.W. side it has high cliffs. It is
about 2½ m. long by ¾ m. broad, with an area of some 370 acres, a third of
which is hilly. Barley and oats are grown. On the S.E. side is a fairly
deep harbour. On the N.E. are the ruins of the tower of St Mary's abbey
(13th century). There is no Anglican church, the inhabitants being
Dissenters. They are farmers and fishermen. The lighthouse, with fixed
light, 140 ft. high and visible for 17 m., is locally celebrated. The
rectory of Aberdaron (on the mainland, opposite Bardsey), Penmachno and
Llangwnadl (Llangwynhoedl), in Lleyn (S. Carnarvonshire), belong to St
John's College, Cambridge. St Dubricius made the sanctuary famous, and died
here in 612. Here was the burial-place of all the monks whose friends could
afford to go thither with their bodies. All the great abbeys of England
sent their quota. Roads to Bardsey--with the monks' wells, found at
intervals of 7 to 9 m.--run from north, east and south. The remnant of
priests fled thither (after the great massacre of Bangor-is-coed in 613, by
Ethelfride of Northumbria) by the road of the Rivals (_Yn Eifl_) [v.03
p.0397] hill, S. Carnarvonshire, on which Pistyll farm still gives food
gratis to all pilgrims or travellers. A part of the isle is one great
cemetery of about 3 to 4 acres, with rude, rough graves as close to each
other as possible, with slabs upon them. Though Aberdaron rectory does not
belong to the isle, the farm "Cwrt" (Court), where the abbot held his
court, still goes with Bardsey, which was granted to John Wynn of Bodvel,
Carnarvonshire, after the battle and partial sack of Norwich by the
Puritans in the Civil War; passing through Mary Bodvel to her husband, the
earl of Radnor, who sold it to Dr Wilson of York. The doctor, in turn, sold
it to Sir John Wynn, of Glynllifon and Bodfean Hall, Carnarvonshire. One of
the Wynns, the 3rd Baron Newborough, was, at his wish, buried here. The
archaeology and history of the isle are voluminous. Lady Guest's
_Mabinogion_ translation (i. p. 115, ed. of 1838) gives an account of the
(legendary) Bardsey House of Glass, into which Merlin (Myrddin) took a
magic ring, originally kept at Caerleon-on-Usk.