BARÈRE DE VIEUZAC, BERTRAND (1755-1841), one of the most notorious members
of the French National Convention, was born at Tarbes in Gascony on the
10th of September 1755. The name of Barère de Vieuzac, by which he
continued to call himself long after the renunciation of feudal rights on
the famous 4th of August, was assumed from a small fief belonging to his
father, a lawyer at Vieuzac. He began to practise as an advocate at the
parlement of Toulouse in 1770, and soon earned a considerable reputation as
an orator; while his brilliant and flowing style as a writer of essays led
to his election as a member of the Academy of Floral Games of Toulouse in
1788. At the age of thirty he married. Four years later, in 1789, he was
elected deputy by the estates of Bigorre to the states-general, which met
in May. He had made his first visit to Paris in the preceding year. His
personal appearance, his manners, social qualities and liberal opinions,
gave him a good standing among the multitude of provincial deputies then
thronging into Paris. He [v.03 p.0398] attached himself at first to the
constitutional party; but he was less known as a speaker in the Assembly
than as a journalist. His paper, however, the _Point du Jour_, according to
Aulard, owes its reputation not so much to its own qualities as to the fact
that the painter David, in his famous picture of the "Oath in the Tennis
Court," has represented Barère kneeling in the corner and writing a report
of the proceedings as though for posterity. The reports of the debates of
the National Assembly in the _Point du Jour_, though not inaccurate, are as
a matter of fact very incomplete and very dry. After the flight of the king
to Varennes, Barère passed over to the republican party, though he
continued to keep in touch with the duke of Orleans, to whose natural
daughter, Paméla, he was tutor. Barère, however, appears to have been
wholly free from any guiding principle; conscience he had none, and his
conduct was regulated only by the determination to be on the side of the
strongest. After the close of the National Assembly he was nominated one of
the judges of the newly instituted court of cassation from October 1791 to
September 1792. In 1792 he was elected deputy to the National Convention
for the department of the Hautes-Pyrénées. At first he voted with the
Girondists, attacked Robespierre, "a pygmy who should not be set on a
pedestal," and at the trial of the king voted with the Mountain for the
king's death "without appeal and without delay." He closed his speech with
a sentence which became memorable: "the tree of liberty could not grow were
it not watered with the blood of kings." Appointed member of the Committee
of Public Safety on the 7th of April 1793, he busied himself with foreign
affairs; then, joining the party of Robespierre, whose resentment he had
averted by timely flatteries, he played an important part in the second
Committee of Public Safety--after the 17th of July 1793--and voted for the
death of the Girondists. He was thoroughly unscrupulous, stopping at
nothing to maintain the supremacy of the Mountain, and rendered it great
service by his rapid work, by the telling phases of his oratory, and by his
clear expositions of the problems of the day. On the 9th Thermidor (July
27th, 1794) Barère hesitated, then he drew up the report outlawing
Robespierre. In spite of this, in Germinal of the year III. (the 21st of
March to the 4th of April 1795), the Thermidorians decreed the accusation
of Barère and his colleagues of the Terror, Collot d'Herbois and
Billaud-Varenne, and he was sent to the Isle of Oléron. He was removed to
Saintes, and thence escaped to Bordeaux, where he lived in concealment for
several years. In 1795 he was elected member of the Council of Five
Hundred, but was not allowed to take his seat. Later he was used as a
secret agent by Napoleon I., for whom he carried on a diplomatic
correspondence. On the fall of Napoleon, Barère played the part of
royalist, but on the final restoration of the Bourbons in 1815 he was
banished for life from France as a regicide, and then withdrew to Brussels
and temporary oblivion. After the revolution of July 1830 he reappeared in
France, was reduced by a series of lawsuits to extreme indigence, accepted
a small pension assigned him by Louis Philippe (on whom he had heaped abuse
and railing), and died, the last survivor of the Committee of Public
Safety, on the 13th of January 1841. (See also FRENCH REVOLUTION.)

The _Mémoires de B. Barère ... publiés par MM. H. Carnot ... et David
(d'Angers) ... précédés d'une notice historique_ (Paris, 1824-1844) are
false, but contain valuable information; Carnot's _Notice_, which is very
good, was published separately in 1842. See F. A. Aulard, _Les Orateurs de
la Constituante_ (Paris, 1882); _Les Orateurs de la Convention_ (2nd ed.,
Paris, 1905). Macaulay's essay on Barère, (_Edinburgh Review_, vol. 79) is
eloquent, but incorrect.