BAREILLY, or BARELI, a city and district of British India in the Bareilly
or Rohilkhand division of the United Provinces. The city is situated on the
Ramganga river, 812 m. N.W. from Calcutta by rail. Pop. (1901) 131,208. The
principal buildings are two mosques built in the 17th century; a modern
fort overlooking the cantonments; the railway station, which is an
important junction on the Oudh and Rohilkhand line; the palace of the nawab
of Rampur, and the government college. Bareilly is the headquarters of a
brigade in the 7th division of the eastern army corps. The chief
manufactures are furniture and upholstery. Bareilly college is a seat of
upper class learning for the surrounding districts. It is conducted by an
English staff, and its course includes the subjects for degrees in the
Calcutta University.

The district of Bareilly has an area of 1580 sq. m. It is a level country,
watered by many streams, the general slope being towards the south. The
soil is fertile and highly cultivated, groves of noble trees abound, and
the villages have a neat, prosperous look. A tract of forest jungle, called
the _tarai_, stretches along the extreme north of the district, and teems
with large game, such as tigers, bears, deer, wild pigs, &c. The river
Sarda or Gogra forms the eastern boundary of the district and is the
principal stream. Next in importance is the Ramganga, which receives as its
tributaries most of the hill torrents of the Kumaon mountains. The Deoha is
another great drainage artery and receives many minor streams. The Gomati
or Gumti also passes through the district. The population in 1901 was
1,090,117. The Mahommedans are chiefly the descendants of Yusafzai Afghans,
called the Rohilla Pathans, who settled in the country about the year 1720.
The Rohillas were formerly the ruling race of the tract of country called
Rohilkhand, and are men of a taller stature, a fairer complexion and a more
arrogant air than the general inhabitants of the district. Bishop Heber
described them as follows:--"The country is burdened with a crowd of lazy,
profligate, self-called sawars (cavaliers), who, though many of them are
not worth a rupee, conceive it derogatory to their gentility and Pathan
blood to apply themselves to any honest industry, and obtain for the most
part a precarious livelihood by sponging on the industrious tradesmen and
farmers, on whom they levy a sort of blackmail, or as hangers-on to the
wealthy and noble families yet remaining in the province. These men have no
visible means of maintenance, and no visible occupation except that of
lounging up and down with their swords and shields, like the ancient
Highlanders, whom in many respects they much resemble." The Rohillas, after
fifty years' precarious independence, were subjugated in 1774 by the
confederacy of British troops with the nawab of Oudh's army, which formed
so serious a charge against Warren Hastings. Their territory was in that
year annexed to Oudh. In 1801 the nawab of Oudh ceded it to the Company in
commutation of the subsidy money. During the Mutiny of 1857 the Rohillas
took a very active part against the English, but since then they have been
disarmed. Both before and after that year, however, the Bareilly
Mahommedans have distinguished themselves by fanatical tumults against the
Hindus. The district is irrigated from the Rohilkhand system of government
canals. There are no manufactures except for domestic use and little
external trade. Several lines of the Oudh and Rohilkhand railway pass
through the district.