BARGAIN[1] AND SALE, in English law, a contract whereby property, real or
personal, is transferred from one person--called the bargainer--to
another--called the bargainee--for a [v.03 p.0399] valuable consideration;
but the term is more particularly used to describe a mode of conveyance of
lands. The disabilities under which a feudal owner very frequently lay gave
rise to the practice of conveying land by other methods than that of
feoffment with livery of seisin, that is, a handing over of the feudal
possession. That of "bargain and sale" was one. Where a man bargained and
sold his land to another for pecuniary consideration, which might be merely
nominal, and need not necessarily be actually paid, equity held the
bargainer to be seised of the land to the use of the bargainee. The Statute
of Uses (1535), by converting the bargainee's interest into a legal estate,
had an effect contrary to the intention of its framers. It made bargain and
sale an easy means of secret or private conveyance, a policy to which the
law was opposed. To remedy this defect, a statute (called the Statute of
Enrolments) was passed in the same year, which provided that every
conveyance by bargain and sale of freehold lands should be enrolled in a
court of record or with the _custos rotulorum_ of the county within six
months of its date. The Statute of Enrolments applied only to estates of
inheritance or for life, so that a bargain and sale of an estate for years
might be made without enrolment. This in turn was the foundation of another
mode of conveyance, namely, lease and release, which took the place of the
deed of bargain and sale, so far as regards freehold. Bargain and sale of
copyhold estates, which operates at common law, is still a mode of
conveyance in England in the case of a sale by executors, where a testator
has directed a sale of his estate to be made, instead of devising it to
trustees upon trust to sell.

See also CONVEYANCING.

[1] From O. Fr. _bargaigne_, a word of doubtful origin, appearing in many
Romance languages, cf. Ital. _bargagno_; it is connected with Late Lat.
_barcaniare_, to traffic, possibly derived from _barca_, a barge.