BARIUM (symbol Ba, atomic weight 137.37 [O=16]), one of the metallic
chemical elements included in the group of the alkaline earths. It takes
its name from the Greek [Greek: barus] (heavy) on account of its presence
in barytes or heavy spar which was first investigated in 1602 by V.
Casciorolus, a shoemaker of Bologna, who found that after ignition with
combustible substances it became phosphorescent, and on this account it was
frequently called Bolognian phosphorus. In 1774 K. W. Scheele, in examining
a specimen of pyrolusite, found a new substance to be present in the
mineral, for on treatment with sulphuric acid it gave an insoluble salt
which was afterwards shown to be identical with that contained in heavy
spar. Barium occurs chiefly in the form of barytes or heavy spar, BaSO_4,
and witherite, BaCO_3, and to a less extent in baryto-calcite,
baryto-celestine, and various complex silicates. The metal is difficult to
isolate, and until recently it may be doubted whether the pure metal had
been obtained. Sir H. Davy tried to electrolyse baryta, but was
unsuccessful; later attempts were made by him using barium chloride in the
presence of mercury. In this way he obtained an amalgam, from which on
distilling off the mercury the barium was obtained as a silver white
residue. R. Bunsen in 1854 electrolysed a thick paste of barium chloride
and dilute hydrochloric acid in the presence of mercury, at 100 C.,
obtaining a barium amalgam, from which the mercury was separated by a
process of distillation. A. N. Guntz (_Comptes rendus_, 1901, 133, p. 872)
electrolyses a saturated solution of barium chloride using a mercury
cathode and obtains a 3% barium amalgam; this amalgam is transferred to an
iron boat in a wide porcelain tube and the tube slowly heated electrically,
a good yield of pure barium being obtained at about 1000 C. The metal when
freshly cut possesses a silver white lustre, is a little harder than lead,
and is extremely easily oxidized on exposure; it is soluble in liquid
ammonia, and readily attacks both water and alcohol.

Three oxides of barium are known, namely, the monoxide, BaO, the dioxide,
BaO_2, and a suboxide, obtained by heating BaO with magnesium in a vacuum
to 1100 (Guntz, _loc. cit._, 1906, p. 359). The monoxide is formed when
the metal burns in air, but is usually prepared by the ignition of the
nitrate, oxygen and oxides of nitrogen being liberated. It can also be
obtained by the ignition of an intimate mixture of the carbonate and
carbon, and in small quantities by the ignition of the iodate. It is a
greyish coloured solid, which combines very energetically with water to
form the hydroxide, much heat being evolved during the combination; on
heating to redness in a current of oxygen it combines with the oxygen to
form the dioxide, which at higher temperatures breaks up again into the
monoxide and oxygen.

Barium hydroxide, Ba(OH)_2, is a white powder that can be obtained by
slaking the monoxide with the requisite quantity of water, but it is
usually made on the large scale by heating heavy spar with small coal
whereby a crude barium sulphide is obtained. This sulphide is then heated
in a current of moist carbon dioxide, barium carbonate being formed, BaS +
H_2O + CO_2 = BaCO_3 + H_2S, and finally the carbonate is decomposed by a
current of superheated steam, BaCO_3 + H_2O = Ba(OH)_2 + CO_2, leaving a
residue of the hydroxide. It is a white powder moderately soluble in cold
water, readily soluble in hot water, the solution possessing an alkaline
reaction and absorbing carbon dioxide readily. The solution, known as
_baryta-water_, finds an extensive application in practical chemistry,
being used in gas-analysis for the determination of the amount of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere; and also being used in organic chemistry as a
hydrolysing agent for the decomposition of complex ureides and substituted
aceto-acetic esters, while E. Fischer has used it as a condensing agent in
the preparation of [alpha]- and [beta]-acrose from acrolein dibromide. A
saturated solution of the hydroxide deposits on cooling a hydrated form
Ba(OH)_2  8H_2O, as colourless quadratic prisms, which on exposure to air
lose seven molecules of water of crystallization.

Barium dioxide, BaO_2, can be prepared as shown above, or in the hydrated
condition by the addition of excess of baryta-water to hydrogen peroxide
solution, when it is precipitated in the crystalline condition as BaO_2 
8H_2O. These crystals on heating to 130 C. lose the water of
crystallization and leave a residue of the anhydrous peroxide. In the Brin
process for the manufacture of oxygen, barium dioxide is obtained as an
intermediate product by heating barium monoxide with air under pressure. It
is a grey coloured powder which is readily decomposed by dilute acids with
the production of hydrogen peroxide.

Barium chloride, BaCl_2  2H_2O, can be obtained by dissolving witherite in
dilute hydrochloric acid, and also from heavy spar by ignition in a
reverberatory furnace with a mixture of coal, limestone and calcium
chloride, the barium chloride being extracted from the fused mass by water,
leaving a residue of insoluble calcium sulphide. The chloride crystallizes
in colourless rhombic tables of specific gravity 3.0 and is readily soluble
in water, but is almost insoluble in concentrated hydrochloric acid and in
absolute alcohol. It can be obtained in the anhydrous condition by heating
it gently to about 120 C. It has a bitter taste and is a strong poison.
Barium bromide is prepared by saturating baryta-water or by decomposing
barium carbonate with hydrobromic acid. It crystallizes as BaBr_2  2H_2O
isomorphous with barium chloride. Barium bromate, Ba(BrO_3)_2, can be
prepared by the action of excess of bromine on baryta-water, or by
decomposing a boiling aqueous solution of 100 parts of potassium bromate
with a similar solution of 74 parts of crystallized barium chloride. It
crystallizes in the monoclinic system, and separates from its aqueous
solution as Ba(BrO_3)_2  H_2O. On heating, it begins to decompose at
260-265 C. Barium chlorate, Ba(ClO_3)_2, is obtained by adding barium
chloride to sodium chlorate solution; on concentration of the solution
sodium chloride separates first, and then on further evaporation barium
chlorate crystallizes out and can be purified by recrystallization. It can
also be obtained by suspending barium carbonate in boiling water and
passing in chlorine. It crystallizes in monoclinic prisms of composition
Ba(ClO_3)_2  H_2O, and begins to decompose on being heated to 250 C.
Barium iodate, Ba(IO_3)_2, is obtained by the action of excess of iodic
acid on hot caustic baryta solution or by adding sodium iodate to barium
chloride solution. It crystallizes in monoclinic prisms of composition
Ba(IO_3)_2  H_2O, and is only very sparingly soluble in cold water.

Barium carbide, BaC_2, is prepared by a method similar to that in use for
the preparation of calcium carbide (see ACETYLENE). L. Maquenne has also
obtained it by distilling a mixture of barium amalgam and carbon in a
stream of hydrogen. Barium sulphide, BaS, is obtained by passing
sulphuretted hydrogen over heated barium monoxide, or better by fusion of
the sulphate with a small coal. It is a white powder which is readily
decomposed by water with the formation of the hydroxide and hydrosulphide.
The phosphorescence of the sulphide obtained by heating the thiosulphate is
much increased by adding uranium, bismuth, or thorium before ignition (_J.
pr. Chem._, 1905, ii. p. 196).

Barium sulphate, BaSO_4, is the most abundant of the naturally occurring
barium compounds (see BARYTES) and can be obtained artificially by the
addition of sulphuric acid or any soluble sulphate to a solution of a
soluble barium salt, when it is precipitated as an amorphous white powder
of specific gravity 4.5. It is practically insoluble in water, and is only
very slightly soluble in dilute acids; it is soluble to some extent, when
freshly prepared, in hot concentrated sulphuric acid, and on cooling the
solution, crystals of composition BaSO_4  H_2SO_4 are deposited. It is
used as a pigment under the name of "permanent white" or _blanc fixe_.

Barium nitride, Ba_3N_2, is obtained as a brownish mass by [v.03 p.0403]
passing nitrogen over heated barium amalgam. It is decomposed by water with
evolution of hydrogen, and on heating in a current of carbonic oxide forms
barium cyanide (L. Maquenne). Barium amide, Ba(NH_2)_2, is obtained from
potassammonium and barium bromide.

Barium nitrate, Ba(NO_3)_2, is prepared by dissolving either the carbonate
or sulphide in dilute nitric acid, or by mixing hot saturated solutions of
barium chloride and sodium nitrate. It crystallizes in octahedra, having a
specific gravity of 3.2, and melts at 597 C. (T. Carnelley). It is
decomposed by heat, and is largely used in pyrotechny for the preparation
of green fire. Barium carbonate, BaCO_3, occurs rather widely distributed
as witherite (_q.v._), and may be prepared by the addition of barium
chloride to a hot solution of ammonium carbonate, when it is precipitated
as a dense white powder of specific gravity 4.3; almost insoluble in water.

Barium and its salts can be readily detected by the yellowish-green colour
they give when moistened with hydrochloric acid and heated in the
Bunsenflame, or by observation of their spectra, when two characteristic
green lines are seen. In solution, barium salts may be detected by the
immediate precipitate they give on the addition of calcium sulphate (this
serves to distinguish barium salts from calcium salts), and by the yellow
precipitate of barium chromate formed on the addition of potassium
chromate. Barium is estimated quantitatively by conversion into the
sulphate. The atomic weight of the element has been determined by C.
Marignac by the conversion of barium chloride into barium sulphate, and
also by a determination of the amount of silver required to precipitate
exactly a known weight of the chloride; the mean value obtained being
136.84; T. W. Richards (_Zeit. anorg. Chem._, 1893, 6, p. 89), by
determining the equivalent of barium chloride and bromide to silver,
obtained the value 137.44. For the relation of barium to radium, see
RADIOACTIVITY.