BARLEY (_Hordeum sativum_), a member of the grass family, and an important
cereal which belongs peculiarly to temperate regions. It originated from a
wild species, _H. spontaneum_, a native of western Asia and has been
cultivated from the earliest times. Three subspecies or races are
recognized, (i.) _H. sativum_, subsp. _distichum_ (described by Linnaeus as
a distinct species, _H. distichon_), two-rowed barley. Only the middle
spikelet of each triplet is fertile; the ear has therefore only two
longitudinal rows of grain, and the spikes are strongly compressed
laterally. This approaches most nearly to the wild stock, from which it is
distinguished by the non-jointed axis and somewhat shorter awns. This is
the race most commonly grown in the British Isles and in central Europe,
and includes a large number of sub-races and varieties among which are the
finest malting-barleys. The chief sub-races are (a) peacock, fan or
battledore barley, described by Linnaeus as a distinct species, _H.
zeocriton_, with erect short ears about 2½ in. long, broad at the base and
narrow at the tip, suggesting an open fan or peacock's tail; (b)
erect-eared barleys (var. _erectum_) with erect broad ears and
closely-packed plump grains; (c) nodding barleys (var. _nutans_). The ripe
ears of the last hang so as to become almost parallel with the stem; they
are narrower and longer than in (b), owing to the grains being placed
farther apart on the rachis; it includes the Chevalier variety, one of the
best for malting purposes, (ii.) _H. sativum_, subsp. _hexastichum_,
six-rowed barley (the _H. hexastichon_ of Linnaeus). All the flowers of
each triplet of spikelets on both sides of the rachis are fertile and
produce ripe fruits; hence the ear produces six longitudinal rows of grain.
The ears are short, erect, and the grain thin and coarse; the straw is also
short. It is a hardy race, but owing to the poor quality of the grain is
rarely met with in Great Britain, (iii.) _H. sativum_, subsp. _vulgare_,
bere, bigg or four-rowed barley (the _H. vulgare_ of Linnaeus). All the
flowers of each triplet are fertile as in (ii.), but the rows are not
arranged regularly at equal distances round the rachis. The central fruits
of each triplet form two regular rows, but the lateral spikelets form not
four straight single rows as in (ii.), but two regular double rows, the
whole ear appearing irregularly four-rowed. This race seems to be of later
origin than the others. The ears are erect, about 2½ in. long, the grains
thinner and longer than in the two-rowed race, and the awns stiff and
firmly adhering to the flowering glume. The var. _pallidum_ is the barley
most frequently cultivated in northern Europe and northern Asia. This race
was formerly used for malt and beer, but owing to its larger amount of
gluten as compared with starch it is less adapted for brewing than the
two-rowed sorts. To this belong the varieties naked barley (_H. coeleste_
and _H. nudum_) and Himalayan barley (_H. trifurcatum_ and _H. aegiceras_).
In both the fruits fall out freely from the glume, and in the latter the
awns are three-pronged and shorter than the grain.

Barley is the most hardy of all cereal grains, its limit of cultivation
extending farther north than any other; and, at the same time, it can be
profitably cultivated in sub-tropical countries. The opinion of Pliny, that
it is the most ancient aliment of mankind, appears to be well-founded, for
no less than three varieties have been found in the lake dwellings of
Switzerland, in deposits belonging to the Stone Period. According to
Professor Heer these varieties are the common two-rowed (_H. distichum_),
the large six-rowed (_H. hexastichum_, var. _densum_), and the small
six-rowed (_H. hexastichum_, var. _sanctum_). The last variety is both the
most ancient and the most commonly found, and is the sacred barley of
antiquity, ears of which are frequently represented plaited in the hair of
the goddess Ceres, besides being figured on ancient coins. The cultivation
of barley in ancient Egypt is indicated in Exod. ix. 31. Till within recent
times barley formed an important source of food in northern countries, and
barley cakes are still to some extent eaten. Owing, however, to its poverty
in that form of nitrogenous compound called gluten, so abundant in wheat,
barley-flour cannot be baked into vesiculated bread; still it is a
highly-nutritious substance, the salts it contains having a high proportion
of phosphoric acid. The following is the composition of barley-meal
according to Von Bibra, omitting the salts:--

  Water    .    .    .    .    15      per cent.
  Nitrogenous compounds   .    12.981      "
  Gum      .    .    .    .     6.744      "
  Sugar    .    .    .    .     3.200      "
  Starch   .    .    .    .    59.950      "
  Fat      .    .    .    .     2.170      "

Barley is now chiefly cultivated for malting (see MALT) to prepare spirits
and beer (see BREWING), but it is also largely employed in domestic
cookery. For the latter purpose the hard, somewhat flinty grains are
preferable, and they are prepared by grinding off the outer cuticle which
forms "pot barley." When the attrition is carried further, so that the
grain is reduced to small round pellets, it is termed "pearl barley."
Patent barley is either pot or pearl barley reduced to flour. Under the
name _decoctum hordei_, a preparation of barley is included in the [v.03
p.0406] British Pharmacopoeia, which is of value as a demulcent and
emollient drink in febrile and inflammatory disorders.

_Cultivation_.--Apart from the growth-habits of the plant itself, the
consideration that chiefly determines the routine of barley cultivation is
the demand on the part of the maltster for uniformity of sample. Less care
is required in its cultivation when it is intended for feeding live-stock.
It is essential that the grains on the maltster's floor should germinate
simultaneously, hence at the time of reaping, the whole crop must be as
nearly as possible in the same stage of maturity. On rich soils the crop is
liable to grow too rapidly and yield a coarse, uneven sample, consequently
the best barley is grown on light, open and preferably calcareous soils,
while if the condition of the soil is too high it is often reduced by
growing wheat before the barley.

Barley (see AGRICULTURE, _Crops and Cropping_) is a rapidly-growing and
shallow-rooted plant. The upper layer of the soil must therefore be free
from weeds, finely pulverized and stocked with a readily-available supply
of nutriment. In most rotations barley is grown after turnips, or some
other "cleaning" crop, with or without the interposition of a wheat crop.
The roots are fed off by sheep during autumn and early winter, after which
the ground is ploughed to a depth of 3 or 4 in. only in order not to put
the layer of soil fertilized by the sheep beyond reach of the plant. The
ground is then left unworked and open to the crumbling influence of frost
till towards the end of winter, when it is stirred with the cultivator
followed by the harrows, or in some cases ploughed with a shallow furrow.
The seed, which should be plump, light in colour, with a thin skin covered
by fine wrinkles, is sown in March and early April[1] at the rate of from 8
to 12 pecks to the acre and lightly harrowed in. As even distribution at a
uniform depth is necessary, the drill is preferred to the broadcast-seeder
for barley sowing. In early districts seeding may take place as early as
February, provided a fine tilth is obtainable, but it rarely extends beyond
the end of April. If artificial manures are used, a usual dressing consists
of 2 or 3 cwt. of superphosphate to the acre at the time of sowing,
followed, if the ground is in poor condition, by 1 cwt. of nitrate of soda
when the plant is showing. Nitrogen must, however, be applied with caution
as it makes the barley rich in albumen, and highly albuminous barley keeps
badly and easily loses its germinating capacity. Farm-yard manure should
also be avoided. After-cultivation may comprise rolling, harrowing (to
preserve the fineness of the tilth) and in some districts hoeing. Barley is
cut, either with scythe or machine, when it is quite ripe with the ears
bending over. The crop is often allowed to lie loose for a day or two,
owing to the belief that sunshine and dews or even showers mellow it and
improve its colour. It may even be stacked without tying into sheaves,
though this course involves greater expenditure of labour in carrying and
afterwards in threshing. There is a prejudice against the use of the binder
in reaping barley, as it is impossible to secure uniformity of colour in
the grain when the stalks are tightly tied in the sheaf, and the sun has
not free access to those on the inside. In any case it must not be stacked
while damp, and if cut by machine is therefore sometimes tied in sheaves
and set up in stocks as in the case of wheat. The above sketch indicates
the general principles of barley-cultivation, but in practice they are
often modified by local custom or farming exigencies.

Barley is liable to smut and the other fungus diseases which attack wheat
(_q.v._), and the insect pests which prey on the two plants are also
similar. The larvae of the ribbon-footed corn-fly (_Chlorops taeniopus_)
caused great injury to the barley crop in Great Britain in 1893, when the
plant was weakened by extreme drought. A fair crop of barley yields about
36 bushels (56 lb to the bushel) per acre, but under the best conditions 40
and 50 bushels may be obtained. The yield of straw is from 15 to 20 cwt.
per acre. Barley-straw is considered inferior both as fodder and litter.

[1] Barley is occasionally sown in autumn to provide keep for sheep in the
following spring.