BARLAAM AND JOSAPHAT, one of the most popular and widely disseminated of
medieval religious romances, which owes its importance and interest to the
fact that it is a Christianized version of the story of Gautama Siddharta,
the Buddha, with which it agrees not only in broad outline but in essential
details.

The Christian story first appears in Greek among the works of John (_q.v._)
of Damascus, who flourished in the early part of the 8th century, and who,
before he adopted the monastic life, had [v.03 p.0404] held high office at
the court of the caliph Ab[=u] Ja`far al-Mans[=u]r, as his father Sergius
is said to have done before him.

The outline of the Greek story is as follows:--St Thomas had converted the
people of India, and after the eremitic life originated in Egypt, many
Indians adopted it. But a powerful pagan king arose who hated and
persecuted the Christians, especially the ascetics. After this king,
Abenner by name, had long been childless, a boy greatly desired and
matchless in beauty, was born to him and received the name of Josaphat. The
king, in his joy, summons astrologers to predict the child's destiny. They
foretell glory and prosperity beyond those of all his predecessors. One
sage, most learned of all, assents, but intimates that the scene of this
glory will be, not the paternal kingdom, but another infinitely more
exalted, and that the child will adopt the faith which his father
persecutes.

The boy shows a thoughtful and devout turn. King Abenner, troubled by this
and by the remembrance of the prediction, selects a secluded city, in which
he causes a splendid palace to be built, where his son should abide,
attended only by tutors and servants in the flower of youth and health. No
stranger was to have access, and the boy was to be cognizant of none of the
sorrows of humanity, such as poverty, disease, old age or death, but only
of what was pleasant, so that he should have no inducement to think of the
future life; nor was he ever to hear a word of Christ and His religion.

Prince Josaphat grows up in this seclusion, acquires all kinds of knowledge
and exhibits singular endowments. At length, on his urgent prayer, the king
reluctantly permits him to pass the limits of the palace, after having
taken all precautions to keep painful objects out of sight. But through
some neglect of orders, the prince one day encounters a leper and a blind
man, and asks of his attendants with pain and astonishment what such a
spectacle should mean. These, they tell him, are ills to which man is
liable. Shall all men have such ills? he asks. And in the end he returns
home in deep depression. Another day he falls in with a decrepit old man,
and stricken with dismay at the sight, renews his questions and hears for
the first time of death. And in how many years, continues the prince, does
this fate befall man? and must he expect death as inevitable? Is there _no_
way of escape? No means of eschewing this wretched state of decay? The
attendants reply as may be imagined; and Josaphat goes home more pensive
than ever, dwelling on the certainty of death and on what shall be
thereafter.

At this time Barlaam, an eremite of great sanctity and knowledge, dwelling
in the wilderness of Sennaritis, divinely warned, travels to India in the
disguise of a merchant, and gains access to Prince Josaphat, to whom he
imparts the Christian doctrine and commends the monastic life. Suspicion
arises and Barlaam departs. But all attempts to shake the prince's
convictions fail. As a last resource the king sends for Theudas, a
magician, who removes the prince's attendants and substitutes seductive
girls; but all their blandishments are resisted through prayer. The king
abandons these efforts and associates his son in the government. The prince
uses his power to promote religion, and everything prospers in his hands.
At last Abenner himself yields to the faith, and after some years of
penitence dies. Josaphat surrenders the kingdom to a friend called
Barachias and departs for the wilderness. After two years of painful search
and much buffeting by demons he finds Barlaam. The latter dies, and
Josaphat survives as a hermit many years. King Barachias afterwards
arrives, and transfers the bodies of the two saints to India, where they
are the source of many miracles.

Now this story is, _mutatis mutandis_, the story of Buddha. It will suffice
to recall the Buddha's education in a secluded palace, his encounter
successively with a decrepit old man, with a man in mortal disease and
poverty, with a dead body, and, lastly, with a religious recluse radiant
with peace and dignity, and his consequent abandonment of his princely
state for the ascetic life in the jungle. Some of the correspondences in
the two stories are most minute, and even the phraseology, in which some of
the details of Josaphat's history are described, almost literally renders
the Sanskrit of the _Lalita Vistara_. More than that, the very word Joasaph
or Josaphat (Arabic, _Y[=u]dasatf_) is a corruption of Bodisat due to a
confusion between the Arabic letters for Y and B, and Bodisatva is a common
title for the Buddha in the many birth-stories that clustered round the
life of the sage. There are good reasons for thinking that the Christian
story did not originate with John of Damascus, and a strong case has been
made out by Zotenberg that it reflects the religious struggles and disputes
of the early 7th century in Syria, and that the Greek text was edited by a
monk of Saint Saba named John, his version being the source of all later
texts and translations. How much older than this the Christian story is, we
cannot tell, but it is interesting to remember that it embodies in the form
of a speech the "Apology" of the 2nd-century philosopher Aristides. After
its appearance among the writings of John of Damascus, it was incorporated
with Simeon Metaphrastes' _Lives of the Saints_ (c. 950), and thence gained
great vogue, being translated into almost every European language. A famous
Icelandic version was made for Prince Hakon early in the 13th century. In
the East, too, it took on new life and Catholic missionaries freely used it
in their propaganda. Thus a Tagala (Philippine) translation was brought out
at Manila in 1712. Besides furnishing the early playwrights with material
for miracle plays, it has supplied episodes and apologues to many a writer,
including Boccaccio, John Gower and Shakespeare. Rudolph of Ems about 1220
expanded it into a long poem of 16,000 lines, celebrating the victory of
Christian over heathen teaching. The heroes of the romance have even
attained saintly rank. Their names were inserted by Petrus de Natalibus in
his _Catalogus Sanctorum_ (c. 1380), and Cardinal Baronius included them in
the official _Martyrologium_ authorized by Sixtus V. (1585-1590) under the
date of the 27th of November. In the Orthodox Eastern Church "the holy
Josaph, son of Abener, king of India" is allotted the 26th of August. Thus
unwittingly Gautama the Buddha has come to official recognition as a saint
in two great branches of the Catholic Church, and no one will say that he
does not deserve the honour. A church dedicated _Divo Josaphat_ in Palermo
is probably not the only one of its kind.

The identity of the stories of Buddha and St Josaphat was recognized by the
historian of Portuguese India, Diogo do Couto (1542-1616), as may be seen
in his history (_Dec_. v. liv. vi. cap. 2). In modern times the honour
belongs to Laboulaye (1859), Felix Liebrecht in 1860 putting it beyond
dispute. Subsequent researches have been carried out by Zotenberg, Max
Müller, Rhys Davids, Braunholtz and Joseph Jacobs, who published his
_Barlaam and Josaphat_ in 1896.