BARNFIELD, RICHARD (1574-1627), English poet, was born at Norbury,
Staffordshire, and baptized on the 13th of June 1574. His obscure though
close relationship with Shakespeare has long made him interesting to
students and has attracted of late years further attention from the
circumstance that important discoveries regarding his life have been made.
Until recently nothing whatever was known about the facts of Barnfield's
career, whose very existence had been doubted. It was, however, discovered
by the late Dr A. B. Grosart that the poet was the son of Richard Barnfield
(or Barnefield) and Maria Skrymsher, his wife, who were married in April
1572. They resided in the parish of Norbury, in Staffordshire, on the
borders of Salop, where the poet was baptized on the 13th of June 1574. The
mother died in giving birth to a daughter early in 1581, and her unmarried
sister, Elizabeth Skrymsher, seems to have devoted herself to the care of
the children. In November 1589 Barnfield matriculated at Brasenose College,
Oxford, and took his degree in [v.03 p.0415] February 1592. He "performed
the exercise for his master's gown," but seems to have left the university
abruptly, without proceeding to the M.A. It is conjectured that he came up
to London in 1593, and became acquainted with Watson, Drayton, and perhaps
with Spenser. The death of Sir Philip Sidney had occurred while Barnfield
was still a school-boy, but it seems to have strongly affected his
imagination and to have inspired some of his earliest verses. In November
1594, in his twenty-first year, Barnfield published anonymously his first
work, _The Affectionate Shepherd_, dedicated with familiar devotion to
Penelope, Lady Rich. This was a sort of florid romance, in two books of
six-line stanza, in the manner of Lodge and Shakespeare, dealing at large
with "the complaint of Daphnis for the love of Ganymede." As the author
expressly admitted later, it was an expansion or paraphrase of Virgil's
second eclogue--

 "Formosum pastor Corydon ardebat Alexin."

This poem of Barnfield's was the most extraordinary specimen hitherto
produced in England of the licence introduced from Italy at the
Renaissance. Although the poem was successful, it did not pass without
censure from the moral point of view. Into the conventional outlines of
_The Affectionate Shepherd_ the young poet has poured all his fancy, all
his epithets, and all his coloured touches of nature. If we are not
repelled by the absurd subject, we have to admit that none of the immediate
imitators of _Venus and Adonis_ has equalled the juvenile Barnfield in the
picturesqueness of his "fine ruff-footed doves," his "speckled flower
call'd sops-in-wine," or his desire "by the bright glimmering of the starry
light, to catch the long-bill'd woodcock." Two months later, in January
1595, Barnfield published his second volume, _Cynthia, with certain
Sonnets_, and this time signed the preface, which was dedicated, in terms
which imply close personal relations, to William Stanley, the new earl of
Derby. This is a book of extreme interest; it exemplifies the earliest
study both of Spenser and Shakespeare. "Cynthia" itself, a panegyric on
Queen Elizabeth, is written in the Spenserian stanza, of which it is
probably the earliest example extant outside _The Faerie Queene_. This is
followed by a sequence of twenty sonnets, which have the extraordinary
interest that, while preceding the publication of Shakespeare's sonnets by
fourteen years, they are closer to them in manner than are any others of
the Elizabethan age. They celebrate, with extravagant ardour, the charms of
a young man whose initials seem to have been J. U. or J. V., and of whom
nothing else seems known. These sonnets, which preceded even the _Amoretti_
of Spenser, are of unusual merit as poetry, and would rank as high in
quality as in date of publication if their subject-matter were not so
preposterous. They show the influence of Drayton's _Idea_, which had
appeared a few months before; in that collection also, it is to be
observed, there had appeared amatory sonnets addressed to a young man. If
editors would courageously alter the gender of the pronouns, several of
Barnfield's glowing sonnets might take their place at once in our
anthologies. Before the publication of his volume, however, he had repented
of his heresies, and had become enamoured of a "lass" named Eliza (or
Elizabeth), whom he celebrates with effusion in an "Ode." This is probably
the lady whom he presently married, and as we find him a grandfather in
1626 it is unlikely that the wedding was long delayed. In 1598 Barnfield
published his third volume, _The Encomion of Lady Pecunia_, a poem in
praise of money, followed by a sort of continuation, in the same six-line
stanza, called "The Complaint of Poetry for the Death of Liberality." In
this volume there is already a decline in poetic quality. But an appendix
of "Poems in diverse Humours" to this volume of 1598 presents some very
interesting features. Here appears what seems to be the absolutely earliest
praise of Shakespeare in a piece entitled "A Remembrance of some English
Poets," in which the still unrecognized author of _Venus and Adonis_ is
celebrated by the side of Spenser, Daniel and Drayton. Here also are the
sonnet, "If Music and sweet Poetry agree," and the beautiful ode beginning
"As it fell upon a day," which were until recently attributed to
Shakespeare himself. In the next year, 1599, _The Passionate Pilgrim_ was
published, with the words "By W. Shakespeare" on the title-page. It was
long supposed that this attribution was correct, but Barnfield claimed one
of the two pieces just mentioned, not only in 1598, but again in 1605. It
is certain that both are his, and possibly other things in _The Passionate
Pilgrim_ also; Shakespeare's share in the twenty poems of that miscellany
being doubtless confined to the five short pieces which have been
definitely identified as his. In the opinion of the present writer the
sonnet beginning "Sweet Cytherea" has unmistakably the stamp of Barnfield,
and is probably a gloss on the first rapturous perusal of _Venus and
Adonis_; the same is to be said of "Scarce had the sun," which is _aut
Barnfield, aut diabolus_. One or two other contributions to _The Passionate
Pilgrim_ may be conjectured, with less confidence, to be Barnfield's. It
has been stated that the poet was now studying the law at Gray's Inn, but
for this the writer is unable to discover the authority, except that
several members of that society are mentioned in the course of the volume
of 1598. In all probability Barnfield now married and withdrew to his
estate of Dorlestone (or Darlaston), in the county of Stafford, a house
romantically situated on the river Trent, where he henceforth resided as a
country gentleman. In 1605 he reprinted his _Lady Pecunia_, and this was
his latest appearance as a man of letters. His son Robert Barnfield and his
cousin Elinor Skrymsher were his executors when his will was proved at
Lichfield; his wife, therefore, doubtless predeceased him. Barnfield died
at Dorlestone Hall, and was buried in the neighbouring parish church of St
Michael's, Stone, on the 6th of March 1627. The labours of Dr Grosart and
of Professor Arber have thrown much light on the circumstances of
Barnfield's career. He has taken of late years a far more prominent place
than ever before in the history of English literature. This is due partly
to the remarkable merit of his graceful, melodious and highly-coloured
verse, which was practically unknown until it was privately printed in 1876
(ed. Grosart, Roxburghe Club), and at length given to the public in 1882
(ed. Arber, _English Scholars' Library_). It is also due to the mysterious
personal relation of Barnfield to Shakespeare, a relation not easy to prove
in detail, as it is built up on a great variety of small indications. It
is, however, obvious that Barnfield warmly admired Shakespeare, whose
earliest imitator he may be said to have been, and that between 1595 and
1600 the younger poet was so close to the elder that the compositions of
the former could be confused with those of the latter. Barnfield died, as a
poet, in his twenty-fifth year. Up to that time he had displayed a talent
which, if he had pursued it, might have placed him very high among the
English poets. As it is, he will always interest a certain number of
readers as being, in his languid "Italianate" way, a sort of ineffectual
Meleager in the rich Elizabethan anthology.

Besides the editions already cited, _The Affectionate Shepherd_ was edited
by Mr J. O. Halliwell-Phillipps for the Percy Society (_Early English
Poetry_, vol. xx.); _The Encomion of Pecunia_ and some other poems by J.
Boswell (Roxburghe Club, 1816); and by J. P. Collier in _Illustrations of
Old English Literature_ (vol. i., 1866).

(E. G.)