BARNSLEY (BLACK, or properly BLEAK BARNSLEY), a market town and municipal
borough in the Barnsley parliamentary division of the West Riding of
Yorkshire, England, 15 m. N. of Sheffield. Pop. (1891) 35,427; (1901)
41,086. It is served by the Midland, Great Central, Lancashire & Yorkshire,
Great Northern, and Hull & Barnsley railways. It is in the parish of
Silkstone, which gives name to important collieries. It is situated on
rising ground west of the river Dearne, and, though it loses in attraction
owing to its numerous factories, its neighbourhood has considerable natural
beauty. Among the principal buildings and institutions are several
churches, of which the oldest, the parish church of St Mary, was built in
1821 on an early site; court house, public hall, institute and free
library. Among several educational institutions, the free grammar school
dates from 1665; and a philosophical society was founded in 1828. A
monument was erected in 1905 to prominent members of the Yorkshire Miners'
Association. The park was presented in 1862 by the widow of Joseph Locke,
M.P. The manufacture of iron and steel, and the weaving of linen and other
cloth, are the two principal industries; but there are also bleachfields,
printfields, dyeworks, sawmills, cornmills and malt-houses; and the
manufacture of glass, needles and wire is carried on. There are large
coalfields in the neighbourhood, which, indeed, extend under the town. Coal
and coke are largely exported to London and Hull. In the vicinity, Monk
Bretton Priory, a Cluniac foundation of 1157, retains a Perpendicular
gatehouse, some Decorated domestic remains, and fragments of the church.
Wentworth Castle, built in 1730 by Thomas, earl of Strafford, stands in a
singularly beautiful park, and contains a fine collection of portraits of
historical interest. Besides the communications afforded by railway,
Barnsley has the advantage of connexion with the Aire and Calder Navigation
system of canals. The borough is under a mayor, six aldermen and eighteen
councillors. Area, 2385 acres.

At the time of the Domesday survey Ilbert de Lacy held Barnsley by gift of
William the Conqueror as part of the honour of Pontefract, and the
overlordship remained in his family until the reign of Stephen, when it was
granted by Henry de Lacy to the monks of Pontefract. Henry III. in 1249
granted the prior and convent of Pontefract a market every Wednesday at
Barnsley, and a fair on the vigil and feast of St Michael and two following
days, and Henry VIII. in 1512 granted them a new fair on the day of the
Conversion of St Paul and two following days. The monastery evidently also
held another fair there called St Ellen's fair, for in 1583 Queen Elizabeth
granted this fair and St Paul's fair and the market "lately belonging to
the dissolved monastery of Pontefract" to one Henry Burdett, and Ralph and
Henry his sons for their lives. Besides these charters and others granting
land in Barnsley to the monks of Pontefract there is very little history of
the town, since it was not until after the introduction of the linen
manufacture in 1744 that it became really important. Before that time the
chief industry had been wire-drawing, but this trade began to decrease
about the end of the 18th century, just as the linen trade was becoming
important. In 1869 Barnsley was incorporated.

See Rowland Jackson, _The History of the Town and Township of Barnsley_
(1858); _Victoria County History--Yorkshire_.