BARNES, WILLIAM (1800-1886), the Dorsetshire poet, was born on the 22nd of
February 1800, at Rushay, near Pentridge in Dorset, the son of John Barnes
and Grace Scott, of the farmer class. He was a delicate child, in direct
contrast to a strong race of forebears, and inherited from his mother a
refined, retiring disposition and a love for books. He went to school at
Sturminster Newton, where he was considered the clever boy of the school;
and when a solicitor named Dashwood applied to the master for a
quick-witted boy to join him as pupil, Barnes was selected for the post. He
worked with the village parson in his spare hours at classics and studied
music under the organist. In 1818 he left Sturminster for the office of one
Coombs at Dorchester, where he continued his evening education with another
kindly clergyman. He also made great progress in the art of wood-engraving,
and with the money he received for a series of blocks for a work called
_Walks about Dorchester_, he printed and published his first book, _Orra, a
Lapland Tale_, in 1822. In the same year he became engaged to Julia Miles,
the daughter of an excise officer. In 1823 he took a school at Mere in
Wiltshire, and four years later married and settled in Chantry House, a
fine old Tudor mansion in that town. The school grew in numbers, and Barnes
occupied all his spare time in assiduous study, reading during these years
authors so diverse in character as Herodotus, Sallust, Ovid, Petrarch,
Buffon and Burns. He also began to write poetry, and printed many of his
verses in the _Dorset County Chronicle_. His chief studies, however, were
philological; and in 1829 he published _An Etymological Glossary of English
Words of Foreign Derivation_. In 1832 a strolling company of actors visited
Mere, and Barnes wrote a farce, _The Honest Thief_, which they produced,
and a comedy which was played at Wincanton. Barnes also wrote a number of
educational books, such as _Elements of Perspective, Outlines of
Geography_, and in 1833 first began his poems in the Dorsetshire dialect,
among them the two eclogues "The 'Lotments" and "A Bit o' Sly Coorten," in
the pages of the local paper. In 1835 he left Mere, and returned to
Dorchester, where he started another school, removing in 1837 into larger
quarters. In 1844 he published _Poems of Rural Life in the Dorset Dialect_.
Three years later Barnes took holy orders, and was appointed to the cure of
Whitcombe, 3 m. from Dorchester. He had been for some years upon the books
of St John's College, Cambridge, and took the degree of B.D. in 1850. He
resigned Whitcombe in 1852, finding the work too hard in connexion with his
mastership; and in June of that year he sustained a severe bereavement by
the death of his wife. Continuing his studies in the science of language,
he published his _Philological Grammar_ in 1854, drawing examples from more
than sixty languages. For the copyright of this erudite work he received
£5. The second series of dialect poems, _Hwomely Rhymes_, appeared in 1859
(2nd ed. 1863). _Hwomely Rhymes_ contained some of his best-known pieces,
and in the year of its publication he first began to give readings from his
works. As their reputation grew he travelled all over the country,
delighting large audiences with his quaint humour and natural pathos. In
1861 he was awarded a civil list pension of £70 a year, and in the next
year published _Tiw_, the most striking of his philological studies, in
which the Teutonic roots in the English language are discussed. Barnes had
a horror of Latin forms in English, and would have substituted English
compounds for many Latin forms in common use. In 1862 he broke up his
school, and [v.03 p.0414] removed to the rectory of Winterborne Came, to
which he was presented by his old friend, Captain Seymour Dawson Damer.
Here he worked continuously at verse and prose, contributing largely to the
magazines. A new series of _Poems of Rural Life in the Dorset Dialect_
appeared in 1862, and he was persuaded in 1868 to publish a series of
_Poems of Rural Life in Common English_, which was less successful than his
dialect poems. These latter were collected into a single volume in 1879,
and on the 7th of October 1886 Barnes died at Winterborne Came. His poetry
is essentially English in character; no other writer has given quite so
simple and sincere a picture of the homely life and labour of rural
England. His work is full of humour and the clean, manly joy of life; and
its rusticity is singularly allied to a literary sense and to high
technical finish. He is indeed the Victorian Theocritus; and, as English
country life is slowly swept away before the advance of the railway and the
telegraph, he will be more and more read for his warm-hearted and fragrant
record of rustic love and piety. His original and suggestive books on the
English language, which are valuable in spite of their eccentricities,
include:--_Se Gefylsta: an Anglo-Saxon Delectus_ (1849); _A Grammar and
Glossary of the Dorset Dialect_ (1864); _An Outline of English
Speech-Craft_ (1878); and _A Glossary of the Dorset Dialect_ (Dorchester,
1886).

See _The Life of William Barnes, Poet and Philologist_ (1887), by his
daughter, Lucy E. Baxter, who is known as a writer on art by the pseudonym
of Leader Scott; and a notice by Thomas Hardy in the _Athenaeum_ (16th of
October 1886).