BARNAVE, ANTOINE PIERRE JOSEPH MARIE (1761-1793), one of the greatest
orators of the first French Revolution, was born at Grenoble in Dauphiné,
on the 22nd of October 1761. He was of a Protestant family. His father was
an advocate at the parlement of Grenoble, and his mother was a woman of
high birth, superior ability and noble character. He was educated by his
mother because, being a Protestant, he could not attend school, and he grew
up at once thoughtful and passionate, studious and social, handsome in
person and graceful in manners. He was brought up to the law, and at the
age of twenty-two made himself favourably known by a discourse pronounced
before the local parlement on the division of political powers. Dauphiné
was one of the first of the provinces to feel the excitement of the coming
revolution; and Barnave was foremost to give voice to the general feeling,
in a pamphlet entitled _Esprit des édits enregistrés militairement le 20
mai 1788_. He was immediately elected deputy, with his father, to the
states of Dauphiné, and took a prominent part in their debates. A few
months later he was transferred to a wider field of action. The
states-general were convoked at Versailles for the 5th of May 1789, and
Barnave was chosen deputy of the _tiers état_ for his native province. He
soon made an impression on the Assembly, became the friend of most of the
leaders of the popular party, and formed with Adrien Duport and Alexandre
Lameth (_q.v._) the group known during the Constituent Assembly as "the
triumvirate." He took part in the conference on the claims of the three
orders, drew up the first address to the king, and supported the proposal
of Sieyès that the Assembly should declare itself National. Until 1791 he
was one of the principal members of the club known later as the Jacobins,
of which he drew up the manifesto and first rules (see JACOBINS). Though a
passionate lover of liberty, he hoped to secure the freedom of France and
her monarchy at the same time. But he was almost unawares borne away by the
mighty currents of the time, and he took part in the attacks on the
monarchy, on the clergy, on church property, and on the provincial
parlements. With the one exception of Mirabeau, Barnave was the most
powerful orator of the Assembly. On several occasions he stood in
opposition to Mirabeau. After the fall of the Bastille he wished to save
the throne. He advocated the suspensory veto, and the establishment of
trial by jury in civil causes, but voted with the Left against the system
of two chambers. His conflict with Mirabeau on the question of assigning to
the king the right to make peace or war (from the 16th to the 23rd of May
1791) was one of the most striking scenes in the Assembly. In August 1790,
after a vehement debate, he fought a duel with J. A. M. de Cazalès, in
which the latter was slightly wounded. About the close of October 1790
Barnave was called to the presidency of the Assembly. On the death of
Mirabeau a few months later, Barnave paid a high tribute to his worth and
public services, designating him the Shakespeare of oratory. On the arrest
of the king and the royal family at Varennes, while attempting to escape
from France, Barnave was [v.03 p.0412] one of the three appointed to
conduct them back to Paris. On the journey he was deeply affected by the
mournful fate of Marie-Antoinette, and resolved to do what he could to
alleviate their sufferings. In one of his most powerful speeches he
maintained the inviolability of the king's person. His public career came
to an end with the close of the Constituent Assembly, and he returned to
Grenoble at the beginning of 1792. His sympathy and relations with the
royal family, to whom he had submitted a plan for a counter-revolution, and
his desire to check the downward progress of the Revolution, brought on him
suspicion of treason. Denounced (15th of August 1792) in the Legislative
Assembly, he was arrested and imprisoned for ten months at Grenoble, then
transferred to Fort Barraux, and in November 1793 to Paris. The nobility of
his character was proof against the assaults of suffering. "Better to
suffer and to die," he said, "than lose one shade of my moral and political
character." On the 28th of November he appeared before the Revolutionary
Tribunal. He was condemned on the evidence of papers found at the Tuileries
and executed the next day, with Duport-Dutertre.

Barnave's _Oeuvres posthumes_ were published in 1842 by Bérenger (de la
Drôme) in 4 vols. See F. A. Aulard, _Les Orateurs de l'assemblée
constituante_ (Paris, 1882).