BARNES, ROBERT (1495-1540), English reformer and martyr, born about 1495,
was educated at Cambridge, where he was a member, and afterwards prior of
the convent of Austin Friars, and graduated D.D. in 1523. He was apparently
one of the Cambridge men who were wont to gather at the White Horse Tavern
for Bible-reading and theological discussion early in the third decade of
the 16th century. In 1526, he was brought before the vice-chancellor for
preaching a heterodox sermon, and was subsequently examined by Wolsey and
four other bishops. He was condemned to abjure or be burnt; and preferring
the former alternative, was committed to the Fleet prison and afterwards to
the Austin Friars in London. He escaped thence to Antwerp in 1528, and also
visited Wittenberg, where he made Luther's acquaintance. He also came
across Stephen Vaughan, an agent of Thomas Cromwell and an advanced
reformer, who recommended him to Cromwell: "Look well," he wrote, "upon Dr
Barnes' book. It is such a piece of work as I have not yet seen any like
it. I think he shall seal it with his blood" (_Letters and Papers of Henry
VIII._ v. 593). In 1531 Barnes returned to England, and became one of the
chief intermediaries between the English government and Lutheran Germany.
In 1535 he was sent to Germany, in the hope of inducing Lutheran divines to
approve of Henry's divorce from Catherine of Aragon, and four years later
he was employed in negotiations connected with Anne of Cleves's marriage.
The policy was Cromwell's, but Henry VIII. had already in 1538 refused to
adopt Lutheran theology, and the statute of Six Articles (1539), followed
by the king's disgust with Anne of Cleves (1540), brought the agents of
that policy to ruin. An attack upon Bishop Gardiner by Barnes in a sermon
at St Paul's Cross was the signal for a bitter struggle between the
Protestant and reactionary parties in Henry's council, which raged during
the spring of 1540. Barnes was forced to apologize and recant; and Gardiner
delivered a series of sermons at St Paul's Cross to counteract Barnes'
invective. But a month or so later Cromwell was made earl of Essex,
Gardiner's friend, Bishop Sampson, was sent to the Tower, and Barnes
reverted to Lutheranism. It was a delusive victory. In July, Cromwell was
attainted, Anne of Cleves was divorced and Barnes was burnt (30th July
1540). He also had an act of attainder passed against him, a somewhat novel
distinction for a heretic, which illustrates the way in which Henry VIII.
employed secular machinery for ecclesiastical purposes, and regarded heresy
as an offence against the state rather than against the church. Barnes was
one of six executed on the same day: two, William Jerome and Thomas
Gerrard, were, like himself, burnt for heresy under the Six Articles;
three, Thomas Abel, Richard Fetherstone and Edward Powell, were hanged for
treason in denying the royal supremacy. Both Lutherans and Catholics on the
continent were shocked. Luther published Barnes' confession with a preface
of his own as _Bekenntnis des Glaubens_ (1540), which is included in
Walch's edition of Luther's _Werke_ xxi. 186.

See _Letters and Papers of Henry VIII._ vols. iv.-xv. _passim_;
Wriothesley's _Chronicle_; Foxe's _Acts and Monuments_, ed. G. Townsend
Burnet's _Hist. of the Ref._, ed. Pocock; Dixon's _Hist. of the Church_;
Gairdner's _Church in the XVIth Century_; Pollard's _Henry VIII. and
Cranmer_; Herzog-Hauck, _Realencyklopadie_, 3rd ed.

(A. F. P.)