BARNABAS, in the New Testament, the surname, according to Acts iv. 36,
given by the apostles (possibly in contrast to Joseph Barsabbas, Acts i.
23) to Joseph, "a Levite, a man of Cyprus by birth," who, though like Paul
not of the Twelve, came like him to rank as an apostle (Acts xiv. 4, 14, 1
Cor. ix. 6; see APOSTLE). The Greek rendering of this Semitic name [Greek:
huios paraklêseôs]) may be translated "son of consolation" (as in the
A.V.), or "son of exhortation" (as in the R.V.). But there is an initial
difficulty about the Greek rendering itself, as no satisfactory etymology
of Bar-nabas in this sense has as yet been suggested. The one at present in
favour on the ground of philological analogy (see Z.N.T.W., 1906, p. 91 for
a fresh instance), viz. Bar-Nebo, lacks intrinsic fitness for a Jew and a
Levite, and of course does not accord with the statement in Acts itself.
Hence it still seems best to assume some unknown Aramaic form equivalent to
[Greek: paraklêsis], and then to take the latter in the sense of comfort or
encouragement. This rendering, rather than "exhortation" in the sense of
eloquence, best suits the usage of Acts, which suggests such comfort as is
given by encouraging rather than rousing words (ix. 31, xi. 23, xiii. 15,
xv. 31 f.; cf. Luke ii. 25, vi. 24). All we hear of Barnabas points to
goodness of heart ("a good man," xi. 24) as his distinctive quality, giving
fineness of perception (ix. 27, xi. 25 f.) and large insight into
essentials (xi. 23 f.). It was probably the practically helpful and
encouraging form that his gift as a "prophet" took (Acts xiii. i, [v.03
p.0408] with 1 Cor. xiv. 3). It is perhaps significant that his first
appearance is of the generously helpful kind described in Acts iv. 36 f.
Yet we must beware of regarding Barnabas as merely a fine character; he
plays too prominent a part in the New Testament for any such limitation.
Thus, he next appears as braving the suspicions which dogged the
ex-persecutor Saul (Paul)--possibly an old acquaintance in Hellenist
circles at Jerusalem (cf. vi. 9, ix. 29)--and introducing him to the older
apostles (ix. 27). More suggestive still of high repute as a man of insight
and authority is his mission from the Jerusalem Church to inspect and judge
of the new departure in the Gospel at Antioch, in Acts xi. 22. This means
very much, though his modesty led him to call in the aid of his friend Saul
to cope with the new and expanding situation (25 f.). After their brief
joint visit to Judaea and Jerusalem (xi. 30, xii. 25) we next get a glimpse
of Barnabas as still chief among the spiritual leaders of the Antiochene
Church, and as called by the Spirit, along with Saul, to initiate the wider
mission of the Gospel, outside Syria even, in regions beyond (xiii. 2, 4).
He led the way to his native Cyprus; but in the crucial struggle with the
magician Bar-Jesus, in the presence of the governor of the island (xiii. 7
ff.), Saul seems to have come so decisively to the front, that henceforth,
for the author of Acts he takes the lead, and Barnabas appears as his
colleague (see xiii. 13, "Paul and his company," and note the turning back
of Mark, the kinsman of Barnabas). The fact that at Lystra the natives
styled Barnabas, Zeus, and Paul, Hermes, while suggesting that Barnabas was
the man of nobler mien, proves that Paul was the chief speaker (xiv. 12);
and the notices in the Pauline epistles fully bear out the view that "the
gospel of the Gentiles" which they preached was in conception Paul's (Gal.
ii. 1-9). Indeed, Barnabas's vacillation at Antioch, as recorded in Gal.
ii. 11 ff. (whether it preceded or followed their mission in Acts
xiii.-xiv.), shows that, while gifted with true intuitions, he was not
strong in thinking out his position to all its issues on principle, and
that it was here that Paul was so immensely his superior. But what Barnabas
did see with full reasoned conviction, he was staunch in upholding; thus he
upheld the general cause of Gentile freedom from the obligation of
circumcision (as distinct from perfect religious equality with Jewish
believers) at the Jerusalem conference (Acts xv.). With this stand for
principle, however, his main work, as a great link in the transition of the
Gospel from its Jewish to its universal mission, reached its climax; and
Acts transfers its attention wholly to Paul, after explaining how their
roads parted under rather painful circumstances (xv. 37 ff.).

When Barnabas sails away with Mark to resume work in Cyprus, the mists of
history hide him from our sight. Only now and again do we catch fugitive
and increasingly doubtful glimpses of him and his work. We learn from 1
Cor. ix. 6 that he adhered to Paul's principle of self-support in his
mission work, and from Col. iv. 10 that his name was well known and
respected at Colossae about A.D. 60. Tradition, which early regards him as
one of the seventy (Clem. Alex.), carries him, plausibly enough, to
Alexandria (_Clem. Hom._ i. 8, ii. 4; cf. the ascription to him of the
Alexandrine _Epistle of Barnabas_). But the evidence for his having visited
Rome (later tradition says also Milan) is stronger because more varied
(_Clem. Recog._ i. 7, cf. _Hom._ i. 7; the early _Actus Petri
Vercellenses_; and the late Cypriot _Encomium_), especially if we might
trust the Western ascription to him of the epistle to the Hebrews, which
begins with Tertullian (_De Pud._ 20). But this may itself be mere
inference from its self-description (xiii. 22), as a "word of exhortation,"
to the "son of exhortation" (Acts iv. 36) as its author. The legend of his
missionary labours in Cyprus, including martyrdom at Salamis, is quite late
and untrustworthy. The date of his death is uncertain, but he was probably
no longer living when Acts was written (_c._ A.D. 75-80).

His was essentially a mediating role. He filled a position intermediate
between Jewish and Pauline Christianity--one characteristic of Christian
Hellenists generally. Hence he is spoken of with respect in the
Clementines; while Paul, as a radical in relation to the Law, is
discountenanced. If we could confidently credit him with the authorship of
the epistle to the Hebrews, we could conceive his theological standpoint
more exactly. But, in any case, the Barnabas of history was a greater man
than the Barnabas of modern tradition.

See W. Cunningham, _Epistle of Barnabas_, pp. xlvii.-lxii.; O.
Braunsberger, _Der Apostel Barnabas, sein Leben ..._ (Mainz, 1876);
articles _s.v._ in _Ency. Biblica_ and Hastings's _Dictionary of the
Bible_.

THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS is one of the apocryphal books of the New
Testament. At the end of the _Codex Sinaiticus_ of the 4th century, as a
sort of appendix to the New Testament, there stands an "Epistle of
Barnabas." Here it is followed by the _Shepherd of Hermas_, while in an
11th-century MS., which contains also the _Didach[=e]_, it is followed by
two writings which themselves form an appendix to the New Testament in the
_Codex Alexandrinus_. This means that it once enjoyed quasi-canonical
authority, a fact amply borne out by what Eusebius (_H. E._ iii. 25) says
as to its standing in the ancient Church. It was at Alexandria that its
authority was greatest. Clement comments on it, as on the canonical
scriptures, in his _Hypotyposes_; Origen cites it in the same spirit as
scripture (_C. Celsum_, i. 63, _De Princ._ iii. 2, 4, 7). Clement, too,
ascribes it to "the apostle" or "the prophet" Barnabas (_Strom._ ii. 6, 31,
cf. ii. 20, 116), with explicit reference to Paul's fellow-apostle.
Internal evidence makes this ascription impossible, nor does the epistle
itself lay any claim to such authorship. Lightfoot, indeed, suggests that
its author was "some unknown namesake" of the famous Barnabas: but it is
simpler to suppose that it was fathered upon the latter by the Alexandrian
Church, ready to believe that so favourite a writing was of apostolic
origin.

"That Alexandria, the place of its earliest reception, was also the place
of its birth, is borne out by the internal evidence of style and
interpretation, which is Alexandrian throughout" (Lightfoot). The picture,
too, which it gives of the danger lest the Christianity of its readers
should be unduly Judaic in feeling and practice, suits well the experiences
of a writer living in Alexandria, where Judaism was immensely strong.
Further, he shows an "astonishing familiarity with the Jewish rites," in
the opinion of a modern Jew (Kohler in the _Jewish Encycl._); so much so,
that the latter agrees with another Jewish scholar in saying that "the
writer seems to have been a converted Jew, whose fanatic zeal rendered him
a bitter opponent of Judaism within the Christian Church." These opinions
must overrule the view of some Christian scholars that the writer often
blunders in Jewish matters, the fact being that his knowledge is derived
from the Judaism of Alexandria[1] rather than Palestine. But we need not
therefore regard the author as of Jewish birth. It is enough, and more in
keeping with the thought as a whole, to regard him as having been in close
contact with Judaism, possibly as a proselyte. He now uses his knowledge to
warn his readers, with intense passion, against all compromise between
Judaism and the Gospel. In this he goes so far as to deny any historical
connexion between the two, maintaining with all the devices of an
extravagant allegorism, including the Rabbinic _Gematria_ based on the
numerical values of letters (ix. 7 f.), that the Law and Prophecy, as meant
by God, had never been given to Israel as a people. The Divine oracles had
ever pointed to the Christian Covenant, and had been so understood by the
men of God in Israel, whereas the apostate people had turned aside to keep
the ceremonial letter of the Law at the instigation of an evil angel (ix.
4). In this way he takes in succession the typical Jewish
institutions--Circumcision, Foods, Ablutions, Covenant, Sabbath,
Temple--showing their spiritual counterpart in the New People and its
ordinances, and that the Cross was prefigured from the first. Such insight
(_gnosis_) into the reality of the case he regards as the natural issue of
Christian faith; and it is his main object to help his readers to attain
such spirituality--the more so that, by similar insight applied to the
signs of the times, he knows and can show that the end of the present age
is imminent (i. 5, 7-iv.). The burden of his epistle, then, is, "Let us
become [v.03 p.0409] spiritual, a perfect temple unto God" (iv. 11); and
that not only by theoretic insight, but also by practical wisdom of life.
In order to enforce this moral, he passes to "another sort of _gnosis_ and
instruction" (xviii. i), _viz._ the precepts of the "Two Ways," cited in a
slightly different form from that found in the first part of the _Teaching
of the Apostles_. The modifications, however, are all in a more spiritual
direction, in keeping with the genuinely evangelic spirit which underlies
and pervades even the allegorical ingenuities of the epistle.

Its opening shows it to have been addressed to a Church, or rather a group
of Churches, recently visited by the writer, who, while not wishing to
write as an authoritative "teacher" so much as one who has come to love
them as a friend (i. 8, cf. ix. 9), yet belongs to the class of "teachers"
with a recognized spiritual gift (_charisma_), referred to _e.g._ in the
_Didach[=e]_. He evidently feels in a position to give his _gnosis_ with
some claim to a deferential hearing. This being so, the epistle was
probably written, not to Alexandria, but rather by a "teacher" of the
Alexandrine Church to some body of Christians in Lower Egypt among whom he
had recently been visiting. This would explain the absence of specific
address, so that it appears as in form a "general epistle," as Origen
styles it. Its date has been much debated. But Lightfoot's reading of the
apocalyptic passage in ch. iv.--with a slight modification suggested by Sir
W. M. Ramsay--is really conclusive for the reign of Vespasian (A.D. 70-79).
The main counter-view, in favour of a date about A.D. 130, can give no
natural account of this passage, while it misconstrues the reference in ch.
xvi. to the building of the spiritual temple, the Christian Church. Thus
this epistle is the earliest of the Apostolic Fathers, and as such of
special interest. Its central problem, the relation of Judaism and
Christianity--of the Old and the New forms of a Covenant which, as Divine,
must in a sense abide the same--was one which gave the early Church much
trouble; nor, in absence of a due theory of the education of the race by
gradual development, was it able to solve it satisfactorily.

LITERATURE.--Besides collected editions of the Apostolic Fathers, see O.
Braunsberger, _Der Apostel Barnabas, ... u. der ihm beigelegte Brief_
(Mainz, 1876); W. Cunningham, _Epistle of Barnabas_ (1877); sections in J.
Donaldson, _The Apostolic Fathers_; E. Reuss, _Théologie chrétienne_, vol.
ii., and in M. von Engelhardt, _Das Christenthum Justins des Martyrers_;
and Lightfoot's fragmentary essay in his _Clement of Rome_, ii. 503-512.
See also APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE, section "New Testament."

GOSPEL OF BARNABAS.--We read in antiquity, _e.g._ in the _Decretum
Gelasii_, of an apocryphal Gospel of Barnabas (see APOCRYPHAL LITERATURE),
but we have no knowledge of its contents. There exists, however, in a
single MS. in Italian a longish gospel with this title, written from a
Mahommedan standpoint, but probably embodying materials partly Gnostic in
character and origin. The Italian MS. was found by the Deist, John Toland,
in a private collection at Amsterdam (see his _Nazarenus_, 1718);
subsequently it came into the possession of Prince Eugene of Savoy, and
finally was obtained with Eugene's library by the imperial library at
Vienna. It has been edited, with an English translation (1907) by (Rev.)
Lonsdale and Laura Ragg, who hold that it was the work of a Christian
renegade to Mahommedanism about the 13th-16th century. See also preliminary
notice in the _Journal of Theol. Studies_, vi. 424 ff. The old view held by
Toland and others that the Italian was a translation from the Arabic is
demonstrably wrong. The Arabic marginal notes are apparently partly pious
ejaculations, partly notes for the aid of Arabic students. The work is
highly imaginative and often grotesque, but it is pervaded by an unusually
high ethical enthusiasm.

(J. V. B.)

[1] His reference to the wide prevalence of circumcision beyond Israel (ix.
6) is perhaps simply an exaggeration, more or less conscious.

[Illustration: 1. _Scalpellum rostratum_, Darwin, Philippine Islands.
2. _Pollicipes cornucopiae_, Leach, European seas.
3. _Tubicinella trachealis_, Shaw, attached to whales.
4. _Acasta sulcata_, Lamk., in sponges, New South Wales;    (4'), tergum;
(4"), scutum.
5. _Balanus tintinnabulum_, Linn., Atlantic.
5'. Section of _Balanus_, Linn.
6. _Coronula diadema_, Linn., attached to whales.]