BARON. This word, of uncertain origin, was introduced into England at the
Conquest to denote "the man" (_i.e._ one who had done him "homage") of a
great lord, and more especially of the king. All who held "in chief"
(_i.e._ directly) of the king were alike _barones regis_, bound to perform
a stipulated service, and members, in theory at least, of his council.
Great nobles, whether earls or not, also spoke of their tenants as
"barons," where lesser magnates spoke of their "men" (_homines_). This was
especially the case in earldoms of a palatine character, such as Chester,
where the earl's barons were a well-recognized body, the Venables family,
"barons of Kinderton," continuing in existence down to 1679. In the
palatinate of Durham also, the bishop had his barons, among whom the
Hiltons of Hilton Castle were usually styled "Barons of Hilton" till
extinct in 1746. Other families to whom the title was accorded,
independently of peerage dignity and on somewhat uncertain grounds, were
"the barons of Greystock," "the barons of Stafford," and the Cornwalls,
"barons of Burford." Fantosme makes Henry II. speak of "mes baruns de
Lundres"; John's charter granting permission to elect a mayor speaks of
"our barons of our city of London," and a London document even speaks of
"the greater barons of the city." The aldermen seem to have been loosely
deemed equivalent to barons and were actually assessed to the poll-tax as
such under Richard II. In Ireland the palatine character of the great
lordships made the title not uncommon (_e.g._ the barons of Galtrim, the
barons of Slane, the barons of the Naas).

As all those who held direct of the crown by military service (for those
who held "by serjeanty" appear to have been classed apart), from earls
downwards, were alike "barons," the great difference in their position and
importance must have led, from an early date, to their being roughly
divided into "greater" and "lesser" barons, and indeed, under Henry II.,
the _Dialogus de Scaccario_ already distinguishes their holdings as
"greater" or "lesser" baronies. Within a century of the Conquest, as we
learn from Becket's case (1164), there arose the practice of sending to the
greater barons a special summons to the council, while the lesser barons,
it is stipulated in Magna Carta (1215), were to be summoned only through
the sheriffs. Thus was introduced a definite distinction, which eventually
had the effect of restricting to the greater barons the rights and
privileges of peerage.

Thus far the baron's position was connected with the tenure of land; in
theory the barons were those who held their lands of the king; in practice,
they were those who so held a large amount of land. The great change in
their status was effected when their presence in that council of the realm
which became the House of Lords was determined by the issue of a writ of
summons, dependent not on the tenure of land, but only on the king's will.
Camden's statement that this change was made by Henry III. after "the
Barons' War" was long and widely accepted, but it is now assigned, as by
Stubbs, to Edward I., and the earliest writs accepted as creating
hereditary baronies are those issued in his reign. It must not, however, be
supposed that those who received such summons were as yet distinguished
from commoners by any style or title. The only possible prefix at that time
was _Dominus_ (lord), which was regularly used by simple knights, and writs
of summons were still issued to the lowest order of peers as knights
(_chevaliers_) only. The style of baron was first introduced by Richard II.
in 1387, when he created John de Beauchamp, by patent, Lord de Beauchamp
and baron of Kidderminster, to make him "unum parium et baronum regni
nostri." But it was not till 1433 that the next "baron" was created, Sir
John Cornwall being then made baron of Fanhope. In spite, however, of these
innovations, the former [v.03 p.0422] was only summoned to parliament by
the style of "John Beauchamp of Kidderminster," and the latter by that of
"John Cornwall, knight." Such creations became common under Henry VI., a
transition period in peerage styles, but "Baron" could not evict "Sire,"
"Chevalier" and "Dominus." Patents of creation contained the formula "Lord
A. (and) Baron of B.," but the grantee still styled himself "Lord" only,
and it is an historically interesting fact that to this day a baron is
addressed in correspondence, not by that style, but as "the Lord A.,"
although all peers under the rank of Duke are spoken of as "lords," while
they are addressed in correspondence by their proper styles. To speak of
"Baron A." or "Baron B." is an unhistorical and quite recent practice. When
a barony, however, is vested in a lady it is now the recognized custom to
speak of her as baroness, _e.g._ Baroness Berkeley.

The solemn investiture of barons created by patent was performed by the
king himself, by enrobing the peer in the scarlet "robe of estate" during
the reading of the patent, and this form continued till 13 Jac. I., when
the lawyers declared that the delivery of the letters patent without
ceremony was sufficient. The letters patent express the limits of
inheritance of the barony. The usual limit is to the grantee and heirs male
of his body, occasionally, in default of male issue, to a collateral male
relative (as in the case of Lord Brougham, 1860) or (as in the case of Lord
Basset, 1797, and Lord Burton, 1897) to the heirs-male of a daughter, and
occasionally (as in the case of Lord Nelson, 1801) to the heirs-male of a
sister. Sometimes also (as in the case of the barony of Rayleigh, 1821) the
dignity is bestowed upon a lady with remainder to the heirs-male of her
body. The coronation robes of a baron are the same as those of an earl,
except that he has only two rows of spots on each shoulder; and, in like
manner, his parliamentary robes have but two guards of white fur, with rows
of gold lace; but in other respects they are the same as those of other
peers. King Charles II. granted to the barons a coronet, having six large
pearls set at equal distances on the chaplet. A baron's cap is the same as
a viscount's. His style is "Right Honourable"; and he is addressed by the
king or queen, "Right Trusty and Well-beloved." His children are by
courtesy entitled to the prefix "The Honourable."

_Barons of the Exchequer_ were formerly six judges (a chief baron and five
puisne barons) to whom the administration of justice was committed in
causes betwixt the king and his subjects relative to matters of revenue.
Selden, in his _Titles of Honour_, conjectures that they were originally
chosen from among the barons of the kingdom, and hence their name; but it
would probably be more exact to say that they were officers of a branch of
the king's _Curia_, which was theoretically composed of his "barons." The
title has become obsolete since 1875, when the court of exchequer was
merged in the High Court of Judicature.

_Barons of the Cinque Ports_ (originally Hastings, Dover, Hythe, Romney and
Sandwich) were at first the whole body of their freemen, who were so spoken
of in royal charters. But the style was afterwards restricted to their
mayors, jurats, and (prior to 1831) members of the House of Commons elected
by the Cinque Ports, two for each port. Their right to the title is
recognized in many old statutes, but in 1606 the use of the term in a
message from the Lower House drew forth a protest from the peers, that
"they would never acknowledge any man that sitteth in the Lower House to
the right or title of a baron of parliament" (_Lords' Journals_). It was
the ancient privilege of these "barons" to bear a canopy over the sovereign
at his or her coronation and retain it as their perquisite. They petitioned
as "barons of the Cinque Ports" to attend the coronation of Edward VII.,
and a deputation was allowed to do so.

_Baron and Feme_, in English law, is a phrase used for husband and wife, in
relation to each other, who are accounted as one person. Hence, by the old
law of evidence, the one party was excluded from giving evidence for or
against the other in civil questions, and a relic of this is still
preserved in the criminal law.

_Baron and Feme_, in heraldry, is the term used when the coats-of-arms of a
man and his wife are borne per pale in the same escutcheon, the man's being
always on the dexter side, and the woman's on the sinister. But in this
case the woman is supposed not to be an heiress, for then her coat must be
borne by the husband on an escutcheon of pretence. (See HERALDRY.)

The foreign title of baron is occasionally borne by English subjects, but
confers no precedence in the United Kingdom. It may be Russian, _e.g._
Baron Dimsdale (1762); German, _e.g._ Baron Stockmar, Baron Halkett
(Hanoverian); Austrian, _e.g._ Baron Rothschild (1822), Baron de Worms;
Italian, _e.g._ Baron Heath; French, _e.g._ Baron de Teissier;
French-Canadian, _e.g._ Baron de Longueil (1700); Dutch, _e.g._ Baron
Mackay (Lord Reay).

(J. H. R.)

_The Foreign Title._--On the continent of Europe the title baron, though
the same in its origin, has come, owing to a variety of causes, to imply a
rank and status very different from its connotation in the United Kingdom,
and again varies considerably in different countries. Originally _baro_
meant no more than "man," and is so used in the Salic and other "barbarian"
laws; _e.g._ _Si quis mortaudit barum vel feminam_, &c. (_Lex Aleman._ tit.
76). In this way, too, it was long preserved in the sense of "husband," as
in the Assize of Jerusalem (MSS. cap. 98): _Si l'on appelle aucune chose
femme qui aura baron, et il la veut deffendre, il la peut deffendre de son
cors_, &c. Gradually the word seems to have come to mean a "strong or
powerful man," and thus generally "a magnate." Finally, in France in the
12th century the general expression _barones_ was introduced in a
restricted sense, as applied properly to all lords possessing an important
fief, subject to the rule of primogeniture and thus not liable to be
divided up, and held of one overlord alone. Sometimes it included
ecclesiastical lordships of the first rank. In the 13th century the
Register of King Philip Augustus places the _barones regis Francie_ next to
the dukes and counts holding in chief, the title being limited to vassals
of the second rank. Towards the end of the century the title had come to
mean that its bearer held his principal fief direct from the crown, and was
therefore more important than that of count, since many counts were only
mediate vassals. Thus the kings in granting a duchy or countship as an
apanage to their brothers or sons used the phrase _in comitatum et
baroniam_. From this period, however, the title tends to sink in
comparative importance. When, in the 14th century, the feudal hierarchy was
completed and stereotyped, the barons are ranked not only below counts, but
below viscounts, though in power and possessions many barons were superior
to many counts. In any case, until the 17th century, the title of baron
could only be borne by the holder of a territorial barony; and it was Louis
XIV. who first cheapened the title in France by creating numerous barons by
royal letters. This entire dissociation of the title from the idea of
feudal rights and obligations was completed by Napoleon's decree of March
1, 1808, reviving the ancient titles. By this instrument the title of baron
was to be borne _ex officio_ by a number of high officials, _e.g._
ministers, senators, councillors of state, archbishops and bishops. It was
given to the 37 mayors who attended the coronation, and could be claimed by
any mayor who had served to the emperor's satisfaction for ten years, and
by any member of an electoral college who had attended three sessions. The
title was made to descend in order of primogeniture to legitimate or
adopted sons and to the nephews of bishops, the sole condition being that
proof must be presented of an actual income of 15,000 fr., of which
one-third should descend with the title. The creation of barons was
continued by Louis XVIII., Charles X. and Louis Philippe, and, suspended at
the revolution of 1848, was revived again on a generous scale by Napoleon
III. The tolerant attitude of the Third Republic towards titles, which it
does not officially recognize, has increased the confusion by facilitating
the assumption of the title on very slender grounds of right. The result
has been that in France the title of Baron, unless borne by the recognized
representative of a historic name, not only involves no political status,
but confers also but very slight social distinction.

The same is true, _mutatis mutandis_, of most other European countries, and
notably of Italy. In Austria and Germany the [v.03 p.0423] case is somewhat
different. Though in Latin documents of the middle ages the term _barones_
for _liberi domini_ was used, it was not until the 17th century that the
word _Baron_, perhaps under the influence of the court of Versailles, began
to be used as the equivalent of the old German _Freiherr_, or free lord of
the Empire. The style _Freiherr_ (_liber dominus_) implied originally a
dynastic status, and many _Freiherren_ held countships without taking the
title of count. When the more important of them styled themselves counts,
the _Freiherren_ sank into an inferior class of nobility. The practice of
conferring the title _Freiherr_ by imperial letters was begun in the 16th
century by Charles V., was assumed on the ground of special imperial
concessions by many of the princes of the Empire, and is now exercised by
all the German sovereigns. Though the practice of all the children taking
the title of their father has tended to make that of Baron comparatively
very common, and has dissociated it from all idea of territorial
possession, it still implies considerable social status and privilege in
countries where a sharp line is drawn between the caste of "nobles" and the
common herd, whom no wealth or intellectual eminence can place on the same
social level with the poorest _Adeliger_. In Japan the title baron (_Dan_)
is the lowest of the five titles of nobility introduced in 1885, on the
European model. It was given to the least important class of territorial
nobles, but is also bestowed as a title of honour without reference to
territorial possession.

See du Cange, _Glossarium_, s. "Baro" (ed. Niort, 1883); John Selden,
_Titles of Honor_, p. 353 (ed. 1672); Achille Luchaire, _Manuel des
institutions françaises_ (Paris, 1892); Maurice Prou, art. "Baron" in _La
Grande Encyclopédie_.

(W. A. P.)