BAROMETER (from Gr. [Greek: baros], pressure, and [Greek: metron],
measure), an instrument by which the weight or pressure of the atmosphere
is measured. The ordinary or mercurial barometer consists of a tube about
36 in. long, hermetically closed at the upper end and containing mercury.
In the "cistern barometer" the tube is placed with its open end in a basin
of mercury, and the atmospheric pressure is measured by the difference of
the heights of the mercury in the tube and the cistern. In the "siphon
barometer" the cistern is dispensed with, the tube being bent round upon
itself at its lower end; the reading is taken of the difference in the
levels of the mercury in the two limbs. The "aneroid" barometer (from the
Gr. [Greek: a-] privative, and [Greek: nêros], wet) employs no liquid, but
depends upon the changes in volume experienced by an exhausted metallic
chamber under varying pressures. "Baroscopes" simply indicate variations in
the atmospheric pressure, without supplying quantitative data. "Barographs"
are barometers which automatically record any variations in pressure.

[Sidenote: Historical.]

Philosophers prior to Galileo had endeavoured to explain the action of a
suction pump by postulating a principle that "Nature abhorred a vacuum."
When Galileo observed that a common suction pump could not raise water to a
greater height than about 32 ft. he considered that the "abhorrence" was
limited to 32 ft., and commended the matter to the attention of his pupil
Evangelista Torricelli. Torricelli perceived a ready explanation of the
observed phenomenon if only it could be proved that the atmosphere had
weight, and the pressure which it exerted was equal to that of a 32-ft.
column of water. He proved this to be the correct explanation by reasoning
as follows:--If the atmosphere supports 32 feet of water, then it should
also support a column of about 2½ ft. of mercury, for this liquid is about
13½ times heavier than water. This he proved in the following manner. He
selected a glass tube about a quarter of an inch in diameter and 4 ft.
long, and hermetically sealed one of its ends; he then filled it with
mercury and, applying his finger to the open end, inverted it in a basin
containing mercury. The mercury instantly sank to nearly 30 in. above the
surface of the mercury in the basin, leaving in the top of the tube an
apparent vacuum, which is now called the _Torricellian vacuum_; this
experiment is sometimes known as the _Torricellian experiment_.
Torricelli's views rapidly gained ground, notwithstanding the objections of
certain philosophers. Valuable confirmation was afforded by the variation
of the barometric column at different elevations. René Descartes and Blaise
Pascal predicted a fall in the height when the barometer was carried to the
top of a mountain, since, the pressure of the atmosphere being diminished,
it necessarily followed that the column of mercury sustained by the
atmosphere would be diminished also. This was experimentally observed by
Pascal's brother-in-law, Florin Périer (1605-1672), who measured the height
of the mercury column at various altitudes on the Puy de Dôme. Pascal
himself tried the experiment at several towers in Paris,--Notre Dame, St
Jacques de la Boucherie, &c. The results of his researches were embodied in
his treatises _De l'équilibre des liqueurs_ and _De la pesanteur de la
masse d'air_, which were written before 1651, but were not published till
1663 after his death. Corroboration was also afforded by Marin Mersenne and
Christiaan Huygens. It was not long before it was discovered that the
height of the column varied at the same place, and that a rise or fall was
accompanied by meteorological changes. The instrument thus came to be used
as a means of predicting the weather, and it was frequently known as the
_weather-glass_. The relation of the barometric pressure to the weather is
mentioned by Robert Boyle, who expressed the opinion that it is exceedingly
difficult to draw any correct conclusions. Edmund Halley, Leibnitz, Jean
André Deluc (1727-1817) and many others investigated this subject, giving
rules for predicting the weather and attempting explanations for the
phenomena. Since the height of the barometric column varies with the
elevation of the station at which it is observed, it follows that
observations of the barometer afford a means for measuring altitudes. The
early experiments of Pascal were developed by Edmund Halley, Edme Mariotte,
J. Cassini, D. Bernoulli, and more especially by Deluc in his _Recherches
sur les modifications de l'atmosphère_ (1772), which contains a full
account of the early history of the barometer and its applications. More
highly mathematical investigations have been given by Laplace, and also by
Richard Ruhlmann (_Barometrischen Hohenmessung._, Leipzig, 1870). The
modern aspects of the relation between atmospheric pressure and the weather
and altitudes are treated in the article METEOROLOGY.

Many attempts have been made by which the variation in the height of the
mercury column could be magnified, and so more exact measurements taken. It
is not possible to enumerate in this article the many devices which have
been proposed; and the reader is referred to Charles Hutton's _Mathematical
and Philosophical Dictionary_ (1815), William Ellis's paper on the history
of the barometer in the _Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological
Society_, vol. xii. (1886), and E. Gerland and F. Traumüller's _Geschichte
der physikalischen Experimentierkunst_ (1899). Descartes suggested a method
which Huygens put into practice. The barometer tube was expanded into a
cylindrical vessel at the top, and into this chamber a fine tube partly
filled with water was inserted. A slight motion of the mercury occasioned a
larger displacement of the water, and hence the changes in the barometric
pressure were more readily detected and estimated. But the instrument
failed as all water-barometers do, for the gases dissolved in the water
coupled with its high vapour tension destroy its efficacy. The substitution
of methyl salicylate for the water has been attended with success. Its low
vapour tension (Sir William Ramsay and Sydney Young give no value below 70°
C.), its low specific gravity (1.18 at 10° C.), its freedom from viscosity,
have contributed to its successful use. In the form patented by C. O.
Bartrum it is claimed that readings to .001 of an inch of mercury can be
taken without the use of a vernier.

The diagonal barometer, in which the upper part of the tube is inclined to
the lower part, was suggested by Bernardo Ramazzini (1633-1714), and also
by Sir Samuel Morland (or Moreland). This form has many defects, and even
when the [v.03 p.0419] tube is bent through 45° the readings are only
increased in the ratio of 7 to 5. The wheel barometer of Dr R. Hooke, and
the steel-yard barometer, endeavour to magnify the oscillation of the
mercury column by means of a float resting on the surface of the mercury in
the cistern; the motion of the float due to any alteration in the level of
the mercury being rendered apparent by a change in the position of the
wheel or steel-yard. The pendant barometer of G. Amontons, invented in
1695, consists of a funnel-shaped tube, which is hung vertically with the
wide end downwards and closed in at the upper end. The tube contains
mercury which adjusts itself in the tube so that the length of the column
balances the atmospheric pressure. The instability of this instrument is
obvious, for any jar would cause the mercury to leave the tube.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Siphon Barometer.]

The _Siphon Barometer_ (fig. 1) consists of a tube bent in the form of a
siphon, and is of the same diameter throughout. A graduated scale passes
along the whole length of the tube, and the height of the barometer is
ascertained by taking the difference of the readings of the upper and lower
limbs respectively. This instrument may also be read by bringing the
zero-point of the graduated scale to the level of the surface of the lower
limb by means of a screw, and reading off the height at once from the
surface of the upper limb. This barometer requires no correction for errors
of capillarity or capacity. Since, however, impurities are contracted by
the mercury in the lower limb, which is usually in open contact with the
air, the satisfactory working of the instrument comes soon to be seriously
interfered with.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Cistern Barometer.]

Fig. 2 shows the _Cistern Barometer_ in its essential and simplest form.
This barometer is subject to two kinds of error, the one arising from
capillarity, and the other from changes in the level of the surface of the
cistern as the mercury rises and falls in the tube, the latter being
technically called the _error of capacity_. If a glass tube of small bore
be plunged into a vessel containing mercury, it will be observed that the
level of the mercury in the tube is not in the line of that of the mercury
in the vessel, but somewhat below it, and that the surface is convex. The
capillary depression is inversely proportional to the diameter of the tube.
In standard barometers, the tube is about an inch in diameter, and the
error due to capillarity is less than .001 of an inch. Since capillarity
depresses the height of the column, cistern barometers require an addition
to be made to the observed height, in order to give the true pressure, the
amount depending, of course, on the diameter of the tube.

The error of capacity arises in this way. The height of the barometer is
the perpendicular distance between the surface of the mercury in the
cistern and the upper surface of the mercurial column. Now, when the
barometer falls from 30 to 29 inches, an inch of mercury must flow out of
the tube and pass into the cistern, thus raising the cistern level; and, on
the other hand, when the barometer rises, mercury must flow out of the
cistern into the tube, thus lowering the level of the mercury in the
cistern. Since the scales of barometers are usually engraved on their brass
cases, which are fixed (and, consequently, the zero-point from which the
scale is graduated is also fixed), it follows that, from the incessant
changes in the level of the cistern, the readings would be sometimes too
high and sometimes too low, if no provision were made against this source
of error.

[Sidenote: Fortin's Barometer.]

A simple way of correcting the error of capacity is--to ascertain (1) the
neutral point of the instrument, or that height at which the zero of the
scale is exactly at the height of the surface of the cistern, and (2) the
rate of error as the barometer rises or falls above this point, and then
apply a correction proportional to this rate. The instrument in which the
error of capacity is satisfactorily (indeed, entirely) got rid of is
_Fortin's Barometer_. Fig. 3 shows how this is effected. The upper part of
the cistern is formed of a glass cylinder, through which the level of the
mercury may be seen. The bottom is made like a bag, of flexible leather,
against which a screw works. At the top of the interior of the cistern is a
small piece of ivory, the point of which coincides with the zero of the
scale. By means of the screw, which acts on the flexible cistern bottom,
the level of the mercury can be raised or depressed so as to bring the
ivory point exactly to the surface of the mercury in the cistern. In some
barometers the cistern is fixed, and the ivory point is brought to the
level of the mercury in the cistern by raising or depressing the scale.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Fortin's Barometer.]

In constructing the best barometers three materials are employed,
viz.:--(1) brass, for the case, on which the scale is engraved; (2) glass,
for the tube containing the mercury; and (3) the mercury itself. It is
evident that if the coefficient of expansion of mercury and brass were the
same, the height of the mercury as indicated by the brass scale would be
the true height of the mercurial column. But this is not the case, the
coefficient of expansion for mercury being considerably greater than that
for brass. The result is that if a barometer stand at 30 in. when the
temperature of the whole instrument, mercury and brass, is 32°, it will no
longer stand at 30 in. if the temperature be raised to 69°; in fact, it
will then stand at 30.1 in. [Sidenote: Corrections of the barometer
reading.] This increase in the height of the column by the tenth of an inch
is not due to any increase of pressure, but altogether to the greater
expansion of the mercury at the higher temperature, as compared with the
expansion of the brass case with the engraved scale by which the height is
measured. In order, therefore, to compare with each other with exactness
barometric observations made at different temperatures, it is necessary to
reduce them to the heights at which they would stand at some uniform
temperature. The temperature to which such observations are reduced is 32°
Fahr. or 0° cent.

If English units be used (Fahrenheit degrees and inches), this correction
is given by the formula

         .09T - 2.56
  x = -H ------------,
             1000

in the centigrade-centimetre system the correction is .0001614 HT (H being
the observed height and T the observed temperature). Devices have been
invented which determine these corrections mechanically, and hence obviate
the necessity of applying the above formula, or of referring to tables in
which these corrections for any height of the column and any temperature
are given.

The standard temperature of the English yard being 62° and not 32°, it will
be found in working out the corrections from the above formula that the
temperature of no correction is not 32° but 28.5°. If the scale be engraved
on the glass tube, or if the instrument be furnished with a glass scale or
with a wooden scale, different corrections are required. These may be
worked out from the above formula by substituting for the coefficient of
the expansion of brass that of glass, which is assumed to be 0.00000498, or
that of wood, which is assumed to be 0. Wood, however, should not be used,
its expansion with temperature being unsteady, as well as uncertain.

If the brass scale be attached to a wooden frame and be free to move up and
down the frame, as is the case with many siphon barometers, the corrections
for brass scales are to be used, since the zero-point of the scale is
brought to the level of the lower limb; but if the brass scale be _fixed_
to a wooden frame, the corrections for brass scales are only applicable
provided the zero of the scale be fixed at (or nearly at) the zero line of
the column, and be free to expand upwards. In siphon barometers, with which
an observation is made from two readings on the scale, the [v.03 p.0420]
scale must be free to expand in one direction. Again, if only the upper
part of the scale, say from 27 to 31 in., be screwed to a wooden frame, it
is evident that not the corrections for brass scales, but those for wooden
scales must be used. No account need be taken of the expansion of the glass
tube containing the mercury, it being evident that no correction for this
expansion is required in the case of any barometer the height of which is
measured from the surface of the mercury in the cistern.

[Sidenote: Position of barometer.]

In fixing a barometer for observation, it is indispensable that it be hung
in a perpendicular position, seeing that it is the _perpendicular distance_
between the surface of the mercury in the cistern and the top of the column
which is the true height of the barometer. The surface of the mercury
column is convex, and in noting the height of the barometer, it is not the
chord of the curve, but its tangent which is taken. This is done by setting
the straight lower edge of the vernier, an appendage with which the
barometer is furnished, as a tangent to the curve. The vernier is made to
slide up and down the scale, and by it the height of the barometer may be
read true to 0.002 or even to 0.001 in.

It is essential that the barometer is at the temperature shown by the
attached thermometer. No observation can be regarded as good if the
thermometer indicates a temperature differing from that of the whole
instrument by more than a degree. For every degree of temperature the
attached thermometer differs from the barometer, the observation will be
faulty to the extent of about 0.003 in., which in discussions of diurnal
range, &c., is a serious amount.

Before being used, barometers should be thoroughly examined as to the state
of the mercury, the size of cistern (so as to admit of low readings), and
their agreement with some known standard instrument at different points of
the scale. The pressure of the atmosphere is not expressed by the weight of
the mercury sustained in the tube by it, but by the perpendicular height of
the column. Thus, when the height of the column is 30 in., it is not said
that the atmospheric pressure is 14.7 lb on the square inch, or the weight
of the mercury filling a tube at that height whose transverse section
equals a square inch, but that it is 30 in., meaning that the pressure will
sustain a column of mercury of that height.

It is essential in gasometry to fix upon some standard pressure to which
all measurements can be reduced. The height of the standard mercury column
commonly used is 76 cms. (29.922 in.) of pure mercury at 0°; this is near
the average height of the barometer. Since the actual _force_ exerted by
the atmosphere varies with the intensity of gravity, and therefore with the
position on the earth's surface, a place must be specified in defining the
standard pressure. This may be avoided by expressing the force as the
pressure in dynes due to a column of mercury, one square centimetre in
section, which is supported by the atmosphere. If H cms. be the height at
0°, and _g_ the value of gravity, the pressure is 13.596 H_g_ dynes (13.596
being the density of mercury). At Greenwich, where _g_ = 981.17, the
standard pressure at 0° is 1,013,800 dynes. At Paris the pressure is
1,013,600 dynes. The closeness of this unit to a mega-dyne (a million
dynes) has led to the suggestion that a mega-dyne per square centimetre
should be adopted as the standard pressure, and it has been adopted by some
modern writers on account of its convenience of calculation and
independence of locality.

[Sidenote: Barometric readings.]

The height of the barometer is expressed in English inches in England and
America, but the metric system is used in all scientific work excepting in
meteorology. In France and most European countries, the height is given in
millimetres, a millimetre being the thousandth part of a metre, which
equals 39.37079 English inches. Up to 1869 the barometer was given in
half-lines in Russia, which, equalling the twentieth of an English inch,
were readily reduced to English inches by dividing by 20. The metric
barometric scale is now used in Russia. In a few European countries the
French or Paris line, equalling 0.088814 in., is sometimes used. The
English measure of length being a standard at 62° Fahr., the old French
measure at 61.2°, and the metric scale at 32°, it is necessary, before
comparing observations made with the three barometers, to reduce them to
the same temperature, so as to neutralize the inequalities arising from the
expansion of the scales by heat.

[Sidenote: Sympiezometer.]

The sympiezometer was invented in 1818 by Adie of Edinburgh. It is a
revived form of Hooke's marine barometer. It consists of a glass tube, with
a small chamber at the top and an open cistern below. The upper part of the
tube is filled with air, and the lower part and cistern with glycerin. When
atmospheric pressure is increased, the air is compressed by the rising of
the fluid; but when it is diminished the fluid falls, and the contained air
expands. To correct for the error arising from the increased pressure of
the contained air when its temperature varies, a thermometer and
sliding-scale are added, so that the instrument may be adjusted to the
temperature at each observation. It is a sensitive instrument, and well
suited for rough purposes at sea and for travelling, but not for exact
observation. It has long been superseded by the _Aneroid_, which far
exceeds it in handiness.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Aneroid Barometer.]

_Aneroid Barometer._--Much obscurity surrounds the invention of barometers
in which variations in pressure are rendered apparent by the alteration in
the volume of an elastic chamber. The credit of the invention is usually
given to Lucien Vidie, who patented his instrument in 1845, but similar
instruments were in use much earlier. Thus in 1799 Nicolas Jacques Conté
(1755-1805), director of the aerostatical school at Meudon, and a man of
many parts--a chemist, mechanician and painter,--devised an instrument in
which the lid of the metal chamber was supported by internal springs; this
instrument was employed during the Egyptian campaign for measuring the
altitudes of the war-balloons. Although Vidie patented his device in 1845,
the commercial manufacture of aneroids only followed after E. Bourdon's
patent of the metallic manometer in 1849, when Bourdon and Richard placed
about 10,000 aneroids on the market. The production was stopped by an
action taken by Vidie against Bourdon for infringing the former's patent,
and in 1858 Vidie obtained 25,000 francs (£1000) damages.

Fig. 4 represents the internal construction, as seen when the face is
removed, but with the hand still attached, of an aneroid which differs only
slightly from Vidie's form. _a_ is a flat circular metallic box, having its
upper and under surfaces corrugated in concentric circles. This box or
chamber being partially exhausted of air, through the short tube _b_, which
is subsequently made air-tight by soldering, constitutes a spring, which is
affected by every variation of pressure in the external atmosphere, the
corrugations on its surface increasing its elasticity. At the centre of the
upper surface of the exhausted chamber there is a solid cylindrical
projection _x_, to the top of which the principal lever _cde_ is attached.
This lever rests partly on a spiral spring at _d_; it is also supported by
two vertical pins, with perfect freedom of motion. The end _e_ of the lever
is attached to a second or small lever _f_, from which a chain _g_ extends
to _h_, where it works on a drum attached to the axis of the hand,
connected with a hair spring at _h_, changing the motion from vertical to
horizontal, and regulating the hand, the attachments of which are made to
the metallic plate _i_. The motion originates in the corrugated elastic box
_a_, the surface of which is depressed or elevated as the weight of the
atmosphere is increased or diminished, and this motion is communicated
through the levers to the axis of [v.03 p.0421] the hand at _h_. The spiral
spring on which the lever rests at _d_ is intended to compensate for the
effects of alterations of temperature. The actual movement at the centre of
the exhausted box, whence the indications emanate, is very slight, but by
the action of the levers is multiplied 657 times at the point of the hand,
so that a movement of the 220th part of an inch in the box carries the
point of the hand through three inches on the dial. The effect of this
combination is to multiply the smallest degrees of atmospheric pressure, so
as to render them sensible on the index. Vidie's instrument has been
improved by Vaudet and Hulot. Eugène Bourdon's aneroid depends on the same
principle. The aneroid requires, however, to be repeatedly compared with a
mercurial barometer, being liable to changes from the elasticity of the
metal chamber changing, or from changes in the system of levers which work
the pointer. Though aneroids are constructed showing great accuracy in
their indications, yet none can lay any claim to the exactness of mercurial
barometers. The mechanism is liable to get fouled and otherwise go out of
order, so that they may change 0.300 in. in a few weeks, or even indicate
pressure so inaccurately and so irregularly that no confidence can be
placed in them for even a few days, if the means of comparing them with a
mercurial barometer be not at hand.

[Sidenote: Barographs.]

The mercurial barometer can be made self-registering by concentrating the
rays from a source of light by a lens, so that they strike the top of the
mercurial column, and having a sheet of sensitized paper attached to a
frame and placed behind a screen, with a narrow vertical slit in the line
of the rays. The mercury being opaque throws a part of the paper in the
shade, while above the mercury the rays from the lamp pass unobstructed to
the paper. The paper being carried steadily round on a drum at a given rate
per hour, the height of the column of mercury is photographed continuously
on the paper. From the photograph the height of the barometer at any
instant may be taken. The principle of the aneroid barometer has been
applied to the construction of barographs. The lever attached to the
collapsible chamber terminates in an ink-fed style which records the
pressure of the atmosphere on a moving ribbon. In all continuously
registering barometers, however, it is necessary, as a check, to make
eye-observations with a mercury standard barometer hanging near the
registering barometer from four to eight times daily.

See Marvin, _Barometers and the Measurement of Atmospheric Pressure_
(1901); and C. Abbe, _Meteorological Apparatus_ (1888). Reference may also
be made to B. Stewart and W. W. H. Gee, _Practical Physics_ (vol. i. 1901),
for the construction of standard barometers, their corrections and method
of reading.