BAROTSE, BAROTSELAND, a people and country of South Central Africa. The
greater part of the country is a British protectorate, forming part of
Rhodesia. The Barotse are the paramount tribe in the region of the Upper
Zambezi basin, but by popular usage the name is also applied to contiguous
subject tribes, Barotseland being the country over which the Barotse
paramount chief exercises authority. The present article treats (1) of the
people, (2) of the country, (3) of the establishment of the British
protectorate and of subsequent developments.

1. _The Barotse._--These people, originally known as Aälui, have [v.03
p.0425] occupied the extensive plain through which the Zambezi passes from
14° 35' S. to 16° 25' S. throughout the reigns of twenty-two successive
paramount chiefs and therefore approximately since the commencement of the
17th century. Previously, for an indefinite period, they dwelt on the
Kabompo river, 200 m. to the N.E. of their present country, and here the
descendants of a section of the tribe which did not migrate still remain,
under the name Balokwakwa (men of the ambuscade), formerly known as
Aälukolui. That the Barotse at a still more remote period emigrated from
the far north-east is indicated by vague tradition as well as by a certain
similarity in type and language to some tribes living in that direction,
though the fact that natives from Mashonaland can understand those at
Lialui (the Barotse capital) has led to the assumption by some writers that
the Barotse are an offshoot of the Mashona. The variety in type among the
Mashona and the homogeneity of the Barotse would rather point to an
opposite conclusion.

Early in the 19th century a section of the Basuto tribe known as Makololo
trekked from the south of what is now the Orange River Colony and fought
their way through Bechuanaland and the Kalahari to the land of the Barotse,
whom they ultimately subdued. Their chief, Sebituane, who as an
administrator and general was far in advance of his compeers, established
the rule of his house for some forty years, until about 1865 an organized
rebellion of the Barotse led to the almost complete extinction of this
Makololo oligarchy and the reinstatement of the original dynasty. It was
the Makololo who gave the Barotse their present name (Rotse,
plain--_Bu_rotse, _country_ of the plain--_Mu_rotse, _man_ of the
plain--_Ma_rotse, _people_ of the plain, the latter being inaccurately
rendered _Ba_rotse, _Ba_ being the equivalent of _Ma_ in certain other
languages).

The Barotse proper are comparatively few in number, but as is inferred from
the fact that for many generations they have held in sway a country two and
a half times the size of Great Britain, they are the intellectual and
physical superiors of the vast majority of the negro races of Africa. Very
black, tall in stature, deep in chest and comparatively speaking refined in
feature, a Barotse is readily distinguishable amidst a mixed group of
natives. Being numerically small they form an oligarchy in which, with few
exceptions, each man holds rank in a chieftainship of which there are three
grades. Next to the chiefs rank their descendants who have not themselves
acquired chief's rank and hold an intermediate position as freeborn; all
others, whether members of the subject-tribes or prisoners of war, being,
up to 1906, mere slaves. This class was also graded. Slaves might own
slaves who in their turn might own slaves, the highest grade always being
directly responsible to some Barotse chief. As a reward of gallantry or
ability the paramount chief occasionally conferred chief's rank on
individuals not of Barotse birth, and these _ipso facto_ assumed the name
and privileges of the Barotse. It was a counterpart of the feudal system of
Europe in which every grade from king to serf found a place. In 1906 the
paramount chief, by proclamation, abolished the state of slavery, an act
which, however, left untouched the predominant position of the Barotse and
their rights to chieftainship. The paramount chief shares with a queen
(_Mokwai_) his authority and prerogatives. The Mokwai is not the wife but
the eldest sister of the ruling chief. With his death her privileges lapse.
Theoretically, these co-rulers are equal, neither may promulgate a national
decree without the assent of the other, but each has a capital town,
councillors and absolute authority in a province, the two having joint
authority over all other provinces. In their code of laws the Barotse show
an advance on the standard of probably any other African negro state. By
right, an accused chief is tried by his peers, each of whom in rotation
from junior to senior gives his verdict, after which the president reports
the finding of the court to the paramount chief, who passes sentence. As to
their religious beliefs the Barotse imagine the sun to be the embodiment of
a great god whose sole care is for the amelioration of man. Him they
worship, though more pains are taken to appease evil spirits, in whose
existence they also believe, to whom every evil to which man is heir is
attributed. The spirits of ancestors--especially of deceased chiefs--are
also objects of worship. Christianity, of a Protestant evangelical type,
was first introduced into the country in 1884 by François Coillard and has
made some progress among the people, among the converts being Letia, eldest
son and heir of Lewanika, the paramount chief.

2. _Barotseland._--This term includes, in the sense of the country in which
the authority of the paramount Barotse chief is acknowledged, not only the
lands of the Barotse proper, but the territory of fifteen contiguous and
subject tribes. This vast territory extends approximately from the Kwito
river in the west to the Kafue river in the east, and from the
Congo-Zambezi watershed in the north to the Linyante or Kwando river and
Zambezi in the south, and may be divided into three groups:--

(a) Central provinces directly administered by the paramount chief from the
capital Lialui (a town on the Zambezi), by the Mokwai from Nalolo, and by
two chiefs of the blood from Sesheke;

(b) Outlying provinces over which, in the absence of a central local system
of government, Barotse chiefs administer districts under the direction of
the paramount chief; and

(c) Tribes over which the local chiefs are permitted to retain their
position subject to the payment of annual tribute and to their doing homage
in person at Lialui when called upon to do so.

With the publication of the king of Italy's award in 1905 in the
Anglo-Portuguese Barotse Boundary dispute (see below), the term Barotseland
may be said to have acquired a second meaning. By this award the western
and part of the northern section of Barotseland as described above were
declared to be outside the dominion of the paramount chief and therefore
not in the British sphere of influence, while tribal boundaries were
complicated by the introduction of a longitudinal and latitudinal frontier.
Though this award altered the political boundaries, ethnologically
Barotseland remains much as above described. The area of the country under
British protection is about 182,000 sq. m.

Excluding the ridge of high ground running east and west which, culminating
at a height of 5000 ft., forms the Congo-Zambezi water-parting, the extreme
east (Batoka) and the district in the immediate vicinity of the Victoria
Falls (_q.v._) throughout which, with local variations, a red laterite clay
predominates, the main physical features of Barotseland may be described as
a series of heavy white sand undulations covered with subtropical forest
vegetation. These are intersected by alluvium-charged valleys through which
streams and rivers flow inwards towards the central basin of the Upper
Zambezi. There is evidence that this has at one time been the site of a
large lake. These valleys, which towards the close of the wet season become
inundated, afford rich cattle pasture, the succulence of which prevents
cattle losing condition towards the end of the dry season, as is the case
in many parts of Africa. There seems to be little or no indication of
mineral wealth in the white sand area, but in the north and east there is
not only every prospect of a great agricultural and pastoral future but
also of considerable mining development. Though basalt predominates in the
neighbourhood of the Victoria Falls and large fields of granite crop up on
the Batoka plateau and elsewhere, there is every indication of the
existence of useful minerals in these districts. Gold, copper, tin, lead,
zinc and iron have been discovered.

Much of the area of Barotseland is within the healthy zone, the healthiest
districts being the Batoka and Mashikolumbwe plateaus in the east with
extreme altitudes of 4400 and 4150 ft. respectively, and the line of the
Congo-Zambezi watershed which rises to 5000 ft. in many places. The Zambezi
valley from the Victoria Falls (3000 ft.) to the Kabompo confluence (3500
ft.), though involving little or no risk to health to the traveller, cannot
be considered suitable for white settlement. Taking into consideration the
relative value of altitude to latitude, the plateauland of Barotseland
compares very favourably with existing conditions elsewhere, being several
degrees more temperate than would be expected. Approximately the mean [v.03
p.0426] maximum and minimum temperatures stand at 80° and 55° F.
respectively, with an extreme range of 100° to 35° and a mean annual
temperature of 68° to 70°. The rainfall varies according to district from
22 to 32 in. a year and has shown extraordinary stability. Since 1884, the
first year in which a record was taken by François Coillard, Barotseland
has known no droughts, though South Africa has suffered periodically in
this respect.

The Zambezi, as would be expected, forms a definite boundary line in the
distribution of many species of fauna and flora. In these respects, as well
as from an ethnological standpoint, Barotseland essentially belongs not to
South but to Central Africa. The great river has also served to prevent the
spread from South Africa into Barotseland of such disastrous cattle
diseases as tick fever and lung sickness.

3. _The Establishment of British Suzerainty._--By the charter granted to
the British South Africa Company in October 1889, the company was allowed
to establish its rule in the regions north of the Middle Zambezi not
included in the Portuguese dominions, and by a treaty of the 11th of June
1891 between Great Britain and Portugal it was declared that the Barotse
kingdom was within the British sphere of influence. The dispute between the
contracting powers as to what were the western limits of Barotseland was
eventually referred to the arbitration of the king of Italy, who by his
award of the 30th of May 1905, fixed the frontier at the Kwando river as
far north as 22° E., then that meridian up to the 13° S., which parallel it
follows as far east as 24° E., and then that meridian to the Belgian Congo
frontier. In the meantime the British South Africa Company had entered into
friendly relations with Lewanika (_q.v._), the paramount chief of the
Barotse, and an administrator was appointed on behalf of the company to
reside in the country. A native police force under the command of a British
officer was raised and magistrates and district commissioners appointed. In
the internal affairs of the Barotse the company did not interfere, and the
relations between the British and Barotse have been uniformly friendly. The
pioneers of Western civilization were not, however, the agents of the
Chartered Company, but missionaries. F. S. Arnot, an Englishman, spent two
years in the country (1882-1884) and in 1884 a mission, fruitful of good
results, was established by the Société des Missions Evangéliques de Paris.
Its first agent was François Coillard (1834-1904), who had previously been
engaged in mission work in Basutoland and who devoted the rest of his life
to the Barotse. Though always an admirer of British institutions and
anxious that the country should ultimately fall under British jurisdiction,
Coillard in the interests of his mission was in the first instance anxious
to delay the advent of white men into the country. It was contrary to his
advice that Lewanika petitioned the "Great White Queen" to assume a
protectorate over his dominions, but from the moment Great Britain assumed
responsibility and the advance of European civilization became inevitable,
all the influence acquired by Coillard's exceptional personal magnetism and
singleness of purpose was used to prepare the way for the extension of
British rule. Only those few pioneers who knew the Barotse under the old
conditions can fully realise what civilization and England owe to the
co-operation of this high-minded Frenchman.

Under the Chartered Company's rule considerable progress has been made in
the development of the resources of the country, especially in opening up
the mining districts in the north. The seat of the administration, Kalomo,
is on the "Cape to Cairo" railway, about midway between the Zambezi and
Kafue rivers. The railway reached the Broken Hill copper mines, 110 m. N.
of the Kafue in 1906, and the Belgian Congo frontier in 1910. From Lobito
Bay in Portuguese West Africa a railway was being built in 1909 which would
connect with the main line near the Congo frontier. This would not only
supply Barotseland with a route to the sea alternative to the Beira and
Cape Town lines, but while reducing the land route by many hundred miles
would also supply a seaport outlet 1700 m. nearer England than Cape Town
and thus create a new and more rapid mail route to southern Rhodesia and
the Transvaal. The Zambezi also, with Kebrabasa as its one bar to
navigation between Barotseland and the sea, will supply a cheap line of
communication. (See RHODESIA.)

See David Livingstone, _Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa_
(London, 1857); Major Serpa Pinto, _How I crossed Africa_ (London, 1881);
F. Coillard, _On the Threshold of Central Africa_ (London, 1897); Major A.
St H. Gibbons, _Exploration and Hunting in Central Africa_ (London, 1898),
_Africa South to North through Marotseland_ (London, 1904); "Journeys in
Marotseland," _Geographical Journal_, 1897; "Travels in the Upper Zambezi
Basin," _Geographical Journal_, 1901; A. Bertrand, _Aux pays des Barotse,
haut Zambèze_ (Paris, 1898); Col. Colin Harding, _In Remotest Barotseland_,
(London, 1905); C. W. Mackintosh, _Coillard of the Zambesi_ (London, 1907),
with a bibliography; L. Decle, _Three Years in Savage Africa_ (London,
1898). Consult also the annual reports of the British South Africa Company,
published in London.

(A. ST H. G.)