BARONET. Although the origin of this title has been the subject of learned
speculation, it is not known for certain why it was selected as that of "a
new Dignitie between Barons and Knights" created by James I. The object of
its institution was to raise money for the crown, as was also done by the
sale of peerage dignities under this sovereign. But the money was
professedly devoted to the support of troops in Ulster, that is, each
grantee was to be liable for the pay of thirty men, at 8d. a day for three
years. This amounted to £1095, which was the sum paid for the honour. When
it was instituted, in May 1611, the king, to keep the baronetage select,
covenanted that he would not create more than two hundred, and that only
those who had £1000 a year in landed estate and whose paternal grandfathers
had borne arms should receive the honour. But these qualifications were
before long abandoned. As an inducement to apply for it, it was made to
confer the prefix of "Sir" and "Lady" (or "Dame"), and was assigned
precedence above knights, though below the younger sons of barons. Eight
years later (30th of September 1619), the baronetage of Ireland was
instituted, the king pledging himself not to create more than a hundred
baronets. Meanwhile, questions had arisen as to the exact precedence of the
baronets, and James by royal decree (28th of May 1612) had announced that
it was his intention to rank them below the younger sons of barons. As this
had the effect of stopping applications for the honour, James issued a
fresh commission (18th of November 1614) to encourage them, and finally, as
"the Kinges wants might be much relieved out of the vanities and ambition
of the gentrie" (in Chamberlain's words), he granted, in 1616, the further
privilege that the heirs apparent of baronets should be knighted on coming
of age.

The baronetage of Nova Scotia was devised in 1624 as a means of promoting
the "plantation" of that province, and James announced his intention of
creating a hundred baronets, each of whom was to support six colonists for
two years (or pay 2000 marks in lieu thereof) and also to pay 1000 marks to
Sir William Alexander (afterwards earl of Stirling), to whom the province
had been granted by charter in 1621. For this he was to receive a "free
barony" of 16,000 acres in Nova Scotia, and to become a baronet of "his
Hienes Kingdom of Scotland." James dying at this point, Charles I. carried
out the scheme, creating the first Scottish baronet on the 28th of May
1625, covenanting in the creation charter that the baronets "of Scotland or
of Nova Scotia" should never exceed a hundred and fifty in number, that
their heirs apparent should be knighted on coming of age, and that no one
should receive the honour who had not fulfilled the conditions, viz. paid
3000 marks (£166, 13s. 4d.) towards the plantation of the colony. Four
years later (17th of November 1629) the king wrote to "the contractors for
baronets," recognizing that they had advanced large sums to Sir William
Alexander for the plantation on the security of the payments to be made by
future baronets, and empowering them to offer a further inducement to
applicants; and on the same day he granted to all Nova Scotia baronets the
right to wear about their necks, suspended by an orange tawny ribbon, a
badge bearing an azure saltire with a crowned inescutcheon of the arms of
Scotland and the motto "Fax mentis honestae gloria." As the required
number, however, could not be completed, Charles announced in 1633 that
English and Irish gentlemen might receive the honour, and in 1634 they
began to do so. Yet even so, he was only able to create a few more than a
hundred and twenty in all. In 1638 the creation ceased to carry with it the
grant of lands in Nova Scotia, and on the union with England (1707) the
Scottish creations ceased, English and Scotsmen alike receiving thenceforth
baronetcies of Great Britain.

It is a matter of dispute whether James I. had kept faith with the baronets
of England as to limiting their number; but his son soon rejected the
restriction freely. Creations became one of his devices for raising money;
blank patents were hawked about, and in 1641 Nicholas wrote that
baronetcies were to be had for £400 or even for £350; a patent was offered
about this time to Mr Wrottesley of Wrottesley for £300. On the other hand,
the honour appears to have been bestowed for nothing on some ardent
royalists when the great struggle began.

Cromwell created a few baronets, but at the Restoration the honour was
bestowed so lavishly that a letter to Sir Richard Leveson (3rd of June
1660) describes it as "too common," and offers to procure it for any one in
return for £300 or £400. Sir William Wiseman, however, is said to have
given £500.

The history of the baronetage was uneventful till 1783, when in consequence
of the wrongful assumption of baronetcies, an old and then increasing evil,
a royal warrant was issued (6th of December) directing that no one should
be recognized as a baronet in official documents till he had proved his
right to the dignity, and also that those created in future must register
their arms and pedigree at the Heralds' College. In consequence of the
opposition of the baronets themselves, the first of these two regulations
was rescinded and the evil remained unabated. Since the union with Ireland
(1800) baronets have been created, not as of Great Britain or of Ireland,
but as of the United Kingdom.

In 1834 a movement was initiated by Mr Richard Broun (whose father had
assumed a Nova Scotia baronetcy some years before), to obtain certain
privileges for the order, but on the advice of the Heralds' College, the
request was refused. A further petition, for permission to all baronets to
wear a badge, as did those of Nova Scotia, met with the same fate in 1836.
Meanwhile George IV. had revoked (19th of December 1827), as to all future
creations the right of baronets' eldest sons to claim knighthood. Mr Broun
claimed it as an heir apparent in 1836, and on finally meeting with
refusal, publicly assumed the honour in 1842, a foolish and futile act. In
1854 Sir J. Kingston James was knighted as a baronet's son, and Sir Ludlow
Cotter similarly in 1874, on his coming of age; but when Sir Claude de
Crespigny's son applied for the honour (17th of May 1895), his application
was refused, on the ground that the lord chancellor did not consider the
clause in the patent (1805) valid. The reason for this decision appears to
be unknown.

Mr Broun's subsequent connexion with a scheme for reviving the territorial
claims of the Nova Scotia baronets as part of a colonizing scheme need not
be discussed here. A fresh agitation was aroused in 1897 by an order giving
the sons of life peers precedence over baronets, some of whom formed
themselves, in 1898, into "the Honourable Society of the Baronetage" for
the maintenance of its privileges. But a royal warrant was issued on the
15th of August 1898, confirming the precedence complained of as an
infringement of their rights. The above body, however, [v.03 p.0424] has
continued in existence as the "Standing Council of the Baronetage," and
succeeded in obtaining invitations for some representatives of the order to
the coronation of King Edward VII. It has been sought to obtain badges or
other distinctions for baronets and also to purge the order of wrongful
assumptions, an evil to which the baronetage of Nova Scotia is peculiarly
exposed, owing to the dignity being descendible to collateral heirs male of
the grantee as well as to those of his body. A departmental committee at
the home office was appointed in 1906 to consider the question of such
assumptions and the best means of stopping them.

All baronets are entitled to display in their coat of arms, either on a
canton or on an inescutcheon, the red hand of Ulster, save those of Nova
Scotia, who display, instead of it, the saltire of that province. The
precedency of baronets of Nova Scotia and of Ireland in relation to those
of England was left undetermined by the Acts of Union, and appears to be
still a moot point with heralds. The premier baronet of England is Sir
Hickman Bacon, whose ancestor was the first to receive the honour in 1611.

See Pixley's _History of the Baronetage_; Playfair's "Baronetage" (in
_British Family Antiquity_, vols. vi.-ix.); Foster's _Baronetage_; G. E.
Cokayne's _Complete Baronetage_; Nichols, "The Dignity of Baronet" (in
_Herald and Genealogist_, vol. iii.)

(J. H. R.)