BARROS, JOÃO DE (1496-1570), called the Portuguese Livy, may be said to
have been the first great historian of his country. Educated in the palace
of King Manoel, he early conceived the idea of writing history, and, to
prove his powers, composed, at the age of twenty, a romance of chivalry,
the _Chronicle of the Emperor Clarimundo_, in which he is said to have had
the assistance of Prince John, afterwards King John III. The latter, on
ascending the throne, gave Barros the captaincy of the fortress of St
George of Elmina, whither he proceeded in 1522, and he obtained in 1525 the
post of treasurer of the India House, which he held until 1528. The pest of
1530 drove him from Lisbon to his country house near Pombal, and there he
finished a moral dialogue, _Rhopica Pneuma_, which met with the applause of
the learned Juan Luis Vives. On his return to Lisbon in 1532 the king
appointed Barros factor of the India and Mina House--positions of great
responsibility and importance at a time when Lisbon was the European
emporium for the trade of the East. Barros proved a good administrator,
displaying great industry and a disinterestedness rare in that age, with
the result that he made but little money where his predecessors had amassed
fortunes. At this time, John III., wishful to attract settlers to Brazil,
divided it up into captaincies and gave that of Maranhão to Barros, who,
associating two partners in the enterprise with himself, prepared an armada
of ten vessels, carrying nine hundred men, which set sail in 1539. Owing to
the ignorance of the pilots, the whole fleet suffered shipwreck, which
entailed serious financial loss on Barros, yet not content with meeting his
own obligations, he paid the debts of those who had perished in the
expedition. During all these busy years he had continued his studies in his
leisure hours, and shortly after the Brazilian disaster he offered to write
a history of the Portuguese in India, which the king accepted. He began
work forthwith, but, before printing the first part, he again proved his
pen by publishing a Portuguese grammar (1540) and some more moral
Dialogues. The first of the Decades of his _Asia_ appeared in 1552, and its
reception was such that the king straightway charged Barros to write a
chronicle of King Manoel. His many occupations, however, prevented him from
undertaking this book, which was finally composed by Damião de Goes
(_q.v._). The Second Decade came out in 1553 and the Third in 1563, but the
Fourth and final one was not published until 1615, long after the author's
death. In January 1568 Barros retired from his remunerative appointment at
the India House, receiving the rank of _fidalgo_ together with a pension
and other pecuniary emoluments from King Sebastian, and died on the 20th of
October 1570. A man of lofty character, he preferred leaving his children
an example of good morals and learning to bequeathing them a large
pecuniary inheritance, and, though he received many royal benefactions,
they were volunteered, never asked for. As an historian and a stylist
Barros deserves the high fame he has always enjoyed. His Decades contain
the early history of the Portuguese in Asia and reveal careful study of
Eastern historians and geographers, as well as of the records of his own
country. They are distinguished by clearness of exposition and orderly
arrangement. His style has all the simplicity and grandeur of the masters
of historical writing, and the purity of his diction is incontestable.
Though, on the whole, impartial, Barros is the narrator and apologist of
the great deeds of his countrymen, and lacks the critical spirit and
intellectual acumen of Damião de Goes. Diogo do Couto continued the
Decades, adding nine more, and a modern edition of the whole appeared in
Lisbon in 14 vols. in 1778-1788. The title of Barros's work is _Da Asia de
João de Barros, dos feitos que os Portuguezes fizeram no descubrimento e
conquista dos mares e terras do Oriente_, and the edition is accompanied by
a volume containing a life of Barros by the historian Manoel Severim de
Faria and a copious index of all the Decades. An Italian version in 2 vols.
appeared in Venice in 1561-1562 and a German in 5 vols. in 1821.
_Clarimundo_ has gone through the following editions: 1522, 1555, 1601,
1742, 1791 and 1843, all published in Lisbon. It influenced Francisco de
Moraes (_q.v._); cf. Purser, _Palmerin of England_, Dublin, 1904, pp. 440
et seq.

The minor works of Barros are described by Innocencio da Silva:
_Diccionario Bibliographico Portuguez_, vol. iii. pp. 320-323 and vol. x.
pp. 187-189, and in Severim de Faria's _Life_, cited above. A compilation
of Barros's _Varia_ was published by the visconde de Azevedo (Porto, 1869).

(E. PR.)