BARROW, ISAAC (1630-1677), English mathematician and divine, was the son of
Thomas Barrow, a linen-draper in London, belonging to an old Suffolk and
Cambridgeshire family. His uncle was Bishop Isaac Barrow of St Asaph
(1614-1680). He was at first placed for two or three years at the
Charterhouse school. There, however, his conduct gave but little hopes of
his ever succeeding as a scholar. But after his removal from this
establishment to Felsted school in Essex, where Martin Holbeach was master,
his disposition took a happier turn; and having soon made considerable
progress in learning, he was in 1643 entered at St Peter's College, and
afterwards at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he applied himself to the
study of literature and science, especially of natural philosophy. He at
first intended to adopt the medical profession, and made some progress in
anatomy, botany and chemistry, after which he studied chronology, geometry
and astronomy. He then travelled in France and Italy, and in a voyage from
Leghorn to Smyrna gave proofs of great personal bravery during an attack
made by an Algerine pirate. At Smyrna he met with a kind reception from the
English consul, Mr Bretton, upon whose death he afterwards wrote a Latin
elegy. From this place he proceeded to Constantinople, where he received
similar civilities from Sir Thomas Bendish, the English ambassador, and Sir
Jonathan Dawes, with whom he afterwards contracted an intimate friendship.
While at Constantinople he read and studied the works of St Chrysostom,
whom he preferred to all the other Fathers. He resided in Turkey somewhat
more than a year, after which he proceeded to Venice, and thence returned
home through Germany and Holland in 1659.

Immediately on his reaching England he received ordination from Bishop
Brownrig, and in 1660 he was appointed to the Greek professorship at
Cambridge. When he entered upon this office he intended to have prelected
upon the tragedies of Sophocles; but he altered his intention and made
choice of Aristotle's rhetoric. His lectures on this subject, having been
lent to a friend who never returned them, are irrecoverably lost. In July
1662 he was elected professor of geometry in Gresham College, on the
recommendation of Dr John Wilkins, master of Trinity College and afterwards
bishop of Chester; and in May 1663 he was chosen a fellow of the Royal
Society, at the first election made by the council after obtaining their
charter. The same year the executors of Henry Lucas, who, according to the
terms of his will, had founded a mathematical chair at Cambridge, fixed
upon Barrow as the first professor; and although his two professorships
were not inconsistent with each other, he chose to resign that of Gresham
College, which he did on the 20th of May 1664. In 1669 he resigned his
mathematical chair to his pupil, Isaac Newton, having now determined to
renounce the study of mathematics for that of divinity. Upon quitting his
professorship Barrow was only a fellow of Trinity College; but his uncle
gave him a small sinecure in Wales, and Dr Seth Ward, bishop of Salisbury,
conferred upon him a prebend in that church. In the year 1670 he was
created doctor in divinity by mandate; and, upon the promotion of Dr
Pearson to the see of Chester, he was appointed to succeed him as master of
Trinity College by the king's patent, bearing the date of the 13th of
February 1672. In 1675 Dr Barrow was chosen vice-chancellor of the
university. He died on the 4th of May 1677, and was interred in Westminster
Abbey, where a monument, surmounted by his bust, was soon after erected by
the contributions of his friends.

By his English contemporaries Barrow was considered a mathematician second
only to Newton. Continental writers do not place him so high, and their
judgment is probably the more correct one. He was undoubtedly a
clear-sighted and able mathematician, who handled admirably the severe
geometrical method, and who in his _Method of Tangents_ approximated to the
course of reasoning by which Newton was afterwards led to the doctrine of
ultimate ratios; but his substantial contributions to the science are of no
great importance, and his lectures upon elementary principles do not throw
much light on the difficulties surrounding the border-land between
mathematics and philosophy. (See INFINITESIMAL CALCULUS.) His _Sermons_
have long enjoyed a high reputation; they are weighty pieces of reasoning,
elaborate in construction and ponderous in style.

His scientific works are very numerous. The most important are:--_Euclid's
Elements; Euclid's Data; Optical Lectures_, read in the public school of
Cambridge; _Thirteen Geometrical Lectures; The Works of Archimedes, the
Four Books of Apollonius's Conic Sections, and Theodosius's Spherics,
explained in a New Method_; A _Lecture_, in which Archimedes' Theorems of
the Sphere and Cylinder are investigated and briefly demonstrated;
_Mathematical Lectures_, read in the public schools of the university of
Cambridge. The above were all written in Latin. His English works have been
collected and published in four volumes folio.

See Ward, _Lives of the Gresham Professors_, and Whewell's biography
prefixed to the 9th volume of Napier's edition of Barrow's _Sermons_.