BARRAS, PAUL FRANÇOIS NICOLAS, COMTE DE (1755-1829), member of the French
Directory of 1795-1799, was descended from a noble family of Provence, and
was born at Fox-Amphoux. At the age of sixteen he entered the regiment of
Languedoc as "gentleman cadet," but embarked for India in 1776. After an
adventurous voyage he reached Pondicherry and shared in the defence of that
city, which ended in its capitulation to the British on the 18th of October
1778. The garrison being released, Barras returned to France. After taking
part in a second expedition to the East Indies in 1782-1783, he left the
army and occupied the following years with the frivolities congenial to his
class and to his nature. At the outbreak of the Revolution in 1789, he
espoused the democratic cause, and became one of the administrators of the
department of the Var. In June 1792 he took his seat in the high national
court at Orleans; and later in that year, on the outbreak of war with the
kingdom of Sardinia, he became commissioner to the French army of Italy,
and entered the Convention (the third of the national assemblies of France)
as a deputy for the department of the Var. In January 1793 he voted with
the majority for the death of Louis XVI. Much of his time, however, was
spent in missions to the districts of the south-east of France; and in this
way he made the acquaintance of Bonaparte at the siege of Toulon. As an
example of the incorrectness of the _Barras Memoirs_ we may note that the
writer assigned 30,000 men to the royalist defending force, whereas it was
less than 12,000; he also sought to minimize the share taken by Bonaparte
in the capture of that city.

In 1794 Barras sided with the men who sought to overthrow the Robespierre
faction, and their success in the _coup d'état_ of 9 Thermidor (27th of
July) brought him almost to the front rank. In the next year, when the
Convention was threatened by the malcontent National Guards of Paris, it
appointed Barras to command the troops engaged in its defence. His
nomination of Bonaparte as one of his subalterns led to the adoption of
vigorous measures, which ensured the dispersion of the royalists and [v.03
p.0432] malcontents in the streets near the Tuileries, 13 Vendémiaire (5th
of October 1795). Thereupon Barras became one of the five Directors who
controlled the executive of the French republic. Owing to his intimate
relations with Joséphine de Beauharnais, he helped to facilitate a marriage
between her and Bonaparte; and many have averred, though on defective
evidence, that Barras procured the appointment of Bonaparte to the command
of the army of Italy early in the year 1796. The achievements of Bonaparte
gave to the Directory a stability which it would not otherwise have
enjoyed; and when in the summer of 1797 the royalist and constitutional
opposition again gathered strength, Bonaparte sent General Augereau
(_q.v._), a headstrong Jacobin, forcibly to repress that movement by what
was known as the _coup d'état_ of 18 Fructidor (4th September). Barras and
the violent Jacobins now carried matters with so high a hand as to render
the government of the Directory odious; and Bonaparte had no difficulty in
overthrowing it by the _coup d'état_ of 18-19 Brumaire (9th-10th of
November). Barras saw the need of a change and was to some extent (how far
will perhaps never be known) an accomplice in Bonaparte's designs, though
he did not suspect the power and ambition of their contriver. He was left
on one side by the three Consuls who took the place of the five Directors
and found his political career at an end. He had amassed a large fortune
and spent his later years in voluptuous ease. Among the men of the
Revolution few did more than Barras to degrade that movement. His
immorality in both public and private life was notorious and contributed in
no small degree to the downfall of the Directory, and with it of the first
French Republic. Despite his profession of royalism in and after 1815, he
remained more or less suspect to the Bourbons; and it was with some
difficulty that the notes for his memoirs were saved from seizure on his
death on the 29th of January 1829.

Barras left memoirs in a rough state to be drawn up by his literary
executor, M. Rousselin de St Albin. The amount of alteration which they
underwent at his hands is not fully known; but M. George Duruy, who edited
them on their publication in 1895, has given fairly satisfactory proofs of
their genuineness. For other sources respecting Barras see the _Memoirs_ of
Gohier, Larevellière-Lépeaux and de Lescure; also Sciout, _Le Directoire_
(4 vols., Paris, 1895-1897), A. Sorel, _L'Europe et la Révolution
française_ (esp. vols. v. and vi., Paris, 1903-1904), and A. Vandal,
_L'Avènement de Bonaparte_ (Paris, 1902-1904).

(J. HL. R.)