BARRY, JAMES (1741-1806), English painter, was born at Cork on the 11th of
October 1741. His father had been a builder, and, at one time of his life,
a coasting trader between the two countries of England and Ireland. To this
business of trader James was destined, and he actually made when a boy
several voyages; but he manifested such an aversion to the life and habits
of a sailor as to induce his father to suffer him to pursue his own
inclinations, which led strongly towards drawing and study. At the schools
in Cork to which he was sent he was regarded as a prodigy. About the age of
seventeen he first attempted oil-painting, and between that and the age of
twenty-two, when he first went to Dublin, he produced several large
pictures, which decorated his father's house, such as "Aeneas escaping with
his Family from the Flames of Troy," "Susanna and the Elders," "Daniel in
the Lions' Den," &c. At this period he also produced the painting which
first brought him into public notice, and gained him the acquaintance and
patronage of Edmund Burke. The picture was founded on an old tradition of
the landing of St Patrick on the sea-coast of Cashel, and of the conversion
and baptism of the king of that district by the patron saint of Ireland. It
was exhibited in London in 1762 or 1763.

By the liberality of Burke and his other friends, Barry in the latter part
of 1765 was enabled to go abroad. He went first to Paris, then to Rome,
where he remained upwards of three years, from Rome to Florence and
Bologna, and thence home through Venice. His letters to the Burkes, giving
an account of Raphael, Michelangelo, Titian and Leonardo da Vinci, show
remarkable insight. Barry painted two pictures while abroad, an Adam and
Eve, and a Philoctetes, neither of them of any merit. Soon after his return
to England in 1771 he produced his picture of Venus, which was compared,
though with little justice, to the Galatea of Raphael, the Venus of Titian
and the Venus de Medici. In 1773 he exhibited his "Jupiter and Juno on
Mount Ida." His [v.03 p.0445] "Death of General Wolfe," in which the
British and French soldiers are represented in very primitive costumes, was
considered as a falling-off from his great style of art. His fondness for
Greek costume was assigned by his admirers as the cause of his reluctance
to paint portraits. His failure to go on with a portrait of Burke which he
had begun caused a misunderstanding with his early patron. The difference
between them is said to have been widened by Burke's growing intimacy with
Sir Joshua Reynolds, and by Barry's feeling some little jealousy of the
fame and fortune of his rival "in a humbler walk of the art." About the
same time he painted a pair of classical subjects, Mercury inventing the
lyre, and Narcissus looking at himself in the water, the last suggested to
him by Burke. He also painted a historical picture of Chiron and Achilles,
and another of the story of Stratonice, for which last the duke of Richmond
gave him a hundred guineas. In 1773 it was proposed to decorate the
interior of St Paul's with historical and sacred subjects; but the plan
fell to the ground, from not meeting with the concurrence of the bishop of
London and the archbishop of Canterbury. Barry was much mortified at the
failure, for he had in anticipation fixed upon the subject he intended to
paint--the rejection of Christ by the Jews when Pilate proposes his
release. In 1773 he published _An Inquiry into the real and imaginary
Obstructions to the Acquisition of the Arts in England_, vindicating the
capacity of the English for the fine arts and tracing their slow progress
hitherto to the Reformation, to political and civil dissensions, and lastly
to the general direction of the public mind to mechanics, manufactures and
commerce. In 1774 a proposal was made through Valentine Green to Reynolds,
West, Cipriani, Barry, and other artists to ornament the great room of the
Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce in the
Adelphi with historical and allegorical paintings. This proposal was at the
time rejected by the artists themselves; but in 1777 Barry made an offer to
paint the whole on condition of being allowed the choice of his subjects,
and being paid by the society the expenses of canvas, paints and models.
His offer was accepted, and he finished the series of pictures at the end
of seven years to the entire satisfaction of the members of the society,
who granted him two exhibitions, and at different periods voted him 50
guineas, their gold medal and 200 guineas. Of the six paintings making up
the series, only one, that of the Olympic Games, shows any artistic power.

Soon after his return from the continent Barry had been chosen a member of
the Royal Academy; and in 1782 he was appointed professor of painting in
the room of Mr Penny with a salary of £30 a year. Among other things, he
insisted on the necessity of purchasing a collection of pictures by the
best masters as models for the students, and proposed several of those in
the Orleans collection. This recommendation was not relished, and in 1799
Barry was expelled from the academy, soon after the appearance of his
_Letter to the Dilettanti Society_, a very amusing but eccentric
publication, full of enthusiasm for his art and at the same time of
contempt for the living professors of it. After the loss of his salary, a
subscription was set on foot by the earl of Buchan to relieve him from his
difficulties, and to settle him in a larger house to finish his picture of
Pandora. The subscription amounted to £1000, with which an annuity was
bought, but on the 6th of February 1806 he was seized with illness and died
on the 22nd of the same month. On the 14th of March his remains were
interred in St Paul's.

As an artist, Barry was more distinguished for the strength of his
conceptions, and for his resolute and persistent determination to apply
himself only to great subjects, than for his skill in designing or for
beauty in his colouring. His drawing is rarely good, his colouring
frequently wretched. He was extremely impulsive and unequal; sometimes
morose, sometimes sociable and urbane; jealous of his contemporaries, and
yet capable of pronouncing a splendid eulogy on Reynolds.