BARROWE, HENRY (?1550-1593), English Puritan and Separatist, was born about
1550, at Shipdam, Norfolk, of a family related by marriage to the lord
keeper Bacon, and [v.03 p.0443] probably to Aylmer, bishop of London. He
matriculated at Clare Hall, Cambridge, in November 1566, and graduated B.A.
in 1569-1570. Afterwards he "followed the court" for some time, leading a
frivolous if not licentious life. He was a member of Gray's Inn for a few
years from 1576, but was never called to the bar. About 1580 or 1581 he was
deeply impressed by a sermon, whereupon he retired to the country, and was
led by study and meditation to the strictest form of Puritanism.
Subsequently, in what manner is not known, he came into intimate relations
with John Greenwood, the Separatist leader, whose views (probably due, in
part at least, to Browne's influence) he adopted without reserve. Though
not strictly resident in London at this time, he was associated with "the
brethren of the Separation" there, in whose secret meetings his natural
earnestness and eloquence made him conspicuous. Greenwood having been
imprisoned in the Clink, Barrowe came from the country to visit him, and on
the 19th of November 1586 was detained by the gaoler and brought before
Archbishop Whitgift. He insisted on the illegality of this arrest, refused
either to take the _ex officio_ oath or to give bail for future appearance,
and was committed to the Gatehouse. After nearly six months' detention and
several irregular examinations before the high commissioners, he and
Greenwood were formally indicted (May 1587) for recusancy under an act
originally directed against Papists. They were ordered to find heavy bail
for comformity, and to remain in the Fleet Prison until it was forthcoming.
Barrowe continued a prisoner for the remainder of his life, nearly six
years, sometimes in close confinement, sometimes having "the liberty of the
prison." He was subjected to several more examinations, once before the
privy council at Whitehall on the 18th of March 1588, as a result of
petition to the queen. On these occasions he vigorously maintained the
principle of separatism, denouncing the prescribed ritual of the Church as
"a false worship," and the bishops as oppressors and persecutors. During
his imprisonments he was engaged in written controversy with Robert Browne
(down to 1588), who had yielded a partial submission to the established
order, and whom he therefore accounted a renegade. He also wrote several
vigorous treatises in defence of separatism and congregational
independency, the most important being:--_A True Description of the Visible
Congregation of the Saints, &c._ (1589); _A Plain Refutation of Mr
Gifford's Booke, intituled A Short Treatise Gainst the Donatistes of
England_ (1590-1591), and _A Brief Discovery of the False Church_ (1591).
Others were written in conjunction with his fellow-prisoner, Greenwood.
These writings were taken charge of by friends and mostly printed in
Holland. By 1590 the bishops thought it advisable to try other means of
convincing or silencing these indomitable controversialists, and sent
several conforming Puritan ministers to confer with them, but without
effect. At length it was resolved to proceed on a capital charge of
"devising and circulating seditious books," for which, as the law then
stood, it was easy to secure a conviction. They were tried and sentenced to
death on the 23rd of March 1593. What followed is, happily, unique in the
history of English misrule. The day after sentence they were brought out as
if for execution and respited. On the 31st of March they were taken to the
gallows, and after the ropes had been placed about their necks were again
respited. Finally they were hanged early on the morning of the 6th of
April. The motive of all this is obscure, but there is some evidence that
the lord treasurer Burghley endeavoured to save their lives, and was
frustrated by Whitgift and other bishops.

The opinions of Browne and Barrowe had much in common, but were not
identical. Both maintained the right and duty of the Church to carry out
necessary reforms without awaiting the permission of the civil power; and
both advocated congregational independency. But the ideal of Browne was a
spiritual democracy, towards which separation was only a means. Barrowe, on
the other hand, regarded the whole established church order as polluted by
the relics of Roman Catholicism, and insisted on separation as essential to
pure worship and discipline (see further CONGREGATIONALISM). Barrowe has
been credited by H. M. Dexter and others with being the author of the
"Marprelate Tracts"; but this is improbable.

AUTHORITIES.--H. M. Dexter, _The Congregationalism of the Last Three
Hundred Years_; F. J. Powicke, _Henry Barrowe and the Exiled Church_. See
also B. Brook, _Lives of the Puritans_; and Cooper, _Athenae
Cantabrigienses_ (1861), vol. ii.