BARROW (from A.S. _beorh_, a mount or hillock), a word found occasionally
among place-names in England applied to natural eminences, but generally
restricted in its modern application to denote an ancient grave-mound. The
custom of constructing barrows or mounds of stone or earth over the remains
of the dead was a characteristic feature of the sepulchral systems of
primitive times. Originating in the common sentiment of humanity, which
desires by some visible memorial to honour and perpetuate the memory of the
dead, it was practised alike by peoples of high and of low development, and
continued through all the stages of culture that preceded the introduction
of Christianity. The primary idea of sepulture appears to have been the
provision of a habitation for the dead; and thus, in its perfect form, the
barrow included a chamber or chambers where the tenant was surrounded with
the prized possessions of his previous life. A common feature of the
earlier barrows is the enclosing fence, which marked off the site from the
surrounding ground. When the barrow was of earth, this was effected by an
encircling trench or a low _vallum_. When the barrow was a stone structure,
the enclosure was usually a circle of standing stones. Sometimes, instead
of a chamber formed above ground, the barrow covered a pit excavated for
the interment under the original surface. In later times the mound itself
was frequently dispensed with, and the interments made within the enclosure
of a trench, a _vallum_ or a circle of standing stones. Usually the great
barrows occupy conspicuous sites; but in general the external form is no
index to the internal construction and gives no definite indication of the
nature of the sepulchral usages. Thus, while the long barrow is
characteristic of the Stone Age, it is impossible to tell without direct
examination whether it may be chambered or unchambered, or whether the
burials within it may be those of burnt or of unburnt bodies.

In England the long barrow usually contains a single chamber, entering by a
passage underneath the higher and wider end of the mound. In Denmark the
chambers are at irregular intervals along the body of the mound, and have
no passages leading into them. The long barrows of Great Britain are often
from 200 to 400 ft. in length by 60 to 80 ft. wide. Their chambers are
rudely but strongly built, with dome-shaped roofs, formed by overlapping
the successive courses of the upper part of the side walls. In Scandinavia,
on the other hand, such dome-roofed chambers are unknown, and the
construction of the chambers as a rule is megalithic, five or six monoliths
supporting one or more capstones of enormous size. Such chambers, denuded
of the covering mound, or over which no covering mound has been raised, are
popularly known in England as "cromlechs" and in France as "dolmens" (see
STONE MONUMENTS). The prevailing mode of sepulture in all the different
varieties of these structures is by the deposit of the body in a contracted
position, accompanied by weapons and implements of stone, occasionally by
ornaments of gold, jet or amber. Vessels of clay, more or less ornate in
character, which occur with these early interments of unburnt bodies, have
been regarded as food-vessels and drinking-cups, differing in character and
purpose from the cinerary urns of larger size in which the ashes of the
dead were deposited after cremation.

The custom of burning the body commenced in the Stone Age, before the long
barrow or the dolmen had passed out of use. While cremation is rare in the
long barrows of the south of England, it is the rule in those of Yorkshire
and the north of Scotland. In Ireland, where the long barrow form is all
but unknown, the round barrow or chambered cairn prevailed from the
earliest Pagan period till the introduction of Christianity. The Irish
barrows occur in groups in certain localities, some of which seem to have
been the royal cemeteries of the tribal confederacies, whereof eight are
enumerated in an ancient Irish manuscript, the _Leabhar na h-Uidhri_,
compiled c. A.D. 1100. The best-known of these is situated on the banks of
the Boyne above Drogheda, and consists of a group of the largest cairns in
Ireland. One, at New Grange, is a huge mound of stones and earth, over 300
ft. in diameter and 70 ft. in height. Around its base are the remains of a
circle of large standing stones. The chamber, which is 20 ft. high in the
centre, is reached by a passage about 70 ft. in length. In the Loughcrew
Hills, Co. Meath, there is a group of about thirty stone barrows or cairns,
mostly chambered, their bases measuring from 5 or 6 to 60 yds. in diameter.
They are unusually interesting from the fact that many of the exposed slabs
in the walls of the chambers are ornamented with spirals and other devices,
rudely incised. As in the case of the long barrows, the traditional form of
the circular, chambered barrow was retained through various changes in the
sepulchral customs of the people. It was the natural result of the practice
of cremation, however, that it should induce a modification of the barrow
structure. The chamber, no longer regarded as a habitation to be tenanted
by the deceased, became simply a cist for the reception of the urn which
held his ashes. The degradation of the chamber naturally produced a
corresponding degradation of the mound which covered it, and the barrows of
the Bronze Age, in which cremation was common, are smaller and less
imposing than those of the Stone Age, but often surprisingly rich in the
relics of the life and of the art workmanship of the time. In addition to
the varied and beautiful forms of implements and weapons--frequently
ornamented with a high degree of artistic taste--armlets and other personal
ornaments in gold, amber, jet and bronze are not uncommon. The barrows of
the bronze period, like some of those of the Stone Age, appear to have been
used as tribal or family cemeteries. In Denmark as many as seventy deposits
of burnt interments have been observed in a single mound, indicating its
use as a burying-place throughout a long succession of years.

In the Iron Age there was less uniformity in the burial customs. In some of
the barrows in central France, and in the wolds of Yorkshire, the
interments include the arms and accoutrements of a charioteer, with his
chariot, harness and horses. In Scandinavia a custom, alluded to in the
sagas, of burying the viking in his ship, drawn up on land, and raising a
barrow over it, is exemplified by the ship-burials discovered in Norway.
The ship found in the Gokstad mound was 78 ft. long, and had a mast and
sixteen pairs of oars. In a chamber abaft the mast the viking had been
laid, with his weapons, and together with him were [v.03 p.0442] buried
twelve horses, six dogs and a peacock. An interesting example of the great
timber-chambered barrow is that at Jelling in Jutland, known as the barrow
of Thyre Danebod, queen of King Gorm the Old, who died about the middle of
the 10th century. It is a mound about 200 ft. in diameter, and over 50 ft.
in height, containing a chamber 23 ft. long, 8 ft. wide and 5 ft. high,
formed of massive slabs of oak. Though it had been entered and plundered in
the middle ages, a few relics were found when it was reopened, among which
were a silver cup, ornamented with the interlacing work characteristic of
the time and some personal ornaments. It is highly illustrative of the
tenacity with which the ancient sepulchral usages were retained even after
the introduction of Christianity that King Harold, son and successor of
Gorm the Old, who is said to have christianized all Denmark and Norway,
followed the pagan custom of erecting a chambered tumulus over the remains
of his father, on the summit of which was placed a rude pillar-stone,
bearing on one side the memorial inscription in runes, and on the other a
representation of the Saviour of mankind distinguished by the crossed
nimbus surrounding the head. The so-called Kings' Hows at Upsala in Sweden
rival those of Jelling in size and height. In the chamber of one, opened in
1829, there was found an urn full of calcined bones; and along with it were
ornaments of gold showing the characteristic workmanship of the 5th and 6th
centuries of the Christian era. Along with the calcined human bones were
bones of animals, among which those of the horse and the dog were
distinguished.

Comparing the results of the researches in European barrows with such
notices of barrow-burial as may be gleaned from early writings, we find
them mutually illustrative.

The Homeric account of the building of the barrow of Hector (_Il._ xxiv.)
brings vividly before us the scene so often suggested by the examination of
the tumuli of prehistoric times. During nine days wood was collected and
brought, in carts drawn by oxen, to the site of the funeral pyre. Then the
pyre was built and the body laid upon it. After burning for twenty-four
hours the smouldering embers were extinguished with libations of wine. The
white and calcined bones were then picked out of the ashes by the friends
and placed in a metallic urn, which was deposited in a hollow grave or cist
and covered over with large well-fitting stones. Finally, a barrow of great
magnitude was heaped over the remains and the funeral feast was celebrated.
The obsequies of Achilles, as described in the _Odyssey_, were also
celebrated with details which are strikingly similar to those observed in
tumuli both of the Bronze and Iron Ages. The body was brought to the pile
in an embroidered robe and jars of unguents and honey were placed beside
it. Sheep and oxen were slaughtered at the pile. The incinerated bones were
collected from the ashes and placed in a golden urn along with those of
Patroclus, Achilles's dearest friend. Over the remains a great and shapely
mound was raised on the high headland, so that it might be seen from afar
by future generations of men.

Herodotus, describing the funeral customs of the Scythians, states that, on
the death of a chief, the body was placed upon a couch in a chamber sunk in
the earth and covered with timber, in which were deposited all things
needful for the comfort of the deceased in the other world. One of his
wives was strangled and laid beside him, his cup-bearer and other
attendants, his charioteer and his horses were killed and placed in the
tomb, which was then filled up with earth and an enormous mound raised high
over all. The barrows which cover the plains of ancient Scythia attest the
truth of this description. A Siberian barrow, described by Demidov,
contained three contiguous chambers of unhewn stone. In the central chamber
lay the skeleton of the ancient chief, with his sword, his spear, his bow
and a quiver full of arrows. The skeleton reclined upon a sheet of pure
gold, extending the whole length of the body, which had been wrapped in a
mantle broidered with gold and studded with precious stones. Over it was
extended another sheet of pure gold. In a smaller chamber at the chief's
head lay the skeleton of a female, richly attired, extended upon a sheet of
pure gold and similarly covered with a sheet of the same metal. A golden
chain adorned her neck and her arms were encircled with bracelets of pure
gold. In a third chamber, at the chief's feet, lay the skeleton of his
favourite horse with saddle, bridle and stirrups.

So curiously alike in their general features were the sepulchral usages
connected with barrow-burial over the whole of Europe, that we find the
Anglo-Saxon Saga of Beowulf describing the chambered tumulus with its
gigantic masonry "held fast on props, with vaults of stone," and the
passage under the mound haunted by a dragon, the guardian of the treasures
of heathen gold which it contained. Beowulf's own burial is minutely
described in terms which have a strong resemblance to the parallel passages
in the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_. There is first the preparation of the pile,
which is hung round with helmets, shields and coats of mail. Then the
corpse is brought and laid in the midst; the pile is kindled and the
roaring flame rises, mingled with weeping, till all is consumed. Then, for
ten long days, the warriors labour at the rearing of his mighty mound on
the headland, high and broad, to be seen afar by the passers-by on land and
sea.

The pyramids of Egypt, the mausolea of the Lydian kings, the circular,
chambered sepulchres of Mycenae, and the Etruscan tombs at Caere and Volci,
are lineally descended from the chambered barrows of prehistoric times,
modified in construction according to the advancement of architectural art
at the period of their erection. There is no country in Europe destitute of
more or less abundant proofs of the almost universal prevalence of
barrow-burial in early times. It can also be traced on both sides of the
basin of the Mediterranean, and from Asia Minor across the continent to
India, China and Japan.

In the new world as well as in the old, similar customs prevailed from a
very remote period. In the great plains of North America the dead were
buried in barrows of enormous magnitude, which occasionally present a
remarkable similarity to the barrows of Great Britain. In these mounds
cremation appears more frequently than inhumation; and both are accompanied
by implements, weapons and ornaments of stone and bone. The pottery
accompanying the remains is often elaborately ornamented, and the mound
builders were evidently possessed of a higher development of taste and
skill than is evinced by any of the modern aboriginal races, by whom the
mounds and their contents are regarded as utterly mysterious.

It is not to be wondered at that customs so widely spread and so deeply
rooted as those connected with barrow-burial should have been difficult to
eradicate. In fact, compliance with the Christian practice of inhumation in
the cemeteries sanctioned by the church, was only enforced in Europe by
capitularies denouncing the punishment of death on those who persisted in
burying their dead after the pagan fashion or in the pagan mounds. Yet even
in the middle ages kings of Christian countries were buried with their
swords and spears, and queens with their spindles and ornaments; the bishop
was laid in his grave with his crozier and comb; the priest with his
chalice and vestments; and clay vessels filled with charcoal (answering to
the urns of heathen times) are found in the churches of France and Denmark.

AUTHORITIES.--Canon W. Greenwell, _British Barrows_ (London, 1877); Dr J.
Thurnam, "On Ancient British Barrows," in _Archaeologia_, vols. 42, 43
(1869); J. R. Mortimer, _Forty Years' Researches in Burial Mounds of East
Yorkshire_ (London, 1905); J. Anderson, _Scotland in Pagan Times_
(Edinburgh, 1886); Dr T. H. Bryce, "Records of Explorations among the
Cairns of Arran and Bute," in _Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of
Scotland_, vols. 36, 37, 38 (1901-1903); W. C. Borlase, _The Dolmens of
Ireland_ (London, 1897); _Dictionnaire archéologique de la Gaule_ (Paris,
1875); A. P. Madsen, _Gravhoie og Gravfund fra Stenalderen i Danmark_
(Copenhagen, 1900); S. Müller, _Nordische Altertumskunde aus Dänemark und
Schleswig_ (Strassburg, 1897); O. Montelius, _The Civilization of Sweden in
Heathen Times_ (London, 1888), and _Der Orient und Europa_ (Stockholm,
1899); E. Cartailhac, _Les Âges préhistoriques de l'Espagne et du Portugal_
(Paris, 1886); W. Gowland, "The Dolmens and Burial Mounds in Japan," in
_Archaeologia_, vol. 55 (1897); C. Thomas, "Report on the Mound
Explorations of the Bureau of Ethnology" (_Twelfth Annual Report_ for
1890-1891, Washington, 1894.)

(J. AN.)