BARROT, CAMILLE HYACINTHE ODILON (1791-1873), French politician, was born
at Villefort (Lozère) on the 19th of September 1791. He belonged to a legal
family, his father, an advocate of Toulouse, having been a member of the
Convention who had voted against the death of Louis XVI. Odilon Barrot's
earliest recollections were of the October insurrection of 1795. He was
sent to the military school of Saint-Cyr, but presently removed to the
Lycée Napoleon to study law and was called to the Parisian bar in 1811. He
was placed in the office of the _conventionel_ Jean Mailhe, who was
advocate before the council of state and the court of cassation and was
proscribed at the second restoration. Barrot eventually succeeded him in
both positions. His dissatisfaction with the government of the restoration
was shown in his conduct of some political trials. For his opposition in
1820 to a law by which any person might be arrested and detained on a
warrant signed by three ministers, he was summoned before a court of
assize, but acquitted. Although intimate with Lafayette and others, he took
no actual share in their schemes for the overthrow of the government, but
in 1827 he joined the association known as _Aide-toi, le ciel t'aidera_. He
presided over the banquet given by the society to the 221 deputies who had
signed the address of March 1830 to Charles X., and threatened to reply to
force by force. After the ordinances of the 26th of July 1830, he joined
the National Guard and took an active part in the revolution. As secretary
of the municipal commission, which sat at the hôtel-de-ville and formed
itself into a provisional government, he was charged to convey to the
chamber of deputies a protest embodying the terms which the advanced
Liberals wished to impose on the king to be elected. He supported the idea
of a constitutional monarchy against the extreme Republicans, and he was
appointed one of the three commissioners chosen to escort Charles X. out of
France. On his return he was nominated prefect of the department of the
Seine. His concessions to the Parisian mob and his extreme gentleness
towards those who demanded the prosecution of the ministers of Charles X.
led to an unflattering comparison with Jérôme Pétion under similar
circumstances. Louis Philippe's government was far from satisfying his
desires for reform, and he persistently urged the "broadening of the bases
of the monarchy," while he protested his loyalty to the dynasty. He was
returned to the chamber of deputies for the department of Eure in 1831. The
day after the demonstration of June 1832 on the occasion of the funeral of
General Lamarque, he made himself indirectly the mouthpiece of the
Democrats in an interview with Louis Philippe, which is given at length in
his _Mémoires_. Subsequently, in pleading before the court of cassation on
behalf of one of the rioters, he secured the annulling of the judgments
given by the council of war. The death of the duke of Orleans in 1842 was a
blow to Barrot's party, which sought to substitute the regency of the
duchess of Orleans for that of the duke of Nemours in the event of the
succession of the count of Paris. In 1846 Barrot made a tour in the Near
East, returning in time to take part a second time in the preliminaries of
revolution. He organized banquets of the disaffected in the various cities
of France, and demanded electoral reform to avoid revolution. He did not
foresee the strength of the outbreak for which his eloquence had prepared
the way, and clung to the programme of 1830. He tried to support the
regency of the duchess in the chamber on the 24th of February, only to find
that the time was past for [v.03 p.0440] half-measures. He acquiesced in
the republic and gave his adhesion to General Cavaignac. He became the
chief of Louis Napoleon's first ministry in the hope of extracting Liberal
measures, but was dismissed in 1849 as soon as he had served the
president's purpose of avoiding open conflict. After the _coup d'état_ of
December 1851 he was one of those who sought to accuse Napoleon of high
treason. He was imprisoned for a short time and retired from active
politics for some ten years. He was drawn once more into affairs by the
hopes of reform held out by Émile Ollivier, accepting in 1869 the
presidency of an extra-parliamentary committee on decentralization. After
the fall of the empire he was nominated by Thiers, whom he had supported
under Louis Philippe, president of the council of state. But his powers
were now failing, and he had only filled his new office for about a year
when he died at Bougival on the 6th of August 1873. He had been
sufficiently an optimist to believe in the triumph of the liberal but
non-republican institutions dear to him under the restoration, under Louis
Philippe and Louis Napoleon successively. He was unable to foresee and
unwilling to accept the consequences of his political agitation in 1830 and
1848, and in spite of his talents and acknowledged influence he thus failed
to secure the honours won by more uncompromising politicians. He was
described by Thureau-Dangin as "le plus solennel des indécis, le plus
méditatif des irréfléchis, le plus heureux des ambitieux, le plus austère
des courtisans de la foule."

His personal relations with Louis Philippe and Napoleon, with his views on
the events in which he was concerned, are described in the four volumes of
his _Mémoires_, edited by Duvergier de Hauranne in 1875-1876. See also
Thureau-Dangin, _Hist. de la monarchie de juillet_.