BARRISTER, in England and Ireland the term applied to the highest class of
lawyers who have exclusive audience in all the superior courts, the word
being derived from the "bar" (_q.v._) in the law courts. Every barrister in
England must be a member of one of the four ancient societies called Inns
of Court, viz. Lincoln's Inn, the Inner and Middle Temples, and Gray's Inn,
and in Ireland, of the King's Inns. The existence of the English societies
as schools can be traced back to the 13th century, and their rise is
attributed to the clause in Magna Carta, by which the Common Pleas were
fixed at Westminster instead of following the king's court, and the
professors of law were consequently brought together in London.
Associations of lawyers acquired houses of their own in which students were
educated in the common law, and the degrees of barrister (corresponding to
apprentice or bachelor) and sergeant (corresponding to doctor) were
conferred. These schools of law are now represented by the Inns of Court
(_q.v._).

Students are admitted as members of the Inns of Court, on paying certain
fees and on passing a general (elementary) examination or (alternatively)
producing evidence of having passed a public examination at a university;
their subsequent call to the bar depends on their keeping twelve terms (of
which there are four in each year), and passing certain further
examinations (see ENGLISH LAW _ad fin._). A term is "kept" by dining six
times (three for a student whose name is on the books of a university) in
hall. This is a relic of the older system in which examinations were not
included, the only requisite being a certificate from a barrister that the
student had read for twelve months in his chambers. Dining in hall then
applied a certain social test, which has now become unmeaning. The
profession of barrister is open to almost every one; but no person
connected [v.03 p.0438] with the law in any inferior capacity or who is a
chartered or professional accountant, can enter an Inn of Court as a
student until he has entirely and bona fide ceased to act or practise in
such capacity. Some of the Inns also make a restriction that their members
shall not be engaged in trade. A form of admission has to be filled up,
containing a declaration to this effect, and mentioning _inter alia_ the
age, nationality, condition in life and occupation of the applicant.
Previous to the student's call this declaration must be repeated, and he
must further declare that he is not in holy orders, has not held any
clerical preferment and has not performed any clerical functions during the
year preceding. Subject to the above, practising solicitors of not less
than five years' standing may be called to the bar without keeping any
terms, upon passing the necessary examinations, and, _per contra_, a
barrister of the same standing may, without any period of apprenticeship,
become a solicitor upon passing the final examination for solicitors. Irish
barristers of three years' standing may be called to the English bar
without passing any examination upon keeping three terms, and so also may
barristers of those colonies where the professions of barrister and
solicitor are still kept distinct. No one can become a barrister till he is
twenty-one years old.

The benchers of the different Inns of Court have the right of rejecting any
applicant for membership with or without cause assigned; and for sufficient
reasons, subject to an appeal to the common-law judges as visitors of the
Inns, they may refuse to call a student to the bar, or may expel from their
society or from the profession ("dis-bar" or "dis-bench") even barristers
or benchers. The benchers appear to take cognizance of any kind of
misconduct, whether professional or not, which they may deem unworthy of
the rank of barrister. The grade of barrister comprehends the
attorney-general and solicitor-general (appointed by and holding office
solely at the will of the government of the day), who rank as the heads of
the profession, king's counsel and ordinary practitioners, sometimes
technically known as "utter barristers."

The peculiar business of barristers is the advocacy of causes in open
court, but in England a great deal of other business falls into their
hands. They are the chief conveyancers, and the _pleadings_ (_i.e._ the
counter statements of parties previous to joining issue) are in all but the
simplest cases drafted by them. There was formerly, indeed, a separate
class of conveyancers and special pleaders, being persons who kept the
necessary number of terms qualifying for a call but who, instead of being
called, took out licences, granted for one year only, but renewable, to
practise under the bar, but now conveyancing and special pleading form part
of the ordinary work of a junior barrister. The higher rank among
barristers is that of king's or queen's counsel. They lead in court, and
give opinions on cases submitted to them, but they do not accept
conveyancing or pleading, nor do they admit pupils to their chambers.
Precedence among king's counsel, as well as among outer barristers, is
determined by seniority.[1] The old order of serjeants-at-law (_q.v._) who
ranked after king's counsel, is now extinct. Although every barrister has a
right to practise in any court in England, each special class of business
has its own practitioners, so that the bar may almost be said to be divided
into several professions. The most marked distinction is that between
barristers practising in chancery and barristers practising in the courts
of common law. The fusion of law and equity brought about by the Judicature
Acts 1873 and 1875 was expected in course of time to break down this
distinction; but to a large extent the separation between these two great
branches of the profession remains. There are also subordinate distinctions
in each branch. Counsel at common law attach themselves to one or other of
the circuits into which England is divided, and may not practise elsewhere
unless under special conditions. In chancery the king's counsel for the
most part restrict themselves to one or other of the courts of the chancery
division. Business before the court of probate, divorce and admiralty, the
privy council and parliamentary committees, exhibits, though in a less
degree, the same tendency to specialization. In some of the larger
provincial towns there are also local bars of considerable strength. The
bar of Ireland exhibits in its general arrangements the same features as
the bar of England. For the Scottish bar, see under ADVOCATES, FACULTY OF.
There is no connexion whatever between the Scottish and English bars. A
distinctive dress is worn by barristers when attending the courts,
consisting of a stuff gown, exchanged for one of silk (whence the
expression "to take silk") when the wearer has attained the rank of king's
counsel, both classes also having wigs dating in pattern and material from
the 18th century.

Counsel is not answerable for anything spoken by him relative to the cause
in hand and suggested in the client's instructions, even though it should
reflect on the character of another and prove absolutely groundless, but if
he mention an untruth of his own invention, or even upon instructions if it
be impertinent to the matter in hand, he is then liable to an action from
the party injured. Counsel may also be punished by the summary power of the
court or judge as for a contempt, and by the benchers of the inn to which
he may belong on cause shown.

The rank of barrister is a necessary qualification for nearly all offices
of a judicial character, and a very usual qualification for other important
appointments. Not only the judgeships in the superior courts of law and
equity in England and in her colonies, but nearly all the magistracies of
minor rank--recorderships, county court judgeships, &c.--are restricted to
the bar. The result is a unique feature in the English system of justice,
viz. the perfect harmony of opinion and interest between the bar as a
profession and all degrees of the judicial bench. Barristers have the rank
of esquires, and are privileged from arrest whilst in attendance on the
superior courts and on circuit, and also from serving on juries whilst in
active practice.

_Revising Barristers_ are counsel of not less than seven years' standing
appointed to revise the lists of parliamentary voters.

Barristers cannot maintain an action for their fees, which are regarded as
gratuities, nor can they, by the usage of the profession, undertake a case
without the intervention of a solicitor, except in criminal cases, where a
barrister may be engaged directly, by having a fee given him in open court,
nor is it competent for them to enter into any contract for payment by
their clients with respect to litigation.

See J. R. V. Marchant, _Barrister-at-law: an Essay on the legal position of
Counsel in England_ (1905).

[1] A king's counsel is appointed by letters patent to be "one of His
Majesty's counsel learned in the law." The appointment rests with the lord
chancellor, to whom the barrister desiring a silk gown makes application.
There is no definite time required to elapse between "call" and application
for a seat within the bar, but it is generally understood that a barrister
must be of at least ten years' standing before he is appointed a king's
counsel. The first king's counsel was Sir Francis Bacon, who was appointed
by Queen Elizabeth "queen's counsel extraordinary," and received a payment,
by way of "pledge and fee," of £40 a year, payable half-yearly. Succeeding
king's counsel received a similar payment, until its abolition in 1831.
There was not another appointment of a king's counsel until 1668, when Lord
Chancellor Francis North was so honoured. From 1775 king's counsel may be
said to have become a regular order. Their number was very small so late as
the middle of the 19th century (20 in 1789; 30 in 1810; 28 in 1850), but at
the beginning of the 20 century there were over 250. A king's counsel may
not, unless by special licence, take a brief against the crown, but such a
licence is never refused unless the crown desires his services in the case.