BARRY, an urban district and seaport of Glamorganshire, Wales, on the
Bristol Channel, 153 m. by rail from London and 8 m. S.W. from Cardiff. Its
station is a terminus on the Barry railway, which starts at Hafod in the
Rhondda Valley, where it joins the Taff Vale railway, having also junctions
with the same line for Aberdare and Merthyr at Treforest, and for Cardiff
and Penarth at Cogan, and with the Great Western main line at Peterstone
and St Fagans. A branch from the main line at Tyn-y-caeau connects with the
Rhymney railway, the London & North-Western railway, and the Brecon &
Merthyr railway. The Vale of Glamorgan railway (which is worked by [v.03
p.0446] the Barry company and has a junction with the Great Western railway
at Bridgend) affords a direct route to Barry from the Llynvi, Ogmore and
Garw coalfields. The urban district of Barry, with a population in 1901 of
27,030, comprises the ecclesiastical parishes of Barry, Cadoxton,
Merthyr-Dovan, and a portion of Sully in which is included Barry Island
(194 acres), now, however, joined to the mainland. The total population of
this area in 1881 was only about 500, that of Barry village alone being
only 85. A small brook named Barri runs here into the sea, whence the place
was formerly known in Welsh as Aber-Barri, but the name of both the river
and the island is supposed to be derived from Baruch, a Welsh saint of the
7th century, who had a cell on the island. His chapel (which still existed
in Leland's time) was a place of pilgrimage in the middle ages. According
to Giraldus, his own family derived its name de Barri from the island which
they once owned. One of the followers of Fitzhamon settled at Barry about
the end of the 11th century, building there a castle of which only a
gateway remains. Besides the small old parish churches of Merthyr-Dovan and
Cadoxton, and the rebuilt parish church of Barry, there are four modern
churches (in one of which Welsh services are held). There are about thirty
nonconformist chapels, in nearly a third of which the services are Welsh.
There are also a Roman Catholic church, and one for German and Scandinavian
seamen. The other public buildings are a county intermediate school for 250
boys and girls, built in 1896, a free library (opened in 1892) with four
branch reading-rooms, a seamen's institute, the Barry market, built in 1890
at a cost of £3500 (but now used as a concert-hall), and Romilly hall for
public meetings.

Barry owes its seaport to the determination of a number of colliery owners
to secure an alternative port to Cardiff, with an independent railway to it
from the coalfields. After failing in 1883, they obtained parliamentary
powers for this purpose in 1884, and the first sod of the new dock at Barry
was cut in November of that year. The docks are 114 acres in extent, and
have accommodation for the largest vessels afloat. Dock No. 1, opened on
the 18th of July 1889, is 73 acres (with a basin of 7 acres) and occupies
the eastern side of the old channel between the island and the mainland,
having a well-sheltered deep-sea entrance. There is good anchorage between
Barry and Sully islands. Dock No. 2 (34 acres) was opened on the 10th of
October 1898. There are 41 acres of timber-ponds and three large
graving-docks. For loading the coal there are thirty fixed and seven
movable coal-hoists. The total tonnage of the exports in 1906 was 9,757,380
(all of which, except 26,491 tons, was coal), and of the imports 506,103
tons.