BARRACKS (derived through the French from the Late Lat. _barra_, a bar),
the buildings used for the accommodation of military or naval forces,
including the quarters for officers, warrant officers, non-commissioned
officers and men, with their messes and recreation establishments,
regimental offices, shops, stores, stables, vehicle sheds and other
accessory buildings for military or domestic purposes. The term is usually
applied to permanent structures of brick or stone used for the peace
occupation of troops; but many hut barracks of corrugated iron lined with
wood have been built, generally in connexion with a training ground for
troops, and in these the accommodation given is somewhat less than in
permanent barracks, and conditions more nearly approach those of a military
encampment.

_British System_.--The accommodation to be given in British military
barracks is scheduled in the _Barrack Synopsis_, which contains "statements
of particulars, based upon decisions which have, from time to time, been
laid down by authority, as regards the military buildings authorized for
various units, and the accommodation and fittings to be provided in
connexion therewith." Each item of ordinary accommodation is described in
the synopsis, and the areas and cubic contents of rooms therein laid down
form the basis of the designs for any new barrack buildings. Supplementary
to the synopsis is a series of "Standard Plans," which illustrate how the
accommodation may be conveniently arranged; the object of the issue of
these plans is to put in convenient form the best points of previous
designs, and to avoid the necessity of making an entirely fresh design for
each building that is to be erected, by using the standard type modified to
suit local conditions. External appearance is considered with regard to the
materials to be used, and the position the buildings are to occupy;
convenience of plan and sound sanitary construction being the principal
objects rather than external effect, designs are usually simple, and depend
for architectural effect more on the grouping and balance of the parts than
on ornamentation such as would add to expense. The synopsis and standard
plans are from time to time revised, and brought up to date as improvements
suggest themselves, and increases in scale of accommodation are authorized,
after due consideration of the financial effect; so that systematic
evolution of barrack design is carried on.

_Modern British Barracks_.--A description of a modern barrack for a
battalion of infantry will give an idea of the standard of accommodation
which is now authorized, and to which older barracks are gradually
remodelled as funds permit. The unmarried soldiers are quartered in
barrack-rooms usually planned to contain twelve men in each; this number
forms a convenient division to suit the organization of the company, and is
more popular with the men than the larger numbers which were formerly the
rule in each barrack-room; there is a greater privacy, whilst the number is
not too small to keep up the feeling of barrack-room comradeship which
plays an important part in the soldier's training. The rooms give 600 cub.
ft. of air per man, and have windows on each side: the beds are spaced
between the windows so that only one bed comes in a corner, and not more
than two between any two windows: inlet ventilators are fixed high up in
the side walls, and an extract shaft warmed by the chimney flue keeps up a
circulation of air through the room: the door is usually at one end of the
room and the fireplace at the opposite end: over each man's bed is a locker
and shelf where he keeps his kit, and his rifle stands near the head of his
bed. Convenient of access from the door to the barrack-room is the
ablution-room with basins and foot-bath; also disconnected by a lobby is a
water-closet and urinal for night use, others for day use being provided in
separate external blocks. Baths are usually grouped in a central bath-house
adjacent to the cook-house, and have hot water laid on. For every two or
four barrack-rooms, a small single room is provided for the occupation of
the sergeant in charge, who is responsible for the safety of a small store,
where men may leave their rifle and kit when going on furlough. Adjacent to
the barrack blocks and next to the cook-house are arranged the dining-rooms
where the men assemble for their meals; no food is now served in the
barrack-rooms, and the air in them is thus kept much purer and fresher than
under the old system. The dining-rooms are lofty and well ventilated, and
are warmed by hot water; tables and forms are arranged so as to make the
most of the space, and room is provided for all the men to dine
simultaneously.

[Illustration: Barracks]

Next to the dining-room is the cook-house where the meals for a half
battalion are cooked, and served direct to the dining-rooms on each side.
Wash-up rooms are arranged off the serving-lobby with plate-racks and
shelves for the storage of the crockery after it has been washed. The
cooking apparatus is designed for economical use of coal fuel, and, if
carefully used, consumes little more than ½ lb of coal per man per day. The
cook-house is well lighted and ventilated by a top lantern; tables,
dressers, and pastry slab are provided for preparing and serving the meals,
and a sink for washing kitchen utensils. Under the kitchen block is a
basement containing the boiler for heating the dining-rooms and another for
the supply of hot water to baths and sinks, with in some cases also a
hot-air furnace for heating drying-rooms, for drying the men's clothing
when they come in wet from a route-march or field day. Not far from the
barrack blocks is placed the recreation establishment or soldiers' club,
where the rank and file may go for relaxation and amusement when off duty;
this establishment has, on the ground floor, a large and lofty room with a
stage at one end for lectures or entertainments, and at the other [v.03
p.0428] end is a supper bar, extending across the room, where mineral
waters and other light refreshments are sold; tables are also arranged for
suppers. A grocery shop is provided where the men and their families may
purchase goods bought under regimental arrangements at wholesale prices,
and sold without more profit than is necessary to keep the institution
self-supporting. On the first floor are billiard and games room,
reading-room and library, and writing-room. The manager's quarter and
kitchen premises complete the establishment. Near the recreation
establishment is the canteen, devoted solely to the sale of beer, and not
permitted to vie in attractiveness with the recreation establishment. A bar
is provided for the soldiers, a separate room for corporals, and a jug
department for the supply of the families; this building also has a
manager's quarter attached to it, and an office for the checking of
accounts.

For the senior non-commissioned officers a sergeants' mess is provided,
containing dining-room, reading-room and billiard-room, with kitchen
premises and liquor store, which also has a jug department for the
sergeants' families. The single non-commissioned officers have all their
meals in this mess, and the married members also use it as a club. The
warrant officers, and the proportion of non-commissioned officers and men
who are on the married establishment, are provided with accommodation at
some little distance from the men's barracks. In all recent schemes, on
open sites, self-contained cottages have been built, and these are more
popular than the older pattern of tenement buildings approached by common
staircases or verandahs. The warrant officers are allowed a living-room,
kitchen, and scullery, with three bedrooms and a bathroom. The married
soldiers have a living-room, scullery, and one, two, or three bedrooms
according to the size of their families. A laundry is provided adjacent to
the married quarters, equipped with washing-troughs, wringer,
drying-closet, and ironing-room; and the women are encouraged to use this
in preference to doing washing in their cottages.

_Officers' Quarters._--At a little distance from the men's barracks, and
usually looking over the parade or cricket ground, is the officers' mess.
This building has an entrance-hall with band alcove, where the band plays
on guest nights; on one side of the hall is the mess-room (or dining-room),
and on the other the anteroom (or reading-room), whilst the billiard-room
and kitchen are kept to the back so that lantern lights can be arranged
for. A mess office is provided, and all the accessories required for the
mess waiters' department, including pantry, plate-closet and cellarage, and
for the kitchen or mess-man's department, with also a quarter for the
mess-man. The officers' quarters are usually arranged in wings extending
the frontage of the mess building, and in a storey over the mess itself.
Each officer has a large room, part of which is partitioned off for a
bedroom, and the field officers are allowed two rooms. The soldier servant,
told off to each officer, has a small room allotted for cleaning purposes,
and bathrooms, supplied with hot water from the mess kitchen, are centrally
situated. A detached house, containing three sitting-rooms, seven bed- and
dressing-rooms, bathroom, kitchen, servants' hall, and the usual
accessories, is provided for the commanding officer: also a smaller house,
having two sitting-rooms, four bedrooms, bath, kitchen, &c., for the
quartermaster. Other regimental married officers are not provided for, and
have to arrange to house themselves, a lodging allowance being usually
granted.

_Regimental Accessories._--Apart from the buildings providing
accommodation, others are required for administrative and military
purposes. These are the guard house and regimental offices, the small-arm
ammunition store, the fire-engine house, the drill and gymnastic hall, and
the medical inspection block with dispensary, where the sick are seen by a
medical officer and either prescribed for or sent into hospital, as may be
necessary. Stables are provided for the officers' and transport horses, and
a vehicle shed and storehouse for the mobilization equipment. Stores are
required for bread, meat, coal, clothing, and for musketry, signalling, and
general small stores under the quartermaster's charge--also workshops for
armourers, carpenters, plumbers, painters and glaziers, shoemakers, and
tailors. Mention of the fives court, recreation ground and parade ground
completes the description of a battalion barrack.

_Cavalry Barracks._--The accommodation provided for cavalry is very similar
to that already described for infantry. The barrack blocks are arranged to
suit the organization of the regiment, and are placed so that the men can
turn out readily and get to their horses. Detached buildings are provided
for cavalry troop stables, one block for the horses of each troop. Formerly
stables were often built for convenience with the barrack-rooms over them;
but this system has been abandoned on sanitary grounds, to the benefit of
both men and horses. Each horse is given 1500 cub. ft. of air space, the
horses' heads are turned to the outer walls, and provision is made, by
traversed air-ducts below the mangers, for fresh air to be supplied to the
horses while lying down. Above the horses' heads are windows which are
arranged to open inwards, being hinged at the bottom and fitted with hopper
checks to avoid direct draught. Ridge ventilation and skylights are given,
so that all parts of the stable are well lighted and airy.

Cast-iron mangers and hay-racks are provided, and the horses are separated
by bails, with chains to manger brackets and heel posts; saddle brackets
are fixed to the heel posts. Each stable has a troop store, where spare
saddles and gear are kept; also an expense forage store, in which the day's
ration, after issue in bulk from the forage barn, is kept until it is given
out in feeds. The stables are paved with blue Staffordshire paving bricks,
graded to a collecting channel carrying the drainage well clear of the
building, before it is taken into a gully.

The space between the blocks of stables is paved with cement concrete to
form a yard, and horse-troughs, litter-sheds and dung-pits are provided.
Officers' stables are built in separate blocks, and usually have only one
row of stalls; the stalls are divided by partitions, and separate
saddle-rooms are provided. Stalls and loose boxes in infirmary stables give
2000 cub. ft. of air space per horse and are placed at some distance from
the troop stables in a separate enclosure. A forge and shoeing shed is
provided in a detached block near the troop stables. A forage barn and
granary is usually built to hold a fortnight's supply, and a chaff-cutter
driven by horse power is fixed close by. Cavalry regiments each have a
large covered riding school, and a number of open _manèges_, for exercise
and riding instruction.

_Artillery, &c._--The accommodation provided for horse and field artillery
is arranged to suit their organization in batteries and brigades, and is
generally similar to that already described, with the addition of vehicle
sheds for guns and ammunition wagons, and special shops for wheelers and
saddlers. Accommodation for other units follows the general lines already
laid down, but has to be arranged to suit the particular organization and
requirements of each unit.

_Garrison Accessories._--In every large military station in addition to the
regimental buildings which have been described, a number of buildings and
works are required for the service of the garrison generally. _Military
hospitals_ are established at home and abroad for the treatment of sick
officers and soldiers as well as their wives and families. Military
hospitals are classified as follows:--First-grade hospitals are large
central hospitals serving important districts. These hospitals are complete
in themselves and fully equipped for the carrying out of operations of all
kinds; they generally contain wards for officers, and may have attached to
them separate isolation hospitals for the treatment of infectious cases,
and military families' hospitals for women and children. Second-grade
hospitals are smaller in size and less fully equipped, but are capable of
acting independently and have operation rooms. Third-grade hospitals or
reception stations are required for small stations principally, to act as
feeders to the large hospitals, and to deal with accident and
non-transportable cases. The principles of construction of military
hospitals do not differ materially from the best modern civil practice; all
are now built on the pavilion system with connecting corridors arranged so
as to interfere as little as possible with the free circulation of air
between the blocks. The site is carefully selected and enclosed with
railings. The administration block [v.03 p.0429] is centrally placed, with
ward blocks on each side, and accessory buildings placed where most
convenient; the isolation wards are in a retired position and divided off
from the hospital enclosure. Ward blocks usually have two storeys, and the
ordinary large wards provide 1200 cub. ft. of air space per patient. A due
proportion of special case and other special wards is arranged in which the
space per patient is greater or less, as necessary.

_Army schools_ are built to give slightly more liberal accommodation than
is laid down as the minimum by the Board of Education, but the principles
of planning are much the same as in civil elementary schools. Schools are
usually placed between the married quarters and the barracks, so as to
serve both for the instruction of the men, when working for educational
certificates, and for the education of the children of the married
soldiers. _Garrison churches_ are built when arrangements for the troops to
attend divine service at neighbouring places of worship cannot well be
made. Only two _military prisons_ now remain, viz. Dover and Curragh, and
these are for soldiers discharged from the service with ignominy. For
ordinary sentences _detention barracks_ and _branch detention barracks_ are
attached to the military commands and districts: these are constructed in
accordance with the home office regulations; but crime in the army
fortunately continues to decrease, and little accommodation has recently
been added. Barrack expense stores for the issue of bedding, utensils and
other stores for which the troops depend upon the Army Service Corps, are
necessary in all barracks; and in large stations a supply depot for the
issue of provisions, with abattoir and bakery attached to it, may be
necessary. An engineer office with building yard and workshops to deal with
the ordinary duties in connexion with the upkeep of War Department property
is required at every station, and for large stations such as Aldershot, it
may be necessary to undertake special water supply schemes, works for
disposal of sewage, and for the supply of electricity or gas for lighting
the barracks. The system of roads, pipes and mains within the barracks are
in all cases maintained by the Royal Engineers, as well as the buildings
themselves. District and brigade offices are necessary for the
administration of large units, and quarters for the general officer
commanding and the headquarters staff may sometimes be required.

_Location of Barracks_.--The selection of a healthy site for a barrack
building or new military station is a matter of great importance. In the
earlier days of barrack construction, barracks were, for political reasons,
usually built in large towns, where troops would be at hand for putting
down disturbances, and cramped and inconvenient buildings of many storeys,
were erected on a small piece of ground often surrounded by the worst slums
of the city; such, for example, were the Ship Street barracks in Dublin,
and the cavalry barracks at Hulme, Manchester. Worse still were cases where
an existing building, such as the Linen Hall in Dublin, was purchased, and
converted into barracks with little regard for the convenience of the
occupants, and a total disregard for the need of a free circulation of pure
air in and about the buildings, which is the first condition of health. In
the present day, except in a few cases where strong local influence is
allowed to prevail to retain troops in towns, where their presence, and
perhaps the money they spend, are appreciated for patriotic or other
motives, every opportunity is taken to move troops from the vicinity of
crowded towns, and quarter them in barracks or hutments built in the open
country. Due regard can then be given to sanitary location, and military
training can more effectively be carried out. With improvements in
communication by rail, road and telegraph, support to the civil power in
case of disturbance can always be afforded in good time, without
permanently stationing troops in the actual locality where their assistance
may be needed. It has been recognized ever since the Crimean War, that the
leading principle of barrack policy must, in the future, be to facilitate
in peace time the training of the army for war, and that this can only be
done by quartering troops in large bodies, including all branches of the
service, in positions where they have space for training, gun and rifle
practice, and manoeuvring. The camps at Aldershot, Colchester, Shorncliffe
and Curragh were accordingly started between 1856 and 1860, and the same
policy has since been continued by the acquisition of Strensall Common,
near York, Kilworth domain, near Fermoy, the lease of a portion of Dartmoor
and a large area at Glen Imaal in Co. Wicklow, and the purchase of the
Stobs estate in Scotland and of a large part of Salisbury Plain.

_Barrack Construction_.--The history of barrack construction in Great
Britain is an interesting study, but can only be touched on briefly. As
long as operations in the field were carried on by troops levied especially
for the war in hand, no barracks apart from fortifications were required,
except those for the royal bodyguard; and even after the standing army
exceeded those limits, the necessity for additional barracks was often
avoided by having recourse to the device of billeting, _i.e._ quartering
the soldiers on the populations of the towns where they were posted. This,
however, was a device burdensome to the people, subversive of discipline,
and prejudicial to military efficiency in many ways, while it exposed the
scattered soldiers to many temptations to disloyalty. Hence barracks were
gradually provided, at first in places where such an arrangement was most
necessary owing to the paucity of the population, or where concentration of
troops was most important, owing to the disaffection of some of the
inhabitants. The earliest barracks of which there is any record as regards
England, were those for the foot guards, erected in 1660. Among the
earliest of those still existing are the Royal Barracks at Dublin, dating
from 1700, and during the 18th century barracks were built in several parts
of Ireland; but in England it was at the end of the 18th and beginning of
the 19th century that most of the earlier barracks were constructed. So
long as barracks were mainly in connexion with fortresses their
construction naturally fell to the duty of the King's Engineers, afterwards
the Corps of Engineers, working under the master-general of the ordnance.
About 1796, however, a special civil department was formed under the
commissioners for the affairs of barracks, to deal with barracks apart from
fortifications. In 1816 we find a warrant appointing a civilian comptroller
of the barrack department to deal with the erection and upkeep of barracks
and barrack hospitals not within fortified places. This warrant gives one
of the earliest records of the nature of accommodation provided, and a few
extracts from it are worth notice. No definite regulations as to cubic or
floor space per man are laid down; but in the infantry, twelve men, and in
the cavalry, eight men are allotted to one room. "Bedsteads or berths" are
allowed, "a single one to each man, or a double one to two men," or
"hammocks where necessary." The married soldier's wife is barely
recognized, as shown by the following extract:--"The Comptroller of the
barrack department may, if he sees fit, and when it in no shape interferes
with or straitens the accommodation of the men, permit (as an occasional
indulgence, and as tending to promote cleanliness, and the convenience of
the soldier) four married women per troop or company of sixty men, and six
per troop or company of a hundred men, to be resident within the barracks;
but no one article shall on this account be furnished by the
barrack-masters, upon any consideration whatever. And if the
barrack-masters perceive that any mischief, or damage, arises from such
indulgence, the commanding officer shall, on their representation, displace
such women. Nor shall any dogs be suffered to be kept in the rooms of any
barrack or hospital." Another regulation says: "Where kitchens are provided
for the soldiers, they shall not be allowed to dress their provisions in
any other places." In about 1818 the civil barrack department was abolished
on account of abuses which had grown up, and the duke of Wellington as
master-general of the ordnance and commander-in-chief transferred to the
corps of Royal Engineers the duties of construction and maintenance of
barracks. In 1826 a course of practical architecture was started at the
school of military engineering at Chatham under Lieutenant-Colonel
(afterwards Sir Charles) Pasley, the first commandant of the school, who
himself wrote an outline of the course. Wellington interested himself in
the [v.03 p.0430] barrack question, and under his orders single iron
bedsteads were substituted for the wooden berths, two tiers high, in which
two men slept in the same bed, then a certain cubical space per man was
allotted, and cook-houses and ablution-rooms were added. Next, sergeants'
messes were started, and ball courts allowed for the recreation of the men.
It was not, however, till after the Crimean War that public attention was
directed by the report dated 1857 of the royal commission on the sanitary
state of the army, to the high death-rate, and certain sanitary defects in
barracks and hospitals, such as overcrowding, defective ventilation, bad
drainage and insufficient means of cooking and cleanliness, to which this
excessive mortality was among other causes assigned.

In 1857 a commission appointed for improving the sanitary condition of
barracks and hospitals made an exhaustive inspection of the barracks in the
United Kingdom, and reported in 1861. This was followed by similar
commissions to examine the barracks in the Mediterranean stations and in
India. These commissions, besides making valuable recommendations for the
improvement of almost every barrack inspected by them, laid down the
general sanitary principles applicable to the arrangement and construction
of military barracks and hospitals; and in spite of the lapse of time, the
reports repay close study by any one interested in sanitary science as
applied to the construction and improvement of such buildings. The names of
Sidney Herbert (afterwards Lord Herbert of Lea), Captain (afterwards Sir
Douglas) Gallon, R.E., and John Sutherland, M.D., stand out prominently
among those who contributed to the work. The commission was constituted a
standing body in 1862, and continues its work to the present day, under the
name of the Army Sanitary Committee, which advises the secretary of state
for war on all sites for new barracks or hospitals, also upon type plans,
especially as to sanitary details, and principles of sanitary construction
and fitments. A definite standard of accommodation was laid down, which
formed the basis of the first issue of the _Barrack Synopsis_ in 1865. A
general order dated 1845 had directed that a space of 450 to 500 cub. ft.
per man should be provided in all new barracks at home stations; but this
had not been applied in existing barracks or buildings appropriated as
such, and when detailed examination was made, it was found that some men
had actually less than 250 cub. ft., and out of accommodation for nominally
76,813 soldiers, 2003 only had 600 cub. ft. per man, which was the minimum
scale now laid down by the royal commission of 1857. To give every soldier
his allotted amount of 600 cub. ft., meant a reduction in accommodation of
the barracks by nearly one-third the number. Many buildings were condemned
as being entirely unsuitable for use as barracks; in other cases
improvements were possible by alterations to buildings and opening-up of
sites. Ventilation of the rooms was greatly improved, cook-houses,
ablution-rooms and sanitary accessories were carefully examined and a
proper scale laid down. Separate quarters for the married soldiers did not
exist in many barracks, and in some instances married men's beds were found
in the men's barrack-rooms without even a screen to separate them; in other
cases, married people were accommodated together in a barrack-room, with
only a blanket hung on a cord as a screen between the different families.
The recommendations of the committee resulted in a single room being
allotted to all married soldiers, and this accommodation has gradually
improved up to the comfortable cottage now provided.

From the time of this first thorough inquiry into barrack accommodation,
steady and systematic progress has been made. Although lack of funds has
always hampered rapid progress, and keeps the accommodation actually
existing below the standard aimed at, much has been done to improve the
soldiers' condition in this respect. Numerous regimental depots and other
barracks were built under the Military Forces Localization Act of 1872. The
Barracks Act of 1890 replaced the worn-out huts at Aldershot, Colchester,
Shorncliffe and Curragh by convenient and sanitary permanent buildings, and
further additions and improvements have been made under the Military Works
Acts of 1897, 1899 and 1901. As some evidence of the practical result of
the care and money that has been expended on this work, it is interesting
to note that while, in 1857, the annual rate of mortality in the army at
home per 1000 men was 17.5 (compared with 9.2 for the civil male population
of corresponding age), forty years later, in 1897, the rate of mortality in
the army was only 3.42 per 1000. No doubt, improved barrack accommodation
contributed greatly to this result. Barrack construction work remained in
the hands of the Corps of Royal Engineers until 1904, when a civil
department was again formed under an architect styled "director of barrack
construction," to deal with the construction of barracks at home stations,
and the construction and maintenance of military hospitals.

_British Colonial_.--Barracks at colonial stations are governed by the
general scale of accommodation in the _Barrack Synopsis_, modified
according to the climate of the station, in the direction of increase in
floor area and height of rooms. In the planning of rooms for occupation in
tropical or sub-tropical countries provision has to be made for the freest
possible circulation of air through the buildings. The walls have to be
protected by verandahs from the direct rays of the sun, and the special
local domestic arrangements have to be taken into consideration. For
example, in hot countries it is usually undesirable to have kitchens
directly attached to the dwelling-houses, sanitary arrangements vary
according to the method's adopted, and in some cases it is necessary to
provide a free circulation of air below the ground floors of all inhabited
buildings by raising them off the ground some 4 ft. The aspect of the
buildings will usually be arranged so as to catch the prevailing wind, and
the mode of construction varies greatly according to the custom and
resources of the country.

_Indian Barracks_.--In India, barracks for the British troops are built by
the Royal Engineer officers detailed for military work duties, assisted by
military foremen, who pass through the civil engineering colleges, and by a
native subordinate staff. The scale of accommodation to be provided is laid
down in the Indian army regulations, and is for the private soldier more
liberal than is allowed by the home government for any of the colonial
stations. The barrack-rooms are lofty and airy, with verandahs all round,
and clerestory windows. Roofs are usually of double tiling. The allowance
of space is 90 sq. ft. per man in rooms 16 ft. high, with, in addition, a
day room adjoining for the use of the men for their meals or as a
sitting-room. Recreation establishments are liberally provided for, and
other means of recreation, such as bowling and skittle alleys, fives
courts, plunge baths and cricket grounds, are given. Separate blocks of
married quarters are provided, and schools for the children. Hospital
accommodation on a higher scale than at home is necessary; but hill
sanatoria have in recent years done much to improve the health of the
troops by giving change of air, during the hot weather, to a large
proportion of the men and families. Piped water supplies have replaced the
old wells at many stations, and attention is being directed to improved
cooking and sanitary arrangements.

_Naval Barracks_.--In recent years, large naval barracks have been built,
notably at Portsmouth, Chatham and Devonport. These differ from military
barracks principally in that they keep up the system of board-ship life to
which the men are accustomed. Large barrack-rooms are provided with caulked
floors like ships' decks, and have rows of hammocks slung across them;
these are stowed in the day-time, when the rooms are used as mess-rooms.
Ablution and sanitary arrangements are grouped together on the basement
floors. Fine recreation establishments and canteens have been built. The
officers' messes have splendid public rooms, but the officers' quarters are
not so large as in military barracks, though no doubt spacious to the naval
officer, accustomed as he is to a small cabin. Married quarters for the men
are not provided except in connexion with coastguard stations.

_Other Countries_.--A great number of the German and French barracks are
erected in the form of a large block of three or four storeys containing
all the accommodation and accessories for officers, married and single
non-commissioned officers and men, of a complete battalion or regiment in
one building. Some of the [v.03 p.0431] modern barracks, however, are
arranged more on the pavilion system with separate blocks; but the single
block system is well liked on account of its compactness and the facility
it gives for supervision; it is also more satisfactory from the
architectural point of view. The system of allotment and arrangement of
accommodation for these two great armies does not differ much, except in
detail, from that adopted by the British army. The floor and cubic space
allotted per man is a little less; accommodation for officers is not
usually provided, except to a limited extent, unless the barracks are on a
country site. The German army, however, now provides every regiment with a
fine officers' mess-house furnished at the public expense. Married quarters
for some of the non-commissioned officers are provided, but not for
privates. American barracks are interesting, as providing for perhaps a
higher class of recruit than usual; they are well designed and superior
finish internally is given. The barracks are arranged usually on the
separate block system, and centre round a post-exchange or soldiers' club,
which is a combined recreation establishment, gymnasium and sergeants'
mess, with bath-house attached. Canteens for the sale of liquor were
abolished in 1901.

See _The Barrack Synopsis_ (1905); _The Handbook of Design and Construction
of Military Buildings_ (1905); _The Army Regulations, India_, vol. xii.

(E. N. S.)