BARTON, ELIZABETH (_c._ 1506-1534), "the maid of Kent," was, according to
her own statement, born in 1506 at Aldington, Kent. She appears to have
been a neurotic girl, subject to epilepsy, and an illness in her nineteenth
year resulted in hysteria and religious mania. She was at the time a
servant in the house of Thomas Cobb, steward of an estate near Aldington
owned by William Warham, archbishop of Canterbury. During her convalescence
she passed into trances lasting for days at a time, and in this state her
ravings were of such "marvellous holiness in rebuke of sin and vice" that
the country folk believed her to be inspired. Cobb reported the matter to
Richard Masters, the parish priest, who in turn acquainted Archbishop
Warham. The girl having recovered, and finding herself the object of local
admiration, was cunning enough, as she confessed at her trial, to feign
trances, during which she continued her prophecies. Her fame steadily
growing, the archbishop in 1526 instructed the prior of Christ Church,
Canterbury, to send two of his monks to hold an inquiry into the case. One
of these latter, Edward Bocking, obtained her admission as a nun to St
Sepulchre's convent, Canterbury. Under Bocking's instruction Barton's
prophecies became still more remarkable, and attracted many pilgrims, who
believed her to be, as she asserted, in direct communication with the
Virgin Mary. Her utterances were cunningly directed towards political
matters, and a profound and widespread sensation was caused by her
declaration that should Henry persist in his intention of divorcing
Catherine he "should no longer be king of this realm ... and should die a
villain's death." Even such men as Fisher, bishop of Rochester, and Sir
Thomas More, corresponded with Barton. On his return from France in 1532
Henry passed through Canterbury and is said to have allowed the nun to
force herself into his presence, when she made an attempt to terrify him
into abandoning his marriage. After its solemnization in May 1533. her
utterances becoming still more treasonable, she was examined before Cranmer
(who had in March succeeded to the archbishopric on Warham's death) and
confessed. On the 25th of September Bocking and another monk, Hadley, were
arrested, and in November, Masters and others were implicated. The maid and
her fellow prisoners were examined before the Star Chamber, and were by its
order publicly exposed at St Paul's Cross, where they each read a
confession. In January 1534 by a bill of attainder the maid and her chief
accomplices were condemned to death, and were executed at Tyburn on the
20th of April. It has been held that her confession was extracted by force,
and therefore valueless, but the evidence of her imposture seems
conclusive.

See Froude, _History of England_; Burnet, _History of the Reformation_;
Lingard, _History of England_; F. A. Gasquet, _Henry VIII. [v.03 p.0453]
and the English Monasteries_ (ch. iii. 1899 ed.); T. E. Bridgett, _Life of
Blessed John Fisher_ (1888); vols. vi. and vii. of _Letters and Papers of
Henry VIII._; James Gairdner, _The English Church in the 16th Century_
(1899); Strype, _Memorials_, I. i. 271, and _Cranmer_; a detailed account
of the case is contained in the published Act of Attainder 25 Henry VIII.
c. 12.