BARTHEZ, or BARTHÈS, PAUL JOSEPH (1734-1806), French physician, was born on
the 11th of December 1734 at Montpellier. He was educated at Narbonne and
Toulouse, and began the study of medicine at Montpellier in 1750, taking
his doctor's degree in 1753. In 1756 he obtained the appointment of
physician to the military hospital in Normandy attached to the army of
observation commanded by Marshal d'Estrées, but a severe attack of hospital
fever compelled him to leave this post. In 1757 his services were required
in the medical staff of the army of Westphalia, where he had the rank of
consulting physician, and on his return to Paris he acted as joint editor
of the _Journal des savants_ and the _Encyclopédie méthodique_. In 1759 he
obtained a medical professorship at Montpellier, and in 1774 he was created
joint chancellor of the university. In 1778 he published his most famous
work, _Nouveaux élémens de la science de l'homme_, in which he employs the
expression "vital principle" as a convenient term for the cause of the
phenomena of life, without committing himself to either a spiritualistic or
a materialistic view of its nature. Taking the degree of doctor of civil
law in 1780, he secured the appointment of counsellor to the Supreme Court
of Aids at Montpellier, but he soon took up his residence in Paris, having
been nominated consulting physician to the king.

On the outbreak of the French Revolution he lost much of his fortune and
retired to Carcassonne, where he devoted himself to the study of
theoretical medicine. It was from this retreat that he gave to the world
his _Nouvelle mécanique des mouvemens de l'homme et des animaux_, which
appeared in 1798. In 1802 he published his _Traitement des maladies
goutteuses_, and he afterwards occupied himself in preparing for the press
a new edition of his _Élémens de la science de l'homme_, of which he just
lived to see the publication. His health had been declining for some years
before his death, which took place soon after his removal to Paris, on the
15th of October 1806. He bequeathed his books and manuscripts to J. Lordat,
who published two volumes of his _Consultations de médecine_ in 1810. His
_Traité du beau_ was also published posthumously in 1807.