BARTOLOMMEI, MARQUIS FERDINANDO (1821-1869), Italian revolutionist and
statesman, who played an important part in the political events of Tuscany
from 1848 to 1860. From the beginning of the revolutionary movement
Bartolommei was always an ardent Liberal, and although belonging to an old
and [v.03 p.0451] noble Florentine family his sympathies were with the
democratic party rather than with the moderately liberal aristocracy. In
1847-1848 his house was a centre of revolutionary committees, and during
the brief constitutional _régime_ he was much to the fore. After the return
of the grand duke Leopold II. in 1849 under Austrian protection,
Bartolommei was present at a requiem service in the church of Santa Croce
for those who fell in the late campaign against Austria; on that occasion
disorders occurred and he was relegated to his country estate in
consequence (1851). Shortly afterwards he was implicated in the
distribution of seditious literature and exiled from Tuscany for a year. He
settled at Turin for a time and established relations with Cavour and the
Piedmontese liberals. He subsequently visited France and England, and like
many Italian patriots became enamoured of British institutions. He returned
to Florence in 1853; from that time onward he devoted himself to the task
of promoting the ideas of Italian independence and unity among the people,
and although carefully watched by the police, he kept a secret
printing-press in his palace in Florence. Finding that the nobility still
hesitated at the idea of uncompromising hostility to the house of Lorraine,
he allied himself more firmly with the popular party, and found an able
lieutenant in the baker Giuseppe Dolfi (1818-1869), an honest and
whole-hearted enthusiast who had great influence with the common people. As
soon as war between Piedmont and Austria appeared imminent, Bartolommei
organized the expedition of Tuscan volunteers to join the Piedmontese army,
spending large sums out of his own pocket for the purpose, and was also
president of the Tuscan branch of the Società Nazionale (see under LA
FARINA and CAVOUR). He worked desperately hard conspiring for the overthrow
of the grand duke, assisted by all the liberal elements, and on the 27th of
April 1859, Florence rose as one man, the troops refused to fire on the
people, and the grand duke departed, never to return. _Sapristi! pas un
carreau cassé!_ was the comment of the French minister to Tuscany on this
bloodless revolution. A provisional government was formed and Bartolommei
elected gonfaloniere. He had much opposition to encounter from those who
still believed that the retention of the grand duke as a constitutional
sovereign and member of an Italian confederation was possible. In the
summer elections were held, and on the meeting of parliament Bartolommei's
Unitarian views prevailed, the assembly voting the resolution that the
house of Lorraine had forfeited its rights and that Tuscany must be united
to Italy under King Victor Emmanuel. Bartolommei was made senator of the
Italian kingdom and received various other honours. His last years were
spent in educational and philanthropic work. He died on the 15th of June
1869, leaving a widow and two daughters.

The best biography of Bartolommei is contained in _Il Rivolgimento Toscano
e l'azione popolare_, by his daughter Matilde Gioli (Florence, 1905), but
the author attributes perhaps an undue preponderance to her father in the
Tuscan revolution, and is not quite fair towards Bettino Ricasoli (_q.v._)
and other leaders of the aristocratic party. Cf. _Lettere e documenti di B.
Ricasoli_ (Florence, 1887-1896), and D. Zanichelli's _Lettere politiche di
B. Ricasoli, U. Peruzzi, N. Corsini, e C. Ridolfi_ (Bologna, 1898).