BARTHÉLEMY, AUGUSTE MARSEILLE (1796-1867), French satirical poet, was born
at Marseilles in 1796. His name can hardly be separated from that of his
friend and compatriot, J. P. A. Méry (1798-1866), with whom he carried on
so intimate a collaboration that it is not possible to distinguish their
personalities in their joint works. After having established some local
reputation as a poet, Barthélemy went to Paris, where by one of his first
efforts, _Le Sacre de Charles X_ (1825) he gained the favour of the court.
His energies, however, were soon enlisted in the service of the opposition
party. In 1825 appeared a clever political satire, _Les Sidiennes_,
followed by _La Villéliade ou la prise du château de Rivoli_ (1827), _La
Corbiéréide_ (1827), _La Peyronnéide_ (1827), the joint productions of
Barthélemy and Méry. The success was immediate and pronounced; fifteen
editions of the _Villéliade_ were called for during the year. A rapid
succession of political squibs and satires was now poured forth by the
authors, among the most remarkable being _Biographie des quarante de
l'académie française_ (1826) and _Napoléon en Égypte_ (1828), which passed
through nearly a dozen editions in a year. In 1829 Barthélemy was
imprisoned and fined 1000 francs for the publication of their _Fils de
l'homme_, a poem on the duke of Reichstadt, Napoleon's son. The Revolution
of 1830 liberated him; and in company with Méry, he celebrated the triumph
of the people in one of their most brilliant efforts, _L'Insurrection_.
From March 1831 to April 1832 they produced a series of verse satires
issued weekly, the _Némésis_, attacking the government and ministers of
Louis Philippe. The small pension of which Barthélemy was the recipient was
stopped. When the publication ceased there was a strong suspicion that
Barthélemy had been paid for his silence. In 1832 he published an anonymous
poem, supporting some acts of the government which were peculiarly
obnoxious to the Liberal party. This change of front destroyed his
influence and his later writings passed unnoticed. For the next few years
he enjoyed a handsome pension from the government and refrained from all
satirical writing. He again resumed his old style in 1844 but without the
former success. From that date he contented himself with merely occasional
poems. Barthélemy died on the 23rd of August 1867 at Marseilles. Joseph
Méry was an ardent romanticist and wrote a great number of stories now
forgotten. He produced several pieces at the Paris theatres, and also
collaborated with Gérard de Nerval in adaptations from Shakespeare and in
other plays. He received a pension from Napoleon III. and died in Paris on
the 16th of June 1866.

The _Oeuvres_ of Barthélemy and Méry were collected, with a notice by L.
Reybaud, in 1831 (4 vols.). See also _Barthélemy et Méry étudiés
spécialement dans leurs rapports avec la légende napoléonienne_, by Jules
Garsou in vol. lviii. of the Mémoires of the Académie Royale ... de
Belgique, which contains full information on both authors.