BARTHÉLEMY, JEAN JACQUES (1716-1795) French writer and numismatist, was
born on the 20th of January 1716 at Cassis, in Provence. He was educated
first at the college of the Oratory in Marseilles, and afterwards at that
of the Jesuits in the same city. While studying for the priesthood, which
he intended to join, he devoted much attention to oriental languages, and
was introduced by his friend M. Gary of Marseilles to the study of
classical antiquities, particularly in the department of numismatics. In
1744 he went to Paris with a letter of introduction to M. Gros de Boze,
perpetual secretary of the Academy of Inscriptions and Belles-lettres and
keeper of the royal collection of medals. He became assistant to de Boze,
on whose death (1753) he became keeper of the medals. In 1755 he
accompanied the French ambassador, M. de Stainville, afterwards duc de
Choiseul, to Italy, where he spent three years in archaeological research.
Choiseul had a great regard for Barthélemy, and on his return to France,
Barthélemy became an inmate of his house, and received valuable preferments
from his patron. In 1789, after the publication of his _Voyage du jeune
Anacharsis_, he was elected a member of the French Academy. During the
Revolution Barthélemy was arrested as an aristocrat. The Committee of
Public Safety, however, were no sooner informed by the duchess of Choiseul
of the arrest, than they gave orders for his immediate release, and in 1793
he was nominated librarian of the Bibliothèque Nationale. He refused this
post but resumed his old functions as keeper of medals, and enriched the
national collection by many valuable accessions. Barthélemy died on the
30th of April 1795.

Barthélemy was the author of a number of learned works on antiquarian
subjects, but the great work on which his fame rests is _Voyage du jeune
Anacharsis en Grèce, vers le milieu du quatrième siècle avant l'ère
chrétienne_ (4 vols., 1787). He had begun it in 1757 and had been working
on it for thirty years. The hero, a young Scythian descended from the
famous philosopher Anacharsis, is supposed to repair to Greece for
instruction in his early youth, and after making the tour of her republics,
colonies and islands, to return to his native country and write this book
in his old age, after the Macedonian hero had overturned the Persian
empire. In the manner of modern travellers, he gives an account of the
customs, government and antiquities of the country he is supposed to have
visited; a copious introduction supplies whatever may be wanting in respect
to historical details; whilst various dissertations on the music of the
Greeks, on the literature of the Athenians, and on the economy, pursuits,
ruling passions, manners and customs of the surrounding states supply ample
[v.03 p.0449] information on the subjects of which they treat. Modern
scholarship has superseded most of the details in the _Voyage_, but the
author himself did not imagine his book to be a register of accurately
ascertained facts; he rather intended to afford to his countrymen, in an
interesting form, some knowledge of Greek civilization. The _Charicles_ of
W. A. Becker is an attempt in a similar direction, but, though superior in
scholarship, it wants the charm of style of the _Anacharsis_.

Barthélémy's correspondence with Paolo Paciaudi, chiefly on antiquarian
subjects, was edited with the _Correspondance inédite du comte de Caylus_
in 1877 by Ch. Nisard; his letters to the comte de Caylus were published by
Antoine Serieys as _Voyage en Italie_ (1801); and his letters to Mme du
Deffand, with whom he was on intimate terms, in the _Correspondance
complète de Mme du Deffand avec la duchesse de Choiseul, l'abbé Barthélemy
et M. Craufurt_ (3 vols., 1866), edited by the marquis de Sainte-Aulaire.
See also _Mémoires sur la vie de l'abbé Barthélemy, écrits par lui-même_
(1824), with a notice by Lalande. His _Oeuvres complètes_ (4 vols. 1821),
contain a notice by Villenave.