BARYTES, a widely distributed mineral composed of barium sulphate (BaSO_4).
Its most striking feature and the one from which it derives its name
barytes, barite (from the Greek [Greek: barus] heavy) or heavy spar, is its
weight. Its specific gravity of 4.5 is about twice as great as that of salt
and of many other colourless, transparent and glassy minerals not unlike
barytes in general appearance. The mineral is usually found in a state of
considerable chemical purity, though small amounts of strontium and calcium
sulphates may isomorphously replace the barium sulphate: ammonium sulphate
is also sometimes present, whilst clay, silica, bituminous matter, &c., may
be enclosed as impurities.

[Illustration]

Crystals of barytes are orthorhombic and isomorphous with the strontium and
lead sulphates (celestite and anglesite); they are usually very perfectly
developed and present great variety of form. The simplest are rhomb-shaped
tables (fig. 1) bounded by the two faces of the basal pinacoid (_c_) and
the four faces of the prism (_m_); the angle between the prism-faces (_mm_)
is 78° 23', whilst that between _c_ and _m_ is 90°. The mineral has a very
perfect cleavage parallel to the faces _c_ and _m_, and the cleavage
surfaces are perfectly smooth and bright. The crystals of prismatic habit
represented in figs. 2 and 3 are bounded by the domes _d_ and _f_ and the
basal pinacoid _c_; fig. 4 is a plan of a still more complex crystal.
Twinning is represented only by twin-lamellae, which are parallel to the
planes _m_ and _f_ and are of secondary origin, having been produced by
pressure.

Crystals of barytes may be transparent and colourless, or white and opaque,
or of a yellow, brown, bluish or greenish colour. Well developed crystals
are extremely common, but the mineral occurs also in a granular, earthy, or
stalactitic condition. It is known as cawk in the Derbyshire lead mines.
The "crested" or "cock's comb" barytes occurs as rounded aggregations of
thin lamellar crystals.

Barytes is of common occurrence in metalliferous veins, especially those
which yield ores of lead and silver; some of the largest and most perfect
crystals of colourless barytes were obtained from the lead mines near
Dufton in Westmorland. It is found also in beds of iron ore, and the
haematite mines of the Cleator Moor district in west Cumberland have
yielded many extremely fine crystals, specimens of which may be seen in all
mineral collections. In the neighbourhood of Nottingham, and other places
in the Midlands, barytes forms a cementing material in the Triassic
sandstones; amber-coloured crystals of the same mineral are found in the
fuller's earth at Nutfield in Surrey; and the septarian nodules in London
Clay contain crystals of barytes as well as of calcite. Crystals are found
as a rarity in the amygdaloidal cavities of igneous rocks.

Artificially prepared crystals of barytes may be obtained by allowing a
solution of a soluble barium salt to diffuse slowly into a solution of a
soluble sulphate. Barium chloride is present in some natural waters, and
when this is the case the interaction of sulphates results in a deposition
of barytes, as has occurred in the pipes and water-boxes of the
Newcastle-on-Tyne coal mines.

Commercially, barytes is used in the preparation of barium compounds, as a
body for certain kinds of paper and cloth, and as a white pigment
("permanent white"). The finely powdered and washed mineral is too
crystalline and consequently of insufficient opacity to be used alone as a
paint, and is therefore mixed with "white lead," of which material it is
also used as an adulterant.

(L. J. S.)

[Illustration]