BASALT, in petrology, one of the oldest rock names, supposed to be derived
from an Ethiopian word _basal_, signifying a stone which yields iron;
according to Pliny, the first basalts were obtained in Ethiopia. In current
usage the term includes a large variety of types of igneous rock belonging
to the basic subdivision, dark in colour weathering to brown, and
comparatively rich in magnesia and iron. Some basalts are in large measure
glassy (tachylites), and many are very fine grained and compact; but it is
more usual for them to exhibit porphyritic structure, showing larger
crystals of olivine, augite or felspar in a finely crystalline groundmass.
Olivine and augite are the commonest porphyritic minerals in basalts, the
former green or yellowish (and weathering to green or brown serpentine),
the latter pitch-black. Porphyritic plagioclase felspars, however, are also
very common, and may be one or two inches in length, though usually not
exceeding a quarter of an inch; when fresh they are dark grey with smooth
lustrous cleavage surfaces; when decomposed they become turbid, and assume
grey or greenish shades. Basaltic lavas are frequently spongy or pumiceous,
especially near their surfaces; and, in course of time, the steam cavities
become filled with secondary minerals such as calcite, chlorite and
zeolites. Another characteristic of this group of rocks is the perfection
with which many of them show prismatic or columnar jointing, a structure
often called "basaltic jointing."

The minerals of basaltic rocks have a fairly uniform character throughout
the whole group. In microscopic section the olivine is pale green or
colourless, and is very frequently more or less altered to serpentine. The
secondary mineral begins to form upon the surfaces and along the cracks of
the olivine, gradually producing a mesh-work in the interstices of which
small kernels of olivine remain; and when the process is completed the mesh
structure persists in the resulting pseudomorph, giving a clear indication
as to its history. The augite is mostly brown, often with a purplish tinge,
hardly at all dichroic, but frequently showing zonal or hour-glass
structure, and various types of twinning. It weathers to chlorite, uralite,
calcite, &c. The plagioclase felspar, if fresh, is transparent and appears
simple in ordinary light, but when polarized breaks up into a series of
bars of different colours owing to its complex twinned structure.
Practically all varieties of this mineral from anorthite to albite are
known to occur in basalt, but by far the commonest species are bytownite
and labradorite. Weathering destroys the limpid character of the fresh
mineral, producing turbid pseudomorphs containing epidote, calcite, white
micas, kaolin, &c. When these minerals occur as phenocrysts their
crystalline outlines may be very perfect (though, especially in the
olivine, corrosion and partial resorption may give rise to rounded or
irregular forms).

In the groundmass, or second generation of crystal, not only are the
ingredients smaller, but their crystals are less perfect; yet in many
basalts small lath-shaped felspars and minute prisms of augite, densely
crowded together, form the matrix. With these there may be a greater or
less amount of brown, isotropic glass. Olivine rarely occurs as an
ingredient of the groundmass. In the vitreous basalts sometimes very few
crystallized minerals are observable; the greater part of the rock is a
dark brown glassy material, almost opaque even in the thinnest sections,
and generally charged with black grains of magnetite, skeleton crystals of
augite or felspar, spherulites, perlitic cracks, or steam vesicles. In
other basaltic rocks no glassy material appears, but the whole mass is
thoroughly crystallized; rocks of this nature are generally known to
British petrologists as dolerites (_q.v._). Till recent years it was widely
believed by continental geologists that the pre-Tertiary basalts differed
so fundamentally from their Tertiary and recent representatives that they
were entitled to be regarded as a distinct class. For the older rocks the
names anamesite, diabase porphyrite, _diabas-mandel-stein_, or melaphyre
were used, and are still favoured by many writers, to indicate varieties
and states of more or less altered basalts and dolerites, though no longer
held to differ in any essential respects from the better preserved basalts.
Still older is the term _trap_, which is derived from a Swedish word
meaning "a stair," for in many places superposed sheets of basalt weather
with well-marked step-like or terraced features. This designation is still
used as a general term for the whole suite of basaltic rocks by many
geologists and travellers (_e.g._ trap-dikes, the "traps" of the Deccan).

In the early years of the 19th century a great controversy convulsed the
geological world as to the origin of the older basalts or "floetz-traps."
Werner, the Saxon mineralogist, and his school held them to be of aqueous
origin, the chemical precipitates deposited in primeval seas, but Hutton
and a number of French geologists maintained that they were really volcanic
rocks emitted by craters now extinct (see GEOLOGY: _Historical_).

Of the less common minerals of basalt, a few may be mentioned. Black
hornblende, dark brown in thin sections, and often corroded, is not
uncommon, especially in intrusive basalts. Hypersthene occurs also, usually
replacing olivine. Black mica (biotite) is not infrequently to be seen.
Sapphire, garnet and zircon are rare. Minerals of the felspathoid group
occur in a large number of basaltic rocks; nepheline and leucite are the
most common, but haüyne is occasionally present. If nepheline entirely
replaces felspar, the rock is known as nepheline-basalt; if the replacement
is only partial the term nepheline-basanite is used. Similarly there are
leucite-basalts and leucite-basanites. The nepheline is in small six-sized
prisms, and usually cannot be detected with the unaided eye. Even with the
help of the microscope nepheline basalts are not always easy to determine,
as the crystals may be exceedingly small and imperfect, and they readily
decompose into analcite and zeolites. In some cases only the presence of an
anisotropic substance, with weak double refraction and readily attacked by
acids (the so-called "nephelinitoid"), can be made out. This substance may
be imperfectly crystallized nepheline, or a peculiar glass which is rich in
soda. Most nepheline basalts are fine grained, very dark coloured rocks,
and belong to the Tertiary period. They are fairly common in some parts of
Germany and occur also in Tripoli, Asia Minor, Montana, Cape Verde Islands,
&c. Leucite-basalts contain small rounded crystals of leucite in place of
plagioclase felspar. Rocks of this group are well known in the Eifel, and
other volcanic districts in Germany, also in Bohemia, Italy, Java, Montana,
Celebes, &c. The minerals haüyne, nosean, sodalite and melilite tend to
occur with some frequency in nepheline and leucite-basalts, though rare in
ordinary basalts. Melilite, a lime-alumina-silicate, is characteristic of
certain very basic rocks, the melilite-basalts. It is pale yellow or
colourless in thin sections, and yields peculiar and characteristic dark
blue polarization colours. This rare group of rocks is known to occur in
Bohemia, Swabia and South Africa. Perofskite, in small dark brown cubic
crystals, is a constant accessory in these rocks. The augite is usually
violet coloured, and shows zonal and hour-glass structures. Green augite
may occur in the nepheline-basalts, and aegerine (soda-iron-augite) is
occasionally found in them.

The distribution of basalts is world-wide; and in some places [v.03 p.0458]
they occur in immense masses, and cover great areas. In Washington, Oregon,
and Idaho many thousands of square miles are occupied by basaltic-lava
flows. In the Sandwich Islands and Iceland they are the prevalent lavas;
and the well-known columnar jointed basalts of Skye, Staffa, and Antrim
(Giant's Causeway) form a southward extension of the Icelandic volcanic
province, with which they are connected by the similar rocks of the Faeroe
Islands. In the Deccan in India great basaltic lava fields are known; and
Etna and Vesuvius emit basaltic rocks. In older geological periods they
were not less common; for example, in the Carboniferous in Scotland.

(J. S. F.)