BASEL, COUNCIL OF. A decree of the council of Constance (9th of October
1417) sanctioned by Martin V. had obliged the papacy periodically to summon
general councils. At the expiry of the first term fixed by this decree,
Martin V. did, in fact, call together at Pavia a council, which it was
necessary to transfer almost at once to Siena, owing to an epidemic, and
which had to be dissolved owing to circumstances still imperfectly known,
just as it was beginning to discuss the subject of reform (1424). The next
council was due to assemble at the expiry of seven years, _i.e._ in 1431;
with his usual punctuality, Martin V. duly convoked it for this date to the
town of Basel, and selected to preside over it the cardinal Julian
Cesarini, a man of the greatest worth, both intellectually and morally.
Martin himself, however, died before the opening of the synod.

From Italy, France and Germany the fathers were slow in appearing at Basel.
Cesarini devoted all his energies to the war against the Hussites, until
the disaster of Taus forced him hastily to evacuate Bohemia. The progress
of heresy, the reported troubles in Germany, the war which had lately
broken out between the dukes of Austria and Burgundy, and finally, the
small number of fathers who had responded to the summons of Martin V.,
caused that pontiff's successor, Eugenius IV., to think that the synod of
Basel was doomed to certain failure. This opinion, added to the desire
which he had of himself presiding over the council, induced him to recall
the fathers from Germany, whither his health, impaired of late, probably
owing to a cerebral congestion, rendered it all the more difficult for him
to go. He commanded the fathers to disperse, and appointed Bologna as their
meeting-place in eighteen months' time, his intention being to make the
session of the council coincide with some conferences with representatives
of the Greek church, which were to be held there with a view to union (18th
December 1431).

This order led to an outcry among the fathers of Basel and incurred the
deep disapproval of the legate Cesarini. The Hussites, it was said, would
think that the Church was afraid to face them; the laity would accuse the
clergy of shirking reform; in short, this failure of the councils would
produce disastrous effects. In vain did the pope explain his reasons and
yield certain points; the fathers would listen to nothing, and, relying on
the decrees of the council of Constance, which amid the troubles of the
schism had proclaimed the superiority, in certain cases, of the council
over the pope, they insisted upon their right of remaining assembled,
hastily beat up the laggards, held sessions, promulgated decrees,
interfered in the government of the papal countship of Venaissin, treated
with the Hussites, and, as representatives of the universal Church,
presumed to impose laws upon the sovereign pontiff himself. Eugenius IV.
resolved to resist this supremacy, though he did not dare openly to
repudiate a very widespread doctrine considered by many to be the actual
foundation of the authority of the popes before the schism. However, he
soon realized the impossibility of treating the fathers of Basel as
ordinary rebels, and tried a compromise; but as time went on, the fathers
became more and more intractable, and between him and them gradually arose
an impassable barrier.

Abandoned by a number of his cardinals, condemned by most of the powers,
deprived of his dominions by _condottieri_ who shamelessly invoked the
authority of the council, the pope made concession after concession, and
ended on the 15th of December 1433 by a pitiable surrender of all the
points at issue in a bull, the terms of which were dictated by the fathers
of Basel, that is, by declaring his bull of dissolution null and void, and
recognizing that the synod had not ceased to be legitimately assembled. It
would be wrong, however, to believe that Eugenius IV. ratified all the
decrees coming from Basel, or that he made a definite submission to the
supremacy of the council. No express pronouncement on this subject could be
wrung from him, and his enforced silence concealed the secret design of
safeguarding the principle of sovereignty.

The fathers, who were filled with suspicion, would only allow the legates
of the pope to preside over them on condition of their recognizing the
superiority of the council; the legates ended by submitting to this
humiliating formality, but in their own name only, thus reserving the
judgment of the Holy See. Nay more, the difficulties of all kinds against
which Eugenius had to contend, the insurrection at Rome, which forced him
to escape by the Tiber, lying in the bottom of a boat, left him at first
little chance of resisting the enterprises of the council. Emboldened by
their success, the fathers approached the subject of reform, their
principal object being to curtail the power and resources of the papacy.
This is why, besides the disciplinary [v.03 p.0464] measures which
regulated the elections, the celebration of divine service, the periodical
holding of diocesan synods and provincial councils, are found also decrees
aimed at some of the "rights" by which the popes had extended their power,
and helped out their finances at the expense of the local churches. Thus
annates (_q.v._) were abolished, the abuse of "reservation" of the
patronage of benefices by the pope was much limited, and the right claimed
by the pope of "next presentation" to benefices not yet vacant (known as
_gratiae expectativae_) was done away with altogether. By other decrees the
jurisdiction of the court of Rome was much limited, and rules were even
made for the election of popes and the constitution of the Sacred College.
The fathers continued to devote themselves to the subjugation of the
Hussites; they also intervened, in rivalry with the pope, in the
negotiations between France and England which led only to the treaty of
Arras, concluded by Charles VII. with the duke of Burgundy; finally, they
investigated and judged numbers of private cases, lawsuits between
prelates, members of religious orders and holders of benefices, thus
themselves falling into one of the serious abuses for which they had most
blamed the court of Rome.

The democratic character of the assembly of Basel was the result both of
its composition and of its organization; not only was the number of
prelates in it always small in comparison with that of the doctors,
masters, representatives of chapters, monks or clerks of inferior orders,
but the influence of the superior clergy had all the less weight because,
instead of being separated into "nations," as at Constance, the fathers
divided themselves according to their tastes or aptitudes into four large
committees or "deputations" (_deputationes_), one concerned with questions
of faith (_fidei_), another with negotiations for peace (_pacis_), the
third with reform (_reformatorii_), the fourth with what they called
"common concerns" (_pro communibus_). Every decision made by three of these
"deputations"--and in each of them the lower clergy formed the
majority--was ratified for the sake of form in general congregation, and if
necessary led to decrees promulgated in session. It was on this account
that the council could sometimes be called, not without exaggeration, "an
assembly of copyists" or even "a set of grooms and scullions."

Eugenius IV., however much he may have wished to keep on good terms with
the fathers of Basel, was neither able nor willing to accept or observe all
their decrees. The question of the union with the Greek church, especially,
gave rise to a misunderstanding between them which soon led to a rupture.
The emperor John Palaeologus, pressed hard by the Turks, showed a great
desire to unite himself with the Catholics; he consented to come with the
principal representatives of the Greek church to some place in the west
where the union could be concluded in the presence of the pope and of the
Latin council. Hence arose a double negotiation between him and Eugenius
IV. on the one hand and the fathers of Basel on the other. The chief object
of the latter was to fix the meeting-place at a place remote from the
influence of the pope, and they persisted in suggesting Basel or Avignon or
Savoy, which neither Eugenius nor the Greeks would on any account accept.
The result was that Palaeologus accepted the offers of the pope, who, by a
bull dated the 18th of September 1437, again pronounced the dissolution of
the council of Basel, and summoned the fathers to Ferrara, where on the 8th
of January 1438 he opened a new synod which he later transferred to
Florence. In this latter town took place the momentary union, which was
more apparent than real, between the Latin and the Greek church (6th July
1439). During this time the council of Basel, though abandoned by Cesarini
and most of its members, persisted none the less, under the presidency of
Cardinal Aleman, in affirming its oecumenical character. On the 24th of
January 1438 it suspended Eugenius IV., and went on in spite of the
intervention of most of the powers to pronounce his deposition (25th June
1439), finally giving rise to a new schism by electing on the 4th of
November Amadeus VIII., duke of Savoy, as pope, who took the name of Felix
V.

This schism lasted fully ten years, although the antipope found hardly any
adherents outside of his own hereditary states, those of Alphonso of
Aragon, of the Swiss confederation and certain universities. Germany
remained neutral; Charles VII. of France confined himself to securing to
his kingdom by the Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges, which became law on the
13th of July 1438, the benefit of a great number of the reforms decreed at
Basel; England and Italy remained faithful to Eugenius IV. Finally, in 1447
Frederick III., king of the Romans, after negotiations with Eugenius,
commanded the burgomaster of Basel not to allow the presence of the council
any longer in the imperial city. In June 1448 the rump of the council
migrated to Lausanne. The antipope, at the instance of France, ended by
abdicating (7th April 1449). Eugenius IV. died on the 23rd of February
1447, and the fathers of Lausanne, to save appearances, gave their support
to his successor, Nicholas V., who had already been governing the Church
for two years. Trustworthy evidence, they said, proved to them that this
pontiff accepted the dogma of the superiority of the council as it had been
defined at Constance and at Basel. In reality, the struggle which they had
carried on in defence of this principle for seventeen years, with a good
faith which it is impossible to ignore, ended in a defeat. The papacy,
which had been so fundamentally shaken by the great schism of the West,
came through this trial victorious. The era of the great councils of the
15th century was closed; the constitution of the Church remained
monarchical.

AUTHORITIES.--Mansi, vol. xxix.-xxxi.; Aeneas Sylvius, _De rebus Basileae
gestis_ (Fermo, 1803); Hefele, _Conciliengeschichte_, vol. vii.
(Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 1874); O. Richter, _Die Organisation und
Geschaftsordnung des Baseler Konzils_ (Leipzig, 1877); _Monumenta
Conciliorum generalium seculi xv., Scriptorum_, vol. i., ii. and iii.
(Vienna, 1857-1895); J. Haller, _Concilium Basiliense_, vol. i.-v. (Basel,
1896-1904); G. Perouse, _Le Cardinal Louis Aleman, président du concile de
Bâle_ (Paris, 1904). Much useful material will also be found in J. C. L.
Gieseler's _Ecclesiastical History_, vol. iv. p. 312, &c., notes (Eng.
trans., Edinburgh, 1853).

(N. V.)