BASEDOW, JOHANN BERNHARD (1723-1790), German educational reformer, was born
at Hamburg on the 11th of September 1723, the son of a hairdresser. He was
educated at the Johanneum in that town, where he came under the influence
of the rationalist H. S. Reimarus (1694-1768), author of the [v.03 p.0462]
famous _Wolfenbütteler Fragmente_, published by Lessing. In 1744 he went to
Leipzig as a student of theology, but gave himself up entirely to the study
of philosophy. This at first induced sceptical notions; a more profound
examination of the sacred writings, and of all that relates to them,
brought him back to the Christian faith, but, in his retirement, he formed
his belief after his own ideas, and it was far from orthodox. He returned
to Hamburg, and between 1749 and 1753 was private tutor in a nobleman's
family in Holstein. Basedow now began to exhibit his really remarkable
powers as an educator of the young, and acquired so much distinction that,
in 1753, he was chosen professor of moral philosophy and belles-lettres in
the academy of Sorö in Denmark. On account of his theological opinions he
was in 1761 removed from this post and transferred to Altona, where some of
his published works brought him into great disfavour with the orthodox
clergy. He was forbidden to give further instruction, but did not lose his
salary; and, towards the end of 1767, he abandoned theology to devote
himself with the same ardour to education, of which he conceived the
project of a general reform in Germany. In 1768 appeared his _Vorstellung
an Menschenfreunde für Schulen, nebst dem Plan eines Elementarbuches der
menschlichen Erkenntnisse_, which was strongly influenced by Rousseau's
_Émile_. He proposed the reform of schools and of the common methods of
instruction, and the establishment of an institute for qualifying
teachers,--soliciting subscriptions for the printing of his
_Elementarwerk_, where his principles were to be explained at length, and
illustrated by plates. The subscriptions for this object amounted to 15,000
Talers (£2250), and in 1774 he was able to publish the work in four
volumes. It contains a complete system of primary education, intended to
develop the intelligence of the pupils and to bring them, so far as
possible, into contact with realities, not with mere words. The work was
received with great favour, and Basedow obtained means to establish an
institute for education at Dessau, and to apply his principles in training
disciples, who might spread them over all Germany. The name of
_Philanthropin_ which he gave to the institution appeared to him the most
expressive of his views; and he engaged in the new project with all his
accustomed ardour. But he had few scholars, and the success by no means
answered his hopes. Nevertheless, so well had his ideas been received that
similar institutions sprang up all over the land, and the most prominent
writers and thinkers openly advocated the plan. Basedow, unfortunately, was
little calculated by nature or habit to succeed in an employment which
required the greatest regularity, patience and attention; his temper was
intractable, and his management was one long quarrel with his colleagues.
He resigned his directorship of the institution in 1778, and it was finally
closed in 1793. Basedow died at Magdeburg on the 25th of July 1790.

See H. Rathmann, _Beiträge zur Lebensgeschichte Basedows_ (Magdeburg,
1791); J. C. Meyer, _Leben, Charakter und Schriften Basedows_ (2 vols.,
Hamburg, 1791-1792); G. P. R. Hahn, _Basedow und sein Verhaltnis zu
Rousseau_ (Leipzig, 1885); A. Pinloche, _Basedow et le philanthropinisme_
(Paris, 1890); C. Gössgen, _Rousseau und Basedow_ (1891).