BASE-BALL (so-called from the bases and ball used), the national summer
sport of the United States, popular also throughout Canada and in Japan.
Its origin is obscure. According to some authorities it is derived from the
old English game of rounders (_q.v._), several variations of which were
played in America during the colonial period; according to other
authorities, its resemblance to rounders is merely a coincidence, and it
had its origin in the United States, probably at Cooperstown, New York, in
1839, when it is said, Abner Doubleday (later a general in the U.S. army)
devised a scheme for playing it. About the beginning of the 19th century a
game generally known as "One Old Cat" became popular with schoolboys in the
North Atlantic states; this game was played by three boys, each fielding
and batting in turn, a run being scored by the batsman running to a single
base and back without being put out. Two Old Cat, Three Old Cat, and Four
Old Cat were modifications of this game, having respectively four, six, and
eight players. A development of this game bore the name of town-ball and
the Olympic Town-Ball Club of Philadelphia was organized in 1833. Matches
between organized base-ball clubs were first played in the neighbourhood of
New York, where the Washington Baseball Club was founded in 1843. The first
regular code of rules was drawn up in 1845 by the Knickerbocker Baseball
Club and used in its matches with the Gotham Eagle and Empire clubs of New
York, and the Excelsior, Putnam, Atlantic and Eckford clubs of Brooklyn. In
1858 the first National Association was organized, and, while its few
simple laws were generally similar to the corresponding rules of the
present code, the ball was larger and "livelier," and the pitcher was
compelled to deliver it with a full toss, no approach to a throw being
allowed. The popularity of the game spread rapidly, resulting in the
organization of many famous clubs, such as the Beacon and Lowell of Boston,
the Red Stockings of Cincinnati, the Forest City of Cleveland and the Maple
Leaf of Guelph, but owing to the sharp rivalry between the foremost teams,
semi-professionalism soon crept in, although in those days a man who played
for a financial consideration always had some other means of livelihood, as
the income to be derived from playing ball in the summer time was not
enough to support him throughout the year. In spite of its popularity, the
game acquired certain undesirable adjuncts. The betting and pool selling
evils became prominent, and before long the game was in thorough disrepute.
It was not only generally believed that the matches were not played on
their merits, but it was known that players themselves were not above
selling contests. At that time many of the journals of the day foretold the
speedy downfall of the sport. A convention of those interested financially
and otherwise in the game, was held in 1867 in Philadelphia, and an effort
was made to effect a reformation. That the sport even then was by no means
insignificant can be seen from the fact that in that convention some 500
organizations were represented. While the work done at the convention did
not accomplish all that was expected, it did produce certain reforms, and
the sport grew rapidly thereafter both in the eastern and in the middle
western part of the United States. In the next five years the [v.03 p.0459]
interest in the game became so great that it was decided to send a
representation of American base-ball players to England; and two clubs, the
Bostons, who were the champions that year, and the Athletics, former
champions, crossed the Atlantic and played several exhibition games with
each other. While successful in exciting some interest, the trip did not
succeed in popularizing base-ball in Great Britain. Fifteen years later two
other nines of representative American base-ball players made a general
tour of Australia and various other countries, completing their trip by a
contest in England. This too, however, had little effect, and later
attempts to establish base-ball in England have likewise been unsuccessful.
But in America the game continued to prosper. The first entirely
professional club was the Cincinnati Red Stockings (1868). Two national
associations were formed in 1871, one having jurisdiction over professional
clubs and the other over amateurs. In 1876 was formed the National League,
of eight clubs under the presidency of Nicholas E. Young, which contained
the expert ball-players of the country. There were so many people in the
United States who wanted to see professional base-ball that this
organization proved too small to furnish the desired number of games, and
hence in 1882 the American Association was formed. For a time it seemed
that there would be room for both organizations; but there was considerable
rivalry, and it was not until an agreement was made between the two
organizations that they were able to work together in harmony. They
practically controlled professional base-ball for many years, although
there were occasional attempts to overthrow their authority, the most
notable being the formation in 1890 of a brotherhood of players called the
Players' League, organized for the purpose of securing some of the
financial benefits accruing to the managers, as well as for the purpose of
abolishing black-listing and other supposed abuses. The Players' League
proved not sufficiently strong for the task, and fell to pieces. For some
years the National League consisted of twelve clubs organized as stock
companies, representing cities as far apart as Boston and St Louis, but in
1900 the number was reduced to eight, namely, Boston, Brooklyn, Chicago,
Cincinnati, New York, Pittsburg, Philadelphia and St Louis. Certain
aggressive and dissatisfied elements took advantage of this change to
organize a second great professional association under the presidency of
B. B. Johnson, the "American League," of eight clubs, six of them in cities
where the National League was already represented. Most of the clubs of
both leagues flourish financially, as also do the many minor associations
which control the clubs of the different sections of the country, among
which are the Eastern League, the American Association, Western League,
Southern Association, New England League, Pacific League and the different
state leagues. Professional base-ball has not been free from certain
objectionable elements, of which the unnecessary and rowdyish fault-finding
with the umpires has been the most evident, but the authorities of the
different leagues have lately succeeded, by strenuous legislation, in
abating these. Of authorities on base-ball, Henry Chadwick (d. 1908) is the
best known.

Amateur base-ball, in its organized phase, is played mostly by school and
university clubs as well as those of athletic associations. The first
college league was formed in 1879 and comprised Harvard, Princeton,
Amherst, Brown and Dartmouth, Yale joining a year later. The Eastern
College League, with Columbia, Harvard, Princeton and Yale, followed in
1887. This was afterwards dissolved and at present the most important
universities of the eastern states are members of no league, although such
organizations exist in New England and different parts of the west and
south. Amateur base-ball has progressed along the same lines as
professional, although the college playing rules formerly differed in
certain minor points from those of the professional leagues.

The following is a general description of the field and of the manner in
which the game is played, but as the game has become highly complicated,
situations may arise in playing in which general statements do not strictly
hold. Any smooth, level field about 150 yds. long and 100 yds. broad will
serve for a base-ball ground. Upon this field is marked out with white
chalk a square, commonly called the diamond, smooth, like a cricket pitch,
the sides of which measure 30 yds. each, and the nearest corner of which is
distant about 30 yds. from the limit of the field. This corner is marked
with a white plate, called the home-base or plate, five-sided in shape, two
of the sides being 1 ft. long and that towards the pitcher 17 in. At the
other three corners and attached to pegs are white canvas bags 15 in.
square filled with some soft material, and called, beginning at the right
as one looks towards the field, first-base, second-base and third-base
respectively. The lines from home-base to first, and from home to third are
indefinitely prolonged and called foul-lines. The game is played by two
sides of nine men each, one of these taking its turn at the bat while the
other is in the field endeavouring, as provided by certain rules, to put
out the side at bat. Each side has nine turns, or innings, at bat, unless
the side last at bat does not need its ninth innings in order to win; a tie
at the end of the ninth innings makes additional innings necessary. A full
game usually takes from 1½ to 2 hrs. to play. Three batsmen are put out in
each innings, and the side scoring the greatest number of runs (complete
encircling of the bases without being put out) wins. A runner who is not
put out but fails to reach home-base does not score a run, but is "left on
base."

Implements of the Game.--The ball, which is 9-9¼ in. in circumference and
weighs 5-5¼ oz., is made of yarn wound upon a small core of vulcanized
rubber and covered with white leather, which may not be intentionally
discoloured. The bat must be round, not over 2¾ in. in diameter at the
thickest part, nor more than 42 in. in length. It is usually made of ash or
some other hard wood, and the handle may be wound with twine.
Three-cornered spikes are usually worn on the players' shoes. The catcher
and first-baseman (_v. infra_) may wear a glove of any size on one hand;
the gloves worn by all other players may not measure more than 14 in. round
the palm nor weigh more than 10 oz.

The Players.--The fielding side consists of (a) the pitcher and catcher,
called the battery, (b) the first-baseman, second-baseman, third-baseman
and short-stop, called infielders, and (c) the left-fielder, centre-fielder
and right-fielder, called out-fielders.

The pitcher, who delivers the ball to the batsman, is the most important
member of the side. In the act of pitching, which is throwing either over
or underhand, he must keep one foot in contact with a white plate, called
the pitcher's plate, 24 in. long and 6 in. wide, placed 60.5 ft. from the
back of the home-base. Before 1875 the pitcher was obliged to deliver the
ball with a full toss only, but about that time a disguised underhand
throw, which greatly increased the pace, began to be used so generally that
it was soon legalized, and the overhand throw followed as a matter of
course. As long as the arm was held stiff no curve could be imparted to the
flight of the ball in the air, but with the increase of pace came the
possibility of doing this by a movement of the wrist as the ball left the
hand, the twist thus given causing the ball, by the pressure on the air, to
swerve to one side or the other, or downwards, according to the position of
the hand and fingers as the ball is let go. The commonest of these swerving
deliveries, and the first one invented, is the out-curve, the ball coming
straight towards the batsman until almost within reach of his bat, when it
suddenly swerves away from him towards the right, if he be right-handed.
The other important curves are the incurve, shooting sharply to the left,
and the drop, with their many variations, nearly every pitcher using some
favourite curve. Change of pace, disguised as well as possible, is also an
important part of pitching strategy, as well as variation of the delivery
and the play upon the known weaknesses or idiosyncrasies of the batsman.
Good control over the ball is a necessity, as four "balls" called by the
umpire,--that is, balls not over the base, or over the base and not between
the shoulder and knee of the batsman,--entitle the batsman to become a
base-runner and take his first base. If the pitcher disregards the
restrictions placed upon him by the rules (_e.g._ he may not, while in
position, make a motion to deliver the ball to the batsman without actually
[v.03 p.0460] delivering it, or to first-base, while that base is occupied
by a runner, without completing the throw), he is said to have made a balk,
which permits a base runner to advance a base. In fielding batted balls the
pitcher takes all that come directly to him, especially slow ones which the
other fielders cannot reach in time. One of his duties is to "back up" the
first-baseman in order to stop balls thrown wide, and to cover first-base
in place of the baseman whenever that player has to leave his base to field
a ground ball. On occasion he also backs up other positions.

The _catcher_ usually stands about 1 yd. behind the home plate, and he must
never be more than 10 ft. behind the home plate when the pitcher delivers
the ball to the batsman. He generally catches the ball from the pitcher
before it strikes the ground, and, when a man of the opposing side has
succeeded in getting to a base, must be on the alert to head this opponent
off should he endeavour to _steal_ the next base, _i.e._ run to it while
the pitcher is delivering the ball to the batsman. For this reason the
catcher must be a quick, strong and accurate thrower. As the catcher alone
faces the whole field, he is able to warn the pitcher when to throw to a
base in order to catch a runner _napping_ off the base, and by secretly
signalling to the pitcher (usually by means of signs with his fingers) he
directs what kind of a ball is to be pitched, so that he may be in the
proper position to receive the ball, be it high or low, to left or right.
Some pitchers, however, prefer to reserve their choice of balls and
therefore do the signalling themselves. The catcher wears a mask, a
breast-pad, and a large glove, without which the position would be a very
dangerous one.

[Illustration: Diagram of Base-ball Field.]

As every batsman upon hitting the ball must run for the first-base, the
first-baseman must be a sure catch of balls thrown to head runners off,
even those thrown too low, high or wide. A tall man is usually chosen for
this position. The second-baseman usually stands about 30 ft. to the right
of second-base and back of the line between the bases, and attends to balls
batted to his side of the diamond. He also backs up any exposed position
and must be ready to cover second-base whenever a runner tries to steal
down from first-base, or whenever there is a runner on second-base, a duty
which he shares with the short-stop, whose position corresponds to that of
the second-baseman on the left side of the diamond. Short-stop must be a
quick and accurate thrower and a lively fielder, as he is required to back
up second- and third-base. Both he and the second-baseman must field ground
balls cleanly and are often called upon to catch fly balls also. The
requirements of third-baseman are very similar, but he must be an
exceptionally good thrower, as he has the longest distance to throw to the
first-base; and as he plays nearer to the batsman than do the
second-baseman and the short-stop, the balls batted in his direction are
apt to be faster and more difficult to field. One of the third-baseman's
chief duties is to be ready to run in towards the batsman to field "bunts,"
_i.e._ balls blocked by allowing them to rebound from a loosely held bat.
These commonly roll slowly in the direction of third-baseman, who, in order
to get them to first-base in time to put the runner out, must run in, pick
them up, usually with one hand, so as to be in position to throw without
the loss of an instant, and "snap" them to the first-baseman, _i.e._ throw
them underhand without taking time to raise his body to an erect position.
Many of these bunts can be fielded either by the pitcher or, if they drop
dead in front of the home-plate, by the catcher. The positions of the three
outfielders can be seen on the diagram. Their duties consist of catching
all "flies" batted over the heads of the infielders (_i.e._ high batted
balls that have not touched the ground), stopping and returning ground
balls that pass the infield, and backing up the baseman. The accompanying
diagram indicates the territory roughly allotted to the different fielders.
"Backing up" is a very prominent feature in fielding. Even the pitcher, for
example, should run behind the first-baseman when the ball is thrown to the
latter by another, in order to stop a widely thrown or missed ball, which,
if allowed to pass, would enable the runner to gain one or more additional
bases. Bases vacated by their basemen while fielding balls must often,
also, be promptly covered by another player. The general rule of defence
strategy is similar to that in cricket, namely, to have as many men as
possible at the probable point of attack. There is usually an infield and
an outfield captain for the special purpose of calling the name of the
player who is to take a certain fly ball, to prevent collisions.

The batsman stands three-quarters facing the pitcher within a parallelogram
("box") 6 ft. long and 4 ft. wide, the lines of which he may not overstep,
on penalty of being declared out. His object is to get to first-base
without being put out. This he may do in several ways. (1) He may make a
"safe-hit," _i.e._ one that is "fair" but cannot be caught, or fielded in
time to put him out. (2) He is entitled to first-base if the pitcher
pitches four bad balls, at none of which he (the batsman) has struck. (3)
He may be unavoidably struck by a pitched ball, in which case he is given
his base. (4) He may, except in certain specified cases, after a third
strike, if the catcher has failed to catch the third one, earn his base if
he can reach it before the catcher can throw the ball to the first-baseman,
and the first-baseman, with the ball in his possession, touch first-base.
(5) He may reach his base by an error of some fielder, which may be either
a muffed fly, a failure to stop and field a ground ball, a muffed thrown
ball or a bad throw. Only balls batted within the foul-lines (see diagram)
are fair. All others are "fouls," and the batsman cannot run on them. All
foul-struck balls are called strikes until two strikes have been called by
the umpire, after which fouls are not counted.

Batting, as in cricket, is a science by itself, although comparatively more
stress is laid on fielding than in cricket. A good batsman can place the
ball in any part of the field he chooses by meeting the ball at different
angles. He may make a safe hit either by hitting the ball on the ground
directly through the infield out of reach of the fielders, or so hard that
it cannot be [v.03 p.0461] stopped. In the last case a failure to stop and
field it does not count as an "error" (misplay) for the fielder, even
though it came straight at him, the decision as to errors appearing in the
score (_v. infra_) depending upon the official scorer of the home club. The
batsman may also hit safely by placing the ball over the heads of the
infielders, but not far enough to be caught by the outfielders, or over the
heads of the outfielders themselves, or he may bunt successfully. A hit by
which two bases can be made (without errors by opponents) is a
"two-base-hit," one for three bases a "three-base-hit," and one for four
bases a "home-run." The batsman may be put out in various ways. For
example, he is out (1) if he fails to bat in the order named in the
published batting-list; (2) if he fails to take his position within one
minute after the umpire has summoned him; (3) if he makes a foul hit which
is caught before it strikes the ground (a ball barely ticked by the bat
["foul-tip"] does not count); (4) if he oversteps the batting-lines; (5) if
he intentionally obstructs or interferes with the catcher; (6) if he
unsuccessfully attempts the third strike and the ball hits his person or is
caught by the catcher (under certain conditions he is out whether the ball
is so caught or not), or, not being caught, is thrown to first-base and
held there by an opposing player before the batsman can get there; (7) if a
fair ball be caught before striking the ground; (8) if any fair ball is
fielded to first-baseman before he reaches the base. The batsman becomes a
base-runner the moment he starts for first-base. He may, when he first
reaches first-base, overrun his base (provided he turns to his right in
returning to it) without risk of being put out, but thereafter can be put
out by being touched with the ball in the hands of a fielder unless some
part of the runner's person is in contact with the base. When a fair or
foul ball struck by a batsman on his side is caught on the fly, he must
retouch his base, or be put out if the baseman receives the ball before he
can do so. A runner on first-base is forced to run to second as soon as a
fair ball is batted, or, being on second with another runner on first, he
is forced to run to third. This is called being "forced off his base." In
such a situation the forced runner can be put out if the ball is thrown to
the baseman at the next base before the runner gets there. He does not
require to be touched with the ball. The runner on first is entitled,
however, to advance to second without risk of being put out if the batsman
becomes similarly entitled to first-base (_e.g._ on being unavoidably
struck by the ball, or on four balls). Frequently, if the ball is batted to
the infield while a runner is on first-base, the fielder tosses it to
second-baseman, putting out the runner, and the second-baseman has still
time to throw the ball to first-base ahead of the batsman, thus completing
a "double play." Triple plays are sometimes made when there are runners on
two or on all of the bases. Base-running is one of the important arts of
base-ball play. A good base-runner takes as long a lead off the base as he
dares, starts to run the moment the pitcher makes the first movement to
deliver the ball, and if necessary throws himself with a slide, either feet
or head first, on to the objective base, the reason for the slide being to
make it more difficult for the baseman to touch the runner, having to stoop
in order to do so, thus losing time. A base-runner is out if he interferes
with an opponent while the latter is fielding a ball or if he is hit by a
batted ball. An example of modern base-running is offered by the "double
steal," carried out, _e.g._, when there is a runner on first-base and a
runner on third-base. The runner on first starts for second leisurely in
order to draw a throw to second by the catcher. If the catcher throws, the
runner on third runs for the home-plate, the second-baseman returning the
ball to the catcher in order to put the runner out. The play often results
in a score, but the runner is frequently caught if the throws are quick and
accurate, or when the catcher deceives the runner by throwing, not to the
player at second-base, but to a man stationed for the purpose much nearer
the home-plate, this man intercepting the ball and returning it to the
catcher if the runner on third is attempting to score, or letting it pass
to the player on second-base, if the runner on third does not make the
attempt.

Team batting is the co-operation of batsman and base-runner. The commonest
example is the "hit and run" play, _e.g._ when a runner is on first-base.
After the runner has ascertained by a false start which infielder, whether
second-baseman or short-stop, will cover second-base, the batsman signals
to the runner that he will hit the next ball. As soon as the pitcher
delivers the ball the runner starts for second and the batsman hits the
ball to that part of the infield vacated by the fielder who has gone to
receive the ball at second from the catcher. If successful this play
results in a safe hit, while the runner not infrequently makes, not only
second, but third-base as well. Another instance of team batting is when a
runner is on third-base and the batsman signals that he will hit the next
ball. This enables the runner to get a long start, making his scoring
nearly certain if the batsman succeeds in hitting the ball fairly. If the
ball is hit without the signal and consequent long start by the runner, the
latter is frequently put out at the plate, as the infielder who fields the
ball will ignore the batsman and throw the ball to the catcher to head off
the runner and prevent a run being scored. In close games the
"sacrifice-hit," a part of team batting, is an important element. It
consists, when a runner is on base, of a hit by the batsman resulting in
his own retirement but the advancement to the next base of the runner. The
sacrifice-hit is most frequently a bunt, as this gives the batsman the best
chance of reaching first-base safely, besides surely advancing the runner.
Another kind of sacrifice-hit is a long fly to the outfield. On such a hit
a runner on third-base (as on the other bases) must remain on the base
until after the ball is caught, but the distance from the outfield to the
home-plate is so great that a fast runner can generally beat the ball and
score his run. When men are on bases, coaches are allowed to stand near
first and third bases to direct the runners.

One umpire, who has absolute jurisdiction over all points of play, usually
officiates in base-ball, but, in important games, two umpires are often
employed, one of them standing behind the catcher and calling the good and
bad balls pitched, and the other, posted in the infield, giving decisions
on plays at the bases.

In cases where the game is tied after nine innings, extra ones are played,
the umpire "calling" a game when it becomes too dark to play. In case of
rain, play is suspended by the umpire, who calls the game if the rain
continues for one half-hour. Should play be permanently interrupted the
game counts if five innings have been completed by each side.

_Scoring_.--The base-ball score shows, in vertical columns, (1) how many
times each player has been at bat (bases taken on balls and sacrifice-hits
not counted); (2) how many runs he has scored; (3) how many base-hits he
has made; (4) how many sacrifice-hits he has made; (5) how many opponents
he has put out; (6) how many "assists," _i.e._ times he has assisted in
putting out (_e.g._ stopping a ground ball and throwing it to first-base);
(7) the number of errors he has made, wild pitches and "passed balls,"
_i.e._ not held by the catcher, as well as balks and bases on balls, not
being counted as errors but set down under the regular columns, together
with the record of stolen bases, extra long hits, double and triple plays,
batsmen struck out by each pitcher, the number of men struck by each
pitcher with the ball, the time of the game and the name of the umpire.

Careful record is kept of the batting, fielding, pitching and base-running
averages of both professional and amateur players. To find the batting
record of a player, divide the number of hits made by the number of times
at bat. To find a fielding record, divide the number of accepted chances by
the total chances, _e.g._ A.B. put 1188 men out, and assisted sixty-four
times, while making fifteen errors; his fielding average is therefore 1252
divided by 1267, or 988, 1000 being perfect fielding.

See _Spalding's Base-ball Guide_, in Spalding's Athletic Library, published
annually; _How to Play Base-ball_, by T. H. Murnane, Spalding's Athletic
Library; _The Book of School and College Sports_, by R. H. Barbour (New
York, 1904).

(E. B.)