BASILICA, a word of Greek origin (see below), frequently used in Latin
literature and inscriptions to denote a large covered building that could
accommodate a considerable number of people. Strictly speaking, a basilica
was a building of this kind situated near the business centre of a city and
arranged for the convenience of merchants, litigants and persons engaged on
the public service; but in a derived sense the word might be used for any
large structure wherever situated, such as a hall of audience (Vitruv. vi.
5. 2) or a covered promenade (St Jerome, _Ep._ 46) in a private palace; a
riding school (_basilica equestris exercitatoria_, _C.I.L._ vii. 965); a
market or store for flowers (_basilica floscellaria_ [_Notitia_]), or other
kinds of goods (_basilica vestiaria_, _C.I.L._ viii. 20156), or a hall of
meeting for a religious body. In this derived sense the word came naturally
to be applied to the extensive buildings used for Christian worship in the
age of Constantine and his successors.

The question whether this word conveyed to the ancients any special
architectural significance is a difficult one, and some writers hold that
the name betokened only the use of the building, others that it suggested
also a certain form. Our knowledge of the ancient basilica as a civil
structure is derived primarily from Vitruvius, and we learn about it also
from existing remains and from incidental notices in classical writers and
in inscriptions. If we review all the evidence we are led to the conclusion
that there did exist a normal form of the building, though many examples
deviated therefrom. This normal form we shall understand if we consider the
essential character of the building in the light of what Vitruvius tells us
of it.

Vitruvius treats the basilica in close connexion with the forum, to which
in his view it is an adjunct. In the earlier classical times, both in
Greece and Italy, business of every kind, political, commercial and legal,
was transacted in the open forum, and there also were presented shows and
pageants. When business increased and the numbers of the population were
multiplied, it was found convenient to provide additional accommodation for
these purposes. Theatres and amphitheatres took the performances and games.
Markets provided for those that bought and sold, while for business of more
important kinds accommodation could be secured by laying out new _agorae_
or _fora_ in the immediate vicinity of the old. At Rome this was done by
means of the so-called imperial fora, the latest and most splendid of which
was that of Trajan. These fora corresponded to the later Greek or
Hellenistic agora, which, as Vitruvius tells us, was of regular form and
surrounded by colonnades in two stories, and they had the practical use of
relieving the pressure on the [v.03 p.0471] original forum (Cic., _ad
Att._, iv. 16). The basilica was a structure intended for the same
purposes. It was to all intents and purposes a covered forum, and in its
normal form was constituted by an arrangement of colonnades in two stories
round a rectangular space, that was not, like the Greek agora, open, but
covered with a roof. Vitruvius writes of it as frequented by merchants, who
would find in it shelter and quiet for the transaction of their business.
Legal tribunals were also set up in it, though it is a mistake to suppose
the basilica a mere law court. The magistrates who presided over these
tribunals had sometimes platforms, curved or rectangular in plan, provided
as part of the permanent fittings of the edifice.

According to Vitruvius (v. 1. 4, cf. also vi. 3. 9) the building is to be
in plan a rectangle, not more than three times nor less than twice as long
as it is broad. If the site oblige the length to be greater, the surplus is
to be cut off to form what he calls _chalcidica_, by which must be meant
open vestibules. The interior is divided into a central space and side
aisles one-third the width of this. The ground plan of the basilica at
Pompeii (fig. 1) illustrates this description, though the superstructure
did not correspond to the Vitruvian scheme. The columns between nave and
aisles, Vitruvius proceeds, are the same height as the width of the latter,
and the aisle is covered with a flat roof forming a terrace (_contignatio_)
on which people can walk. Surrounding this on the inner side is a
breastwork or parapet (_pluteum_), which would conceal these promenaders
from the view of the merchants in the basilica below. On the top of this
parapet stood the upper row of columns, three-quarters as high as the lower
ones. The spaces between these columns, above the top of the _pluteum_,
would be left free for the admission of light to the central space, which
was covered by a roof called by Vitruvius (v. 1. 6) _mediana testudo_.
Nothing is said about a permanent tribunal or about an apse.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Basilica at Pompeii. 1, Portico (Chalcidicum); 2,
hall of basilica; 3, aisles; 4, altar; 5, tribunal; 6, offices.]

How far existing remains agree with the Vitruvian scheme will be seen as we
proceed. We have now to consider the derivation of the word "basilica," the
history of the form of building, and its architectural scheme as
represented in actual relics.

The word "basilica" is a Latinized form of the Greek adjective [Greek:
basilikê], "royal," and some feminine substantive, such as _domus_, or
_stoa_, must be understood with it. A certain building at Athens, wherein
the [Greek: archôn basileus] transacted business and the court of the
Areopagus sometimes assembled, was called [Greek: basileios stoa], and it
is an accredited theory, though it is by no means proved, that we have here
the origin of the later basilica. It is difficult to see why this was
called "royal" except for some special but accidental reason such as can in
this case be divined. There are other instances in which a term that
becomes specific has been derived from some one specimen accidentally
named. "Labyrinth" is one case in point, and "basilica" may be another. It
is true that we do not know what was the shape of the King Archon's
portico, but the same name ([Greek: basileios stoa]) was given to the grand
structure erected by Herod the Great along the southern edge of the Temple
platform at Jerusalem, and this corresponded to the Vitruvian scheme of a
columned fabric, with nave and aisles and clerestory lighting.

Whether the Roman basilicas, with which we are chiefly concerned, were
derived directly from the Athenian example, or mediately from this through
structures of the same kind erected in the later Greek cities, is hard to
say. We should naturally look in that direction for the prototypes of the
Roman basilicas, but as a fact we are not informed of any very early
basilicas in these cities. The earliest we know of is the existing basilica
at Pompeii, that may date back into the 2nd century B.C., whereas basilicas
made their appearance at Rome nearly at the beginning of that century. The
first was erected by M. Porcius Cato, the censor, in 184 B.C., and was
called after his name Basilica Porcia. Cato had recently visited Athens and
had been struck by the beauty of the city, so that it is quite possible
that the importation was direct.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Plan of Basilica Julia, Rome.

(From Baedeker's _Central Italy_, by permission of Karl Baedeker.)]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Plan of Basilica Ulpia, from Capitoline plan of
Rome.]

Rome soon obtained other basilicas, of which the important Basilica
Fulvia-Aemilia came next in point of time, till by the age of Augustus
there were at least five in the immediate neighbourhood of the forum, the
latest and most extensive being the Basilica Julia, which ran parallel to
its southern side, and is shown in plan in fig. 2. The great Basilica Ulpia
was built by Trajan in connexion with his forum about A.D. 112, and a
fragment of the Capitoline plan of Rome gives the scheme of it (fig. 3),
while an attempted restoration of the interior by Canina is shown in fig.
4. The vaulted basilica of Maxentius or Constantine on the Via Sacra dates
from the beginning of the 4th century, and fig. 5 gives the section of it.
The number of public basilicas we read of at Rome alone amounts to about a
score, while many private basilicas, for business or recreation, must also
have existed, that in the palace of Domitian on the Palatine being the best
known. In provincial cities in Italy, and indeed all over the empire,
basilicas were almost universal, and in the case of Italy we have proof of
this as early as the date of the death of Augustus, for Suetonius (_Aug_.
100) tells us that the body of that emperor, when it was brought from Nola
in Campania to Rome, rested "_in basilica cujusque oppidi._"

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Interior view of Trajan's Basilica (_Basilica
Ulpia_), as restored by Canina.]

As regards existing examples, neither in the peninsula nor the provinces
can it be said that these give any adequate idea of the former abundance
and wide distribution of basilicas. Northern Africa contributes one or two
examples, and a plan is given of that at Timgad (fig. 6). The Gallic
basilicas, which must have been very numerous, are represented only by the
noble structure at Trier (Trèves), which is now a single vast hall 180 ft.
long, 90 ft. wide and 100 ft. high, commanded at one end by a spacious
apse. There is reason to conjecture that this is the basilica erected by
Constantine, and some authorities believe that originally it had internal
colonnades. In England basilicas remain in part at Silchester (fig. 7),
Uriconium (Wroxeter), [v.03 p.0472] Chester (?) and Lincoln, while three
others are mentioned in inscriptions (_C.I.L._ vii. 287, 445, 965).

A comparison of the plans of existing basilicas shows considerable variety
in form. Some basilicas (Julia, Ulpia, Pompeii) have the central space
surrounded by galleries supported on columns or piers, according to the
normal scheme, and the newly excavated Basilica Aemilia, north of the Roman
forum, agrees with these. In some North African examples, in the palace
basilica of Domitian, and at Silchester, there are colonnades down the long
sides but not across the ends. Others (Trier [?], Timgad) have no interior
divisions. One (Maxentius) is entirely a vaulted structure and in form
resembles the great halls of the Roman Thermae. At Pompeii, Timgad and
Silchester, there are fixed tribunals, while vaulted apses that may have
contained tribunals occur in the basilica of Maxentius. In the Basilica
Julia there was no tribunal at all, though we know that the building was
regularly used for the centumviral court (Quint. xii. 5. 6), and the same
was the case in the Ulpia, for the semicircular projection at the end shown
on the Capitoline-plan, was not a vaulted apse and was evidently distinct
from the basilica.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Section of the Basilica of Maxentius or Constantine
(Temple of Peace).]

In view of the above it might be questioned whether it is safe to speak of
a normal form of the basilica, but when we consider the vast number of
basilicas that have perished compared to the few that have survived, and
the fact that the origins and traditions of the building show it to have
been, as Vitruvius describes it, essentially a columned structure, there is
ample justification for the view expressed earlier in this article. There
can be little doubt that the earlier basilicas, and the majority of
basilicas taken as a whole, had a central space with galleries, generally
in two stories, round it, and some arrangement for clerestory lighting.
Later basilicas might vary in architectural scheme, while affording the
same sort of accommodation as the older ones.

The relation of the civil basilica of the Romans to the Christian church
has been extensively discussed, and the reader will find the controversy
ably summarized in Kraus's _Geschichte der christlichen Kunst_, bk. 5.
There is nothing remarkable in the fact that a large church was called a
basilica, for the term was applied, as we have seen, to structures of many
kinds, and we even find "basilica" used for the meeting-place of a pagan
religious association (_Röm. Mitt._ 1891, p. 109). The similarity in some
respects of the early Christian churches to the normal form of the columned
basilica is so striking, that we can understand how the theory was once
held that Christian churches were the actual civil basilicas turned over
from secular to religious uses. There is no evidence for this in the case
of public basilicas, and it stands to reason that the demands on these for
secular purposes would remain the same whether Christianity were the
religion of the empire or not. Moreover, though there are one or two civil
basilicas that resemble churches, the latter differ in some most important
respects from the form of the basilica that we have recognized as normal.
The early Christian basilicas, at any rate in the west, had very seldom, if
ever, galleries over the side aisles, and their interior is always
dominated by the semi-dome of an apse that terminates the central nave,
whereas, with the doubtful exception of Silchester (_Archaeologia_, liii.
549), there is no instance known of a vaulted apse in a columned civil
basilica of the normal kind.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Plan of Basilica adjoining the Forum of the Roman
city of Timgad, in North Africa.

(From Gsell's _Monuments antiques de l'Algerie_, by permission of A.
Fontemoing.) ]

When buildings were first expressly erected for Christian worship, in the
3rd or perhaps already in the 2nd century A.D. (Leclercq, _Manuel_, ch.
iii. "Les édifices chrétiens avant la paix de l'église"), they probably
took the form of an oblong interior [v.03 p.0473] terminated by an apse.
After the time of Constantine, when the numbers of the faithful were
enormously increased, side aisles were added, and in this way the structure
came to assume an appearance similar to that of the civil basilica. A
striking confirmation of this view has recently come to light at S. Saba on
the Aventine at Rome, where a small and very early church, without aisles,
has been discovered beneath the floor of the present basilica.

There are, on the other hand, instances in which private basilicas in
palaces and mansions were handed over to the Christians for sacred uses. We
know that to have been the case with the basilicas of S. Croce in
Gerusalemme and S. Maria Maggiore at Rome, which originated in the halls of
the Sessorian and Liberian palaces respectively, granted by Constantine to
the Christians. We may adduce also as evidence of the same practice a
passage in bk. x. ch. 71 of the theological romance known as _The
Recognitions of Clement_, probably dating from the early half of the 3rd
century, in which we are told that Theophilus of Antioch, on his conversion
by St Peter, made over "the basilica of his house" for a church. But
however this may have been, with, perhaps, the single exception of S.
Croce, the existing Christian basilicas were erected from the ground for
their sacred purpose. At Rome the columns, friezes and other materials of
the desecrated temples and public buildings furnished abundant materials
for their construction. The decadence of art is plainly shown by the
absence of rudimentary architectural knowledge in these reconstructions.
Not only are columns of various heights and diameters made to do duty in
the same colonnade, but even different orders stand side by side (_e.g._
Ionic, Corinthian and Composite at S. Maria in Trastevere); while pilasters
assume a horizontal position and serve as entablatures, as at S. Lorenzo
fuori le Mura. There being no such quarry of ready-worked materials at
Ravenna, the noble basilicas of that city are free from these defects, and
exhibit greater unity of design and harmony of proportions.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Plan of Basilica adjoining the Forum of the Roman
city at Silchester, Hants. (From _Archaeologia,_ vol. liii.)]

An early Christian basilica may be thus described in its main features:--A
porch supported on pillars (as at S. Clemente) gave admission into an open
court or _atrium_, surrounded by a colonnaded cloister (S. Clemente, Old St
Peter's, S. Ambrogio at Milan, Parenzo). In the centre of the court stood a
cistern or fountain (_cantharus_, _phiale_), for drinking and ablutions. In
close contiguity to the atrium, often to the west, was the baptistery,
usually octagonal (Parenzo). The church was entered through a long narrow
porch (_narthex_), beyond which penitents, or those under ecclesiastical
censure, were forbidden to pass. Three or more lofty doorways, according to
the number of the aisles, set in marble cases, gave admission to the
church. The doors themselves were of rich wood, elaborately carved with
scriptural subjects (S. Sabina on the Aventine), or of bronze similarly
adorned and often gilt. Magnificent curtains, frequently embroidered with
sacred figures or scenes, closed the entrance, keeping out the heat of
summer and the cold of winter.

The interior consisted of a long and wide nave, sometimes as much as 80 ft.
across, terminating in a semicircular apse, with one or sometimes (St
Paul's, Old St Peter's, St John Lateran) two aisles on each side, separated
by colonnades of marble pillars supporting horizontal entablatures (Old St
Peter's, S. Maria Maggiore, S. Lorenzo) or arches (St Paul's, S. Agnese, S.
Clemente, the two basilicas of S. Apollinare at Ravenna). Above the pillars
the clerestory wall rose to a great height, pierced in its upper part by a
range of plain round-headed windows. The space between the windows and the
colonnade (the later triforium-space) was usually decorated with a series
of mosaic pictures in panels. The colonnades sometimes extended quite to
the end of the church (the Ravenna basilicas), sometimes ceased some little
distance from the end, thus admitting the formation of a transverse aisle
or transept (St Paul's, Old St Peter's, St John Lateran). Where this
transept occurred it was divided from the nave by a wide arch, the face and
soffit of which were richly decorated with mosaics. Over the crown of the
arch we often find a bust of Christ or the holy lamb lying upon the altar,
and, on either side, the evangelistic symbols, the seven candlesticks and
the twenty-four elders. Another arch spanned the semicircular apse, in
which the church always terminated. From Carolingian times this was
designated the _arch of triumph_, because a cross was suspended from it.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--S. Apollinare in Classe, Ravenna.]

The conch or semi-dome that covered the apse was always covered with mosaic
pictures, usually paintings of our Lord, either seated or standing, with St
Peter and St Paul, and other apostles and saints, on either hand. The beams
of the roof were sometimes concealed by a flat ceiling, richly carved and
gilt. The altar, standing in the centre of the chord of the apse on a
raised platform reached by flights of steps, was rendered conspicuous by a
lofty canopy supported by marble pillars (_ciborium_, _baldacchino_), from
which depended curtains of the richest materials. Beneath the altar was the
_confessio_, a subterranean chapel, containing the body of the patron
saint, and relics of other holy persons. This was approached by descending
flights of steps from the nave or aisles. The _confessio_ in some cases
reproduced the original place of interment of the patron saint, either in a
catacomb-chapel or in an ordinary grave, and thus formed the sacred nucleus
round which the church arose. We have good examples of this arrangement at
St Peter's and St Paul's at Rome, and S. Apollinare in Classe, Ravenna. It
was copied in the original cathedral of Canterbury. The bishop or
officiating presbyter advanced from his seat in the centre of the
semicircle of the apse to the altar, and celebrated the Eucharist with his
face to the congregation below. At the foot of the altar steps a raised
platform, occupying the upper portion of the nave, formed a choir for the
singers, readers and other inferior clergy. This oblong space was separated
from the aisles and from the western portion of the nave by low marble
walls or railings (_cancelli_). From these walls projected _ambones_ or
pulpits with desks, also of marble, ascended by steps.

The exterior of the basilicas was usually of an extreme plainness. The vast
brick walls were unrelieved by ornament, save occasionally by arcading as
at S. Apollinare in Classe, Ravenna, and had no compensating grace of
outline or beauty of proportion. An exception was made for the entrance
front, which was sometimes covered with plates of marble mosaics or painted
stucco (Old St Peter's, S. Lorenzo). But in spite of any decorations the
external effect of a basilica must always have been heavy and unattractive.
S. Apollinare in Classe at Ravenna (fig. 8) affords a typical [v.03 p.0474]
example. The campanile is a later addition. Within, apart from the
beautiful mosaic decoration, a fine effect was produced by the arch of
triumph and the apse, which terminated the nave and dominated the whole
vast space of the interior.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--Façade of old St Peter's, Rome.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--Ground-Plan of the original Basilica of St Peter's
at Rome.

_a_, Porch. _b_, Atrium. _c_, Cloisters. _d_, Narthex. _e_, Nave. _f_, _f_,
Aisles, _g_, Bema. _h_, Altar, protected by a double screen. _i_, Bishop's
throne in centre of the apse. _k_, Sacristy. _l_, Tomb of Honorius. _m_,
Church of St Andrew. ]

To pass from general description to individual churches, the first place
must be given, as the earliest and grandest examples of the type, to the
world-famous Roman basilicas; those of St Peter, St Paul and St John
Lateran, _"omnium urbis et orbis ecclesiarum mater et caput."_ It is true
that no one of these exists in its original form, Old St Peter's having
been entirely removed in the 16th century to make room for its magnificent
successor; and both St Paul's and St John Lateran having been greatly
injured by fire, and the last named being so completely modernized as to
have lost all interest. Of the two former, however, we possess drawings and
plans and minute descriptions, which give an accurate conception of the
original buildings. To commence with St Peter's, from the illustrations
annexed (figs. 9, 10, 11) it will be seen that the church was entered
through a vast colonnaded _atrium_, 212 ft. by 235 ft., with a fountain in
the centre,--the atrium being preceded by a porch mounted by a noble flight
of steps. The church was 212 ft. wide by 380 ft. long; the nave, 80 ft. in
width, was six steps lower than the side aisles, of which there were two on
each side. The four dividing colonnades were each of twenty-two Corinthian
columns. Those next the nave supported horizontal entablatures. The inner
colonnades bore arches, with a second clerestory. The main clerestory walls
were divided into two rows of square panels containing mosaics, and had
windows above. The transept projected beyond the body of the church,--a
very unusual arrangement. The apse, of remarkably small dimensions, was
screened off by a double row of twelve wreathed columns of Parian marble.
The pontifical chair was placed in the centre of the curve of the apse, on
a platform raised several steps above the presbytery. To the right and left
the seats of the cardinals followed the line of the apse. At the centre of
the chord stood the high altar beneath a ciborium, resting on four pillars
of porphyry. Beneath the altar was the subterranean chapel, the centre of
the devotion of so large a portion of the Christian world, believed to
contain the remains of St Peter; a vaulted crypt ran round the foundation
wall of the apse in which many of the popes were buried. The roof showed
its naked beams and rafters.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.--Sectional view of the old Basilica of St Peter,
before its destruction in the 16th century.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--Ground-Plan of St Paul's, Rome, before its
destruction by fire.

_a_, Narthex. _b_, Nave. _c_, _c_, Side aisles. _d_, Altar. _e_, Bema. _f_,
Apse.]

The basilica of St Paul without the walls, dedicated 324 A.D., rebuilt
388-423, remained in a sadly neglected state, but substantially unaltered,
till the disastrous fire of 1823, which reduced the nave to a calcined
ruin. Its plan and dimensions (figs. 12, 13) were almost identical with
those of St Peter's.

The only parts of the modernized five-aisled basilica of St John Lateran
(of which we have a plan in its original state, Agincourt, pl. lxxiii. No.
22) which retain any interest, are the double-vaulted aisle which runs
round the apse, a most unusual arrangement, and the baptistery. The latter
is an octagonal building standing some little distance from the basilica to
the south. Its roof is supported by a double range of columns, one above
the other, encircling the baptismal basin sunk below the floor.

Of the three-aisled basilicas the best example is the Liberian or S. Maria
Maggiore dedicated 365, and reconstructed 432 A.D. Its internal length to
the chord of the apse is 250 ft. by 100 ft. in breadth. The Ionic pillars
of grey granite, uniform in style, twenty on each side, form a colonnade of
great dignity and beauty, unfortunately broken towards the east by
intrusive arches opening into chapels. The clerestory, though modern, is
excellent in style and arrangement. Corinthian pilasters divide the
windows, beneath which are very remarkable mosaic pictures of subjects from
Old Testament history, generally supposed to [v.03 p.0475] date from the
pontificate of Sixtus III., 432-440. The face of the arch of triumph
presents also a series of mosaics illustrative of the infancy of our Lord,
of great value in the history of art. The apse is of later date,
reconstructed by Paschal I. in 818.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--Section of the Basilica of St Paul, Rome.]

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--Section of Basilica of S. Agnese at Rome.]

Of the remaining Roman basilicas that of S. Sabina on the Aventine is of
special interest as its interior, dating from about A.D. 430, has preserved
more of the primitive aspect than any other. Its carved wooden doors of
early Christian date are of unique value, and in the spandrils of its inner
arcades, upborne by splendid antique Corinthian columns, are some good
specimens of _opus sectile_ or mosaic of cut marble. The ancient roof is an
open one. The basilicas of S. Lorenzo fuori le Mura and S. Agnese deserve
particular notice, as exhibiting galleries corresponding to those of the
civil basilicas and to the later triforium, carried above the aisles and
returned across the entrance end. It is doubtful, however, whether these
galleries are part of the original schemes. The architectural history of S.
Lorenzo's is curious. When originally constructed in A.D. 432, it consisted
of a short nave of six bays, with an internal narthex the whole height of
the building. In the 13th century Honorius III. disorientated the church by
pulling down the apse and erecting a nave of twelve bays on its site and
beyond it, thus converting the original nave into a square-ended choir, the
level being much raised, and the magnificent Corinthian columns half
buried. As a consequence of the church being thus shifted completely round,
the face of the arch of triumph, turned away from the present entrance, but
towards the original one, is invested with the usual mosaics (Agincourt,
pl. xxviii. Nos. 29, 30, 31). The basilica of S. Agnese, of which we give a
section (fig. 14), is a small but interesting building, much like what S.
Lorenzo must have been before it was altered.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--Plan of Basilica of S. Clemente in Rome.

1. Porch. 2. Atrium. 3. Nave. 4. Aisle for men. 5. Aisle for women. 6.
Chorus cantorum. 7. Altar. 8. Gospel-ambo. 9. Epistle-ambo. 10. Confessio.
11. Bishop's throne.]

Though inferior in size, and later in date than most of the basilicas
already mentioned, that of S. Clemente is not surpassed in interest by any
one of them. This is due to its having retained its original ritual
arrangements and church-fittings more perfectly than any other. These
fittings have been removed from the earlier church, lying below the
existing building, which at some unknown date and for some unrecorded
reason was abandoned and filled up with earth, while a new building was
erected upon it as a foundation. The most probable account is that the
earlier church was so completely overwhelmed in the ruin of the city in
1084, when Robert Guiscard burnt all the public buildings from the Lateran
to the Capitol, that it was found simpler and more convenient to build a
new edifice at a higher level than to repair the old one. The annexed plan
(fig. 15) and view (fig. 16) show the peculiarities of the existing
building. The church is preceded by an _atrium_, the only perfect example
remaining in Rome, in the centre of which is the _cantharus_ or fountain
for ablutions. The atrium is entered by a portico made up of earlier
fragments very carelessly put together. The _chorus cantorum_, which
occupies about one-third of the nave, is enclosed by a low marble screen,
about 3 ft. high, a work of the 9th century, preserved from the old church
but newly arranged. The white marble slabs are covered with patterns in low
relief, and are decorated with ribbons of glass mosaic of the 13th century.
These screen-walls stand quite free of the pillars, leaving a passage
between. On the ritual north stands the gospel-ambo, of octagonal form,
with a double flight of steps westwards and eastwards. To the west of it
stands the great Paschal candlestick, with a spiral shaft, decorated with
mosaic. Opposite, to the south, is the epistle-ambo, square in plan, with
two marble reading-desks facing east and west, for the reading of the
epistle and the gradual respectively. The sanctuary is raised two steps
above the choir, from which it is divided by another portion of the same
marble screen. The altar stands beneath a lofty _ciborium_, supported by
marble columns, with a canopy on smaller shafts above. It retains the rods
and rings for the curtains to run on. Behind the altar, in the centre of
the curved line of the apse, is a marble episcopal throne, bearing the
monogram of Anastasius who was titular cardinal of this church in 1108. The
conch of the apse is inlaid with mosaics of quite the end of the 13th
century. The subterranean church, disinterred by the zeal of Father
Mullooly, the prior of the adjacent Irish Dominican convent, is supported
by columns of very rich marble of various kinds. The aisle walls, as well
as those of the narthex, are covered with fresco-paintings of various dates
from the 7th to the 11th century, in a marvellous state of preservation
(See _St Clement, Pope and Martyr, and his Basilica in Rome_, by Joseph
Mullooly, O.P., Rome, 1873.)

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Interior of S. Clemente in Rome.]

The fullest lists of early Christian basilicas outside Rome are given in
Kraus's _Realencyklopädie der christlichen Alterthümer_, Freiburg i. B.,
1882, art. "Basilica," and more recently in Leclercq's _Manuel
d'archéologie chrétienne_, Paris 1907, vol. i. App. i., "Essai de
Classement des Principaux Monuments." Only a few characteristic specimens
in different regions can here be noticed. In Italy, apart from Rome, the
most remarkable basilican churches are the two dedicated to S. Apollinare
at Ravenna. They are of smaller dimensions than those of Rome, but the
design and proportions are better. The cathedral of this city, a noble
basilica with double aisles, erected by Archbishop Ursus, A.D. 400
(Agincourt, pl. xxiii. No. 21), was unfortunately destroyed on the erection
of the present tasteless building. Of the two basilicas of S. Apollinare,
the earlier, S. Apollinare Nuovo, originally an Arian church erected by
Theodoric, 493-525, measuring 315 ft. in length by 115 ft. in breadth, has
a nave 51 ft. wide, separated from the single aisles by colonnades of
twenty-two pillars, supporting arches, a small prismatic block bearing a
sculptured cross intervening with very happy effect between the capital and
the arch. Below the windows a continuous band of saintly figures, male on
one side and female on the other, advancing in stately procession towards
Our Lord and the Virgin Mother respectively, affords one of the most
beautiful examples of mosaic ornamentation to be found [v.03 p.0476] in any
church (fig. 17). The design of the somewhat later and smaller church of S.
Apollinare in Classe, A.D. 538-549, measuring 216 ft. by 104 ft., is so
similar that they must have proceeded from the same architect (Agincourt,
pl lxxiii. No. 35).

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--Arches of S Apollinare Nuovo, Ravenna.]

The cathedral on the island of Torcello near Venice, originally built in
the 7th century, but largely repaired c. A.D. 1000, deserves special
attention from the fact that it preserves, in a more perfect state than can
be seen elsewhere, the arrangements of the seats in the apse (fig. 18). The
bishop's throne occupies the centre of the arc, approached by a steep
flight of steps. Six rows of stone benches for the presbyters, rising one
above another like the seats in a theatre, follow the curve on either
side--the whole being singularly plain and almost rude. The altar stands on
a platform; the sanctuary is divided from the nave by a screen of six
pillars. The walls of the apse are inlaid with plates of marble. The church
is 125 ft. by 75 ft. The narrow aisles are only 7 ft. in width.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--Apse of Basilica, Torcello, with Bishop's throne
and seats for the clergy. (From a drawing by Lady Palgrave.)]

Another very remarkable basilica, less known than it deserves to be, is
that of Parenzo in Istria, _c._ A.D. 542. Few basilicas have sustained so
little alteration. From the annexed ground-plan (fig. 19) it will be seen
that it retains its _atrium_ and a baptistery, square without, octagonal
within, to the west of it. Nine pillars divide each aisle from the nave,
some of them borrowed from earlier buildings. The capitals are Byzantine.
The choir occupies the three easternmost bays. The apse, as at Torcello,
retains the bishop's throne and the bench for the presbyters apparently
unaltered. The mosaics are singularly gorgeous, and the apse walls, as at
Torcello, are inlaid with rich marble and mother-of-pearl. The dimensions
are small--121 ft. by 32 ft. (See _Kunstdenkmale des österreichischen
Kaiserreichs_, by Dr G. Heider and others.)

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--Ground-Plan of Cathedral of Parenzo, Istria.

_a_, Cloistered atrium. +, Narthex. _b_, Nave. _c_, _c_, Aisles. _d_,
Chorus cantorum. _e_, Altar. _f_, Bishop's throne. _g_, Baptistery. _h_,
Belfry. _i_, Chapel of St Andrew.]

In the Eastern church, though the erection of St Sophia at Constantinople
introduced a new type which almost entirely superseded the old one, the
basilican form, or as it was then termed _dromical_, from its shape being
that of a race-course (_dromos_), was originally as much the rule as in the
West. The earliest church of which we have any clear account, that of
Paulinus at Tyre, A.D. 313-322, described by Eusebius (_Hist. Eccl._ x. 4 §
37), was evidently basilican, with galleries over the aisles, and had an
atrium in front. That erected by Constantine at Jerusalem, on the side of
the Holy Sepulchre, 333, followed the same plan (Euseb., _Vit. Const._ iii.
c. 29), as did the original churches of St Sophia and of the Apostles at
Constantinople. Both these buildings have entirely passed away, but we have
an excellent example of an oriental basilica of the same date still
standing in the church of the Nativity at Bethlehem, rebuilt by Justinian
in the 6th century (fig. 20). Here we find an oblong atrium, a vestibule or
narthex, double aisles with Corinthian columns, and a transept, each end of
which terminates in an apse, in addition to that in the usual position.
Beneath the centre of the transept is the subterranean church of the
Nativity (Vogué, _Les Églises de la Terre Sainte_, p. 46).

Constantinople preserved till recently a basilican church of the 5th
century, that of St John Studios, 463, now a ruin. It had a nave and side
aisles divided by columns supporting a horizontal entablature, with another
order supporting arches forming a gallery above. There was the usual
apsidal termination. The chief difference between the Eastern and Roman
basilicas is in the galleries. This feature is very rare in the West, and
only occurs in some few examples, the antiquity of which is questioned at
Rome but never at Ravenna. It is, on the other hand, a characteristic
feature of Eastern churches, the galleries being intended for women, for
whom privacy was more studied than in the West (Salzenberg, _Altchrist.
Baudenkmale von Constantinople_).

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Plan of church of the Nativity, Bethlehem. 1,
Narthex; 2, nave; 3, 3, aisles.]

Other basilican churches in the East which deserve notice are those of the
monastery of St Catherine on Mt. Sinai built by Justinian, that of Dana
between Antioch and Bir of the same date, St Philip at Athens, Bosra in
Arabia, Xanthus in Lycia, and the very noble church of St Demetrius at
Thessalonica. Views and descriptions of most of these may be found in
Texier and Pullan's _Byzantine Architecture_, Couchaud's _Choix d'églises
byzantines_, and the works of the count de Vogué. In the Roman province of
North Africa there are abundant remains of early Christian churches, and S.
Gsell, _Les Monuments antiques de l'Algérie_, has noticed more than 130
examples. Basilicas of strictly early Christian date are not now to be met
with in France, Spain or Germany, but the interesting though very plain
"Basse Oeuvre" at Beauvais may date from Carolingian times, while Germany
can show at Michelstadt in the Odenwald an unaltered basilica of the time
of Charles the Great. The fine-columned basilica of St Mauritius, near
Hildesheim, dates from the 11th century, and the basilican form has been
revived in the noble modern basilica at Munich.

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--Plan of early Christian Basilica of about the 4th
century at Silchester, Hants.

(From _Archaeologia_, liii.)]

England can show more early Christian survivals than France or Germany. In
the course of the excavation of the Roman city of Silchester, there was
brought to light in 1892 the remains of a small early Christian basilica
dating from the 4th century of which fig. 21 gives the plan
(_Archaeologia_, vol. liii.). It will be [v.03 p.0477] noted that the apse
is flanked by two chambers, of the nature of sacristies, cut off from the
rest of the church, and known in ecclesiastical terminology as _prothesis_
and _diaconicon_. These features, rare in Italy, are almost universal in
the churches of North Africa and Syria. Another existing English basilica
of early date is that of Brixworth in Northamptonshire, probably erected by
Saxulphus, abbot of Peterborough, _c._ A.D. 680. It consisted of a nave
divided from its aisles by quadrangular piers supporting arches turned in
Roman brick, with clerestory windows above, and a short chancel terminating
in an apse, outside which, as at St Peter's at Rome, ran a circumscribing
crypt entered by steps from the chancel. At the west end was a square
porch, the walls of which were carried up later in the form of a tower.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.--Ground-Plan of the original Cathedral at
Canterbury, as restored by Willis.

A, High altar. B, Altar of our Lord. C, C, Steps to crypt. D, Crypt. E, F,
Chorus cantorum. G, Our Lady's altar. H, Bishop's throne. K, South porch
with altar. L, North porch containing school. M, Archbishop Odo's tomb.]

The first church built in England under Roman influence was the original
Saxon cathedral of Canterbury. From the annexed ground-plan (fig. 22), as
conjecturally restored from Eadmer's description, we see that it was an
aisled basilica, with an apse at either end, containing altars standing on
raised platforms approached by steps. Beneath the eastern platform was a
crypt, or _confessio_, containing relics, "fabricated in the likeness of
the confessionary of St Peter at Rome" (Eadmer). The western apse,
dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, contained the bishop's throne. From this
and other indications Willis thinks that this was the original altar end,
the eastern apse being a subsequent addition of Archbishop Odo, _c._ 950,
the church having been thus turned from west to east, as at the
already-described basilica of S. Lorenzo at Rome. The choir, as at S.
Clemente's, occupied the eastern part of the nave, and like it was probably
enclosed by breast-high partitions. There were attached porches to the
north and south of the nave. The main entrance of the church was through
that to the south. At this _suthdure_, according to Eadmer, "all disputes
from the whole kingdom, which could not legally be referred to the king's
court, or to the hundreds and counties, received judgment." The northern
porch contained a school for the younger clergy.

AUTHORITIES.--Vitruvius, _De Architectura_, v. 1, vi. 3, 9; Huelsen, _The
Roman Forum_ (1906); Mau, _Pompeii: its Life and Art_; C. Lange, _Haus und
Halle_; Canina, _Edifizii di Roma Antica_; Ciampini, _Vetera Monimenta_;
Seroux d'Agincourt, _L'Histoire de l'art par les monumens_; Bunsen and
Plattner, _Beschreibung der Stadt Rom_; Gutensohn and Knapp, _Basiliken des
christlichen Roms_; Zestermann, _Die antiken u. die christlichen
Basiliken_; Hübsch, _Die altchristlichen Kirchen_; Messmer, _Über den
Ursprung, &c., der Basilica_; Letarouilly, _Edifices de Rome moderne_; Von
Quast, _Altchristliche Bauwerke von Ravenna_; Texier and Pullan, _Byzantine
Architecture_; Vogué, _Eglises de la Terre Sainte; Syrie Centrale,
Architecture, &c._; Couchaud, _Choix d'églises byzantines_; Dehio und von
Bezold, _Die kirchliche Baukunst des Abendlandes_; Holtzinger, _Die
altchristliche Architectur in systematischer Darstellung_; Kraus,
_Geschichte der christlichen Kunst_; Leclercq, _Manuel d'archéologie
chrétienne_ (Paris, 1907).

(E. V.; G. B. B.)