BASIL II. (_c._ 958-1025), known as BULGAROKTONOS (slayer of Bulgarians),
Roman emperor in the East, son of Romanus II. and Theophano,
great-great-grandson of Basil I., was born about 958 and crowned on the
22nd of April 960. After their father's death (963) he and his younger
brother Constantine were nominal emperors during the actual reigns of
Nicephorus Phocas, their stepfather, and John Tzimisces. On the death of
the latter (10th of January 976) they assumed the sovereignty without a
colleague, but throughout their joint reign Constantine exercised no power
and devoted himself chiefly to pleasure. This was in accordance with the
Byzantine principle that in the case of two or more co-regnant _basileis_
only one governed. Basil was a brave soldier and a superb horseman; he was
to approve himself a strong ruler and an able general. He did not at first
display the full extent of his energy. The administration remained in the
hands of the eunuch Basileios (an illegitimate son of Romanus I.),
president of the senate, a wily and gifted man, who hoped that the young
emperors would be his puppets. Basil waited and watched without
interfering, and devoted himself to learning the details of administrative
business and instructing himself in military science. During this time the
throne was seriously endangered by the rebellion of an ambitious general
who aspired to play the part of Nicephorus Phocas or Tzimisces. This was
Bardas [v.03 p.0468] Sclerus, whom the eunuch deposed from his post of
general in the East. He belonged to the powerful landed aristocracy of Asia
Minor, whose pretensions were a perpetual menace to the throne. He made
himself master of the Asiatic provinces and threatened Constantinople. To
oppose him, Bardas Phocas, another general who had revolted in the previous
reign and been interned in a monastery, was recalled. Defeated in two
battles, he was victorious in a third and the revolt was suppressed (979).
Phocas remained general in the East till 987, when he rebelled and was
proclaimed emperor by his troops. It seems that the minister Basileios was
privy to this act, and the cause was dissatisfaction at the energy which
was displayed by the emperor, who showed that he was determined to take the
administration into his own hands and personally to control the army.
Phocas advanced to the Hellespont and besieged Abydos. Basil obtained
timely aid, in the shape of Varangian mercenaries, from his brother-in-law
Vladimir, the Russian prince of Kiev, and marched to Abydos. The two armies
were facing each other, when Basil galloped forward, seeking a personal
combat with the usurper who was riding in front of his lines. Phocas, just
as he prepared to face him, fell from his horse and was found to be dead.
This ended the rebellion.

The fall of Basileios followed; he was punished with exile and the
confiscation of his enormous property. Basil made ruthless war upon the
system of immense estates which had grown up in Asia Minor and which his
predecessor, Romanus I., had endeavoured to check. (For this evil and the
legislation which was aimed at it see ROMAN EMPIRE, LATER.) He sought to
protect the lower and middle classes.

Basil gained some successes against the Saracens (995); but his most
important work in the East was the annexation of the principalities of
Armenia. He created in those highlands a strongly fortified frontier,
which, if his successors had been capable, should have proved an effective
barrier against the invasions of the Seljuk Turks. The greatest achievement
of the reign was the subjugation of Bulgaria. After the death of Tzimisces
(who had reduced only the eastern part of the Bulgarian kingdom), the power
of Bulgaria was restored by the Tsar Samuel, in whom Basil found a worthy
foe. The emperor's first efforts against him were unsuccessful (981), and
the war was not resumed till 996, Samuel in the meantime extending his rule
along the Adriatic coast and imposing his lordship on Servia. Eastern
Bulgaria was finally recovered in 1000; but the war continued with varying
successes till 1014, when the Bulgarian army suffered an overwhelming
defeat. Basil blinded 15,000 prisoners, leaving a one-eyed man to every
hundred to lead them to their tsar, who fainted at the sight and died two
days later. The last sparks of resistance were extinguished in 1018, and
the great Slavonic realm lay in the dust. The power of Byzantium controlled
once more the Illyrian peninsula. Basil died in December 1025 in the midst
of preparations to send a naval expedition to recover Sicily from the
Saracens.

Basil's reign marks the highest point of the power of the Eastern empire
since Justinian I. Part of the credit is due to his predecessors Nicephorus
and Tzimisces, but the greater part belongs to him. He dedicated himself
unsparingly to the laborious duties of ruling, and he had to reckon
throughout with the ill-will of a rich and powerful section of his
subjects. He was hard and cruel, without any refinement or interest in
culture. In a contemporary psalter (preserved in the library of St Mark at
Venice) there is a portrait of him, with a grey beard, crowned and robed in
imperial costume.

AUTHORITIES.--Leo Diaconus (ed. Bonn, 1828); Psellus, _History_ (ed.
Sathas, London, 1899); George Cedrenus (_Chronicle_, transcribed from the
work of John Scylitzes, vol. ii., ed. Bonn, 1839); Zonaras, bk. xvii. (ed.
Bonn, vol. iii., 1897); Cecaumenus, _Strategikon_ (ed. Vasilievski and
Jernstedt, St Petersburg, 1896); Yahy[=a] of Antioch (contemporary Asiatic
chronicle), extracts with Russian translation by Rosen (St Petersburg,
1883); Al Mekin (Elmacinus), _Historia Saracenica_, (ed. with Latin
translation by Erpenius, Leiden, 1625); "Laws (_Novellae_) of Basil" (ed.
Zachariä von Lingenthal, in _Jus Graeco-Romanum_, vol. iii., 1853); Finlay,
_Hist. of Greece_; Gibbon, _Decline and Fall_; G. Schlumberger, _L'Épopée
byzantine_, part i. and part ii. (Paris, 1896, 1900).

(J. B. B.)