BASILICA, a code of law, drawn up in the Greek language, with a view to
putting an end to the uncertainty which prevailed throughout the East Roman
empire in the 9th century as to the authorized sources of law. This
uncertainty had been brought about by the conflicting opinions of the
jurists of the 6th century as to the proper interpretation to be given to
the legislation of the emperor Justinian, from which had resulted a system
of teaching which had deprived that legislation of all authority, and the
imperial judges at last were at a loss to know by what rules of law they
were to regulate their decisions. An endeavour had been made by the emperor
Leo the Isaurian to remedy this evil, but his attempted reform of the law
had been rather calculated to increase its uncertainty; and it was reserved
for Basil the Macedonian to show himself worthy of the throne, which he had
usurped, by purifying the administration of justice and once more reducing
the law into an intelligible code. There has been considerable controversy
as to the part which the emperor Basil took in framing the new code. There
is, however, no doubt that he abrogated in a formal manner the ancient
laws, which had fallen into desuetude, and the more probable opinion would
seem to be, that he caused a revision to be made of the ancient laws which
were to continue in force, and divided them into forty books, and that this
code of laws was subsequently enlarged and distributed into sixty books by
his son Leo the Philosopher. A further revision of this code is stated to
have been made by Constantine Porphyrogenitus, the son and successor of
Leo, but this statement rests only on the authority of Theodorus Balsamon,
a very learned canonist of the 12th century, who, in his preface to the
_Nomocanon_ of Patriarch Photius, cites passages from the Basilica which
differ from the text of the code as revised by the emperor Leo. The weight
of authority, however, is against any further revision of the code having
been made after the formal revision which it underwent in the reign of the
emperor Leo, who appointed a commission of jurists under the presidency of
Sympathius, the captain of the body-guard, to revise the work of his
father, to which he makes allusion in the first of his _Novellae_. This
latter conclusion is the more probable from the circumstance, that the text
of the code, as revised by the emperor Leo, agrees with the citations from
the Basilica which occur in the works of Michael Psellus and Michael
Attaliates, both of them high dignitaries of the court of Constantinople,
who lived a century before Balsamon, and who are silent as to any second
revision of the code having taken place in the reign of Constantine
Porphyrogenitus, as well as with other citations from the Basilica, which
are found in the writings of Mathaeus Blastares and of Constantine
Harmenopulus, both of whom wrote shortly after Balsamon, and the latter of
whom was far too learned a jurist and too accurate a lawyer to cite any but
the official text of the code.

Authors are not agreed as to the origin of the term Basilica, by which the
code of the emperor Leo is now distinguished. The code itself appears to
have been originally entitled _The Revision of the Ancient Laws_ ([Greek:
hê anakatharsis tôn palaiôn nomôn]); next there came into use the title
[Greek: hê hexêkontabiblos], derived from the division of the work into
sixty books; and finally, before the conclusion of the 10th century, the
code came to be designated [Greek: ho basilikos], or [Greek: ta basilika],
being elliptical forms of [Greek: ho basilikos nomos] and [Greek: ta
basilika nomima], namely the Imperial Law or the Imperial Constitutions.
This explanation of the term "Basilica" is more probable than the
derivation of it from the name of the father of the emperor Leo, inasmuch
as the Byzantine jurists of the 11th and 12th centuries ignored altogether
the part which the emperor Basil had taken in initiating the legal reforms,
which were completed by his son; besides the name of the father of the
emperor Leo was written [Greek: basileios], from which substantive,
according to the genius of [v.03 p.0478] the ancient Greek language, the
adjective [Greek: basilikos] could not well be derived.

No perfect MS. has been preserved of the text of the Basilica, and the
existence of any portion of the code seems to have been ignored by the
jurists of western Europe, until the important bearing of it upon the study
of the Roman law was brought to their attention by Viglius Zuichemus, in
his preface to his edition of the Greek _Paraphrase of Theophilus_,
published in 1533. A century, however, elapsed before an edition of the
sixty books of the Basilica, as far as the MSS. then known to exist
supplied materials, was published in seven volumes, by Charles Annibal
Fabrot, under the patronage of Louis XIII. of France, who assigned an
annual stipend of two thousand livres to the editor during its publication,
and placed at his disposal the royal printing-press. This edition, although
it was a great undertaking and a work of considerable merit, was a very
imperfect representation of the original code. A newly-restored and far
more complete text of the sixty books of the Basilica was published at
Leipzig in six volumes (1833-1870), edited by K. W. E. Heimbach and G. E.
Heimbach. It may seem strange that so important a body of law as the
Basilica should not have come down to us in its integrity, but a letter has
been preserved, which was addressed by Mark the patriarch of Alexandria to
Theodoras Balsamon, from which it appears that copies of the Basilica were
in the 12th century very scarce, as the patriarch was unable to procure a
copy of the work. The great bulk of the code was an obstacle to the
multiplication of copies of it, whilst the necessity for them was in a
great degree superseded by the publication from time to time of synopses
and encheiridia of its contents, composed by the most eminent jurists, of
which a very full account will be found in the _Histoire au droit
byzantin_, by the advocate Mortreuil, published in Paris in 1846.