BASIL I. (d. 886), known as the "MACEDONIAN", Roman emperor in the East,
was born of a family of Armenian (_not_ Slavonic) descent, settled in
Macedonia. He spent a part of his boyhood in captivity in Bulgaria, whither
his family was carried by the Bulgarian prince Krum in 813. He succeeded in
escaping and was ultimately lucky enough to enter the service of
Theophilitzes, a relative of the Caesar Bardas (uncle of Michael III.), as
groom. It seems that while serving in this capacity he visited Patrae with
his master, and gained the favour of Danielis, a very wealthy lady of that
place, who received him into her household, and endowed him with a fortune.
He earned the notice of Michael III. by winning a victory in a wrestling
match, and soon became the emperor's boon companion and was appointed
chamberlain (_parakoem[=o]menos_). A man of his stamp, advancing
unscrupulously on the road of fortune, had no hesitation in divorcing his
wife and marrying a mistress of Michael, Eudocia Ingerina, to please his
master. It was commonly believed that Leo VI., Basil's successor and
reputed son, was really the son of Michael. The next step was to murder the
powerful Caesar Bardas, who, as the emperor was devoted to amusement,
virtually ruled the empire; this was done with the emperor's consent by
Basil's own hand (April 866), and a few weeks later Basil was raised to the
imperial dignity. Hitherto few perhaps had divined in the unprincipled
adventurer, who shared in the debauches of the imperial drunkard, the
talents of a born ruler. On the throne he soon displayed the serious side
of his nature and his exceptional capacities for administration. In
September 867 he caused his worthless benefactor to be assassinated, and
reigned alone. He inaugurated a new age in the history of the empire,
associated with the dynasty which he founded,--"the Macedonian dynasty" it
is usually called; it would be more instructive to call it "Armenian." It
was a period of territorial expansion, during which the empire was the
strongest power in Europe. The great legislative work which Basil undertook
and his successor completed, and which may be described as a revival of
Justinianean law, entitles him to the designation of a second Justinian
(the _Basilica_, a collection of laws in sixty books; and the manuals known
as the _Prochiron_ and _Epanagog[=e]_. For this legislation see BASILICA
and ROMAN EMPIRE, LATER). His financial administration was prudent. His
ecclesiastical policy was marked by a wish to keep on good terms with Rome.
One of his first acts was to exile the patriarch Photius and restore his
rival Ignatius, whose claims were supported by the pope. Yet he had no
intention of yielding to Rome's pretensions beyond a certain point. The
decision of the Bulgarian tsar Michael to submit the new Bulgarian Church
to the jurisdiction of Constantinople was a great blow to Rome, who had
hoped to secure it for herself. In 877 Photius became patriarch again, and
there was a virtual though not a formal breach with Rome. Thus the
independence of the Greek Church may be said to date from the time of
Basil. His reign was marked by a troublesome war with the Paulician
heretics, an inheritance from his predecessor; the death of their able
chief Chrysochir led to the definite subjection of this little state, of
which the chief stronghold was Tephrice on the upper Euphrates, and which
the Saracens had helped to bid a long defiance to the government of
Constantinople. There was the usual frontier warfare with the Saracens in
Asia Minor. Cyprus was recovered, but only retained for seven years.
Syracuse was lost, but Bari was won back and those parts of Calabria which
had been occupied by the Saracens. The last successes opened a new period
of Byzantine domination in southern Italy. Above all, New Rome was again
mistress of the sea, and especially of the gates of the Adriatic. Basil
reigned nineteen years as sole sovereign. His death (29th of August 886)
was due to a fever contracted in consequence of a serious accident in
hunting. A stag dragged him from his horse by fixing its antlers in his
belt. He was saved by an attendant who cut him loose with a knife. His last
act was to cause his saviour to be beheaded, suspecting him of the
intention to kill and not to rescue. Basil is one of the most remarkable
examples of a man, without education and exposed to the most demoralizing
influences, manifesting extraordinary talents in the government of a great
state, when he had climbed to the throne by acts of unscrupulous bloodshed.

SOURCES.--_Vita Basilii_, by his grandson Constantine VII. (bk. v. of the
_Continuation of Theophanes_, ed. Bonn); Genesius (ed. Bonn); _Vita
Euthymii_, ed. De Boor (Berlin, 1888). Of the Arabic sources Tabari is the
most important.

MODERN WORKS.--Finlay, _History of Greece_, vol. ii. (Oxford, 1877);
Gibbon, _Decline and Fall_, vols. v. and vi. (ed. Bury, London, 1898);
Hergenröther, _Photius, Patriarch von Constantinopel_, vol. ii.
(Regensburg, 1867).

(J. B. B.)