BASILIAN MONKS, those who follow the rule of Basil the Great. The chief
importance of the monastic rule and institute of St Basil lies in the fact
that to this day his reconstruction of the monastic life is the basis of
the monasticism of the Greek and Slavonic Churches, though the monks do not
call themselves Basilians. St Basil's claim to the authorship of the Rules
and other ascetical writings that go under his name, has been questioned;
but the tendency now is to recognize as his at any rate the two sets of
Rules. Probably the truest idea of his monastic system may be derived from
a correspondence between him and St Gregory Nazianzen at the beginning of
his monastic life, the chief portions whereof are translated by Newman in
the _Church of the Fathers_, "Basil and Gregory," §§ 4, 5. On leaving
Athens Basil visited the monasteries of Egypt and Palestine; in the latter
country and in Syria the monastic life tended to become more and more
eremitical and to run to great extravagances in the matter of bodily
austerities (see MONASTICISM). When (_c._ 360) Basil formed his monastery
in the neighbourhood of Neocaesarea in Pontus, he deliberately set himself
against these tendencies. He declared that the cenobitical life is superior
to the eremitical; that fasting and austerities should not interfere with
prayer or work; that work should form an integral part of the monastic
life, not merely as an occupation, but for its own sake and in order to do
good to others; and therefore that monasteries should be near towns. All
this was a new departure in monachism. The life St Basil established was
strictly cenobitical, with common prayer seven times a day, common work,
common meals. It was, in spite of the new ideas, an austere life, of the
kind called contemplative, given up to prayer, the reading of the
Scriptures and heavy field-work. The so-called Rules (the Longer and the
Shorter) are catechisms of the spiritual life rather than a body of
regulations for the corporate working of a community, such as is now
understood by a monastic rule. Apparently no vows were taken, but
obedience, personal poverty, chastity, self-denial, and the other monastic
virtues were strongly enforced, and a monk was not free to abandon the
monastic life. A novitiate had to be passed, and young boys were to be
educated in the monastery, but were not expected to become monks.

St Basil's influence, and the greater suitability of his institute to
European ideas, ensured the propagation of Basilian monachism; and Sozomen
says that in Cappadocia and the neighbouring provinces there were no
hermits but only cenobites. However, the eastern hankering after the
eremitical life long survived, and it was only by dint of legislation, both
ecclesiastical (council of Chalcedon) and civil (Justinian Code), that the
Basilian cenobitic form of monasticism came to prevail throughout the
Greek-speaking lands, though the eremitical forms have always maintained
themselves.

Greek monachism underwent no development or change for four centuries,
except the vicissitudes inevitable in all things human, which in
monasticism assume the form of alternations of relaxation and revival. The
second half of the 8th century seems to have been a time of very general
decadence; but about the year 800 Theodore, destined to be the only other
creative name in Greek monachism, became abbot of the monastery of the
Studium in Constantinople. He set himself to reform his monastery and
restore St Basil's spirit in its primitive vigour. But to effect this, and
to give permanence to the reformation, he saw that there was need of a more
practical code of laws to regulate the details of the daily life, as a
supplement to St Basil's Rules. He therefore drew up constitutions,
afterwards codified (see Migne, _Patrol. Graec._ xcix., 1704-1757), which
became the norm of the life at the Studium monastery, and gradually spread
thence to the monasteries of the rest of the Greek empire. Thus to this day
the Rules of Basil and the Constitutions of Theodore the Studite, along
with the canons of the Councils, constitute the chief part of Greek and
Russian monastic law.

The spirit of Greek monachism, as regenerated by Theodore, may best be
gathered from his _Letters, Discourses and Testament_.[1] Under the abbot
were several officials to superintend the various departments; the
liturgical services in the church took up a considerable portion of the
day, but Theodore seems to have made no attempt to revive the early
practice of the Studium in this matter (see ACOEMETI); the rest of the time
was divided between reading and work; the latter included the chief
handicrafts, for the monks, only ten in number, when Theodore became abbot,
increased under his rule to over a thousand. One kind of work practised
with great zeal and success by the Studite monks, was the copying of
manuscripts, so that to them and to the schools that went forth from them
we owe a great number of existing Greek MSS. and the preservation of many
works of classical and ecclesiastical antiquity. In addition to this,
literary and theological studies were pursued, and the mysticism of
pseudo-Dionysius was cultivated. The life, though simple and self-denying
and hard, was not of extreme austerity. There was a division of the monks
into two classes, similar to the division in vogue in later time in the
West into choir-monks and lay-brothers. The life of the choir-monks was
predominantly contemplative, [v.03 p.0470] being taken up with the church
services and private prayer and study; the lay-brothers carried on the
various trades and external works. There is little or no evidence of works
of charity outside the monastery being undertaken by Studite monks. Strict
personal poverty was enforced, and all were encouraged to approach
confession and communion frequently. Vows had been imposed on monks by the
council of Chalcedon (451). The picture of Studite life is the picture of
normal Greek and Slavonic monachism to this day.

During the middle ages the centre of Greek monachism shifted from
Constantinople to Mount Athos. The first monastery to be founded here was
that of St Athanasius (_c._ 960), and in the course of the next three or
four centuries monasteries in great numbers--Greek, Slavonic and one
Latin--were established on Mount Athos, some twenty of which still survive.

Basilian monachism spread from Greece to Italy and Russia. Rufinus had
translated St Basil's Rules into Latin (_c._ 400) and they became the rule
of life in certain Italian monasteries. They were known to St Benedict, who
refers his monks to "the Rule of our holy Father Basil,"--indeed St
Benedict owed more of the ground-ideas of his Rule to St Basil than to any
other monastic legislator. In the 6th and 7th centuries there appear to
have been Greek monasteries in Rome and south Italy and especially in
Sicily. But during the course of the 8th, 9th and 10th centuries crowds of
fugitives poured into southern Italy from Greece and Sicily, under stress
of the Saracenic, Arab and other invasions; and from the middle of the 9th
century Basilian monasteries, peopled by Greek-speaking monks, were
established in great numbers in Calabria and spread northwards as far as
Rome. Some of them existed on into the 18th century, but the only survivor
now is the monastery founded by St Nilus (_c._ 1000) at Grottaferrata in
the Alban Hills. Professor Kirsopp Lake has (1903) written four valuable
articles (_Journal of Theological Studies_, iv., v.) on "The Greek
monasteries of South Italy"; he deals in detail with their scriptoria and
the dispersal of their libraries, a matter of much interest, in that some
of the chief collections of Greek MSS. in western Europe--as the Bessarion
at Venice and a great number at the Vatican--come from the spoils of these
Italian Basilian houses.

Of much greater importance was the importation of Basilian monachism into
Russia, for it thereby became the norm of monachism for all the Slavonic
lands. Greek monks played a considerable part in the evangelization of the
Slavs, and the first Russian monastery was founded at Kiev (_c._ 1050) by a
monk from Mount Athos. The monastic institute had a great development in
Russia, and at the present day there are in the Russian empire some 400
monasteries of men and 100 of women, many of which support hospitals,
almshouses and schools. In the other Slavonic lands there are a
considerable number of monasteries, as also in Greece itself, while in the
Turkish dominions there are no fewer than 100 Greek monasteries. The
monasteries are of three kinds: _cenobia_ proper, wherein full monastic
common life, with personal poverty, is observed; others called
_idiorrhythmic_, wherein the monks are allowed the use of their private
means and lead a generally mitigated and free kind of monastic life; and
the _lauras_, wherein the life is semi-eremitical. Greek and Slavonic monks
wear a black habit. The visits of Western scholars in modern times to Greek
monasteries in search of MSS.--notably to St Catherine's on Mount Sinai,
and to Mount Athos--has directed much attention to contemporary Greek
monachism, and the accounts of these expeditions commonly contain
descriptions, more or less sympathetic and intelligent, of the present-day
life of Greek monks. The first such account was Robert Curzon's in parts
iii. (1834) and iv. (1837) of the _Monasteries of the Levant_; the most
recent in English is Athelstan Riley's _Athos_ (1887). The life is mainly
given up to devotional contemplative exercises; the church services are of
extreme length; intellectual study is little cultivated; manual labour has
almost disappeared; there are many hermits on Athos (_q.v._).

The ecclesiastical importance of the monks in the various branches of the
Orthodox Church lies in this, that as bishops must be celibate, whereas the
parochial clergy must be married, the bishops are all recruited from the
monks. But besides this they have been a strong spiritual and religious
influence, as is recognized even by those who have scant sympathy with
monastic ideals (see Harnack, _What is Christianity?_ Lect. xiii., end).

Outside the Orthodox Church are some small congregations of Uniat
Basilians. Besides Grottaferrata, there are Catholic Basilian monasteries
in Poland, Hungary, Galicia, Rumania; and among the Melchites or Uniat
Syrians.

There have been Basilian nuns from the beginning, St Macrina, St Basil's
sister, having established a nunnery which was under his direction. The
nuns are devoted to a purely contemplative life, and in Russia, where there
are about a hundred nunneries, they are not allowed to take final vows
until the age of sixty. They are very numerous throughout the East.

AUTHORITIES.--In addition to the authorities for different portions of the
subject-matter named in the course of this article, may be mentioned, on St
Basil and his Rules, Montalembert, _Monks of the West_, second part of bk.
ii., and the chapter on St Basil in James O. Hannay's _Spirit and Origin of
Christian Monasticism_ (1903). On the history and spirit of Basilian
Monachism, Helyot, _Hist. des Ordres Religieux_, i. (1714); Heimbucher,
_Orden und Kongregationen_ (1907), i., § 11; Abbé Marin, _Les Moines de
Constantinople_ (1897); Karl Holl, _Enthusiasmus und Bussgewalt beim
griechischen Mönchtum_ (1898); Otto Zöckler, _Askese und Mönchtum_, pp.
285-309 (1897). For general information see Wetzer und Welte,
_Kirchenlexicon_ (ed. ii.), art. "Basilianer," and Herzog-Hauck,
_Realencyklopädie_ (ed. iii.), in articles "Mönchtum," "Orientalische
Kirche," and "Athosberg," where copious references will be found.

(E. C. B.)

[1] Specimen passages, and also a general picture of the life, will be
found in Miss Alice Gardner's _Theodore of Studium_, ch. v.