BASKET, a vessel made of twigs, cane or rushes, as well as of a variety of
other materials, interwoven together, and used for holding, protecting or
carrying any commodity. The process of interweaving twigs, rushes or
leaves, is practised among the rudest nations of the world; and as it is
one of the most universal of arts, so also does it rank among the most
ancient industries, being probably the origin of all the textile arts of
the world. Decorative designs in old ceramic ware are derived from the
marks left by the basket mould used before the invention of the potter's
wheel, and in the willow pattern on old china, and the basket capitals or
mouldings of Byzantine architecture, the influence of the basketmaker's art
is clearly traceable. Essentially a primitive craft, its relative
importance is in inverse ratio to the industrial development of a people.

The word "basket" has been generally identified with the Latin _bascauda_,
as in Martial (xiv. 99):--

 "Barbara de pictis veni bascauda Britannis:
  Sed me iam mavult dicere Roma suam."

But its etymology is unknown, and the _New English Dictionary_ states that
there is no evidence to connect basket with _bascauda_, which denotes
rather a tub, tray or brazen vessel.

Among many uncivilized tribes, baskets of a superior order are made and
applied to various useful purposes. The North American Indians prepare
strong water-tight _Wattape_ baskets from the roots of a species of
_abies_, and these they frequently adorn with very pretty patterns made
from the dyed quills of their native porcupine, _Erethizon dorsatum_.
Wealthy Americans have formed collections of the beautiful ware treasured
as heirlooms in Indian families, and large prices have been paid for
baskets made by the few squaws who have inherited the traditions and
practice of the art, as much as £300 having been given for one specimen. It
has been computed that baskets to the value of £1,000,000 were recently
drawn from California and Arizona within two years. The Indians of South
America weave baskets equally useful from the fronds of the Carnahuba and
other palms. The Kaffirs and Hottentots of South Africa are similarly
skilful in using the Ilala reed and the roots of plants; while the
Abyssinians and the tribes of Central Africa display great adroitness in
the art of basket-weaving.

Basket-making, however, has by no means been confined to the fabrication of
those simple and useful utensils from which its name is derived. Of old,
the shields of soldiers were fashioned of wicker-work, either plain or
covered with hides. Xenophon, in his story of the Thirty Tyrants at Athens,
relates that the exiled Greeks who had seized on the Peiraeus made
themselves shields of whitened osiers; and similar weapons of defence are
still constructed by modern savages. The huts of the earliest settlers in
Rome and in western Europe generally were made of osier work plastered with
clay. Some interesting remains of British dwellings of this nature found
near Lewes in 1877 were described by Major-General H. L. F. Pitt-Rivers in
_Archaeologia_, vol. xlvi. pp. 456-458. Boats of the same material, covered
with the skins of animals, attracted the notice of the Romans in Britain;
they seem to have been of the ordinary boat-shape. The basketwork boats
mentioned by Herodotus as being used on the Tigris and Euphrates were round
and covered with bitumen. Boats of this shape are still used on these
rivers, and boats of analogous construction are employed in crossing the
rivers of India, in which the current is not rapid. Nor have methods of
making much changed. The strokes employed in the construction of
basket-work found in Etruscan tombs and now exhibited in the Museo Etrusco
at Florence, and in similar articles discovered in Egyptian tombs, are the
same as those used by the English basket-maker to-day. General Pitt-Rivers,
on comparing the remains excavated near Lewes with a modern hamper in his
possession, found the method to be identical.

Since about the middle of the 19th century the character of basket-work in
England has been greatly modified. The old English cradle, reticule, and
other small domestic wares, have been driven out of the market by cheap
goods made on the continent of Europe, and the coarse brown osier packing
and hampers have been largely superseded by rough casks and cases made from
cheap imported timber. This loss has, however, been more than
counterbalanced by the production of work of a higher class, such as finely
made chairs, tables, lounges and other articles of furniture; luncheon and
tea-baskets and similar requisites of travel. In addition to the foregoing
the chief categories of English manufacture are: vegetable and fruit
baskets, transit and travelling hampers, laundry and linen baskets,
partition baskets for wine, and protective wicker cases for fragile ware
such as glass carboys, stone and other bottles. Wicker shields or cases
made from cane pith, for the protection of shells, have been introduced by
the English military authorities. Some evidence of the above-mentioned
developments is afforded by a comparison of the wages lists of the London
Union of Journeymen Basketmakers issued in 1865 and in 1896. The former
consists of 87 printed pages; the latter of 144 pages, and these more
closely set.

No machinery is used in basket-making. A considerable training and natural
aptitude go to form the expert workman, for the ultimate perfection of
shape and beauty of texture depend upon the more or less perfect conception
of form in the [v.03 p.0482] craftsman's mind and on his power to impress
it on a recalcitrant material. In England at least, he rarely uses a mould;
every stroke made has a permanent effect on the symmetry of the whole work
and no subsequent pressure will alter it. Wages in London vary from 25s. to
50s. per week according to aptitude. The Basketmakers' Company is one of
the oldest craft gilds of the city of London and still exists.

Employment is given by the London Association for the Welfare of the Blind
to a number of partially or wholly blind workpeople, who are engaged in the
making of some of the coarser kinds of baskets; but the work, which bears
obvious traces of its origin, is not commercially remunerative, and the
association depends for partial support on the contributions of the
charitable, and on supplementary sales of fine or fancy work produced under
ordinary conditions and largely imported. Similar associations exist in
some English provincial towns, in Edinburgh, in Dublin and Belfast, and in
certain European cities.

The materials which are actually employed in the construction of
basket-work are numerous and varied, but it is from certain species of
willow that the largest supply of basket-making materials is produced.
Willows for basket-work are extensively grown on the continent of Europe,
whence large quantities are exported to Great Britain and the United
States; but no rods surpass those of English growth for their tough and
leathery texture, and the finest of basket-making willows are now
cultivated in England--in Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire and the valleys
of the Thames and the Trent. In the early part of the 19th century,
considerable attention was given in Britain to the cultivation of willows
suitable for basket-making, and the industry was first stimulated by
premiums offered by the Society of Arts. Mr William Scaling of Basford,
Notts, was a most successful grower and published some admirable pamphlets
on the cultivation of willows. The most extensive English willow plantation
or salicetum (Lat. _salix_, willow) of the present day is that planted by
Mr W. P. Ellmore at Thurmaston near Leicester, and consists of about 100
acres of the finest qualities. Mr Ellmore, a practical basket-maker,
successfully introduced some valuable continental varieties (see OSIER).

Willows are roughly classed by the basket-maker into "osier" and "fine."
The former consists of varieties of the true osier, _Salix viminalis_; the
latter of varieties of _Salix triandra_, _S. purpurea_ and some other
species and hybrids of tougher texture. For the coarsest work, dried
unpeeled osiers, known as "brown stuff," are used; for finer work, "white
(peeled) stuff" and "buff" (willows stained a tawny hue by boiling them
previous to peeling). Brown stuff is sorted, before it reaches the workman,
into lengths varying from 3½ ft. to 8 or 10 ft., the smallest being known
in London and the home counties as "luke," the largest as "great," and the
intermediate sizes as "long small," "threepenny" and "middleboro." White
and buff rods are more carefully sorted, the smallest, about 2 ft. or less,
being known as "small tack," and rising sizes as "tack," "short small,"
"small," "long small," "threepenny," "middleboro" and "great." Rods of two
to three years' growth, known as "sticks," are used to form the rigid
framework of the bottoms and lids of square work. In every case, except the
last, the stuff is soaked in tanks to render it pliable before use--brown
from three to seven days, white and buff from half-an-hour to half a day.
The rods are used whole for ordinary work, but for baskets of slight and
finer texture each is divided into "skains" of different degrees of size.
"Skains" are osiers cleft into three or four parts, by means of an
implement called a "cleaver," which is a wedge-shaped tool of boxwood
inserted at the point or top end of the rod and run down through its entire
length. They are next drawn through an implement resembling the common
spokeshave, keeping the grain of the split next the iron or stock of the
shave, while the pith is presented to the steel edge of the instrument, and
in order to bring the split into a shape still more regular, it is passed
through another implement called an upright, consisting of a flat piece of
steel, each end of which is fashioned into a cutting edge, like that of an
ordinary chisel and adjusted to the required width by means of a
thumb-screw.

The tools required by a basket-maker are few and simple. They consist,
besides the foregoing, of a shop-knife for cutting out material; a picking
knife for cutting off the protruding butts and tops of the rods after the
work is completed; two or three bodkins of varying sizes; a flat piece of
iron somewhat narrowly triangular in shape for driving the work closely
together; a stout pair of shears and a "dog" or "commander" for
straightening sticks. The employer supplies a screw block or vice for
gripping the bottom and cover sticks of square work, and a lapboard on
which the workman fixes the upsetted bottom while siding up the basket.
This is the full kit. A common round or oval basket may, however, be made
with no other tools than a shop-knife and a bodkin. On the continent of
Europe shapes or blocks are in use on which the fabric is in some cases
woven.

[Illustration]

The technicalities of basket-making may be easily followed by a glance at
the illustration here reproduced by the courtesy of the Society of Arts.[1]
It will be seen that the "bye-stakes" are merely inserted in the "upsett,"
whereas the stakes are driven in at each side of the "bottom-sticks" and
pricked up to form the rigid framework of the side. When the "bottom-stick"
and "stake" are formed of one and the same continuous rod, it is termed a
"league." If the bottom is made on a hoop the butts of the stakes are
"sliped," _i.e._ cut away with a long cut of the shop-knife, and turned
tightly round the hoop; they are then said to be "scallomed" on. The chief
strokes used in constructing an ordinary basket are:--the "slew"--two or
more rods woven together; the "rand," rods woven in singly; the "fitch,"
two rods tightly worked alternately one under the other, employed for
skeleton work such as cages and waste-paper baskets; the "pair," two rods
worked alternately one over the other, used for filling up bottoms and
covers of round and oval baskets; and the "wale," three or more rods worked
alternately, forming a string or binding course. Various forms of plaiting,
roping and tracking are used for bordering off or finishing.

An ordinary oval basket is made by preparing the requisite number of bottom
sticks, preserving their length greater than the required width of the
bottom. They are ranged in pairs on the floor parallel to each other at
small intervals, in the direction of the longer diameter of the basket,
thus forming what may be called the "woof," for basket-work is literally a
web. These parallel rods are then crossed at right angles by two pairs of
the largest osiers, on the butt ends of which the workman places his feet;
and they are confined in their places by being each woven alternately over
and under the parallel pieces first laid down and their own butts which
form the end bottom sticks. The whole now forms what is technically called
the "slath," which is the foundation of the basket. Next other rods are
taken and [v.03 p.0483] woven under and over the sticks all round the
bottom until it be of sufficient size, and the woof be occupied by them.
Thus the bottom or foundation on which the superstructure is to be raised
is finished. This latter part is accomplished by sharpening the large ends
of as many long and stout osiers as may be necessary to form the stakes or
skeleton. These are forced between the bottom sticks from the edge towards
the centre, and are turned up or "upset" in the direction of the sides;
then other rods are woven in and out between each of them, until the basket
is raised to the intended height, or, more correctly speaking, the depth it
is to receive. The edge or border is finished by turning down the ends of
the stakes, now standing up, behind and in front of each other, whereby the
whole is firmly and compactly united, and it is technically known as the
"belly." A lid is constructed on the same plan as that of the bottom, and
tied on with hinges formed of twisted rods; simple handles may be made by
inserting similar rods by the sides of two opposite stakes and looping them
under the border to form rope-like handles of three strands. This is the
most simple kind of basket, from which others differ only in being made
with finer materials and in being more nicely executed; but in these there
is considerable scope for taste and fancy, and articles are produced of
extreme neatness and ingenuity in construction.

In addition to willows many other materials are employed in the fabrication
of wicker-work. Among the more important of these is the stem of _Calamus
viminalis_ or other allied species--the cane or rattan of commerce--which
is used whole or made into skains. Since 1880 the central pith of this
material, known as "cane-pulp" or "cane-pith," has been largely used in
Great Britain and on the continent of Europe in the manufacture of
furniture and other finer classes of work. About the same period plaited
rush and straw, often coloured, came into use together with enamelled
skains of cane. It must be admitted, however, that basket-work in these
developments has encroached somewhat on the domain of cabinet-making; for
wood and nails are now much used in constructing basket-work chairs, tables
and other furniture.

With splits of various species of bamboo the Japanese and Chinese
manufacture baskets of unequalled beauty and finish. The bamboo wicker-work
with which the Japanese sometimes encase their delicate egg-shell porcelain
is a marvellous example of manipulation, and they and the Chinese excel in
the application of bamboo wicker-work to furniture. In India "Cajan"
baskets are extensively made from the fronds of the Palmyra palm, _Borassus
flabelliformis_, and this manufacture has been established in the Black
Forest of Germany, where it is now an important and characteristic staple.
Among the other materials may be enumerated the odorous roots of the
khus-khus grass, _Anatherum muricatum_, and the leaves of various species
of screw pine, used in India and the East generally. The fronds of the palm
of the Seychelles, _Lodoicea sechellarum_, are used for very delicate
basket-work in those islands. Strips of the New Zealand flax plant,
_Phormium tenax_, are made into baskets in New Zealand. Esparto fibre is
used in Spain and Algeria for rude fruit baskets. Various species of
_Maranta_ yield basket materials in the West Indies and South America; and
the _Tirite_, a species of _Calathea_, a member of the order
_Zingiberaceae_, is also employed similarly in Trinidad. Baskets are also
frequently made from straw, from various sedges (_Cyperus_), and from
shavings and splints of many kinds of wood.

The chief centres of English basket manufacture outside London are
Thurmaston near Leicester, Basford near Nottingham, and Grantham. Large but
decreasing quantities of light basket-work are made for the English market
in Verdun, in the department of the Aisne, and in other parts of France;
and great quantities of fancy and other work are produced in Belgium, in
the Netherlands and in Germany, notably at Lichtenfels in Bavaria, at
Sonnefeld in Saxony and in the Black Forest.

The import and export values of baskets and basket-ware, and of willows and
rods for basket-making, have been enumerated in the Board of Trade returns
for the United Kingdom since 1900, in which year basket-ware from foreign
countries was imported to the value of £239,402. In 1901 the imports
increased to £264,183; then they declined to £227,070 in 1905. The main
sources of supply are shown in this comparison of 1900 and 1905:

  +----------+---------+---------+---------+
  |          |   1900. |   1905. |         |
  +----------+---------+---------+---------+
  | Belgium  | £72,031 | £77,766 | +£5,735 |
  | Holland  |  58,214 |  54,407 | - 3,807 |
  | France   |  55,870 |  27,910 | -27,960 |
  | Germany  |  33,155 |  22,892 | -10,263 |
  | Japan    |   8,140 |  25,536 | +17,396 |
  | Portugal |   5,066 |   3,971 | - 1,095 |
  +----------+---------+---------+---------+

The increase from Japan (for 1904 the value was £52,377) and the decrease
from France are remarkable.

The import values of foreign willows increased from £52,219 in 1900 to
£62,286 in 1905, the most important exporting countries being:--

              1900.    1905.
  Germany   £22,594  £34,752   +£12,158
  Belgium    18,800   11,864   -  6,936
  Holland     9,771   12,750   +  2,979

Small British re-exports of willows (£1808 in 1900 and £371 in 1905) and of
baskets (£3785 in 1900 and £6633 in 1905) to foreign parts and British
possessions are tabulated. No particulars of exports of British produce and
manufacture are specified in the returns.

(T. O.)

[1] See the report of a paper by T. Okey, published in the _Journal_ of the
Society of Arts, January 11th, 1907.