BASKET-BALL, a game adapted to the open air, but usually played upon the
floor of a gymnasium and in the cold season. It was the invention, in 1891,
of James Naismith, an instructor in the gymnasium of the Young Men's
Christian Association training-school at Springfield, Massachusetts. A
demand had arisen for a game for the gymnasium class, which would break the
monotony and take the place, during the winter months, of football and
baseball, and which was not too rough to be played indoors. The idea of the
game was first published in the _Triangle_, the school paper. It soon
became one of the most popular indoor games of America, for girls as well
as for men, and spread to England and elsewhere.

Basket-ball is played on a marked-off space 60 ft. by 40 ft. in extent,
though in the open air the dimensions may be greater. In the middle of each
short side and 10 ft. above the floor or ground, is placed a basket
consisting of a net suspended from a metal ring 18 in. in diameter, backed,
at a distance of 6 in., by a back-board 6 ft. long and 4 ft. high. The
object of the game is to propel an inflated, leather-covered ball, 30 in.
in circumference, into the opponents' basket, which is the goal, by
striking it with the open hands. The side wins that scores most goals
during two periods of play divided by an interval of rest. Although there
is practically no limit to the number of players on each side, all indoor
matches are played by teams of five, in positions opposing one another as
in lacrosse, centre, right and left forwards and right and left guards (or
backs). A referee has the general supervision of the game and decides when
goals have been properly scored, and an umpire watches for infringements of
the rules, which constitute _fouls_. There are also a scorer and
timekeeper.

The game is started with the two opposing centres standing within a 4-foot
ring in the middle of the floor. The referee puts the ball in play by
tossing it into the air over the heads of the centres, who jump into the
air for its possession or endeavour to bat it towards the opposing goal.
From this moment the ball is in play until it falls into a basket, or
passes the boundary-lines, or a foul is made. After a goal has been scored,
the ball is again put in play by the referee in the centre. Should it be
thrown across the boundary, a player of the opposing side, standing on the
line at the point where the ball went over, puts it in play by passing or
throwing it to one of his own side in any direction, there being no
off-side rule--another point of similarity to lacrosse. His opponents, of
course, try to prevent the pass or intercept the throw, thus securing the
ball themselves. When a foul has been called, a player of the opposing side
is allowed a "free throw" for his opponents' basket from a mark 15 ft.
distant from it and without interference. A goal scored from a [v.03
p.0484] free throw counts one point; one scored while the ball is in play
counts two. Hacking, striking, holding and kicking are foul, but a player
may interfere with an opponent who has the ball so long as he uses one arm
only and does not hold. A player must throw the ball from where he gets it,
no running with it being allowed excepting when continuously bounding it on
the floor. Basket-ball is an extremely fast game and admits of a high
degree of combination or team-play. The principal qualifications of a good
player are quickness of movement and of judgment, coolness, endurance,
accuracy and self-control. Good dodging, throwing, passing and team-play
are the important requisites of the game, which is looked upon as excellent
winter training for outdoor games. Basket-ball, with somewhat modified
rules, is extremely popular with young women.

See _Spalding's Basket-Ball Guide_; and George T. Hepbron, _How to Play
Basket-Ball_; and _Spalding's Basket-Ball Guide for Women_.