BASOCHE, or BAZOCHE, with the analogous forms BASOQUE, BASOGUE and
BAZOUGES; from the Lat. _basilica_, in the sense of law courts, a French
gild of clerks, from among whom legal representatives (_procureurs_) were
recruited. This gild was very ancient, even older than the gild of the
_procureurs_, with which it was often at variance. It dated, no doubt, from
the time when the profession of _procureur_ (procurator, advocate or legal
representative) was still free in the sense that persons rendering that
service to others when so permitted by the law were not yet public and
ministerial officers. For this purpose there was established near each
important juridical centre a group of clerks, that is to say, of men
skilled in law (or reputed to be so), who at first would probably fill
indifferently the rôles of representative or advocate. Such was the origin
of the Basoche of the parlement of Paris; which naturally formed itself
into a gild, like other professions and trades in the middle ages. But this
organization eventually became disintegrated, dividing up into more
specialized bodies: that of the advocates, whose history then begins; and
that of legal representatives, whose profession was regularized in 1344,
and speedily became a saleable charge. The remnant of the original clerks
constituted the new Basoche, which thenceforward consisted only of those
who worked as clerks for the procureurs, the richer ones among them
aspiring themselves to attain the position of procureur. They all, however,
retained some traces of their original conditions. "They are admitted,"
writes an 18th-century author, "to plead before M. le lieutenant civil _sur
les réferés_[1] and before M. le juge auditeur; so that the procureurs of
these days are but the former clerks of the Basoche, admitted to officiate
in important cases in preference to other clerks and to their exclusion."
From its ancient past the Basoche had also preserved certain picturesque
forms and names. It was called the "kingdom of the _Basoche_," and for a
long time its chief, elected each year in general assembly, bore the title
of "king." This he had to give up towards the end of the 16th century, by
order, it is said, of Henry III., and was thenceforth called the
"chancellor." The Basoche had besides its _maîtres des requêtes_, a grand
court-crier, a referendary, an advocate-general, a _procureur-général_, a
chaplain, &c. In early days, and until the first half of the 16th century,
it was organized in companies in a military manner and held periodical
reviews or parades (_montres_), sometimes taking up arms in the king's
service in time of war. Of this there survived later only an annual
_cavalcade_, when the members of the Basoche went to the royal forest of
Bondy to cut the maypole, which they afterwards set up in the court-yard of
the Palais. We hear also of satirical and literary entertainments given by
clerks of the Palais de Justice, and of the moralities played by them in
public, which form an important element in the history of the national
theatre; but at the end of the 16th century these performances were
restricted to the great hall of the Palais.

To the last the Basoche retained two principal prerogatives. (1) In order
to be recognized as a qualified procureur it was necessary to have gone
through one's "stage" in the Basoche, to have been entered by name for ten
years on its register. It was not sufficient to have been merely clerk to a
procureur during the period and to have been registered at his office. This
rule was the occasion of frequent conflicts during the 17th and 18th
centuries between the members of the Basoche and the procureurs, and on the
whole, despite certain decisions favouring the latter, the parlement
maintained the rights of the Basoche. Opinion was favourable to it because
the _certificats de complaisance_ issued by the procureurs were dreaded.
These _certificats_ held good, moreover, in places where there was no
Basoche. (2) The Basoche had judiciary powers recognized by the law. It had
disciplinary jurisdiction over its members and decided personal actions in
civil law brought by one clerk against another or by an outsider against a
clerk. The judgment, at any rate if delivered by a _maître des requêtes_,
was authoritative, and could only be contested by a civil petition before
the ancient council of the Basoche. The Châtelet of Paris had its special
basoche, which claimed to be older even than that of the Palais de Justice,
and there was contention between them as to certain rights. The clerks of
the procureurs at the _cour des comptes_ of Paris had their own Basoche of
great antiquity, called the "empire de Galilée." The Basoche of the Palais
de Justice had in its ancient days the right to create provostships in
localities within the jurisdiction of the parlement of Paris, and thus
there sprang up a certain number of local basoches. Others were independent
in origin; among such being the "regency" of Rouen and the Basoche of the
parlement of Toulouse.

[v.03 p.0485] See also _Répertoire de jurisprudence des Guyot; Recueil des
Statuts du royaume de la basoche_ (Paris, 1654); L. A. Fabre, _Études
historiques sur les clercs de la basoche_ (Paris, 1856).

(J. P. E.)

[1] A procedure for obtaining a provisional judgment on urgent cases.