BASQUE PROVINCES (_Provincias Vascongadas_), a division of north-eastern
Spain, comprising the three provinces of Álava, Biscay or Vizcaya and
Guipúzcoa. Pop. (1900) 603,596; area 2739 sq. m., the third in density in
Spain. The territory occupied by the Basque Provinces forms a triangle
bounded on the west and south by the provinces of Santander, Burgos and
Logrono, on the east by Navarre, on the north by France and the Bay of
Biscay. The French Pays Basque forms part of the arrondissements of Bayonne
and Mauléon. For an account of the people, their origin, customs and
language, see BASQUES. Of the Provinces, Guipúzcoa is the only one which is
wholly Basque, Álava is the least so. Its capital, Vitoria, is said to have
been founded by the Gothic king Leovigild (581). Older than these
divisions, the date of which is uncertain, the ancient limits of the
dioceses of Pamplona, Bayonne and Calahorra, probably corresponded more
nearly to the boundaries of the ancient tribes, the Autrigones, the
Caristi, the Varduli and the Vascones, with their still differing dialects,
than do these civil provinces.

Leaving aside the legendary and uncertain portion of their history, we find
the Provinces in some districts dependent allies of Navarre, in others of
Castile. In Biscay the counts of Haro were lords of Biscay from 1093 to
1350. There was a short union with Castile under Pedro the Cruel, but the
definitive union did not take place till 1370. In Álava the ruling power
was the confederation of Arriaga (so called after its meeting place), which
united the province to the crown of Castile in 1332. Guipúzcoa, which had
been dependent sometimes on Navarre, sometimes on Castile, was definitively
united to Castile in 1200. From the year 1425 the provinces were desolated
by party wars among the lesser nobles (_parientes mayores_) but these came
to an end in 1460-1498, when Henry IV. and Ferdinand the Catholic
strengthened the power of the towns and forbade the erection of any
fortified house in the country. Though the three Basque Provinces were thus
united to the crown of Spain, they still remained a land apart (_tierra
apartada_). Their juntas acted to some extent in common; and although no
written federal pact is known to have existed, they employed, as the symbol
of their unity, a seal with the word _Iruracbat_, "The Three One," engraved
upon it. They preserved their own laws, customs, _fueros_ (see BASQUES),
which the Spanish kings swore to observe and maintain. Unless countersigned
by the juntas the decrees of Cortes and Spanish legislation or royal orders
had no force in the Provinces. In the junta of 1481 Guipúzcoa alone
proposed a treaty of friendship, peace and free trade for ten years with
England, and this was signed in Westminster, on the 9th of March 1482 (see
Rymer, _Foedera_). The Basques still made their own treaties with England
and France and are mentioned apart from Spain in the treaty of Utrecht
(1713). They still preserved in their municipal institutions the old style
of _republicas_ derived from the _civitates_ and _respublicae_ of ancient
Rome. This kind of independence and autonomy lasted unchallenged until the
death of Ferdinand VII. in 1833, when, in default of male heirs, his
brother Don Carlos claimed the throne, confirmed the Basque _fueros_, and
raised the standard of revolt against his niece, Isabel II. A seven years'
war followed, in which an English legion under Sir George de Lacy Evans and
a naval force under Lord John Hay took part. It was ended by the Convenio
de Vergara (August 31st, 1839) in which the concession and modification of
the _fueros_ was demanded. The troubled period which followed the expulsion
of Isabel II. in 1868 gave opportunity for a second Carlist war from 1872
to 1876. This ended, unlike the former one, in the utter defeat of the
Carlist forces, and left the Provinces at the mercy of the government,
without terms or agreement. In general government and legislation the
Provinces were then assimilated to the rest of the nation. After 1876, the
Provincial parliaments (_diputaciones_) were elected like the other
provincial councils of Spain, deprived of many privileges and subjected to
the ordinary interference of the civil governors. But their
representatives, assisted by the senators and deputies of the Basque
Provinces in the Cortes, negotiated successive pacts, each lasting several
years, securing for the three Provinces their municipal and provincial
self-government, and the assessment, distribution and collection of their
principal taxes and octroi duties, on the understanding that an agreed sum
should be paid annually to the state, subject to an increase whenever the
national taxation of other provinces was augmented. In December 1906, after
long discussion, the contribution of the Basque Provinces to the state,
according to the law of the 21st of July 1876, was fixed for the next
twenty years; for the first ten years at 8,500,000 pesetas, for the next
ten an additional 500,000 pesetas, from 31st December 1916 to 31st December
1926, the province of Guipúzcoa paying in addition 700,000 pesetas to the
treasury. These pacts have hitherto been scrupulously observed, and as the
local authorities levy the contribution after their own local customs,
landed property and the industrial and commercial classes are less heavily
taxed in these territories than in the rest of Spain. Enough is raised,
however, besides the amount handed over to the government, to enable the
schools, roads, harbours and public works of every kind to be maintained at
a standard which compares very favourably with other parts of Spain. When
the three provinces sent in their first contingent of conscripts in 1877,
it was found that all but about sixty knew how to read and write, and
succeeding contingents have kept up this high standard.

In agriculture the Basque Provinces and the Pays Basque were great cider
countries, but during the 19th century this was gradually replaced by
wine-growing. The chief industries of the Basque Provinces are the sea
fisheries and iron mining. Some of the mines round Bilbao have been worked
from prehistoric times. In 1905 the Basque Provinces produced 5,302,344
tons of iron, over five millions of which came from Biscay, out of a total
of 9,395,314 tons for the whole of Spain. More than the half of this total
5,845,895 tons, was exported to England. The swords of Mondragon in
Guipúzcoa were renowned before those of Toledo. Eibar in the same province
has long been a small-arms factory. There in the 19th century Señor Zuloaga
successfully revived the artistic inlaying of gold and silver in steel and
iron.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Of older works, though often uncritical, R. P. Henao's
_Averiguaciones de las Antiguedades de Cantabria_ (Salamanca, 1688) is
still valuable (new edition, 1894). For all that relates to the manners and
customs of the people, _Corografía de Guipúzcoa_, by R. P. M. de
Larramendi, S.J., is indispensable. Written about 1750, it was first
printed in Barcelona in 1882 (later edition, San Sebastian, 1896). There
are excellent chapters on the Basque Provinces in the _Introduccion a la
Historia Natural, y a la Geografía Fisica de España_, by D. Guillermo
Bowles (Madrid, 1775). _El Guipuzcoano instruido_ (San Sebastian, 1780), in
the form of a dictionary, gives full details of the life, the rights,
duties and obligations of a Basque citizen of that date. The _Diccionario
Geografico-Historico de España_, tome i., ii. _El Reyno de Navarra Senorio
de Vizcaya y Provincias de Álava y Guipúzcoa_ (Madrid, 1802), is full of
local information, but with a strong bias in favour of the central
government. The best works on the various editions of the _fueros_ are
_Historia de la Legislacion ... civil de España_, by A. Marichalar, Marques
de Montesa, and Cayetano Manrique; _Fueros de Navarra Vizcaya, Guipúzcoa y
Álava_ (Madrid, 2nd ed., 1868); and the _Noticia de las cosas memorables de
Guipúzcoa_, by D. Pablo de Gorosabel (Tolosa, 1899-1901), the last volume
of which by C. de Echegaray, gives the legislative acts down to May 1900.
_Las Provincias Vascongadas a Fines de la Edad Media_, by D. Carmelo de
Echegaray (San Sebastian, 1895), is excellent. There is a _Historia de
Bizcaya_, by Dr E. de Labayru, and a _Compendio_ of the same by Fermin
Herran (Bilbao, 1903). D. Carmelo de Echegaray, Cronista de las Provincias
Vascongadas, with his colleagues D. Serapio Mugica, F. Soraluce, and other
historians, has examined, catalogued and indexed the municipal archives of
all the towns, without which no true history can be written. Several
discoveries of important missing documents and MSS. were thus made. The
development of the Basque mining industry is fully described in _Las Minas
de hierro de la provincia de Vizcaya, progressos realizados en esta region
derde 1870 hasta 1899_ (Bilbao, 1900).

(W. WE.)