BASRA (written also BUSRA, BASSORA and BUSSORA), the name of a vilayet of
Asiatic Turkey, and of its capital. The vilayet has an area of 16,470 sq.
m., formed in 1884 by detaching the southern districts of the Bagdad
vilayet. It includes the great marshy districts of the lower Euphrates and
Tigris, and of their joint stream, the Shatt el-Arab, and a sanjak on the
western shore of the Persian Gulf. A settled population is found only along
the river banks. Except the capital, Basra, there are no towns of
importance. Korna, at the junction of the two great rivers; Amara on the
Tigris; Shatra on the Shatt el-Haï canal, connecting the Tigris and
Euphrates; Nasrieh, at the junction of that canal with the Euphrates and
Suk esh-Sheiukh, on the lower reaches of the Euphrates, are the principal
settlements, with a population varying from 3000 to 10,000 or somewhat
less. Along the Shatt el-Arab and the lower reaches of the Tigris and
Euphrates there are vast plantations of date-palms, which produce the
finest dates known. Here and there are found extensive rice-fields;
liquorice, wheat, barley and roses are also cultivated in places. But in
general the ancient canals on which the fertility of the country depends
have been allowed to go to ruin. The whole land is subject to inundations
which render settled agriculture impracticable, and the population consists
chiefly of nomadic and semi-nomadic tribes whose wealth consists in herds
of buffaloes, horses, sheep and goats. The principal exports are wool,
dates, cereals, gum, liquorice-root and horses. The climate is humid and
unhealthy. The population is estimated at about 200,000 almost exclusively
Moslems, of whom three-quarters are Shi`ites. There are about 4000 Jews and
perhaps 6000 Christians, among whom are reckoned the remains of the curious
sect of Sabaeans or Mandaeans, whose headquarters are in the neighbourhood
of Suk esh-Sheiukh.

The capital of the vilayet, also called Basra, is situated in 47° 34' E.
long. and 32° N. lat., near the western bank of the Shatt el-Arab, about 55
m. from the Persian Gulf. The town proper lies on the canal el-`Assar about
1½ to 2 m. W. of the Shatt el-Arab. There are no public buildings of
importance. The houses are meanly built, partly of sun-dried and partly of
burnt bricks, with flat roofs surrounded by parapets. The bazaars are
miserable structures, covered with mats laid on rafters of date trees. The
streets are irregular, narrow and unpaved. The greater part of the area of
the town is occupied by gardens and plantations of palm-trees, intersected
by a number of little canals, cleansed twice daily with the ebb and flow of
the tide, which rises here about 9 ft. These canals are navigated by small
boats, called _bellem_ (plur. _ablam_), resembling dug-outs in form, but
light and graceful. At high-tide, accordingly, the town presents a very
attractive appearance, but at low-tide, when the mud banks are exposed, it
seems dirty and repulsive, and the noxious exhalations are extremely
trying. The whole region is subject to inundations. The town itself is
unhealthy and strangers especially are apt to be attacked by fever. Basra
is the port of Bagdad, with which it has steam communication by an English
line of river steamers weekly and also by a Turkish line. The Shatt el-Arab
is deep and broad, easily navigable for ocean steamers, and there is weekly
communication by passenger steamer with India, while two or more freight
lines, which also take passengers, connect Basra directly with the
Mediterranean, and with European and British ports. It is the great date
port of the world, and the dates of Basra are regarded as the finest in the
market. Besides dates the principal articles of export are wool, horses,
liquorice, gum and attar of roses. The annual value of the exports is
approximately £1,000,000 and of the imports a little more. The foreign
trade is almost exclusively in the hands of the English, but of late the
Germans have begun to enter the market, and the Hamburg-American line of
steamers has established direct communication. Since 1898 there has been a
British consul at Basra (before that time he was a representative of the
Indian government). France and Russia also maintain consular establishments
at Basra. The settled population of Basra is probably under 50,000, but how
much it is impossible to estimate. It is a heterogeneous mixture of all the
nations and religions of the East--Turks, Arabs, Persians, Indians,
Armenians, Chaldaeans and Jews. Of the latter there are about 1900, engaged
in trade and commerce. Fewest in number are the Turks, comprising only the
officials. Most numerous are the Arabs, chiefly Shi`ites. The wealthiest
and most influential personage in the capital and the vilayet is the
_nakib_, or marshal of the nobility (_i.e._ descendants of the family of
the prophet, who are entitled to wear the green turban). Basra is a station
of the Arabian mission of the Dutch Reformed Church of America.

_History._--The original city of Basra was founded by the caliph Omar in
A.D. 636 about 8 m. S.W. of its present site, on the edge of the stony and
pebbly Arabian plateau, on an ancient canal now dry. The modern town of
Zobeir, a sort of health suburb, occupied by the villas of well-to-do
inhabitants of Basra, lies near the ruin mounds which mark the situation of
the ancient city. In the days of its prosperity it rivalled Kufa and Wasit
in wealth and size, and its fame is in the tales of the _Arabian Nights_.
With the decay of the power of the Abbasid caliphate its importance
declined. The canals were neglected, communication with the Persian Gulf
was cut off and finally the place was abandoned altogether. The present
city was conquered by the Turks in 1668, and since that period has been the
scene of many revolutions. It was taken in 1777 after a siege of eight
months by the Persians under Sadik Khan. In about a year it fell again into
the hands of the Turks, who were again deprived of it by the sheikh of the
Montefik (Montafiq) Arabs. The town was in the October following recovered
by Suleiman Pasha, who encountered the sheikh on the banks of the Euphrates
and put him to flight; it has since remained in the hands of the Turks.

(J. P. PE.)