BASSIANUS, JOANNES, Italian jurist of the 12th century. Little is known of
his origin, but he is said by Corolus de Tocco to have been a native of
Cremona. He was a professor in the law school of Bologna, the pupil of
Bulgarus (_q.v._), and the master of Azo (_q.v._). The most important of
his writings which have been preserved in his _Summary on the Authentica_,
which Savigny regarded as one of the most precious works of the school of
the Gloss-writers. Joannes, as he is generally termed, was remarkable for
his talent in inventing ingenious forms for explaining his ideas with
greater precision, and perhaps his most celebrated work is his "Law-Tree,"
which he entitled _Arbor Arborum_, and which has been the subject of
numerous commentaries. The work presents a tree, upon the branches of which
the various kinds of actions are arranged after the manner of fruit. The
civil actions, or _actiones stricti juris_, being forty-eight in number,
are arranged on one side, whilst the equitable or _praetorian_ actions, in
number one hundred and twenty-one, are arranged on the other side. A
further scientific division of actions was made by him under twelve heads,
and by an ingenious system of notation the student was enabled to class at
once each of the civil or praetorian actions, as the case might be, under
its proper head in the scientific division. By the side of the tree a few
glosses were added by Joannes to explain and justify his classification.
_His Lectures on the Pandects_ and the _Code_, which were collected by his
pupil Nicolaus Furiosus, have unfortunately perished.

[v.03 p.0495] BASSOMPIERRE, FRANÇOIS DE (1579-1646), French courtier, son
of Christophe de Bassompierre (1547-1596), was born at the castle of
Harrouel in Lorraine. He was descended from an old family which had for
generations served the dukes of Burgundy and Lorraine, and after being
educated with his brothers in Bavaria and Italy, was introduced to the
court of Henry IV. in 1598. He became a great favourite of the king and
shared to the full in the dissipations of court life. In 1600 he took part
in the brief campaign in Savoy, and in 1603 fought in Hungary for the
emperor against the Turks. In 1614 he assisted Marie de' Medici in her
struggle against the nobles, but upon her failure in 1617 remained loyal to
the King Louis XIII. and assisted the royalists when they routed Marie's
supporters at Ponts-de-Cé in 1620. His services during the Huguenot rising
of 1621-22 won for him the dignity of marshal of France. He was with the
army of the king during the siege of La Rochelle in 1628, and in 1629
distinguished himself in the campaign against the rebels of Languedoc. In
1615 Bassompierre had purchased from Henri, duc de Rohan (1579-1638), the
coveted position of colonel-general of the Swiss and Grisons; on this
account he was sent to raise troops in Switzerland when Louis XIII. marched
against Savoy in 1629, and after a short campaign in Italy his military
career ended. As a diplomatist his career was a failure. In 1621 he went to
Madrid as envoy extraordinary to arrange the dispute concerning the seizure
of the Valteline forts by Spain, and signed the fruitless treaty of Madrid.
In 1625 he was sent into Switzerland on an equally futile mission, and in
1626 to London to secure the retention of the Catholic ecclesiastics and
attendants of Henrietta Maria, wife of Charles I. The personal influence of
Henry IV. had deterred Bassompierre from a marriage with Charlotte de
Montmorency, daughter of the constable Montmorency, afterwards princesse de
Condé, and between 1614 and 1630 he was secretly married to Louise
Marguerite, widow of Francois, prince de Conti, and through her became
implicated in the plot to overthrow Richelieu on the "Day of Dupes" 1630.
His share was only a slight one, but his wife was an intimate friend of
Marie de' Medici, and her hostility to the cardinal aroused his suspicions.
By Richelieu's orders, Bassompierre was arrested at Senlis on the 25th of
February 1631, and put into the Bastille, where he remained until
Richelieu's death in 1643. On his release his offices were restored to him,
and he passed most of his time at the castle of Tillières in Normandy,
until his death on the 12th of October 1646. He left a son, François de la
Tour, by the princesse de Conti, and an illegitimate son, Louis de
Bassompierre, afterwards bishop of Saintes. His _Mémoires_, which are an
important source for the history of his time, were first published at
Cologne in 1665. He also left an incomplete account of his embassies to
Spain, Switzerland and England (Cologne, 1668) and a number of discourses
upon various subjects.

The best edition of the _Mémoires_ is that issued by the Société de
l'Histoire de France (Paris, 1877); see also G. Tallemant des Reaux,
_Historiettes de la princesse de Conti, et du maréchal de Bassompierre_
(Paris, 1854-1860).

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Bassoon with 17 keys. Savary Model. (Rudall, Carte
& Co.)]