BASS CLARINET (Fr. _clarinette basse_; Ger. _Bass-Klarinette_; Ital.
_clarinetto basso_ or _darone_), practically the A, Bb or C clarinet
speaking an octave lower; what therefore has been said concerning the
fingering, transposition, acoustic properties and general history of the
clarinet (_q.v._) also applies to the bass clarinet. Owing to its greater
length the form of the bass clarinet differs from that of the clarinets in
that the bell joint is bent up in front of the instrument, terminating in a
large gloxinea-shaped bell, and that the mouthpiece is attached by means of
a strong ligature and screws to a serpent-shaped crook of brass or silver.
The compass of the modern orchestral bass clarinet is in the main the same
as that of the higher clarinets in C, Bb and A, but an octave lower, and
therefore for the bass clarinet in C is [Notation: E2 B5.]; for the bass
clarinet in Bb the real sounds are one tone, and for the bass clarinet in A
1½ tone lower, although the notation is the same for all three.

Sometimes the treble clef is used in notation for the bass clarinet. It
must then be understood that the instrument in C speaks an octave lower,
the bass clarinet in Bb a major ninth and the bass clarinet in A a minor
tenth lower. The tenor clef is also frequently used in orchestral works.

The quality of tone is less reedy in the bass clarinet than in the higher
instruments. It resembles the bourdon stop on the organ, and in the lowest
register, more especially, the tone is somewhat hollow and wanting in power
although mellower than that of the bassoon. In the lowest octave the
instrument speaks slowly and is chiefly used for sustained bass or melody
notes; rapid passages are impossible.

The modern orchestral model may be fitted with almost every kind of
key-mechanism, including the Boehm, and the degree of perfection and
ingenuity attained has removed the all but insuperable difficulties which
stood in the way of the original inventors who, not understanding key-work,
made many futile attempts to bridge the necessarily great distance between
the finger-holes by making the bore serpentine, boring the holes obliquely,
&c.

The low pitch of the bass clarinet (8 ft. tone) contrasted with the
moderate length of the instrument--whose bore measures only some 42 to 43
inches from mouthpiece to bell, whereas that of the bassoon, an instrument
of the same pitch, is twice that length--is a puzzle to many. An
explanation of the fact is to be found in the peculiar acoustic properties
of the cylindrical tube played by means of a reed mouthpiece characterizing
the clarinet family, which acts as a closed pipe speaking an octave lower
than an open pipe of the same length, and overblowing a twelfth instead of
an octave. This is more fully explained in the articles CLARINET and AULOS.

The construction of the bass clarinet demands the greatest care. The bore
should theoretically be strictly cylindrical throughout its length from
mouthpiece to bell joint; the slightest deviation from mathematical
accuracy, such as an undue widening of the bell from the point where it
joins the body to the mouth of the bell, would tend to muffle the lower
notes of the instrument and to destroy correct intonation.

The origin of the bass clarinet must be sought in Germany, where Heinrich
Grenser of Dresden, one of the most famous instrument-makers of his day,
made the first bass clarinet in 1793. The basset horn (_q.v._) or tenor
clarinet, which had reached the height of its popularity, no doubt
suggested to Grenser, who was more especially renowned for his excellent
fagottos, the possibility of providing for the clarinet a bass of its own.
One of these earliest attempts in the form of a fagotto, stamped "A.
Grenser, Dresden," with nine square-flapped brass keys working on knobs, is
in the Grossherzogliches Museum at Darmstadt and was lent to the Royal
Military Exhibition, London 1890.[1] Two other early specimens,[2]
belonging originally to Adolphe Sax and to M. de Coussemaker, are now
respectively preserved in the museums of the Brussels Conservatoire and of
the Berlin Hochschule (Snoeck Collection). The tubes are of great thickness
and the holes are bored obliquely through the walls. Both instruments are
in A.

Attempts were made in Italy to overcome the mechanical difficulties by
making the bore of the bass clarinet serpentine. A specimen by Nicolas
Papalini of Pavia[3] in the museum of the Brussels Conservatoire has the
serpentine bore pierced through two slabs of pear-wood; the two halves,
each forming a vertical section of the instrument, are fitted together with
wooden pins. The outside length is only 2 ft. 3½ in. and there are nineteen
finger-holes.

Joseph Uhlmann of Vienna[4] constructed a bass clarinet, also termed "bass
basset horn," with twenty-three keys and a compass from Bb through four
complete octaves with all chromatic [v.03 p.0492] semitones. These
instruments resemble the saxophones (_q.v._), having the bell joint bent up
in front and the crook almost at right angles backwards, but the bore of
the saxophone is conical.

Georg Streitwolf (1779-1837), an ingenious musical instrument-maker of
Göttingen, produced in 1828 a bass clarinet with a compass extending from
Ab to F, nineteen keys and a fingering the same as that of the clarinet
with but few exceptions. In form it resembled the fagotto and had a crook
terminating in a beak mouthpiece. The Streitwolf bass clarinet was adopted
in 1834 by the Prussian infantry as bass to the wood-wind.[5] Streitwolf's
first bass clarinets were in C, but later he constructed instruments in Bb
as well. Like the basset horn, Streitwolf's instruments had the four
chromatic open keys extending the compass downwards to Bb. The tone was of
very fine quality. One of these instruments is in the possession of Herr C.
Kruspe of Erfurt,[6] and another is preserved in the Berlin collection at
the Hochschule.

It was, however, the successive improvements of Adolphe Sax (Paris,
1814-1894), working probably from Grenser's and later from Streitwolf's
models, which produced the modern bass clarinet, and following up the work
of Halary and Buffet in the same field, he secured its introduction into
the orchestra at the opera. The bass clarinet in C made its first
appearance in opera in 1836 in Meyerbeer's _Huguenots_, Act V., where in a
fine passage the lower register of the instrument is displayed to
advantage, and later in _Dinorah_ (_Le pardon de Ploermel_). Two years
later (1838) at the theatre of Modena a bass clarinet by P. Maino of Milan,
differing in construction from the Sax model, was independently introduced
into the orchestra.[7] Wagner employed the bass clarinet in Bb and C in
_Tristan und Isolde_,[8] where at the end of Act II. it is used with great
effect to characterize the reproachful utterance of King Mark, thus:

[Illustration]

etc.

(K. S.)

[1] See Captain C. R. Day, _Descriptive Catalogue_ (London, 1891), No. 266,
p. 125.

[2] See Victor Mahillon, _Catalogue descriptif_, vol. ii. (1896), pp.
224-226, No. 940.

[3] See Captain C. R. Day, _op. cit_. p. 123, pl. v. B. and p. 123, No.
262.

[4] See Dr Schafhäutl's report on the Munich exhibition, _Bericht der
Beurtheilungscommission für Musikinstrumente_ (Munich, 1855), P. 153.

[5] See _Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung_ (Leipzig, 1834), Bd. xxxvi.
March, p. 193.

[6] See Wilhelm Altenburg, _Die Klarinette_ (Heilbronn, 1904-1905), p. 33.

[7] See W. Altenburg, _op. cit._ p. 34.

[8] Orchestral score, p. 284.