BASSES-ALPES, a department of south-eastern France, formed in 1790 out of
the northern portion of Provence. It is bounded N. by the department of the
Hautes Alpes, E. by Italy and the department of the Alpes Maritimes, S. by
that of the Var, and W. by those of Vaucluse and the Drôme. Its area is
about 2698 sq. m., while its greatest length is 89½ m. and its greatest
breadth 56 m. Pop. (1906) 113,126. The river Durance passes through the
western part of this department, receiving (left), as affluents, the Ubaye,
the Bléone and the Asse (the entire course of each of these rivers is
included within the department) as well as the Verdon, the upper course of
which is within the department, while the lower course forms its southern
limit. It is a poor and hilly district, the highest summits (the loftiest
is the Aiguille de Chambeyron, 11,155 ft.) rising round the head waters of
the Ubaye. The department is divided into five arrondissements (Digne,
Barcelonnette, Castellane, Forcalquier, and Sisteron), 30 cantons and 250
communes. It forms the bishopric of Digne, formerly in the ecclesiastical
province of Embrun, but since 1802 in that of Aix-en-Provence. Its chief
towns are Digne, Barcelonnette, Castellane, Forcalquier, and Sisteron. It
is poorly supplied with railways (total length 109½ m.), the main line from
Grenoble to Avignon running through it from Sisteron to Manosque, and
sending off two short branch lines to Digne (14 m.) and to Forcalquier (9
m.). It is a poor department from the material point of view, being very
mountainous and containing many mountain pastures. But these pastures have
been much damaged by the Provençal shepherds to whom they are let out,
while the forests have been very much thinned (though extensive
reafforestments are now being carried out) so that the soil is very dry and
made drier by exposure to the southern sun. From near the head of the Ubaye
valley the pass of the Col de l'Argentière (6545 ft.) leads over from
Barcelonnette to Cuneo, in Italy; it was perhaps traversed by Hannibal, and
certainly in 1515 by Francis I.

See C. J. J. M. Féraud, _Histoire, géographie et statistique du Département
des Basses-Alpes_ (Digne, 1861).

(W. A. B. C.)