BASSI, UGO (1800-1849), Italian patriot, was born at Cento, and received
his early education at Bologna. An unhappy love affair induced him to
become a novice in the Barnabite order when eighteen years old. He repaired
to Rome, where he led a life of study and devotion, and entered on his
ministry in 1833. It was as a preacher that he became famous, his sermons
attracting large crowds owing to their eloquence and genuine enthusiasm. He
lived chiefly at Bologna, but travelled all over Italy preaching and
tending the poor, so poor himself as to be sometimes almost starving. On
the outbreak of the revolutionary movements in 1848, when Pope Pius IX.
still appeared to be a Liberal and an Italian patriot, Bassi, filled with
national enthusiasm, joined General Durando's papal force to protect the
frontiers as army chaplain. His eloquence drew fresh recruits to the ranks,
and he exercised great influence over the soldiers and people. When the
pope discarded all connexion with the national movement, it was only Bassi
who could restrain the Bolognese in their indignation. At Treviso, where he
had followed Guidotti's volunteers against the Austrians, he received three
wounds, delighted to shed his blood for Italy (12th of May, 1848). He was
taken to Venice, and on his recovery he marched unarmed at the head of the
volunteers in the fight at Mestre. After the pope's flight from Rome and
the proclamation of the Roman republic, Bassi took part with Garibaldi's
forces against the French troops sent to re-establish the temporal power.
He exposed his life many times while tending the wounded under fire, and
when Garibaldi was forced to leave Rome with his volunteers the faithful
monk followed him in his wanderings to San Marino. When the legion broke up
Garibaldi escaped, but Bassi and a fellow-Garibaldian, Count Livraghi,
after endless hardships, were captured near Comacchio. On being brought
before the papal governor, Bassi said: "I am guilty of no crime save that
of being an Italian like yourself. I have risked my life for Italy, and
your duty is to do good to those who have suffered for her." The governor
would have freed the prisoners; but he did not dare, and gave them over to
an Austrian officer. They were escorted to Bologna, falsely charged before
a court martial with having been found with arms in their hands (Bassi had
never borne arms at all), and shot on the 8th of August, 1849. Bassi is one
of the most beautiful figures of the Italian revolution, a gentle unselfish
soul, who, although unusually gifted and accomplished, had an almost
childlike nature. His execution excited a feeling of horror all over Italy.

Countess Martinengo gives a charming sketch of his life in her _Italian
Characters_ (2nd ed., London, 1901); see also Zironi, _Vita del Padre Ugo
Bassi_ (Bologna, 1879); F. Venosta, "Ugo Bassi, Martire di Bologna," in the
_Pantheon dei Martiri Italiani_ (Milan, 1863).

(L. V.*)