BASSA, a province of the British protectorate of Northern Nigeria,
occupying the angle made by the meeting of the Benue river with the Niger.
It has an area of 7000 sq. m., with a population estimated at about one and
a half millions. It is bounded N. by the Benue, W. by the Niger, S. by the
frontier of Southern Nigeria, and E. by the province of Muri. The province
is heavily forested, and is estimated to be one of the richest of the
protectorate in natural products. It has never been penetrated by Moslem
influence, and is inhabited in the greater part by warlike and unruly
pagans. Early in the 16th century the Igbira (Okpoto or Ibo) were one of
the most powerful pagan peoples of Nigeria and had their capital at Iddah.
At a later period the Bassas conquered the western portion of the state and
the Munshis the eastern, while the Okpoto still held the south and a
wedge-shaped district partially dividing the Munshis and Bassas. The Bassas
are a very remarkable pagan race who permeate the entire protectorate of
Northern Nigeria, and are to be found in small colonies in almost every
province. They are clever agriculturists, naturally peaceful and
industrious. The Munshis, though also good agriculturists, are a warlike
and most unruly race, as are also the Okpoto.

The districts which now comprise the province of Bassa came nominally under
British control in 1900, but up to the year 1903 administrative authority
was confined to the western half with Dekina (in 7° 3' E., 7° 41' N.) for
its capital. In December of 1903 a disturbance resulting in the murder of
the British resident led to the despatch of a military expedition, and as a
result of the operations the frontiers of the districts under control were
extended to the borders of the Munshi country in about 8° E. The western
portion of the province, occupied by friendly and peaceful tribes upon the
Niger, has been organized for administration on the same system as the rest
of the protectorate. Courts of justice are operative and taxes are
peacefully collected. The Okpoto, however, remain turbulent, as do their
neighbours the Munshis. Spirits, of which the importation is forbidden in
Northern Nigeria, are freely smuggled over the border from Southern
Nigeria. Arms and powder are also imported. The slave-trade is still alive
in this district, and an overland route for slaves is believed to have been
established through eastern Bassa to the Benue. In consequence of the
natural wealth of the province, there are trading establishments of the
Niger Company and of Messrs Holt on the Niger and Benue, and colonies of
native traders have penetrated the country from the north. Roman Catholic
and Protestant missions are established at Dekina and Gbebe.