ARNDT, JOHANN (1555-1621), German Lutheran theologian, was born at
Ballenstedt, in Anhalt, and studied in several universities. He was at
Helmstadt in 1576; at Wittenberg in 1577. At Wittenberg the
crypto-Calvinist controversy was then at its height, and he took the
side of Melanchthon and the crypto-Calvinists. He continued his studies
in Strassburg, under the professor of Hebrew, Johannes Pappus
(1549-1610), a zealous Lutheran, the crown of whose life's work was the
forcible suppression of Calvinistic preaching and worship in the city,
and who had great influence over him. In Basel, again, he studied
theology under Simon Sulzer (1508-1585), a broad-minded divine of
Lutheran sympathies, whose aim was to reconcile the churches of the
Helvetic and Wittenberg confessions. In 1581 he went back to
Ballenstedt, but was soon recalled to active life by his appointment to
the pastorate at Badeborn in 1583. After some time his Lutheran
tendencies exposed him to the anger of the authorities, who were of the
Reformed Church. Consequently, in 1590 he was deposed for refusing to
remove the pictures from his church and discontinue the use of exorcism
in baptism. He found an asylum in Quedlinburg (1590), and afterwards was
transferred to St Martin's church at Brunswick (1599). Arndt's fame
rests on his writings. These were mainly of a mystical and devotional
kind, and were inspired by St Bernard, J. Tauler and Thomas à Kempis.
His principal work, _Wahres Christentum_ (1606-1609), which has been
translated into most European languages, has served as the foundation of
many books of devotion, both Roman Catholic and Protestant. Arndt here
dwells upon the mystical union between the believer and Christ, and
endeavours, by drawing attention to Christ's life _in_ His people, to
correct the purely forensic side of the Reformation theology, which paid
almost exclusive attention to Christ's death _for_ His people. Like
Luther, Arndt was very fond of the little anonymous book, _Deutsche
Theologie_. He published an edition of it and called attention to its
merits in a special preface. After _Wahres Christentum_, his best-known
work is _Paradiesgärtlein aller christlichen Tugenden_, which was
published in 1612. Both these books have been translated into English;
_Paradiesgärtlein_ with the title the _Garden of Paradise_. Several of
his sermons are published in R. Nesselmann's _Buch der Predigten_
(1858). Arndt has always been held in very high repute by the German
Pietists. The founder of Pietism, Philipp Jacob Spener, repeatedly
called attention to him and his writings, and even went so far as to
compare him with Plato (cf. Karl Scheele, _Plato und Johann Arndt, Ein
Vortrag, &c._, 1857).

  A collected edition of his works was published in Leipzig and Görlitz
  in 1734. A valuable account of Arndt is to be found in C. Aschmann's
  _Essai sur la vie, &c., de J. Arndt_. See further, Herzog-Hauck,
  _Realencyklopadie_.