ARNDT, ERNST MORITZ (1769-1860), German poet and patriot, was born on
the 26th of December 1769 at Schoritz in the island of Rügen, which at
that time belonged to Sweden. He was the son of a prosperous farmer, and
emancipated serf of the lord of the district, Count Putbus; his mother
came of well-to-do German yeoman stock. In 1787 the family removed into
the neighbourhood of Stralsund, where Arndt was enabled to attend the
academy. After an interval of private study he went in 1791 to the
university of Greifswald as a student of theology and history, and in
1793 removed to Jena, where he fell under the influence of Fichte. On
the completion of his university course he returned home, was for two
years a private tutor in the family of Ludwig Kosegarten (1758-1818),
pastor of Wittow and poet, and having qualified for the ministry as a
"candidate of theology," assisted in the church services. At the age of
twenty-eight he renounced the ministry, and for eighteen months he led a
wandering life, visiting Austria, Hungary, Italy, France and Belgium.
Returning homewards up the Rhine, he was moved by the sight of the
ruined castles along its banks to intense bitterness against France. The
impressions of this journey he later described in _Reisen durch einen
Theil Teutschlands, Ungarns, Italiens und Frankreichs in den Jahren 1798
und 1799_ (1802-1804). In 1800 he settled in Greifswald as
_privat-docent_ in history, and the same year published _Über die
Freiheit der alien Republiken_. In 1803 appeared _Germanien und
Europa_," a fragmentary ebullition," as be himself called it, of his
views on the French aggression. This was followed by one of the most
remarkable of his books, _Versuch einer Geschichte der Leibeigenschaft
in Pommern und Rügen_ (Berlin, 1803), a history of serfdom in Pomerania
and Rügen, which was so convincing an indictment that King Gustavus
Adolphus IV. in 1806 abolished the evil. Arndt had meanwhile risen from
_privat-docent_ to extraordinary professor, and in 1806 was appointed to
the chair of history at the university. In this year he published the
first part of his _Geist der Zeit_, in which he flung down the gauntlet
to Napoleon and called on his countrymen to rise and shake off the
French yoke. So great was the excitement it produced that Arndt was
compelled to take refuge in Sweden to escape the vengeance of Napoleon.
Settling in Stockholm, he obtained government employment, but devoted
himself to the great cause which was nearest his heart, and in
pamphlets, poems and songs communicated his enthusiasm to his
countrymen. Schill's heroic death at Stralsund impelled him to return to
Germany and, under the disguise of "Almann, teacher of languages," he
reached Berlin in December 1809. In 1810 he returned to Greifswald, but
only for a few months. He again set out on his adventurous travels,
lived in close contact with the first men of his time, such as Blücher,
Gneisenau and Stein, and in 1812 was summoned by the last named to St
Petersburg to assist in the organization of the final struggle against
France. Meanwhile, pamphlet after pamphlet, full of bitter hatred of the
French oppressor, came from his pen, and his stirring patriotic songs,
such as _Was ist das deutsche Vaterland? Der Gott, der Eisen wachsen
liess_, and _Was blasen die Trompeten?_ were on all lips. When, after
the peace, the university of Bonn was founded in 1818, Arndt was
appointed to the chair of modern history. In this year appeared the
fourth part of his _Geist der Zeit_, in which he criticized the
reactionary policy of the German powers. The boldness of his demands for
reform offended the Prussian government, and in the summer of 1819 he
was arrested and his papers confiscated. Although speedily liberated, he
was in the following year, at the instance of the Central Commission of
Investigation at Mainz, established in accordance with the Carlsbad
Decrees, arraigned before a specially constituted tribunal. Although not
found guilty, he was forbidden to exercise the functions of his
professorship, but was allowed to retain the stipend. The next twenty
years he passed in retirement and literary activity. In 1840 he was
reinstated in his professorship, and in 1841 was chosen rector of the
university. The revolutionary outbreak of 1848 rekindled in the
venerable patriot his old hopes and energies, and he took his seat as
one of the deputies to the National Assembly at Frankfort. He formed one
of the deputation that offered the imperial crown to Frederick William
IV., and indignant at the king's refusal to accept it, he retired with
the majority of von Gagern's adherents from public life. He continued to
lecture and to write with freshness and vigour, and on his 90th birthday
received from all parts of Germany good wishes and tokens of affection.
He died at Bonn on the 29th of January 1860. Arndt was twice married,
first in 1800, his wife dying in the following year; a second time in
1817.

  Arndt's untiring labour for his country rightly won for him the title
  of "the most German of all Germans." His lyric poems are not, however,
  all confined to politics. Many among the Gedichte (1803-1818; complete
  edition, 1860) are religious pieces of great beauty. Among his other
  works are _Reise durch Schweden_ (1797); _Nebenstunden, eine
  Beschreibung und Geschichte der schottländischen Inseln und der
  Orkaden_ (1820); _Die Frage über die Niederlande_ (1831);
  _Erinnerungen aus dem äusseren Leben_ (an autobiography, and the most
  valuable source of information for Arndt's life, 1840); _Rhein- und
  Ahrwanderungen_ (1846), _Wanderungen und Wandlungen mit dem
  Reichsfreiherrn von Stein_ (1858), and _Pro populo Germanico_ (1854),
  which was originally intended to form the fifth part of the _Geist der
  Zeit_. Arndt's _Werke_ have been edited by H. Rösch and H. Meisner in
  8 vols. (not complete) (1892-1898). Biographies have been written by
  E. Langenberg (1869) and Wilhelm Baur (5th ed., 1882); see also H.
  Meisner and R. Geerds, _E.M. Arndt, ein Lebensbild in Briefen_ (1898),
  and R. Thiele, _E.M. Arndt_ (1894). There are monuments to his memory
  at Schoritz, his birthplace, and at Bonn, where he is buried.