ARNOLD, MATTHEW (1822-1888), English poet, literary critic and inspector
of schools, was born at Laleham, near Staines, on the 24th of December
1822. When it is said that he was the son of the famous Dr Arnold of
Rugby, and that Winchester, Rugby and Balliol College, Oxford,
contributed their best towards his education, it seems superfluous to
add that, in estimating Matthew Arnold and his work, training no less
than original endowment has to be considered. A full academic training
has its disadvantages as well as its gains. In the individual no less
than in the species the history of man's development is the history of
the struggle between the impulse to express original personal force and
the impulse to make that force bow to the authority of custom. Where in
any individual the first of these impulses is stronger than usual, a
complete academic training is a gain; but where the second of these
impulses is the dominant one, the effect of the academic habit upon the
mind at its most sensitive and most plastic period is apt to be
crippling. In regard to Matthew Arnold, it would be a bold critic of his
life and his writings who should attempt to say what his work would have
been if his training had been different. In his judgments on Goethe,
Wordsworth, Byron, Shelley and Hugo, it may be seen how strong was his
impulse to bow to authority. On the other hand, in Arnold's ingenious
reasoning away the conception of Providence to "a stream of tendency not
ourselves which makes for righteousness," we see how strong was his
natural impulse for taking original views. The fact that the very air
Arnold breathed during the whole of the impressionable period of his
life was academic is therefore a very important fact to bear in mind.

In one of his own most charming critical essays he contrasts the poetry
of Homer, which consists of "natural thoughts in natural words," with
the poetry of Tennyson, which consists of "distilled thoughts in
distilled words." "Distilled" is one of the happiest words to be found
in poetical criticism, and may be used with equal aptitude in the
criticism of life. To most people the waters of life come with all their
natural qualities--sweet or bitter--undistilled. Only the ordinary
conditions of civilization, common to all, flavoured the waters of life
to Shakespeare, to Cervantes, to Burns, to Scott, to Dumas, and those
other great creators whose minds were mirrors--broad and clear--for
reflecting the rich drama of life around them. To Arnold the waters of
life came distilled so carefully that the wonder is that he had any
originality left. A member of the upper stratum of that "middle class"
which he despised, or pretended to despise--the eldest son of one of the
most accomplished as well as one of the most noble-tempered men of his
time--Arnold from the moment of his birth drank the finest distilled
waters that can be drunk even in these days. Perhaps, on the whole, the
surprising thing is how little he suffered thereby. Indeed those who had
formed an idea of Arnold's personality from their knowledge of his
"culture," and especially those who had been delighted by the fastidious
and feminine delicacy of his prose style, used to be quite bewildered
when for the first time they met him at a dinner-table or in a friend's
smoking-room. His prose was so self-conscious that what people expected
to find in the writer was the Arnold as he was conceived by certain
"young lions" of journalism whom he satirized--a somewhat over-cultured
_petit-maître_--almost, indeed, a coxcomb of letters. On the other hand,
those who had been captured by his poetry expected to find a man whose
sensitive organism responded nervously to every uttered word as an
aeolian harp answers to the faintest breeze. What they found was a
broad-shouldered, manly--almost burly--Englishman with a fine
countenance, bronzed by the open air of England, wrinkled apparently by
the sun, wind-worn as an English skipper's, open and frank as a
fox-hunting squire's--and yet a countenance whose finely chiselled
features were as high-bred and as commanding as Wellington's or Sir
Charles Napier's. The voice they heard was deep-toned, fearless, rich
and frank, and yet modulated to express every _nuance_ of thought, every
movement of emotion and humour. In his prose essays the humour he showed
was of a somewhat thin-lipped kind; in his more important poems he
showed none at all. It was here, in this matter of humour, that Arnold's
writings were specially misleading as to the personality of the man.
Judged from his poems, it was not with a poet like the writer of "The
Northern Farmer," or a poet like the writer of "Ned Bratts," that any
student of poetry would have dreamed of classing him. Such a student
would actually have been more likely to class him with two of his
contemporaries between whom and himself there were but few points in
common, the "humourless" William Morris and the "humourless" Rossetti.
For, singularly enough, between him and them there was this one point of
resemblance: while all three were richly endowed with humour, while all
three were the very lights of the sets in which they moved, the moment
they took pen in hand to write poetry they became sad. It would almost
seem as if, like Rossetti, Arnold actually held that poetry was not the
proper medium for humour. No wonder, then, if the absence of humour in
his poetry did much to mislead the student of his work as to the real
character of the man.

After a year at Winchester, Matthew Arnold entered Rugby school in 1837.
He early began to write and print verses. His first publication was a
Rugby prize poem, _Alaric at Rome_, in 1840. This was followed in 1843,
after he had gone up to Oxford in 1840 as a scholar of Balliol, by his
poem _Cromwell_, which won the Newdigate prize. In 1844 he graduated
with second-class honours, and in 1845 was elected a fellow of Oriel
College, where among his colleagues was A.H. Clough, his friendship with
whom is commemorated in that exquisite elegy _Thyrsis_. From 1847 to
1851 he acted as private secretary to Lord Lansdowne; and in the latter
year, after acting for a short time as assistant-master at Rugby, he was
appointed to an inspectorship of schools, a post which he retained until
two years before his death. He married, in June 1851, the daughter of Mr
Justice Wightman, Meanwhile, in 1849, appeared _The Strayed Reveller,
and other Poems, by A_, a volume which gained a considerable esoteric
reputation. In 1852 he published another volume under the same initial,
_Empedocles on Etna, and other Poems_. _Empedocles_ is as undramatic a
poem perhaps as was ever written in dramatic form, but studded with
lyrical beauties of a very high order. In 1853 Arnold published a volume
of _Poems_ under his own name. This consisted partially of poems
selected from the two previous volumes. A second series of poems, which
contained, however, only two new ones, was published in 1855. So great
was the impression made by these in academic circles, that in 1857
Arnold was elected professor of poetry at Oxford, and he held the chair
for ten years. In 1858 he published his classical tragedy, _Merope_.
Nine years afterwards his _New Poems_ (1867) were published. While he
held the Oxford professorship he published several series of lectures,
which gave him a high place as a scholar and critic. The essays[1] _On
Translating Homer: Three Lectures given at Oxford_, published in 1861,
supplemented in 1862 by _On Translating Homer: Last Words_, a fourth
lecture given in reply to F.W. Newman's _Homeric Translation in Theory
and Practice_ (1861), and _On the Study of Celtic Literature_, published
in 1867, were full of subtle and brilliant if not of profound criticism.
So were the two series of _Essays in Criticism_, the first of which,
consisting of articles reprinted from various reviews, appeared in 1865.
The essay on "A Persian Passion Play" was added in the editions of 1875;
and a second series, edited by Lord Coleridge, appeared in 1888.

Arnold's poetic activity almost ceased after he left the chair of poetry
at Oxford. He was several times sent by government to make inquiries
into the state of education in France, Germany, Holland and other
countries; and his reports, with their thorough-going and searching
criticism of continental methods, as contrasted with English methods,
showed how conscientiously he had devoted some of his best energies to
the work. His fame as a poet and a literary critic has somewhat
overshadowed the fact that he was during thirty-five years of his
life--from 1851 to 1836--employed in the Education Department as one of
H.M. inspectors of schools, while his literary work was achieved in such
intervals of leisure as could be spared from the public service. At the
time of his appointment the government, by arrangement with the
religious bodies, entrusted the inspection of schools connected with the
Church of England to clergymen, and agreed also to send Roman Catholic
inspectors to schools managed by members of that communion. Other
schools--those of the British and Foreign Society, the Wesleyans, and
undenominational schools generally--were inspected by laymen, of whom
Arnold was one. There were only three or four of these officers at
first, and their districts were necessarily large. It is to the
experience gained in intercourse with Nonconformist school managers that
we may attribute the curiously intimate knowledge of religious sects
which furnished the material for some of his keen though good-humoured
sarcasms. The Education Act of 1870, which simplified the administrative
system, abolished denominational inspection, and thus greatly reduced
the area assigned to a single inspector. Arnold took charge of the
district of Westminster, and remained in that office until his
resignation, taking also an occasional share in the inspection of
training colleges for teachers, and in conferences at the central
office. His letters, _passim_, show that some of the routine which
devolved upon him was distasteful, and that he was glad to entrust to a
skilled assistant much of the duty of individual examination and the
making up of schedules and returns. But the influence he exerted on
schools, on the department, and on the primary education of the whole
country, was indirectly far greater than is generally supposed. His
annual reports, of which more than twenty were collected into a volume
by his friend and official chief, Sir Francis (afterwards Lord)
Sandford, attracted, by reason of their freshness of style and thought,
much more of public attention than is usually accorded to blue-book
literature; and his high aims, and his sympathetic appreciation of the
efforts and difficulties of the teachers, had a remarkable effect in
raising the tone of elementary education, and in indicating the way to
improvement. In particular, he insisted on the formative elements of
school education, on literature and the "humanities," as distinguished
from the collection of scraps of information and "useful knowledge"; and
he sought to impress all the young teachers with the necessity of
broader mental cultivation than was absolutely required to obtain the
government certificate. In his reports also he dwelt often and forcibly
on the place which the study of the Bible, not the distinctive
formularies of the churches, ought to hold in English schools. He urged
that besides the religious and moral purposes of Scriptural teaching, it
had a literary value of its own, and was the best instrument in the
hands even of the elementary teacher for uplifting the soul and refining
and enlarging the thoughts of young children.

On three occasions Arnold was asked to assist the government by making
special inquiries into the state of education in foreign countries.
These duties were especially welcome to him, serving as they did as a
relief from the monotony of school inspection at home, and as
opportunities for taking a wider survey of the whole subject of
education, and for expressing his views on principles and national aims
as well as administrative details. In 1859, as foreign assistant
commissioner, he prepared for the duke of Newcastle's commission to
inquire into the subject of elementary education a report (printed 1860)
which was afterwards reprinted (1861) in a volume entitled _The Popular
Education of France, with Notices of that of Holland and Switzerland_.
In 1865 he was again employed as assistant-commissioner by the Schools
Inquiry Commission under Lord Taunton; and his report on this subject,
_On Secondary Education in Foreign Countries_ (1866), was subsequently
reprinted under the title _Schools and Universities on the Continent_
(1868). Twenty years later he was sent by the Education Department to
make special inquiries on certain specified points, e.g. free education,
the status and training of teachers, and compulsory attendance at
schools. The result of this investigation appeared as a parliamentary
paper, _Special Report on certain points connected with Elementary
Education in Germany, Switzerland and France_, in 1886. He also
contributed the chapter on "Schools" (1837-1887) to the second volume of
Mr Humphry Ward's _Reign of Queen Victoria_. Part of his official
writings may be studied in _Reports for Elementary Schools_ (1852-1882),
edited by Sir F. Sandford in 1889.

All these reports form substantial contributions to the history and
literature of education in the Victorian age. They have been quoted
often, and have exercised marked influence on subsequent changes and
controversies. One great purpose underlies them all. It is to bring home
to the English people a conviction that education ought to be a national
concern, that it should not be left entirely to local, or private, or
irresponsible initiative, that the watchful jealousy so long shown by
Liberals, and especially by Nonconformists, in regard to state action
was a grave practical mistake, and that in an enlightened democracy,
animated by a progressive spirit and noble and generous ideals, it was
the part of wisdom to invoke the collective power of the state to give
effect to those ideals. To this theme he constantly recurred in his
essays, articles and official reports. "_Porro unum est necessarium_.
One thing is needful; organize your secondary education."

In 1883 a pension of £250 was conferred on Arnold in recognition of his
literary merits. In the same year he went to the United States on a
lecturing tour, and again in 1886, his subjects being "Emerson" and the
"Principles and Value of Numbers." The success of these lectures, though
they were admirable in matter and form, was marred by the lecturer's
lack of experience in delivery. It is sufficient, further, to say that
_Culture and Anarchy: an Essay in Political and Social Criticism_,
appeared in 1869; _St Paul and Protestantism, with an Introduction on
Puritanism and the Church of England_ (1870); _Friendship's Garland:
being the Conversations, Letters and Opinions of the late Arminius Baron
van Thunder-ten-Tronckh_ (1871); _Literature and Dogma: an Essay towards
a Better Apprehension of the Bible_ (1873); _God and the Bible: a Review
of Objections to Literature and Dogma_ (1875); _Last Essays on Church
and Religion_ (1877); _Mixed Essays_ (1879); _Irish Essays and Others_
(1882); _Discourses in America_ (1885). Such essays as the first of
these, embodying as they did Arnold's views of theological and polemical
subjects, attracted much attention at the time of their publication,
owing to the state of the intellectual atmosphere at the moment; but it
is doubtful, perhaps, whether they will be greatly considered in the
near future. Many severe things have been said, and will be said,
concerning the inadequacy of poets like Coleridge and Wordsworth when
confronting subjects of a theological or philosophical kind.
Wordsworth's High Church Pantheism and Coleridge's disquisitions on the
Logos seem farther removed from the speculations of to-day than do the
dreams of Lucretius. But these two great writers lived before the days
of modern science. Arnold, living only a few years later, came at a
transition period when the winds of tyrannous knowledge had blown off
the protecting roof that had covered the centuries before, but when time
and much labour were needed to build another roof of new materials--a
period when it was impossible for the poet to enjoy either the quietism
of High Church Pantheism in which Wordsworth had basked, or the
sheltering protection of German metaphysics under which Coleridge had
preached--a period, nevertheless, when the wonderful revelations of
science were still too raw, too cold and hard, to satisfy the yearnings
of the poetic soul. Objectionable as Arnold's rationalizing criticism
was to contemporary orthodoxy, and questionable as was his equipment in
point of theological learning, his spirituality of outlook and ethical
purpose were not to be denied. Yet it is not Arnold's views that have
become current coin so much as his literary phrases--his craving for
"culture" and "sweetness and light," his contempt for "the dissidence of
Dissent and the Protestantism of the Protestant religion," his "stream
of tendency not ourselves making for righteousness," his classification
of "Philistines and barbarians"--and so forth. His death at Liverpool,
of heart failure on the 15th of April 1888, was sudden and quite
unexpected.

Arnold was a prominent figure in that great galaxy of Victorian poets
who were working simultaneously--Tennyson, Browning, Rossetti, William
Morris and Swinburne--poets between whom there was at least this
connecting link, that the quest of all of them was the old-fashioned
poetical quest of the beautiful. Beauty was their watchword, as it had
been the watchword of their immediate predecessors--Wordsworth,
Coleridge, Keats, Shelley and Byron. That this group of early
19th-century poets might be divided into two--those whose primary quest
was physical beauty, and those whose primary quest was moral beauty-is
no doubt true. Still, in so far as beauty was their quest they were all
akin. And so with the Victorian group to which Arnold belonged. As to
the position which he takes among them opinions must necessarily vary.
On the whole, his place in the group will be below all the others. The
question as to whether he was primarily a poet or a _prosateur_ has been
often asked. If we were to try to answer that question here, we should
have to examine his poetry in detail--we should have to inquire whether
his primary impulse of expression was to seize upon the innate
suggestive power of words, or whether his primary impulse was to rely
upon the logical power of the sentence. In nobility of temper, in
clearness of statement, and especially in descriptive power, he is
beyond praise. But intellect, judgment, culture and study of great poets
may do much towards enabling a prose-writer to write what must needs be
called good poetry. What they cannot enable him to do is to produce
those magical effects which poets of the rarer kind can achieve by
seizing that mysterious, suggestive power of words which is far beyond
all mere statement. Notwithstanding the exquisite work that Arnold has
left behind him, some critics have come to the conclusion that his
primary impulse in expression was that of the poetically-minded
_prosateur_ rather than that of the born poet. And this has been said by
some who nevertheless deeply admire poems like "The Scholar Gypsy,"
"Thyrsis," "The Forsaken Merman," "Dover Beach," "Heine's Grave," "Rugby
Chapel," "The Grande Chartreuse," "Sohrab and Rustum," "The Sick King in
Bokhara," "Tristram and Iseult," &c. It would seem that a man may show
all the endowments of a poet save one, and that one the most
essential--the instinctive mastery over metrical effects.

In all literary expression there are two kinds of emphasis, the emphasis
of sound and the emphasis of sense. Indeed the difference between those
who have and those who have not the true rhythmic instinct is that,
while the former have the innate faculty of making the emphasis of sound
and the emphasis of sense meet and strengthen each other, the latter are
without that faculty. But so imperfect is the human mind that it can
rarely apprehend or grasp simultaneously these two kinds of emphasis.
While to the born _prosateur_ the emphasis of sense comes first, and
refuses to be more than partially conditioned by the emphasis of sound,
to the born poet the emphasis of sound comes first, and sometimes will,
even as in the case of Shelley, revolt against the tyranny of the
emphasis of sense. Perhaps the very origin of the old quantitative
metres was the desire to make these two kinds of emphasis meet in the
same syllable. In manipulating their quantitative metrical system the
Greeks had facilities for bringing one kind of emphasis into harmony
with the other such as are unknown to writers in accentuated metres.
This accounts for the measureless superiority of Greek poetry in verbal
melody as well as in general harmonic scheme to all the poetry of the
modern world. In writers so diverse in many ways as Homer, Aeschylus,
Sophocles, Pindar, Sappho, the harmony between the emphasis of sound and
the emphasis of sense is so complete that each of these kinds of
emphasis seems always begetting, yet always born of the other. When in
Europe the quantitative measures were superseded by the accentuated
measures a reminiscence was naturally and inevitably left behind of the
old system; and the result has been, in the English language at least,
that no really great line can be written in which the emphasis of
accent, the emphasis of quantity and the emphasis of sense do not meet
on the same syllable. Whenever this junction does not take place the
weaker line, or lines, are always introduced, not for makeshift
purposes, but for variety, as in the finest lines of Milton and
Wordsworth. Wordsworth no doubt seems to have had a theory that the
accent of certain words, such as "without," "within," &c., could be
disturbed in an iambic line; but in his best work he does not act upon
his theory, and endeavours most successfully to make the emphasis of
accent, of quantity and of sense meet. It might not be well for a poem
to contain an entire sequence of such perfect lines as

  "I thought of Chatterton, the marvellous boy,"

or

  "Thy soul was like a star and dwelt apart,"

for then the metricist's art would declare itself too loudly and weaken
the imaginative strength of the picture. But such lines should no doubt
form the basis of the poem, and weaker lines--lines in which there is no
such combination of the three kinds of emphasis--should be sparingly
used, and never used for makeshift purposes. Now, neither by instinct
nor by critical study was Arnold ever able to apprehend this law of
prosody. If he does write a line of the first order, metrically
speaking, he seems to do so by accident. Such weak lines as these are
constantly occurring--

  "The poet, to whose mighty heart
   Heaven doth a quicker pulse impart,
   Subdues that energy to scan
   Not his own course, but that of man."

Much has been said about what is called the "Greek temper" of Matthew
Arnold's muse. A good deal depends upon what it meant by the Hellenic
spirit. But if the Greek temper expresses itself, as is generally
supposed, in the sweet acceptance and melodious utterance of the beauty
of the world as it is, accepting that beauty without inquiring as to
what it means and as to whither it goes, it is difficult to see where in
Arnold's poetry this temper declares itself. Surely it is not in
_Empedocles on Etna_, and surely it is not in _Merope_. If there is a
poem of his in which one would expect to find the joyous acceptance of
life apart from questionings about the civilization in which the poet
finds himself environed (its hopes, its fears, its aspirations and its
failures)--such questionings, in short, as were for ever Vexing Arnold's
soul--it would be in "The Scholar Gypsy," a poem in which the poet tries
to throw himself into the mood of a "Romany Rye." The great attraction
of the gypsies to Englishmen of a certain temperament is that they alone
seem to feel the joyous acceptance of life which is supposed to be
specially Greek. Hence it would have been but reasonable to look, if
anywhere, for the expression of Arnold's Greek temper in a poem which
sets out to describe the feelings of the student who, according to
Glanville's story, left Oxford to wander over England with the Romanies.
But instead of this we got the old fretting about the unsatisfactoriness
of modern civilization. Glanville's Oxford student, whose story is
glanced at now and again in the poem, flits about in the scenery like a
cloud-shadow on the grass; but the way in which Arnold contrives to
avoid giving us the faintest idea either dramatic or pictorial of the
student about whom he talks so much, and the gypsies with whom the
student lived, is one of the most singular feats in poetry. The
reflections which come to a young Oxonian lying on the grass and longing
to escape life's fitful fever without shuffling off this mortal coil,
are, no doubt, beautiful reflections beautifully expressed, but the
temper they show is the very opposite of the Greek. To say this is not
in the least to disparage Arnold. "A man is more like the age in which
he lives," says the Chinese aphorism, "than he is like his own father
and mother," and Arnold's polemical writings alone are sufficient to
show that the waters of life he drank were from fountains distilled,
seven times distilled, at the topmost slope of 19th-century
civilization. Mr George Meredith's "Old Chartist" exhibits far more of
the temper of acceptance than does any poem by Matthew Arnold.

His most famous critical dictum is that poetry is a "criticism of
life." What he seems to have meant is that poetry is the crowning fruit
of a criticism of life; that just as the poet's metrical effects are and
must be the result of a thousand semiconscious generalizations upon the
laws of cause and effect in metric art, so the beautiful things he says
about life and the beautiful pictures he paints of life are the result
of his generalizations upon life as he passes through it, and
consequently that the value of his poetry consists in the beauty and the
truth of his generalizations. But this is saying no more than is said in
the line--

  "Rien n'est beau que le vrai; le vrai seul est aimable"--

or in the still more famous lines--

  "'Beauty is truth, truth beauty,'--that is all
   Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know."

To suppose that Arnold confounded the poet with the writer of _pensées_
would be absurd. Yet having decided that poetry consists of
generalizations on human life, in reading poetry he kept on the watch
for those generalizations, and at last seemed to think that the less and
not the more they are hidden behind the dramatic action, and the more
unmistakably they are intruded as generalizations, the better. For
instance, in one of his essays he quotes those lines from the "Chanson
de Roland" of Turoldus, where Roland, mortally wounded, lays himself
down under a pine-tree with his face turned towards Spain and the enemy,
and begins to "call many things to remembrance; all the lands which his
valour conquered, and pleasant France, and the men of his lineage, and
Charlemagne, his liege lord, who nourished him"--

  "De plusurs choses à remembrer li prist,
   De tames teres cume li bers cunquist,
   De dulce France, des humes de sun ligu,
   De Carlemagne sun seignor ki l'nurrit."

"That," says Arnold, "is primitive work, I repeat, with an undeniable
poetic quality of its own. It deserves such praise, and such praise is
sufficient for it." Then he contrasts it with a famous passage in
Homer--that same passage which is quoted in the article POETRY, for the
very opposite purpose to that of Arnold's, quoted indeed to show how the
epic poet, leaving the dramatic action to act as chorus, weakens the
[Greek: apatae] of the picture--the passage in the _Iliad_ (iii 243-244)
where the poet, after Helen's pathetic mention of her brother's comments
on the causes of their absence, "criticizes life" and generalizes upon
the impotence of human intelligence, the impotence even of human love,
to pierce the darkness in which the web of human fate is woven. He
appends Dr Hawtrey's translation:--

  [Greek: Os phato roys d êdê katechen physizoos aia
  en Lakedaimoni authi, philê en patridi gaiê.]

  "So said she; they long since in Earth's soft arms were reposing
   There, in their own dear land, their fatherland, Lacedaemon."

"We are here," says Arnold, "in another world, another order of poetry
altogether; here is rightly due such supreme praise as that which M.
Vitel gives to the _Chanson de Roland_. If our words are to have any
meaning, if our judgments are to have any solidity, we must not heap
that supreme praise upon poetry of an order immeasurably inferior." He
does not see that the two passages cannot properly be compared at all.
In the one case the poet gives us a dramatic picture; in the other; a
comment on a dramatic picture.

Perhaps, indeed, the place Arnold held and still holds as a critic is
due more to his exquisite felicity in expressing his views than to the
penetration of his criticism. Nothing can exceed the easy grace of his
prose at the best. It is conversational and yet absolutely exact in the
structure of the sentences; and in spite of every vagary, his
distinguishing note is urbanity. Keen-edged as his satire could be, his
writing for the most part is as urbane as Addison's own. His influence
on contemporary criticism and contemporary ideals was considerable, and
generally wholesome. His insistence on the necessity of looking at "the
thing in itself," and the need for acquainting oneself with "the best
that has been thought and said in the world," gave a new stimulus alike
to originality and industry in criticism; and in his own selection of
subjects--such as _Joubert_, or the _de Guérins_--he opened a new world
to a larger class of the better sort of readers, exercising in this
respect an awakening influence in his own time akin to that of Walter
Pater a few years afterwards. The comparison with Pater might indeed be
pressed further, and yet too far. Both were essentially products of
Oxford. But Arnold, whose description of that "home of lost causes, and
forsaken beliefs, and unpopular names, and impossible loyalties," is in
itself almost a poem, had a classical austerity in his style that
savoured more intimately of Oxford tradition, and an ethical earnestness
even in his most flippant moments which kept him notably aloof from the
more sensuous school of aesthetics.

  The first collected edition of Arnold's poems was published in 1869 in
  two volumes, the first consisting of _Narrative and Elegiac Poems_,
  and the second of _Dramatic and Lyric Poems_. Other editions appeared
  in 1877, 1881; a library edition (3 vols., 1885); a one-volume reprint
  of the poems printed in the library edition with one or two additions
  (1890). Publications by Matthew Arnold not mentioned in the foregoing
  article include: _England and the Italian Question_ (1859), a
  pamphlet; _A French Eton; or, Middle Class Education and the State_
  (1864); _Higher Schools and Universities in Germany_ (1874), a partial
  reprint from _Schools and Universities on the Continent_ (1868); _A
  Bible Reading for Schools; The Great Prophecy of Israel's
  Restoration_, an arrangement of _Isaiah_, chs. xl.-lxvi. (1872),
  republished with additions and varying titles in 1875 and 1883; an
  edition of the _Six Chief Lives from Johnson's Lives of the Poets_
  (1878); editions of the _Poems of Wordsworth_ (1879), and the _Poetry
  of Byron_ (1881), for the Golden Treasury Series, with prefatory
  essays reprinted in the second series of _Essays in Criticism_; an
  edition of _Letters, Speeches and Tracts on Irish Affairs by Edmund
  Burke_ (1881); and many contributions to periodical literature. _The
  Letters of Matthew Arnold_ (1848-1888) were collected and arranged by
  George W.E. Russell in 1895, reprinted 1901. _Matthew Arnold's Note
  Books, with a Preface by the Hon. Mrs Wodehouse_, appeared in 1902. A
  complete and uniform edition of _The Works of Matthew Arnold_ (15
  vols., 1904-1905) includes the letters as edited by Mr Russell. Vol.
  iii. contains a complete bibliography of his works, many of the early
  editions of which are very valuable, by Mr T.B. Smart, who published a
  separate bibliography in 1892. A valuable note on the rather
  complicated subject of Arnold's bibliography is given by Mr H. Buxton
  Forman in Arnold's _Poems, Narrative, Elegiac and Lyric_ (Temple
  Classics, 1900).

  It was Arnold's expressed desire that his biography should not be
  written, and before his letters were published they underwent
  considerable editing at the hands of his family. There are, however,
  monographs on Matthew Arnold (1899) in _Modern English Writers_ by
  Prof. Saintsbury, and by Mr H.W. Paul (1902), in the English Men of
  Letters Series. These two works are supplemented by Mr G.W.E. Russell,
  who, as the editor of Arnold's letters, is in a sense the official
  biographer, in _Matthew Arnold_ (1904, Literary Lives Series). There
  are also studies of Arnold in Mr J.M. Robertson's _Modern Humanists_
  (1891), and in W.H. Hudson's _Studies in Interpretation_ (1896), in
  Sir J.G. Fitch's _Thomas and Matthew Arnold_ (1897), and a review of
  some of the works above mentioned in the _Quarterly_ for January 1905
  by T.H. Warren.     (T. W.-D.; J. G. F.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] These essays were edited in 1905 with an introduction by W.H.D.
    Rouse.