ARNULF (c. 850-899), Roman emperor, illegitimate son of Carloman, king
of Bavaria and Italy, was made margrave of Carinthia about 876, and on
his father's death in 880 his dignity and possessions were confirmed by
the new king of the east Franks, Louis III. The failure of legitimate
male issue of the later Carolingians gave Arnulf a more important
position than otherwise he would have occupied; but he did homage to the
emperor Charles the Fat in 882, and spent the next few years in constant
warfare with the Slavs and the Northmen. In 887, however, Arnulf
identified himself with the disgust felt by the Bavarians and others at
the incapacity of Charles the Fat. Gathering a large army, he marched to
Tribur; Charles abdicated and the Germans recognized Arnulf as their
king, a proceeding which L. von Ranke describes as "the first
independent action of the German secular world." Arnulf's real authority
did not extend far beyond the confines of Bavaria, and he contented
himself with a nominal recognition of his supremacy by the kings who
sprang up in various parts of the Empire. Having made peace with the
Moravians, he gained a great and splendid victory over the Northmen near
Louvain in October 891, and in spite of some opposition succeeded in
establishing his illegitimate son, Zwentibold, as king of the district
afterwards called Lorraine. Invited by Pope Formosus to deliver him from
the power of Guido III., duke of Spoleto, who had been crowned emperor,
Arnulf went to Italy in 894, but after storming Bergamo and receiving
the homage of some of the nobles at Pavia, he was compelled by
desertions from his army to return. The restoration of peace with the
Moravians and the death of Guido prepared the way for a more successful
expedition in 895 when Rome was stormed by his troops; and Arnulf was
crowned emperor by Formosus in February 896. He then set out to
establish his authority in Spoleto, but on the way was seized with
paralysis. He returned to Bavaria, where he died on the 8th of December
899, and was buried at Regensburg. He left, by his wife Ota, a son Louis
surnamed the Child. Arnulf possessed the qualities of a soldier, and was
a loyal supporter of the church.

  See "Annales Fuldenses" in the _Monumenta Germaniae historica.
  Scriptores_, Band i. (Hanover and Berlin, 1826); E. Dümmler,
  _Geschichte des ostfränkischen Reichs_ (Leipzig, 1887-1888); M.J.L. de
  Gagern, _Arnulfi imperatoris vita_ (Bonn, 1837); E. Dümmler, _De
  Arnulfo Francorum rege_ (Berlin, 1852); W.B. Wenck, _Die Erhebung
  Arnulfs und der Zerfall des karolingischen Reiches_ (Leipzig, 1852);
  O. Dietrich, _Beitrâge zur Geschichte Arnolfs von Karnthen und Ludwigs
  des Kindes_ (Berlin, 1890); E. Mühlbacher, _Die Regesten des
  Kaiserreichs unter den Karolingern_ (Innsbruck, 1881).