AROIDEAE (Arum family), a large and wide-spread botanical order of
Monocotyledons containing about 1000 species in 105 genera. It is
generally distributed in temperate and tropical regions, but especially
developed in warm countries. The common British representative of the
order, _Arum maculatum_ (cuckoo-pint, lords and ladies, or wake robin),
gives a meagre idea of its development. The plants are generally
herbaceous, often, however, reaching a gigantic size, but are sometimes
shrubby, as in _Pothos_, a genus of shrubby climbing plants, chiefly
Malayan. _Monstera_ is a tropical American genus of climbing shrubs,
with large often much-perforated leaves; the fruiting spikes of a
Mexican species, _M. deliciosa_, are eaten. The roots of the climbing
species are of interest in their adaptation to the mode of life of the
plant. For instance, some species of _Philodendron_ have a growth like
that of ivy, with feeding roots penetrating the soil and clasping roots
which fix the plant to its support. In other species of the genus the
seed germinates on a branch, and the seedling produces clasping roots,
and roots which grow downwards hanging like stout cords, and ultimately
reaching the ground. The leaves, which show great variety in size and
form, are generally broad and net-veined, but in sweet-flag (_Acorus
Calamus_) are long and narrow with parallel veins. In _Arum_ the blade
is simple, as also in the so-called arum-lily (_Richardia_), a South
African species common in Britain as a greenhouse plant, and in
_Caladium_, a tropical South American genus, and _Alocasia_ (tropical
Asia), species of which are favourite warm-greenhouse plants on account
of their variegated leaves. In other genera the leaves are much divided
and sometimes very large; those of _Dracontium_ (tropical America) may
be 15 ft. high, with a long stem-like stalk and a much-branched
spreading blade. The East Indian genus _Amorphophallus_ has a similar
habit. A good series of tropical aroids is to be seen in the aroid house
at Kew. The so-called water cabbage (_Pistia Stratiotes_) is a floating
plant widely distributed in the tropics, and consisting of rosettes of
broadish leaves several inches across and a tuft of roots hanging in the
water.

[Illustration: _Arum maculatum_, Cuckoo-pint.

  1. Leaves and inflorescence.
  2. Underground root-stock.
  3. Lower part of spathe cut open.
  4. Spike of fruits. Showing in succession (from below) female flowers,
  male flowers, and sterile flowers forming a ring of hairs borne on the
  spadix.]

The small flowers are densely crowded on thick fleshy spikes, which are
associated with, and often more or less enveloped by, a large leaf
(bract), the so-called spathe, which, as in cuckoo-pint, where it is
green in colour, _Richardia_, where it is white, creamy or yellow,
_Anthurium_, where it is a brilliant scarlet, is often the most striking
feature of the plant. The details of the structure of the flower show a
wide variation; the flowers are often extremely simple, sometimes as in
_Arum_, reduced to a single stamen or pistil. The fruit is a berry--the
scarlet berries of the cuckoo-pint are familiar objects in the hedges in
late summer. The plants generally contain an acrid poisonous juice. The
underground stems (rhizomes or tubers) are rich in starch; from that of
_Arum maculatum_ Portland arrowroot was formerly extensively prepared by
pounding with water and then straining; the starch was deposited from
the strained liquid.

The order is represented in Britain by _Arum maculatum_, a low
herbaceous plant common in woods and hedgerows in England, but probably
not wild in Scotland. It grows from a whitish root-stock which sends up
in the spring a few long-stalked, arrow-shaped leaves of a polished
green, often marked with dark blotches. These are followed by the
inflorescence, a fleshy spadix bearing in the lower part numerous
closely crowded simple unisexual flowers and continued above into a
purplish or yellowish appendage; the spadix is enveloped by a leafy
spathe, constricted in the lower part to form a chamber, in which are
the flowers. The mouth of this chamber is protected by a ring of hairs
pointing downwards, which allow the entrance but prevent the escape of
small flies; after fertilization of the pistils the hairs wither. The
insects visit the plant in large numbers, attracted by the foetid smell,
and act as carriers of the pollen from one spathe to another. As the
fruit ripens the spathe withers, and the brilliant red berries are
exposed.

The sweet-flag _Acorus Calamus_ (q.v.), which occurs apparently wild in
England in ditches, ponds, &c., is supposed to have been introduced.