ARRAS, a city of northern France, chief town of the department of
Pas-de-Calais, 38 m. N.N.E. of Amiens on the Northern railway between
that city and Lille. Pop (1906) 20,738. Arras is situated in a fertile
plain on the right and southern bank of the Scarpe, at its junction with
the Crinchon which skirts the town on the south and east. Of the
fortifications erected by Vauban in the 17th century, only a gateway and
the partially dismantled citadel, nicknamed _la Belle Inutile_, are
left. The most interesting quarter lies in the east of the town, where
the lofty houses which border the spacious squares known as the Grande
and the Petite Place are in the Flemish style. They are built with their
upper storeys projecting over the footway and supported on columns so as
to form arcades; beneath these are deep cellars extending under the
squares themselves. The celebrated hôtel de ville of the 16th century
overlooks the Petite Place; its belfry, which contains a fine peal of
bells, rises to a height of 240 ft. The decoration is in the richest
Gothic style, and is especially admirable in the case of the windows. Of
the numerous ecclesiastical buildings the cathedral, a church of the
18th century possessing some good pictures, is the most important. It
occupies the site of the church of the abbey of St Vaast, the buildings
of which adjoin it and contain the bishop's palace, the ecclesiastical
seminary, a museum of antiquities, paintings and sculptures, and a rich
library.

Arras is the seat of a prefect and of a bishop. It has tribunals of
first instance and of commerce, a chamber of commerce, a branch of the
Bank of France, a communal college, training colleges, and a school of
military engineering. Its industrial establishments include oil-works,
dye-works and breweries, and manufactories of hosiery, railings and
other iron-work, and of oil-cake. For the tapestry manufacture formerly
flourishing at Arras see TAPESTRY. It has a very important market for
cereals and oleaginous grains. The trade of the town is facilitated by
the canalization of the Scarpe, the basin of which forms the port.

Before the opening of the Christian era Arras was known as _Nemetacum_,
or _Nemetocenna_, and was the chief town of the Atrebates, from which
the word Arras is derived. Passing under the rule of the Romans, it
became a place of some importance, and traces of the Roman occupation
have been found. In 407 it was destroyed by the Vandals, and having been
partially rebuilt, came into the hands of the Franks. Christianity was
introduced by St Vedast (Vaast), who founded a bishopric at Arras about
500. This was soon transferred to Cambrai, but brought back to its
original seat about 1100. As the chief town of the province of Artois,
Arras passed to Baldwin I., count of Flanders, in 863, and about 880 was
ravaged by the Normans. During this troubled period it retained some
vestiges of its former trade, and the woollen manufacture was
established here at an early date. Early in the 12th century a commune
was established here, but the earliest known charter only dates from
about 1180; owing to the importance of Arras, this soon became a model
for many neighbouring communes. At this time the city appears to have
been divided into two parts, one dependent upon the bishop, and the
other upon the count. When Philip Augustus, king of France, married
Isabella, niece of Philip, count of Flanders, Arras came under the rule
of the French king, who confirmed its privileges in 1194. As part of
Artois it came in 1237 to Robert, son of Louis VIII., king of France,
and in 1384 to Philip the Bold, duke of Burgundy, who promised to
respect its privileges. Anxious to recover the city for France, Louis
XI. placed a garrison therein after the death of Charles the Bold, duke
of Burgundy, in 1477. This was driven out by the inhabitants, and Louis
then stormed Arras, razed the walls, deported the citizens, whose places
were taken by Frenchmen, and changed the name to _Franchise_. The
successor of Louis, Charles VIII., restored the city to its former name
and position, and as part of the inheritance of Mary, daughter and
heiress of Charles the Bold, it was contended for by the French king,
and his rival, the German king, Maximilian I. The peace of Senlis in
1493 gave Arras to Maximilian, and in spite of attacks by the French, it
remained under the rule of the Habsburgs until 1640. Taken in this year
by the French, this capture was ratified by the peace of the Pyrenees in
1659, and henceforward it remained part of France. It suffered severely
during the French Revolution, especially from Joseph Lebon, who, like
the brothers Maximilien and Augustin Robespierre, was a native of the
town. Owing to its position and importance, Arras has been the scene of
various treaties. In 1414 the peace between the Armagnacs and the
Burgundians was made here, and in 1435 a congress met here to make peace
between the English and their Burgundian allies on the one side, and the
French on the other, and after the English representatives had
withdrawn, a treaty was signed on the 20th of September between France
and Burgundy. In 1482 Louis XI. made a treaty here with the estates and
towns of Flanders about the inheritance of Mary of Burgundy, wife of the
German king Maximilian I.

  See E. Lecesne, _Histoire d'Arras jusqu'en 1789_ (Arras, 1880); _Arras
  sous la Révolution_ (Arras, 1882-1883).