ARRETIUM (mod. _Arezzo_), an ancient city of Etruria, in the upper
valley of the Arno, situated on the Via Cassia, 50 m. S.E. of Florentia.
The site of the original city is not quite certain; some writers place
it on the isolated hill called Poggio di S. Cornelio, 2½ m. to the S.E.,
where remains of a fortified _enceinte_ still exist (cf. F. Noack in
_Römische Mitteilungen_, 1897, p. 186); while others maintain, and
probably rightly, that it occupied the hill at the summit of the modern
town, where the medieval citadel (_fortezza_) was erected, and which was
enclosed by an ancient wall. Numerous Etruscan tombs have been
discovered within the lower portion of the area of the modern town,
which appears to correspond in site with the Roman (_C.I.L._ xi. p.
1082; G. Gamurrini in _Notizie degli scavi_, 1883, 262; 1887, 437).
Vitruvius (ii. 8. 9) and Pliny (_Nat. Hist._ xxxv. 173) speak of the
strength of its walls of bricks, but these have naturally disappeared.
Many remains of Roman buildings have been discovered within the modern
town, and the amphitheatre is still visible in the southern angle.
Arretium appears as one of the cities which aided the Tarquins after
their expulsion. It was an opponent of Rome at the end of the 4th and
beginning of the 3rd century B.C., but soon sought for help against the
attacks of the Gauls, against whom it was almost a frontier fortress. It
was an important Roman base during the Hannibalic wars (though at one
time it threatened defection--Livy xxvii. 21-24), and in 205 B.C. was
able to furnish Scipio with a considerable quantity of arms and
provisions (Livy xxviii. 45). In 187 B.C. the high road was extended as
far as Bononia. Arretium took the part of Marius against Sulla, and the
latter settled some of his veterans there as colonists. Caesar, or
Octavian, added others, so that there are three classes, _Arretini
veteres, Fidentiores_, and _Iulienses_. A considerable contingent from
Arretium joined Catiline and in 49 B.C. Caesar occupied it. C.
Maecenas[1] was perhaps a native of Arretium. Its fertility was famous
in ancient times, and still more the red pottery made of the local clay,
with its imitation of chased silver. The reliefs upon it are sometimes
of considerable beauty, and large quantities of it, and the sites of
several of the kilns, have been discovered in and near Arretium. It was
also considerably exported. See _Corp. Inscrip. Lat._ xi. (Berlin, 1901)
p. 1081, and _Notizie degli scavi, passim_ (especially, 1884, 369, for
the discovery of a fine group of the moulds from which these vases were
made). The museum contains a very fine collection of these and a good
collection of medieval majolica.     (T. As.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] The name Cilnius was apparently never borne by Maecenas himself,
    though he is so described, e.g. by Tacitus, _Ann_. vi. II, cf.
    Macrob. ii. 4, 12. The Cilnii with whom Maecenas was connected were a
    noble Etruscan family.