ARREST (Fr. _arrester, arrêter_, to stop or stay), the restraint of a
man's person, for the purpose of compelling him to be obedient to the
law. It is defined to be the execution of the command of some court of
record or officer of justice.

Arrests in England are either in civil or in criminal cases.

I. _In Civil Cases._--The arrest must be by virtue of a precept or order
out of some court, and must be effected by corporal seizing or touching
the defendant's body, or as directed by the writ, _capias et attachias_,
take and catch hold of. And if the defendant make his escape it is a
_rescous_, or rescue, and attachment may be had against him, and the
bailiff may then justify the breaking open of the house in which he is,
to carry him away.

_Arrests on mesne process_ (see PROCESS), before judgment obtained, were
abolished by the Debtors Act 1869, s. 6; an exception, however, is made
in cases in which the plaintiff proves, at any time before final
judgment, by evidence on oath to the satisfaction of a judge of one of
the superior courts, that he has a good cause of action to the amount of
£50, that the defendant is about to quit the country, and that his
absence will materially prejudice the plaintiff in prosecuting his
action. In such cases an order for arrest may be obtained till security
to the amount of the claim be found.

Formerly a judgment creditor might arrest his debtor under a writ of
_capias ad satisfaciendum_, but since 1869 imprisonment for debt has
been abolished in England, except in certain cases, and in these the
period of detention must not exceed one year.

The following persons are privileged from arrest, viz., 1st, members of
the royal family and the ordinary servants of the king or queen regnant,
chaplains, lords of the bedchamber, &c. This privilege does not extend
to servants of a consort queen or dowager. 2nd, peers of the realm,
peeresses by birth, creation or marriage, Scottish and Irish peers and
peeresses. 3rd, members of the House of Commons during the session of
parliament, and for a convenient time (forty days) before and after it.
Members of Convocation appear to have the same privilege. 4th, foreign
ambassadors and their "domestics and domestic servants." Temporary
privilege from arrest in civil process is enjoyed by barristers
travelling on circuit, by parties, witnesses or attorneys connected with
a cause, and by clergymen whilst performing divine service.

The arrest of any privileged person is irregular _ab initio_, and the
party may be discharged on motion. The only exception is as to
indictable crimes, such as treason, felony and breach of the peace.

There are no longer any places where persons are privileged from arrest,
such as the Mint, Savoy, Whitefriars, &c., on the ground of their being
ancient palaces.

Except in cases of treason, felony or breach of the peace, an arrest
cannot be made on a Sunday, and if made it is void (Sunday Observance
Act 1677); but it may be made in the night as well as in the day.

II. _In Criminal Cases._--All persons whatsoever are, without
distinction, equally liable to this arrest, and any man may arrest
without warrant or precept, and outer doors may be broken open for that
purpose. The arrest may be made,--1st, by warrant; 2nd, by an officer
without warrant; 3rd, by a private person without warrant; or, 4th, by a
hue and cry.

1. Warrants are ordinarily granted by justices of the peace on
information or complaint in writing and upon oath, and they must be
indorsed when it is intended they should be executed in another county
by a magistrate of that county (see Indictable Offences Act 1848). A
warrant issued by a metropolitan police magistrate can be executed
anywhere by a metropolitan police officer. Warrants are also granted in
cases of treason or other offence affecting the government by the privy
council, or one of the secretaries of state, and also by the chief or
other justice of the court of king's bench (_bench-warrant_) in cases of
felony, misdemeanour or indictment found, or criminal information
granted in that court. Every warrant ought to specify the offence
charged, the authority under which the arrest is to be made, the person
who is to execute it and the person who is to be arrested. A warrant
remains in force till executed or discharged by order of a court. An
officer may break open doors in order to execute a warrant in cases of
treason, felony or indictable offences, provided that, on demand,
admittance cannot otherwise be obtained. (See WARRANT.)

2. The officers who may arrest without warrant are,--justices of the
peace, for felony or breach of the peace committed in their presence;
the sheriff and the coroner in their county, for felony; constables, for
treason, felony or breach of the peace committed in their view,--and
within the metropolitan police district they have even larger powers
(Metropolitan Police Acts 1829-1895).

3. A private person is bound to arrest for a felony committed in his
presence, under penalty of fine and imprisonment. By the Prevention of
Offences Act 1851, a private person is allowed to arrest any one whom he
finds committing an indictable offence by night, and under the Malicious
Damage Act 1861, any person committing an offence against that act may
be arrested without warrant by the owner of the property damaged, or his
servants, or persons authorized by him. So, too, by the Coinage Offences
Act 1861. s. 31, any person may arrest any one whom he shall find
committing any offence relating to the coin, or other offence against
that act.

A person arrested without warrant must not be detained in private
custody but must be taken with all convenient speed to a police station
or justice and there charged (Summary Jurisdiction Act 1879).

4. The arrest by hue and cry is where officers and private persons are
concerned in _pursuing_ felons, or such as have dangerously wounded
others. By the Fugitive Offenders Act 1881, provision was made for the
arrest in the United Kingdom of persons committing treason, and felony
in any of the British colonies and vice versa; as to the arrest of
fugitives in foreign countries see EXTRADITION.

The remedy for a wrongful arrest is by an action for false imprisonment.

In Scotland the law of arrest in criminal procedure has a general
constitutional analogy with that of England, though the practice differs
with the varying character of the judicatories. Colloquially the word
arrest is used in compulsory procedure for the recovery of debt; but the
technical term applicable in that department is _caption_, and the law
on the subject is generically different from that of England. There
never was a practice in Scottish law corresponding with the English
arrest in mesne process; but by old custom a warrant for caption could
be obtained where a creditor made oath that he had reason to believe his
debtor meditated flight from the country, and the writ so issued is
called a warrant against a person _in meditatione fugae_. Imprisonment
of old followed on ecclesiastical cursing, and by fiction of law in
later times it was not the creditor's remedy, but the punishment of a
refractory person denounced rebel for disobedience to the injunctions of
the law requiring fulfilment of his obligation. The system was reformed
and stripped of its cumbrous fictions by an act of the year 1837.
Although the proceedings against the person could only follow on
completed process, yet, by a peculiarity of the Scottish law, documents
executed with certain formalities, and by special statute bills and
promissory notes, can be registered in the records of a court for
execution against the person as if they were judgments of the court.

The general principles as to the law of arrest in most European
countries correspond more or less exactly to those prevailing in
England.

An _arrest of a ship_, which is the method of enforcing the admiralty
process _in rem_, founded either on a maritime lien or on a claim
against the ship, is dealt with under ADMIRALTY JURISDICTION.

See also article ATTACHMENT.

_Arrest of Judgment_ is the assigning just reason why judgment should
not pass, notwithstanding verdict given, either in civil or in criminal
cases, and from intrinsic causes arising on the face of the record.

_United States._--The law of arrest assimilates to that existing in
England. Actual manual touching is not necessary (_Pike_ v. _Hanson_, 9
N.H. 491; _Hill_ v. _Taylor_, 50 Mich. 549); words of arrest by the
officer, not protested against and no resistance offered, are sufficient
(_Emery_ v. _Chesley_, 18 N.H. 198; _Goodell_ v. _Tower_, 1904, 58 Am.
Rep. 790). Words of arrest, staying over night at prisoner's house,
going with him before the magistrate next day constitute arrest
(_Courtery_ v. _Dozier_, 20 Ga. 369). Restraining a person in his own
house is arrest.

In civil cases in most of the states arrest for debt is abolished,
except in cases of fraud or wilful injury to persons or property by
constitutional provision or by statute. One arrested under process of a
federal court cannot be arrested under that of a state court for the
same cause. There is no provision in the United States constitution as
to imprisonment for debt, but congress has enacted (in Rev. Stat., s.
990) that all the provisions of the law of any state applicable to such
imprisonment shall apply to the process of federal courts in that state.
A woman can be arrested in New York for wilful injury to person,
character or property, and in certain other cases (Code, s. 553). The
president, federal officials, governors of states, members of congress
and of state legislatures (during the session), marines, soldiers and
sailors on duty, voters while going to and from the polls, judges, court
officials (1904, 100 N.W. 591), coroners and jurors while attending upon
their public duties, lawyers, parties and witnesses while going to,
attending or returning from court, and generally married women without
separate property, are exempt from arrest.

In criminal cases a bench-warrant in New York may be served in any
county without being backed by a magistrate (Code Crim. Proc., s. 304).
In Nebraska one found violating the law may be arrested and detained
until a legal warrant can be issued (Crim. Code, s. 283). A bail may
lawfully recapture his principal (1905) 121 Georgia Rep. 594. Foreign
ambassadors and ministers and their servants are exempt from arrest.
Exemption from arrest is a privilege, not of the court, as in England,
but of the person, and can be waived (_Petrie_ v. _Fitzgerald_, 1 Daly
401).