ARRHENIUS, SVANTE AUGUST (1859-   ), Swedish physicist and chemist, was
born on the 19th of February 1859, at Schloss Wijk, near Upsala. He
studied at Upsala from 1876 to 1881 and at Stockholm from 1881 to 1884,
then returning to Upsala as privat-docent in physical chemistry. He
spent two years from 1886 to 1888 in travelling, and visited Riga
Polytechnic and the universities of Würzburg, Graz, Amsterdam and
Leipzig. In 1891 he was appointed lecturer in physics at Stockholm and
four years later became full professor. Arrhenius is specially
associated with the development of the theory of electrolytic
dissociation, and his great paper on the subject, _Recherches sur la
conductibilité galvanique des électrolytes_--(1) _conductibilité
galvanique des solutions aqueuses extrêmement diluées_, (2) _théorie
chimique des électrolytes_, was presented to the Stockholm Academy of
Sciences in 1883. He was subsequently continuously engaged in extending
the applications of the doctrine of electrolytic conduction in relation
not only to the problems of chemical action but also, on the supposition
that in certain conditions the air conducts electrolytically, to the
phenomena of atmospheric electricity. In 1900 he published a _Lärobok i
teoretik elektrokemi_, which was translated into German and English, and
his _Lehrbuch der kosmischen Physik_ appeared in 1903. In 1904 he
delivered at the university of California a course of lectures, the
object of which was to illustrate the application of the methods of
physical chemistry to the study of the theory of toxins and antitoxins,
and which were published in 1907 under the title _Immunochemistry_. In
his _Worlds in the Making_ (1908), an English translation of _Das Werden
der Welten_ (1907), he combated the generally accepted doctrine that the
universe is tending to what Clausius termed _Wärmetod_ through
exhaustion of all sources of heat and motion, and suggested that by
virtue of a mechanism which maintains its available energy it is
self-renovating, energy being "degraded" in bodies which are in the
solar state, but "elevated" or raised to a higher level in bodies which
are in the nebular state. He further put forward the conception that
life is universally diffused, constantly emitted from all habitable
worlds in the form of spores which traverse space for years or ages, the
majority being ultimately destroyed by the heat of some blazing star,
but some few finding a resting-place on bodies which have reached the
habitable stage.