ARROWROOT. A large proportion of the edible starches obtained from the
rhizomes or root-stocks of various plants are known in commerce under
the name of arrowroot. Properly the name should be restricted to the
starch yielded by two or three species of _Maranta_ (nat. ord.
Marantaceae), the chief of which is _M. arundinacea_; and when genuine
or West Indian arrowroot is spoken of, it is understood that this is the
variety meant. _Maranta arundinacea_ is probably a native of Guiana and
western Brazil, but it has long been cultivated in the West Indian
Islands, and has now spread to most tropical countries. The plant is a
herbaceous perennial with a creeping root-stock which gives off fleshy
cylindrical branches or tubers, covered with pale brown or white scales
and afterwards ringed with their scars. It is at the period when these
tubers are gorged with starch, immediately before the season of rest,
that it is ripe for use. In addition to about 25% of starch, the tubers
contain a proportion of woody tissue, vegetable albumen and various
salts. The arrowroot may be separated on a small scale in the same
manner as potato-starch is frequently prepared, that is, by peeling the
root and grating it in water, when the starch falls to the bottom. The
liquor is then drained off, and the starch purified by repeated washings
till it is ready for drying. On a large scale the manufacture of
arrowroot is conducted with specially arranged machinery. The rhizomes
when dug up are washed free of earthy impurities and afterwards skinned.
Subsequently, according to Pereira's _Materia Medica_, "the carefully
skinned tubers are washed, then ground in a mill, and the pulp washed in
tinned-copper cylindrical washing-machines. The fecula (dim. of Lat.
_faex_, dregs, or sediment) is subsequently dried in drying-houses. In
order to obtain the fecula free from impurity, pure water must be used,
and great care and attention paid in every step of the process. The
skinning or peeling of the tubers must be performed with great nicety,
as the cuticle contains a resinous matter which imparts colour and a
disagreeable flavour to the starch. German-silver palettes are used for
skinning the deposited fecula, and shovels of the same metal for packing
the dried fecula. The drying is effected in pans, covered with white
gauze to exclude dust and insects."

[Illustration: FIG. 1. FIG. 2.

Arrowroot Plant (Maranta arundinacea).--Fig. 1, stem, leaves and
flowers; fig. 2, tubers.]

Arrowroot is distinguished by the granules agglomerating into small
balls, by slightly crepitating when rubbed between the fingers, and by
yielding with boiling water a fine, transparent, inodorous and
pleasant-tasting jelly. In microscopic structure the granules present an
ovoid form, marked with concentric lines very similar to potato-starch,
but readily distinguished by having a "hilum" marking at the thick
extremity of the granule, while in potato-starch the same appearance
occurs at the thin end (compare figs. 3 and 4 below). In addition to the
West Indian supplies, arrowroot is found in the commerce of Brazil, the
East Indies, Australia, Cape Colony and Natal.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. FIG. 4. FIG. 5. FIG. 6. Starch Granules
magnified.

  Fig. 3. Potato.
  Fig. 4. Arrowroot.
  Fig. 5. Tous-les-mois.
  Fig. 6. Manihot.]

The name "arrowroot" is derived from the use by the Mexican Indians of
the juice of the fresh root as an application to wounds produced by
poisoned arrows. Sir Hans Sloane refers to it in his _Catalogue of
Jamaica Plants_ (1696), and it is said to have been introduced into
England by William Houston about 1732. It is grown as a stove-plant in
botanic gardens. The slender, much-branched stem is 5 or 6 ft. high, and
bears numerous leaves with long, narrow sheaths and large spreading
ovate blades, and a few short-stalked white flowers.

_Tous-les-mois_, or Tulema arrowroot, also from the West Indies, is
obtained from several species of _Canna_, a genus allied to _Maranta_,
and cultivated in the same manner. The granules of _tous-les-mois_ are
readily distinguishable by their very large size (fig. 5). East Indian
arrowroot is obtained from the root-stocks of several species of the
genus _Curcuma_ (nat. ord. Zingiberaceae), chiefly _C. angustifolia_, a
native of central India. Brazilian arrowroot is the starch of the
cassava plant, a species of Manihot (fig. 6), which when agglutinated on
hot plates forms the tapioca of commerce. The cassava is cultivated in
the East Indian Archipelago as well as in South America. _Tocca_, or
_Otaheite_ arrowroot, is the produce of _Tacca pinnatifida_, the pia
plant of the South Sea Islands. Portland arrowroot was formerly prepared
on the Isle of Portland from the tubers of the common cuckoo-pint, _Arum
maculatum_. Various other species of arum yield valuable food-starches
in hot countries. Under the name of British arrowroot the farina of
potatoes is sometimes sold, and the French excel in the preparation of
imitations of the more costly starches from this source. The chief use,
however, of potato-farina as an edible starch is for adulterating other
and more costly preparations. This falsification can readily be detected
by microscopic examination, and the accompanying drawings exhibit the
appearance under the microscope of the principal starches we have
described. Although these starches agree in chemical composition, their
value as articles of diet varies considerably, owing to different
degrees of digestibility and pleasantness of taste. Arrowroot contains
about 82% of starch, and about 1% of proteid and mineral matter. Farina,
or British arrowroot, at about one-twelfth the price, is just as useful
and pleasant a food.