ARSACES, a Persian name, which occurs on a Persian seal, where it is
written in cuneiform characters. The most famous Arsaces was the chief
of the Parni, one of the nomadic Scythian or Dahan tribes in the desert
east of the Caspian Sea. A later tradition, preserved by Arrian, derives
Arsaces I. and Tiridates from the Achaemenian king Artaxerxes II., but
this has evidently no historical value. Arsaces, seeking refuge before
the Bactrian king Diodotes, invaded Parthia, then a province of the
Seleucid empire, about 250 B.C. (Strabo xi. p. 515, cf. Arrian p. 1,
Müller, in Photius, _Cod._ 58, and Syncellus p. 284). After two years
(according to Arrian) he was killed, and his brother Tiridates, who
succeeded him and maintained himself for a short time in Parthia, during
the dissolution of the Seleucid empire by the attacks of Ptolemy III.
(247 ff.), was defeated and expelled by Seleucus II. (about 238). But
when this king was forced, by the rebellion of his brother, Antiochus
Hierax, to return to the west, Tiridates came back and defeated the
Macedonians (Strabo xi. pp. 513, 515; Justin xli. 4; Appian, _Syr._ 65;
Isidorus of Charax 11). He was the real founder of the Parthian empire,
which was of very limited extent until the final decay of the Seleucid
empire, occasioned by the Roman intrigues after the death of Antiochus
IV. Epiphanes (165 B.C.), enabled Mithradates I. and his successors to
conquer Media and Babylonia. Tiridates adopted the name of his brother
Arsaces, and after him all the other Parthian kings (who by the
historians are generally called by their proper names), amounting to the
number of about thirty, officially wear only the name Arsaces. With very
few exceptions only the name [Greek: ARSAKIS] (with various epithets)
occurs on the coins of the Parthian kings, and the obverse generally
shows the seated figure of the founder of the dynasty, holding in his
hand a strung bow. The Arsacidian empire was overthrown in A.D. 226 by
Ardashir (Artaxerxes), the founder of the Sassanid empire, whose
conquests began about A.D. 212. The name Arsaces of Persia is also borne
by some kings of Armenia, who were of Parthian origin. (See PERSIA and
PARTHIA.)     (Ed. M.)