ARSENIUS AUTORIANUS (13th century), patriarch of Constantinople, lived
about the middle of the 13th century. He received his education in
Nicaea at a monastery of which he later became the abbot, though not in
orders. Subsequently he gave himself up to a life of solitary asceticism
in a Bithynian monastery, and is said, probably wrongly, to have
remained some time in a monastery on Mount Athos. From this seclusion he
was in A.D. 1255 called by Theodore II. Lascaris to the position of
patriarch at Nicaea, and four years later, on that emperor's death,
became joint guardian of his son John. His fellow-guardian Georgios
Mouzalon was immediately murdered by Michael Palaeologus, who assumed
the position of tutor. Arsenius then took refuge in the monastery of
Paschasius, retaining his office of patriarch but refusing to discharge
its duties. Nicephorus of Ephesus was appointed in his stead. In 1261
Michael, having recovered Constantinople, induced Arsenius again to
undertake the office of patriarch, but soon incurred his severe censure
by ordering the young prince John to be blinded. Arsenius went so far as
to excommunicate the emperor, who, having vainly sought for pardon, took
refuge in false accusations against Arsenius and caused him to be
banished to Proconnesus, where some years afterwards (according to
Fabricius in 1264; others say in 1273) he died. Throughout these years
he declined to remove the sentence of excommunication which he had
passed upon Michael, and after his death, when the new patriarch
Josephus gave absolution to the emperor, the quarrel was carried on
between the "Arsenites" and the "Josephists." The "Arsenian schism"
lasted till 1315, when reconciliation was effected by the patriarch
Niphon (see Gibbon, _Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_, ed. J.B.
Bury, 1898, vol. vi. 467 foll.). Arsenius is said to have prepared from
the decisions of the councils and the works of the Fathers a summary of
divine laws under the title _Synopsis Canonum_. This was published
(Greek original and Latin version) by G. Voël and H. Justel in
_Bibliotheca Jur. Canon. Vet._ (Paris, 1661), 749 foll. Some hold that
the _Synopsis_ was the work of another Arsenius, a monk of Athos (see L.
Petit in Vacant's _Dict. théol. cathol._ i. col. 1994); the ascription
depends on whether the patriarch Arsenius did or did not sojourn at
Mount Athos.

  See Georgius Pachymeres ii. 15, iii. _passim_, iv. 1-16; Nicephorus
  Gregoras iii. 1, iv. 1; for the will of Arsenius see Cotelerius,
  _Monumenta_, ii. 168.