ARSENIC (symbol As, atomic weight 75.0), a chemical element, known to
the ancients in the form of its sulphides. Aristotle gave them the name
[Greek: sanoarakae], and Theophrastus mentions them under the name
[Greek: arsenikon]. The oxide known as white arsenic is mentioned by the
Greek alchemist Olympiodorus, who obtained it by roasting arsenic
sulphide. These substances were all known to the later alchemists, who
used minerals containing arsenic in order to give a white colour to
copper. Albertus Magnus was the first to state that arsenic contained a
metal-like substance, although later writers considered it to be a
bastard or semi-metal, and frequently called it _arsenicum rex_. In 1733
G. Brandt showed that white arsenic was the calx of this element, and
after the downfall of the phlogiston theory the views concerning the
composition of white arsenic were identical with those which are now
held, namely that it is an oxide of the element.

Arsenic is found in the uncombined condition in various localities, but
more generally in combination with other metals and sulphur, in the form
of more or less complex sulphides. Native arsenic is usually found as
granular or curvilaminar masses, with a reniform or botryoidal surface.
These masses are of a dull grey colour, owing to surface tarnish; only
on fresh fractures is the colour tin-white with metallic lustre. The
hardness is 3.5 and the specific gravity 5.63-5.73. Crystals of arsenic
belong to the rhombohedral system, and have a perfect cleavage parallel
to the basal plane; natural crystals are, however, of rare occurrence,
and are usually acicular in habit. Native arsenic occurs usually in
metalliferous veins in association with ores of antimony, silver, &c.;
the silver mines of Freiberg in Saxony, St Andreasberg in the Harz, and
Chañarcillo in Chile being well-known localities. Attractive globular
aggregates of well-developed radiating crystals have been found at
Akatani, a village in the province Echizen, in Japan.

Arsenic is a constituent of the minerals arsenical iron, arsenical
pyrites or mispickel, tin-white cobalt or smaltite, arsenical nickel,
realgar, orpiment, pharmacolite and cobalt bloom, whilst it is also met
with in small quantities in nearly all specimens of iron pyrites. The
ordinary commercial arsenic is either the naturally occurring form,
which is, however, more or less contaminated with other metals, or is
the product obtained by heating arsenical pyrites, out of contact with
air, in earthenware retorts which are fitted with a roll of sheet iron
at the mouth, and an earthenware receiver. By this method of
distillation the arsenic sublimes into the receiver, leaving a residue
of iron sulphide in the retort. For further purification, it may be
sublimed, after having been previously mixed with a little powdered
charcoal, or it may be mixed with a small quantity of iodine and heated.
It can also be obtained by the reduction of white arsenic (arsenious
oxide) with carbon. An electro-metallurgical process for the extraction
of arsenic from its sulphides has also been proposed (German Patent.
67,973). These compounds are brought into solution by means of
polysulphides of the alkali metals and the resultant liquor run into the
cathode compartment of a bath, which is divided by diaphragms into a
series of anode and cathode chambers; the anode divisions being closed
and gas-tight, and containing carbon or platinum electrodes. The arsenic
solution is decomposed at the cathode, and the element precipitated
there.

Arsenic possesses a steel-grey colour, and a decided metallic lustre; it
crystallizes on sublimation and slow condensation in rhombohedra,
isomorphous with those of antimony and tellurium. It is very brittle.
Its specific gravity is given variously from 5.395 to 5.959; its
specific heat is 0.083, and its coefficient of linear expansion
0.00000559 (at 40° C.). It is volatile at temperatures above 100° C. and
rapidly vaporizes at a dull red heat. It liquefies when heated under
pressure, and its melting point lies between 446° C. and 457° C. The
vapour of arsenic is of a golden yellow colour, and has a garlic odour.
The vapour density is 10.6 (air = 1) at 564° C., corresponding to a
tetratomic molecule As4; at a white heat the vapour density shows a
considerable lowering in value, due to the dissociation of the complex
molecule.

By condensing arsenic vapour in a glass tube, in a current of an
indifferent gas, such as hydrogen, amorphous arsenic is obtained, the
deposit on the portion of the tube nearest to the source of heat being
crystalline, that farther along (at a temperature of about 210° C.)
being a black amorphous solid, while still farther along the tube a grey
deposit is formed. These two latter forms possess a specific gravity of
4.710 (14° C.) [A. Bettendorff, _Annalen_, 1867, 144, p. 110], and by
heating at about 358°-360° C. pass over into the crystalline variety.
Arsenic burns on heating in a current of oxygen, with a pale
lavender-coloured flame, forming the trioxide. It is easily oxidized by
heating with concentrated nitric acid to arsenic acid, and with
concentrated sulphuric acid to arsenic trioxide; dilute nitric acid only
oxidizes it to arsenious acid. It burns in an atmosphere of chlorine
forming the trichloride; it also combines directly with bromine and
sulphur on heating, while on fusion with alkalis it forms arsenites.

Arsenic and most of its soluble compounds are very poisonous, and
consequently the methods used for the detection of arsenic are very
important. For full accounts of methods used in detecting minute traces
of arsenic in foods, &c., see "Report to Commission to Manchester
Brewers' Central Association," the _Analyst_, 1900, 26, p. 8; "Report of
Conjoint Committee of Society of Chemical Industry and Society of Public
Analysts," the _Analyst_, 1902, 27, p. 48; T.E. Thorpe, _Journal of the
Chemical Society_, 1903, 83, p. 774; O. Hehner and others, _Journal of
Society of Chemical Industry_, 1902, 21, p. 94; also ADULTERATION.

  Arsenic and arsenical compounds generally can be detected by (a)
  _Reinsch's test_: A piece of clean copper is dipped in a solution of
  an arsenious compound which has been previously acidified with pure
  hydrochloric acid. A grey film is produced on the surface of the
  copper, probably due to the formation of a copper arsenide. The
  reaction proceeds better on heating the solution. On removing, washing
  and gently drying the metal and heating it in a glass tube, a white
  crystalline sublimate is formed on the cool part of the tube; under
  the same conditions antimony does not produce a crystalline sublimate.

  (b) _Fleitmann's test_ and _Marsh's test_ depend on the fact that
  arsenic and its compounds, when present in a solution in which
  hydrogen is being generated, are converted into arseniuretted
  hydrogen, which can be readily detected either by its action on silver
  nitrate solution or by its decomposition on heating. In Fleitmann's
  test, the solution containing the arsenious compound is mixed with
  pure potassium hydroxide solution and a piece of pure zinc or
  aluminium foil dropped in and the whole then heated. A piece of
  bibulous paper, moistened with silver nitrate, is held over the mouth
  of the tube, and if arsenic be present, a grey or black deposit is
  seen on the paper, due to the silver nitrate being reduced by the
  arseniuretted hydrogen. Antimony gives no reaction under these
  conditions, so that the method can be used to detect arsenic in the
  presence of antimony, but the test is not so delicate as either
  Reinsch's or Marsh's method.

  In the Marsh test the solution containing the arsenious compounds is
  mixed with pure hydrochloric acid and placed in an apparatus in which
  hydrogen is generated from pure zinc and pure sulphuric acid. The
  arseniuretted hydrogen produced is passed through a tube containing
  lead acetate paper and soda-lime, and finally through a narrow glass
  tube, constricted at various points, and heated by a very small flame.
  As the arseniuretted hydrogen passes over the heated portion it is
  decomposed and a black deposit formed. Instead of heating the tube,
  the gas may be ignited at the mouth of the tube and a cold surface of
  porcelain or platinum placed in the flame, when a black deposit is
  formed on the surface. This may be distinguished from the similar
  antimony deposit by its ready solubility in a solution of sodium
  hypochlorite. A blank experiment should always be carried out in
  testing for small quantities of arsenic, to ensure that the materials
  used are quite free from traces of arsenic. It is to be noted that the
  presence of nitric acid interferes with the Marsh test; and also that
  if the arsenic is present as an _arsenic_ compound it must be reduced
  to the _arsenious_ condition by the action of sulphurous acid. Arsenic
  compounds can be detected in the dry way by heating in a tube with a
  mixture of sodium carbonate and charcoal when a deposit of black
  amorphous arsenic is produced on the cool part of the tube, or by
  conversion of the compound into the trioxide and heating with dry
  sodium acetate when the offensive odour of the extremely poisonous
  cacodyl oxide is produced. In the wet way, arsenious oxide and
  arsenites, acidified with hydrochloric acid, give a yellow precipitate
  of arsenic trisulphide on the addition of sulphuretted hydrogen; this
  precipitate is soluble in solutions of the alkaline hydroxides,
  ammonium carbonate and yellow ammonium sulphide. Under like conditions
  arsenates only give a precipitate on long-continued boiling.

  Arsenic is usually estimated either in the form of magnesium
  pyroarsenate or as arsenic sulphide. For the pyroarsenate method it is
  necessary that the arsenic should be in the _arsenic_ condition, if
  necessary this can be effected by heating with nitric acid; the acid
  solution is then mixed with "magnesia mixture" and made strongly
  alkaline by the addition of ammonia. It is then allowed to stand
  twenty-four hours, filtered, washed with dilute ammonia, dried,
  ignited to constant weight and weighed, the filter paper being
  incinerated separately after moistening with nitric acid. From the
  weight of magnesium pyroarsenate obtained the weight of arsenic can be
  calculated.

  In the sulphide method, the arsenic should be in the _arsenious_ form.
  Sulphuretted hydrogen is passed through the liquid until it is
  thoroughly saturated, the excess of sulphuretted hydrogen is expelled
  from the solution by a brisk stream of carbon dioxide, and the
  precipitate is filtered on a Gooch crucible and washed with water
  containing a little sulphuretted hydrogen and dried at 100° C.; it is
  then well washed with small quantities of pure carbon disulphide to
  remove any free sulphur, again dried and weighed. Arsenic can also be
  estimated by volumetric methods; for this purpose it must be in the
  _arsenious_ condition, and the method of estimation consists in
  converting it into the _arsenic_ condition by means of a standard
  solution of iodine, in the presence of a cold saturated solution of
  sodium bicarbonate.

  The atomic weight of arsenic has been determined by many different
  chemists. J. Berzelius, in 1818, by heating arsenious oxide with
  excess of sulphur obtained the value 74.3; J. Pelouze (_Comptes
  rendus_, 1845, 20, p. 1047) titrated arsenic chloride with silver
  solution and obtained 75.0; and F. Kessler (_Pogg. Ann._ 1861, 113, p.
  134) by converting arsenic trisulphide in hydrochloric acid solution
  into arsenic pentasulphide also obtained 75.0.

  _Compounds._--Arsenic forms two hydrides:--The _dihydride_, As2H2, is
  a brown velvety powder formed when sodium or potassium arsenide is
  decomposed by water. It is a somewhat unstable substance, decomposing
  on being heated, with liberation of hydrogen. Arsenic _trihydride_
  (arsine or arseniuretted hydrogen), AsH3, is formed by decomposing
  zinc arsenide with dilute sulphuric acid; by the action of nascent
  hydrogen on arsenious compounds, and by the electrolysis of solutions
  of arsenious and arsenic acids; it is also a product of the action of
  organic matter on many arsenic compounds. It is a colourless gas of
  unpleasant smell, excessively poisonous, very slightly soluble in
  water. It easily burns, forming arsenious oxide if the combustion
  proceeds in an excess of air, or arsenic if the supply of air is
  limited; it is also decomposed into its constituent elements when
  heated. It liquefies at -40° C. and becomes solid at -118.9° C. (K.
  Olszewski). Metals such as tin, potassium and sodium, when heated in
  the gas, form arsenides, with liberation of hydrogen; and solutions of
  gold and silver salts are reduced by the gas with precipitation of
  metallic gold and silver. Chlorine, bromine and iodine decompose
  arsine readily, the action being most violent in the case of chlorine.

  _Arsenic tribromide_, AsBr3, is formed by the direct union of arsenic
  and bromine, and subsequent distillation from the excess of arsenic;
  it forms colourless deliquescent prisms which melt at 20°-25° C., and
  boil at 220° C. Water decomposes it, a small quantity of water leading
  to the formation of the _oxybromide_, AsOBr, whilst a large excess of
  water gives arsenious oxide, As4O6.

  Arsenic certainly forms two, or possibly three iodides. The
  _di-iodide_, As2I4 or AsI2, which is prepared by heating one part of
  arsenic with two parts of iodine, in a sealed tube to 230° C., forms
  dark cherry-red prisms, which are easily oxidized, and are readily
  decomposed by water. The _tri-iodide_, AsI3, prepared by subliming
  arsenic and iodine together in a retort, by leading arsine into an
  alcoholic iodine solution, or by boiling powdered arsenic and iodine
  with water, filtering and evaporating, forms brick-red hexagonal
  tables, of specific gravity 4.39, soluble in alcohol, ether and
  benzene, and in a large excess of water; in the presence of a small
  quantity of water, it is decomposed with formation of hydriodic acid
  and an insoluble basic salt of the composition 4AsOI·3As4O6·24H2O. It
  combines with alkaline iodides to form very unstable compounds. The
  _pentaiodide_, AsI5, appears to be formed when a mixture of one part
  of arsenic and seven parts of iodine is heated to 190° C., but on
  dissolving the resulting product in carbon bisulphide and
  crystallizing from this solvent, only the tri-iodide is obtained.

  _Arsenic trichloride_, AsCl3, is prepared by distilling white arsenic
  with concentrated sulphuric acid and common salt, or by the direct
  union of arsenic with chlorine, or from the action of phosphorus
  pentachloride on white arsenic. It is a colourless oily heavy liquid
  of specific gravity 2.205 (0° C.), which, when pure and free from
  chlorine, solidifies at -18° C., and boils at 132° C. It is very
  poisonous and decomposes in moist air with evolution of white fumes.
  With a little water it forms arsenic oxychloride, AsOCl, and with
  excess of water it is completely decomposed into hydrochloric acid and
  white arsenic. It combines directly with ammonia to form a solid
  compound variously given as AsCl3·3NH3, or 2AsCl3·7NH3, or AsCl3·4NH3.

  _Arsenic trifiuoride_, AsF3, is prepared by distilling white arsenic
  with fluorspar and sulphuric acid, or by heating arsenic tribromide
  with ammonium fluoride; it is a colourless liquid of specific gravity
  2.73, boiling at 63° C.; it fumes in air, and in contact with the skin
  produces painful wounds. It is decomposed by water into arsenious and
  hydrofluoric acids, and absorbs ammonia forming the compound
  2AsF3·5NH3. By the action of gaseous ammonia on arsenious halides at
  -30° C. to -40° C., _arsenamide_, As(NH2)3, is formed. Water
  decomposes it into arsenious oxide and ammonia, and when heated to 60°
  it loses ammonia and forms _arsenimide_, As2(NH)3 (C. Hugot, _Compt.
  rend._ 1904, 139, p. 54). For AsF5, see _Ber_., 1906, 39, p. 67.

  Two oxides of arsenic are definitely known to exist, namely the
  trioxide (white arsenic), As4O6, and the pentoxide, As2O5, while the
  existence of a suboxide, As2O(?), has also been mooted. Arsenic
  trioxide has been known from the earliest times, and was called
  _Hüttenrauch_ (furnace-smoke) by Basil Valentine. It occurs naturally
  in the mineral claudetite, and can be artificially prepared by burning
  arsenic in air or oxygen. It is obtained commercially by roasting
  arsenical pyrites in either a Brunton's or Oxland's rotatory calciner,
  the crude product being collected in suitable condensing chambers, and
  afterwards refined by resublimation, usually in reverberatory
  furnaces, the foreign matter being deposited in a long flue leading to
  the condensing chambers. White arsenic exists in two crystalline forms
  (octahedral and prismatic) and one amorphous form; the octahedral form
  is produced by the rapid cooling of arsenic vapour, or by cooling a
  warm saturated solution in water, or by crystallization from
  hydrochloric acid, and also by the gradual transition of the amorphous
  variety, this last phenomenon being attended by the evolution of heat.
  Its specific gravity is 3.7; it is only slightly soluble in cold
  water, but is more soluble in hot water, the solution reacting faintly
  acid. The prismatic variety of the oxide can be obtained by
  crystallization from a saturated boiling solution in potassium
  hydroxide, or by the crystallization of a solution of silver arsenite
  in nitric acid. Its specific gravity is 4.15. In the amorphous
  condition it can be obtained by condensing the vapour of the oxide at
  as high a temperature as possible, when a vitreous mass is produced,
  which melts at 200° C., has a specific gravity of 3.68-3.798, and is
  more soluble in water than the crystalline variety.

  Arsenious oxide is very poisonous. It acts as a reducing agent; it is
  not convertible into the pentoxide by the direct action of oxygen; and
  its solution is reduced by many metals (e.g. zinc, tin and cadmium)
  with precipitation of arsenic and formation of arseniuretted hydrogen.
  The solution of arsenious oxide in water reacts acid towards litmus
  and contains tribasic arsenious acid, although on evaporation of the
  solution the trioxide is obtained and not the free acid. The salts of
  the acid are, however, very stable, and are known as arsenites. Of
  these salts several series are known, namely the ortho-arsenites,
  which are derivatives of the acid H3AsO3, the meta-arsenites,
  derivatives of HAsO2, and the pyro-arsenites, derivatives of H4As2O5.
  The arsenites of the alkali metals are soluble in water, those of the
  other metals are insoluble in water, but are readily soluble in acids.
  A neutral solution of an arsenite gives a yellow precipitate of silver
  arsenite, Ag3AsO3, with silver nitrate solution, and a yellowish-green
  precipitate (Scheele's green) of cupric hydrogen arsenite, CuHAsO3,
  with copper sulphate solution. By the action of oxidizing agents such
  as nitric acid, iodine solution, &c., arsenious acid is readily
  converted into arsenic acid, in the latter case the reaction
  proceeding according to the equation H3AsO3 + I2 + H2O = H3AsO4 + 2HI.
  Arsenic pentoxide, As2O5, is most easily obtained by oxidation of a
  solution of arsenious acid with nitric acid; the solution on
  concentration deposits the compound 2H3AsO4·H2O (below 15° C.), which
  on being heated to a dark red heat loses its water of crystallization
  and leaves a white vitreous mass of the pentoxide. This substance
  dissolves slowly in water, forming arsenic acid; by heating to redness
  it decomposes into arsenic and oxygen. It deliquesces in moist air,
  and is easily reduced to arsenic by heating with carbon.

  Arsenic acid, H3AsO4, is prepared as shown above, the compound
  2H3AsO4·H2O on being heated to 100° C. parting with its water of
  crystallization and leaving a residue of the acid, which crystallizes
  in needles. On heating to 180° C. it loses water and yields
  pyroarsenic acid, H4As2O7, which at 200° C. loses more water and
  leaves a crystalline mass of meta-arsenic acid, HAsO3. These latter
  two acids are only stable in the solid state; they dissolve readily in
  water with evolution of heat and immediate transformation into the
  ortho-arsenic acid. The salts of arsenic acid, termed arsenates, are
  isomorphous with the phosphates, and in general character and
  reactions resemble the phosphates very closely; thus both series of
  salts give similar precipitates with "magnesia mixture" and with
  ammonium molybdate solution, but they can be distinguished by their
  behaviour with silver nitrate solution, arsenates giving a
  reddish-brown precipitate, whilst phosphates give a yellow
  precipitate.

  There are three known compounds of arsenic and sulphur, namely,
  realgar As2S2, orpiment As2S3, and arsenic pentasulphide As2S5.
  Realgar occurs native in orange prisms of specific gravity 3.5; it is
  prepared artificially by fusing together arsenic and sulphur, but the
  resulting products vary somewhat in composition; it is readily fusible
  and sublimes unchanged, and burns on heating in a current of oxygen,
  forming arsenic trioxide and sulphur dioxide.

  Orpiment (_auri pigmentum_) occurs native in pale yellow rhombic
  prisms, and can be obtained in the amorphous form by passing a current
  of sulphuretted hydrogen gas through a solution of arsenious oxide or
  an arsenite, previously acidified with dilute hydrochloric acid. It
  melts easily and volatilizes. It burns on heating in air, and is
  soluble in solutions of alkaline hydroxides and carbonates, forming
  thioarsenites, As2S3 + 4KHO = K2HAsO3 + K2HAsS3 + H2O. On acidifying
  the solution so obtained with hydrochloric acid, the whole of the
  arsenic is reprecipitated as trisulphide, K2HAsO3 + K2HAsS3 + 4HCl =
  4KCl + 3H2O + As2S3. Arsenic pentasulphide, As2S5, can be prepared by
  fusing the trisulphide with the requisite amount of sulphur; it is a
  yellow easily-fusible solid, which in absence of air can be sublimed
  unchanged; it is soluble in solutions of the caustic alkalis, forming
  thioarsenates, which can also be obtained by the action of alkali
  polysulphides on orpiment. The thioarsenites and thioarsenates of the
  alkali metals are easily soluble in water, and are readily decomposed
  by the action of mineral acids. Arsenic compounds containing selenium
  and sulphur are known, such as arsenic seleno-sulphide, AsSeS2, and
  arsenic thio-selenide, AsSSe2. Arsenic phosphide, AsP, results when
  phosphine is passed into arsenic trichloride, being precipitated as a
  red-brown powder.

  Many organic arsenic compounds are known, analogous to those of
  nitrogen and phosphorus, but apparently the primary and secondary
  arsines, AsH2·CH3 and AsH(CH3)2, do not exist, although the
  corresponding chlorine derivatives, AsCl2·CH3, methyl arsine chloride,
  and AsCl(CH4)2, dimethyl arsine chloride, are known. The tertiary
  arsines, such as As(CH3)3, trimethyl arsine, and the quaternary
  arsonium iodides and hydroxides, (CH3)4AsI and (CH3)4As·OH,
  tetramethyl arsonium iodide and hydroxide, have been obtained. The
  arsines and arsine chlorides are liquids of overpowering smell, and in
  some cases exert an extremely irritating action on the mucous
  membrane. They do not possess basic properties; the halogen in the
  chlorine compounds is readily replaced by oxygen, and the oxides
  produced behave like basic oxides. The chlorides AsCl2·CH3 and
  AsCl(CH3)2 as well as As(CH3)3 are capable of combining with two atoms
  of chlorine, the arsenic atom apparently changing from the tri- to the
  penta-valent condition, and the corresponding oxygen compounds can
  also be oxidized to compounds containing one oxygen atom or two
  hydroxyl groups more, forming acids or oxides. The compounds of the
  type AsX5, e.g. AsCl4·CH3, AsCl3(CH3)2, on heating break down, with
  separation of methyl chloride and formation of compounds of the type
  AsX3; the breaking down taking place more readily the fewer the number
  of methyl groups in the compound. The dimethyl arsine (or cacodyl)
  compounds have been most studied. On distillation of equal parts of
  dry potassium acetate and arsenious oxide, a colourless liquid of
  unbearable smell passes over, which is spontaneously inflammable and
  excessively poisonous. It is sometimes called Cadet's fuming liquid,
  and its composition was determined by R. Bunsen, who gave it the name
  cacodyl oxide ([Greek: kakodes], stinking); its formation may be shown
  thus:

    As4O6 + 8CH3CO2K = 2[(CH3)2As]2O + 4K2CO3 + 4CO2.

  The liquid is spontaneously inflammable owing to the presence of free
  cacodyl, As2(CH3)4, which is also obtained by heating the oxide with
  zinc clippings in an atmosphere of carbon dioxide; it is a liquid of
  overpowering odour, and boils at 170°C. Cacodyl oxide boils at 150°
  C., and on exposure to air takes up oxygen and water and passes over
  into the crystalline cacodylic acid, thus:

    [(CH3)2As]2O + H2O + O2 = 2(CH3)2As·O·OH.

_Pharmacology._--Of arsenic and its compounds, arsenious acid (dose
1/60-1/15 gr.) and its preparation liquor arsenicalis, Fowler's solution
(dose 2-8 [minim]), are in very common use. The iodide of arsenic (dose
1/20-1/5 gr.) is one of the ingredients of Donovan's solution (see
MERCURY); and iron arsenate (dose 1/16-¼ gr. in a pill), a mixture of
ferrous and ferric arsenates with some iron oxide, is of great use in
certain cases. Sodium arsenate (1/40-1/10 gr.) is somewhat less commonly
prescribed, though all the compounds of this metal have great value in
experienced hands.

Externally, arsenious acid is a powerful caustic when applied to raw
surfaces, though it has no action on the unbroken skin. Internally,
unless the dose be extremely small, all preparations are severe
gastro-intestinal irritants. This effect is the same however the drug be
administered, as, even after subcutaneous injection, the arsenic is
excreted into the stomach after absorption, and thus sets up gastritis
in its passage through the mucous membrane. In minute doses it is a
gastric stimulant, promoting the flow of gastric juice. It is quickly
absorbed into the blood, where its presence can be demonstrated
especially in the white blood corpuscles. In certain forms of anaemia it
increases the number of the red corpuscles and also their haemoglobin
content. None of these known effects of arsenic is sufficient to account
for the profound change that a course of the drug will often produce in
the condition of a patient. It has some power of affecting the general
metabolism, but no wholly satisfactory explanation is forthcoming.
According to Binz and Schultz its power is due to the fact that it is an
oxygen-carrier, arsenious acid withdrawing oxygen from the protoplasm to
form arsenic acid, which subsequently yields up its oxygen again. It is
thus vaguely called an alterative, since the patient recovers under its
use. It is eliminated chiefly by the urine, and to a less extent by the
alimentary canal, sweat, saliva, bile, milk, tears, hair, &c., but it is
also stored up in the body mainly in the liver and kidneys.

_Therapeutics._--Externally arsenious acid has been much used by quack
doctors to destroy morbid growths, &c., a paste or solution being
applied, strong enough to kill the mass of tissue and make it slough out
quickly. But many accidents have resulted from the arsenic being
absorbed, and the patient thereby poisoned. Internally it is useful in
certain forms of dyspepsia, but as some patients are quite unable to
tolerate the drug, it must always be administered in very small doses at
first, the quantity being slowly increased as tolerance is shown.
Children as a rule bear it better than adults. It should never be given
on an empty stomach, but always after a full meal. Certain cases of
anaemia which do not yield to iron are often much improved by arsenic,
though in other apparently similar ones it appears to be valueless. It
is the routine treatment for pernicious anaemia and Hodgkin's disease,
though here again the drug may be of no avail. For the neuralgia and
anaemia following malaria, for rheumatoid arthritis, for chorea and also
asthma and hay fever, it is constantly prescribed with excellent
results. Certain skin diseases, as psoriasis, pemphigus and occasionally
chronic eczema, are much benefited by its use, though occasionally a too
prolonged course will produce the very lesion for which under other
circumstances it is a cure. A recent method of using the drug is in the
form of sodium cacodylate by subcutaneous injection, and this
preparation is said to be free from the cumulative effects sometimes
arising after the prolonged use of the other forms. Other organic
derivatives employed are sodium metharsenite and sodium anilarsenate or
atoxyl; hypodermic injections of the latter have been used in the
treatment of sleeping sickness. Occasionally, as among the Styrians,
individuals acquire the habit of arsenic-eating, which is said to
increase their weight, strength and appetite, and clears their
complexion. The probable explanation is that an antitoxin is developed
within them.

_Toxicology and Forensic Medicine._--The commonest source of arsenical
poisoning is the arsenious acid or white arsenic, which in one form is
white and opaque, like flour, for which it has been mistaken with fatal
results. Also, as it has little taste and no colour it is easily mixed
with food for homicidal purposes. When combined with potash or soda it
is used to saturate flypapers, and strong solutions can be obtained by
soaking these in water; this fact has also been used with criminal
intent. Copper arsenite (or Scheele's green) used to be much employed as
a pigment for wall-papers and fabrics, and toxic effects have resulted
from their use. Metallic arsenic is probably not poisonous, but as it
usually becomes oxidized in the alimentary canal, the usual symptoms of
arsenical poisoning follow its use.

In acute poisoning the interval between the reception of the poison and
the onset of symptoms ranges from ten minutes, or even less, if a strong
solution be taken on an empty stomach, to twelve or more hours if the
drug be taken in solid form and the stomach be full of food. The usual
period, however, is from half an hour to an hour. In a typical case a
sensation of heat developing into a burning pain is felt in the throat
and stomach. This is soon followed by uncontrollable vomiting, and a
little later by severe purging, the stools being first of all faecal but
later assuming a rice water appearance and often containing blood. The
patient suffers from intense thirst, which cannot be relieved, as
drinking is immediately followed by rejection of the swallowed fluid.
There is profound collapse, the features are sunken, the skin moist and
cyanosed. The pulse is feeble and irregular, and respiration is
difficult. The pain in the stomach is persistent, and cramps in the
calves of the legs add to the torture. Death may be preceded by coma,
but consciousness is often maintained to the end. The similarity of the
symptoms to those of cholera is very marked, but if the suspicion arises
it can soon be cleared up by examining any of the secretions for
arsenic. More rarely the poison seems to centre itself on the nerve
centres, and gastro-intestinal symptoms may be almost or quite absent.
In such cases the acute collapse occurs in company with both superficial
and deep anaesthesia of the limbs, and is soon followed by coma
terminating in death. In criminal poisoning repeated doses are usually
given, so that such cases may not be typical, but will present some of
the aspects of acute and some of chronic arsenical poisoning. As regards
treatment, the stomach must be washed out with warm water by means of a
soft rubber tube, an emetic being also administered. Then, if available,
freshly precipitated ferric hydrate must be given, which can be prepared
by adding a solution of ammonia to one of iron perchloride. The
precipitate is strained off, and the patient can swallow it suspended in
water. While this is being obtained, magnesia, castor oil or olive oil
can be given; or failing all these, copious draughts of water. The
collapse must be treated with hot blankets and bottles, and subcutaneous
injections of brandy, ether or strychnine. The pain can be lessened by
injections of morphia.

Arsenic may be gradually absorbed into the system in very small
quantities over a prolonged period, the symptoms of chronic poisoning
resulting. The commonest sources used to be wall-papers, fabrics,
artificial flowers and toys: also certain trades, as in the manufacture
of arsenical sheep-dipping. But at the present time cases arising from
these causes occur very rarely. In 1900 an outbreak of "peripheral
neuritis" with various skin affections occurred in Lancashire, which was
traced to beer made from glucose and invert sugar, in the preparation of
which sulphuric acid contaminated with arsenic was said to have been
used. But the nature of the disease in this case was decidedly obscure.
The symptoms so closely resembled those of _beri-beri_ that it has also
been suggested that the illness was the same, and was caused by the
manufacture of the glucose from mouldy rice (see BERI-BERI), though no
proof of this was possible. The earliest symptoms are slight gastric
disorders, loss of appetite and general malaise, followed later by
colicky pains, irritation of eyelids and skin eruptions. But sooner or
later peripheral neuritis develops, usually beginning with sensory
disturbances, tingling, numbness, formication and occasionally cutaneous
anaesthesia. Later the affected muscles become exquisitely tender, and
then atrophy, while the knee-jerk or other reflex is lost. Pigmentation
of the skin may occur in the later stages. Recovery is very slow, and in
fatal cases death usually results from heart failure.

After acute poisoning, the stomach at a _post-mortem_ presents signs of
intense inflammation, parts or the whole of its mucous membrane being of
a colour varying from dark red to bright vermilion and often corrugated.
Submucous haemorrhages are usually present, but perforation is rare. The
rest of the alimentary canal exhibits inflammatory changes in a somewhat
lesser degree. After chronic poisoning a widely spread fatty
degeneration is present. Arsenic is found in almost every part of the
body, but is retained in largest amount by the liver, secondly by the
kidneys. After death from chronic poisoning it is found present even in
the brain and spongy bone. The detection of arsenic in criminal cases is
effected either by Reinsch's test or by Marsh's test, the urine being
the secretion analysed when available. But Reinsch's test cannot be used
satisfactorily for a quantitative determination, nor can it be used in
the presence of chlorates or nitrates. And Marsh's test is very
unmanageable with organic liquids on account of the uncontrollable
frothing that takes place. But in such cases the organic matter can be
first destroyed by one of the various methods, usually the moist method
devised by Fresenius being chosen.