ARSINOË, the name of four Egyptian princesses of the Ptolemaic dynasty.
The name was introduced into the Ptolemaic dynasty by the mother of
Ptolemy I. This Arsinoë was originally a mistress of Philip II. of
Macedon, who presented her to a Macedonian soldier Loqus shortly before
Ptolemy was born. It was, therefore, assumed by the Macedonians that the
Ptolemaic house was really descended from Philip (see PTOLEMIES).

1. Daughter of Lysimachus, king of Thrace, first wife of Ptolemy II.
Philadelphus (285-247 B.C.). Accused of conspiring against her husband,
who perhaps already contemplated marriage with his sister, also named
Arsinoë, she was banished to Coptos, in Upper Egypt. Her son Ptolemy was
afterwards king under the title of Euergetes. It is supposed by some
(e.g. Niebuhr, _Kleine Schriften_; cf. Ehrlichs, _De Callimachi hymnis_)
that she is to be identified with the Arsinoë who became wife of Magas,
king of Cyrene, and that she married him after her exile to Coptos. But
this hypothesis is apparently without foundation. Magas before his death
had betrothed his daughter Berenice to the son of his brother Ptolemy
II. Philadelphus, but Arsinoë, disliking the projected alliance, induced
Demetrius the Fair, son of Demetrius Poliorcetes, to accept the throne
of Cyrene as husband of Berenice. She herself, however, fell in love
with the young prince, and Berenice in revenge formed a conspiracy, and,
having slain Demetrius, married Ptolemy's son (see BERENICE, 3).

2. Daughter of Ptolemy I. Soter and Berenice. Born about 316 B.C., she
married Lysimachus, king of Thrace, who made over to her the territories
of his divorced wife, Amastris. To secure the succession for her own
children she brought about the murder of her stepson Agathocles.
Lysandra, the wife of Agathocles, took refuge with Seleucus, king of
Syria, who made war upon Lysimachus and defeated him (281). After her
husband's death Arsinoë fled to Ephesus and afterwards to Cassandreia in
Macedonia. Seleucus, who had seized Lysimachus's kingdom, was murdered
in 281 by Ptolemy Ceraunus (half-brother of Arsinoë), who thus became
master of Thrace and Macedonia. To obtain possession of Cassandreia, he
offered his hand in marriage to Arsinoë, and being admitted into the
town, killed her two younger sons and banished her to Samothrace.
Escaping to Egypt, she became the wife of her full brother Ptolemy II.,
the first instance of the practice (afterwards common) of the Greek
kings of Egypt marrying their sisters. She was a woman of a masterful
character and won great influence. Her husband, though she bore him no
children, was devoted to her and paid her all possible honour after her
death in 271. He gave her name to a number of cities, and also to a
district (nome) of Egypt.[1] It is related that he ordered the architect
Dinochares to build a temple in her honour in Alexandria; in order that
her statue, made of iron, might appear to be suspended in the air, the
roof was to consist of an arch of loadstones (Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ xxxiv.
42). Coins were also struck, showing her crowned and veiled on the
obverse, with a double cornucopia on the reverse. She was worshipped as
a goddess under the title of [Greek: Thea Philadelphos], and she and her
husband as [Greek: Theoi adelphoi] (Justin xxiv. 2, 3; Pausanias i. 7).

  See von Prott, _Rhein. Mus._ liii. (1898), pp. 460 f.

3. Daughter of Ptolemy III. Euergetes, sister and wife of Ptolemy IV.
Philopator. She seems to be erroneously called Eurydice by Justin (xxx.
2), and Cleopatra by Livy (xxvii. 4). Her presence greatly encouraged
the troops at the battle of Raphia (217), in which Antiochus the Great
was defeated. Her husband put her to death to please his mistress
Agathocleia, a Samian dancer (between 210 and 205). She was worshipped
as [Greek: Thea Philopator]; she and her husband as [Greek: Theoi
Philopatores] (Polybius v. 83, 84, xv. 25-33).

4. Youngest daughter of Ptolemy XIII. Auletes, and sister of the famous
Cleopatra. During the siege of Alexandria by Julius Caesar (48) she was
recognized as queen by the inhabitants, her brother, the young Ptolemy,
being then held captive by Caesar. Caesar took her with him to Rome as a
precaution. After Caesar's triumph she was allowed to return to
Alexandria. After the battle of Philippi she was put to death at Miletus
(or in the temple of Artemis at Ephesus) by order of Mark Antony, at the
request of her sister Cleopatra (Dio Cassius xlii. 39; Caesar, _Bell.
civ._ iii. 112; Appian, _Bell. civ._ v. 9).

  AUTHORITIES.--For general authorities see article PTOLEMIES. The
  article "Arsinoë" in Pauly-Wissowa's _Realencyclopädie_ contains a
  full list of those who bore the name, and also of the numerous towns
  which were called after the various princesses.

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] The appendix to pt. ii. of the Tebtunis series of papyri
    (Grenfell, Hunt and Goodspeed, 1907) contains a lengthy account of
    the topography of the Arsinoite nome.