ARSINOITHERIUM (so called from the Egyptian queen Arsinoë), a gigantic
horned mammal from the Middle Eocene beds of the Fayum, Egypt,
representing a sub-order of Ungulata, called Barypoda. The skull is
remarkable for carrying a huge pair of horn-cores above the muzzle,
which seem to be the enlarged nasal bones, and a rudimentary pair
farther back; the front horn-cores, like the rest of the skull, consist
of a mere shell of bone, and were probably clothed in life with horny
sheaths. The teeth form a continuous even series, the small canines
being crowded between the incisors and premolars; the crowns of the
cheek-series are tall (hypsodont), with a distinctive pattern of their
own. Although the brain is relatively larger, the bones of the limbs,
especially the short, five-toed feet, approximate to those of the
Amblypoda and Proboscidea; but in the articulation of the astragalus
with both the navicular and cuboid _Arsinoitherium_ is nearer the former
than the latter group.

It is probable, however, that these resemblances are mainly due to
parallelism in development, and are in all three cases adaptations
necessary to support the enormous weight of the body. On the other hand,
the marked resemblance of the structure of the tarsus is probably
indicative of descent from nearly allied condylarthrous ancestors (see
PHENACODUS). No importance can be attached to the presence of horns as
an indication of affinity between _Arsinoitherium_ and the Amblypoda;
and there are important differences in the structure of the skulls of
the two, notably in the external auditory meatus, the occiput, the
premaxillae, the palatal foramina and the lower jaw.

From the Proboscidea _Arsinoitherium_ differs broadly in skull
structure, in the form of the cheek-teeth, and in the persistence of the
complete dental series of forty-four without gaps or enlargement of
particular teeth. Whether there is any relationship with the Hyracoidea
cannot be determined until we are acquainted with the forerunners of
_Arsinoitherium_, which is evidently a highly specialized type.

It may be added that as the name Barypoda has been used at an earlier
date for another group of animals, the alternative title Embrithopoda
has been suggested in case the former should be considered barred.

  See C.W. Andrews, _Descriptive Catalogue of the Tertiary Vertebrata of
  the Fayum, British Museum_ (1906).     (R. L.*)