ARSON (from Lat. _ardere_, to burn), a crime which has been described as
the malicious and voluntary burning of the house of another (3 Co.
_Inst._ 66). At common law in England it is an offence of the degree of
felony. In the Roman civil law arson was punishable by death. It appears
early in the history of English law, being known in ancient laws by the
term of _boernet_. It is mentioned by Cnut as one of the bootless
crimes, and under the Saxon laws was punishable by death. The sentence
of death for arson was, says Stephen (_Commentaries_, iv. 89), in the
reign of Edward I. executed by a kind of _lex talionis_, for the
incendiaries were burnt to death; a punishment which was inflicted also
under the Gothic institutions. Death continued to be the penalty at
least down to the reign of King John, according to a reported case
(Gloucester Pleas, pl. 216), but in course of time the penalty became
that of other common-law felonies, death by the gallows. It is one of
the earliest crimes in which the _mens rea_, or criminal intent, was
taken special notice of. Bracton deals at length with the _mala
conscientia_, which he says is necessary for this crime, and contrasts
it with _negligentia_ (f. 146 b), while in many early indictments malice
aforethought (_malitia praecogitata_) appears. Arson was deprived of
"benefit of clergy" under the Tudors, while an act of 8 Henry VI. c. 6
(1429) made the wilful burning of houses, under particular
circumstances, high treason, but acts of 1 Ed. VI. c. 12 (1547) and 1
Mary (1553) reduced it to an ordinary felony. The English law concerning
arson was consolidated by 7 & 8 Geo. IV. c. 30, which was repealed and
re-enacted by the Malicious Damage Act 1861.

The common-law offence of arson (which has been greatly enlarged by the
act of 1861) required some part of the house to be actually burnt;
neither a bare intention nor even an actual attempt by putting fire in
or towards it will constitute the offence, if no part was actually
burnt, but the burning of any part, however trifling, is sufficient, and
the offence is complete even if the fire is put out or goes out of
itself. The burning must be malicious and wilful, otherwise it is only a
trespass. If a man by wilfully setting fire to his own house burn the
house of his neighbour also, it will be a felony, even though the
primary intention of the party was to burn his own house only. The word
_house_, in the definition of the offence at common law, extends not
only to dwelling-houses, "but to all out-houses which are parcel
thereof, though not adjoining thereto." Barns with corn and hay in them,
though distant from a house, are within the definition.

The different varieties of the offence are specified in the Malicious
Damage Act 1861. The following crimes are thereby made felonies: (1)
setting fire to any church, chapel, meeting-house or other place of
divine worship; (2) setting fire to a dwelling-house, any person being
therein; (3) setting fire to a house, out-house, manufactory,
farm-building, &c., with intent to impose and defraud any person; (4)
setting fire to buildings appertaining to any railway, port, dock or
harbour; or (5) setting fire to any public building. In these cases the
act provides that the person convicted shall be liable, at the
discretion of the court, to be kept in penal servitude for life, or for
any term not less than three years (altered to _five_ years by the Penal
Servitude Acts Amendment Act 1864), or to be imprisoned for any time not
exceeding two years, with or without hard labour, and, if a male under
sixteen years of age, with or without whipping. Setting fire to other
buildings, and setting fire to goods in buildings under such
circumstances that, if the building were thereby set fire to, the
offence would amount to felony, are subject to the punishments last
enumerated, with this exception that the period of penal servitude is
limited to fourteen years. The attempt to set fire to any building, or
any matter or thing not enumerated above, is punishable as a felony.
Russell says (_Crimes_, p. 1781) that the term building is no doubt very
indefinite, but it was used in 9 & 10 Vict. c. 25, s. 2; and it was
thought much better to adopt this term and leave it to be interpreted as
each case might arise, than to attempt to define; as any such attempt
would probably have failed in producing any expression more certain than
the term "building" itself. In _R._ v. _Manning_, 1872 (L.R. 1 C.C.R.
338), it was held that an unfinished house was a building within the
meaning of the act. The setting fire to crops of hay, grass, corn, &c.,
is punishable by penal servitude for any period not exceeding fourteen
years, but setting fire to stacks of the same, or any cultivated
vegetable produce, or to peat, coals, &c., is regarded as a more serious
offence, and the penal servitude may be for life. For the attempt to
commit the last two offences penal servitude is limited to seven years.
Setting fire to mines of coal, anthracite or other mineral fuel is
visited with the full measure of penalty, and in the case of an attempt
the penal servitude is limited to fourteen years. By the Dockyards, &c.,
Protection Act 1772 it is a felony punishable by death wilfully and
maliciously to set fire to any of His Majesty's ships or vessels of war,
or any of His Majesty's arsenals, magazines, dockyards, rope-yards,
victualling offices or buildings therein, or any timber, material,
stores or ammunition of war therein or in any part of His Majesty's
dominions. If the person guilty of the offence is a person subject to
naval discipline, he is triable by court-martial, and if found guilty, a
sentence of capital punishment may be passed. The Malicious Damage Act
1861, s. 43, also includes as a felony the setting fire to any ship or
vessel, with intent to prejudice any owner or part owner of the vessel,
or of any goods on the same, or any person who has underwritten any
policy of insurance on the vessel, or upon any goods on board the same.

In Scotland the offence equivalent to arson in England is known by the
more expressive name of fire-raising. The crime was punishable capitally
by old consuetudinary law, but it is now no longer capital, and may be
tried in the sheriff court (50 & 51 Vict. c. 35, s. 56). Formerly the
public prosecutor had the privilege of declining to demand capital
punishment, and he invariably did so. _Wilful fire-raising_, which is
the most heinous form of the crime, requires the raising of fire,
without any lawful object, but with the deliberate intention of
destroying certain premises or things, whether directly by the
application of fire thereto, or indirectly by its application to
something contained in or forming part of or communicating with them;
also the intention to destroy premises or things of a certain
description (much as mentioned above); and such premises or things must
be the property of another than the accused. _Wicked, culpable and
reckless fire-raising_ differs from wilful fire-raising in that the fire
is raised _without_ the deliberate intention of destroying premises or
things, but while the accused was engaged in some unlawful act, or while
he was in such a state of passion, excitement or recklessness as not to
care what results might follow from his acts.

_United States._--The same general principles apply to this crime in
American law. In some states by statute the intent to injure or defraud
must be shown, e.g. when the property is insured. In New York one who
wilfully burns property (including a vessel or its cargo) with intent to
defraud or prejudice the insurer thereof, though the offence of arson is
not committed, is punishable by imprisonment for not more than five
years (N.Y. Pen. Code, ss. 575, 578). There must be an intent to destroy
the building (_ibid._ s. 490; California Code, s. 447). An agreement to
commit arson is conspiracy (_ibid._ s. 171). Killing a person in
committing the crime of arson is murder in the first degree (_ibid._ s.
183); this is so in California, even where the crime is merely an
attempt to commit arson (Cal. Pen. Code, s. 189). Explosion of a house
by gunpowder or dynamite is arson (Texas Pen. Code, art. 761), but a
charge of arson by "burning" will not be sustained by proof of exploding
by dynamite, even though part of the building is burnt by the explosion
(_Landers_ v. _State_ [Tex.], 47 S.W. 1008).

  AUTHORITIES.--W.S. Holdsworth, _History of English Law_, vol. iii.;
  Pollock and Maitland, _History of English Law_; Stephen, _History of
  Criminal Law_, vol. iii.; Stephen, _Commentaries_; Russell on
  _Crimes_.