ART TEACHING. It is the tendency of all departments of the human mind to
outgrow their original limits. Traditions of teaching are long-lived,
especially in art, and new ideas only slowly displace the old, so that
art teaching as a whole is seldom abreast of the ideas and practice of
the more advanced artists. The old academic system adapted to the
methods and aims in art in the 18th century, which has been carried on
in the principal art schools of Great Britain with but slight changes of
method, consisted chiefly of a course of drawing from casts of antique
statues in outline, and in light and shade without backgrounds, of
anatomical drawings, perspective, and drawing and painting from the
living model. Such a training seems to be more or less a response to
Lessing's definition of painting as "the imitation of solid bodies upon
a plane surface." It seems to have been influenced more by the
sculptor's art than any other. Indeed, the academic teaching from the
time of the Italian Renaissance was no doubt principally derived from
the study of antique sculpture; the proportions of the figure, the
style, pose, and sentiment being all taken from Graeco-Roman and Roman
sculptures, discovered so abundantly in Italy from the 16th century
onwards. As British ideas of art were principally derived from Italy,
British academics endeavoured to follow the methods of teaching in vogue
there in later times, and so the art student in Great Britain has had
his intention and efforts directed almost exclusively to the
representations of the abstract human form in abstract relief.
Traditions in art, however, may sometimes prove helpful and beneficial,
and preservative of beauty and character, as in the case of certain
decorative and constructive arts and handicrafts in common use, such as
those of the rural waggon-maker and wheelwright, and horse-harness
maker.

Some schools of painting, sculpture and architecture have preserved fine
and noble traditions which yet allowed for individuality. Such
traditions may be said to have been characteristic of the art of the
middle ages. It often happens, too, when many streams of artistic
influence meet, there may be a certain domination or ascendancy of the
traditions of one art over the others, which is injurious in its effects
on those arts and diverts them from their true path. The domination of
individualistic painting and sculpture over the arts of design during
the last century or two is a case in point.

With the awakening of interest in industrial art--sharply separated by
pedantic classification from fine art--which began in England about the
middle of the 19th century, schools of design were established which
included more varied studies. Even as early as 1836 a government grant
was made towards the opening of public galleries and the establishment
of a normal school of design with a museum and lectures, and in 1837 the
first school of design was opened at Somerset House. In 1840 grants were
made to establish schools of the same kind in provincial towns, such as
Manchester, Birmingham, Glasgow, Leeds and Paisley. The names of G.
Wallis in 1847, and Ambrose Poynter in 1850, are associated with schemes
of art instruction adopted in the government art schools, and the year
1851, the year of the Great Exhibition, was also marked by the first
public exhibition of students' works, and the first institution of
prizes and scholarships. In 1852 "the Department of Practical Art" was
constituted, and a museum of objects collected at Marlborough House
which afterwards formed the nucleus of the future museum at South
Kensington. In 1853 "the Department of Science and Art" was established,
and in 1857, under the auspices of Henry Cole, the offices of the
department and the National Art Training School were removed from
Marlborough House to South Kensington. Classes for instruction in
various crafts had been carried on both at Somerset House and
Marlborough House, and the whole object of the government schools of
design was to give an artistic training to the designer and craftsman,
so that he could carry back to his trade or craft improved taste and
skill. The schools, however, became largely filled by students of
another type--leisured amateurs who sought to acquire some artistic
accomplishment, and even in the case of genuine designers and craftsmen
who developed pictorial skill in their studies, the attraction and
superior social distinction and possibility of superior commercial value
accruing to the career of a painter of easel pictures diverted the
schools from their original purpose.

For some time after the removal to South Kensington, during the progress
of the new buildings, and under the direction of Godfrey Sykes and F.W.
Moody, practical decorative work both in modelling and painting was
carried out in the National Art Training School; but on the completion
of these works, the school relapsed into a more or less academic school
on the ordinary lines, and was regarded chiefly as a school for the
training of art teachers and masters who were required to pass through
certain stereotyped courses and execute a certain series of drawings in
order to obtain their certificates. Thus model-drawing, freehand
outline, plant-drawing in outline, outline from the cast, light and
shade from the cast, drawing of the antique figure, still life,
anatomical drawings, drawing and painting from the life, ornamental
design, historic studies of ornament, perspective and geometry, were all
taken up in a cut-and-dried way, as isolated studies, and with a view
solely to obtaining the certificate or passing an examination. This
theoretic kind of training, though still in force, and though it
enabled the department to turn out certificated teachers for the
schools of the country of a certain standard, and to give to students a
general theoretic idea of art, has been found wanting, since, in
practice, when the student in design leaves his school and desires to
take up practical work as a designer or craftsman, he requires _special_
knowledge, and specialized skill in design for his work to be of use;
and though he may be able to impart to others what he himself has
laboriously acquired, the theoretic and general character of his
training proves of little or no use, face to face with the ever shifting
and changing demands of the modern manufacturer and the modern market.

A growing conviction of the inadequacy of the schools of the Science and
Art Department (now the Board of Education), considered as training
grounds for practical designers and craftsmen, led to the establishment
of new technical schools in the principal towns of Great Britain. The
circumstance of certain large sums, diverted from their original purpose
of compensation to brewers, being available for educational purposes and
at the disposal of the county councils and municipal bodies, provided
the means for the building and equipment of these new technical schools,
which in many cases are under the same roof as the art school in the
provincial towns, and, since the Education Act of 1902, are generally
rate-supported. The art schools formerly managed by private committees
and supported by private donors, assisted by the government grants, are
now, in the principal industrial towns of Great Britain, taken over by
the municipality. Birmingham is singularly well organized in this
respect, and its art school has long held a leading position. The school
is well housed in a new building with class-rooms with every appliance,
not only for the drawing, designing and modelling side, but also for the
practice of artistic handicrafts such as metal repoussé, enamelling,
wood-carving, embroidery, &c. The municipality have also established a
jewelry school, so as to associate the practical study of art with local
industry. Manchester and other cities are also equipped with
well-organized art schools.

The important change involved in the incorporation of the Science and
Art Department with the Board of Education also led to a reorganization
of the Royal College of Art. A special council of advice on art matters
was appointed, consisting of representatives of painting, sculpture,
architecture and design, who deal with the Royal College of Art, and
appoint the professors who control the teaching in the classes for
architecture, design and handicraft, decorative painting and sculpture,
modelling and carving. The council decide upon the curriculum, and
examine and criticize the work of the college from time to time. They
also advise the board in regard to the syllabus issued to the art
schools of the country, and act as referees in regard to purchases for
the museum.

Of other institutions for the teaching of art, the following may be
named: The Royal Drawing Society of Great Britain and Ireland, which was
formed principally to promote the teaching of drawing in schools as a
means of education. The system therein adopted differs from the ordinary
drawing courses, and favours the use of the brush. Brushwork has
generally been adopted for elementary work, too, by London County
Council teachers, drawing being now a compulsory subject. Remarkable
results have been obtained by the Alma Road Council schools in the
teaching of boys from eight to twelve by giving them spaces to fill with
given forms--leaf shapes--from which patterns are constructed to fill
the spaces, brush and water-colour being the means employed. At the
Royal Female School of Art in Queen Square, London, classes in drawing
and painting from life are held, and decorative design is also studied.
There are also the Royal School of Art Needlework and the School of Art
Wood-carving, all aided by the London County Council. The City and
Guilds of London Institute has two departments for what is termed
"applied" art, one at the South London School of Technical Art, and the
other at the Art Department in the Technical College, Finsbury. The
Slade School of Drawing, Painting and Sculpture, University College,
Gower Street, confines itself to drawing and painting from the antique
and life, and exercise in pictorial composition. There are also lectures
on anatomy and perspective. The Slade professorships at Oxford and
Cambridge universities are concerned with the teaching and literature of
art, but they do not concern themselves with the practice. There are
also, in addition to the schools of art named and those in connexion
with the Board of Education and the London County Council in the various
districts of London, many and various private clubs and schools, such as
the Langham and "Heatherley's," chiefly concerned in encouraging drawing
and painting from the life, and for the study of art from the pictorial
point of view, or for the preparation of candidates for the Royal
Academy or other schools. The polytechnics and technical institutes also
provide instruction in a great variety of artistic crafts.

A general survey, therefore, of the various institutions which are
established for the teaching of art in Great Britain gives the
impression that the study of art is not neglected, although, perhaps,
further inquiry might show that, compared with the great educational
establishments, the proportion is not excessive. Now that the Education
Act 1902 has given the county councils control of elementary and
secondary education and charged them with the task of promoting the
co-ordination of all forms of education in consultation with the Board
of Education, it is probable that an elementary scholar who shows
artistic ability will be enabled to pass on from the elementary classes
in one school to the higher art and technical schools, secondary and
advanced, without retracing his steps, thus escaping the depression of
going over old ground.

The general movement of revival of interest in the arts of decorative
design and the allied handicrafts, with the desire to re-establish their
influence in art-teaching, has been due to many causes, among which the
work of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society may count as important.
From the leading members of this body the London County Council
Technical Educational Board, when it was face to face with the problem
of organizing its new schools and its technical classes, sought advice
and aid. Success has attended their schools, especially the Central
School of Arts and Crafts at Morley Hall, Regent Street. The object of
the school is to provide the craftsman in the various branches of
decorative design with such means of improving his taste and skill as
the workshop does not afford. It does not concern itself with the
amateur or with theoretic drawing. The main difference in principle
adopted in this school in the teaching of design is the absence of
teaching design _apart from handicraft._ It is considered that a
craftsman thoroughly acquainted with the natural capacities of his
material and strictly understanding the conditions of his work, would be
able, if he had any feeling or invention, to design appropriately in
that material, and no designing can be good apart from a knowledge of
the material in which it is intended to be carried out. It should be
remembered, too, that graphic skill in representing the appearances of
natural objects is one sort of skill, and the executive skill of the
craftsman in working out his design, say in wood or metal, is quite
another. It follows that the works of drawing or design made by the
craftsman would be of quite a different character from a pictorial
drawing, and might be quite simple and abstract, while clear and
accurate. The training for the pictorial artist and for the craftsman
would, therefore, naturally be different.

The character of the art-teaching adopted in any country must of course
depend upon the dominant conception of art and its function and purpose.
If we regard it as an idle accomplishment for the leisured few, its
methods will be amateurish and superficial. If we regard art as an
important factor in education, as a language of the intelligence, as an
indispensable companion to literature, we shall favour systematic study
and a training in the power of direct expression by means of line. We
shall value the symbolic drawing of early civilizations like the
Egyptian, and symbolic art generally, and in the history of decorative
art we shall find the true accompaniment and illustration of human
history itself. From this point of view we shall value the acquisition
of the power of drawing for the purpose of presenting and explaining the
facts and forms of nature. Drawing will be the most direct means at the
command of the teacher to explain, to expound, to demonstrate where mere
words are not sufficiently definite or explicit. Drawing in this sense
is taking a more important place in education, especially in primary
education, though there is no need for it to stop there, and one feels
it may be destined to take a more important position both as a training
for the eye and hand and an aid to the teacher. Then, again, we may
regard art more from its social aspect as an essential accompaniment of
human life, not only for its illustrative and depicting powers, but also
and no less for its pleasure-giving properties, its power of awakening
and stimulating the observation and sympathy with the moods of nature,
its power of touching the emotions, and above all of appealing to our
sense of beauty. We shall regard the study of art from this point of
view as the greatest civilizer, the most permeating of social and human
forces. Such ideas as these, shared no doubt by all who take pleasure
and interest in art, or feel it to be an important element in their
lives, are crossed and often obscured by a multitude of mundane
considerations, and it is probably out of the struggle for ascendancy
between these that our systems of art teaching are evolved. There is the
demand of the right to live on the part of the artist and the teacher of
art. There is the demand on the part of the manufacturer and salesman
for such art as will help him to dispose of his goods. In the present
commercial rivalry between nations this latter demand is brought into
prominent relief, and art is apt to be made a minister, or perhaps a
slave to the market. These are but accidental relationships with art.
All who care for art value it as a means of expression, and for the
pleasure and beauty it infuses into all it touches, or as essential and
inseparable from life itself. Seeing then the importance of art from any
point of view, individual, social, commercial, intellectual, emotional,
economic, it should be important to us in our systems of art-teaching
not to lose sight of the end in arranging the means--not to allow our
teaching to be dominated by either dilettantism or commercialism,
neither to be feeble for want of technical skill, nor to sacrifice
everything to technique. The true object of art-teaching is very much
like that of all education--to inform the mind, while you give skill to
the hand--not to impose certain rigid rules, or fixed recipes and
methods of work, but while giving instruction in definite methods and
the use of materials, to allow for the individual development of the
student and enable him to acquire the power to express himself through
different media without forgetting the grammar and alphabet of design.
Practice may vary, but principles remain, and there is a certain logic
in art, as well as in reasoning. All art is conditioned in the mode of
its expression by its material, and even the most individual kind of art
has a convention of its own by the very necessities and means of its
existence. Methods of expression, conventions alter as each artist, each
age seeks some new interpretation of nature and the imagination--the
well-springs of artistic life, and from these reviving streams
continually flow new harmonies, new inventions and recombinations,
taking form and colour according to the temperaments which give them
birth.     (W. Cr.)