ART GALLERIES. An art gallery (by which, as distinguished from more
general MUSEUMS OF ART, q.v., is here meant one specially for pictures)
epitomizes so many phases of human thought and imagination that it
connotes much more than a mere collection of paintings. In its technical
and aesthetic aspect the gallery shows the treatment of colour, form and
composition. In its historical aspect we find the true portraits of
great men of the past; we can observe their habits of life, their
manners, their dress, the architecture of their times, and the religious
worship of the period in which they lived. Regarded collectively, the
art of a country epitomizes the whole development of the people that
produced it. Most important of all is the emotional aspect of painting,
which must enter less or more into every picture worthy of notice. To
take examples from the British National Gallery: pathos in its most
intense degree will be found in Francia's "Pietà"; dignity in Velasquez'
portrait of Admiral Pareja; homeliness in Van Eyck's portrait of Jan
Arnolfini and his wife; the interpretation of the varying moods of
nature in the work of Turner or Hobbema; nothing can be more devotional
than the canvases of Bellini or his Umbrian contemporaries. So also the
ruling sentiments of mankind--mysticism, drama and imagination--are the
keynotes of other great conceptions of the artist. All this may be at
the command of those who visit the art gallery; but without patience,
care and study the higher meaning will be lost to the spectator. The
picture which "tells its own story" is often the least didactic, for it
has no inner or deeper lesson to reveal; it gives no stimulus or
training to the eye, quick as that organ may be--_segnius irritant
animos_--to translate sight into thought. In brief, the painter asks
that his [Greek: aethos] may be shared as much as possible by the man
who looks at the painting--the art above all others in which it is most
needful to share the master's spirit if his work is to be fully
appreciated. So, too, the art gallery, recalling the gentler
associations of the past amidst surroundings of harmonious beauty and
its attendant sense of comfort, is essentially a place of rest for the
mind and eye. In the more famous galleries where the wealth of paintings
allows a grouping of pictures according to their respective schools, one
may choose the country, the epoch, the style or even the emotion best
suited to one's taste. According to this theory, though imperfectly
realized owing to the paucity of examples, the philosophic influence of
art galleries is becoming more widely extended; and in its further
development will be found an ever-growing source of interest,
instruction and scholarship to the community. The most suitable method
of describing art galleries is to classify them by their types and
contents rather than by the various countries to which they belong. Thus
the great representative galleries of the world which possess works of
every school are grouped together, followed by state galleries which are
not remarkable for more than one school of national art. Municipal
galleries are divided into those which have general collections, and
those which are notable for special collections. Churches which have
good paintings, together with those which are now secularized, are
treated separately; while the collections in the Vatican and private
houses are described together. The remaining galleries, such as the
Salon or the Royal Academy, are periodical or commercial in character,
and are important in the development of modern art.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Plan of the National Gallery, London.

  North Vestibule, Early Italian Schools:
      I. Tuscan School (15th and 16th centuries).
     II. Sienese School, &c.
    III. Tuscan School.
     IV. Lombard School.
      V. Ferrarese and Bolognese Schools.
     VI. Umbrian School, &c.
    VII. Venetian and Brescian Schools.
   VIII. Paduan and Early Venetian Schools.
     IX. Later Venetian School.
      X. Flemish School.
     XI. Early Dutch and Flemish Schools.
    XII. Dutch and Flemish Schools.
   XIII. Flemish School.
    XIV. Spanish School.
     XV. German Schools.
    XVI. French School.
   XVII. French School.
  XVIII. British School.
    XIX. Old British School.
     XX. British School.
    XXI. British School.
   XXII. Turner Collection.
  Octagonal Hall: Miscellaneous.
  East Vestibule: British School.
  West Vestibule: Italian School.]

  State galleries of international schools.

The collections most worthy of attention are the state galleries
representative of international schools. Among these the British
National Gallery holds a high place. The collection was founded in 1824
by the acquisition of the Angerstein pictures. Its accessions are mainly
governed by the parliamentary grant of £5000 to £10,000 a year, a sum
which has occasionally been enlarged to permit special purchases. Thus,
in 1871, the Peel collection of seventy-seven pictures was bought for
£75,000, and in 1885 the Ansidei Madonna (Raphael) and Van Dyck's
portrait of Charles I. were bought, the one for £70,000 and the other
for £17,500. In 1890 the government gave £25,000 to meet a gift of
£30,000 made by three gentlemen to acquire three portraits by Moroni,
Velazquez and Holbein. The most important private gifts were the Vernon
gift in 1847, the Turner bequest in 1856 and the Wynne-Ellis legacy in
1876. Since 1905 the Art Collections Fund, a society of private
subscribers, has also been responsible for important additions to the
gallery, notably the Venus of Velazquez (1907). The gallery contains
very few poor works and all schools are well represented, with the sole
exception of the French school. This, however, can be amply studied at
Hertford House (Wallace Collection), which, besides Dutch, Spanish and
British pictures of the highest value, contains twenty examples of
Greuze, fifteen by Pater, nineteen by Boucher, eleven by Watteau and
fifteen by Meissonier. The national gallery of pictures at Berlin
(Kaiser Friedrich Museum), like the British National Gallery, is
remarkable for its variety of schools and painters, and for the select
type of pictures shown. During the last twenty-five years of the 19th
century, the development of this collection was even more striking than
that of the English gallery. Italian and Dutch examples are specially
numerous, though every school but the British (here as elsewhere) is
really well seen. The purchase grant is considerable, and is well
applied. Two other German capitals have collections of international
importance--Dresden and Münich. The former is famous for the Sistine
Madonna by Raphael, a work of such supreme excellence that there is a
tendency to overlook other Italian pictures of celebrity by Titian,
Giorgione and Correggio. Münich (Old Pinakothek) has examples of all the
best masters, the South German school being particularly noticeable. The
arrangement is good, and the methods of exhibition make this one of the
most pleasant galleries on the continent. Vienna has the Imperial
Gallery, a collection which in point of number cannot be considered
large, as there are not more than 1700 pictures. This, however, is in
itself a safeguard, like the wise provision in a statute of 1856 for
enabling the English authorities to dispose of pictures "unfit for the
collection, or not required." It avoids the undue multiplication of
canvases, and the overcrowding so noticeable in many Italian galleries
where first-rate pictures hang too high to be examined. Thus the
Viennese gallery, besides the intrinsic value of its pictures (Albert
Durer's chief work is there), is admirably adapted for study. The best
gallery in Russia (St Petersburg, Hermitage) was made entirely by royal
efforts, having been founded by Peter the Great, and much enlarged by
the empress Catherine. It contains the collections of Crozat, Brühl and
Walpole. There are about 1800 works, the schools of Flanders and Italy
being of signal merit; and there are at least thirty-five genuine
examples by Rembrandt. The French collection (Louvre Palace, Paris) is
one of the most important of all. In 1880 it was undoubtedly the first
gallery in Europe, but its supremacy has since been menaced by other
establishments where acquisitions are made more frequently and with
greater care, and where the system of classification is such that the
value of the pictures is enhanced rather than diminished by their
display. In 1900 it was partly rearranged with great effect. The feature
of the Louvre is the Salon Carré, a room in which the supposed finest
canvases in the collection are kept together, pictures of world-wide
fame, representing all schools. It is now generally accepted that this
system of selection not only lowers the standard of individual schools
elsewhere by withdrawing their best pictures, but does not add to the
aesthetic or educational value of the masterpieces themselves. In
Florence the Tribuna room of the Uffizi gallery is a similar case in
point. Probably the two most widely known pictures in the Louvre are
Watteau's second "Embarquement pour Cythère," and the "Monna Lisa," a
portrait by Leonardo da Vinci, but each school has many unique examples.
The original drawings should be noted, being of equal importance to the
collection preserved at the British Museum. The last collection to be
mentioned under this heading is that known as the Royal Galleries in
Florence, housed in the Pitti and Uffizi palaces. In some ways this
collection does not represent general painting sufficiently to justify
its inclusion with the galleries of Berlin, Paris and London. On the
other hand, the great number of Italian pictures of vital importance to
the history of international art makes this one of the finest existing
collections. The two great palaces, dating from the 15th and 16th
centuries, are joined together and contain the Medici pictures. They
form the largest gallery in the world, and though many of the rooms are
small and badly lighted, and although many paintings have suffered from
thoughtless restoration, they have a charm and attraction which
certainly make them the most popular galleries in Europe. The Pitti has
ten Raphaels and excellent examples of Andrea del Sarto, Giorgione and
Perugino. The Uffizi is more representative of non-Italian schools, but
is best known for its works by Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci,
Michelangelo and Sodoma, the schools of Tuscany and Umbria forming the
bulk of both collections. Admission to the galleries is by payment, and
the small income derived from this source is devoted to maintaining and
enlarging the collections.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Plan of the first and second floors of the
Imperial Gallery, Vienna.]

As to the ground plans of the National Gallery, London (fig. 1), and of
the Imperial Gallery at Vienna (fig. 2), it will be observed that while
the former has the advantage of uniform top-light, the galleries at
Vienna possess the most ample facilities for minute classification,
small rooms or "cabinets" opening from each large room. Special rooms
are also provided for drawings and water-colours, while special ranges
of rooms are used by copyists and those responsible for the repair and
preservation of the pictures.

  State galleries of national schools.

Though not so comprehensive as the great collections just described, the
state galleries showing national schools of painting and little else are
of striking interest. In England the National Gallery of British Art
(known as the Tate Gallery) contains British pictures. The corresponding
collection of modern French art is at Paris (Luxembourg Palace), Berlin,
Rome, Dresden, Vienna and Madrid having analogous galleries. The
Victoria and Albert Museum has also numerous British pictures,
especially in water-colour, and the National Portrait Gallery, founded
in 1856, and since 1896 housed in its permanent home, is instructive in
this connexion, though many of its pictures are the work of foreign
artists. The national collections at Dublin and Edinburgh may be
mentioned here, though most schools are represented. Brussels and
Antwerp are remarkable for fine examples of Flemish art--Matsys, Memlinc
and Van Eyck of the primitive schools, Rubens and Van Dyck of the later
period. The collections at Amsterdam (Ryks Museum) and the Hague
(Mauritshuis) are a revelation to those who have only studied Rembrandt,
Franz Hals, Van der Helst, and other Dutch portrait painters outside
Holland; and in the former gallery especially, the pictures are arranged
in a manner showing them to the best advantage. The Museo del Prado is
even more noteworthy, for the fifty examples of Velasquez (outrivalling
the Italian pictures, important as they are) make a visit to Madrid
imperative to those who wish to realize the achievements of Spanish art.
Christiania, Stockholm and Copenhagen have large collections of
Scandinavian art, and the cities of Budapest and Basel have galleries of
some importance. In Italy the state maintains twelve collections, mainly
devoted to pictorial art. Of these the best are situated at Bologna,
Lucca, Parma, Venice, Modena, Turin and Milan. In each case the local
school of painting is fully represented. In Rome the Corsini and
Borghese Galleries, the latter being the most catholic in the city,
contain superb examples, some of them accepted masterpieces of Italian
art; there are also good foreign pictures, but their number is limited.
The Accademia at Florence should also be noted as the most important
state gallery of early Italian art. The central Italian Renaissance can
be more adequately studied here than in the Pitti. The "Primavera" of
Botticelli, and the "Last Judgment" by Fra Angelico are perhaps the
best-known works. The large statue of David by Michelangelo is also in
this gallery, which, on the whole, is one of the most remarkable in
Italy. Speaking broadly, these national galleries scattered throughout
the country are not well arranged or classified; and though some are
kept in fine old buildings, beautiful in themselves, the lighting is
often indifferent, and it is with difficulty that the pictures can be
seen. In nearly every case admission fees are charged every day,
festivals and Sundays excepted; few pictures are bought, acquisitions
being chiefly made by removing pictures from churches.

  Municipal galleries of special schools.

Many towns own collections of well-merited repute. In Italy such
galleries are common, and among them may be noted Siena, with Sodoma and
his school; Venice with Tintoretto (Doge's Palace); Genoa, with the
great palaces Balbi and Rosso; Vicenza (Montagna and school), Ferrara
(Dosso and school), Bergamo and Milan (north Italian schools). Other
civic collections of Italian art are maintained at Verona, Pisa, Rome,
Perugia and Padua. In Holland, Haarlem, Leiden, Rotterdam and the Hague
have galleries supplemental to those of the state, and are remarkable in
showing the brilliance of artists like Grebber, de Bray and Ravesteyn,
who are usually ignored. Birmingham and Manchester have good examples of
modern British art. Moscow (Tretiakoff collection) has modern Russian
pictures, and contemporary German and French work will be found in all
the galleries of these two countries included in the municipal group.
Collections of French work are found at Amiens, Rouen, Nancy, Tours, Le
Mans and Angers, but large as these civic collections are, sometimes
containing six and eight hundred canvases, few of their pictures are
really good, many being the enormous patriotic canvases marked "Don de
l'État," which do not confer distinction on the galleries. Cologne has
the central collection of the early Rhenish school; Nuremberg is
remarkable for early German work (Wohlgemut, &c.). Stuttgart, Cassel
(Dutch) and Hamburg (with a considerable number of British pictures) are
also noteworthy, together with Brunswick, Hanover, Augsburg, Darmstadt
and Düsseldorf, where German and Dutch art preponderate. Seville is
famous for twenty-five examples of Murillo, and there are old Spanish
paintings at Valencia, Cordova and Cadiz.

  Municipal galleries of general schools.

In Great Britain the best of the municipal galleries of general schools
are at Liverpool (early Flemish and British), and at Glasgow (Scottish
painters, Rembrandt, Van der Goes and Venetian schools). In France there
are very large galleries at Tours, Montpellier, Lyons (Perugino,
Rubens), Dijon and Grenoble (Italian), Valenciennes (Watteau and
school), while Rennes, Lille and Marseilles have first-rate collections.
Nantes, Orleans, Besançon, Cherbourg and Caen have also many paintings,
French for the most part, but with occasional foreign pictures of real
importance, presented by the state during the Napoleonic conquests, and
not returned on the declaration of peace as were the works of art
amassed in Paris. Some of the American collections have in recent years
made a great advance in their acquisition of good pictures. At Boston
(Museum of Fine Arts) all schools are represented, so too at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, which is strong in Italian and
Dutch works. Modern French and Flemish art is a feature of the Academy
at Philadelphia, at the Lenox Library (New York), and at Chicago, where
there are good examples of Millet, Constable and Rembrandt. The Corcoran
bequest at Washington is of minor importance. The best civic collection
in Germany of this class is the Städel Institute at Frankfort (Van Eyck,
Christus, early Flemish and Italian).

  Churches.

As the great bulk of religious painting was executed for church
decoration, there are still numberless churches which may be considered
picture galleries. Thus at Antwerp cathedral the Rubens paintings are
remarkable; at Ghent, Van Eyck; at Bruges (hospital of St John),
Memlinc; at Pisa, the Campo Santo (early Tuscan schools); at Sant'
Apollinare, Ravenna, primitive Italo-Byzantine mosaics; at Siena,
Pinturichio. Examples could be multiplied indefinitely--in Italy alone
there are 80,000 churches and chapels, in all of which pictorial art has
been employed. In Italy, besides the church "galleries" still used for
religious services, there are some which have been secularized and are
now used as museums, e.g. Certosa at Pavia, and San Vitale at Ravenna
(mosaics); at Florence, the Scalzo (Andrea del Sarto); San Marco (Fra
Angelico); the Riccardi and Pazzi chapels (Gozzoli and Perugino); at
Milan, in the Santa Maria delle Grazie, the "Last Supper," by Leonardo,
and at Padua, the famous Arena chapel (Giotto).

  Private and semi-private galleries.

The Vatican galleries, though best known for their statuary, have fine
examples of painting, chiefly of the Italian school; the most famous
easel picture is Raphael's "Transfiguration," but the Stanze, apartments
entirely decorated by painting, are even more famous. In England three
royal palaces are open to the public--Hampton Court (Mantegna), Windsor
(Van Dyck, Zuccarelli), and Kensington (portraits). At Buckingham Palace
the Dutch pictures are admirable, and Queen Victoria lent the celebrated
Raphael cartoons to the Victoria and Albert Museum. Semi-private
collections belong to Dulwich College (Velasquez and Watteau), Oxford
University (Italian drawings), the Soane Museum (Hogarth and English
school), and the Royal Academy (Leonardo). Among private collections the
most important are the Harrach, and Prince Liechtenstein (Vienna), J.
Pierpont Morgan (including miniatures), Mrs J. Gardner of Boston
(Italian), Prince Corsini (Florence). In Great Britain there are immense
riches in private houses, though many collections have been dispersed.
The most noteworthy (1909) belong to the dukes of Devonshire and
Westminster, Lord Ellesmere, Captain Holford (including the masterpiece
of Cuyp), Ludwig Mond, Lord Lansdowne, Miss Rothschild. The finest
private collection is at Panshanger, formerly the seat of Lord Cowper,
the gallery of Van Dyck's work being quite the best in the world.

  Periodical and commercial.

Many galleries are devoted to periodical exhibitions in London; the
Royal Academy is the leading agency of this character, having held
exhibitions since 1769. Its loan exhibitions of Old Masters are most
important. Similar enterprises are the New Gallery, opened in 1888, the
Grafton Gallery, and others. There are also old-established societies of
etchers, water-colourists, &c. A feature common to these exhibitions is
that the public always pays for admission, though they differ from the
commercial exhibitions, becoming more common every year, in which the
work of a single school or painter is shown for profit. But the annual
exhibitions at the Guildhall, under the auspices of the corporation, are
free. The great periodical exhibition of French art is known as the
Salon, and for some years it has had a rival in the Champ de Mars
exhibition. These two societies are now respectively housed in the Grand
Palais and Petit Palais, in the Champs Elysees, which were erected in
connexion with the Paris Exhibition of 1900, but with the ultimate
object of being devoted to the service of the two Salons. Berlin, Rome,
Vienna and other Continental towns have regular exhibitions of original
work.

  The best history of art galleries is found in their official and other
  catalogues, see article MUSEUMS. See also L. Viardot, _Les Musees
  d'Italie, &c._ (3 vols., Paris, 1842, 1843, 1844); Annual Reports,
  official, of National Portrait Gallery, National Galleries of England,
  Ireland and Scotland; Civil Service Estimates, class iv. official. See
  also the series edited by Lafenestre and E. Richtenberger: _Le Louvre,
  La Belgique, Le Hollande, Florence, Belgique_; A. Lavice, _Revue des
  musees de France,... d'Allemagne,... d'Angleterre, ... d'Espagnc,...
  d'Italie,... de Belgique, de Hollande et de Russie_ (Paris,
  1862-1872); E. Michel, _Les Musees d'Allemagne_ (Paris, 1886); Kate
  Thompson, _Public Picture Galleries of Europe_ (1880); C.L. Eastlake,
  _Notes on Foreign Picture Galleries_; Lord Ronald Gower, _Pocket Guide
  to Art Galleries (public and private) of Belgium and Holland_ (1875);
  and many works, albums, and so forth, issued mainly for the sake of
  the illustrations.     (B.)