ART SOCIETIES. In banding themselves into societies and associations
artists have always been especially remarkable. The fundamental motive
of such leaguing together is apparent, for, by the establishment of
societies, it becomes possible for the working members of these to hold
exhibitions and thereby to obtain some compensation or reward for their
labours. With the growth of artistic practice and public interest,
however, art societies have been instituted where this primary object is
either absent or is allied to others of more general scope. The
furtherance of a cult and the specializing of work have also given rise
to many new associations in Great Britain, besides the Royal Academy
(see ACADEMY, ROYAL). At the outset, therefore, it will be well to
mention the leading art societies thus described. The (now Royal)
Society of Painters in Water Colours, founded in 1804, and the (now
Royal) Society of British Artists (1823), are typical of those societies
which exist merely for purposes of holding exhibitions and conferring
diplomas of membership. The British Institution (for the encouragement
of British artists) was started in 1806 on a plan formed by Sir Thomas
Bernard; and in the gallery, erected by Alderman Boydell to exhibit the
paintings executed for his edition of Shakespeare, were from time to
time exhibited pictures by the old masters, deceased British artists and
others, till 1867, when the lease of the premises expired. A fund of
£16,200, then in the hands of trustees, had accumulated to £24,610 in
1884. The Artists' Society, formed in 1830, has for its object the
providing of facilities to enable its members to perfect themselves in
their art. To this end there is a good library of works on art, and
abundant opportunities are afforded for general study from the life. In
the furtherance of a cult the Japan Society, devoted to the
encouragement of the study of the arts and industries of Japan, is a
typical example; and the Society of Mezzotint Engravers is
representative of those bodies formed in the interests of particular
groups of workers. One of the remarkable features in the history of art
in Great Britain has been the rapid increase of the artistic rank and
file. Taking the number of exhibitors at the principal London and
provincial exhibitions, it is found that in the period 1885-1900 the
ranks were doubled. At the end of the 19th century it was estimated that
there were quite 7000 practising artists. Coincident with this
astonishing development there has been a corresponding addition of new
art societies and the enlargement of older bodies. For instance, the
membership of the Royal Society of British Artists advanced in the
period mentioned from 80 to 150. Similar extensions can be noted in
other societies, or in such a case as that of the Royal Institute of
Painters in Water Colours, where the membership is limited to 100, it
is to be noticed that more space is given to the works of outsiders. But
the expansion of older exhibiting societies has not proved sufficient.
Portrait painters, pastellists, designers, miniaturists and women
artists have felt the necessity of forming separate coteries.
Interesting though these movements from within may be, the growth of
societies originating in the spirit of altruism associated with such
names as Ruskin and Kyrle is equally instructive. Nearly all these are
the products of the last quarter of the 19th century, and include the
Sunday Society, which in 1896 secured the Sunday opening of the national
museums and galleries in the metropolis.

The specializing of study and work has also given rise to much artistic
endeavour. For a long time archaeology--British and Egyptian--claimed
almost exclusive attention. Latterly the arts of India and Japan have
engaged much notice, and societies have been organized to further their
study. Finally, bands of workers in particular branches of art have felt
the need of clubbing together in order to protect their special
interests. A slight suspicion of trade-unionism is attached to some of
these; but on the whole the establishment of such bodies as the Society
of Illustrators, the Society of Designers, and the Society of Mezzotint
Engravers has been with a view to advancing the public knowledge of the
merits of these branches of artistic enterprise.

EXHIBITING SOCIETIES.--(a) Old Established. These in London are: The
Royal Academy, the Royal Water Colour Society, the Royal Institute of
Painters in Water Colours, the Society of Oil Painters, and the Royal
Society of British Artists. In the provinces, the Birmingham Royal
Society of Artists has been in existence since 1825, and has a life
academy with professors attached. (b) Modern.--In this category are many
which reflect the new spirit which came into artistic life in the last
quarter of the 19th century. The New English Art Club, founded in 1885
as a protest against academic art, achieves its purpose by exhibition
only. The International Society of Painters and Engravers, again,
represents the wider ideas of the 20th century. The Royal Society of
Painter-Etchers and Engravers, consisting of fellows and associates, not
exceeding 150 in all, conserves the interests of a numerous body of
workers, and, in addition to holding exhibitions, confers diplomas (R.E.
and A.R.E.) on the exhibitors of meritorious etchings or engravings. The
Society of Women Artists (formerly the Society of Lady Artists) is
wholly devoted to the display of works by female artists, and in 1891
the Society of Portrait Painters was formed to carry out the object
conveyed in its title. Two associations advance the art of the
miniature-painter, and the Pastel Society, formed in 1898, holds
displays of members' work at the Royal Institute Galleries. In Scotland
there is the Royal Scottish Academy. The Royal Scottish Society of
Painters in Water Colours (Glasgow) grants the title R.S.W. to its
members, and the Society of Scottish Artists (Edinburgh), founded in
1891, has a membership of nearly 500 young artists. Other exhibiting
societies which call for mention are: The Yorkshire Union of Artists
(Leeds), which consolidates many local societies; the Nottingham Society
of Artists, which also encourages drawing from the living model; and the
Liverpool Sketching Club, founded in 1870, which holds an annual
exhibition.

SOCIETIES OF INSTRUCTION AND POPULAR ENCOURAGEMENT.--It is under this
head that the chief evidence of the modern art revival will be found.
First it should be noted that there are very few societies designed for
the artistic improvement of artists. The Artists' Society has already
been mentioned; and the Art Workers' Guild, which meets at Clifford's
Inn Hall, provides meetings, from which the public is excluded, where
profitable discussions take place on questions of craft and design. But,
as a rule, the art society, of which only artists are members, is
organized for exhibition purposes or for the protection of interests.
With regard to those societies of popular and educational intention the
old Society of Arts in the Adelphi, founded in 1754, enjoys a good
record. Numerous lectures on art subjects have from time to time been
given, and in 1887 a scheme was devised by which awards are made to
student-workers in design. The Society for the Encouragement of the Fine
Arts (Conduit Street) has also laboured since its foundation in 1858 to
increase a technical knowledge, its members holding conversazioni at
various picture galleries. The Artists' and Amateurs' Conversazione,
instituted in 1831, which used to meet at the Piccadilly Galleries and
is now defunct, carried out a similar plan. Two other societies, now
obsolete, should be mentioned whose method were directly educational.
The Arundel Society, which for many years promoted the knowledge of art
by copying and publishing important works of ancient masters, issued to
its members on payment of annual subscriptions, was eventually wound up
on the last day of 1897. The Arundel Club, founded in 1904, continues
the aim, but with a wider scope, reproducing works of art rendered
somewhat inaccessible by being in private collections. The International
Chalcographical Society, formed for the study of the early history of
engraving, also did useful work. Another association of painters,
sculptors, architects and engravers, the Graphic Society, ceased on the
29th of October 1890. This was one of the most interesting of societies,
rare works of art being exhibited and discussed at its meetings. A very
active educational body, originated in 1888, namely the Royal Drawing
Society, has for its definite object the teaching of drawing as a means
of education. The methods of instruction are based on the facts that
very young children try to draw before they can write, and that they
have very keen perception and retentive memory. The society aims,
therefore, at using drawing as a means of developing these innate
characteristics of the young, and already nearly 300 important schools
follow out its system. Lord Leighton, Sir John Millais, and Sir Edward
Burne-Jones took an active part in the society's labours. The Art for
Schools Association, founded in 1883, has also done steady work in
endeavouring to provide schools with works of art. These are chiefly
reproductions of standard works of art or of historical and natural
subjects. The wave of enthusiasm aroused by Mr Ruskin's teachings caused
Societies of the Rose to be founded in London, Manchester, Sheffield,
Birmingham, Aberdeen and Glasgow; but some of these eventually ceased
active work, to be revived again, however, by the Ruskin Union, formed
in the year of the great writer's death (1900). Most of these societies
were formed in 1879; but it should not be forgotten that two years
earlier the Kyrle Society was started with the object of bringing the
refining and cheering influences of natural and artistic beauty to the
homes of the people. Under the presidency of Earl Brownlow, the Home
Arts and Industries Association continues a work which was started in
1884, and anticipated much of the present system of technical education.
Voluntary teachers organize classes for working people, at which a
practical knowledge of art handiwork is taught. Training classes for
voluntary teachers are held at the studios at the Albert Hall, as well
as an annual exhibition. An interesting type of society has been
established in Bolton, Lancashire. Under the title of an Arts Guild the
members, numbering over 200, devote themselves to the advancement of
taste in municipal improvements.

SOCIETIES OF SPECIAL STUDY, PRACTICE AND PROTECTION.--Under this head
should be placed those associations which affect a cult, or are composed
of particular workers, or which protect public or private interests.
Perhaps the chief of the first kind is the Japan Society, which, since
its inception in 1892, has been joined by over 1350 members interested
in matters relating to Japanese art and industries. The Dürer Society,
formed in 1897, has for its main object the reproduction of works by
Albrecht Dürer, and his German and Italian contemporaries. The Vasari
Society, founded in 1905, works in harmony with the Arundel Club and the
Dürer Society, reproducing drawings by the Old Masters. In this category
of special study may also be placed the Society for the Encouragement
and Preservation of Indian Art, the Egypt Exploration Fund, and the
Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies. Of the societies of
special practice it has already been noticed that some are purely
exhibiting associations, such as the Portrait Painters, the Pastel
Society, and the two miniature bodies. The formation of the Society of
Mezzotint Engravers in 1898 is an example of the leaguing together of
particular workers to call attention to their interests. Original and
translator engravers, together with collectors and connoisseurs,
comprise the membership. The decaying art of wood engraving is also
fostered by the International Society of Wood Engravers, and the Society
of Designers, founded in 1896, safeguards the interests of professional
designers for applied art, without holding exhibitions. Special practice
and protection are also considered by the Society of Illustrators,
composed of artists who work in black and white for the illustrated
press. This society was inaugurated in 1894, and fifteen of the members
of the committee must be active workers in illustration. As an instance
of the tendency of art workers to combine, the Society of Art Masters is
a good illustration. This is an association of teachers of art schools,
controlled by the art branch of the Board of Education, and has a
membership of over 300. Good work of another kind occupies the National
Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty. The council of
the Trust includes representatives of such bodies as the National
Gallery, the Royal Academy, the Royal Society of Painters in Water
Colours, the Society of Antiquaries, the Royal Institute of British
Architects, the Universities, Kyrle Society, Society for the Protection
of Ancient Buildings and the Selborne Society.

FOREIGN ART SOCIETIES.--The following are brief particulars of the chief
art societies elsewhere than in Great Britain:--

  AUSTRIA.--Vienna, _Vereinigung bildender Künstler Österreichs_
  (Society of Austrian Painters) and the _Wiener Künstlergenossenschaft_
  (Association of Viennese Artists).

  BELGIUM.--Brussels, _Société des beaux-arts_, the _Libre Esthétique_,
  _Société des aquarellistes et pastellistes_, _Société royale beige des
  aquarellistes_, and numerous private societies (_cercles_) in
  Brussels, Antwerp, Liége, Ghent and other cities.

  FRANCE.--Paris, the _Société des artistes français_ (The Salon),
  _Société nationale des beaux-arts_ (The New Salon), _Société des
  aquarellistes_. Exhibiting societies are the _Société des artistes
  indépendants_, _Société des orientalistes_, and _Salon des
  pastellistes_.

  GERMANY.--The small local societies are affiliated to one large parent
  body, the _Deutsche Künstlergenossenschaft_, in Berlin under the
  presidency of Anton von Werner. The _Deutsche Illustratoren-verband_
  watches over the interests of illustrators and designers. In Münich
  there are two bodies--the _Künstlergenossenschaft_ (old society of
  artists), holding its exhibitions in the Glaspalast, and the _Verein
  bildender Künstler_, the Secessionists.

  ITALY.--Four exhibiting societies: Rome, _Società in Arte Libertas_,
  _Scuola degli Aquarellisti_; Milan, _Famiglia Artistica_, _Società
  degli Artiste_; Florence, _Circolo Artistico_; Naples, _Instituti di
  Belli Arti._

  PORTUGAL.--_Sociedade promotora das Bellas-Artes_ and _Gremio
  Artistico_.

  RUSSIA.--There is no exclusively art society of importance, but there
  is at St Petersburg the _Société littéraire et artistique_.

  SPAIN.--Madrid, _L'Association des artistes espagnols_.

  SWEDEN.--Stockholm, _Svenska Konstuareruas Forening_.

  SWITZERLAND.--Berne, _La Société des peintres et sculpteurs suisses_.

  UNITED STATES.--New York, National Academy of Design, American Water
  Color Society, and National Sculpture Society. (A. C. R. C.)