ARTEVELDE, JACOB VAN (c. 1290-1345), Flemish statesman, was born at
Ghent about 1290. He sprang from one of the wealthy commercial families
of this great industrial city, his father's name being probably William
van Artevelde. His brother John, a rich cloth merchant, took a leading
part in public affairs during the first decades of the 14th century.
Jacob, who according to tradition was a brewer by trade, spent three
years in amassing quietly a large fortune. He was twice married, the
second time to Catherine de Coster, whose family was of considerable
influence in Ghent. Not till 1337, when the outbreak of hostilities
between France and England threatened to injure seriously the industrial
welfare of his native town, did Jacob van Artevelde make his first
appearance as a political leader. As the Flemish cities depended upon
England for the supply of the wool for their staple industry of weaving,
he boldly came forward, as a tribune of the people, and at a great
meeting at the monastery of Biloke unfolded his scheme of an alliance of
the Flemish towns, with those of Brabant, Holland and Hainaut, to
maintain an armed neutrality in the dynastic struggle between Edward
III. and Philip VI. of France. His efforts were successful. Bruges,
Ypres and other towns formed a league with Ghent, in which town
Artevelde, with the title of captain-general, henceforth until his death
exercised almost dictatorial authority. His first step was to conclude a
commercial treaty with England. The efforts of the count of Flanders to
overthrow the power of Artevelde by force of arms completely failed, and
he was compelled at Bruges to sign a treaty (June 21, 1338) sanctioning
the federation of the three towns, Ghent, Bruges and Ypres, henceforth
known as the "Three members of Flanders." This was the first of a series
of treaties, made during the year 1339-1340, which gradually brought
into the federation all the towns and provinces of the Netherlands. The
policy of neutrality, however, proved impracticable, and the Flemish
towns, under the leadership of Artevelde, openly took the side of the
English king, with whom a close alliance was concluded. Artevelde now
reached the height of his power, concluding alliances with kings, and
publicly associating with them on equal terms. Under his able
administration trade flourished, and Ghent rose rapidly in wealth and
importance. His well-nigh despotic rule awoke at last among his
compatriots jealousy and resentment. The proposal of Artevelde to disown
the sovereignty of Louis, count of Flanders, and to recognize in its
place that of Edward, prince of Wales (the Black Prince), gave rise to
violent dissatisfaction. A popular insurrection broke out in Ghent, and
Artevelde fell into the hands of the crowd and was murdered on the 24th
of July 1345.

The great services that he rendered to Ghent and to his country have in
later times been recognized. A statue was erected in his native town on
the Marché du Vendredi, and was unveiled by Leopold I., king of the
Belgians, on the 13th of September 1863.

  See J. Hutten, _James and Philip van Artevelde_ (London, 1882); W.J.
  Ashley, _James and Philip van Artevelde_ (London, 1883); P. Namèche,
  _Les van Artevelde et leur époque_ (Louvain, 1887); L. Vanderkindere,
  _Le Siècle des Arteveldes_ (Brussels, 1879).