ARTEMIS, one of the principal goddesses in Greek mythology, the
counterpart of the Roman Diana. The suggested etymologies of the name
(see O. Gruppe, _Griechische Mythologie_, ii. p. 1267, note 2), as in
the case of most of the Olympian deities, are unsatisfactory, and throw
no light upon her significance and characteristics. The Homeric and
later conception of Artemis, though by no means the original one, may be
noticed first. She is the daughter of Zeus and Leto, twin-sister and
counterpart of Apollo. She is said to have been born a day before him
(on the 6th of the month) and tradition assigns them different
birthplaces--Delos to Apollo, Ortygia to Artemis. But Ortygia ("home of
quails") applies still to Delos, and may well have been a synonym for
that island. In its original sense it does not apply either to the
island of Ortygia at Syracuse, or to Ortygia near Ephesus, which also
claimed the honour of having been the birthplace of the goddess. Artemis
is the goddess of chastity, an aspect of her character which gradually
assumed more and more importance--the protectress of young men and
maidens, who defies and contemns the power of Aphrodite. Her resemblance
to her brother is shown in many ways. Like him, armed with bow and
arrows, she deals death to mortals, sometimes gently and suddenly,
especially to women, but also as a punishment for offences against
herself or morality. With him she takes part in the combat with Python
and with Tityus, in the slaughter of the children of Niobe, while alone
she executes vengeance on Orion. Although Apollo has nothing to do with
the earlier cult of Artemis, nor Artemis with that of Delphi, their
association was a comparatively early one, and probably originated in
Delos. Here the connexion of Artemis with the Hyperborean legend (see
APOLLO) is shown in the names of the maidens (Opis, Hecaerge) who were
supposed to have brought offerings from the north to Delos, where they
were buried. Both Opis (or Oupis) and Hecaerge are names of Artemis, the
latter being the feminine of Hecaergos, an epithet of Apollo. Like her
brother, she is not only a goddess who deals death, but she is also a
healing and a purifying divinity, [Greek: oulia] ("the healer," cf.
Apollo Oulios), [Greek: luae, luaia] ("purifier,") and [Greek: soteira],
"she who saves from all evils" (cf. Apollo [Greek: apotropaios]). Her
connexion with the prophetic art is doubtful, although mention is made
of an Artemis Sibylla. To her association with Apollo are certainly to
be referred the names Delphinia and Pythia, and the titles referring to
state and family life--[Greek: prostataeria], [Greek: patriotis],
[Greek: boulaia]. It probably accounts for her appearance as a goddess
of seafarers, the bestower of fair weather and prosperous voyages. At
Phigalia in Arcadia, Eurynome, represented as half woman and half fish,
was probably another form of Artemis. To the same association may be
traced her slight connexion with music, song and dance.

It is in the Arcadian and Athenian rites and legends, however, which are
certainly earlier than Homer, that the original conception of the
goddess is to be found. These tend to show that Artemis was first and
foremost a nature goddess, whose cult shows numerous traces of totemism.
As a goddess of fertilizing moisture, lakes, rivers, springs, and marshy
lowlands are brought into close connexion with her. Thus she is [Greek:
limnaia, despoina limnaes] ("lady of the lake"), [Greek: eleia] ("of
marshes"), [Greek: potamia] ("of rivers," especially of the Cladaus and
Alpheus, whence her name [Greek: Alpheiaia]). Her influence is very
active in promoting the increase of the fruits of the field, hence she
is specially a goddess of agriculture. She drives away the mice (cf.
Apollo Smintheus) and slays the Aloidae, the corn spirits; she is the
friend of the reapers, and requires her share of the first fruits. Her
character as a harvest goddess is clearly shown in the legend of the
Calydonian boar, sent by her to ravage the fields out of resentment at
not having received a harvest offering from Oeneus (see MELEAGER). As
[Greek: epimulios] and [Greek: epiklibanios] ("presiding over the mill
and the oven") she extends her protection over the further development
of the grain for the use of man.

Artemis was naturally also a goddess of trees and vegetation. Near
Orchomenus her wooden image stood in a large cedar-tree--an indication
that her worship was originally that of the tree itself ([Greek:
kedreatis], "the cedar goddess"); at Caryae there was an image of
Artemis [Greek: karuatis] ("the nut-tree goddess"). Two curious epithets
in this connexion deserve notice: [Greek: lugodesma] ("bound with
withies"), derived from the legend that the image of Artemis Orthia was
found in a thicket of withies, which twined round it and kept it upright
([Greek: lugos] is the _agnus castus_, and points to Artemis in her
relation to women); and [Greek: apagchomenae] ("the suspended"),
probably a reference to the custom of hanging the mask or image of a
vegetation-divinity on a tree to obtain fertility (Farnell, _Cults of
the Greek States_, ii. p. 429; cf. the "swing" festival ([Greek: aiora])
of the Greeks, and the _oscilla_ of the Romans).

The functions of the goddess extended from the vegetable to the animal
world, to the inhabitants of the woods and mountains. This is clearly
expressed in the cult of Artemis Laphria (possibly connected with
[Greek: laphura], "spoils"), at whose festivals all kinds of animals,
both wild and tame, as well as fruits, were thrown together on a huge
wood fire. Her general name in this connexion was [Greek: agrotera]
("roaming the wilds," not necessarily "goddess of the chase," an aspect
less familiar in the older religion), to whom five hundred goats were
offered every year by the Athenians as a thanksgiving in commemoration
of the victory at Marathon. Numerous animals were sacred to her, and at
Syracuse all kinds of wild beasts, including a lioness, were carried in
procession in her honour. It has been observed that she is rather the
patroness of the wild beasts of the field than of the more agricultural
or domestic animals (Farnell, _Cults_, ii. p. 431), although the epithet
[Greek: Haemerasia] ("the tamer," according to others, the "gentle"
goddess of healing) seems to refer to her connexion with the latter. The
bear was especially associated with her in Arcadia, and in her worship
as Artemis Brauronia at Brauron in Attica. According to the legend,
Callisto, an Arcadian nymph, became by Zeus the mother of Arcas, the
eponymous hero of the Arcadians. Zeus, to conceal the amour, changed
Callisto into a she-bear; Hera, however, discovered it, and persuaded
Artemis to slay Callisto, who was placed amongst the stars as [Greek:
arktos] ("the bear"). There is no doubt that Callisto is identical with
Artemis; her name is an obvious variation of [Greek: kallistae], a
frequent epithet of the goddess, to whom a temple was erected on the
hill where Callisto was supposed to be buried. It is suggested by M.
Kraus in _Classical Review_, February 1908, that Aphaea, the cult-name
of Artemis at Aegina, is of Semitic origin and means "beautiful."
Closely connected with this legend is the worship of Artemis Brauronia.
The accounts of its institution, which differ in detail, agree that it
was intended to appease the wrath of the goddess at the killing of a
bear. A number of young girls, between five and ten years of age,
wearing a bear-skin (afterwards a saffron-coloured robe) danced a
bear-dance, called [Greek: arkteia], the girls themselves being called
[Greek: arktoi]. In one account, a maiden was ordered to be sacrificed
to the bear Artemis, but a certain man who had a goat called it his
daughter and offered it up in secret, just as at Munychium a fawn
dressed up as a girl was sacrificed to the goddess. In place of the goat
or fawn a bear might have been expected, but the choice may have been
influenced by the animal totem of the tribe into whose hands the ritual
fell. The whole is a reminiscence of earlier times, when the goddess
herself was a bear, to whom human sacrifice was offered. Callisto was
originally a bear-goddess worshipped in Arcadia, identified with
Artemis, when nothing remained of the original animal-worship but name
and ritual. The worship of Callisto being merged in that of the greater
divinity, she became the handmaid and companion of Artemis. A stone
figure of a bear found on the Acropolis seems to point to the worship of
Artemis Brauronia. Her death at the hands of the latter was explained by
the wrath of the goddess--in her later aspect as goddess of chastity--at
Callisto's amour with Zeus (see A. Lang, _Myth, Ritual and Religion_,
ii.; Farnell, _Cults_, ii. p. 437). The custom of flogging youths at the
altar of Artemis Orthia[1] at Limnaeum in Laconia, and the legend of
Iphigeneia (q.v.), herself another form of Artemis, connected with
Artemis Taurica of the Tauric Chersonese, are usually supposed to point
to early human sacrifice (but see Farnell). Various explanations have
been given of the epithet [Greek: orthia]: (1) that it refers to the
primitive type of the "erect" wooden idol; (2) that it means "she who
safely rears children after birth," or "heals the sick" (cf. [Greek:
orthios] applied to Asclepius); (3) that it has a phallic significance
(Schreiber in Roscher's _Lexikon_). Scholars differ as to whether
Artemis Taurica is identical with Artemis Tauropolos, worshipped chiefly
at Samos with a milder ritual, but it is more probable that [Greek:
Tauropolos] simply means "protectress of bulls."

The protecting influence of Artemis was extended, like that of Apollo,
to the highest animal, man. She was especially concerned in the bringing
up of the young. Boys were brought by their nurses to the temple of
Artemis [Greek: koruthalia] (= [Greek: kourotrophos]) and there
consecrated to her; at the Apaturia, on the day called [Greek:
koureotis], boys cut off and dedicated their hair to her. Girls as well
as boys were under her protection. Her function as a goddess of marriage
is less certain, and the cult-titles adduced in support of it are hardly
convincing; such are [Greek: Haegemonae], interpreted as "she who leads
home the bride," [Greek: selasphoros], "bearer of light," that is, of
torches at the marriage procession. On the other hand, her connexion
with childbirth is clearly shown: in many places she is even called
Eilithyia, who in the earlier poets was regarded as distinct from her.
In one version of the story of her birth she is said to have been born a
day before Apollo, in order to assist Leto at his birth; women in
childbirth invoked her aid, and after delivery offered up their clothes
or a lock of hair. As already noticed, in Homer Artemis appears as a
goddess of death; closely akin to this is the conception of her as a
goddess of war. As such she is [Greek: nikaephoros] ("bringer of
victory"); the title [Greek: kolainis] is possibly connected with
[Greek: koleos] ("sword-sheath"); and [Greek: laphria] (see above) may
refer to the spoils of war as well as the chase.

The idea of Artemis as a virgin goddess, the "queen and huntress, chaste
and fair," which obtained great prominence in early times, and seems
inconsistent with her association with childbirth, is generally
explained as due to her connexion with Apollo, but it is suggested by
Farnell that [Greek: parthenos] originally meant "unmarried," and that
"[Greek: Artemis parthenos] may have been originally the goddess of a
people who had not yet the advanced Hellenic institutions of settled
marriage ... and when society developed the later family system the
goddess remained celibate, though not opposed to childbirth."

Another view of the original character of Artemis, which has found much
support in modern times, is that she was a moon-goddess. But there is no
trace of Artemis as such in the epic period, and the Homeric hymn knows
nothing of her identification with Selene. The attribute of the torch
will apply equally well to the goddess of the chase, and epithets such
as [Greek: phosphoros, selasphoros, aithopia], although applicable, are
by no means convincing. The idea dates from the 5th century, and was due
to her connexion with Hecate and Apollo. When the latter came to be
identified by philosophical speculation with the sun-god Helios, it was
natural that his sister and counterpart should be identified with the
moon-goddess Selene. But she is nowhere recognized in cult as such (see
Gruppe, _Griechische Mythologie_, ii. p. 1297, note 2).

It has been mentioned that Callisto, Iphigeneia, Eilithyia, are only
Artemis under different names; to these may be added Adrasteia,
Atalanta, Helen, Leto and others (see Wernicke in Pauly-Wissowa's
_Realencyclopädie_).

Again, various non-Hellenic divinities were identified with Artemis, and
their cult gradually amalgamated with hers. The most important of these
was Artemis of Ephesus, whose seat was in the marshy valley of the
Caystrus. Like the Greek Artemis, she was essentially a nature goddess,
the great foster-mother of the vegetable and animal kingdom. A number of
officials were engaged in the performance of her temple service. Her
eunuch priests, [Greek: megabyzoi] (a name which points to a Persian
origin), were under the control of a high priest called Essen (according
to others, there was a body of priests called Essenes). There were also
three classes of priestesses, Mellierae, Hierae, Parierae; there is no
evidence that they were called Melissae ("bees"), although the bee is a
frequent symbol on the coins of the city. Her chief festival, Ephesia or
Artemisia, was held in the spring, at which games and various contests
took place after the Greek fashion, although the ritual continued to be
of a modified oriental, orgiastic type. This goddess is closely
connected with the Amazons (q.v.), who are said to have built her temple
and set up her image in the trunk of a tree. The Greeks of Ephesus
identified her with their own Artemis, and claimed that her birthplace
Ortygia was near Ephesus, not in Delos. She has much in common with the
oriental prototype of Aphrodite, and the Cappadocian goddess Ma, another
form of Cybele. The usual figure of the Ephesian Artemis, which was said
in the first instance to have fallen from heaven, is in the form of a
female with many breasts, the symbol of productivity or a token of her
function as the all-nourishing mother. From the waist to the feet her
image resembles a pillar, narrowing downwards and sculptured all round
with rows of animals (lions, rams and bulls).

Mention may also be made of the following non-Hellenic representatives
of Artemis. Leucophryne (or Leucophrys), whose worship was brought by
emigrants from Magnesia in Thessaly to Magnesia on the Maeander, was a
nature goddess, and her representation on coins exactly resembles that
of the Ephesian Artemis. Her cult, however, from the little that is
known of it appears to have been more Hellenic. There was an altar and
temple of Artemis Pergaea at Perga in Pamphylia, where a yearly festival
was held in her honour. As in the case of Cybele, mendicant priests were
attached to her service. Similar figures were Artemis Coloene,
worshipped at Lake Coloe near Sardis; Artemis Cordax, celebrated in
wanton dances on Mount Sipylus; the Persian Artemis, identical with
Anaitis Bendis, was a Thracian goddess of war and the chase, whose cult
was introduced into Attica in the middle of the 5th century B.C. by
Thracian metics. At her festival called Bendidea, held at the Peiraeus,
there was a procession of Thracians who were settled in the district,
and a torch-race on horseback. (For Britomartis see separate article.)

Among the chief attributes of Artemis are: the hind, specially regarded
as her sacred animal; the bear, the boar and the goat; the zebu (Artemis
Leucophrys); the lion, one of her oldest animal symbols; bow and arrows,
as goddess of the chase and death; a mural crown, as the protectress of
cities; the torch, originally an attribute of the goddess of the chase
or marriage, but, like the crescent (originally an attribute of the
Asiatic nature goddesses), transferred to Artemis, when she came to be
regarded as a moon-goddess. The Greek Artemis was usually represented as
a huntress with bow and quiver, or torch in her hand, in face very like
Apollo, her drapery flowing to her feet, or, more frequently, girt high
for speed. She is accompanied often by a deer or a dog. Perhaps the
finest existing statue of her is the Diana of Versailles from Hadrian's
Villa (now in the Louvre), in which she wears a short tunic drawn in at
the waist and sandals on her feet; her hair is bound up into a knot at
the back of her head, with a band over the forehead. With her left hand
she holds a stag, while drawing an arrow from the quiver on her shoulder
with the right. Another famous statue is one from Gabii, in which she is
finishing her toilet and fastening the chlamys over her tunic. In older
times her figure is fuller and stronger, and the clothing more complete;
certain statues discovered at Delos, imitated from wooden models
(xoana), are supposed to represent Artemis; they are described as stiff
and rigid, the limbs as it were glued to the body without life or
movement, garments closely fitting, the folds of which fall in
symmetrical parallel lines. As a goddess of the moon she wears a long
robe, carries a torch, and her head is surmounted by a crescent. On the
coins of Arcadia, Aetolia, Crete and Sicily, are to be seen varied and
beautiful representations of her head as conceived by the Greek artists
in the best times.

  AUTHORITIES.--Articles in Pauly-Wissowa's _Realencyclopädie_;
  Roscher's _Lexikon der Mythologie_, and Daremberg and Saglio's
  _Dictionnaire des antiquités_ (s.v. Diana, with well-arranged
  bibliography); L. Preller, _Griechische Mythologie_ (4th ed. by C.
  Robert); L.R. Farnell, _The Cults of the Greek States_, ii. (1896); O.
  Gruppe, _Griechische Mythologie und Religions-Geschichte_, ii. (1906);
  A. Claus, _De Dianae antiquissima apud Graecos natura_ (Breslau,
  1880). In the article GREEK ART, fig. 11 (a gold ornament from
  Camirus) represents the Oriental goddess identified by the Greeks with
  Artemis.

  For the Roman goddess identified with Artemis see DIANA.     (J. H. F.)

FOOTNOTE:

  [1] The site of the temple of Artemis Orthia was excavated by the
    British School of Archaeology at Athens (see _Annual_, 1906). The
    flogging ([Greek: diamastigosis]) is explained by R.C. Bosanquet as a
    late institution of decadent Sparta, an exaggeration of an old ritual
    practice of whipping away boys who tried to steal cheeses from the
    altar (see _The Year's Work in Classical Studies_, ed. W.H.D. Rouse,
    1907).