ARTHUR, CHESTER ALAN (1830-1886), twenty-first president of the United
States, was born in Fairfield, Vermont, on the 5th of October 1830. His
father, William Arthur (1796-1875), when eighteen years of age,
emigrated from Co. Antrim, Ireland, and, after teaching in various
places in Vermont and Lower Canada, became a Baptist minister. William
Arthur had married Malvina Stone, an American girl who lived at the time
of the marriage in Canada, and the numerous changes of the family
residence afforded a basis for allegations in 1880 that the son Chester
was born not in Vermont, but in Canada, and was therefore ineligible for
the presidency. Chester entered Union College as a sophomore, and
graduated with honour in 1848. He then became a schoolmaster, at the
same time studying law. In 1853 he entered a law office in New York
city, and in the following year was admitted to the bar. His reputation
as a lawyer began with his connexion with the famous "Lemmon slave
case," in which, as one of the special counsel for the state, he secured
a decision from the highest state courts that slaves brought into New
York while in transit between two slave states were _ipso facto_ free.
In another noted case, in 1855, he obtained a decision that negroes were
entitled to the same accommodations as whites on the street railways of
New York city. In politics he was actively associated from the outset
with the Republican party. When the Civil War began he held the position
of engineer-in-chief on Governor Edwin D. Morgan's staff, and afterwards
became successively acting quartermaster-general, inspector-general, and
quartermaster-general of the state troops, in which capacities he showed
much administrative efficiency. At the close of Governor Morgan's term,
on the 31st of December 1862, General Arthur resumed the practice of his
profession, remaining active, however, in party politics in New York
city. In November 1871 he was appointed by President U.S. Grant
collector of customs for the port of New York. The custom-house had long
been conspicuous for the most flagrant abuses of the "spoils system";
and though General Arthur admitted that the evils existed and that they
rendered efficient administration impossible, he made no extensive
reforms. In 1877 President Rutherford B. Hayes began the reform of the
civil service with the New York custom-house. A non-partisan commission,
appointed by Secretary John Sherman, recommended sweeping changes. The
president demanded the resignation of Arthur and his two principal
subordinates, George H. Sharpe, the surveyor, and Alonzo B. Cornell, the
naval officer, of the Port. General Arthur refused to resign on the
ground that to retire "under fire" would be to acknowledge wrong-doing,
and claimed that as the abuses were inherent in a widespread system he
should not be made to bear the responsibility alone. His cause was
espoused by Senator Roscoe Conkling, for a time successfully; but on the
11th of July 1878, during a recess of the Senate, the collector was
removed, and in January 1879, after another severe struggle, this action
received the approval of the Senate. In 1880 General Arthur was a
delegate at large from New York to the Republican national convention.
In common with the rest of the "Stalwarts," he worked hard for the
nomination of Gen. U.S. Grant for a third term. Upon the triumph of
James A. Garfield, the necessity of conciliating the defeated faction
led to the hasty acceptance of Arthur for the second place on the
ticket. His nomination was coldly received by the public; and when,
after his election and accession, he actively engaged on behalf of
Conkling in the great conflict with Garfield over the New York
patronage, the impression was widespread that he was unworthy of his
position. Upon the death of President Garfield, on the 19th of September
1881, Arthur took the oath as his successor. Contrary to the general
expectation, his appointments were as a rule unexceptionable, and he
earnestly promoted the Pendleton law for the reform of the civil
service. His use of the veto in 1882 in the cases of a Chinese
Immigration Bill (prohibiting immigration of Chinese for twenty years)
and a River and Harbour Bill (appropriating over $18,000,000, to be
expended on many insignificant as well as important streams) confirmed
the favourable impression which had been made. The most important events
of his administration were the passage of the Tariff Act of 1883 and of
the "Edmunds Law" prohibiting polygamy in the territories, and the
completion of three great trans-continental railways--the Southern
Pacific, the Northern Pacific, and the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fé. His
administration was lacking in political situations of a dramatic
character, but on all questions that arose his policy was sane and
dignified. In 1884 he allowed his name to be presented for renomination
in the Republican convention, but he was easily defeated by the friends
of James G. Blaine. At the expiration of his term he resumed his
residence in New York city, where he died on the 18th of November 1886.

  For an account of his administration see UNITED STATES: _History_.