ARTHUR I. (1187-1203), duke of Brittany, was the posthumous son of
Geoffrey, the fourth son of Henry II. of England, and Constance, heiress
of Conan IV., duke of Brittany. The Bretons hoped that their young
prince would uphold their independence, which was threatened by the
English. Henry II. tried to seize Brittany, and in 1187 forced Constance
to marry one of his favourites, Randulph de Blundevill, earl of Chester
(d. 1232). Henry, however, died soon afterwards (1189). The new king of
England, Richard Coeur de Lion, claimed the guardianship of the young
Arthur, but in 1190 Richard left for the Crusade. Constance profited by
his absence by governing the duchy, and in 1194 she had Arthur
proclaimed duke of Brittany by an assembly of barons and bishops.
Richard invaded Brittany in 1196, but was defeated in 1197 and became
reconciled to Constance. On his death in 1189, the nobles of Anjou,
Maine and Touraine refused to recognize John of England, and did homage
to Arthur, who declared himself the vassal of Philip Augustus. In 1202
war was resumed between the king of England and the king of France. The
king of France recognized Arthur's right to Brittany, Anjou, Maine and
Poitou. While Philip Augustus was invading Normandy, Arthur tried to
seize Poitou. But, surprised at Mirebeau, he fell into the hands of
John, who sent him prisoner to Falaise. In the following year he was
transferred to Rouen, and disappeared suddenly. It is thought that John
killed him with his own hand. After this murder John was condemned by
the court of peers of France, and stripped of the fiefs which he
possessed in France.

  See Ralph of Coggeshall, "Chronicon Anglicanum," in the _Monumenta
  Britanniae historica_; Dom Lobineau, _Histoire de Bretagne_ (1702);
  Dom Morice, _Histoire de Bretagne_ (1742-1756); A. de la Borderie,
  _Histoire de Bretagne_, vol. iii. (1899); Bémont, "De la condamnation
  de Jean-sans-Terre par la Cour des Pairs de France," in the _Revue
  historique_ (1886), vol. xxxii.