ARTHROPODA, a name, denoting the possession by certain animals of
jointed limbs, now applied to one of the three sub-phyla into which one
of the great phyla (or primary branches) of coelomocoelous animals--the
Appendiculata-is divided; the other two being respectively the
Chaetopoda and the Rotifera. The word "Arthropoda" was first used in
classification by Siebold and Stannius (_Lehrbuch der vergleich.
Anatomie_, Berlin, 1845) as that of a primary division of animals, the
others recognized in that treatise being Protozoa, Zoophyta, Vermes,
Mollusca and Vertebrata. The names Condylopoda and Gnathopoda have been
subsequently proposed for the same group. The word refers to the
jointing of the chitinized exo-skeleton of the limbs or lateral
appendages of the animals included, which are, roughly speaking, the
Crustacea, Arachnida, Hexapoda (so-called "true insects"), Centipedes
and Millipedes. This primary group was set up to indicate the residuum
of Cuvier's Articulata when his class Annelides (the modern Chaetopoda)
was removed from that _embranchement_. At the same time C.T.E. von
Siebold and H. Stannius renovated the group Vermes of Linnaeus, and
placed in it the Chaetopods and the parasitic worms of Cuvier, besides
the Rotifers and Turbellarian worms.[1]

The result of the knowledge gained in the last quarter of the 19th
century has been to discredit altogether the group Vermes (see WORM),
thus set up and so largely accepted by German writers even at the
present day. We have, in fact, returned very nearly to Cuvier's
conception of a great division or branch, which he called Articulata,
including the Arthropoda and the Chaetopoda (Annelides of Lamarck, a
name adopted by Cuvier), and differing from it only by the inclusion of
the Rotifera. The name Articulata, introduced by Cuvier, has not been
retained by subsequent writers. The same, or nearly the same, assemblage
of animals has been called Entomozoaria by de Blainville (1822),
Arthrozoa by Burmeister (1843), Entomozoa or Annellata by H.
Milne-Edwards (1855), and Annulosa by Alexander M'Leay (1819), who was
followed by Huxley (1856). The character pointed to by all these terms
is that of a ring-like segmentation of the body. This, however, is not
the character to which we now ascribe the chief weight as evidence of
the genetic affinity and monophyletic (uni-ancestral) origin of the
Chaetopods, Rotifers and Arthropods. It is the existence in each ring of
the body of a pair of hollow _lateral appendages_ or _parapodia_, moved
by intrinsic muscles and penetrated by blood-spaces, which is the
leading fact indicating the affinities of these great sub-phyla, and
uniting them as blood-relations. The parapodia (fig. 8) of the marine
branchiate worms are the same things genetically as the "legs" of
Crustacea and Insects (figs. 10 and 11). Hence the term Appendiculata
was introduced by Lankester (preface to the English edition of
Gegenbaur's _Comparative Anatomy_, 1878) to indicate the group. The
relationships of the Arthropoda thus stated are shown in the subjoined

table:--

                          / Sub-phylum 1. Rotifera.
  Phylum--APPENDICULATA  <      "      2. Chaetopoda.
                          \     "      3. Arthropoda.

The ROTIFERA are characterized by the retention of what appears in
Molluscs and Chaetopods as an embryonic organ, the velum or ciliated
prae-oral girdle, as a locomotor and food-seizing apparatus, and by the
reduction of the muscular parapodia to a rudimentary or non-existent
condition in all present surviving forms except _Pedalion_. In many
important respects they are degenerate--reduced both in size and
elaboration of structure.

The CHAETOPODA are characterized by the possession of horny epidermic
chaetae embedded in the integument and moved by muscles. Probably the
chaetae preceded the development of parapodia, and by their
concentration and that of the muscular bundles connected with them at
the sides of each segment, led directly to the evolution of the
parapodia. The parapodia of Chaetopoda are never coated with dense
chitin, and are, therefore, never converted into jaws; the primitive
"head-lobe" or prostomium persists, and frequently carries eyes and
sensory tentacles. Further, in all members of the sub-phylum Chaetopoda
the relative position of the prostomium, mouth and peristomium or first
ring of the body, retains its primitive character. We do not find in
Chaetopoda that parapodia, belonging to primitively post-oral rings or
body-segments (called "somites," as proposed by H. Milne-Edwards), pass
in front of the mouth by adaptational shifting of the oral aperture.
(See, however, 8.)

The ARTHROPODA might be better called the "Gnathopoda," since their
distinctive character is, that one or more pairs of appendages behind
the mouth are densely chitinized and turned (fellow to fellow on
opposite sides) towards one another so as to act as jaws. This is
facilitated by an important general change in the position of the
parapodia; their basal attachments are all more ventral in position than
in the Chaetopoda, and tend to approach from the two sides towards the
mid-ventral line. Very usually (but not in the Onychophora =
_Peripatus_) all the parapodia are plated with chitin secreted by the
epidermis, and divided into a series of joints--giving the
"arthropodous" or hinged character.

There are other remarkable and distinctive features of structure which
hold the Arthropoda together, and render it impossible to conceive of
them as having a polyphyletic origin, that is to say, as having
originated separately by two or three distinct lines of descent from
lower animals; and, on the contrary, establish the view that they have
been developed from a single line of primitive Gnathopods which arose by
modification of parapodiate annulate worms not very unlike some of the
existing Chaetopods. These additional features are the following--(1)
All existing Arthropoda have an ostiate heart and have undergone
"phleboedesis," that is to say, the peripheral portions of the
blood-vascular system are not fine tubes as they are in the Chaetopoda
and as they were in the hypothetical ancestors of Arthropoda, but are
swollen so as to obliterate to a large extent the coelom, whilst the
separate veins entering the dorsal vessel or heart have coalesced,
leaving valvate ostia (see fig. 1) by which the blood passes from a
pericardial blood-sinus formed by the fused veins into the dorsal vessel
or heart (see Lankester's _Zoology_, part ii., introductory chapter,
1900). The only exception to this is in the case of minute degenerate
forms where the heart has disappeared altogether. The rigidity of the
integument caused by the deposition of dense chitin upon it is
intimately connected with the physiological activity and form of all the
internal organs, and is undoubtedly correlated with the total
disappearance of the circular muscular layer of the body-wall present in
Chaetopods. (2) In all existing Arthropoda the region in front of the
mouth is no longer formed by the primitive prostomium or head-lobe, but
one or more segments, originally post-oral, with their appendages have
passed in front of the mouth (prosthomeres). At the same time the
prostomium and its appendages cease to be recognizable as distinct
elements of the head. The brain no longer consists solely of the
nerve-ganglion-mass proper to the prostomial lobe, as in Chaetopoda, but
is a composite (syncerebrum) produced by the fusion of this and the
nerve-ganglion-masses proper to the prosthomeres or segments which pass
forwards, whilst their parapodia (= appendages) become converted into
eye-stalks, and antennae, or more rarely grasping organs. (3) As in
Chaetopoda, coelomic funnels (coelomoducts) _may_ occur right and left
as pairs in each ring-like segment or somite of the body, and some of
these are in all cases retained as gonoducts and often as renal
excretory organs (green glands, coxal glands of Arachnida, _not_ crural
glands, which are epidermal in origin); but true nephridia, genetically
identical with the nephridia of earthworms, do not occur (on the subject
of coelom, coelomoducts and nephridia, see the introductory chapter of
part ii. of Lankester's _Treatise on Zoology_).

[Illustration: After Lankester, _Q. J. Mic. Sci._ vol. xxxiv., 1893.

FIG. 1.--Diagram to show the gradual formation of the Arthropod
pericardial blood-sinus and "ostiate" heart by the swelling up
(phleboedesis) of the veins entering the dorsal vessel or heart of a
Chaetopod-like ancestor. The figure on the left represents the condition
in a Chaetopod, that on the right the condition in an Arthropod, the
other two are hypothetical intermediate forms.]

_Tabular Statement of the Grades, Classes and Sub-classes of the
Arthropoda._--It will be convenient now to give in the clearest form a
statement of the larger subdivisions of the Arthropoda which it seems
necessary to recognize at the present day. The justification of the
arrangement adopted will form the substance of the rest of the present
article. The orders included in the various classes are not discussed
here, but are treated of under the following titles:--PERIPATUS
(Onychophora), CENTIPEDE and MILLIPEDE (Myriapoda), HEXAPODA (Insecta),
ARACHNIDA and CRUSTACEA.

  SUB-PHYLUM ARTHROPODA (of the Phylum Appendiculata).

  Grade A. HYPARTHROPODA (hypothetical forms connecting ancestors of
    Chaetopoda with those of Arthropoda).

  Grade B. PROTARTHROPODA.
    Class ONYCHOPHORA.
      Ex.--_Peripatus._

  Grade C. EUARTHROPODA.
    Class 1. DIPLOPODA.
      Ex.--_Julus._
    Class 2. ARACHNIDA.
      Grade a. Anomomeristica.
        Ex.--_Phacops._
      Grade b. Nomomeristica.
        (a) Pantopoda.
          Ex.--_Pycnogonum._
        (b) Euarachnida.
          Ex.--_Limulus, Scorpio, Mygale, Acarus._
    Class 3. CRUSTACEA.
      Grade a. Entomostraca.
        Ex.--_Apus, Branchipus, Cyclops, Balanus._
      Grade b. Malacostraca.
        Ex.--_Nebalia, Astacus, Oniscus, Gammarus._
    Class 4. CHILOPODA.
      Ex.--_Scolopendra._
    Class 5. HEXAPODA (syn. Insecta Pterygota).
      Ex.--_Locusta, Phryganea, Papilio, Apis, Mnsca, Cimex, Lucanus,
        Machilis._

  _Incertae sedis_--Tardigrada, Pentastomidae (degenerate forms).

  _The Segmentation of the Body of Arthropoda._--The body of the
  Arthropoda is more or less clearly divided into a series of rings,
  segments, or somites which can be shown to be repetitions one of
  another, possessing identical parts and organs which may be larger or
  smaller, modified in shape or altogether suppressed in one somite as
  compared with another. A similar constitution of the body is more
  clearly seen in the Chaetopod worms. In the Vertebrata also a
  repetition of units of structure (myotomes, vertebrae, &c.)--which is
  essentially of the same nature as the repetition in Arthropods and
  Chaetopods, but in many respects subject to peculiar developments--is
  observed. The name "metamerism" has been given to this structural
  phenomenon because the "meres," or repeated units, follow one another
  in line. Each such "mere" is often called a "metamere." A satisfactory
  consideration of the structure of the Arthropods demands a knowledge
  of what may be called the laws of metamerism, and reference should be
  made to the article under that head.

  [Illustration: From Goodrich, _Q. J. Micr. Sci._ vol. xi p. 247.

  FIG. 2.--Diagram of the head and adjacent region of an Ohgochaet
  Chaetopod.

    Pr, The prostomium.
    m, The mouth.
    A, The prostomial ganglion-mass or archi-cerebrum.
    I, II, III, coelom of the first, second and third somites.]

  _The Theory of the Arthropod Head._--The Arthropod head is a tagma or
  group of somites which differ in number and in their relative position
  in regard to the mouth, in different classes. In a simple Chaetopod
  (fig. 2) the head consists of the first somite only; that somite is
  perforated by the mouth, and is provided with a prostomium or
  prae-oral lobe. The prostomium is essentially a part or outgrowth of
  the first somite, and cannot be regarded as itself a somite. It gives
  rise to a nerve-ganglion mass, the prostomial ganglion. In the marine
  Chaetopods (the Polychaeta) (fig. 3), we find the same essential
  structure, but the prostomium may give rise to two or more tactile
  tentacles, and to the vesicular eyes. The somites have well-marked
  parapodia, and the second and third, as well as the first, may give
  rise to tentacles which are directed forward, and thus contribute to
  form "the head." But the mouth remains as an inpushing of the wall of
  the first somite.

  [Illustration: FIG. 3.--Diagram of the head and adjacent region of a
  Polychaet Chaetopod Letters as in fig. 1, with the addition of T,
  prostomial tentacle; _Pa_, parapodium. (From Goodrich.)]

  The Arthropoda are all distinguished from the Chaetopoda by the fact
  that the head consists of one or more somites which lie _in front of
  the mouth_ (now called prosthomeres), as well as of one or more
  somites behind it (opisthomeres). The first of the post-oral somites
  invariably has its parapodia modified so as to form a pair of
  hemignaths (mandibles). About 1870 the question arose for discussion
  whether the somites in front of the mouth are to be considered as
  derived from the prostomium of a Chaetopod-like ancestor.
  Milne-Edwards and Huxley had satisfied themselves with discussing and
  establishing, according to the data at their command, the number of
  somites in the Arthropod head, but had not considered the question of
  the _nature_ of the prae-oral somites. Lankester (2) was the first to
  suggest that (as is actually the fact in the Nauplius larva of the
  Crustacea) the prae-oral somites or prosthomeres and their appendages
  were ancestrally post-oral, but have become prae-oral "by adaptational
  shifting of the oral aperture." This has proved to be a sound
  hypothesis and is now accepted as the basis upon which the Arthropod
  head must be interpreted (see Korschelt and Heider (3)). Further, the
  morphologists of the 'fifties appear, with few exceptions, to have
  accepted a preliminary scheme with regard to the Arthropod head and
  Arthropod segmentation generally, which was misleading and caused them
  to adopt forced conclusions and interpretations. It was conceived by
  Huxley, among others, that the same number of cephalic somites would
  be found to be characteristic of all the diverse classes of
  Arthropoda, and that the somites, not only of the head but of the
  various regions of the body, could be closely compared in their
  numerical sequence in classes so distinct as the Hexapods, Crustaceans
  and Arachnids.

  The view which it now appears necessary to take is, on the contrary,
  this--viz that all the Arthropoda are to be traced to a common
  ancestor resembling a Chaetopod worm, but differing from it in having
  lost its chaetae and in having a prosthomere in front of the mouth
  (instead of prostomium only) and a pair of hemignaths (mandibles) on
  the parapodia of the buccal somite. From this ancestor Arthropods with
  heads of varying degrees of complexity have been developed
  characteristic of the different classes, whilst the parapodia and
  somites of the body have become variously modified and grouped in
  these different classes. The resemblances which the members of one
  class often present to the members of another class in regard to the
  form of the limb-branches (rami) of the parapodia and the formation of
  tagmata (regions) are not hastily to be ascribed to common
  inheritance, but we must consider whether they are not due to
  homoplasy--that is, to the moulding of natural selection acting in the
  different classes upon fairly similar elements under like exigencies.

  [Illustration: FIG. 4.--Diagram of the head and adjacent region of
  _Peripatus_. Monoprosthomerous.

    m, Mouth.
    I, Coelom of the first somite which carries the antennae and is in
      front of the mouth.
    II, Coelom of the second somite which carries the mandibles (hence
      deuterognathous).
    III and IV, Coelom of the third and fourth somites.
    FP, Rudimentary frontal processes perhaps representing the
      prostomial tentacles of Polychaeta.
    Ant, Antenna or tactile tentacle.
    Md, Mandible.
    Op, Oral-papilla.
    P, Protocerebrum or foremost cerebral mass belonging to the first
      somite.
    D, Deuterocerebrum, consisting of ganglion cells belonging to the
      second or mandibular somite. (After Goodrich.)]

  The structure of the head in Arthropods presents _three_ profoundly
  separated grades of structure dependent upon the number of
  prosthomeres which have been assimilated by the prae-oral region. The
  classes presenting these distinct plans of head-structure cannot be
  closely associated in any scheme of classification professing to be
  natural. Penpatus, the type-genus of the class Onychophora, stands at
  the base of the series with only a single prosthomere (fig. 4). In
  Peripatus the prostomium of the Chaetopod-like ancestor is atrophied,
  but it is possible that two processes on the front of the head (FP)
  represent in the embryo the dwindled prostomial tentacles. The single
  prosthomere carries the retractile tentacles as its "parapodia." The
  second somite is the buccal somite (II, fig. 4); its parapodia have
  horny jaws on their ends, like the claws on the following legs (fig.
  9), and act as hemignaths (mandibles). The study of sections of the
  embryo establishes these facts beyond doubt. It also shows us that the
  neuromeres, no less than the embryonic coelomic cavities, point to the
  existence of one, and only one, prosthomerp in Peripatus, of which the
  "protocerebrum," P, is the neuromere, whilst the deuterocerebrum, D,
  is the neuromere of the second or buccal somite. A brief indication of
  these facts is given by saying that the Onychophora are
  "deuterognathous"--that is to say, that the buccal somite carrying the
  mandibular hemignaths is the second of the whole series.

  What has become of the nerve-ganglion of the prostomial lobe of the
  Chaetopod in Peripatus is not clearly ascertained, nor is its fate
  indicated by the study of the embryonic head of other Arthropods so
  far. Probably it is fused with the protocerebrum, and may also be
  concerned in the history of the very peculiar paired eyes of
  Peripatus, which are like those of Chaetopods in structure--viz
  vesicles with an intravesicular lens, whereas the eyes of all other
  Arthropods have essentially another structure, being "cups" of the
  epidermis, in which a knob-like or rod-like thickening of the cuticle
  is fitted as refractive medium.

  In Diplopoda (_Julus_, &c.) the results of embryological study point
  to a composition of the front part of the head exactly similar to that
  which we find in Onychophora. They are deuterognathous.

  [Illustration: FIG. 5.--Diagram of the head and adjacent region of an
  Arachnid. Diprosthomerous in the adult condition, though
  embryologically the appendages of somite II and the somite itself are,
  as here drawn, not actually in front of the mouth.

    E, Lateral eye.
    Ch, Chelicera.
    m, Mouth.
    P, Protocerebrum,
    D, Deuterocerebrum.
    I, II, III, IV. Coelom of the first, second, third and fourth
      somites. (After Goodrich.)]

  The Arachnida present the first stage of progress. Here embryology
  shows that there are two prosthomeres (fig. 5), and that the
  gnathobases of the chelae which act as the first pair of hemignaths
  are carried by the third somite. The Arachnida are therefore
  tritognathous. The two prosthomeres are indicated by their coelomic
  cavities in the embryo (I and II, fig. 5), and by two neuromeres, the
  protocerebrum and the deuterocerebrum. The appendages of the first
  prosthomere are not present as tentacles, as in Peripatus and
  Diplopods, but are possibly represented by the eyes or possibly
  altogether aborted. The appendages of the second prosthomere are the
  well-known chelicerae of the Arachnids, rarely, if ever, antenniform,
  but modified as "retroverts" or clasp-knife tangs in spiders.

  The Crustacea (fig. 6) and the Hexapoda (fig. 7) agree in having three
  somites in front of the mouth, and it is probable, though not
  ascertained, that the Chilopoda (Scolopendra, &c.) are in the same
  case. The three prosthomeres or prae-oral somites of Crustacea due to
  the sinking back of the mouth one somite farther than in Arachnida are
  not clearly indicated by coelomic cavities in the embryo, but their
  existence is clearly established by the development and position of
  the appendages and by the neuromeres.

  The eyes in some Crustacea are mounted on articulated stalks, and from
  the fact that they can after injury be replaced by antenna-like
  appendages it is inferred that they represent the parapodia of the
  most anterior prosthomere. The second prosthomere carries the first
  pair of antennae and the third the second pair of antennae. Sometimes
  the pair of appendages has not a merely tactile jointed ramus, but is
  converted into a claw or clasper. Three neuromeres--a proto-,
  deutero-, and trito-cerebrum--corresponding to those three
  prosthomeres are sharply marked in the embryo. The fourth somite is
  that in which the mouth now opens, and which accordingly has its
  appendages converted into hemignathous mandibles. The Crustacea are
  tetartognathous.

  [Illustration: FIG. 6.--Diagram of the head of a Crustacean.
  Tri-prosthomerous.

    FP, Frontal processes (observed in Cirrhiped nauplius-larvae)
      probably representing the prostomial tentacles of Chaetopods.
    e, Eye.
    Ant^1, First pair of antennae.
    Ant^2, Second pair of antennae.
    md, Mandible.
    mx^1, mx^2, First and second pairs of maxillae.
    m, Mouth.
    I, II, and III, The three prosthomeres.
    IV, V, VI, The three somites following the mouth.
    P, Protocerebrum.
    D, Deuterocerebrum.
    T, Tritocerebrum.

  (After Goodrich.)]

  [Illustration: FIG. 7.--Diagram of the head of a Hexapod insect.

    e, Eye.
    ant, Antenna.
    md, Mandible.
    mx^1, First maxilla.
    mx^2, Second maxilla.
    m, Mouth.
    I, Region of the first or eye-bearing prosthomere.
    II, Coelom of the second antenna-bearing prosthomere.
    III, Coelom of the third prosthomere devoid of appendages.
    IV, V, and VI, Coelom of the fourth, fifth and sixth somites.
    P, Protocerebrum belonging to the first prosthomere.
    D, Deuterocerebrum belonging to the second prosthomere.
    T, Tritocerebrum belonging to the third prosthomere.

  (After Goodrich.)]

  The history of the development of the head has been carefully worked
  out in the Hexapod insects. As in Crustacea and Arachnida, a first
  prosthomere is indicated by the paired eyes and the protocerebrum; the
  second prosthomere has a well-marked coelomic cavity, carries the
  antennae, and has the deuterocerebrum for its neuromere. The third
  prosthomere is represented by a well-marked pair of coelomic cavities
  and the tritocerebrum (III, fig. 7), but has no appendages. They
  appear to have aborted. The existence of this third prosthomere
  corresponding to the third prosthomere of the Crustacea is a strong
  argument for the derivation of the Hexapoda, and with them the
  Chilopoda, from some offshoot of the Crustacean stem or class. The
  buccal somite, with its mandibles, is in Hexapoda, as in Crustacea,
  the fourth: they are tetartognathous.

  The adhesion of a greater or less number of somites to the buccal
  somite posteriorly (opisthomeres) is a matter of importance, but of
  minor importance, in the theory and history of the Arthropod head. In
  Peripatus no such adhesion or fusion occurs. In Diplopoda two
  opisthomeres--that is to say, one in addition to the buccal
  somite--are united by a fusion of their terga with the terga of the
  prosthomeres. Their appendages are respectively the mandibles and the
  gnathochilarium.

  In Arachnida the highest forms exhibit a fusion of the tergites of
  five post-oral somites to form one continuous carapace united with the
  terga of the two prosthomeres. The five pairs of appendages of the
  post-oral somites of the head or prosoma thus constituted all
  primitively carry gnathobasic projections on their coxal joints, which
  act as hemignaths: in the more specialized forms the mandibular
  gnathobases cease to develop.

  In Crustacea the fourth or mandibular somite never has less than the
  two following somites associated with it by the adaptation of their
  appendages as jaws, and the ankylosis of their terga with that of the
  prosthomeres. But in higher Crustacea the cephalic "tagma" is
  extended, and more somites are added to the fusion, and their
  appendages adapted as jaws of a kind.

  The Hexapoda are not known to us in their earlier or more primitive
  manifestations; we only know them as possessed of a definite number of
  somites arranged in definite numbers in three great tagmata. The head
  shows two jaw-bearing somites besides the mandibular somite (V, VI, in
  fig. 7)--thus six in all (as in some Crustacea), including
  prosthomeres, all ankylosed by their terga to form a cephalic shield.
  There is, however, good embryological evidence in some Hexapods of the
  existence of a seventh somite, the supra-lingual, occurring between
  the somite of the mandibles and the somite of the first maxillae (4).
  This segment is indicated embryologically by its paired coelomic
  cavities. It is practically an excalated somite, having no existence
  in the adult. It is probably not a mere coincidence that the Hexapod,
  with its two rudimentary somites devoid of appendages, is thus found
  to possess twenty-one somites, including that which carries the anus,
  and that this is also the number present in the Malacostracous
  Crustacea.

  [Illustration: FIG. 8.--Diagram of the somite-appendage or parapodium
  of a Polychaet Chaetopod. The chaetae are omitted.

    Ax, The axis.
    nr.c, Neuropodial cirrhus.
    nr.l^1, nr.l^2, Neuropodial lobes or endites.
    nt.c. Notopodial cirrhus.
    nt.l^1, nt.l^2, Notopodial lobes or exites.

  The parapodium is represented with its neural or ventral surface
  uppermost. (Original).]

  _The Segmented Lateral Appendages or Limbs of Arthropoda._--It has
  taken some time to obtain any general acceptance of the view that the
  parapodia of the Chaetopoda and the limbs of Arthropoda are
  genetically identical structures; yet if we compare the parapodium of
  Tomopteris or of Phyllodoce with one of the foliaceous limbs of
  Branchipus or Apus, the correspondences of the two are striking. An
  erroneous view of the fundamental morphology of the Crustacean limb,
  and consequently of that of other Arthropoda, came into favour owing
  to the acceptance of the highly modified limbs of Astacus as typical.
  Protopodite, endopodite, exopodite, and epipodite were considered to
  be the morphological units of the crustacean limb. Lankester (5) has
  shown (and his views have been accepted by Professors Korschelt and
  Heider in their treatise on _Embryology_) that the limb of the lowest
  Crustacea, such as Apus, consists of a corm or axis which may be
  jointed, and gives rise to outgrowths, either leaf-like or filiform,
  on its inner and outer margins (endites and exites). Such a corm (see
  figs. 10 and 11), with its outgrowths, may be compared to the simple
  parapodia of Chaetopoda with cirrhi and branchial lobe (fig. 8). It is
  by the specialization of two "endites" that the endopodite and
  exopodite of higher Crustacea are formed, whilst a flabelliform exite
  is the homogen or genetic equivalent of the epipodite (see Lankester,
  "Observations and Reflections on Apus Cancriformis," _Q. J. Micr.
  Sci._). The reduction of the outgrowth-bearing "corm" of the
  parapodium of either a Chaetopod or an Arthropod to a simple
  cylindrical stump, devoid of outgrowths, is brought about when
  mechanical conditions favour such a shape. We see it in certain
  Chaetopods (e.g. Hesione) and in the Arthropod Peripatus (fig. 9). The
  conversion of the Arthropod's limb into a jaw, as a rule, is effected
  by the development of an endite near its base into a hard, chitinized,
  and often toothed gnathobase (see figs. 10 and 11, _en^1_). It is not
  true that all the biting processes of the Arthropod limb are thus
  produced--for instance, the jaws of Peripatus are formed by the axis
  or corm itself, whilst the poison-jaws of Chilopods, as also their
  maxillae, appear to be formed rather by the apex or terminal region of
  the ramus of the limb; but the opposing jaws (= hemignaths) of
  Crustacea, Arachnida and Hexapoda are gnathobases, and not the axis or
  corm. The endopodite (corresponding to the fifth endite of the limb of
  Apus, see fig. 10) becomes in Crustacea the "walking leg" of the
  mid-region of the body; it becomes the palp or jointed process of
  anterior segments. A second ramus, the "exopodite," often is also
  retained in the form of a palp or feeler. In Apus, as the figure
  shows, there are four of these "antenna-like" palps or filaments on
  the first thoracic limb. A common modification of the chief ramus of
  the Arthropod parapodium is the chela or nipper formed by the
  elongation of the penultimate joint of the ramus, so that the last
  joint works on it--as, for instance, in the lobster's claw. Such
  chelate rami or limb-branches are independently developed in Crustacea
  and in Arachnida, and are carried by somites of the body which do not
  correspond in position in the two groups. The range of modification of
  which the rami or limb-branches of the limbs of Arthropoda are capable
  is very large, and in allied orders or even families or genera we
  often find what is certainly the palp of the same appendage (as
  determined by numerical position of the segments)--in one case
  antenniform, in another chelate, in another pediform, and in another
  reduced to a mere stump or absent altogether. Very probably the power
  which the appendage of a given segment has of assuming the perfected
  form and proportions previously attained by the appendage of another
  segment must be classed as an instance of "homoeosis," not only where
  such a change is obviously due to abnormal development or injury, but
  also where it constitutes a difference permanently established between
  allied orders or smaller groups, or between the two sexes.

  [Illustration: FIG. 9.--Three somite-appendages or parapodia of
  _Peripatus._

    A, A walking leg; p^1 to p^4, the characteristic "pads"; f, the
      foot; cl^1, cl^2, the two claws.
    B, An oral papilla, one of the second pair of post-oral appendages.
    C, One of the first post-oral pair of appendages or mandibles; cl^1,
      cl^2, the greatly enlarged claws. (Compare A.)

  The appendages are represented with the neural or ventral surface
  uppermost.]

  The most extreme disguise assumed by the Arthropod parapodium or
  appendage is that of becoming a mere stalk supporting an eye--a fact
  which did not obtain general credence until the experiments of Herbst
  in 1895, who found, on cutting off the eye-stalk of Palaemon, that a
  jointed antenna-like appendage was regenerated in its place. Since the
  eye-stalks of Podophthalmate Crustacea represent appendages, we are
  forced to the conclusion that the sessile eyes of other Crustacea, and
  of other Arthropoda generally, indicate the position of appendages
  which have atrophied.[2]

  From what has been said, it is apparent that we cannot, in attempting
  to discover the affinities and divergences of the various forms of
  Arthropoda, attach a very high phylogenetic value to the coincidence
  or divergence in form of the appendages belonging to the somites
  compared with one another.

  [Illustration: After Lankester, _Q. J. Mic. Sci._ vol. xxi., 1881.

  FIG. 10.--The second thoracic (fifth post-oral) appendage of the left
  side of _Apus cancriformis_, placed with its ventral or neural surface
  uppermost to compare with figs. 8 and 9.

    1, 2, The two segments of the axis.
    en^1, The gnathobase.
    en^2 to en^6, The five following "endites."
    fl, The flabellum or anterior exite.
    br, The bract or posterior exite.]

  The principal forms assumed by the Arthropod parapodium and its rami
  may be thus enumerated:--

  (1) Axial corm well developed, unsegmented or with two to four
  segments; lateral endites and exites (rami) numerous and of various
  lengths (certain limbs of lower Crustacea).

  (2) Corm, with short unsegmented rami, forming a flattened foliaceous
  appendage, adapted to swimming and respiration (trunk-limbs of
  Phyllopods).

  (3) Corm alone developed; with no endites or exites, but provided with
  terminal chitinous claws (ordinary leg of Peripatus), with terminal
  jaw teeth (jaw of Peripatus), or with blunt extremity (oral papilla of
  same) (see fig. 9).

  (4) Three of the rami of the primitive limb (endites 5 and 6, and
  exite 1) specially developed as endopodite, exopodite, and
  epipodite--the first two often as firm and strongly chitinized,
  segmented, leg-like structures; the original axis or corm reduced to a
  basal piece, with or without a distinct gnathobase (endite 1)--typical
  tri-ramose limb of higher Crustacea.

  (5) One ramus (the endopodite) alone developed--the original axis or
  corm serving as its basal joint with or without gnathobase. This is
  the usual uni-ramose limb found in the various classes of Arthropoda.
  It varies as to the presence or absence of the jaw-process and as to
  the stoutness of the segments of the ramus, their number (frequently
  six, plus the basal corm), and the modification of the free end. This
  may be filiform or brush-like or lamellate when it is an antenna or
  palp; a simple spike (walking leg of Crustacea, of other aquatic
  forms, and of Chilopods and Diplopods); the terminal joint flattened
  (swimming leg of Crustacea and Gigantostraca); the terminal joint
  provided with two or with three recurved claws (walking leg of many
  terrestrial forms--e.g. Hexapoda and Arachnida); the penultimate joint
  with a process equal in length to the last joint, so as to form a
  nipping organ (chelae of Crustaceans and Arachnids); the last joint
  reflected and movable on the penultimate, as the blade of a
  clasp-knife on its handle (the retrovert, toothed so as to act as a
  biting jaw in the Hexapod _Mantis_, the Crustacean _Squilla_ and
  others); with the last joint produced into a needle-like stabbing
  process in spiders.

  [Illustration: After Lankester, _Q. J. Mic. Sci._ vol. xxi., 1881.

  FIG. 11.--The first thoracic (fourth post-oral) appendage of _Apus
  cancriformis_ (right side).

    Ax^1 to Ax^4, the four segments of the axis with muscular bands.
    En^1, Gnathobase.
    En^2 to En^5, The elongated jointed endites (rami).
    En^6, The rudimentary sixth endite (exopodite of higher Crustacea).
    Fl, The flabellum which becomes the epipodite of higher forms.
    Br, The bract devoid of muscles and respiratory in function.]

  (6) Two rami developed (usually, but perhaps not always, the
  equivalents of the endopodite and exopodite) supported on the somewhat
  elongated corm (basal segment). This is the typical "bi-ramose limb"
  often found in Crustacea. The rami may be flattened for swimming, when
  it is "a bi-ramose swimmeret," or both or only one may be filiform and
  finely annulate; this is the form often presented by the antennae of
  Crustacea, and rarely by prae-oral appendages in other Arthropods.

  (7) The endopoditic ramus is greatly enlarged and flattened, without
  or with only one jointing, the corm (basal segment) is evanescent;
  often the plate-like endopodites of a pair of such appendages unite in
  the middle line with one another or by the intermediary of a sternal
  up-growth and form a single broad plate. These are the plate-like
  swimmerets and opercula of Gigantostraca and Limulus among Arachnids
  and of Isopod Crustaceans. They may have rudimentary exopodites, and
  may or may not have branchial filaments or lamellae developed on their
  posterior faces. The simplest form to which they may be reduced is
  seen in the genital operculum of the scorpion.

  (8) The gnathobase becomes greatly enlarged and not separated by a
  joint from the corm; it acts as a hemignath or half jaw working
  against its fellow of the opposite side. The endopodite may be
  retained as a small segmented palp at the side of the gnathobase or
  disappear (mandible of Crustacea, Chilopoda and Hexapoda).

  (9) The corm becomes the seat of a development of a special visual
  organ, the Arthropod eye (as opposed to the Chaetopod eye). Its
  jointing (segmentation) may be retained, but its rami disappear
  (Podophthalmous Crustacea). Usually it becomes atrophied, leaving the
  eye as a sessile organ upon the prae-oral region of the body (the
  eye-stalk and sessile lateral eyes of Arthropoda generally, exclusive
  of Peripatus).

  (10) The forms assumed by special modification of the elements of the
  parapodium in the maxillae, labium, &c., of Hexapods, Chilopods,
  Diplopods, and of various Crustacea, deserve special enumeration, but
  cannot be dealt with without ample space and illustration.

  It may be pointed out that the most radical difference presented in
  this list is that between appendages consisting of the corm alone
  without rami (Onychophora) and those with more or less developed rami
  (the rest of the Arthropoda). In the latter class we should
  distinguish three phases: (a) those with numerous and comparatively
  undeveloped rami; (b) those with three, or two highly developed rami,
  or with only one--the corm being reduced to the dimensions of a mere
  basal segment; (c) those reduced to a secondary simplicity
  (degeneration) by overwhelming development of one segment (e.g. the
  isolated gnathobase often seen as "mandible" and the genital
  operculum).

  There is no reason to suppose that any of the forms of limb observed
  in Arthropoda may not have been independently developed in two or more
  separate diverging lines of descent.

  _Branchiae._--In connexion with the discussion of the limbs of
  Arthropods, a few words should be devoted to the gill-processes. It
  seems probable that there are branchial plumes or filaments in some
  Arthropoda (some Crustacea) which can be identified with the distinct
  branchial organs of Chaetopoda, which lie dorsal of the parapodia and
  are not part of the parapodium. On the other hand, we cannot refuse to
  admit that any of the processes of an Arthropod parapodium may become
  modified as branchial organs, and that, as a rule, branchial
  out-growths are easily developed, _de novo_, in all the higher groups
  of animals. Therefore, it seems to be, with our present knowledge, a
  hopeless task to analyse the branchial organs of Arthropoda and to
  identify them genetically in groups.

  A brief notice must suffice of the structure and history of the
  _Eyes_, the _Tracheae_ and the so-called _Malpighian tubes_ of
  Arthropoda, though special importance attaches to each in regard to
  the determination of the affinities of the various animals included in
  this great sub-phylum.

  _The Eyes._--The Arthropod eye appears to be an organ of special
  character developed in the common ancestor of the Euarthropoda, and
  distinct from the Chaetopod eye, which is found only in the
  Onychophora where the true Arthropod eye is absent. The essential
  difference between these two kinds of eye appears to be that the
  Chaetopod eye (in its higher developments) is a vesicle enclosing the
  lens, whereas the Arthropod eye is a pit or series of pits into which
  the heavy chitinous cuticle dips and enlarges knobwise as a lens. Two
  distinct forms of the Arthropod eye are observed--the monomeniscous
  (simple) and the polymeniscous (compound). The nerve-end-cells, which
  lie below the lens, are part of the general epidermis. They show in
  the monomeniscous eye (see article ARACHNIDA, fig. 26) a tendency to
  group themselves into "retinulae," consisting of five to twelve cells
  united by vertical deposits of chitin (rhabdoms). In the case of the
  polymeniscous eye (fig. 23, article ARACHNIDA) a single retinula or
  group of nerve-end-cells is grouped beneath each associated lens. A
  further complication occurs in each of these two classes of eye. The
  monomeniscous eye is rarely provided with a single layer of cells
  beneath its lens; when it is so, it is called monostichous (simple
  lateral eye of Scorpion, fig. 22, article ARACHNIDA). More usually, by
  an infolding of the layer of cells in development, we get three layers
  under the lens; the front layer is the corneagen layer, and is
  separated by a membrane from the other two which, more or less, fuse
  and contain the nerve-end-cells (retinal layer). These eyes are called
  diplostichous, and occur in Arachnida and Hexapoda (fig. 24, article
  ARACHNIDA).

  On the other hand, the polymeniscous eye undergoes special elaboration
  on its lines. The retinulae become elongated as deep and very narrow
  pits (fig. 12 and explanation), and develop additional cells near the
  mouth of the narrow pit. Those nearest to the lens are the corneagen
  cells of this more elaborated eye, and those between the original
  retinula cells and the corneagen cells become firm and transparent.
  They are the crystalline cells or vitrella (see Watase, 7). Each such
  complex of cells underlying the lenticle of a compound eye is called
  an "ommatidium"; the entire mass of cells underlying a monomeniscous
  eye is an "ommataeum." The ommataeum, as already stated, tends to
  segregate into retinulae which correspond potentially each to an
  ommatidium of the compound eye. The ommatidium is from the first
  segregate and consists of few cells. The compound eye of the king-crab
  (Limulus) is the only recognized instance of ommatidia in their
  simplest state. Each can be readily compared with the single-layered
  lateral eye of the scorpion. In Crustacea and Hexapoda of all grades
  we find compound eyes with the more complicated ommatidia described
  above. We do not find them in any Arachnida.

  It is difficult in the absence of more detailed knowledge as to the
  eyes of Chilopoda and Diplopoda to give full value to these facts in
  tracing the affinities of the various classes of Arthropods. But they
  seem to point to a community of origin of Hexapods and Crustacea in
  regard to the complicated ommatidia of the compound eye, and to a
  certain isolation of the Arachnida, which are, however, traceable, so
  far as the eyes are concerned, to a distant common origin with
  Crustacea and Hexapoda through the very simple compound eyes
  (monostichous, polymeniscous) of Limulus.

  [Illustration: FIG. 12.--Diagram to show the derivation of the unit or
  "ommatidium" of the compound eye of Crustacea and Hexapoda, C, from a
  simple monomeniscous monostichous eye resembling the lateral eye of a
  scorpion, A, or the unit of the compound lateral eye of Limulus (see
  article ARACHNIDA, figs. 22 and 23). B represents an intermediate
  hypothetical form in which the cells beneath the lens are beginning to
  be superimposed as corneagen, vitrella and retinula, instead of
  standing side by side in horizontal series. The black represents the
  cuticular product of the epidermal cells of the ocular area, taking
  the form either of lens, _cl_, of crystalline body, _cry_, or of
  rhabdom, _rhab_; _hy_, hypodermis or epidermal cells; _corn^1_,
  laterally-placed cells in the simpler stage, A, which like the
  nerve-end cells, _vit^1_ and _ret^1_, are corneagens or
  lens-producing; _corn_, specialized corneagen or lens-producing cells;
  _vit^1_, potential vitrella cells with _cry^1_, potential crystalline
  body now indistinguishable from retinula cells and rhabdomeres; _vit_,
  vitrella cell with _cry_, its contained cuticular product, the
  crystalline cone or body; _ret^1_, _rhab^1_, retinula cells and
  rhabdom of scorpion undifferentiated from adjacent cells, _vit^1;
  ret_, retinula cell; _rhab_, rhabdom; _nf_, optic nerve-fibres.
  (Modified from Watase.)]

  _The Tracheae._--In regard to tracheae the very natural tendency of
  zoologists has been until lately to consider them as having once
  developed and once only, and therefore to hold that a group
  "Tracheata" should be recognized, including all tracheate Arthropods.
  We are driven by the conclusions arrived at as to the derivation of
  the Arachnida from branchiate ancestors, independently of the other
  tracheate Arthropods, to formulate the conclusion that tracheae have
  been independently developed in the Arachnidan class. We are also, by
  the isolation of Peripatus and the impossibility of tracing to it all
  other tracheate Arthropoda, or of regarding it as a degenerate offset
  from some one of the tracheate classes, forced to the conclusion that
  the tracheae of the Onychophora have been independently acquired.
  Having accepted these two conclusions, we formulate the generalization
  that tracheae can be independently acquired by various branches of
  Arthropod descent in adaptation to a terrestrial as opposed to an
  aquatic mode of life. A great point of interest therefore exists in
  the knowledge of the structure and embryology of tracheae in the
  different groups. It must be confessed that we have not such full
  knowledge on this head as could be wished for. Tracheae are
  essentially tubes like blood-vessels--apparently formed from the same
  tissue elements as blood-vessels--which contain air in place of blood,
  and usually communicate by definite orifices, the tracheal stigmata,
  with the atmosphere. They are lined internally by a cuticular deposit
  of chitin. In Peripatus and the Diplopods they consist of bunches of
  fine tubes which do not branch but diverge from one another; the
  chitinous lining is smooth. In the Hexapods and Chilopods, and the
  Arachnids (usually), they form tree-like branching structures, and
  their finest branches are finer than any blood-capillary, actually in
  some cases penetrating a single cell and supplying it with gaseous
  oxygen. In these forms the chitinous lining of the tubes is thickened
  by a close-set spiral ridge similar to the spiral thickening of the
  cellulose wall of the spiral vessels of plants. It is a noteworthy
  fact that other tubes in these same terrestrial Arthropoda--namely,
  the ducts of glands--are similarly strengthened by a chitinous
  cuticle, and that a spiral or annular thickening of the cuticle is
  developed in them also. Chitin is _not_ exclusively an ectodermal
  product, but occurs also in cartilaginous skeletal plates of
  mesoblastic origin (connective tissue). The immediate cavities or pits
  into which the tracheal stigmata open appear to be in many cases
  ectodermic in sinkings, but there seems to be no reason (based on
  embryological observation) for regarding the tracheae as an ingrowth
  of the ectoderm. They appear, in fact, to be an air-holding
  modification of the vasifactive connective tissue. Tracheae are
  abundant just in proportion as blood-vessels become suppressed. They
  are reciprocally exclusive. It seems not improbable that they are two
  modifications of the same tissue-elements. In Peripatus the stigmatic
  pits at which the tracheae communicate with the atmosphere are
  scattered and not definite in their position. In other cases the
  stigmata are definitely paired and placed in a few segments or in
  several. It seems that we have to suppose that the vasifactive tissue
  of Arthropoda can readily take the form of air-holding instead of
  blood-holding tubes, and that this somewhat startling change in its
  character has taken place independently in several instances--viz. in
  the Onychophora, in more than one group of Arachnida, in Diplopoda,
  and again in the Hexapoda and Chilopoda.

  _The Malpighian Tubes._--This name is applied to the numerous fine
  caecal tubes of noticeable length developed from the proctodaeal
  invert of ectodermal origin in Hexapods. These tubes are shown to
  excrete nitrogenous waste products similar to uric acid. Tubes of
  renal excretory function in a like position occur in most terrestrial
  Arthropoda--viz. in Chilopoda, Diplopoda and Arachnida. They are also
  found in some of the semi-terrestrial and purely aquatic Amphipod
  Crustaceans. But the conclusion that all such tubes are identical in
  essential character seems to be without foundation. The Malpighian
  tubes of Hexapods are outgrowths of the proctodaeum, but those of
  Scorpion and the Amphipod Crustacea are part of the metenteron or
  endodermal gut, though originating near its junction with the
  proctodaeum. Hence the presence or absence of such tubes cannot be
  used as an argument as to affinity without some discrimination. The
  Scorpion's so-called Malpighian tubes are _not_ the same organs as
  those so named in the other Tracheata. Such renal caecal tubes seem to
  be readily evolved from either metenteron or proctodaeum when the
  conditions of the out-wash of nitrogenous waste-products are changed
  by the transference from aquatic to terrestrial life. The absence of
  such renal caeca in Limulus and their presence in the terrestrial
  Arachnida is precisely on a parallel with their absence in aquatic
  Crustacea and their presence in the feebly branchiate Amphipoda.

  _Group Characters._--We shall now pass the groups of the Arthropoda in
  review, attempting to characterize them in such a way as will indicate
  their probable affinities and genetic history.

  SUB-PHYLUM ARTHROPODA.--The characters of the sub-phylum and those of
  the associated sub-phyla Chaetopoda and Rotifera have been given
  above, as well as the general characters of the phylum Appendiculata
  which comprises these great sub-phyla.

    Grade A.--Hyparthropoda.

    Hypothetical forms.

    Grade B.--Protarthropoda.

  (a) The integument is covered by a delicate soft cuticle (not firm or
  plated) which allows the body and its appendages great range of
  extension and contraction.

  (b) The paired claws on the ends of the parapodia and the fang-like
  modifications of these on the first post-oral appendages (mandibles)
  are the only hard chitinous portions of the integument.

  (c) The head is deuterognathous--that is to say, there is only one
  prosthomere, and accordingly the first and only pair of hemignaths is
  developed by adaptation of the appendages of the second somite.

  (d) The appendages of the third somite (second post-oral) are clawless
  oral papillae.

  (e) The rest of the somites carry equi-formal simple appendages,
  consisting of a corm or axis tipped with two chitinous claws and
  devoid of rami.

  (f) The segmentation of the body is anomomeristic, there being no
  fixed number of somites characterizing all the forms included.

  (g) The pair of eyes situated on the prosthomere are not of the
  Euarthropod type, but resemble those of Chaetopods (hence
  Nereid-ophthalmous).

  (h) The muscles of the body-wall and gut do not consist of
  transversely-striped muscular fibre, but of the unstriped tissue
  observed also in Chaetopoda.

  (i) A pair of coelomoducts is developed in every somite including the
  prosthomere, in which alone it atrophies in later development.

  (j) The ventral nerve-cords are widely separated--in fact, lateral in
  position.

  (k) There are no masses of nerve-cells forming a ganglion (neuromere)
  in each somite. (In this respect the Protarthropoda are at a lower
  stage than most of the existing Chaetopoda.)

  (l) The genital ducts are formed by the enlargement of the
  coelomoducts of the penultimate somite.

    Class (Unica).--ONYCHOPHORA.

  With the characters of the grade: add the presence within the body of
  fine unbranched tracheal tubes, devoid of spiral thickening, opening
  to the exterior by numerous irregularly scattered tracheal pits.

  Genera--Eoperipatus, Peripatopsis, Opisthopatus, &c. (See PERIPATUS.)

    Grade C (of the Arthropoda).--Euarthropoda.

  (a) Integument heavily plated with firm chitinous cuticle, allowing no
  expansion and retraction of regions of the body nor change of
  dimensions, except, in some cases, a dorso-ventral bellows movement.
  The separation of the heavier plates of chitin by grooves of delicate
  cuticle results in the hinging or jointing of the body and its
  appendages, and the consequent flexing and extending of the jointed
  pieces.

  (b) Claws and fangs are developed on the branches or rami of the
  parapodia, not on the end of the axis or corm.

  (c) The head is either deuterognathous, tritognathous, or
  tetartognathous.

  (d) Rarely only one, and usually at least two, of the somites
  following the mandibular somite carry appendages modified as jaws
  (with exceptions of a secondary origin).

  (e) The rest of the somites may all carry appendages, or only a
  limited number may carry appendages. In all cases the appendages
  primarily develop rami or branches which form the limbs, the primitive
  axis or corm being reduced and of insignificant size. In the most
  primitive stock all the post-oral appendages had gnathobasic
  outgrowths.

  (f) The segmentation of the body is anomomeristic in the more archaic
  members of each class, nomomeristic in the higher members.

  (g) The two eyes of Chaetopod structure have disappeared, and are
  replaced by the Euarthropod eyes.

  (h) The muscles in all parts of the body consist of striped muscular
  fibre, never of unstriped muscular tissue.

  (i) The coelomoducts are suppressed in most somites, and retained only
  as the single pair of genital ducts (very rarely more numerous) and in
  some also as the excretory glands (one or two pairs).

  (j) The ventral nerve-cords approach one another in the mid-ventral
  line behind the mouth.

  (k) The nerve-cells of the ventral nerve cords are segregated as
  paired ganglia in each somite, often united by meristic dislocation
  into composite ganglia.

  (l) The genital ducts may be the coelomoducts of the penultimate or
  ante-penultimate or adjacent somite, or of a somite placed near the
  middle of the series, or of a somite far forward in the series.

    Class 1 (of the Euarthropoda).--DIPLOPODA.

  The head has but one prosthomere (monoprosthomerous), and is
  accordingly deuterognathous. This carries short-jointed antennae (in
  one case bi-ramose) and eyes, the structure and development of which
  require further elucidation. Only one somite following the first
  post-oral or mandibular segment has its appendages modified as jaws.

  The somites of the body, except in Pauropus, either fuse after early
  development and form double somites with two pairs of appendages
  (Julus, &c.), or present legless and leg-bearing somites alternating.

  Somites, anomomeristic, from 12 to 150 in the post-cephalic series.

  The genital ducts open in the fourth, or between the fourth and fifth
  post-oral somite.

  Terrestrial forms with small-jointed legs formed by adaptation of a
  single ramus of the appendage. Tracheae are present.

  _Note._--The Diplopoda include the Juliformia, the Symphyla
  (Scolopendrella), and Pauropoda (Pauropus). They were until recently
  classified with the Chilopoda (Centipedes), with which they have no
  close affinity, but only a superficial resemblance. (Compare the
  definition of the class Chilopoda.)

  The movement of the legs in Diplopoda is like that of those of
  Peripatus, of the Phyllopod Crustacea, and of the parapodia of
  Chaetopoda, symmetrical and identical on the two sides of the body.
  The legs of Chilopoda move in alternating groups on the two sides of
  the body. This implies a very much higher development of nerves and
  muscles in the latter. (See MILLIPEDE.)

    Class 2 (of the Euarthropoda).--ARACHNIDA.

  Head tritognathous and diprosthomerous--that is to say, with two
  prosthomeres, the first bearing typical eyes, the second a pair of
  appendages reduced to a single ramus, which is in more primitive forms
  antenniform, in higher forms chelate or retrovert. The ancestral stock
  was pantognathobasic--i.e. had a gnathobase or jaw process on every
  parapodium. As many as six pairs of appendages following the mouth may
  have an enlarged gnathobase actually functional as a jaw or hemignath,
  but a ramus is well developed on each of these appendages either as a
  simple walking leg, a palp or a chela. In the more primitive forms the
  appendage of every post-oral somite has a gnathobase and two rami; in
  higher specialized forms the gnathobases may be atrophied in every
  appendage, even in the first post-oral.

  The more primitive forms are anomomeristic; the higher forms
  nomomeristic, showing typically three groups or tagmata of six somites
  each.

  The genital apertures are placed on the first somite of the second
  tagma or mesosoma. Their position is unknown in the more primitive
  forms. The more primitive forms have branchial respiratory processes
  developed on a ramus of each of the post-oral appendages. In higher
  specialized forms these branchial processes become first of all
  limited to five segments of the mesosoma, then sunk beneath the
  surface as pulmonary organs, and finally atrophied, their place being
  taken by a well-developed tracheal system.

  A character of great diagnostic value in the more primitive Arachnida
  is the tendency of the chitinous investment of the tergal surface of
  the telson to unite during growth with that of the free somites in
  front of it, so as to form a pygidial shield or posterior carapace,
  often comprising as many as fifteen somites (Trilobites, Limulus).

  A pair of central monomeniscous diplostichous eyes is often present on
  the head. Lateral eyes also are often present which are monostichous
  with aggregated lenses (_Limulus_) or with isolated lenses (Scorpio),
  or are diplostichous with simple lens (_Pedipalpi_, Araneae, &c.).

    Class 3 (of the Euarthropoda).--CRUSTACEA.

  Head tetartognathous and triprosthomerous--that is to say, with three
  prosthomeres; the first bearing typical eyes, the second a pair of
  antenniform appendages (often bi-ramose), the third a pair of
  appendages usually antenniform, sometimes claw-like. The ancestral
  stock was (as in the Arachnida) pantognathobasic, that is to say, had
  a gnathobase or jaw-process on the base of every post-oral appendage.

  Besides the first post-oral or mandibular pair, at least two
  succeeding pairs of appendages are modified as jaws. These have small
  and insignificant rami, or none at all, a feature in which the
  Arachnida differ from them. The appendages of four or more additional
  following somites may be turned upwards towards the mouth and assist
  in the taking of food.

  The more primitive forms (Entomostraca) are anomomeristic, presenting
  great variety as to number of somites, form of appendages, and
  tagmatic grouping; the higher forms (Malacostraca) are nomomeristic,
  showing in front of the telson twenty somites, of which the six hinder
  carry swimmerets and the five next in front ambulatory limbs. The
  genital apertures are neither far forward nor far backward in the
  series of somites, e.g. on the fourteenth post-oral in Apus, on the
  ninth post-oral in female Astacus and in Cyclops.

  With rare exceptions, branchial plates are developed either by
  modification of a ramus of the limbs or as processes on a ramus, or
  upon the sides of the body. No tracheate Crustacea are known, but some
  terrestrial Isopoda develop pulmonary in-sinkings of the integument. A
  characteristic, comparable in value to that presented by the pygidial
  shield of Arachnida, is the frequent development of a pair of long
  appendages by the penultimate somite, which with the telson form a
  trifid, or, when that is small, a bifid termination to the body.

  The lateral eyes of Crustacea are polymeniscous, with highly
  specialized retinulae like those of Hexapoda, and unlike the simpler
  compound lateral eyes of lower Arachnida. Monomeniscous eyes are
  rarely present, and when present, single, minute, and central in
  position.

  _Note._--The Crustacea exhibit a longer and more complete series of
  forms than any other class of Arthropoda, and may be regarded as
  preserving the most completely represented line of descent.

    Class 4.--CHILOPODA.

  Head triprosthomerous[3] and tetartognathous. The two somites
  following the mandibular or first post-oral or buccal somite carry
  appendages modified as maxillae. The fourth post-oral somite has its
  appendages converted into very large and powerful hemignaths, which
  are provided with poison-glands. The remaining somites carry
  single-clawed walking legs, a single pair to each somite. The body is
  anomomeristic, showing in different genera from 17 (inclusive of the
  anal and genital) to 175 somites behind that which bears the poison
  jaws. No tagmata are developed. The genital ducts open on the
  penultimate somite.

  Tracheae are developed which are dendriform and with spiral thickening
  of their lining. Their trunks open at paired stigmata placed laterally
  in each somite of the trunk or in alternate somites. Usually the
  tracheae open by paired stigmata placed upon the sides of a greater or
  less number of the somites, but never quite regularly on alternating
  somites. At most they are present on all the pedigerous somites
  excepting the first and the last. In _Scutigera_ there are seven
  unpaired dorsal stigmata, each leading into a sac whence a number of
  air-holding tubes project into the pencardial blood-sinus.

  Renal caecal tubes (Malpighian tubes) open into the proctodaeum. (See
  CENTIPEDE.)

    Class 5.--HEXAPODA.

  Head shown by its early development to be triprosthomerous and
  consequently tetartognathous. The first prosthomere has its appendages
  represented by the compound eyes and a protocerebrum, the second has
  the antennae for its appendages and a deutocerebral neuromere, the
  third has suffered suppression of its appendages (which corresponded
  to the second pair of antennae of Crustacea), but has a tritocerebrum
  and coelomic chamber. The mandibular somite bears a pair of
  gnathobasic hemignaths without rami or palps, and is followed by two
  jaw-bearing somites (maxillary and labial). This enumeration would
  give six somites in all to the head--three prosthomeres and three
  opisthomeres. Recent investigations (Folsom, 4) show the existence in
  the embryo of a prae-maxillary or supra-lingual somite which is
  suppressed during development. This gives seven somites to the
  Hexapod's head, the tergites of which are fused to form a cephalic
  carapace or box. The number is significant, since it agrees with that
  found in Edriophthalmous Crustacea, and assigns the labium of the
  Hexapod to the same somite numerically as that which carries the
  labium-like maxillipedes of those Crustacea.

  The somites following the head are strictly nomomeristic and
  nomotagmic. The first three form the thorax, the appendages of which
  are the walking legs, tipped with paired claws or ungues (compare the
  homoplastic claws of Scorpio and Peripatus). Eleven somites follow
  these, forming the abdominal "tagma," giving thus twenty-one somites
  in all (as in the higher Crustacea). The somites of the abdomen all
  may carry rudimentary appendages in the embryo, and some of the hinder
  somites may retain their appendages in a modified form in adult life.
  Terminal telescoping of the abdominal somites and excalation may occur
  in the adult, reducing the obvious abdominal somites to as few as
  eight. The genital apertures are median and placed far back in the
  series of somites, viz. the female on the seventh abdominal
  (seventeenth of the whole series) and the male on the ninth or
  ante-penultimate abdominal (nineteenth of the whole series). The
  appendages of the eighth and tenth abdominal somites are modified as
  gonapophyses. The eleventh abdominal segment is the telson, usually
  small and soft; it carries the anus.

  The Hexapoda are not only all confined to a very definite disposition
  of the somites, appendages and apertures, as thus indicated, but in
  other characters also they present the specialization of a
  narrowly-limited highly-developed order of such a class as the
  Crustacea rather than a range from lower more generalized to higher
  more specialized forms such as that group and also the Arachnida
  present. It seems to be a legitimate conclusion that the most
  primitive Hexapoda were provided with wings, and that the term
  Pterygota might be used as a synonym of Hexapoda. Many Hexapoda have
  lost either one pair or both pairs of wings; cases are common of
  wingless genera allied to ordinary Pterygote genera. Sdme Hexapods
  which are very primitive in other respects happen to be also Apterous,
  but this cannot be held to prove that the possession of wings is not a
  primitive character of Hexapods (compare the case of the Struthious
  Birds). The wings of Hexapoda are lateral expansions of the terga of
  the second and third thoracic somites. They appear to be serial
  equivalents (homogenous meromes) of the tracheal gills, which develop
  in a like position on the abdominal segments of some aquatic Hexapods.

  The Hexapoda are all provided with a highly developed tracheal system,
  which presents considerable variation in regard to its stigmata or
  orifices of communication with the exterior. In some a serial
  arrangement of stigmata comparable to that observed in Chilopoda is
  found. In other cases (some larvae) stigmata are absent; in other
  cases again a single stigma is developed, as in the smaller Arachnida
  and Chilopoda, in the median dorsal line or other unexpected position.
  When the facile tendency of Arthropoda to develop tracheal air-tubes
  is admitted, it becomes probable that the tracheae of Hexapods do not
  all belong to one original system, but may be accounted for by new
  developments within the group. Whether the primitive tracheal system
  of Hexapoda was a closed one or open by serial stigmata in every
  somite remains at present doubtful, but the intimate relation of the
  system to the wings and tracheal gills cannot be overlooked.

  The lateral eyes of Hexapoda, like those of Crustacea, belong to the
  most specialized type of "compound eye," found only in these two
  classes. Simple monomeniscous eyes are also present in many Hexapods.

  Renal excretory caeca (Malpighian tubes) are developed from the
  proctodaeum (not from mesenteron as in scorpion and Amphipoda).

  _Concluding Remarks on the Relationships to one another of the
  Classes of the Arthropoda._--Our general conclusion from a survey of
  the Arthropoda amounts to this, that whilst Peripatus, the Diplopoda,
  and the Arachnida represent terrestrial offshoots from successive
  lower grades of primitive aquatic Arthropoda which are extinct, the
  Crustacea alone present a fairly full series of representatives
  leading upwards from unspecialized forms. The latter were not very far
  removed from the aquatic ancestors (Trilobites) of the Arachnida, but
  differed essentially from them by the higher specialization of the
  head. We can gather no indication of the forefathers of the Hexapoda
  or of the Chilopoda less specialized than they are, whilst possessing
  the essential characteristics of these classes. Neither embryology nor
  palaeontology assists us in this direction. On the other hand, the
  facts that the Hexapoda and the Chilopoda have triprosthomerous heads,
  that the Hexapoda have the same total number of somites as the
  nomomeristic Crustacea, and the same number of opisthomeres in the
  head as the more terrestrial Crustacea, together with the same
  adaptation of the form of important appendages in corresponding
  somites, and that the compound eyes of both Crustacea and Hexapoda are
  extremely specialized and elaborate in structure and identical in that
  structure, all lead to the suggestion that the Hexapoda, and with
  them, at no distant point, the Chilopoda, have branched off from the
  Crustacean main stem as specialized terrestrial lines of descent. And
  it seems probable that in the case of the Hexapoda, at any rate, the
  point of departure was subsequent to the attainment of the
  nomomeristic character presented by the higher grade of Crustacea. It
  is on the whole desirable to recognize such affinities in our schemes
  of classification.

  We may tabulate the facts as to head-structure in Chaetopoda and
  Arthropoda as follows:--

    Grade x (below the Arthropoda).--AGNATHA, APROSTHOMERA.

  Without parapodial jaws; without the addition of originally post-oral
  somites to the prae-oral region, which is a simple prostomial lobe of
  the first somite; the first somite is perforated by the mouth and its
  parapodia are not modified as jaws.

    = CHARTOPODA.

    Grade 1 (of the Arthropoda).--MONOGNATHA, MONOPROSTHOMERA.

  With a single pair of parapodial jaws carried by the somite which is
  perforated by the mouth; this is not the first somite, but the second.
  The first somite has become a prosthomere, and carries a pair of
  extensile antennae.

    = ONYCHOPHORA (_Peripatus, &c._).

    Grade 2 (of the Arthropoda).--DIGNATHA, MONOPROSTHOMERA.

  The third somite as well as the second develops a pair of parapodial
  jaws; the first somite is a prosthomere carrying jointed antennae.

    = DIPLOPODA.

    Grade 3 (of the Arthropoda).--PANTOGNATHA, DIPROSTHOMERA.

  A gnathobase is developed (in the primitive stock) on every pair of
  post-oral appendages; two prosthomeres present, the second somite as
  well as the first having passed in front of the mouth, but only the
  second has appendages.

    = ARACHNIDA.

    Grade 4 (of the Arthropoda).--PANTOGNATHA, TRIPROSTHOMERA.

  The original stock, like that of the last grade, has a gnathobase on
  every post-oral appendage, but three prosthomeres are now present, in
  consequence of the movement of the oral aperture from the third to the
  fourth somite. The later eyes are polymeniscous, with specialized
  vitrellae and retinulae of a definite type peculiar to this grade.

    = CRUSTACEA, CHILOPODA, HEXAPODA.

  According to older views the increase of the number of somites in
  front of the mouth would have been regarded as a case of intercalation
  by new somite-budding of new prae-oral somites in the series. We are
  prohibited by a general consideration of metamerism in the Arthropoda
  from adopting the hypothesis of intercalation of somites. However
  strange it may seem, we have to suppose that one by one in the course
  of long historical evolution somites have passed forwards and the
  mouth has passed backwards. In fact, we have to suppose that the
  actual somite which in grades 1 and 2 bore the mandibles lost those
  mandibles, developed their rami as tactile organs, and came to occupy
  a position in front of the mouth, whilst its previous jaw-bearing
  function was taken up by the next somite in order, into which the oral
  aperture had passed. A similar history must have been slowly brought
  about when this second mandibulate somite in its turn became agnathous
  and passed in front of the mouth. The mandibular parapodia may be
  supposed during the successive stages of this history to have had,
  from the first, well-developed rami (one or two) of a palp-like form,
  so that the change required when the mouth passed away from them would
  merely consist in the suppression of the gnathobase. The solid
  palpless mandible such as we now see in some Arthropoda is,
  necessarily, a late specialization. Moreover, it appears probable that
  the first somite never had its parapodia modified as jaws, but became
  a prosthomere with tactile appendages before parapodial jaws were
  developed at all, or rather _pari passu_ with their development on the
  second somite. It is worth while bearing in mind a second possibility
  as to the history of the prosthomeres, viz. that the buccal
  gnathobasic parapodia (the mandibles) were in each of the three grades
  of prosthomerism only developed after the recession of the mouth and
  the addition of one, of two, or of three post-oral somites to the
  prae-oral region had taken place. In fact, we may imagine that the
  characteristic adaptation of one or more pairs of post-oral parapodia
  to the purposes of the mouth as jaws did not occur until after
  ancestral forms with one, with two, and with three prosthomeres had
  come into existence. On the whole the facts seem to be against this
  supposition, though we need not suppose that the gnathobase was very
  large or the rami undeveloped in the buccal parapodia which were
  destined to lose their mandibular features and pass in front of the
  mouth.

  REFERENCES.--1. Bateson, _Materials for the Study of Variation_
  (Macmillan, 1894), p. 85; 2. Lankester, "Primitive Cell-layers of the
  Embryo." _Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist._ (1873), p. 336; 3. Korschelt and
  Heider, _Entwickelungsgeschichte_ (Jena, 1892), cap. xv. p. 389; 4.
  Folsom, "Development of the Mouth Parts of Anurida," _Bulletin Mus.
  Comp. Zool. Harvard College_, vol. xxxvi. No. 5 (1900), pp. 142-146;
  5. Lankester, "Observations and Reflections on the Appendages and
  Nervous System of Apus Cancriformis," _Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci._ vol.
  xxi. (1881); 6. Hofer, "Ein Krebs mit einer Extremitt statt eines
  Stielauges," _Verhandl. d. deutschen zool. Gesellsch._ (1894); 7.
  Watase, "On the Morphology of the Compound Eyes of Arthropods,"
  _Studies from the Biol. Lab. of the Johns Hopkins University_, vol.
  iv. pp. 287-334; 8. Benham describes backward shifting of the oral
  aperture in certain Chaetopods, _Proc. Zoolog. Soc. London_ (1900),
  No. lxiv. p. 976. N.B.--References to the early literature concerning
  the group Arthropoda will be found in Carus, _Geschichte der
  Zoologie_. The more important literature up to 1892 is given in the
  admirable treatise on Embryology by Professors Korschelt and Heider.
  Detailed references will be found under the articles on the separate
  groups of Arthropoda.     (E. R. L.)

FOOTNOTES:

  [1] The group Arthropoda itself, thus constituted, was precisely
    identical in its area with the Insecta of Linnaeus, the Entoma of
    Aristotle. But the word "Insect" had become limited since the days of
    Linnaeus to the Hexapod Pterygote forms, to the exclusion of his
    Aptera. Lamarck's penetrating genius is chiefly responsible for the
    shrinkage of the word Insecta, since it was he who, forty years after
    Linnaeus's death, set up and named the two great classes Crustacea
    and Arachnida (included by Linnaeus under Insecta as the order
    "Aptera"), assigning to them equal rank with the remaining Insecta of
    Linnaeus, for which he proposed the very appropriate class-name
    "Hexapoda." Lamarck, however, appears not to have insisted on this
    name Hexapoda, and so the class of Pterygote Hexapods came to retain
    the group-name Insecta, which is, historically or etymologically, no
    more appropriate to them than it is to the classes Crustacea and
    Arachnida. The tendency to retain the original name of an old and
    comprehensive group for one of the fragments into which such group
    becomes divided by the advance of knowledge--instead of keeping the
    name for its logical use as a comprehensive term, including the new
    divisions, each duly provided with a new name--is most curiously
    illustrated in the history of the word physiology. Cicero says,
    "Physiologia naturae ratio," and such was the meaning of the name
    _Physiologus_, given to a cyclopaedia of what was known and imagined
    about earth, sea, sky, birds, beasts and fishes, which for a thousand
    years was the authoritative source of information on these matters,
    and was translated into every European tongue. With the revival of
    learning, however, first one and then another special study became
    recognized--anatomy, botany, zoology, mineralogy, until at last the
    great comprehensive term physiology was bereft of all its
    once-included subject-matter, excepting the study of vital processes
    pursued by the more learned members of the medical profession.
    Professional tradition and an astute perception on their part of the
    omniscience suggested by the terms, have left the medical men in
    English-speaking lands in undisturbed but illogical possession of the
    words physiology, physic and physician.

  [2] H. Milne-Edwards, who was followed by Huxley, long ago formulated
    the conclusion that the eye-stalks of Crustacea are modified
    appendages, basing his argument on a specimen of Palinurus (figured
    in Bateson's book (1), in which the eye-stalk of one side is replaced
    by an antenniform palp. Hofer (6) in 1894 described a similar case in
    Astacus.

  [3] Embryological evidence of this is still wanting. In the other
    classes of Arthropoda we have more or less complete embryological
    evidence on the subject. It appears from observation of the embryo
    that whilst the first prosthomere of Centipedes has its appendages
    reduced and represented only by eye-patches (as in Arachnida,
    Crustacea and Hexapoda). the second has a rudimentary antenna, which
    disappears, whilst the third carries the permanent antennae, which
    accordingly correspond to the second antennae of Crustacea, and are
    absent in Hexapoda.