ARTHURIAN LEGEND. By the "Arthurian legend," or _Matière de Brelagne_,
we mean the subject-matter of that important body of medieval literature
known as the Arthurian cycle (see ARTHUR). The period covered by the
texts in their present form represents, roughly speaking, the century
1150-1250. The _History_ of Nennius is, of course, considerably earlier,
and that of Geoffrey of Monmouth somewhat antedates 1150 (1136), but
with these exceptions the dates above given will be found to cover the
composition of all our extant texts.

As to the origin of this _Matière de Bretagne_, and the circumstances
under which it became a favourite theme for literary treatment, two
diametrically opposite theories are held. One body of scholars, headed
by Professor Wendelin Förster of Bonn, while admitting that, so far as
any historic basis can be traced, the events recorded must have happened
on insular ground, maintain that the knowledge of these events, and
their romantic development, are due entirely to the Bretons of the
continent. The British who fled before the Teutonic and Scandinavian
invasions of the 6th and 8th centuries, had carried with them to
Armorica, and fondly cherished, the remembrance of Arthur and his deeds,
which in time had become interwoven with traditions of purely Breton
origin. On the other side of the Channel, i.e. in Arthur's own land,
these memories had died out, or at most survived only as the faint echo
of historic tradition. Through the medium of French-speaking Bretons
these tales came to the cognizance of Northern French poets, notably
Chrétien de Troyes, who wove them into romances. According to Professor
Förster there were no Arthurian romances previous to Chrétien, and
equally, of course, no insular romantic tradition. This theory reposes
mainly on the supposed absence of pre-Chrétien poems, and on the
writings of Professor H. Zimmer, who derives the Arthurian names largely
from Breton roots. This represents the prevailing standpoint of German
scholars, and may be called the "continental" theory. In opposition to
this the school of which the late Gaston Paris was the leading, and most
brilliant, representative, maintains that the Arthurian tradition,
romantic equally with historic, was preserved in Wales through the
medium of the bards, was by them communicated to their Norman
conquerors, worked up into poems by the Anglo-Normans, and by them
transmitted to the continental poets. This, the "insular" theory, in
spite of its inherent probability, has hitherto been at a disadvantage
through lack of positive evidence, but in a recently acquired MS. of the
British Museum, Add. 36614, we find the first continuator of the
_Perceval_, Wauchier de Denain, quoting as authority for stories of
Gawain a certain Bleheris, whom he states to have been "born and bred in
Wales." The identity of this Bleheris with the Bledhericus mentioned by
Giraldus Cambrensis as _Famosus ille fabulator_, living at a bygone and
unspecified date, and with the Bréri quoted by Thomas as authority for
the _Tristan_ story, has been fully accepted by leading French scholars.
Further, on the evidence of certain MSS. of the _Perceval_, notably the
Paris MS. (Bibl. Nat. 1450), it is clear that Chrétien was using, and
using freely, the work of a predecessor, large fragments of which have
been preserved by the copyists who completed his unfinished work. The
evidence of recent discoveries is all in favour of the insular, or
French, view.

So far as the character, as distinguished from the _provenance_, of this
subject-matter is concerned, it is largely of folk-lore origin,
representing the working over of traditions, in some cases (as e.g. in
the account of Arthur's birth and upbringing) common to all the Aryan
peoples, in others specifically Celtic. Thus there are a number of
parallels between the Arthurian and the Irish heroic cycles, the precise
nature of which has yet to be determined. So far as Arthur himself is
concerned these parallels are with the Fenian, or Ossianic, cycle, in
the case of Gawain with the Ultonian.

In its literary form the cycle falls into three
groups:--pseudo-historic: the _Histories_ of Nennius and Geoffrey, the
_Brut_ of Wace and Layamon (see ARTHUR); poetic: the works of Chrétien
de Troyes, Thomas, Raoul de Houdenc and others (see GAWAIN, PERCEVAL,
TRISTAN, and the writers named above); prose: the largest and most
important group (see GRAIL, LANCELOT, MERLIN, TRISTAN). Of these three
branches the prose romances offer the most insuperable problems; none
can be dated with any certainty; all are of enormous length; and all
have undergone several redactions. Of not one do we as yet possess a
critical and comparative text, and in the absence of such texts the
publication of any definite and detailed theory as to the evolution and
relative position of the separate branches of the Arthurian cycle is to
be deprecated. The material is so vast in extent, and in so chaotic a
condition, that the construction of any such theory is only calculated
to invite refutation and discredit.

  The best general study of the cycle is to be found in Gaston Paris's
  manual _La Littérature française au moyen âge_ (new and revised
  edition, 1905). See also the introduction to vol. xxx. of _Histoire
  littéraire de la France_. For the theories as to origin, see the
  Introductions to Professor Förster's editions of the poems of Chrétien
  de Troyes, notably that to vol. iv., _Der Karrenritter_, which is a
  long and elaborate restating of his position. Also Professor H.
  Zimmer's articles in _Gottingische gelehrte Anzeigen_, 12 and 20. For
  the Insular view, Ferd. Lot's "Études sur la provenance du cycle
  arthurien," _Romania_, vols. xxiv.-xxviii., are very valuable. For a
  popular treatment of the subject, cf. Nos. i. and iv. of _Popular
  Studies in Romance and Folk-lore_ (Nutt). Robert Huntington Fletcher's
  "The Arthurian Matter in the Chronicles" (vol. x. of _Harvard Studies
  and Notes in Philology and Literature_), is a most useful summary.
       (J. L. W.)