ARTHUR III. (1393-1458), earl of Richmond, constable of France, and
afterwards duke of Brittany, was the third son of John IV., duke of
Brittany, and Joan of Navarre, afterwards the wife of Henry IV. of
England. His brother, John V., gave him his earldom of Richmond in
England. While still very young, he took part in the civil wars which
desolated France during the reign of Charles VI. From 1410 to 1414 he
served on the side of the Armagnacs, and afterwards entered the service
of Louis the dauphin, whose intimate friend he became. He profited by
his position at court to obtain the lieutenancy of the Bastille, the
governorship of the duchy of Nemours, and the confiscated territories of
Jean Larchevêque, seigneur of Parthenay. His efforts to reduce the
latter were, however, interrupted by the necessity of marching against
the English. At Agincourt he was wounded and captured, and remained a
prisoner in England from 1415 to 1420. Released on parole, he gained the
favour of King Henry V. by persuading his brother, the duke of Brittany,
to conclude the treaty of Troyes, by which France was handed over to the
English king. He was rewarded with the countship of Ivry.

In 1423 Arthur married Margaret of Burgundy, widow of the dauphin Louis,
and became thus the brother-in-law of Philip the Good of Burgundy, and
of the regent, the duke of Bedford. Offended, however, by Bedford's
refusal to give him a high command, he severed his connexion with the
English, and in March 1425 accepted the constable's sword from King
Charles VII. He now threw himself with ardour into the French cause,
and persuaded his brother, John V. of Brittany, to conclude with Charles
VII. the treaty of Saumur (October 7, 1425). But though he saw clearly
enough the measures necessary for success, he lacked the means to carry
them out. In the field he met with a whole series of reverses; and at
court, where his rough and overbearing manners made him disliked, his
influence was overshadowed by that of a series of incompetent
favourites. The peace concluded between the duke of Brittany and the
English in September 1427 led to his expulsion from the court, where
Georges de la Trémoille, whom he himself had recommended to the king,
remained supreme for six years, during which Richmond tried in vain to
overthrow him. In the meantime, in June 1429, he joined Joan of Arc at
Orleans, and fought in several battles under her banner, till the
influence of La Trémoille forced his withdrawal from the army. On the
5th of March 1432 Charles VII. concluded with him and with Brittany the
treaty of Rennes; but it was not until June of the following year that
La Trémoille was overthrown. Arthur now resumed the war against the
English, and at the same time took vigorous measures against the
plundering bands of soldiers and peasants known as _routiers_ or
_écorcheurs_. On the 20th of September 1435, mainly as a result of his
diplomacy, was signed the treaty of Arras between Charles VII. and the
duke of Burgundy, to which France owed her salvation.

On the 13th of April 1436, Arthur took Paris from the English; but he
was ill seconded by the king, and hampered by the necessity for leading
frequent expeditions against the _écorcheurs_; it was not till May 1444
that the armistice of Tours gave him leisure to carry out the
reorganization of the army which he had long projected. He now created
the _compagnies d'ordonnance_, and endeavoured to organize the militia
of the _francs archers_. This reform had its effect in the struggles
that followed. In alliance with his nephew, the duke of Brittany, he
reconquered, during September and October 1449, nearly all the Cotentin;
on the 15th of April 1450 he gained over the English the battle of
Formigny; and during the year he recovered for France the whole of
Normandy, which for the next six or seven years it was his task to
defend from English attacks. On the death of his nephew Peter II., on
the 22nd of September 1457, he became duke of Brittany, and though
retaining his office of constable of France, he refused, like his
predecessors, to do homage to the French king for his duchy. He reigned
little more than a year, dying on the 26th of December 1458, and was
succeeded by his nephew Francis II., son of his brother Richard, count
of Étampes.

Arthur was three times married: (1) to Margaret of Burgundy, duchess of
Guienne (d. 1442); (2) to Jeanne d'Albret, daughter of Charles II. of
Albret (d. 1444); (3) to Catherine of Luxemburg, daughter of Peter of
Luxemburg, count of St Pol, who survived him. He left no legitimate
children.

  AUTHORITIES.--The main source for the life of Duke Arthur III. is the
  chronicle of Guillaume Gruel (c. 1410-1474-1482). Gruel entered the
  service of the earl of Richmond about 1425, shared in all his
  campaigns, and lived with him on intimate terms. The chronicle covers
  the whole period of the duke's life, but the earlier part, up to 1425,
  is much less full and important than the later, which is based on
  Gruel's personal knowledge and observation. In spite of a perhaps
  exaggerated admiration for his hero, Gruel displays in his work so
  much good faith, insight and originality that he is accepted as a
  thoroughly trustworthy authority. It was first published at Paris in
  1622. Of the numerous later editions, the best is that of Achille le
  Vavasseur, _Chronique d'Arthur de Richemont_ (Paris, 1890). See also
  E. Cosneau, _Le Connétable de Richemont_ (Paris, 1886); G. du Fresne
  de Beaucourt, _Histoire de Charles VII._ (Paris, 1881, seq.).