ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION, in English company law, the regulations for the
internal management of a joint stock company registered under the
Companies Acts. They are, in fact, the terms of the partnership agreed
upon by the shareholders among themselves. They regulate such matters as
the transfer and forfeiture of shares, calls upon shares, the
appointment and qualification of directors, their powers and
proceedings, general meetings of the shareholders, votes, dividends, the
keeping and audit of accounts, and other such matters. In regard to
these internal regulations the legislature has left the company free to
adopt whatever terms of association it chooses. It has furnished in the
schedule to the Companies Act 1862 (Table A), a model or specimen set of
regulations, but their adoption, wholly or in part, is optional; only if
a company does not register articles of its own these statutory
regulations are to apply. When, as is commonly the case, a company
decides to have articles of its own framing, such articles must be
expressed in separate paragraphs, numbered arithmetically, and signed by
the subscribers of the memorandum of association. They must also be
printed, stamped like a deed, and attested. When so perfected, they are
to be delivered, with the memorandum of association, to the registrar of
joint stock companies, who is to retain and register them. The articles
of association thereupon become a public document, which any person may
inspect on payment of a fee of one shilling. This has important
consequences, because every person dealing with the company is presumed
to be acquainted with its constitution, and to have read its articles.
The articles, also, upon registration, bind the company and its members
to the same extent as if each member had subscribed his name and affixed
his seal to them. (See also MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION; COMPANY;
INCORPORATION.)

In the United States, articles of association are any instrument in
writing which sets forth the purposes, the terms and conditions upon
which a body of persons have united for the prosecution of a joint
enterprise. When this instrument is duly executed and filed, the law
gives it the force and effects of a charter of incorporation.