ARTIODACTYLA (from Gr. [Greek: artios], even, and [Greek: daktylos], a
finger or toe, "even-toed"), the suborder of ungulate mammals in which
the central (and in some cases the only) pair of toes in each foot are
arranged symmetrically on each side of a vertical line running through
the axes of the limbs. As contrasted with the Perissodactyla living, and
in a great degree extinct, Artiodactyla are characterized by the
following structural features. The upper premolar and molar teeth are
not alike, the former being single and the latter two-lobed; and the
last lower molar of both first and second dentition is almost invariably
three-lobed. Nasal bones not expanded posteriorly. No alisphenoid canal.
Dorsal and lumbar vertebrae together always nineteen, though the former
may vary from twelve to fifteen. Femur without third trochanter. Third
and fourth digits of both feet almost equally developed, and their
terminal phalanges flattened on their inner or contiguous surfaces, so
that each is not symmetrical in itself, but when the two are placed
together they form a figure symmetrically disposed to a line drawn
between them. Or, in other words, the axis or median line of the whole
foot is a line drawn between the third and fourth digits (fig. 1). Lower
articular surface of the astragalus divided into two nearly equal
facets, one for the navicular and a second for the cuboid bone. The
calcaneum with an articular facet for the lower end of the fibula.
Stomach almost always more or less complex. Colon convoluted. Caecum
small. Placenta diffused or cotyledonary. Teats either few and inguinal,
or numerous and abdominal.

Artiodactyla date from the Eocene period, when they appear to have been
less numerous than the Perissodactyla, although at the present day they
are immeasurably ahead of that group, and form indeed the dominant
ungulates. As regards the gradual specialization and development of the
modern types, the following features are noteworthy.

1. As regards the teeth, we have the passage of a simply tubercular, or
bunodont ([Greek: bounos], a hillock) type of molar into one in which
the four main tubercles, or columns, have assumed a crescentic form,
whence this type is termed selenodont ([Greek: selaenae], the new moon).
Further, there is the modification of the latter from a short-crowned,
or brachyodont type, to one in which the columns are tall, constituting
the hypsodont, or hypsiselenodont, type. It is noteworthy, however, that
in some instances there appears to have been a retrograde modification
from the selenodont towards the bunodont type, the hippopotamus being a
case in point. Other modifications are the loss of the upper incisors;
the development of the canines into projecting tusks; and the loss of
the anterior premolars.

2. As regards the limbs. Reduction of the ulna from a complete and
distinct bone to a comparatively rudimentary state in which it coalesces
more or less firmly with the radius. Reduction of the fibula till
nothing but its lower extremity remains. Reduction and final loss of
outer pair of digits (second and fifth), with coalescence of the
metacarpal and metatarsal bones of the two middle digits to form a
cannon-bone. Union of the navicular and cuboid, and sometimes the
ectocuneiform bone, of the tarsus.

3. Change of form of the odontoid process of the second or axis
vertebrae from a cone to a hollow half-cylinder.

4. Development of horns or antlers on the frontal bones, and gradual
complication of form of antlers.

5. By inference only, increasing complication of stomach with ruminating
function superadded. Modification of placenta from simple diffused to
cotyledonary form.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Bones of Right Fore Feet of existing
Artiodactyla.

  A, Pig (_Sus scrofa_).             l, Lunar.
  B, Red deer (_Cervus elaphus_).    s, Scaphoid.
  C, Camel (_Camelus bactrianus_).   u, Unciform.
  U, Ulna.                           m, Magnum.
  R, Radius.                         td, Trapezoid.]
  c, Cuneiform.

In the Sheep and the Camel the long compound bone, supporting the two
main (or only) toes is the cannon-bone.

The primitive Artiodactyla thus probably had the typical number (44) of
incisor, canine and molar teeth, brachyodont molars, conical odontoid
process, four distinct toes on each foot, with metacarpal, metatarsal
and all the tarsal bones distinct, and no frontal appendages.

  Pecora.

As regards classification, the first group is that of the Pecora, or
Cotylophora, in which the cheek-teeth are selenodont, but there are no
upper incisors or canine-like premolars, while upper canines are
generally absent, though sometimes largely developed. Inferior incisors,
three on each side with an incisiform canine in contact with them.
Cheek-teeth consisting of p.3/3, m.3/3, in continuous series. Auditory
bulla simple and hollow within. Odontoid process of second vertebra in
the form of a crescent, hollow above. Lower extremity of the fibula
represented by a distinct malleolar bone articulating with the outer
surface of the lower end of the tibia. Third and fourth metacarpals and
metatarsals confluent into cannon-bones (fig. 1 B), and the toes
enclosed in hoofs. Outer toes small and rudimentary, or in some cases
entirely suppressed; their metacarpal or metatarsal bones never
complete. Navicular and cuboid bones of tarsus united. The skull
generally lacks a sagittal crest; and the condyle of the lower jaw is
transversely elongated. Horns or antlers usually present, at least in
the male sex. Left brachial artery arising from a common innominate
trunk, instead of coming off separately from the aortic arch. Stomach
with four complete cavities. Placenta cotyledonous. Teats 2 or 4.

The group at the present day is divided into _Giraffidae_ (giraffe and
okapi), _Cervidae_ (deer), _Antilocapridae_ (prongbuck), and _Bovidae_
(oxen, sheep, goats, antelopes, &c.). (See PECORA.)

  Tylopoda.

The second group is represented at the present day by the camels
(_Camelus_) of the Old, and the llamas (_Lama_) of the New World,
collectively constituting the family _Camelidae_. They derive their name
of Tylopoda ("boss-footed") from the circumstance that the feet form
large cushion-like pads, supporting the weight of the body, while the
toes have broad nails on their upper surface only, instead of being
encased in hoofs. The cheek-teeth are selenodont, and one pair of upper
incisors is retained, while some of the anterior premolars assume a
canine-like shape, and are separated from the rest of the cheek-series.
Auditory bulla filled with honeycombed bony tissue. Odontoid process of
second vertebra semi-cylindrical; skull with a sagittal crest; and the
condyle of the lower jaw rounded. Third and fourth metacarpals and
metatarsals (which are alone present) fused into cannon-bones for the
greater part of their length, but diverging inferiorly (fig. 1, C) and
with their articular surfaces for the toes smooth, instead of ridged as
in the Pecora. Navicular and cuboid bones of tarsus distinct. No horns
or antlers. Stomach, although complex, differing essentially from that
of the Pecora. Placenta diffuse, without cotyledons. Teats few. (See
TYLOPODA.)

In the same sectional group is included the North American family of
oreodonts (_Oreodontidae_), which are much more primitive ruminants, with
shorter necks and limbs, the full series of 44 teeth, all in apposition,
and the metacarpal and metatarsal bones separate, and the toes generally
of more normal type, although sometimes claw-like. (See OREODON.) The
Eocene American genus _Homacodon_ is regarded as representing a third
family group, the _Homacodontidae (= Pantolestidae_), in which the molars
were of a bunodont type, and approximate to those of the Condylarthra
from which this family appears to have sprung, and to have given origin
on the one hand to the _Oreodontidae_, and on the other to the
_Camelidae_. The family is represented in the Lower, or Wasatch, Eocene
by _Trigonolestes_, in the Middle (Bridger) Eocene by _Homacodon_
(Pantolestes), and in the Upper (Uinta) Eocene by _Bunomeryx_.

  Tragulina.

The third group is that represented by the chevrotains or mouse-deer,
forming the family _Tragulidae_, with _Tragulus_ in south-eastern Asia
and _Dorcatherium_ (or _Hyomoschus_) in equatorial Africa. The
cheek-teeth are selenodont, as in the two preceding groups; there are no
upper incisors, but there are long, narrow and pointed upper canines,
which attain a large size in the males; the lower canines are
incisor-like, as in the Pecora, and there are no caniniform premolars in
either jaw. Cheek-teeth in a continuous series consisting of p. 3/3, m.
3/3. Odontoid process of axis conical. Fibula complete. Four complete
toes on each foot. The middle metacarpals and metatarsals generally
confluent, the outer ones (second and fifth) slender but complete, i.e.
extending from the carpus or tarsus to the digit. Navicular, cuboid and
ectocuneiform bones of tarsus united. Auditory bulla of skull filled
with cancellar tissue. No frontal appendages. Ruminating, but the
stomach with only three distinct compartments, the maniplies or third
cavity of the stomach of the Pecora being rudimentary. Placenta
diffused. (See CHEVROTAIN.)

  Anoplotherina.

In this place must be mentioned the extinct Oligocene European group
typified by the well-known genus _Anoplotherium_ of the Paris
gypsum-quarries, and hence termed Anoplotherina, although the
alternative title Dichobunoidea has been suggested. It includes the two
families _Anoplotheriidae_ and _Dichobunidae_, of which the first died
out with the Oligocene, while the second may have given origin to the
Tragulina and perhaps the Pecora. There is the full series of 44 teeth,
generally without any gaps, and most of the bones of the skeleton are
separate and complete; while, in many instances at any rate, the tail
was much longer than in any existing ungulates, and the whole bodily
form approximated to that of a carnivore. The upper molars, which may
be either selenodont or buno-selenodont, carry five cusps each, instead
of the four characteristic of all the preceding groups; and they are all
very low-crowned, so as to expose the whole of the valleys between the
cusps. In _Anoplotherium_, some of the species of which were larger than
tapirs, there were either two or three toes, the latter number being
almost unique among the Artiodactyla. Allied genera are _Diplobune_ and
_Dacrytherium_.

The _Dichobunidae_ include the genus _Dichobune_, of which the species
were small animals with buno-selenodont molars. _Xiphodon_ and
_Dichodon_ represent another type with cutting premolars and selenodont
molars; while _Caenotherium_ and _Plesiomeryx_ form yet another branch,
with resemblances to the ruminants. The most interesting genera are
however, the Upper Oligocene and Lower Miocene _Gelocus_ and
_Prodremotherium_, which have perfectly selenodont teeth, and the third
and fourth metacarpal and metatarsal bones respectively fused into an
imperfect cannon-bone, with the reduction of the lateral metacarpals and
metatarsals to mere remnants of their upper and lower extremities. While
_Gelocus_ exhibits a marked approximation to the _Tragulidae,
Prodremotherium_ comes nearer to the _Cervidae_, of which it not
improbably indicates the ancestral type. The _Dichobunidae_ may be
regarded as occupying a position analogous to that of the
_Homacodontidae_ in the Tylopoda, and like the latter, are probably the
direct descendants of Condylarthra.

[Illustration: FIG 2.--Restoration of _Anoplotherium commune._]

  Suina.

The last section of the Artiodactyla is that of the Suina, represented
at the present day by the pigs (_Suidae_), and the hippopotamuses
(_Hippopotamidae_), and in past times by the _Anthracotheriidae_, in
which may probably be included the _Elotheriidae._ In the existing
members of the group the cheek-teeth approximate to the bunodont type,
although showing signs of being degenerate modifications of the
selenodont modification. There is at least one pair of upper incisors,
while the full series of 44 teeth may be present. The metacarpals and
metatarsals are generally distinct (fig. 1 A), and never fuse into a
complete cannon-bone; and the navicular and cuboid bones of the tarsus
are separate. The odontoid process of the second vertebra is pig-like:
and the tibia and fibula and radius and ulna are severally distinct. The
stomach is simple or somewhat complex, and the placenta diffused. The
_Suidae_ include the Old World pigs (_Suinae_) and the American
peccaries (_Dicotylinae_), and are characterized by the snout
terminating in a fleshy disk-like expansion, in the midst of which are
perforated the nostrils; while the toes are enclosed in sharp hoofs, of
which the lateral ones do not touch the ground. There is a caecum. The
_Dicotylinae_ differ from the _Suinae_ in that the upper canines are
directed downwards (instead of curving upwards) and have sharp
cutting-edges, while the toes are four in front and three behind
(instead of four on each foot), and the stomach is complex instead of
simple. In the Old World a large number of fossil forms are known, of
which the earliest is the Egyptian Eocene _Geniohyus._ Originally the
family was an Old World type, but in the Miocene it gained access into
North America, where the earliest form is _Bothriolabis_, an ancestral
peccary showing signs of affinity with the European Miocene genus
_Palaeochoerus._ (See SWINE and PECCARY.)

The _Hippopotamidae_ are an exclusively Old World group, in which the
muzzle is broad and rounded and quite unlike that of the _Suidae_, while
the crowns of the cheek-teeth form a distinctly trefoil pattern, when
partially worn, which is only foreshadowed in those of the latter. The
short and broad teeth terminate in four subequal toes, protected by
short rounded hoofs, and all reaching the ground. The hinder end of the
lower jaw is provided with a deep descending flange. Both incisors and
canines are devoid of roots and grow throughout life, the canines, and
in the typical species one pair of lower incisors, growing to an immense
size. The stomach is complex; but there is no caecum. Although now
exclusively African, the family (of which all the representatives may be
included in the single genus _Hippopotamus_, with several subgeneric
groups) is represented in the Pliocene of Europe and the Lower Pliocene
of northern India. Its place of origin cannot yet be determined.

The extinct _Anthracotheriidae_ were evidently nearly allied to the
_Hippopotamidae_, of which they are in all probability the ancestral
stock. They agree, for instance, with that family in the presence of a
descending flange at the hinder end of each side of the lower jaw; but
their dentition is of a more generalized type, comprising the full
series of 44 teeth, among which the incisors and canines are of normal
form, but specially enlarged, and developing roots in the usual manner.
The molars are partially selenodont in the typical genus
_Anthracotherium_, with five cusps, or columns, on the crowns of those
of the upper jaw, which are nearly square. The genus has a very wide
distribution, extending from Europe through Asia to North America, and
occurring in strata which are of Oligocene and Miocene age. In _Ancodon_
(_Hyopotamus_) the cusps on the molars are taller, so that the dentition
is more decidedly selenodont; the distribution of this genus includes
not only Europe, Asia and North Africa, but also Egypt where it occurs
in Upper Eocene beds in company with the European genus _Rhagatherium_,
which is nearer _Anthracotherium._ On the other hand, in
_Merycopotamus_, of the Lower Pliocene of India and Burma, the upper
molars have lost the fifth intermediate cusp of _Ancodon_; and thus,
although highly selenodont, might be easily modified, by a kind of
retrograde development, into the trefoil-columned molars of
_Hippopotamus._ In the above genera, so far as is known, the feet were
four-toed, although with the lateral digits relatively small; but in
_Elotherium_ (or _Entelodon_), from the Lower Miocene of Europe and the
Oligocene of North America, the two lateral digits in each foot had
disappeared. This is the more remarkable seeing that _Elotherium_ may be
regarded as a kind of bunodont _Anthracotherium._ It shows the
characteristic hippopotamus-flange to the lower jaw, but has also a
large descending process from the jugal bone of the zygomatic arch of
the skull. Finally, we have in the Pliocene of India the genus
_Tetraconodon_, remarkable for the enormous size attained by the bluntly
conical premolars; as the molars are purely bunodont, this genus seems
to be a late and specialized survivor of a primitive type.     (R. L.*)