ARTOIS, an ancient province of the north of France, corresponding to the
present department of Pas de Calais, with the exclusion of the
arrondissements of Boulogne and Montreuil, which belonged to Picardy. It
is a rich and well-watered country, producing abundance of grain and
hops, and yielding excellent pasture for cattle. The capital of the
province was Arras, and the other important places were Saint-Omer,
Béthune, Aire, Hesdin, Bapaume, Lens, Lillers, Saint-Pol and
Saint-Venant. The name Artois (still more corrupted in "Arras") is
derived from the Atrebates, who possessed the district in the time of
Caesar. From the 9th to the 12th century Artois belonged to the counts
of Flanders. It was bestowed in 1180 on Philip Augustus of France by
Philip of Alsace, as the dowry of his niece Isabella of Hainaut. At her
death in 1190, Baldwin IX., count of Flanders (d. 1206), and then his
son-in-law, Ferrand (Ferdinand) of Portugal, count of Flanders, disputed
the possession of the country with the king of France, Ferrand being in
the coalition which was overthrown by Philip Augustus at Bouvines
(1214). In 1237 Artois, which was raised to a countship the following
year, was conferred as an appanage by Saint Louis on his brother
Robert, who died on crusade in 1250. His son, Robert II., took part in
the wars in Navarre, Sicily, Guienne and Flanders, and was killed at the
battle of Courtrai in 1302. After his death, his son Philip having
predeceased him (1298), Artois was adjudged to his daughter Mahaut, or
Matilda, as against her nephew Robert, son of Philip, who attempted to
support his claim to the countship by forged titles. Banished from
France for this crime (1322), Robert of Artois took refuge in England,
where he became earl of Richmond, and incited Edward III. to make war
upon Philip of Valois. His descendants, the counts of Eu (q.v.),
continued to style themselves counts of Artois. By the marriage of
Mahaut (d. 1329) with Otto IV., Artois passed to the house of Burgundy,
in whose possession it remained till the marriage of Mary, the daughter
of Charles the Bold, to the archduke Maximilian brought it to the house
of Austria. Louis XI., however, occupied portions of Artois, and the
claims of Austria were contested by France until the treaty of Senlis
(1493). The emperor Charles V. established the council of Artois, with
sovereign authority. At the end of the Thirty Years' War Artois was
again conquered by the French, and the conquest was ratified in the
treaty of the Pyrenees (1659) by Spain, to whom the province had fallen
in 1634. During the war between France and Holland (1672-77) and that of
the Spanish Succession. Artois was invaded again, but the treaties of
Nijmwegen (1678) and of Utrecht (1713) confirmed the sovereignty of
France. The title of count of Artois was borne by Charles X. of France
before his accession to the throne. This new creation became extinct on
the death of the comte de Chambord in 1883.