ARU ISLANDS (Dutch _Aroe_), a group in the residency of Amboyna, Dutch
East Indies; between 5° 18' and 7° 5' S., and 134° and 135° E.; the
member nearest to the south-west coast of New Guinea lying about 70 m.
from it. The larger islands (Wokan, Kobrur, Maikor and Trangan), and
certain of the lesser ones, are regarded by the Malays as one land mass
which they call _tana besar_ ("great land"). This is justified inasmuch
as its parts are only isolated by narrow creeks of curious form, having
the character of rivers. The smaller islands number some eighty; the
total land area is 3244 sq. m.; and the population about 22,000. The
islands are low, but it is only on the coast that the ground is swampy.
The principal formation is coralline limestone; the eastern coast is
defended by coral reefs, and the neighbouring sea (extending as far as
New Guinea, and thus demonstrating a physical connexion with that land)
is shallow, and abounds in coral in full growth. A large part of the
surface is covered with virgin forest, consisting of screw-pines, palm
trees, tree ferns, canariums, &c. The fauna is altogether Papuan. The
natives are also Papuans, but of mixed blood. They are divided into two
confederations, the Uli-luna and the Uli-sawa, which are hostile to each
other. The houses are remarkable as being built on piles sunk in the
solid rock and having two rooms, the one surrounding the other. The
people are in manners complete savages. The natives are governed by
rajas (_orang kajas_), the Dutch government being represented by a
_posthouder._ In the interior is said to exist a tribe--the
Korongoeis--with white skins and fair hair, but it has never been seen
by travellers. A few villages are nominally Christian, and the Malays
have introduced Mahommedanism, but most of the natives have no religion.
Dobbo, on a small western island, is the chief place; its resident
population is reinforced annually, at the time of the west monsoon, by
traders from that quarter, who deal in the tripang, pearl shell,
tortoise-shell, and other produce of the islands.