ARUNDEL, EARLDOM OF. This historic dignity, the premier earldom of
England, is popularly but erroneously supposed to be annexed to the
possession of Arundel Castle. Norman earls were earls of counties,
though sometimes styled from their chief residence or from the county
town, and Mr J.H. Round has shown that the earldom of "Arundel" was
really that of Sussex. Its origin was the grant by Henry I. to his
second wife, in dower, of the forfeited "honour" of Arundel, of which
the castle was the head, and which comprised a large portion of Sussex.
After his death she married William "de Albini" (i.e. d'Aubigny), who
from about the year 1141 is variously styled earl of Sussex, of
Chichester, or of Arundel, or even Earl William "de Albini." His first
known appearance as earl is at Christmas 1141, and it has been
ascertained that, after acquiring the castle by marriage, he had not
thereby become an earl. Henry II., on his accession, "gave" him the
castle and honour of Arundel, in fee, together with "the third penny of
the pleas of Sussex, of which he is earl." His male line of heirs became
extinct on the death of Hugh "de Albini," earl of Arundel, in 1243, who
had four sisters and co-heirs. In the partition of his estates, the
castle and honour of Arundel were assigned to his second sister's son,
John Fitzalan of a Breton house, from which sprang also the royal house
of Stuart. It is proved, however, by record evidence, that neither John
nor his son and successor were ever earls; but from about the end of
1289, when his grandson Richard came of age, he is styled earl of
Arundel. Richard's son Edmund was forfeited and beheaded in 1326, and
Arundel was out of possession of the family till 1331, when his son was
restored, and regained the castle and also the earldom by separate
grants. Both were again lost in 1397 on his son being beheaded and
attainted. But the latter's son was restored to both the earldom and the
estates by Henry IV. in 1400. He died without issue in 1415.

The castle and estates now passed to the late earl's cousin and
heir-male under a family entail, but the representation in blood of the
late earl passed to his sisters and co-heirs, of whom the eldest had
married Thomas Mowbray, duke of Norfolk. The descent of the earldom
remained in doubt, till the heir-male's son and heir successfully
claimed it in 1433, in virtue of his tenure of the castle, alleging that
it was "a dignity or name united and annexed to the castle and lordship
of Arundel for time whereof memory of man was not to the contrary." His
claim was opposed on behalf of the Mowbrays, and the allegation on which
it was based is discussed and refuted at great length in the _Lords'
Reports on the Dignity of a Peer_ (i. 404-429). In the descendants of
his brother the earldom remained vested till 1580, when the last
Fitzalan earl died, leaving as his sole heir his daughter's son Philip
Howard, whose father Thomas, duke of Norfolk, had been beheaded and
attainted in 1572.

Philip, who was through his father senior representative of the earls of
Arundel down to 1415, and through his mother sole representative of the
subsequent earls, was summoned to parliament as earl in January 1581,
but was attainted in 1589. His son Thomas was restored to the earldom
and certain other honours in 1604, and, in 1627, obtained an act of
parliament "concerning the title, name and dignity of Earl of Arundel,
and for the annexing of the Castle, Honour, Manor and Lordship of
Arundel ... with the titles and dignities of the Baronies of Fitzalan,
Clun and Oswaldestre, and Maltravers, ... to the same title, name and
dignity of Earl of Arundel." This act, which was based on the earl's
allegation that the title had been "invariably used and enjoyed" by the
owners of the castle, "and by reason of the said inheritance and
seisin," has been much discussed, especially in the _Lords' Reports_ (i.
430-434). There is no doubt that the earl's object was to entail the
earldom and the castle strictly on a certain line of heirs, and this was
effected by elaborate remainders (passing over the Howards, earls of
Suffolk). It is under this act of parliament that the earldom has been
held ever since, and that it passed with the castle in 1777 to the
heir-male of the Howards, although the representation in blood then
passed to heirs general. Thus the castle and the earldom cannot be
alienated from the line of heirs on whom it is entailed by the act of
1627; while the heirship in blood of the earlier earls (to 1415) is
vested in Lords Mowbray and Petre and the Baroness Berkeley, and that of
the later earls (to 1777) in Lords Mowbray and Petre.

The precedence of the earldom was challenged in 1446 by Thomas
Courtenay, earl of Devon, owing to the question as to its descent spoken
of above, but the king in council confirmed to the earl the precedence
of his ancestors "by reason of the Castle, Honour and Lordship of
Arundel." In the act of 1627 the "places" and "pre-eminences" belonging
to the earldom were secured to it. It would appear, however, that the
decision of the dispute with the earl of Devon in 1446 restricts that
precedency to such as the earl's ancestors had enjoyed, if indeed it
goes farther than to guarantee his precedence over the earl of Devon.
But as there is no other existing earldom older than that of Shrewsbury
(1442), the present position of Arundel as the premier earldom is beyond
dispute.

  See _Lords' Reports on the Dignity of a Peer_; Dugdale's _Baronage_;
  Tierney's _History of Arundel_; G.E. C[okayne]'s _Complete Peerage_;
  Round's _Geoffrey de Mandeville_; Pike's _Constitutional History of
  the House of Lords_.     (J. H. R.)