AUSTRIAN SUCCESSION, WAR OF THE (1740-1748). This war began with the
invasion of Silesia by Frederick II. of Prussia in 1740, and was ended by
the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle (Aachen) in 1748. After 1741 nearly all the
powers of Europe were involved in the struggle, but the most enduring
interest of the war lies in the struggle of Prussia and Austria for
Silesia. Southwest Germany, the Low Countries and Italy were, as usual, the
battle-grounds of France and Austria. The constant allies of France and
Prussia were Spain and Bavaria; various other powers at intervals joined
them. The cause of Austria was supported almost as a matter of course by
England and Holland, the traditional enemies of France. Of Austria's allies
from time to time Sardinia and Saxony were the most important.

1. _Frederick's Invasion of Silesia, 1740._--Prussia in 1740 was a small,
compact and thoroughly organized power, with an army 100,000 strong. The
only recent war service of this army had been in the desultory Rhine
campaign of 1733-35. It was therefore regarded as one of the minor armies
of Europe, and few thought that it could rival the forces of Austria and
France. But it was drilled to a perfection not hitherto attained, and the
Prussian infantry soldier was so well trained and equipped that [v.03
p.0040] he could fire five shots to the Austrian's three, though the
cavalry and artillery were less efficient. But the initial advantage of
Frederick's army was that it had, undisturbed by wars, developed the
standing army theory to full effect. While the Austrians had to wait for
drafts to complete the field forces, Prussian regiments could take the
field at once, and thus Frederick was able to overrun Silesia almost
unopposed. His army was concentrated quietly upon the Oder, and without
declaration of war, on the 16th of December 1740, it crossed the frontier
into Silesia. The Austrian generals could do no more than garrison a few
fortresses, and with the small remnant of their available forces fell back
to the mountain frontier of Bohemia and Moravia. The Prussian army was soon
able to go into winter quarters, holding all Silesia and investing the
strong places of Glogau, Brieg and Neisse.

2. _Silesian Campaign of 1741._--In February 1741, the Austrians collected
a field army under Count Neipperg (1684-1774) and made preparations to
reconquer Silesia. The Austrians in Neisse and Brieg still held out.
Glogau, however, was stormed on the night of the 9th of March, the
Prussians, under Prince Leopold (the younger) of Anhalt-Dessau, executing
their task in one hour with a mathematical precision which excited
universal admiration. But the Austrian army in Moravia was now in the
field, and Frederick's cantonments were dispersed over all Upper Silesia.
It was a work of the greatest difficulty to collect the army, for the
ground was deep in snow, and before it was completed Neisse was relieved
and the Prussians cut off from their own country by the march of Neipperg
from Neisse on Brieg; a few days of slow manoeuvring between these places
ended in the battle of Mollwitz (10th April 1741), the first pitched battle
fought by Frederick and his army. The Prussian right wing of cavalry was
speedily routed, but the day was retrieved by the magnificent discipline
and tenacity of the infantry. The Austrian cavalry was shattered in
repeated attempts to ride them down, and before the Prussian volleys the
Austrian infantry, in spite of all that Neipperg and his officers could do,
gradually melted away. After a stubborn contest the Prussians remained
masters of the field. Frederick himself was far away. He had fought in the
cavalry mêlée, but after this, when the battle seemed lost, he had been
persuaded by Field Marshal Schwerin to ride away. Schwerin thus, like
Marshal Saxe at Fontenoy, remained behind to win the victory, and the king
narrowly escaped being captured by wandering Austrian hussars. The
immediate result of the battle was that the king secured Brieg, and
Neipperg fell back to Neisse, where he maintained himself and engaged in a
war of manoeuvre during the summer. But Europe realized suddenly that a new
military power had arisen, and France sent Marshal Belleisle to Frederick's
camp to negotiate an alliance. Thenceforward the "Silesian adventure"
became the War of the Austrian Succession. The elector of Bavaria's
candidature for the imperial dignity was to be supported by a French
"auxiliary" army, and other French forces were sent to observe Hanover.
Saxony was already watched by a Prussian army under Prince Leopold of
Anhalt-Dessau, the "old Dessauer," who had trained the Prussian army to its
present perfection. The task of Sweden was to prevent Russia from attacking
Prussia, but her troops were defeated, on the 3rd of September 1741, at
Wilmanstrand by a greatly superior Russian army, and in 1742 another great
reverse was sustained in the capitulation of Helsingfors. In central Italy
an army of Neapolitans and Spaniards was collected for the conquest of the
Milanese.

3. _The Allies in Bohemia._--The French duly joined the elector's forces on
the Danube and advanced on Vienna; but the objective was suddenly changed,
and after many countermarches the allies advanced, in three
widely-separated corps, on Prague. A French corps moved via Amberg and
Pilsen. The elector marched on Budweis, and the Saxons (who had now joined
the allies) invaded Bohemia by the Elbe valley. The Austrians could at
first offer little resistance, but before long a considerable force
intervened at Tabor between the Danube and the allies, and Neipperg was now
on the march from Neisse to join in the campaign. He had made with
Frederick the curious agreement of Klein Schnellendorf (9th October 1741),
by which Neisse was surrendered after a mock siege, and the Austrians
undertook to leave Frederick unmolested in return for his releasing
Neipperg's army for service elsewhere. At the same time the Hungarians,
moved to enthusiasm by the personal appeal of Maria Theresa, had put into
the field a _levée en masse_, or "insurrection," which furnished the
regular army with an invaluable force of light troops. A fresh army was
collected under Field Marshal Khevenhüller at Vienna, and the Austrians
planned an offensive winter campaign against the Franco-Bavarian forces in
Bohemia and the small Bavarian army that remained on the Danube to defend
the electorate. The French in the meantime had stormed Prague on the 26th
of November, the grand-duke Francis, consort of Maria Theresa, who
commanded the Austrians in Bohemia, moving too slowly to save the fortress.
The elector of Bavaria, who now styled himself archduke of Austria, was
crowned king of Bohemia (19th December 1741) and elected to the imperial
throne as Charles VII. (24th January 1742), but no active measures were
undertaken. In Bohemia the month of December was occupied in mere
skirmishes. On the Danube, Khevenhüller, the best general in the Austrian
service, advanced on the 27th of December, swiftly drove back the allies,
shut them up in Linz, and pressed on into Bavaria. Munich itself
surrendered to the Austrians on the coronation day of Charles VII. At the
close of this first act of the campaign the French, under the old Marshal
de Broglie, maintained a precarious foothold in central Bohemia, menaced by
the main army of the Austrians, and Khevenhüller was ranging unopposed in
Bavaria, while Frederick, in pursuance of his secret obligations, lay
inactive in Silesia. In Italy the allied Neapolitans and Spaniards had
advanced towards Modena, the duke of which state had allied himself with
them, but the vigilant Austrian commander Count Traun had outmarched them,
captured Modena, and forced the duke to make a separate peace.

4. _Campaign of 1742._--Frederick had hoped by the truce to secure Silesia,
for which alone he was fighting. But with the successes of Khevenhüller and
the enthusiastic "insurrection" of Hungary, Maria Theresa's opposition
became firmer, and she divulged the provisions of the truce, in order to
compromise Frederick with his allies. The war recommenced. Frederick had
not rested on his laurels; in the uneventful summer campaign of 1741 he had
found time to begin that reorganization of his cavalry which was before
long to make it even more efficient than his infantry. Charles VII., whose
territories were overrun by the Austrians, asked him to create a diversion
by invading Moravia. In December 1741, therefore, Schwerin had crossed the
border and captured Olmütz. Glatz also was invested, and the Prussian army
was concentrated about Olmütz in January 1742. A combined plan of
operations was made by the French, Saxons and Prussians for the rescue of
Linz. But Linz soon fell; Broglie on the Moldau, weakened by the departure
of the Bavarians to oppose Khevenhüller, and of the Saxons to join forces
with Frederick, was in no condition to take the offensive, and large forces
under Prince Charles of Lorraine lay in his front from Budweis to Iglau.
Frederick's march was made towards Iglau in the first place. Brünn was
invested about the same time (February), but the direction of the march was
changed, and instead of moving against Prince Charles, Frederick pushed on
southwards by Znaim and Nikolsburg. The extreme outposts of the Prussians
appeared before Vienna. But Frederick's advance was a mere foray, and
Prince Charles, leaving a screen of troops in front of Broglie, marched to
cut off the Prussians from Silesia, while the Hungarian levies poured into
Upper Silesia by the Jablunka Pass. The Saxons, discontented and
demoralized, soon marched off to their own country, and Frederick with his
Prussians fell back by Zwittau and Leutomischl to Kuttenberg in Bohemia,
where he was in touch with Broglie on the one hand and (Glatz having now
surrendered) with Silesia on the other. No defence of Olmütz was attempted,
and the small Prussian corps remaining in Moravia fell back towards Upper
Silesia. Prince Charles, in pursuit of the king [v.03 p.0041] marched by
Iglau and Teutsch (Deutsch) Brod on Kuttenberg, and on the 17th of May was
fought the battle of Chotusitz or Czaslau, in which after a severe struggle
the king was victorious. His cavalry on this occasion retrieved its
previous failure, and its conduct gave an earnest of its future glory not
only by its charges on the battlefield, but its vigorous pursuit of the
defeated Austrians. Almost at the same time Broglie fell upon a part of the
Austrians left on the Moldau and won a small, but morally and politically
important, success in the action of Sahay, near Budweis (May 24, 1742).
Frederick did not propose another combined movement. His victory and that
of Broglie disposed Maria Theresa to cede Silesia in order to make good her
position elsewhere, and the separate peace between Prussia and Austria,
signed at Breslau on the 11th of June, closed the First Silesian War. The
War of the Austrian Succession continued.

5. _The French at Prague._--The return of Prince Charles, released by the
peace of Breslau, put an end to Broglie's offensive. The prince pushed back
the French posts everywhere, and his army converged upon Prague, where,
towards the end of June 1742, the French were to all intents and purposes
surrounded. Broglie had made the best resistance possible with his inferior
forces, and still displayed great activity, but his position was one of
great peril. The French government realized at last that it had given its
general inadequate forces. The French army on the lower Rhine, hitherto in
observation of Hanover and other possibly hostile states, was hurried into
Franconia. Prince Charles at once raised the siege of Prague (September
14), called up Khevenhüller with the greater part of the Austrian army on
the Danube, and marched towards Amberg to meet the new opponent. Marshal
Maillebois (1682-1762), its commander, then manoeuvred from Amberg towards
the Eger valley, to gain touch with Broglie. Marshal Belleisle, the
political head of French affairs in Germany and a very capable general, had
accompanied Broglie throughout, and it seems that Belleisle and Broglie
believed that Maillebois' mission was to regain a permanent foothold for
the army in Bohemia; Maillebois, on the contrary, conceived that his work
was simply to disengage the army of Broglie from its dangerous position,
and to cover its retreat. His operations were no more than a demonstration,
and had so little effect that Broglie was sent for in haste to take over
the command from him, Belleisle at the same time taking over charge of the
army at Prague. Broglie's command was now on the Danube, east of
Regensburg, and the imperial (chiefly Bavarian) army of Charles VII. under
Seckendorf aided him to clear Bavaria of the Austrians. This was effected
with ease, for Khevenhüller and most of his troops had gone to Bohemia.
Prince Charles and Khevenhüller now took post between Linz and Passau,
leaving a strong force to deal with Belleisle in Prague. This, under Prince
Lobkowitz, was little superior in numbers or quality to the troops under
Belleisle, under whom served Saxe and the best of the younger French
generals, but its light cavalry swept the country clear of provisions. The
French were quickly on the verge of starvation, winter had come, and the
marshal resolved to retreat. On the night of the 16th of December 1742, the
army left Prague to be defended by a small garrison under Chevert, and took
the route of Eger. The retreat (December 16-26) was accounted a triumph of
generalship, but the weather made it painful and costly. The brave Chevert
displayed such confidence that the Austrians were glad to allow him freedom
to join the main army. The cause of the new emperor was now sustained only
in the valley of the Danube, where Broglie and Seckendorf opposed Prince
Charles and Khevenhüller, who were soon joined by the force lately opposing
Belleisle.

In Italy, Traun held his own with ease against the Spaniards and
Neapolitans. Naples was forced by a British squadron to withdraw her troops
for home defence, and Spain, now too weak to advance in the Po valley, sent
a second army to Italy via France. Sardinia had allied herself with
Austria, and at the same time neither state was at war with France, and
this led to curious complications, combats being fought in the Isère valley
between the troops of Sardinia and of Spain, in which the French took no
part.

6. _The Campaign of 1743_ opened disastrously for the emperor. The French
and Bavarian armies were not working well together, and Broglie and
Seckendorf had actually quarrelled. No connected resistance was offered to
the converging march of Prince Charles's army along the Danube,
Khevenhüller from Salzburg towards southern Bavaria, and Prince Lobkowitz
(1685-1755) from Bohemia towards the Naab. The Bavarians suffered a severe
reverse near Braunau (May 9, 1743), and now an Anglo-allied army commanded
by King George II., which had been formed on the lower Rhine on the
withdrawal of Maillebois, was advancing southward to the Main and Neckar
country. A French army, under Marshal Noailles, was being collected on the
middle Rhine to deal with this new force. But Broglie was now in full
retreat, and the strong places of Bavaria surrendered one after the other
to Prince Charles. The French and Bavarians had been driven almost to the
Rhine when Noailles and the king came to battle. George, completely
outmanoeuvred by his veteran antagonist, was in a position of the greatest
danger between Aschaffenburg and Hanau in the defile formed by the Spessart
Hills and the river Main. Noailles blocked the outlet and had posts all
around, but the allied troops forced their way through and inflicted heavy
losses on the French, and the battle of Dettingen is justly reckoned as a
notable victory of the British arms (June 27). Both Broglie, who, worn out
by age and exertions, was soon replaced by Marshal Coigny (1670-1759), and
Noailles were now on the strict defensive behind the Rhine. Not a single
French soldier remained in Germany, and Prince Charles prepared to force
the passage of the great river in the Breisgau while the king of England
moved forward via Mainz to co-operate by drawing upon himself the attention
of both the French marshals. The Anglo-allied army took Worms, but after
several unsuccessful attempts to cross, Prince Charles went into winter
quarters. The king followed his example, drawing in his troops to the
northward, to deal, if necessary, with the army which the French were
collecting on the frontier of Flanders. Austria, England, Holland and
Sardinia were now allied. Saxony changed sides, and Sweden and Russia
neutralized each other (peace of Abo, August 1743). Frederick was still
quiescent; France, Spain and Bavaria alone continued actively the struggle
against Maria Theresa.

In Italy, the Spaniards on the Panaro had achieved a Pyrrhic victory over
Traun at Campo Santo (February 8, 1743), but the next six months were
wasted in inaction, and Lobkowitz, joining Traun with reinforcements from
Germany, drove back the enemy to Rimini. The Spanish-Piedmontese war in the
Alps continued without much result, the only incident of note being a
combat at Casteldelfino won by the king of Sardinia in person.

7. _Campaign of 1744._--With 1744 began the Second Silesian War. Frederick,
disquieted by the universal success of the Austrian cause, secretly
concluded a fresh alliance with Louis XV. France had posed hitherto as an
auxiliary, her officers in Germany had worn the Bavarian cockade, and only
with England was she officially at war. She now declared war direct upon
Austria and Sardinia (April 1744). A corps was assembled at Dunkirk to
support the cause of the Pretender in Great Britain, and Louis in person,
with 90,000 men, prepared to invade the Austrian Netherlands, and took
Menin and Ypres. His presumed opponent was the allied army previously under
King George and now composed of English, Dutch, Germans and Austrians. On
the Rhine, Coigny was to make head against Prince Charles, and a fresh army
under the prince de Conti was to assist the Spaniards in Piedmont and
Lombardy. This plan was, however, at once dislocated by the advance of
Charles, who, assisted by the veteran Traun, skilfully manoeuvred his army
over the Rhine near Philipsburg (July 1), captured the lines of
Weissenburg, and cut off the French marshal from Alsace. Coigny, however,
cut his way through the enemy at Weissenburg and posted himself near
Strassburg. Louis XV. now abandoned the invasion of Flanders, and his army
moved down to take a decisive part [v.03 p.0042] in the war in Alsace and
Lorraine. At the same time Frederick crossed the Austrian frontier
(August).

The attention and resources of Austria were fully occupied, and the
Prussians were almost unopposed. One column passed through Saxony, another
through Lusatia, while a third advanced from Silesia. Prague, the
objective, was reached on the 2nd of September. Six days later the Austrian
garrison was compelled to surrender, and the Prussians advanced to Budweis.
Maria Theresa once again rose to the emergency, a new "insurrection" took
the field in Hungary, and a corps of regulars was assembled to cover
Vienna, while the diplomatists won over Saxony to the Austrian side. Prince
Charles withdrew from Alsace, unmolested by the French, who had been thrown
into confusion by the sudden and dangerous illness of Louis XV. at Metz.
Only Seckendorf with the Bavarians pursued him. No move was made by the
French, and Frederick thus found himself after all isolated and exposed to
the combined attack of the Austrians and Saxons. Marshal Traun, summoned
from the Rhine, held the king in check in Bohemia, the Hungarian irregulars
inflicted numerous minor reverses on the Prussians, and finally Prince
Charles arrived with the main army. The campaign resembled that of 1742;
the Prussian retreat was closely watched, and the rearguard pressed hard.
Prague fell, and Frederick, completely outmanoeuvred by the united forces
of Prince Charles and Traun, regained Silesia with heavy losses. At the
same time, the Austrians gained no foothold in Silesia itself. On the
Rhine, Louis, now recovered, had besieged and taken Freiburg, after which
the forces left in the north were reinforced and besieged the strong places
of Flanders. There was also a slight war of manoeuvre on the middle Rhine.

In 1744 the Italian war became for the first time serious. A grandiose plan
of campaign was formed, and as usual the French and Spanish generals at the
front were hampered by the orders of their respective governments. The
object was to unite the army in Dauphiné with that on the lower Po. The
adhesion of Genoa was secured, and a road thereby obtained into central
Italy. But Lobkowitz had already taken the offensive and driven back the
Spanish army of Count de Gages towards the Neapolitan frontier. The king of
Naples at this juncture was compelled to assist the Spaniards at all
hazards. A combined army was formed at Velletri, and defeated Lobkowitz
there on the 11th of August. The crisis past, Lobkowitz then went to
Piedmont to assist the king against Conti, the king of Naples returned
home, and de Gages followed the Austrians with a weak force. The war in the
Alps and the Apennines was keenly contested. Villefranche and Montalban
were stormed by Conti on the 20th of April, a desperate fight took place at
Peyre-Longue on the 18th of July, and the king of Sardinia was defeated in
a great battle at Madonna del Olmo (September 30) near Coni (Cuneo). Conti
did not, however, succeed in taking this fortress, and had to retire into
Dauphiné for his winter quarters. The two armies had, therefore, failed in
their attempt to combine, and the Austro-Sardinians still lay between them.

8. _Campaign of 1745._--The interest of the next campaign centres in the
three greatest battles of the war--Hohenfriedberg, Kesselsdorf and
Fontenoy. The first event of the year was the Quadruple Alliance of
England, Austria, Holland and Saxony, concluded at Warsaw on the 8th of
January. Twelve days previously, the death of Charles VII. submitted the
imperial title to a new election, and his successor in Bavaria was not a
candidate. The Bavarian army was again unfortunate; caught in its scattered
winter quarters (action of Amberg, January 7), it was driven from point to
point, and the young elector had to abandon Munich once more. The peace of
Füssen followed on the 22nd of April, by which he secured his hereditary
states on condition of supporting the candidature of the grand-duke
Francis, consort of Maria Theresa. The "imperial" army ceased _ipso facto_
to exist, and Frederick was again isolated. No help was to be expected from
France, whose efforts this year were centred on the Flanders campaign. In
effect, on the 10th of May, before Frederick took the field, Louis XV. and
Saxe had besieged Tournay, and inflicted upon the relieving army of the
duke of Cumberland the great defeat of Fontenoy (_q.v._). In Silesia the
customary small war had been going on for some time, and the concentration
of the Prussian army was not effected without severe fighting. At the end
of May, Frederick, with about 65,000 men, lay in the camp of Frankenstein,
between Glatz and Neisse, while behind the Riesengebirge about Landshut
Prince Charles had 85,000 Austrians and Saxons. On the 4th of June was
fought the battle of Hohenfriedberg (_q.v._) or Striegau, the greatest
victory as yet of Frederick's career, and, of all his battles, excelled
perhaps by Leuthen and Rossbach only. Prince Charles suffered a complete
defeat and withdrew through the mountains as he had come. Frederick's
pursuit was methodical, for the country was difficult and barren, and he
did not know the extent to which the enemy was demoralized. The manoeuvres
of both leaders on the upper Elbe occupied all the summer, while the
political questions of the imperial election and of an understanding
between Prussia and England were pending. The chief efforts of Austria were
directed towards the valleys of the Main and Lahn and Frankfort, where the
French and Austrian armies manoeuvred for a position from which to overawe
the electoral body. Marshal Traun was successful, and the grand-duke became
the emperor Francis I. on the 13th of September. Frederick agreed with
England to recognize the election a few days later, but Maria Theresa would
not conform to the treaty of Breslau without a further appeal to the
fortune of war. Saxony joined in this last attempt. A new advance of Prince
Charles quickly brought on the battle of Soor, fought on ground destined to
be famous in the war of 1866. Frederick was at first in a position of great
peril, but his army changed front in the face of the advancing enemy and by
its boldness and tenacity won a remarkable victory (September 30). But the
campaign was not ended. An Austrian contingent from the Main joined the
Saxons under Marshal Rutowski, and a combined movement was made in the
direction of Berlin by Rutowski from Saxony and Prince Charles from
Bohemia. The danger was very great. Frederick hurried up his forces from
Silesia and marched as rapidly as possible on Dresden, winning the actions
of Katholisch-Hennersdorf (November 24) and Görlitz (November 25). Prince
Charles was thereby forced back, and now a second Prussian army under the
old Dessauer advanced up the Elbe from Magdeburg to meet Rutowski. The
latter took up a strong position at Kesselsdorf between Meissen and
Dresden, but the veteran Leopold attacked him directly and without
hesitation (December 14). The Saxons and their allies were completely
routed after a hard struggle, and Maria Theresa at last gave way. In the
peace of Dresden (December 25) Frederick recognized the imperial election,
and retained Silesia, as at the peace of Breslau.

9. _Operations in Italy, 1745-1747._--The campaign in Italy this year was
also no mere war of posts. In March 1745 a secret treaty allied the Genoese
republic with France, Spain and Naples. A change in the command of the
Austrians favoured the first move of the allies, De Gages moved from Modena
towards Lucca, the French and Spaniards in the Alps under Marshal
Maillebois advanced through the Riviera to the Tanaro, and in the middle of
July the two armies were at last concentrated between the Scrivia and the
Tanaro, to the unusually large number of 80,000. A swift march on Piacenza
drew the Austrian commander thither, and in his absence the allies fell
upon and completely defeated the Sardinians at Bassignano (September 27), a
victory which was quickly followed by the capture of Alessandria, Valenza
and Casale. Jomini calls the concentration of forces which effected the
victory "le plus remarquable de toute la guerre." But the complicated
politics of Italy brought it about that Maillebois was ultimately unable to
turn his victory to account. Indeed, early in 1746, Austrian troops, freed
by the peace with Frederick, passed through Tirol into Italy; the
Franco-Spanish winter quarters were brusquely attacked, and a French
garrison of 6000 men at Asti was forced to capitulate. At the same time
Count Browne with an Austrian corps struck at the allies on the lower Po,
and cut off their communication with the main body [v.03 p.0043] in
Piedmont. A series of minor actions thus completely destroyed the great
concentration. The allies separated, Maillebois covering Liguria, the
Spaniards marching against Browne. The latter was promptly and heavily
reinforced, and all that the Spaniards could do was to entrench themselves
at Piacenza; the Spanish Infant as supreme commander calling up Maillebois
to his aid. The French, skilfully conducted and marching rapidly, joined
forces once more, but their situation was critical, for only two marches
behind them the army of the king of Sardinia was in pursuit, and before
them lay the principal army of the Austrians. The pitched battle of
Piacenza (June 16) was hard fought, and Maillebois had nearly achieved a
victory when orders from the Infant compelled him to retire. That the army
escaped at all was in the highest degree creditable to Maillebois and to
his son and chief of staff, under whose leadership it eluded both the
Austrians and the Sardinians, defeated an Austrian corps in the battle of
Rottofreddo (August 12), and made good its retreat on Genoa. It was,
however, a mere remnant of the allied army which returned, and the
Austrians were soon masters of north Italy, including Genoa (September).
But they met with no success in their forays towards the Alps. Soon Genoa
revolted from the oppressive rule of the victors, rose and drove out the
Austrians (December 5-11), and the French, now commanded by Belleisle, took
the offensive (1747). Genoa held out against a second Austrian siege, and
after the plan of campaign had as usual been referred to Paris and Madrid,
it was relieved, though a picked corps of the French army under the
chevalier de Belleisle, brother of the marshal, was defeated in the almost
impossible attempt (July 19) to storm the entrenched pass of Exiles (Col di
Assietta), the chevalier, and with him the _élite_ of the French nobility,
being killed at the barricades. Before the steady advance of Marshal
Belleisle the Austrians retired into Lombardy, and a desultory campaign was
waged up to the conclusion of peace.

In North America the most remarkable incident of what has been called "King
George's War" was the capture of the French Canadian fortress of Louisburg
by a British expedition (April 20-June 16, 1745), of which the military
portion was furnished by the colonial militia under Colonel (afterwards
Lieutenant-General Sir William) Pepperell (1696-1759) of Maine. Louisburg
was then regarded merely as a nest of privateers, and at the peace it was
given up, but in the Seven Years' War it came within the domain of grand
strategy, and its second capture was the preliminary step to the British
conquest of Canada. For the war in India, see INDIA: _History_.

10. _Later Campaigns._--The last three campaigns of the war in the
Netherlands were illustrated by the now fully developed genius of Marshal
Saxe. After Fontenoy the French carried all before them. The withdrawal of
most of the English to aid in suppressing the 'Forty-Five rebellion at home
left their allies in a helpless position. In 1746 the Dutch and the
Austrians were driven back towards the line of the Meuse, and most of the
important fortresses were taken by the French. The battle of Roucoux (or
Raucourt) near Liége, fought on the 11th of October between the allies
under Prince Charles of Lorraine and the French under Saxe, resulted in a
victory for the latter. Holland itself was now in danger, and when in April
1747 Saxe's army, which had now conquered the Austrian Netherlands up to
the Meuse, turned its attention to the United Provinces, the old fortresses
on the frontier offered but slight resistance. The prince of Orange and the
duke of Cumberland underwent a severe defeat at Lauffeld (Lawfeld, &c.,
also called Val) on the 2nd of July 1747, and Saxe, after his victory,
promptly and secretly despatched a corps under (Marshal) Löwendahl to
besiege Bergen-op-Zoom. On the 18th of September Bergen-op-Zoom was stormed
by the French, and in the last year of the war Maestricht, attacked by the
entire forces of Saxe and Löwendahl, surrendered on the 7th of May 1748. A
large Russian army arrived on the Meuse to join the allies, but too late to
be of use. The quarrel of Russia and Sweden had been settled by the peace
of Abo in 1743, and in 1746 Russia had allied herself with Austria.
Eventually a large army marched from Moscow to the Rhine, an event which
was not without military significance, and in a manner preluded the great
invasions of 1813-1814 and 1815. The general peace of Aix-la-Chapelle
(Aachen) was signed on the 18th of October 1748.

11. _General Character of the War._--Little need be said of the military
features of the war. The intervention of Prussia as a military power was
indeed a striking phenomenon, but her triumph was in a great measure due to
her fuller application of principles of tactics and discipline universally
recognized though less universally enforced. The other powers reorganized
their forces after the war, not so much on the Prussian model as on the
basis of a stricter application of known general principles. Prussia,
moreover, was far ahead of all the other continental powers in
administration, and over Austria, in particular, her advantage in this
matter was almost decisive of the struggle. Added to this was the personal
ascendancy of Frederick, not yet a great general, but energetic and
resolute, and, further, opposed to generals who were responsible for their
men to their individual sovereigns. These advantages have been decisive in
many wars, almost in all. The special feature of the war of 1740 to 1748,
and of other wars of the time, is the extraordinary disparity between the
end and the means. The political schemes to be executed by the French and
other armies were as grandiose as any of modern times; their execution,
under the then conditions of time and space, invariably fell short of
expectation, and the history of the war proves, as that of the Seven Years'
War was to prove, that the small standing army of the 18th century could
conquer by degrees, but could not deliver a decisive blow. Frederick alone,
with a definite end and proportionate means wherewith to achieve it,
succeeded completely. The French, in spite of their later victories,
obtained so little of what they fought for that Parisians could say to each
other, when they met in the streets, "You are as stupid as the Peace." And
if, when fighting for their own hand, the governments of Europe could so
fail of their purpose, even less was to be expected when the armies were
composed of allied contingents, sent to the war each for a different
object. The allied national armies of 1813 co-operated loyally, for they
had much at stake and worked for a common object; those of 1741 represented
the divergent private interests of the several dynasties, and achieved
nothing.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Besides general works on Frederick's life and reign, of
which Carlyle, Preuss and v. Taysen are of particular importance, and
Frederick's own works, see the Prussian official _Die I. und II.
schlesischen Kriege_ (Berlin, 1890-1895); Austrian official _Kriege der
Kaiserin Maria Theresia; Gesch. des österr. Erbfolgekrieges_ (Vienna, from
1895); Jomini, _Traité des grandes opérations militaires_, introduction to
vol. i. (Paris, 4th edition, 1851); C. von B.-K., _Geist und Stoff im
Kriege_ (Vienna, 1895); v. Arneth, _Maria Teresias ersten Regierungsjahre_
(1863); v. Schöning, _Die 5 erste Jahre der Regierung Friedrichs des
Grossen_; Bernhardi, _Friedrich der Grosse als Feldherr_ (Berlin, 1881); v.
Canitz, _Nachrichten, &c., über die Taten und Schicksale der Reiterei, &c_.
(Berlin, 1861); Grünhagen, _Gesch. des I. schlesischen Krieges_ (Gotha,
1881-1882); Orlich, _Gesch. der schlesischen Kriege_; Deroy, _Beiträge zur
Gesch. des österr. Erbfolgekrieges_ (Munich, 1883); Crousse, _La Guerre de
la succession dans les provinces belgiques_ (Paris, 1885); Duncker,
_Militärische, &c., Aktenstücke zur Gesch. des I. schles. Krieges_;
_Militär-Wochenblatt_ supplements 1875, 1877, 1878, 1883, 1891, 1901, &c.
(Berlin); _Mitteilungen des k.k. Kriegsarchivs_, from 1887 (Vienna);
Baumgart, _Die Litteratur, &c., über Friedrich d. Gr_. (Berlin, 1886);
Fortescue, _History of the British Army_, vol. ii.; F. H. Skrine, _Fontenoy
and the War of the Austrian Succession_ (London, 1906); Francis Parkman, _A
Half-Century of Conflict_ (1892).

(C. F. A.)

_Naval Operations._

The naval operations of this war were languid and confused. They are
complicated by the fact that they were entangled with the Spanish war,
which broke out in 1739 in consequence of the long disputes between England
and Spain over their conflicting claims in America. Until the closing years
they were conducted with small intelligence or spirit. The Spanish
government was nerveless, and sacrificed its true interest to the family
ambition of the king Philip V., who wished to establish his younger sons as
ruling princes in Italy. French administration was corrupt, and the
government was chiefly concerned in its political interests in Germany. The
British navy was at its lowest point of energy [v.03 p.0044] and efficiency
after the long administration of Sir Robert Walpole. Therefore, although
the war contained passages of vigour, it was neither interesting nor
decisive on the sea.

War on Spain was declared by Great Britain on the 23rd of October 1739. It
was universally believed that the Spanish colonies would fall at once
before attack. A plan was laid for combined operations against them from
east and west. One force, military and naval, was to assault them from the
West Indies under Admiral Edward Vernon. Another, to be commanded by
Commodore George Anson, afterwards Lord Anson, was to round Cape Horn and
to fall upon the Pacific coast. Delays, bad preparations, dockyard
corruption, and the unpatriotic squabbles of the naval and military
officers concerned caused the failure of a hopeful scheme. On the 21st of
November 1739 Admiral Vernon did indeed succeed in capturing the
ill-defended Spanish harbour of Porto Bello (in the present republic of
Panama)--a trifling success to boast of. But he did nothing to prevent the
Spanish convoys from reaching Europe. The Spanish privateers cruised with
destructive effect against British trade, both in the West Indies and in
European waters. When Vernon had been joined by Sir Chaloner Ogle with
naval reinforcements and a strong body of troops, an attack was made on
Cartagena in what is now Colombia (March 9-April 24, 1741). The delay had
given the Spanish admiral, Don Bias de Leso, time to prepare, and the siege
failed with a dreadful loss of life to the assailants. Want of success was
largely due to the incompetence of the military officers and the brutal
insolence of the admiral. The war in the West Indies, after two other
unsuccessful attacks had been made on Spanish territory, died down and did
not revive till 1748. The expedition under Anson sailed late, was very ill
provided, and less strong than had been intended. It consisted of six ships
and left England on the 18th of September 1740. Anson returned alone with
his flagship the "Centurion" on the 15th of June 1744. The other vessels
had either failed to round the Horn or had been lost. But Anson had harried
the coast of Chile and Peru and had captured a Spanish galleon of immense
value near the Philippines. His cruise was a great feat of resolution and
endurance.

While Anson was pursuing his voyage round the world, Spain was mainly
intent on the Italian policy of the king. A squadron was fitted out at
Cadiz to convey troops to Italy. It was watched by the British admiral
Nicholas Haddock. When the blockading squadron was forced off by want of
provisions, the Spanish admiral Don José Navarro put to sea. He was
followed, but when the British force came in sight of him Navarro had been
joined by a French squadron under M. de Court (December 1741). The French
admiral announced that he would support the Spaniards if they were attacked
and Haddock retired. France and Great Britain were not yet openly at war,
but both were engaged in the struggle in Germany--Great Britain as the ally
of the queen of Hungary, Maria Theresa; France as the supporter of the
Bavarian claimant of the empire. Navarro and M. de Court went on to Toulon,
where they remained till February 1744. A British fleet watched them, under
the command of admiral Richard Lestock, till Sir Thomas Mathews was sent
out as commander-in-chief, and as minister to the court of Turin. Partial
manifestations of hostility between the French and British took place in
different seas, but avowed war did not begin till the French government
issued its declaration of the 30th of March, to which Great Britain replied
on the 31st. This formality had been preceded by French preparations for
the invasion of England, and by a collision between the allies and Mathews
in the Mediterranean (see TOULON, BATTLE OF). On the 11th of February a
most confused battle was fought, in which the van and centre of the British
fleet was engaged with the rear and centre of the allies. Lestock, who was
on the worst possible terms with his superior, took no part in the action.
He endeavoured to excuse himself by alleging that the orders of Mathews
were contradictory. Mathews, a puzzle-headed and hot-tempered man, fought
with spirit but in a disorderly way, breaking the formation of his fleet,
and showing no power of direction. The mismanagement of the British fleet
in the battle, by arousing deep anger among the people, led to a drastic
reform of the British navy which bore its first fruits before the war
ended.

The French invasion scheme was arranged in combination with the Jacobite
leaders, and soldiers were to be transported from Dunkirk. But though the
British government showed itself wholly wanting in foresight, the plan
broke down. In February 1744, a French fleet of twenty sail of the line
entered the Channel under Jacques Aymar, comte de Roquefeuil, before the
British force under admiral John Norris was ready to oppose him. But the
French force was ill equipped, the admiral was nervous, his mind dwelt on
all the misfortunes which might possibly happen, and the weather was bad.
M. de Roquefeuil came up almost as far as the Downs, where he learnt that
Sir John Norris was at hand with twenty-five sail of the line, and
thereupon precipitately retreated. The military expedition prepared at
Dunkirk to cross under cover of Roquefeuil's fleet naturally did not start.
The utter weakness of the French at sea, due to long neglect of the fleet
and the bankrupt state of the treasury, was shown during the Jacobite
rising of 1745, when France made no attempt to profit by the distress of
the British government. The Dutch having by this time joined Great Britain,
made a serious addition to the naval power opposed to France, though
Holland was compelled by the necessity for maintaining an army in Flanders
to play a very subordinate part at sea. Not being stimulated by formidable
attack, and having immediate interests both at home and in Germany, the
British government was slow to make use of its latest naval strength.
Spain, which could do nothing of an offensive character, was almost
neglected. During 1745 the New England expedition which took Louisburg
(April 30-June 16) was covered by a British naval force, but the operations
were in a general way sporadic, subordinated to the supply of convoy, or to
unimportant particular ends. In the East Indies, Mahé de la Bourdonnais
made a vigorous use of a small squadron to which no effectual resistance
was offered by the British naval forces. He captured Madras (July
24-September 9, 1746), a set-off for Louisburg, for which it was exchanged
at the close of the war. In the same year a British combined naval and
military expedition to the coast of France--the first of a long series of
similar ventures which in the end were derided as "breaking windows with
guineas"--was carried out during August and October. The aim was the
capture of the French East India company's dockyard at L'Orient, but it was
not attained.

From 1747 till the close of the war in October 1748 the naval policy of the
British government, without reaching a high level, was yet more energetic
and coherent. A closer watch was kept on the French coast, and effectual
means were taken to intercept communication between France and her American
possessions. In the spring information was obtained that an important
convoy for the East and West Indies was to sail from L'Orient. In the
previous year the British government had allowed a French expedition under
M. d'Anville to fail mainly by its own weakness. In 1747 a more creditable
line was taken. An overwhelming force was employed under the command of
Anson to intercept the convoy in the Channel. It was met, crushed and
captured, or driven back, on the 3rd of May. On the 14th of October another
French convoy, protected by a strong squadron, was intercepted by a
well-appointed and well-directed squadron of superior numbers--the
squadrons were respectively eight French and fourteen British--in the Bay
of Biscay. The French admiral Desherbiers de l'Étenduère made a very
gallant resistance, and the fine quality of his ships enabled him to
counteract to some extent the superior numbers of Sir Edward Hawke, the
British admiral. While the war-ships were engaged, the merchant vessels,
with the small protection which Desherbiers could spare them, continued on
their way to the West Indies. Most of them were, however, intercepted and
captured in those waters. This disaster convinced the French government of
its helplessness at sea, and it made no further effort.

The last naval operations took place in the West Indies, where the
Spaniards, who had for a time been treated as a negligible quantity, were
attacked on the coast of Cuba by a British [v.03 p.0045] squadron under Sir
Charles Knowles. They had a naval force under Admiral Regio at Havana. Each
side was at once anxious to cover its own trade, and to intercept that of
the other. Capture was rendered particularly desirable to the British by
the fact that the Spanish homeward-bound convoy would be laden with the
bullion sent from the American mines. In the course of the movement of each
to protect its trade, the two squadrons met on the 1st of October 1748 in
the Bahama Channel. The action was indecisive when compared with the
successes of British fleets in later days, but the advantage lay with Sir
Charles Knowles. He was prevented from following it up by the speedy
receipt of the news that peace had been made in Europe by the powers, who
were all in various degrees exhausted. That it was arranged on the terms of
a mutual restoration of conquests shows that none of the combatants could
claim to have established a final superiority. The conquests of the French
in the Bay of Bengal, and their military successes in Flanders, enabled
them to treat on equal terms, and nothing had been taken from Spain.

The war was remarkable for the prominence of privateering on both sides. It
was carried on by the Spaniards in the West Indies with great success, and
actively at home. The French were no less active in all seas. Mahé de la
Bourdonnais's attack on Madras partook largely of the nature of a
privateering venture. The British retaliated with vigour. The total number
of captures by French and Spanish corsairs was in all probability larger
than the list of British--partly for the reason given by Voltaire, namely,
that more British merchants were taken because there were many more British
merchant ships to take, but partly also because the British government had
not yet begun to enforce the use of convoy so strictly as it did in later
times.

See Beatson's _Naval and Military Memoirs_ (London, 1804); _La Marine
militaire de la France sous le règne de Louis XV_, by G. Lacour-Gayet
(Paris, 1902); _The Royal Navy_, by Sir W. L. Clowes and others (London,
1891, &c.).

(D. H.)