AUSTRIA, UPPER (Ger. _Oberösterreich_ or _Österreich ob der Enns_, "Austria
above the river Enns"), an archduchy and crown-land of Austria, bounded N.
by Bohemia, W. by Bavaria, S. by Salzburg and Styria, and E. by Lower
Austria. It has an area of 4631 sq. m. Upper Austria is divided by the
Danube into two unequal parts. Its smaller northern part is a prolongation
of the southern angle of the Bohemian forest and contains as culminating
points the Plöcklstein (4510 ft.) and the Sternstein (3690 ft.). The
southern part belongs to the region of the Eastern Alps, containing the
Salzkammergut and Upper Austrian Alps, which are found principally in the
district of Salzkammergut (_q.v._). To the north of these mountains,
stretching towards the Danube, is the Alpine foothill region, composed
partly of terraces and partly of swelling undulations, of which the most
important is the Hausruckwald. This is a wooded chain of mountains, with
many branches, rich in brown coal and culminating in the Göblberg (2950
ft.). Upper Austria belongs to the watershed of the Danube, which flows
through it from west to east, and receives here on the right the Inn with
the Salzach, the Traun, the Enns with the Steyr and on its left the Great
and Little Mühl rivers. The Schwarzenberg canal between the Great Mühl and
the Moldau establishes a direct navigable route between the Danube and the
Elbe. The climate of Upper Austria, which varies according to the altitude,
is on the whole moderate; it is somewhat severe in the north, but is mild
in Salzkammergut. The population of the duchy in 1900 was 809,918, which is
equivalent to 174.8 inhabitants per sq. m. It has the greatest density of
population of any of the Alpine provinces. The inhabitants are almost
exclusively of German stock and Roman Catholics. For administrative
purposes, Upper Austria is divided into two autonomous municipalities, Linz
(58,778) the capital, and Steyr (17,592) and 12 districts. Other principal
towns are Wels (12,187), Ischl (9646) and Gmunden (7126). The local diet,
of which the bishop of Linz is a member _ex officio_, is composed of 50
members and the duchy sends 22 members to the Reichsrat at Vienna. The soil
in the valleys and on the lower slopes of the hills is fertile, indeed
35.08% of the whole area is arable. Agriculture is well developed and
relatively large quantities of the principal cereals are produced. Upper
Austria has the largest proportion of meadows in all Austria, 18.54%, while
2.49% is lowland and Alpine pasturage. Of the remainder, woods occupy
34.02%, gardens 1.99% and 4.93% is unproductive. Cattle-breeding is also in
a very advanced stage and together with the timber-trade forms a
considerable resource of the province. The principal mineral wealth of
Upper Austria is salt, of which it extracts nearly 50% of the total
Austrian production. Other important products are lignite, gypsum and a
variety of valuable stones and clays. There are about thirty mineral
springs, the best known being the salt baths of Ischl and the iodine waters
at Hall. The principal industries are the iron and metal manufactures,
chiefly centred at Steyr. Next in importance are the machine, linen, cotton
and paper manufactures, the milling, brewing and distilling industries and
shipbuilding. The principal articles of export are salt, stone, timber,
live-stock, woollen and iron wares and paper.

See Edlbacher, _Landeskunde von Oberösterreich_ (Linz, 2nd ed., 1883);
Vansca, _op. cit._ in the preceding article.