AUTOGRAPHS. Autograph (Gr. [Greek: autos], self, [Greek: graphein], to
write) is a term applied by common usage either to a document signed by the
person from whom it emanates, or to one written entirely by the hand of
such person (which, however, is also more technically described as
_holograph_, from [Greek: holos], entire, [Greek: graphein], to write), or
simply to an independent signature.

The existence of autographs must necessarily have been coeval with the
invention of letters. Documents in the handwriting of their composers may
possibly exist among the early papyri of Egypt and the clay tablets of
Babylonia and Assyria, and among the early examples of writing in the East.
But the oriental practice of employing professional scribes in writing the
body of documents and of using seals for the purpose of "signing" (the
"signum" originally meaning the impression of the seal) almost precludes
the idea. When we are told (1 Kings xxi. 8) that Jezebel wrote letters in
Ahab's name and sealed them with his seal, we are, of course, to understand
that the letters were written by the professional scribes and that the
impression of the king's seal was the authentication, equivalent to the
signature of western nations; and again, when King Darius "signed" the
writing and the decree (Dan. vi. 9), he did so with his seal. To find
documents which we can [v.03 p.0046] recognize with certainty to be
autographs, we must descend to the Ptolemaic and Roman periods of Egyptian
history, which are represented by an abundance of papyrus documents of all
kinds, chiefly in Greek. Among them are not a few original letters and
personal documents, in which we may see the handwriting of many lettered
and unlettered individuals who lived during the 3rd century B.C. and in
succeeding times, and which prove how very widespread was the practice of
writing in those days. We owe it to the dry and even atmosphere of Egypt
that these written documents have been preserved in such numbers. On the
other hand, in Italy and Greece ancient writings have perished, save the
few charred papyrus rolls and waxen tablets which have been recovered from
the ruins of Herculaneum and Pompeii. These tablets, however, have a
special value, for many of them contain autograph signatures of principals
and witnesses to legal deeds to which they were attached, together with
impressions of seals, in compliance with the Roman law which required the
actual subscriptions, or attested marks, of the persons concerned.

But, when we now speak of autographs and autograph collections, we use such
terms in a restricted sense and imply documents or signatures written by
persons of some degree of eminence or notoriety in the various ranks and
professions of life; and naturally the only early autographs in this sense
which could be expected to survive are the subscriptions and signatures of
royal personages and great officials attached to important public deeds,
which from their nature have been more jealously cared for than mere
private documents.

Following the Roman practice, subscriptions and signatures were required in
legal documents in the early centuries of our era. Hence we find them in
the few Latin deeds on papyrus which have come to light in Egypt; we find
them on the well-known Dacian waxen tablets of the 2nd century; and we find
them in the series of papyrus deeds from Ravenna and other places in Italy
between the 5th and 10th centuries. The same practice obtained in the
Frankish empire. The Merovingian kings, or at least those of them who knew
how to write, subscribed their diplomas and great charters with their own
hands; and their great officers of state, chancellors and others,
countersigned in autograph. The unlettered Merovingian kings made use of
monograms composed of the letters of their names; and, curiously, the
illiterate monogram was destined to supersede the literate subscriptions.
For the monogram was adopted by Charlemagne and his successors as a
recognized symbol of their subscription. It was their _signum manuale_,
their sign manual. In courtly imitation of the royal practice, monograms
and other marks were adopted by official personages, even though they could
write. The notarial marks of modern times are a survival of the practice.
By the illiterate other signs, besides the monogram, came to be employed,
such as the cross, &c., as signs manual. The monogram was used by French
monarchs from the reign of Charlemagne to that of Philip the Fair, who died
in 1314. It is very doubtful, however, whether in any instance this sign
manual was actually traced by the monarch's own hand. At the most, the
earlier sovereigns appear to have drawn one or two strokes in their
monograms, which, so far, may be called their autographs. But in the later
period not even this was done; the monogram was entirely the work of the
scribe. (See DIPLOMATIC.)

The employment of marks or signs manual went out of general use after the
12th century, in the course of which the affixing or appending of seals
became the common method of executing deeds. But, as education became more
general and the practice of writing more widely diffused, the usage grew up
in the course of the 14th century of signing the name-signature as well as
of affixing the seal; and by the 15th century it had become established,
and it remains to the present time. Thus the _signum manuale_ had
disappeared, except among notaries; but the term survived, and by a natural
process it was transferred to the signature. In the present day it is used
to designate the "sign manual" or autograph signature of the sovereign.

The Anglo-Saxon kings of England did not sign their charters, their names
being invariably written by the official scribes. After the Norman
conquest, the sign manual, usually a cross, which sometimes accompanied the
name of the sovereign, may in some instances be autograph; but no royal
signature is to be found earlier than the reign of Richard II. Of the
signatures of this king there are two examples, of the years 1386 and 1389,
in the Public Record Office; and there is one, of 1397, in the British
Museum. Of his father, the Black Prince, there is in the Record Office a
motto-signature, _De par Homont_ (high courage), _Ich dene_, subscribed to
a writ of privy seal of 1370. The kings of the Lancastrian line were
apparently ready writers. Of the handwriting of both Henry IV. and Henry V.
there are specimens both in the Record Office and in the British Museum.
But by their time writing had become an ordinary accomplishment.

Apart from the autographs of sovereigns, those of famous men of the early
middle ages can hardly be said to exist, or, if they do exist, they are
difficult to identify. For example, there is a charter at Canterbury
bearing the statement that it was written by Dunstan; but, as there is a
duplicate in the British Museum with the same statement, it is probable
that both the one and the other are copies. The autograph MSS. of the
chronicles of Ordericus Vitalis, of Robert de Monte, and of Sigebert of
Gembloux are in existence; and among the Cottonian MSS. there are
undoubtedly autograph writings of Matthew of Paris, the English chronicler
of Henry III.'s reign. There are certain documents in the British Museum in
the hand of William of Wykeham; and among French archives there are
autograph writings of the historian Joinville. These are a few instances.
When we come to such a collection as the famous Paston Letters, the
correspondence of the Norfolk family of Paston of the 15th century, we find
therein numerous autographs of historical personages of the time.

From the 16th century onward, we enter the period of modern history, and
autograph documents of all kinds become plentiful. And yet in the midst of
this plenty, by a perverse fate, there is in certain instances a remarkable
dearth. The instance of Shakespeare is the most famous. But for three
signatures to the three sheets of his will, and two signatures to the
conveyances of property in Blackfriars, we should be without a vestige of
his handwriting. For certain other signatures, professing to be his,
inscribed in books, may be dismissed as imitations. Such forgeries come up
from time to time, as might be expected, and are placed upon the market.
The Shakespearean forgeries, however, of W. H. Ireland were perpetrated
rather with a literary intent than as an autographic venture.

Had autograph collecting been the fashion in Shakespeare's days, we should
not have had to deplore the loss of his and of other great writers'
autographs. But the taste had not then come into vogue, at least not in
England. The series of autograph documents which were gathered in such a
library as that of Sir Robert Cotton, now in the British Museum, found
their way thither on account of their literary or historic interest, and
not merely as specimens of the handwriting of distinguished men. Such a
series also as that formed by Philippe de Béthune, Comte de Selles et
Charost, and his son, in the reign of Louis XIV., consisting for the most
part of original letters and papers, now in the Bibliothèque Nationale,
might have been regarded as the result of autograph collecting did we not
know that it was brought together for historical purposes. It was in
Germany and the Low Countries that the practice appears to have originated,
chiefly among students and other members of the universities, of collecting
autograph inscriptions and signatures of one's friends in albums, _alba
amicorum_, little oblong pocket volumes of which a considerable number have
survived, a very fair collection being in the British Museum. The earliest
album in the latter series is the Egerton MS. 1178, beginning with an entry
of the year 1554. Once the taste was established, the collecting of
autographs of living persons was naturally extended to those of former
times; and many collections, famous in their day, have been formed, but in
most instances only to be dispersed again as the owners tired of their
fancy or as their heirs failed to inherit their tastes along with their
[v.03 p.0047] possessions. The most celebrated collection formed in England
in recent years is that of the late Mr Alfred Morrison, which still remains
intact, and which is well known by means of the sumptuous catalogue, with
its many facsimiles, compiled by the owner.

The rivalry of collectors and the high prices which rare or favourite
autographs realize have naturally given encouragement to the forger. False
letters of popular heroes and of popular authors, of Nelson, of Burns, of
Thackeray, and of others, appear from time to time in the market: in some
instances clever imitations, but more generally too palpably spurious to
deceive any one with experience. Like the Shakespearean forgeries of
Ireland, referred to above, the forgeries of Chatterton were literary
inventions; and both were poor performances. One of the cleverest frauds of
this nature in modern times was the fabrication, in the middle of the 19th
century, of a series of letters of Byron and Shelley, with postmarks and
seals complete, which were even published as _bona fide_ documents (Brit.
Mus., Add. MS. 19,377).

There are many published collections of facsimiles of autographs of
different nations. Among those published in England the following may be
named:--_British Autography_, by J. Thane (1788-1793, with supplement by
Daniell, 1854); _Autographs of Royal, Noble, Learned and Remarkable
Personages in English History_, by J. G. Nichols (1829); _Facsimiles of
Original Documents of Eminent Literary Characters_, by C. J. Smith (1852);
_Autographs of the Kings and Queens and Eminent Men of Great Britain_, by
J. Netherclift (1835); _One Hundred Characteristic Autograph Letters_, by
J. Netherclift and Son (1849); _The Autograph Miscellany_, by F.
Netherclift (1855); _The Autograph Souvenir_, by F. G. Netherclift and R.
Sims (1865); _The Autographic Mirror_ (1864-1866); _The Handbook of
Autographs_, by F. G. Netherclift (1862); _The Autograph Album_, by L. B.
Phillips (1866); _Facsimiles of Autographs_ (British Museum publication),
five series (1896-1900). Facsimiles of autographs also appear in the
official publications, _Facsimiles of National MSS., from William the
Conqueror to Queen Anne_ (Master of the Rolls), 1865-1868; _Facsimiles of
National MSS. of Scotland_ (Lord Clerk Register), 1867-1871; and
_Facsimiles of National MSS. of Ireland_ (Public Record Office, Ireland),
1874-1884.

(E. M. T.)