AUTOMATIC WRITING, the name given by students of psychical research to
writing performed without the volition of the agent. The writing may also
take place without any consciousness of the words written; but some
automatists are aware of the word which they are actually writing, and
perhaps of two or three words on either side, though there is rarely any
clear perception of the meaning of the whole. Automatic writing may take
place when the agent is in a state of trance, spontaneous or induced, in
hystero-epilepsy or other morbid states; or in a condition not
distinguishable from normal wakefulness. Automatic writing has played an
important part in the history of modern spiritualism. The phenomenon first
appeared on a large scale in the early days (_c._ 1850-1860) of the
movement in America. Numerous writings are reported at that period, many of
considerable length, which purported for the most part to have been
produced under spirit guidance. Some of these were written in "unknown
tongues." Of those which were published the most notable are Andrew J.
Davis's _Great Harmonia_, Charles Linton's _The Healing of the Nations_,
and J. Murray Spear's _Messages from the Spirit Life_.

In England also the early spiritualist newspapers were filled with
"inspirational" writing,--_Pages of Ike Paraclete_, &c. The most notable
series of English automatic writings are the _Spirit Teachings_ of the Rev.
W. Stainton Moses. The phenomenon, of course, lends itself to deception,
but there seems no reason to doubt that in the great majority of the cases
recorded the writing was in reality produced without deliberate volition.
In the earlier years of the spiritualist movement, a "planchette," a little
heart-shaped board running on wheels, was employed to facilitate the
process of writing.

Of late years, whilst the theory of external inspiration as the cause of
the phenomenon has been generally discredited, automatic writing has been
largely employed as a method of experimentally investigating subconscious
mental processes. Knowledge which had lapsed from the primary consciousness
is frequently revealed by this means; _e.g._ forgotten fragments of poetry
or foreign languages are occasionally given. An experimental parallel to
this reproduction of forgotten knowledge was devised by Edmund Gurney. He
showed that information communicated to a subject in the hypnotic trance
could be subsequently reproduced through the handwriting, whilst the
attention of the subject was fully employed in conversing or reading aloud;
or an arithmetical problem which had been set during the trance could be
worked out under similar conditions without the apparent consciousness of
the subject.

Automatic writing for the most part, no doubt, brings to the surface only
the debris of lapsed memories and half-formed impressions which have never
reached the focus of consciousness--the stuff that dreams are made of. But
there are indications in some cases of something more than this. In some
spontaneous instances the writing produces anagrams, puns, nonsense verses
and occasional blasphemies or obscenities; and otherwise exhibits
characteristics markedly divergent from those of the normal consciousness.
In the well-known case recorded by Th. Flournoy (_Des Indes à la planète
Mars_) the automatist produced writing in an unknown character, which
purported to be the Martian language. The writing generally resembles the
ordinary handwriting of the agent, but there are sometimes marked
differences, and the same automatist may employ two or three distinct
handwritings. Occasionally imitations are produced of the handwriting of
other persons, living or dead. Not infrequently the writing is reversed, so
that it can be read only in a looking-glass (_Spiegelschrift_); the ability
to produce such writing is often associated with the liability to
spontaneous somnambulism. The hand and arm are often insensible in the act
of writing. There are some cases on record in which the automatist has
seemed to guide his hand not by sight, but by some special extension of the
muscular sense (Carpenter, _Mental Physiology_, § 128; W. James,
_Proceedings American S.P.R_. p. 554).

Automatic writing frequently exhibits indications of telepathy. The most
remarkable series of automatic writings recorded in this connexion are
those executed by the American medium, Mrs Piper, in a state of trance
(_Proceedings S.P.R._). These writings appear to exhibit remarkable
telepathic powers, and are thought by some to indicate communication with
the spirits of the dead.

[v.03 p.0048] The opportunities afforded by automatic writing for
communicating with subconscious strata of the personality have been made
use of by Pierre Janet and others in cases of hystero-epilepsy, and other
forms of dissociation of consciousness. A patient in an attack of
hysterical convulsions, to whom oral appeals are made in vain, can
sometimes be induced to answer in writing questions addressed to the hand,
and thus to reveal the secret of the malady or to accept therapeutic
suggestions.

See Edmonds and Dexter, _Spiritualism_ (New York, 1853); Epes Sargent,
_Planchette, the Despair of Science_ (Boston, U.S.A., 1869); Mrs de Morgan,
_From Matter to Spirit_ (London, 1863); W. Stainton Moses, _Spirit
Teachings_ (London, 1883); _Proceedings S.P R. passim_; Th. Flournoy, _Des
Indes à la planète Mars_ (Geneva, 1900); F. Podmore, _Modern Spiritualism_
(London, 1902); F. W. H. Myers, _Human Personality_ (London, 1903); Pierre
Janet, _L'Automatisme psychologique_ (2nd ed., Paris, 1894); Morton Prince,
_The Dissociation of a Personality_ (London, 1906).

(F. P.)