AUTOMATISM. In philosophical terminology this word is used in two main
senses: (1) in ethics, for the view that man is not responsible for his
actions, which have, therefore, no moral value; (2) in psychology, for all
actions which are not the result of conation or conscious endeavour.
Certain actions being admittedly automatic, Descartes maintained that, in
regard of the lower animals, all action is purely mechanical. The same
theory has since been applied to man, with this difference that,
accompanying the mechanical phenomena of action, and entirely disconnected
with it, are the phenomena of consciousness. Thus certain physical changes
in the brain result in a given action; the concomitant mental desire or
volition is in no sense causally connected with, or prior to, the physical
change. This theory, which has been maintained by T. Huxley (_Science and
Culture_) and Shadworth Hodgson (_Metaphysic of Experience and Theory of
Practice_), must be distinguished from that of the psychophysical
parallelism, or the "double aspect theory" according to which both the
mental state and the physical phenomena result from a so-called "mind
stuff," or single substance, the material or cause of both.

Automatic acts are of two main kinds. Where the action goes on while the
attention is focused on entirely different subjects (_e.g._ in cycling), it
is purely automatic. On the other hand, if the attention is fixed on the
end or on any particular part of a given action, and the other component
parts of the action are performed unconsciously, the automatism may be
called relative.

See G. F. Stout, _Anal. Psych_, i. 258 foll.; Win. James, _Princ. of
Psych._ i. chap. 5; also the articles PSYCHOLOGY, SUGGESTION, &c.

_Sensory Automatism_ is the term given by students of psychical research to
a centrally initiated hallucination. Such hallucinations are commonly
provoked by crystal-gazing (_q.v._), but auditory hallucinations may be
caused by the use of a shell (shell-hearing), and the other senses are
occasionally affected.

_Motor Automatism_, on the other hand, is a non-reflex movement of a
voluntary muscle, executed in the waking state but not controlled by the
ordinary waking consciousness. Phenomena of this kind play a large part in
primitive ceremonies of divination (_q.v._) and in our own day furnish much
of the material of Psychical Research. At the lowest level we have vague
movements of large groups of muscles, as in "bier-divination," where the
murderer or his residence is inferred from the actions of the bearers; of a
similar character but combined with more specialized action are many kinds
of witch seeking. These more specialized actions are most typically seen in
the Divining Rod (_q.v._; see also TABLE-TURNING), which indicates the
presence of water and is used among the uncivilized to trace criminals. At
a higher stage still we have the delicate movements necessary for Automatic
Writing (_q.v._) or Drawing. A parallel case to Automatic Writing is the
action of the speech centres, resulting in the production of all kinds of
utterances from trance speeches in the ordinary language of the speaker to
mere unintelligible babblings. An interesting form of speech automatism is
known as Glossolalia; in the typical case of Helène Smith, Th. Flournoy has
shown that these utterances may reach a higher plane and form a real
language, which is, however, based on one already known to the speaker.

See _Man_ (1904), No. 68; _Folklore_, xiii. 134; Myers in _Proc. S.P.R._
ix. 26, xii. 277, xv. 403; Flournoy, _Des Indes à la planète Mars_ and in
_Arch. de Psychologie_; Myers, _Human Personality_.

(N. W. T.)