AUVERGNE, formerly a province of France, corresponding to the departments
of Cantal and Puy-de-Dôme, with the arrondissement of Brioude in
Haute-Loire. It contains many mountains volcanic in origin (Plomb du
Cantal, Puy de Dôme, Mont Dore), fertile valleys such as that of Limagne,
vast pasture-lands, and numerous medicinal springs. Up to the present day
the population retains strongly-marked Celtic characteristics. In the time
of Caesar the _Arverni_ were a powerful confederation, the Arvernian
Vercingetorix being the most famous of the Gallic chieftains who fought
against the Romans. Under the empire _Arvernia_ formed part of _Prima
Aquitania_, and the district shared in the fortunes of Aquitaine during the
Merovingian and Carolingian periods. Auvergne was the seat of a separate
countship before the end of the 8th century; the first hereditary count was
William the Pious (886). By the marriage of Eleanor of Aquitaine with Henry
Plantagenet, the countship passed under the suzerainty of the kings of
England, but at the same time it was divided, William VII., called the
Young (1145-1168), having been despoiled of a portion of his domain by his
uncle William VIII., called the Old, who was supported by Henry II. of
England, so that he only retained the region bounded by the Allier and the
Coux. It is this district that from the end of the 13th century was called
the _Dauphiné d'Auvergne_. This family quarrel occasioned the intervention
of Philip Augustus, king of France, who succeeded in possessing himself of
a large part of the country, which was annexed to the royal domains under
the name of _Terre d'Auvergne_. As the price of his concurrence with the
king in this matter, the bishop of Clermont, Robert I. (1195-1227), was
granted the lordship of the town of Clermont, which subsequently became a
countship. Such was the origin of the four great historic lordships of
Auvergne. The _Terre d'Auvergne_ was first an appanage of Count Alphonse of
Poitiers (1241-1271), and in 1360 was erected into a duchy in the peerage
of France (duché-pairie) by King John II. in favour of his son John,
through whose daughter the new title passed in 1416 to the house of
Bourbon. The last duke, the celebrated constable Charles of Bourbon, united
the domains of the _Dauphiné_ to those of the [v.03 p.0050] duchy, but all
were confiscated by the crown in consequence of the sentence which punished
the constable's treason in 1527. The countship, however, had passed in 1422
to the house of La Tour, and was not annexed to the domain until 1615. The
administration of the royal province of Auvergne was organized under Louis
XIV. At the time of the revolution it formed what was called a
"government," with two divisions: Upper Auvergne (Aurillac), and Lower
Auvergne (Clermont).

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--Baluze, _Histoire généalogique de la maison d'Auvergne_
(1708); André Imberdis, _Histoire générale de l'Auvergne_ (1867); J. B. M.
Bielawski, _Histoire de la comté d'Auvergne et de sa capitale Vic-le-Comte_
(1868); B. Gonot, _Catalogue des ouvrages imprimés et manuscrits concernant
l'Auvergne_ (1849). See further Chevalier, _Répertoire des sources hist.,
Topobibliographie_, s.v.