AUXERRE, a town of central France, capital of the department of Yonne, 38
m. S.S.E. of Sens on the Paris-Lyon railway, between Laroche and Nevers.
Pop. (1906) 16,971. It is situated on the slopes and the summit of an
eminence on the left bank of the Yonne, which is crossed by two bridges
leading to suburbs on the right bank. The town is irregularly built and its
streets are steep and narrow, but it is surrounded by wide tree-lined
boulevards, which have replaced the ancient fortifications, and has some
fine churches. That of St Étienne, formerly the cathedral, is a majestic
Gothic building of the 13th to the 16th centuries. It is entered by three
richly sculptured portals, over the middle and largest of which is a rose
window; over the north portal rises a massive tower, but that which should
surmount the south portal is unfinished. The lateral entrances are
sheltered by tympana and arches profusely decorated with statuettes. The
plan consists of a nave, with aisles and lateral chapels, transept and
choir, with a deambulatory at a slightly lower level. Beneath the choir,
which is a fine example of early Gothic architecture, extends a crypt of
the 11th century with mural paintings of the 12th century. The church has
some fine stained glass and many pictures and other works of art. The
ancient episcopal palace, now used as prefecture, stands behind the
cathedral; it preserves a Romanesque gallery of the 12th century. The
church of St Eusèbe belongs to the 12th, 13th and 16th centuries. Of the
abbey church of St Germain, built in the 13th and 14th centuries, most of
the nave has disappeared, so that its imposing Romanesque tower stands
apart from it; crypts of the 9th century contain the tombs of bishops of
Auxerre. The abbey was once fortified and a high wall and cylindrical tower
remain. The buildings (18th century) are partly occupied by a hospital and
a training college. The church of St Pierre, in the Renaissance style of
the 16th and 17th centuries, is conspicuous for the elaborate ornamentation
of its west façade. The old law-court contains the museum, with a
collection of antiquities and paintings, and a library. In the middle of
the town is a gateway surmounted by a belfry, dating from the 15th century.
Auxerre has statues of Marshal Davout, J. B. J. Fourier and Paul Bert, the
two latter natives of the town. The town is the seat of a court of assizes
and has tribunals of first instance and of commerce, and a branch of the
Bank of France. A lycée for girls, a communal college and training colleges
are among its educational establishments. Manufactures of ochre, of which
there are quarries in the vicinity, and of iron goods are carried on. The
canal of Nivernais reaches as far as Auxerre, which has a busy port and
carries on boat-building. Trade is principally in the choice wine of the
surrounding vineyards, and in timber and coal.

Auxerre (_Autessiodurum_) became the seat of a bishop and a civitas in the
3rd century. Under the Merovingian kings the abbey of St Germain, named
after the 6th bishop, was founded, and in the 9th century its schools had
made the town a seat of learning. The bishopric was suppressed in 1790.

The countship of Auxerre was granted by King Robert I. to his son-in-law
Renaud, count of Nevers. It remained in the house of Nevers until 1184,
when it passed by marriage to that of Courtenay. Other alliances
transferred it successively to the families of Donzy, Châtillon, Bourbon
and Burgundy. Alice of Burgundy, countess of Auxerre, married John of
Châlons (d. 1309), and several counts of Auxerre belonging to the house of
Châlons distinguished themselves in the wars against the English during the
14th century. John II., count of Auxerre, was killed at the battle of Crécy
(1346), and his grandson, John IV., sold his countship to King Charles V.
in 1370.