AVEBURY, a village in the Devizes parliamentary division of Wiltshire,
England, on the river Kennet, 8 m. by road from Marlborough. The fine
church of St James contains an early font with Norman carving, a rich
Norman doorway, a painted reredos, and a beautiful old roodstone in good
preservation. Avebury House is Elizabethan, with a curious stone dovecot.
The village has encroached upon the remains of a huge stone circle (not
quite circular), surrounded by a ditch and rampart of earth, and once
approached by two avenues of monoliths. Within the larger circle were two
smaller ones, placed not in the axis of the great one but on its
north-eastern side, each of which consisted of a double concentric ring of
stones; the centre being in one case a menhir or pillar, in the other a
dolmen or tablestone resting on two uprights. Few traces remain, as the
monoliths have been largely broken up for building purposes. The circle is
the largest specimen of primitive stone monuments in Britain, measuring on
the average 1200 ft. in diameter. The stones are all the native Sarsens
which occur everywhere in the district, and show no evidence of having been
hewn. Those still remaining vary in size from 5 to 20 ft. in height above
ground, and from 3 to 12 ft. in breadth. As in the case of Stonehenge, the
purpose for which the Avebury monument was erected has been the source of
much difference of opinion among antiquaries, Dr Stukely (_Stonehenge a
Temple restored to the British Druids_, 1740) regarding it as a Druidical
temple, while Fergusson (_Rude Stone Monuments_, 1872) believed that it, as
well as Silbury Hill, marks the site of the graves of those who fell in the
last Arthurian battle at Badon Hill (A.D. 520). The majority of
antiquaries, however, see no reason for dissociating its chronological
horizon from that of the numerous other analogous monuments found in Great
Britain, many of which have been shown to be burial places of the Bronze
Age. Excavations were carried out here in 1908, but without throwing any
important new light on the monument.

There are many barrows on the neighbouring downs, besides traces of a
double oval of monoliths on Hackpen hill, and the huge mound of Silbury
Hill. Waden Hill, to the south, has been, like Badbury, identified with
Badon Hill, which was the traditional scene of the twelfth and last great
battle of King Arthur in 520. The Roman road from Winchester to Bath skirts
the south side of Silbury Hill.

At the time of the Domesday Survey, the church of Avebury (Avreberie,
Abury), with two hides attached, was held in chief by Rainbold, a priest,
and was bestowed by Henry III. on the abbot and monks of Cirencester, who
continued to hold it until the reign of Henry VIII. The manor of Avebury
was granted in the reign of Henry I. to the Benedictine monks of St George
of Boucherville in Normandy, and a cell from that abbey was subsequently
established here. In consequence of the war with France in the reign of
Edward III., this manor was annexed by the crown, and was conferred on the
newly founded college of New College, Oxford, together with all the
possessions, spiritual and temporal, of the priory.