AVENTINUS (1477-1534), the name taken by JOHANN TURMAIR, author of the
_Annales Boiorum_, or _Annals of Bavaria_, from Aventinum, the Latin name
of the town of Abensberg, where he was born on the 4th of July 1477. Having
studied at Ingolstadt, Vienna, Cracow and Paris, he returned to Ingolstadt
in 1507, and in 1509 was appointed tutor to Louis and Ernest, the two
younger sons of Albert the Wise, the late duke of Bavaria-Munich. He
retained this position until 1517, wrote a Latin grammar, and other manuals
for the use of his pupils, and in 1515 travelled in Italy with Ernest.
Encouraged by William IV., duke of Bavaria, he began to write the _Annales
Boiorum_, about 1517, and finishing this book in 1521, undertook a German
version of it, entitled _Bayersche Chronik_, which he completed some years
later. He assisted to found the _Sodalitas litteraria Angilostadensis_,
under the auspices of which several old manuscripts were brought to light.
Although Aventinus did not definitely adopt the reformed faith, he
sympathized with the reformers and their teaching, and showed a strong
dislike for the monks. On this account he.was imprisoned in 1528, but his
friends soon effected his release. The remainder of his life was somewhat
unsettled, and he died at Regensburg on the 9th of January 1534. The
_Annales_, which are in seven books, deal with the history of Bavaria in
conjunction with general history from the earliest times to 1460, and the
author shows a strong sympathy for the Empire in its struggle with the
Papacy. He took immense pains with his work, and to some degree anticipated
the modern scientific method of writing history. The _Annales_ were first
published in 1554, but many important passages were omitted in this
edition, as they reflected on the Roman Catholics. A more complete edition
was published at Basel in 1580 by Nicholas Cisner. Aventinus, who has been
called the "Bavarian Herodotus," wrote other books of minor importance, and
a complete edition of his works was published at Munich (1881-1886). More
recently a new edition (six vols.) has appeared.

See T. Wiedemann, _Johann Turmair gen. Aventinus_ (Freising, 1858); W.
Dittmar, _Aventin_ (Nördlingen, 1862); J. von Döllinger, _Aventin und seine
Zeit_ (Munich, 1877); S. Riezler, _Zum Schutze der neuesten Edition von
Aventins Annalen_ (Munich, 1886); F. X. von Wegele, _Aventin_ (Bamberg,
1890).

[v.03 p.0054] AVENTURINE, or AVANTURINE, a variety of quartz containing
spangles of mica or scales of iron-oxide, which confer brilliancy on the
stone. It is found chiefly in the Ural Mountains, and is cut for ornamental
purposes at Ekaterinburg. Some of the Siberian aventurine, like that of the
vase given by Nicholas I. to Sir R. Murchison, in 1843, is a micaceous
iron-stained quartz, of but little beauty. Most aventurine is of reddish
brown or yellow colour, but a green variety, containing scales of fuchsite
or chrome-mica, is also known. This green aventurine, highly valued by the
Chinese, is said to occur in the Bellary district in India.

Aventurine felspar, known also as Sun-stone (_q.v._) is found principally
at Tvedestrand in south Norway, and is a variety of oligoclase enclosing
micaceous scales of haematite. Other kinds of felspar, even orthoclase, may
however also show the aventurine appearance. Both plagioclastic and
orthoclastic aventurine occur at several localities in the United States.

The mineral aventurine takes its name from the well-known aventurine-glass
of Venice. This is a reddish brown glass with gold-like spangles, more
brilliant than most of the natural stone. The story runs that this kind of
glass was originally made accidentally at Murano by a workman, who let some
copper filings fall into the molten "metal," whence the product was called
_avventurino_. From the Murano glass the name passed to the mineral, which
displayed a rather similar appearance.

(F. W. R.*)