AVERAGE, a term found in two main senses. (1) The first, which occurs in
old law, is from a Law-Latin _averagium_, and is connected with the
Domesday Book _avera_, the "day's work which the king's tenants gave to the
sheriff"; it is supposed to be a form of the O. Fr. _ovre_ (_oeuvre_),
work, affected by _aver_, the O. Eng. word for cattle or property, but the
etymology is uncertain. As meaning some form of feudal service rendered by
tenants to their superiors, it survived for a long time in the Scottish
phrase "arriage and carriage," this form of the word being due to a
contraction into "arage." (2) The second word, which represents the modern
usages, is also uncertain in its derivation, but corresponded with the Fr.
_avarie_, and was early spelt "averays," recurring also as "avaria,"
"averia," and meaning a certain tax on goods, and then more precisely in
maritime law any charge additional to "freight" (see AFFREIGHTMENT),
payable by the owner of goods sent by ship. Hence the modern employment of
the term for _particular_ and _general_ average (see below) in marine
insurance. The essential of equitable distribution, involved in this sense,
was transferred to give the word "average" its more colloquial meaning of
an equalization of amount, or medium among various quantities, or nearest
common rate or figure. (For a discussion of the etymology, see the _New
English Dictionary_, especially the concluding note with reference to
authorities.)

_In Shipping._--Average, in modern law, is the term used in maritime
commerce to signify damages or expenses resulting from the accidents of
navigation. Average is either _general_ or _particular_. General average
arises when sacrifices have been made, or expenditures incurred, for the
preservation of the ship, cargo and freight, from some peril of the sea or
from its effects. It implies a subsequent contribution, from all the
parties concerned, rateably to the values of their respective interests, to
make good the loss thus occasioned. Particular average signifies the damage
or partial loss happening to the ship, goods, or freight by some fortuitous
or unavoidable accident. It is borne by the parties to whose property the
misfortune happens or by their insurers. The term average originally meant
what is now distinguished as general average; and the expression
"particular average," although not strictly accurate, came to be afterwards
used for the convenience of distinguishing those damages or partial losses
for which no general contribution could be claimed.

Although nothing can be more simple than the fundamental principle of
general average, that a loss incurred for the advantage of all the
coadventurers should be made good by them all in equitable proportion to
their stakes in the adventure, the application of this principle to the
varied and complicated cases which occur in the course of maritime commerce
has given rise to many diversities of usage at different periods and in
different countries. It is soon discovered that the principle cannot be
applied in any settled or consistent manner unless by the aid of rules of a
technical and sometimes of a seemingly arbitrary character. The difficulty,
which at one time seemed nearly insuperable, of bringing together the rules
in force in the several maritime countries, has been to a large extent
overcome--not by legislation but by framing a set of rules covering the
principal points of difference in such a manner as to satisfy, on the
whole, those who are practically concerned, and to lead them to adopt these
[Sidenote: History of the York-Antwerp rules.] rules in their contracts of
affreightment and contracts of insurance (see INSURANCE: _Marine_). The
honour of the achievement belongs to a small number of men who recognized
the need of uniformity. The work began in May 1860 at the congress held at
Glasgow, under the presidency of Lord Brougham, assisted by Lord Neaves.
Further congresses were held in London (1862), and at York (1864), when a
body of rules known as the "York Rules" was agreed to. There the matter
stood, until it was taken up by the "Association for the Reform and
Codification of the Law of Nations" at conferences held at the Hague
(1875), Bremen (1876) and Antwerp (1877). Some changes were made in the
"York Rules"; and so altered, the body of rules was adopted at the
last-named conference, and was styled the "York and Antwerp (or
York-Antwerp) Rules." The value of these rules was quickly perceived, and
practical use of them followed. But they proved to be insufficient, or
unsatisfactory, on some points; and again, in the autumn of 1890, a
conference on the subject was held, this time at Liverpool, by the same
Association, under the able presidency of Dr F. Sieveking, president of the
Hanseatic High Court of Appeal at Hamburg. Important changes were then
made, carrying further certain departures from English law, already
apparent in the earlier rules, in favour of views prevailing upon the
continent of Europe and in the United States. The new rules were styled the
[v.03 p.0055] York-Antwerp Rules 1890. In practice they quickly displaced
those of 1877; and in 1892, at a conference of the same Association held at
Genoa, it was formally declared that the only international rules of
general average having the sanction and authority of the association were
the York-Antwerp Rules as revised in 1890, and that the original rules were
rescinded. It is this later body of rules which is now known as the
York-Antwerp Rules. Reference is now to be found in most English contracts
of carriage and contracts of insurance, to these rules, as intended to
govern the adjustment of G.A. between the parties; with the result that (so
far as the rules cover the ground) adjustments do not depend upon the law
of the place of destination, and so do not vary according to the
destination, or the place at which the voyage may happen to be broken up,
as used formerly to be the case.

The rules are as follows:--

RULE I.--JETTISON OF DECK CARGO

No jettison of deck cargo shall be made good as G.A.

Every structure not built in with the frame of the vessel shall be
considered to be a part of the deck of the vessel.

RULE II.--DAMAGE BY JETTISON AND SACRIFICE FOR THE COMMON SAFETY

Damage done to a ship and cargo, or either of them, by or in consequence of
a sacrifice made for the common safety, and by water which goes down a
ship's hatches opened, or other opening made for the purpose of making a
jettison for the common safety, shall be made good as G.A.

RULE III.--EXTINGUISHING FIRE ON SHIPBOARD

Damage done to a ship and cargo, or either of them, by water or otherwise,
including damage by beaching or scuttling a burning ship, in extinguishing
a fire on board the ship, shall be made good as G.A.; except that no
compensation shall be made for damage to such portions of the ship and bulk
cargo, or to such separate packages of cargo, as have been on fire.

RULE IV.--CUTTING AWAY WRECK

Loss or damage caused by cutting away the wreck or remains of spars, or of
other things which have previously been carried away by sea-peril, shall
not be made good as G.A.

RULE V.--VOLUNTARY STRANDING

When a ship is intentionally run on shore, and the circumstances are such
that if that course were not adopted she would inevitably sink, or drive on
shore or on rocks, no loss or damage caused to the ship, cargo and freight,
or any of them, by such intentional running on shore, shall be made good as
G.A. But in all other cases where a ship is intentionally run on shore for
the common safety, the consequent loss or damage shall be allowed as G.A.

RULE VI.--CARRYING PRESS OF SAIL--DAMAGE TO OR LOSS OF SAILS

Damage to or loss of sails and spars, or either of them, caused by forcing
a ship off the ground or by driving her higher up the ground, for the
common safety, shall be made good as G.A.; but where a ship is afloat, no
loss or damage caused to the ship, cargo and freight, or any of them, by
carrying a press of sail, shall be made good as G.A.

RULE VII.--DAMAGE TO ENGINES IN REFLOATING A SHIP

Damage caused to machinery and boilers of a ship which is ashore and in a
position of peril, in endeavouring to refloat, shall be allowed in G.A.,
when shown to have arisen from an actual intention to float the ship for
the common safety at the risk of such damage.

RULE VIII.--EXPENSES OF LIGHTENING A SHIP WHEN ASHORE, AND CONSEQUENT
DAMAGE

When a ship is ashore, and, in order to float her, cargo, bunker coals and
ship's stores, or any of them, are discharged, the extra cost of
lightening, lighter hire, and reshipping (if incurred), and the loss or
damage sustained thereby, shall be admitted as G.A.

RULE IX.--CARGO, SHIP'S MATERIALS, AND STORES BURNT FOR FUEL

Cargo, ship's materials and stores, or any of them, necessarily burnt for
fuel for the common safety at a time of peril, shall be admitted as G.A.,
when and only when an ample supply of fuel had been provided; but the
estimated quantity of coals that would have been consumed, calculated at
the price current at the ship's last port of departure at the date of her
leaving, shall be charged to the shipowner and credited to the G.A.

RULE X.--EXPENSES AT PORT OF REFUGE, &c.

(a) When a ship shall have entered a port or place of refuge, or shall
have returned to her port or place of loading, in consequence of accident,
sacrifice, or other extraordinary circumstances, which render that
necessary for the common safety, the expenses of entering such port or
place shall be admitted as G.A.; and when she shall have sailed thence with
her original cargo, or a part of it, the corresponding expenses of leaving
such port or place, consequent upon such entry or return, shall likewise be
admitted as G.A.

(b) The cost of discharging cargo from a ship, whether at a port or place
of loading, call or refuge, shall be admitted as G.A., when the discharge
was necessary for the common safety or to enable damage to the ship, caused
by sacrifice or accident during the voyage, to be repaired, if the repairs
were necessary for the safe prosecution of the voyage.

(c) Whenever the cost of discharging cargo from a ship is admissible as
G.A., the cost of reloading and storing such cargo on board the said ship,
together with all storage charges on such cargo, shall likewise be so
admitted. But when the ship is condemned or does not proceed on her
original voyage, no storage expenses incurred after the date of the ship's
condemnation or of the abandonment of the voyage shall be admitted as G.A.

(d) If a ship under average be in a port or place at which it is
practicable to repair her, so as to enable her to carry on the whole cargo,
and if, in order to save expenses, either she is towed thence to some other
port or place of repair or to her destination, or the cargo or a portion of
it is transhipped by another ship, or otherwise forwarded, then the extra
cost of such towage, transhipment and forwarding, or any of them (up to the
amount of the extra expense saved), shall be payable by the several parties
to the adventure in proportion to the extraordinary expense saved.

RULE XI.--WAGES AND MAINTENANCE OF CREW IN PORT OF REFUGE, &c.

When a ship shall have entered or shall have been detained in any port or
place under the circumstances, or for the purposes of the repairs,
mentioned in Rule X., the wages payable to the master, officers and crew,
together with the cost of maintenance of the same, during the extra period
of detention in such port or place until the ship shall or should have been
made ready to proceed upon her voyage, shall be admitted as G.A. But when
this ship is condemned or does not proceed on her original voyage, the
wages and maintenance of the master, officers and crew, incurred after the
date of the ship's condemnation or of the abandonment of the voyage, shall
not be admitted as G.A.

RULE XII.--DAMAGE TO CARGO IN DISCHARGING, &c.

Damage done to or loss of cargo necessarily caused in the act of
discharging, storing, reloading and stowing shall be made good as G.A. when
and only when the cost of those measures respectively is admitted as G.A.

RULE XIII.--DEDUCTIONS FROM COST OF REPAIRS

In adjusting claims for G.A., repairs to be allowed in G.A. shall be
subject to the following deductions in respect of "new for old," viz.:--

In the case of _iron or steel ships_, from date of original register to the
date of accident:--

_Up to 1 year old (A.)_

    All repairs to be allowed in full, except painting or coating of
    bottom, from which one-third is to be deducted.

_Between 1 and 3 years (B.)_

    One-third to be deducted off repairs to and renewal of woodwork of
    hull, masts and spars, furniture, upholstery, crockery, metal and
    glassware, also sails, rigging, ropes, sheets and hawsers (other than
    wire and chain), awnings, covers and painting.

    One-sixth to be deducted off wire rigging, wire ropes and wire hawsers,
    chain cables and chains, donkey engines, steam winches and connexions,
    steam cranes and connexions; other repairs in full.

_Between 3 and 6 years (C.)_

    Deductions as above under clause B, except that one-sixth be deducted
    off ironwork of masts and spars, and machinery (inclusive of boilers
    and their mountings).

_Between 6 and 10 years (D.)_

    Deductions as above under clause C, except that one-third be deducted
    off ironwork of masts and spars, repairs to and renewal of all
    machinery (inclusive of boilers and their mountings), and all hawsers,
    ropes, sheets and rigging.

_Between 10 & 15 years (E.)_

    One-third to be deducted off all repairs and renewals, except ironwork
    of hull and cementing and chain cables, from which one-sixth to be
    deducted. Anchors to be allowed in full.

_Over 15 years (F.)_

    One-third to be deducted off all repairs and renewals. Anchors to be
    allowed in full. One-sixth to be deducted off chain cables.

_Generally (G.)_

    The deductions (except as to provisions and stores, machinery and
    boilers) to be regulated by the age of the ship, and not the age of the
    particular part of her to which they apply. No painting bottom to be
    allowed if the bottom has not been painted within six months previous
    to the date of accident. No deduction to be made in respect of old
    material which is repaired without being replaced by new, and
    provisions and stores which have not been in use.

[v.03 p.0056]

In the case of _wooden or composite ships_:--

    When a ship is under one year old from date of original register, at
    the time of accident, no deduction "new for old" shall be made. After
    that period a deduction of one-third shall be made, with the following
    exceptions:--

        Anchors shall be allowed in full. Chain cables shall be subject to
        a deduction of one-sixth only.

        No deduction shall be made in respect of provisions and stores
        which had not been in use.

        Metal sheathing shall be dealt with, by allowing in full the cost
        of a weight equal to the gross weight of metal sheathing stripped
        off, minus the proceeds of the old metal. Nails, felt and labour
        metalling are subject to a deduction of one-third.

In the case of _ships generally_:--

    In the case of all ships, the expense of straightening bent ironwork,
    including labour of taking out and replacing it, shall be allowed in
    full.

    Graving dock dues, including expenses of removals, cartages, use of
    shears, stages and graving dock materials, shall be allowed in full.

RULE XIV.--TEMPORARY REPAIRS

No deductions "new for old" shall be made from the cost of temporary
repairs of damage allowable as G.A.

RULE XV.--LOSS OF FREIGHT

Loss of freight arising from damage to or loss of cargo shall be made good
as G.A., either when caused by a G.A. act or when the damage to or loss of
cargo is so made good.

RULE XVI.--AMOUNT TO BE MADE GOOD FOR CARGO LOST OR DAMAGED BY SACRIFICE

The amount to be made good as G.A. for damage or loss of goods sacrificed
shall be the loss which the owner of the goods has sustained thereby, based
on the market values at the date of the arrival of the vessel or at the
termination of the adventure.

RULE XVII.--CONTRIBUTORY VALUES

The contribution to a G.A. shall be made upon the actual values of the
property at the termination of the adventure, to which shall be added the
amount made good as G.A. for property sacrificed; deduction being made from
the shipowner's freight and passage-money at risk, of such port charges and
crew's wages as would not have been incurred had the ship and cargo been
totally lost at the date of the G.A. act or sacrifice, and have not been
allowed as G.A.; deduction being also made from the value of the property
of all charges incurred in respect thereof subsequently to the G.A. act,
except such charges as are allowed in G.A.

Passengers' luggage and personal effects, not shipped under bill of lading,
shall not contribute to G.A.

RULE XVIII.--ADJUSTMENT

Except as provided in the foregoing rules, the adjustment shall be drawn up
in accordance with the law and practice that would have governed the
adjustment had the contract of affreightment not contained a clause to pay
G.A. according to these rules.

The above rules differ in some important respects from English common law,
and from former English practice. They follow ideas upon the subject of
G.A. which have prevailed in practice in foreign countries (though often in
apparent opposition to the language of the codes), in preference to the
more strict principle of the common law applied by English courts. That
principle requires that, in order to have the character of G.A. a sacrifice
or expenditure must be made for the common _safety_ of the several
interests in the adventure and under the pressure of a common risk. It is
not enough that the sacrifice or expenditure is prudent, or even necessary
to enable the common adventure to be completed. G.A., on the English view,
only arises where the _safety_ of the several interests is at stake. "The
idea of a common commercial adventure, as distinguished from the common
safety from the sea," is not recognized. It is not sufficient "that an
expenditure should have been made to benefit both cargo owner and
shipowner."[1]

[Sidenote: Port of refuge expenses.]

Thus expenses incurred after ship and cargo are in safety, say at a port of
refuge, are not generally, by English law, to be treated as G.A.; although
the putting into port may have been for safety, and therefore a G.A. act.
If the putting into port has been necessitated by a G.A. sacrifice, as by
cutting away the ship's masts, the case is different; the port expenses,
the expenses of repairing the G.A. damage, and the incidental expenses of
unloading, storing and reloading the cargo are, in such a case, treated as
consequences of the original sacrifice, and therefore subjects for
contribution. But where the reason for putting in is to avoid some danger,
such as a storm or hostile cruiser, or to effect repairs necessitated by
some _accidental_ damage to the ship, the G.A. sacrifice is considered to
be at an end when the port has been reached, if the ship and cargo are then
in physical safety. The subsequent expenditure in the port is said not to
flow from that sacrifice, but from the necessity of completing the voyage,
and is incurred in performance of the shipowner's obligation under his
contract. The practice of English average adjusters has indeed modified
this strict view by treating the expense of _unloading_ as G.A.; but it may
well be doubted whether that practice can be legally supported. Moreover,
expenditure in the port which is incurred in protecting the cargo as in
warehousing it, is by English practice treated as a charge to be borne by
the cargo for whose benefit it was incurred.

If we turn now to York-Antwerp Rule X., it will be seen that a much broader
view is adopted. Whatever the reason for putting into the port of refuge,
provided it was necessary for the common safety, the expenses of going in,
and the consequent expenses of getting out (if she sails again with all or
part of her original cargo), are allowed as G.A., Rule X. (a). Further, the
cost of discharging the cargo to enable damage to the ship to be repaired,
whether caused by sacrifice or by accident during the voyage, is to be
allowed as G.A., "if the repairs were necessary for the safe prosecution of
the voyage," Rule X. (b). And that is to be so even where such repairs are
done at a port of _call_, as well as where done at a port of _refuge_.
Again, when the cost of discharging is treated as G.A., so also are to be
the expenses of storing the cargo on shore, and of reloading and stowing it
on board, after the repairs have been done (Rule X. (c)), together with any
damage or loss incidental to those operations (Rule XII.).

Further, by Rule XI. the wages of the master, officers and crew, and the
cost of their maintenance, during the detention of a ship under the
circumstances, or for the purpose of the repairs mentioned in Rule X., are
to be allowed in G.A. It is questionable whether English law allows the
wages and maintenance of the crew at a port of refuge in any case. Where
the detention is to repair _accidental_ damage it seems clear that they are
not allowed. And in practice under common law, the allowance is never made;
so that Rule XI. is an important concession to the shipowner. Like the
changes introduced by Rule X., it is a change towards the practice in
foreign countries.

It may be noted that the rules do not afford equal protection to a shipper
in the comparatively infrequent case of his being put to expense by the
delay at a port of refuge. Thus a shipper of cattle is not entitled to have
the extra wages and provisions of his cattlemen on board, nor the extra
fodder consumed by the cattle during the stay at a repairing port, made as
good as G.A. under Rules XI. and X. (_Anglo-Argentine &c. Agency_ v.
_Temperley Shipping Co._, 1899, 2 Q.B. 403).

[Sidenote: General average sacrifices.]

As to the acts which amount to G.A. sacrifices, as distinguished from
expenditures, the York-Antwerp Rules do not much alter English common law.
They do, however, make definite provisions upon some points on which
authority was scanty or doubtful. (See Rules I.-IX.) And in Rule I., as to
jettison of deck cargo, a change is made from the common law rule, for the
jettison is not allowed as G.A. even though the cargo be carried on deck in
accordance with an established custom of the particular trade.

Rule III. deals with damage done in extinguishing fire on board a ship.
Modern decisions have cleared away the old doubts whether such damage to
ship or cargo should, at law, be allowed in G.A. But recent cases in the
United States have raised the question whether the allowance should be made
where the fire occurs in port, and is extinguished, not by the master, but
by a public authority acting in the interests of the public. The Supreme
Court of the United States decided against the allowance in 1894 in a case
of _Ralli_ v. _Troup_ (157 U.S. 386). The ship had there been scuttled to
put out a fire on board, by the port authority, acting upon their own
judgment, but with the assent of the master. It was held that the damage
suffered by ship and cargo ought not to be made good by G.A. contributions;
for the sacrifice had not been made "by some one specially charged with the
control and safety of that adventure," but was the compulsory act of a
public authority. On the other hand, in the English case of _Papayanni_ v.
_Grampian S.S. Co._ (I. Com. Ca. 448), Mathew, J., held that the scuttling
of a ship at a port of refuge in Algeria, by orders of the captain of the
port, was a G.A. act. It had been done in the interest of ship and cargo,
and there was no evidence of any other motive.

Rule V. deals with the question whether, and under what conditions, a
voluntary stranding of the ship is a G.A. act, in a manner which will
probably be held to express the law in England when the matter comes up for
decision.

Rules VI. and VII. deal with the damage sustained by the ship, or her
appliances, in efforts to force her off the ground when she has stranded.
Such efforts involve an abnormal use which is likely to cause damage to
sails and spars, or to engines and boilers; and they are treated as acts of
sacrifice. The case of "The Bona," 1895 (P. 125) shows that the rules are
in accord with English law upon the point. The court of appeal held that
both the damage sustained by the engines while worked to get the ship off,
and the coal and stores consumed, were subjects for G.A. contribution at
common law.

[v.03 p.0057] Rule VIII. allows as G.A. any damage sustained by cargo when
discharged and, say, lightered for the purpose of getting the ship off a
strand. And the corresponding damage in the case of cargo discharged at a
port of refuge to enable repairs to be done to the ship is allowed by Rule
XII. But in the latter case the allowance does not expressly extend to
damage sustained while stored on land. Whether the law would require
contribution to a loss of goods, say, by thieves or by fire, while landed
for repairs, is not clear. Where the landing has been necessitated by a
G.A. act, as cutting away masts, it would seem that the loss ought to be
made good, as being a result of the special risks to which those goods have
thereby been exposed. The risks which they would have run if they had
remained on board throughout are taken into account, as will presently
appear, in estimating _how much_ of the damage is to be made good.

Where cattle were taken into a port of refuge in Brazil, owing to
accidental damage to the ship, with the result that they could not legally
be landed at their destination (Deptford), and had to be taken to another
port (Antwerp), at which they were of much less value, this loss of value
was allowed in G.A. (_Anglo-Argentine &c. Agency_ v. _Temperley Shipping
Co._, 1899, 2 Q.B. 403).

The case of a stranded ship and cargo often gives rise to difficulty as to
whether the cost of operations to lighten the ship, and afterwards to get
her floated, should be treated as G.A. expenditure, or as expenses
separately incurred in saving the separate interests. The true conclusion
seems to be that either the whole operation should be treated as one for
the common safety, and the whole expense be contributed to by all the
interests saved, or else the several parts of the operation should be kept
distinct, debiting the cost of each to the interests thereby saved. Which
of these two views should be adopted in any case seems to depend upon the
motives with which the earlier operations (usually the discharge of the
cargo) were presumably undertaken. It may, however, happen that this test
cannot be applied once for all. Take the case of a stranded ship carrying a
bulky cargo of hemp and grain, but carrying also some bullion. Suppose this
last to be rescued and taken to a place of safety at small expense in
comparison with its value. It may well be that that operation must be
regarded as done in the interest simply of the bullion itself, but that the
subsequent operations of lightening the ship and floating her can only be
properly regarded as undertaken in the common interest of ship, hemp, grain
and freight. In such a case there will be a G.A. contribution towards those
later operations by those interests. But the bullion will not contribute;
it will merely bear the expense of its own rescue (_Royal Mail S. P. Co._
v. _English Bank of Rio de Janeiro_, 1887, 19 Q.B.D. 362).

The York-Antwerp Rules have not only had the valuable result of introducing
uniformity where there had been great variety, and corresponding certainty
as to the principles which will be acted upon in adjusting any G.A. loss,
but also they have introduced greater clearness and definiteness on points
where there had been a want of definition. Thus Rule XIII. has laid down a
careful and definite scale to regulate the deductions from the cost of
repairs, in respect of "new for old," in place of the former somewhat
uncertain customary rules which varied according to the place of
adjustment; while at the same time the opportunity has been taken of
adapting the scale of deductions to modern conditions of shipbuilding. And
Rule XVII. lays down a rule as to contributory values in place of the
widely varying rules of different countries as to the amounts upon which
ship and freight shall contribute (cf. Gow, _Marine Insurance_, 305).

It may be of interest to refer briefly to one or two main principles which
govern the _adjustment_ (_q.v._) of general average, _i.e._ the calculation
of the amounts to be made good and paid by the several interests, which is
a complicated matter. The fundamental idea is that the several interests at
risk shall contribute in proportion to the benefits they have severally
received by the completion of the adventure. Contributions are not made in
proportion to the amounts at stake when the sacrifice was made, but in
proportion to the results when the adventure has come to an end. An
interest which has become lost after the sacrifice, during the subsequent
course of the voyage, will pay nothing; an interest which has become
depreciated will pay in proportion to the diminished value. The liability
to contribute is inchoate only when the sacrifice has been made. It becomes
complete when the adventure has come to an end, either by arrival at the
destination, or by having been broken up at some intermediate point, while
the interest in question still survives. To this there is one exception, in
the case of G.A. _expenditure_. Where such expenditure has been incurred by
the owner of one interest, generally by the shipowner, the repayment to him
by the other interests ought not to be wholly dependent upon the subsequent
safety of those interests at the ultimate destination. If those other
interests or some of them arrive, or are realized, as by being landed at an
intermediate port, the rule (as in the case of G.A. sacrifices) is that the
contributions are to be in proportion to the arrived or realized values.
But if all are lost the burden of the expenditure ought not to remain upon
the interest which at first bore it; and the proper rule seems to be that
contributions must be made by all the interests which were at stake when it
was made, in proportion to their _then_ values.

Again, the object of the law of G.A. is to put one whose property is
sacrificed upon an equal footing with the rest, not upon a better footing.
Thus, if goods to the value of £100 have been thrown overboard for the
general safety, the owner of those goods must not receive the full £100 in
contribution. He himself must bear a part of it, for those goods formed
part of the adventure for whose safety the jettison was made; and it is
owing to the partial safety of the adventure that any contribution at all
is received by him. He, therefore, is made to contribute with the other
saved interests towards his own loss, in respect of the amount "made good"
to him for that. The full £100 is treated as the amount to be made good,
but the owner of the goods is made to contribute towards that upon the sum
of £100 thus saved to him.

The same principle has a further consequence. The amount to be made good
will not necessarily be the value of the goods or other property in their
condition at the time they were sacrificed; so to calculate it would in
effect be to withdraw those goods from the subsequent risks of the voyage,
and thus to put them in a better position than those which were not
sacrificed. Hence, in estimating the amount to be made good, the value of
the goods or property sacrificed must be estimated _as on arrival_, with
reference to the condition in which they would probably have arrived had
they remained on board throughout the voyage.

The liability to pay G.A. contributions falls primarily upon the owner of
the contributing interest, ship, goods or freight. But in practice the
contributions are paid by the insurers of the several interests. Merchants
seldom have to concern themselves with the subject. And yet in an ordinary
policy of insurance there is no express provision requiring the underwriter
to indemnify the assured against this liability. The policy commonly
contains clauses which recognize such an obligation, _e.g._ a warranty
against average "unless general," or an agreement that G.A. shall be
payable "as per foreign statement," or "according to York-Antwerp Rules";
but it does not directly state the obligation. It assumes that. The
explanation seems to be that the practice of the underwriter to pay the
contribution has been so uniform, and his liability has been so fully
recognized, that express provisions were needless. But one result has been
that very differing views of the ground of the obligation have been held.
One view has been that it is covered by the sue and labour clause of an
ordinary policy, by which the insurer agrees to bear his proportion of
expenses voluntarily incurred "in and about the defence, safeguard and
recovery" of the insured subject. But that has been held to be mistaken by
the House of Lords (_Aitchison_ v. _Lohre_, 1879, 4 A.C. 755). Another view
is that the underwriter impliedly undertakes to repay sums which the law
may require the assured to pay towards averting losses which would, by the
contract, fall upon the underwriter. Expenses voluntarily incurred by the
assured with that object are expressly made repayable by the sue and labour
clause of the policy. It might well be implied that payments compulsorily
required from the assured by law for contributions to G.A., or as salvage
for services by salvors, will be undertaken or repaid by the underwriter,
the service being for his benefit. But the decision in _Aitchison_ v.
_Lohre_ negatives this ground also. The claim was against underwriters on a
ship which had been so damaged that the cost of repairs had exceeded her
insured value. A claim for the ship's contribution to certain salvage and
G.A. expenses which had been incurred, over and above the cost of repairs,
was disallowed. The view seems to have been that the insurer is liable for
salvage and G.A. payments as losses of the subject insured, and therefore
included in the sum insured, not as collateral payments made on his behalf.
This bases the claim against the insurer upon a fiction, for there has been
no loss of [v.03 p.0058] the subject insured; in fact, the payment has been
for averting such a loss. And it suggests that the insurer is not liable
for salvage where the policy is free of particular average, which does not
accord with practice.

An important question as to an insurer's liability for G.A. arose in the
case of the _Brigella_ (1893, P. 189), where a shipowner had incurred
expenses which would have been the subject of G.A. contributions, but that
he alone was interested in the voyage. There were no contributories. He
claimed from the insurers of the ship what would have been the ship's G.A.
contribution had there been other persons to contribute in respect of
freight or cargo. The claim was disallowed on the ground that there could
be no G.A. in such circumstances, and therefore no basis for a claim
against the insurer. The liability of the insurer was thus made to depend,
not upon the character of the loss, but upon the fact or possibility of
contribution. But this was not followed in _Montgomery_ v. _Indemnity
Mutual M. I. Co._ (1901, 1 K.B. 147). There ship, freight and cargo all
belonged to the same person. He had insured the cargo but not the ship. The
cargo underwriters were held liable to pay a contribution to damage done to
the ship by cutting away masts for the general safety. The loss was in
theory spread over all the interests at risk, and they had undertaken to
bear the cargo's share of such losses. Their liability did not depend upon
the accident of whether the interests all belonged to one person or not.
This agrees with the view taken in the United States.

As to _Particular Average_, see under INSURANCE: _Marine_.

AUTHORITIES.--Lowndes on _General Average_ (4th ed., London, 1888);
Abbott's _Merchant Ships and Seamen_ (14th ed., London, 1901); Arnould's
_Marine Insurance_ (7th ed., London, 1901); Carver's _Carriage by Sea_ (4th
ed., London, 1905).

(T. G. C.)

[1] Per Bowen, L.J., in _Svensden_ v. _Wallace_, 1883, 13 Q.B.D. at p. 84.