AVEYRON, a department of southern France, bounded N. by Cantal, E. by
Lozère and Card, S.W. by Tarn and W. by Tarn-et-Garonne and Lot. Area, 3386
sq. m. Pop. (1906) 377,299. It corresponds nearly to the old district of
Rouergue, which gave its name to a countship established early in the 9th
century, and united with that of Toulouse towards the end of the 11th
century. The earliest known natives of this region were the Celtic Rutheni,
to whom the numerous megalithic monuments found in the department are
attributed. Aveyron lies on the southern border of the central plateau of
France. Its chief rivers are the Lot in the north, the Aveyron in the
centre and the Tarn in the south, all tributaries of the Garonne. They flow
from east to west, following the general slope of the department, and
divide it into four zones. In the north-east, between the Lot and its
tributary the Truyère, lies the lonely pastoral plateau of the Viadène,
dominated by the volcanic mountains of Aubrac, which form the north-eastern
limit of the department and include its highest summit (4760 ft.).
Entraygues, at the confluence of the Lot and the Truyère, is one of the
many picturesque towns of the department. Between the Lot and the Aveyron
is a belt of _causses_ or monotonous limestone table-lands, broken here and
there by profound and beautiful gorges--a type of scenery characteristic of
Aveyron. This zone is also watered by the Dourdou du Nord, a tributary of
the Lot. The salient feature of the region between the Tarn and the Aveyron
is the plateau of the Ségala, bordered on the east by the heights of
Lévezou and Palanges and traversed from east to west by the deep valley of
the Viaur, a tributary of the Aveyron. The country south of the Tarn is
occupied in great part by the huge plateau of Larzac, which lies between
the Causse Noir and the Causse St Affrique, the three forming the
south-western termination of the Cévennes. On the Causse Noir is found the
fantastic chaos of rocks and precipices known as Montpellier-le-Vieux,
resembling the ruins of a huge city. The climate of Aveyron varies from
extreme rigour in the mountains to mildness in the sheltered valleys; the
south wind is sometimes of great violence. Wheat, rye and oats are the
chief cereals cultivated, the soil of Aveyron being naturally poor. Other
crops are potatoes, colza, hemp and flax. The mainstay of the agriculture
of the department is the raising of live-stock, especially of cattle of the
Aubrac breed, for which Laguiole is an important market. The wines of
Entraygues, St Georges, Bouillac and Najac have some reputation; in the
Ségala chestnuts form an important element in the food of the peasants, and
the walnut, cider-apple, mulberry (for the silk-worm industry), and plum
are among the fruit trees grown. The production of Roquefort cheeses is
prominent among the agricultural industries. They are made from the milk of
the large flocks of the plateau of Larzac, and the choicest are ripened in
the even temperature of the caves in the cliff which overhangs Roquefort.
The minerals found in the department include the coal of the basins of
Aubin and Rodez as well as iron, zinc and lead. Quarries of various kinds
of stone are also worked. The chief industrial centres are Decazeville,
which has metallurgical works, and Millau, where leather-dressing and the
manufacture of gloves have attained considerable importance. Wool-weaving
and the manufacture of woollen goods, machinery, chemicals and bricks are
among the other industries.

There are five arrondissements, of which the chief towns are Rodez, capital
of the department, Espalion, Millau, St Affrique and Villefranche, with 43
cantons and 304 communes. Rodez is the seat of a bishopric, the diocese of
which comprises the department. Aveyron belongs to the 16th military
region, and to the _académie_ or educational circumscription of Toulouse.
Its court of appeal is at Montpellier. The department is traversed by the
lines both of the Orléans and Southern railways. The more important towns
are Rodez, Millau, St Affrique, Villefranche-de-Rouergue and Decazeville.
The following are also of interest:--Sauveterre, founded in 1281, a
striking example of the bastide (_q.v._) of that period; Conques, which has
a remarkable abbey-church of the 11th century like St Sernin of Toulouse in
plan and possessing a rich treasury of reliquaries, &c.; Espalion, where
amongst other old buildings there are the remains of a feudal stronghold
and a church of the Romanesque period; Najac, which has the ruins of a
magnificent château of the 13th century; and Sylvanès, with a church of the
12th century, once attached to a Cistercian abbey.