AVIGNON, a city of south-eastern France, capital of the department of
Vaucluse, 143 m. S. of Lyons on the railway between that city and
Marseilles. Pop. (1906) 35,356. Avignon, which lies on the left bank of the
Rhone, a few miles above its confluence with the Durance, occupies a large
oval-shaped area not fully populated, and covered in great part by parks
and gardens. A suspension bridge leads over the river to
Villeneuve-lès-Avignon (_q.v._), and a little higher up, a picturesque
ruined bridge of the 12th century, the Pont Saint-Bénézet, projects into
the stream. Only four of the eighteen piles are left; on one of them stands
the chapel of Saint-Bénézet, a small Romanesque building. Avignon is still
encircled by the ramparts built by the popes in the 14th century, which
offer one of the finest examples of medieval fortification in existence.
The walls, which are of great strength, are surmounted by machicolated
battlements, flanked at intervals by thirty-nine massive towers and pierced
by several gateways, three of which date from the 14th century. The whole
is surrounded by a line of pleasant boulevards. The life of the town is
almost confined to the Place de l'Hôtel de Ville and the Cours de la
République, which leads out of it and extends to the ramparts. Elsewhere
the streets are narrow, quiet, and, for the most part, badly paved. At the
northern extremity of the town a precipitous rock, the Rocher des Doms,
rises from the river's edge and forms a plateau stretching southwards
nearly to the Place de l'Hôtel de Ville. Its summit is occupied by a public
garden and, to the south of this, by the cathedral of Notre-Dame des Doms
and the Palace of the Popes. The cathedral is a Romanesque building, mainly
of the 12th century, the most prominent feature of which is the gilded
statue of the Virgin which surmounts the western tower. Among the many
works of art in the interior, the most beautiful is the mausoleum of Pope
John XXII., a masterpiece of Gothic [v.03 p.0064] carving of the 14th
century. The cathedral is almost dwarfed by the Palace of the Popes, a
sombre assemblage of buildings, which rises at its side and covers a space
of more than 1¼ acres. Begun in 1316 by John XXII., it was continued by
succeeding popes until 1370, and is in the Gothic style; in its
construction everything has been sacrificed to strength, and though the
effect is imposing, the place has the aspect rather of a fortress than of a
palace. It was for long used as a barracks and prison, to the exigencies of
which the fine apartments were ruthlessly adapted, but it is now municipal
property. Among the minor churches of the town are St Pierre, which has a
graceful façade and richly carved doors, St Didier and St Agricol, all
three of Gothic architecture. The most notable of the civil buildings are
the hôtel de ville, a modern building with a belfry of the 14th century,
and the old Hôtel des Monnaies, the papal mint which was built in 1610 and
is now used as a music-school. The Calvet Museum, so named after F. Calvet,
physician, who in 1810 left his collections to the town, is rich in
inscriptions, bronzes, glass and other antiquities, and in sculptures and
paintings. The library has over 140,000 volumes. The town has a statue of a
Persian, Jean Althen, who in 1765 introduced the culture of the madder
plant, which long formed the staple and is still an important branch of
local trade. In 1873 John Stuart Mill died at Avignon, and is buried in the
cemetery. For the connexion of Petrarch with the town see PETRARCH.

Avignon is subject to violent winds, of which the most disastrous is the
_mistral_. The popular proverb is, however, somewhat exaggerated, _Avenio
ventosa, sine vento venenosa, cum vento fastidiosa_ (windy Avignon,
pest-ridden when there is no wind, wind-pestered when there is).

Avignon is the seat of an archbishop and has tribunals of first instance
and of commerce, a council of trade-arbitrators, a lycée, and training
college, a chamber of commerce and a branch of the Bank of France. It is in
the midst of a fertile district, in the products of which it has a large
trade, and has flour-mills, distilleries, oil-works and leather-works,
manufactures soap, chemicals and liquorice, and is well known for its
sarsanet and other fabrics.

Avignon (_Avenio_) was an important town of the Gallic tribe of the
Cavares, and under the Romans one of the leading cities of Gallia
Narbonensis. Severely harassed during the barbarian invasions and by the
Saracens, it was, in later times, attached successively to the kingdoms of
Burgundy and of Arles and to the domains of the counts of Provence and of
Toulouse and of Forcalquier. At the end of the 12th century it became a
republic, but in 1226 was taken and dismantled by Louis VIII. as punishment
for its support of the Albigenses, and in 1251 was forced to submit to the
counts of Toulouse and Provence. In 1309 the city was chosen by Clement V.
as his residence, and from that time till 1377 was the papal seat. In 1348
the city was sold by Joanna, countess of Provence, to Clement VI. After
Gregory XI. had migrated to Rome, two antipopes, Clement VII. and Benedict
XIII., resided at Avignon, from which the latter was expelled in 1408. The
town remained in the possession of the popes, who governed it by means of
legates, till its annexation by the National Assembly in 1791, though
during this interval several kings of France made efforts to unite it with
their dominions. In 1791 conflicts between the adherents of the Papacy and
the Republicans led to much bloodshed. In 1815 Marshal Brune was
assassinated in the town by the adherents of the royalist party. The
bishopric, founded in the 3rd century, became an archbishopric in 1475.

See Fantoni Castrucci, _Istoria della città d'Avignone e del Contado
Venesino_ (Venice, 1678); J. B. Joudou, _Histoire des souverains pontifes
qui ont siégé à Avignon_ (Avignon, 1855); A. Canron, _Guide de l'étranger
dans la ville d'Avignon et ses environs_ (Avignon, 1858); J. F. André,
_Histoire de la Papauté à Avignon_ (Avignon, 1887).

ÁVILA, GIL GONZALEZ DE (_c._ 1577-1658), Spanish biographer and antiquary,
was born and died at Ávila. He was made historiographer of Castile in 1612,
and of the Indies in 1641. Of his numerous works, the most valuable are his
_Teatro de las Grandezas des Madrid_ (Madrid, 1623, sqq.), and his _Teatro
Eclesiastico_, descriptive of the metropolitan churches and cathedrals of
Castile, with lives of the prelates (Madrid, 1645-1653, 4 vols. 4to).

ÁVILA, a province of central Spain, one of the modern divisions of the
kingdom of Old Castile; bounded on the N. by Valladolid, E. by Segovia and
Madrid, S. by Toledo and Cáceres, and W. by Salamanca. Pop. (1900) 200,457;
area, 2570 sq. m. Ávila is naturally divided into two sections, differing
completely in soil, climate, productions and social economy. The northern
portion is generally level; the soil is of indifferent quality, strong and
marly in a few places, but rocky in all the valleys of the Sierra de Ávila;
and the climate alternates from severe cold in winter to extreme heat in
summer. The population of this part is mainly agricultural. The southern
division is one mass of rugged granitic sierras, interspersed, however,
with sheltered and well-watered valleys, abounding with rich vegetation.
The winter here, especially in the elevated region of the Paramera and the
waste lands of Ávila, is long and severe, but the climate is not unhealthy.
In this region stock-breeding is an important industry. The principal
mountain chains are the Guadarrama, separating this province from Madrid;
the Paramera and Sierra de Ávila, west of the Guadarrama; and the vast wall
of the Sierra de Gredos along the southern frontier, where its outstanding
peaks rise to 6000 or even 8000 ft. The ridges which ramify from the
Paramera are covered with valuable forests of beeches, oaks and firs,
presenting a striking contrast to the bare peaks of the Sierra de Gredos.
The principal rivers are the Alberche and Tietar, belonging to the basin of
the Tagus, and the Tórmes, Trabáncos and Adaja, belonging to that of the
Douro. The mountains contain silver, copper, iron, lead and coal, but their
mineral wealth has been exaggerated, and at the beginning of the 20th
century mining had practically been abandoned. Quarries of fine marble and
jasper exist in the district of Arenas. The province declined in wealth and
population during the 18th and 19th centuries, a result due less to the
want of activity on the part of the inhabitants than to the oppressive
manorial and feudal rights and the strict laws of entail and mortmain,
which acted as barriers to progress.

Towards the close of this period many improvements were introduced,
although the want of irrigation is still keenly felt. Wide tracts of waste
land were planted with pinewoods by the ducal house of Medina Sidonia. The
main roads are fairly good; and Ávila, the capital, is connected by rail
with Salamanca, Valladolid and Madrid; but in many parts of the province
the means of communication are defective. Except Ávila there are no
important towns. The principal production is the wool of the merino sheep,
which at one time yielded an immense revenue. Game is plentiful, and the
rivers abound in fish, specially trout. Olives, chestnuts and grapes are
grown, and silk-worms are kept. There is little trade, and the manufactures
are few, consisting chiefly of copper utensils, lime, soap, cloth, paper
and combs. The state of elementary education is comparatively good, rather
more than two-thirds of the population being able to read and write, and
the ratio of crime is proportionately low.

ÁVILA (anc. _Abula_ or _Avela_), the capital of the province described
above; on the right bank of the river Adaja, 54 m. W. by N. of Madrid, by
the Madrid-Valladolid railway. Pop. (1900) 11,885. The city is built on the
flat summit of a rocky hill, which rises abruptly in the midst of a
veritable wilderness; a brown, arid, treeless table-land, strewn with
immense grey boulders, and shut in by lofty mountains. The ancient walls of
Ávila, constructed of brown granite, and surmounted by a breastwork, with
eighty-six towers and nine gateways, are still in excellent repair; but a
large part of the city lies beyond their circuit. Ávila is the seat of a
bishop, and contains several ecclesiastical buildings of high interest. The
Gothic cathedral, said by tradition to date from 1107, but probably of 13th
or 14th century workmanship, has the appearance of a fortress, with
embattled walls and two solid towers. It contains many interesting
sculptures and paintings, besides one especially fine silver pyx, the work
of Juan de Arphe, dating from 1571. The churches of San Vicente, San Pedro,
Santo Tomás and San [v.03 p.0065] Segundo are, in their main features,
Romanesque of the 15th century, although parts of the beautiful San
Vicente, and of San Pedro, may be as old as the 12th century. Especially
noteworthy is the marble monument in Santo Tomás, carved by the
15th-century Florentine sculptor Domenico Fancelli, over the tomb of Prince
John (d. 1497), the only son of Ferdinand and Isabella. The convent and
church of Santa Teresa mark the supposed birthplace of the saint whose name
they bear (c. 1515-1582) Ávila also possesses an old Moorish castle
(_alcázar_) used as barracks, a foundling hospital, infirmary, military
academy, and training schools for teachers of both sexes. From 1482 to 1807
it was also the seat of a university. It has a considerable trade in
agricultural products, leather, pottery, hats, linen and cotton goods.

For the local history see V. Picatoste, _Tradiciones de Ávila_ (Madrid,
1888); and L. Ariz, _Historia de las grandezas de ... Ávila_ (Alcalá de
Henares, 1607).