AXMINSTER, a market-town in the Honiton parliamentary division of
Devonshire, England, on the river Axe, 27 m. E. by N. of Exeter by the
London & South-Western railway. Pop. (1901) 2906. The minster, dedicated to
St Mary the Virgin, illustrates every style of architecture from Norman to
Perpendicular. There are in the chancel two freestone effigies, perhaps of
the 14th century, besides three sedilia, and a piscina under arches.
Axminster was long celebrated for the admirable quality of its carpets,
which were woven by hand, like tapestry. Their manufacture was established
in 1755. Their name is preserved, but since the seat of this industry was
removed to Wilton near Salisbury, the inhabitants of Axminster have found
employment in brush factories, corn mills, timber yards and an iron
foundry. Cloth, drugget, cotton, leather, gloves and tapes are also made.
Coaxdon House, the birthplace in 1602 of Sir Symonds d'Ewes, the Puritan
historian, is about 2 m. distant, and was formerly known as St Calyst.

Axminster (Axemystre) derives its name from the river Axe and from the old
abbey church or minster said to have been built by King Æthelstan. The
situation of Axminster at the intersection of the two great ancient roads,
Iknield Street and the Fosse Way, and also the numerous earthworks and
hill-fortresses in the neighbourhood indicate a very early settlement.
There is a tradition that the battle of Brunanburh was fought in the valley
of the Axe, and that the bodies of the Danish princes who perished in
action were buried in Axminster church. According to Domesday, Axminster
was held by the king. In 1246 Reginald de Mohun, then lord of the manor,
founded a Cistercian abbey at Newenham within the parish of Axminster,
granting it a Saturday market and a fair on Midsummer day, and the next
year made over to the monks from Beaulieu the manor and hundred of
Axminster. The abbey was dissolved in 1539. The midsummer fair established
by Reginald de Mohun is still held.

See _Victoria County History--Devon_; James Davidson, _British and Roman
Remains in the Vicinity of Axminster_ (London, 1833).