AXOLOTL, the Mexican name given to larvae salamanders of the genus
_Amblystoma_. It required the extraordinary acumen of the great Cuvier at
once to recognize, when the first specimens [v.03 p.0069] of the _Gyrinus
edulis_ or _Axolotl_ of Mexico were brought to him by Humboldt in the
beginning of the 19th century, that these Batrachians were not really
related to the Perennibranchiates, such as _Siren_ and _Proteus_, with
which he was well acquainted, but represented the larval form of some
air-breathing salamander. Little heed was paid to his opinion by most
systematists, and when, more than half a century later, the axolotl was
found to breed in its branchiferous condition, the question seemed to be
settled once for all against him, and the genus _Siredon_, as it was called
by J. Wagler, was unanimously maintained and placed among the permanent
gill-breathers.

It seemed impossible to admit that an animal which lives for years without
losing its gills, and is able to propagate in that state, could be anything
but a perfect form. And yet subsequent discoveries, which followed in rapid
succession, have established that _Siredon_ is but the larval form of the
salamander _Amblystoma_, a genus long known from various parts of North
America; and Cuvier's conclusions now read much better than they did half a
century after they were published. Before reviewing the history of these
discoveries, it is desirable to say a few words of the characters of the
axolotl (larval form) and of the _Amblystoma_ (perfect or imago form).

The axolotl has been known to the Mexicans from the remotest times, as an
article of food regularly brought from neighbouring lakes to the Mexico
market, its flesh being agreeable and wholesome. Francisco Hernandez
(1514-1578) has alluded to it as _Gyrinus edulis_ or _atolocatl_, and as
_lusus aquarum_, _piscis ludicrus_, or _axolotl_, which latter name has
remained in use, in Mexico and elsewhere, to the present day. But for its
large size--it grows to a length of eleven inches--it is a nearly exact
image of the British newt larvae. It has the same moderately long, plump
body, with a low dorsal crest, the continuation of the membrane bordering
the strongly compressed tail; a large thick head with small eyes without
lids and with a large pendent upper lip; two pairs of well-developed limbs,
with free digits; and above all, as the most characteristic feature, three
large appendages on each side of the back of the head, fringed with
filaments which, in their fullest development, remind one of black ostrich
feathers. These are the external gills, through which the animal breathes
the oxygen dissolved in the water. The jaws are provided with small teeth
in several rows, and there is an elongate patch of further teeth on each
side of the front of the palate (inserted on the vomerine and palatine
bones). The colour is blackish, or of a dark olive-grey or brownish grey
with round black spots or dots.

The genus _Amblystoma_ was established by J. J. Tschudi in 1838 for various
salamanders from North America, which had previously been described as
_Lacerta_ or _Salamandra_, and which, so far as general appearance is
concerned, differ little from the European salamanders. The body is smooth
and shiny, with vertical grooves on the sides, the tail is but feebly
compressed, the eye is moderately large and provided with movable lids, and
the upper lip is nearly straight. But the dentition of the palate is very
different; the small teeth, which are in a single row, as in the jaws, form
a long transverse, continuous or interrupted series behind the inner nares
or choanae. The animal leaves the water after completing its metamorphosis,
the last stage of which is marked by the loss of the gills. One of the
largest and most widely distributed species of this genus, which includes
about twenty, is the _Amblystoma tigrinum_, an inhabitant of both the east
and west of the United States and of a considerable part of the cooler
parts of Mexico. It varies much in colour, but it may be described as
usually brown or blackish, with more or less numerous yellow spots,
sometimes arranged in transverse bands. It rarely exceeds a length of nine
inches. This is the _Amblystoma_ into which the axolotl has been
ascertained to transform. It is generally admitted that the axolotls which
were kept alive in Europe and were particularly abundant between 1870 and
1880 are all the descendants of a stock bred in Paris and distributed
chiefly by dealers, originally, we believe, by the late P. Carbonnier.
Close in-breeding without the infusion of new blood is probably the cause
of the decrease in their numbers at the present day, specimens being more
difficult to procure and fetching much higher prices than they did
formerly, at least in England and in France.

The original axolotls, from the vicinity of Mexico City, it is believed,
arrived at the Jardin d'Acclimatation, Paris, late in 1863. They were
thirty-four in number, among which was an albino, and had been sent to that
institution, together with a few other animals, by order of Marshal Forey,
who was appointed commander-in-chief of the French expeditionary force to
Mexico after the defeat of General Lorencez at Puebla (May 5th, 1862), and
returned to France at the end of 1863, after having handed over the command
to Marshal (then General) Bazaine. Six specimens (five males and one
female) were given by the Société d'Acclimatation to Professor A. Duméril,
the administrator of the reptile collection of the Jardin des Plantes, the
living specimens of which were at that time housed in a very miserable
structure, situated at a short distance from the comparatively sumptuous
building which was erected some years later and opened to the public in
1874. Soon after their arrival at the Jardin d'Acclimatation, some of the
axolotls spawned, but the eggs, not having been removed from the aquarium,
were devoured by its occupants. At the same time, in the Jardin des
Plantes, the single female axolotl also spawned, twice in succession, and a
large number of young were successfully reared. This, it then seemed,
solved the often-discussed question of the perennibranchiate nature of
these Batrachians. But a year later, the second generation having reached
sexual maturity, new broods were produced, and out of these some
individuals lost their gills and dorsal crest, developed movable eyelids,
changed their dentition, and assumed yellow spots,--in fact, took on all
the characters of _Amblystoma tigrinum_. However, these transformed
salamanders, of which twenty-nine were obtained from 1865 to 1870, did not
breed, although their branchiate brethren continued to do so very freely.
It was not until 1876 that the axolotl in its _Amblystoma_ state, offspring
of several generations of perennibranchiates, was first observed to spawn,
and this again took place in the reptile house of the Jardin des Plantes,
as reported by Professor E. Blanchard.

The original six specimens received in 1864 at the Jardin des Plantes,
which had been carefully kept apart from their progeny, remained in the
branchiate condition, and bred eleven times from 1865 to 1868, and, after a
period of two years' rest, again in 1870. According to the report of Aug.
Duméril, they and their offspring gave birth to 9000 or 10,000 larvae
during that period. So numerous were the axolotls that the Paris Museum was
able to distribute to other institutions, as well as to dealers and private
individuals, over a thousand examples, which found their way to all parts
of Europe, and numberless specimens have been kept in England from 1866 to
the present day. The first specimens exhibited in the London Zoological
Gardens, in August 1864, were probably part of the original stock received
from Mexico by the Société d'Acclimatation but do not appear to have bred.

"White" axolotls, albinos of a pale flesh colour, with beautiful red gills,
have also been kept in great numbers in England and on the continent. They
are said to be all descendants of one albino male specimen received in the
Paris Museum menagerie in 1866, which, paired with normal specimens in 1867
and 1868, produced numerous white offspring, which by selection have been
fixed as a permanent race, without, according to L. Vaillant, showing any
tendency to reversion. We are not aware of any but two of these albinos
having ever turned into the perfect _Amblystoma_ form, as happened in Paris
in 1870, the albinism being retained.

Thus we see that in our aquariums most of the axolotls remain in the
branchiate condition, transformed individuals being on the whole very
exceptional. Now it has been stated that in the lakes near Mexico City,
where it was first discovered, the axolotl _never_ transforms into an
_Amblystoma_. This the present writer is inclined to doubt, considering
that he has received examples of the normal _Amblystoma tigrinum_ from
various parts of Mexico, and that Alfred Dugès has described an
_Amblystoma_ from mountains near Mexico City; at the same time he feels
very [v.03 p.0070] suspicious of the various statements to that effect
which have appeared in so many works, and rather disposed to make light of
the ingenious theories launched by biological speculators who have never
set foot in Mexico, especially Weismann's picture of the dismal condition
of the salt-incrusted surroundings which were supposed to have hemmed in
the axolotl--the brackish Lago de Texcoco, the largest of the lakes near
Mexico, being evidently in the philosopher's mind.

Thanks to the enthusiasm of H. Gadow during his visit to Mexico in the
summer of 1902, we are now better informed on the conditions under which
the axolotl lives near Mexico City. First, he ascertained that there are no
axolotls at all in the Lago de Texcoco, thus disposing at once of the
Weismannian explanation; secondly, he confirmed A. Dugès's statement that
there is a second species of _Amblystoma_, which is normal in its
metamorphosis, near Mexico but at a higher altitude, which may explain
Velasco's observation that regularly transforming _Amblystomas_ occur near
that city; and thirdly, he made a careful examination of the two lakes,
Chalco and Xochimilco, where the axolotls occur in abundance and are
procured for the market. The following is an abstract of Gadow's very
interesting account. "Lakes Chalco and Xochimilco are a paradise, situated
about 10 ft. higher than the Texcoco Lake and separated from it by several
hills. High mountains slope down to the southern shores, with a belt of
fertile pastures, with shrubs and trees and little streams, here and there
with rocks and ravines. In fact, there are thousands of inviting
opportunities for newts to leave the lake if they wanted to do so. Lake
Xochimilco contains powerful springs, but away from them the water appears
dark and muddy, full of suspended fresh and decomposing vegetable matter,
teeming with fish, larvae of insects, _Daphniae_, worms and axolotl. These
breed in the beginning of February. The native fishermen know all about
them; how the eggs are fastened to the water plants, how soon after the
little larvae swarm about in thousands, how fast they grow, until by the
month of June they are all grown into big, fat creatures ready for the
market; later in the summer the axolotls are said to take to the rushes, in
the autumn they become scarce, but none have ever been known to leave the
water or to metamorphose, nor are any perfect _Amblystomas_ found in the
vicinity of the two lakes."

In Gadow's opinion, the reason why there are only perennibranchiate
axolotls in these lakes is obvious. The constant abundance of food, stable
amount of water, innumerable hiding-places in the mud, under the banks,
amongst the reeds and roots of the floating islands which are scattered all
over them,--all these points are inducements or attractions so great that
the creatures remain in their paradise and consequently retain all those
larval features which are not directly connected with sexual maturity.
There is nothing whatever to prevent them from leaving these lakes, but
there is also nothing to induce them to do so. The same applies
occasionally to European larvae, as in the case observed in the Italian
Alps by F. de Filippi. Nevertheless, in the axolotl the latent tendency can
still be revived, as we have seen above and as is proved by the experiments
of Marie von Chauvin. When once sexually ripe the axolotl are apparently
incapable of changing, but their ancestral course of evolution is still
latent in them, and will, if favoured by circumstances, reappear in
following generations.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--G. Cuvier, _Mém. Instit. Nation._ (1807), p. 149, and in A.
Humboldt and A. Bompland, _Observ. zool._ i. (1811), p. 93; L. Calori,
_Mem. Acc. Bologna_, iii. (1851), p. 269; A. Duméril, _Comptes rendus_, lx.
(1865), p. 765, and _N. Arch. Mus._ ii. (1866), p. 265; E. Blanchard,
_Comptes rendus_, lxxxii. (1876), p. 716; A. Weismann, _Z. wiss. Zool._
xxv. (Suppl. 1875), p. 297; M. von Chauvin, _Z. wiss. Zool._ xxvii. (1876),
p. 522; F. de Filippi, _Arch. p. la zool._ i. (1862), p. 206; G. Hahn,
_Rev. Quest. Sci._ Brussels (2), i. (1892), p. 178; H. Gadow, _Nature_,
lxvii. (1903), p. 330.

(G. A. B.)