AYALA Y HERRERA, ADELARDO LOPEZ DE (1828-1879), Spanish writer and
politician, was born at Guadalcanal on the 1st of May 1828, and at a very
early age began writing for the theatre of his native town. The titles of
these juvenile performances, which were played by amateurs, were _Salga por
donde saliere_, _Me voy á Sevilla_ and _La Corona y el Puñal._ As
travelling companies never visited Guadalcanal, and as ladies took no part
in the representations, these three plays were written for men only. Ayala
persuaded his sister to appear as the heroine of his comedy, _La primera
Dama_, and the innovation, if it scandalized some of his townsmen,
permitted him to develop his talent more freely. In his twentieth year he
matriculated at the university of Seville, but his career as a student was
undistinguished. In Seville he made acquaintance with Garcia Gutierrez, who
is reported to have encouraged his dramatic ambitions and to have given him
the benefit of his own experience as a playwright. Early in 1850 Ayala
removed his name from the university books, and settled in Madrid with the
purpose of becoming a professional dramatist. Though he had no friends and
no influence, he speedily found an opening. A four-act play in verse, _Un
Hombre de Estado_, was accepted by the managers of the Teatro Español, was
given on the 25th of January 1851, and proved a remarkable success.
Henceforward Ayala's position and popularity were secure. Within a
twelvemonth he became more widely known by his _Castigo y Perdón_, and by a
more humorous effort, _Los dos Guzmanes_; and shortly afterwards he was
appointed by the _Moderado_ government to a post in the home office, which
he lost in 1854 on the accession to power of the Liberal party. In 1854 he
produced _Rioja_, perhaps the most admired and the most admirable of all
his works, and from 1854 to 1856 he took an active part in the political
campaign carried on in the journal _El Padre Cobos_. A _zarzuela_, entitled
_Guerta a muerte_, for which Emilio Arrieta composed the music, belongs to
1855, and to the same collaboration is due _El Agente de Matrimonios_. At
about this date Ayala passed over from the Moderates to the Progressives,
and this political manoeuvre had its effect upon the fate of his plays. The
performances of _Los Comuneros_ were attended by members of the different
parties; the utterances of the different characters were taken to represent
the author's personal opinions, and every speech which could be brought
into connexion with current politics was applauded by one half of the house
and derided by the other half. A _zarzuela_, named _El Conde de Castralla_,
was given amid much uproar on the 20th of February 1856, and, as the piece
seemed likely to cause serious disorder in the theatre, it was suppressed
by the government after the third performance. Ayala's rupture with the
Moderates was now complete, and in 1857, through the interest of O'Donnell,
he was elected as Liberal deputy for Badajoz. His political changes are
difficult to follow, or to explain, and they have been unsparingly
censured. So far as can be judged, Ayala had no strong political views, and
drifted with the current of the moment. He took part in the revolution of
1868, wrote the "Manifesto of Cadiz," took office as colonial minister,
favoured the candidature of the duc de Montpensier, resigned in 1871,
returned to his early Conservative principles, and was a member of Alfonso
XII.'s first cabinet. Meanwhile, however divided in opinion as to his
political conduct, his countrymen were practically unanimous in admiring
his dramatic work; and his reputation, if it gained little by _El Nuevo Don
Juan_, was greatly increased by _El Tanto por Ciento_ and _El Tejado de
Vidrio_. His last play, _Consuelo_, was given on the 30th of March 1878.
Ayala was nominated to the post of president of congress shortly before his
death, which occurred unexpectedly on the 30th of January 1879. The best of
his lyrical work, excellent for finish and intense sincerity, is his
_Epístola_ to Emilio Arrieta, and had he chosen to dedicate himself to
lyric poetry, he might possibly have ranked with the best of Spain's modern
singers; as it is, he is a very considerable poet who affects the dramatic
form. In his later writings he deals with modern society, its vices, ideals
and perils; yet in many essentials he is a manifest disciple of Calderon.
He has the familiar Calderonian limitations; the substitution of types for
characters, of eloquence for vital dialogue. Nor can he equal the sublime
lyrism of his model; but he is little inferior in poetic conception, in
dignified idealization, and in picturesque imagery. And it may be fairly
claimed for him that in _El Tejado de Vidrio_ and _El Tanto par Ciento_ he
displays a very exceptional combination of satiric intention with romantic
inspiration. By these plays and by _Rioja_ and _Consuelo_ he is entitled to
be judged. They will at least ensure for him an honourable place in the
history of the modern Spanish theatre.

A complete edition of his dramatic works, edited by his friend and rival
Tamayo y Baus, has been published in seven volumes (Madrid, 1881-1885).

(J. F.-K.)