AYRSHIRE, a south-western county of Scotland, bounded N. by Renfrewshire,
E. by Lanarkshire and Dumfriesshire, S.E. by [v.03 p.0075]
Kirkcudbrightshire, S. by Wigtownshire and W. by the Firth of Clyde. It
includes off its coast the conspicuous rock of Ailsa Craig, 10 m. W. of
Girvan, Lady Island, 3 m. S.W. of Troon, and Horse Island, off Ardrossan.
Its area is 724,523 acres or 1142 sq. m., its coast-line being 70 m. long.
In former times the shire was divided into the districts of Cunninghame (N.
of the Irvine), Kyle (between the Irvine and the Boon), and Carrick (S. of
the Doon), and these terms are still occasionally used. Kyle was further
divided by the Ayr into King's Kyle on the north and Kyle Stewart. Robert
Bruce was earl of Carrick, a title now borne by the prince of Wales. The
county is politically divided into North and South Ayrshire, the former
comprising Cunninghame and the latter Kyle and Carrick. The surface is
generally undulating with a small mountainous tract in the north and a
larger one in the south and south-east. The principal hills are Black Craig
(2298 ft.), 5 m. south-east of New Cumnock; Enoch (1865 ft.), 5 m. east of
Dalmellington; Polmaddie (1750 ft.) 2 m. south-east of Barr; Stake on the
confines of Ayrshire and Renfrewshire, and Corsancone (1547 ft.), 3 m.
north-east of New Cumnock. None of the rivers is navigable, but their
varied and tranquil beauty has made them better known than many more
important streams. The six most noted are the Stinchar (_c_ soft), Girvan,
Doon, Ayr, Irvine and Garnock. Of these the Ayr is the longest. It rises at
Glenbuck, on the border of Lanarkshire, and after a course of some 38 m.
falls into the Firth of Clyde at the county town which, with the county, is
named from it. The scenery along its banks from Sorn downwards--passing
Catrine, Ballochmyle, Barskimming, Sundrum, Auchencruive and Craigie--is
remarkably picturesque. The lesser streams are numerous, but Burns's verse
has given preeminence to the Afton, the Cessnock and the Lugar. There are
many lochs, the largest of which is Loch Doon, 5½ m. long, the source of
the river of the same name. From Loch Finlas, about 20 m. south-east of
Ayr, the town derives its water-supply. The Nith rises in Ayrshire and a
few miles of its early course belong to the county.

_Geology._--The greater portion of the hilly region in the south of the
county forms part of the Silurian tableland of the south of Scotland. Along
its north margin there is a belt of elevated ground consisting mainly of
Old Red Sandstone strata, while the tract of fertile low ground is chiefly
occupied by younger Palaeozoic rocks. The Silurian belt stretching
eastwards from the mouth of Loch Ryan to the Merrick range is composed of
grits, greywackes and shales with thin leaves of black shales, containing
graptolites of Upper Llandeilo age which are repeated by folding and cover
a broad area. Near their northern limit Radiolarian cherts, mudstones and
lavas of Arenig age rise from underneath the former along anticlines
striking north-east and south-west. In the Ballantrae region there is a
remarkable development of volcanic rocks--lavas, tuffs and agglomerates--of
Arenig age, their horizon being defined by graptolites occurring in cherty
mudstones and black shales interleaved in lavas and agglomerates. These
volcanic materials are pierced by serpentine, gabbro and granite. The
serpentine forms two belts running inland from near Bennane Head and from
Burnfoot, being typically developed on Balhamie Hill near Colmonell. Gabbro
appears on the shore north of Lendalfoot, while on the Byne and Grey Hills
south of Girvan there are patches of granite and quartz-diorite which seem
to pass into more basic varieties. These volcanic and plutonic rocks and
Radiolarian cherts are covered unconformably by conglomerates (Bennan Hill
near Straiton and Kennedy's Pass) which are associated with limestones of
Upper Llandeilo age that have been wrought in the Stinchar valley and at
Craighead. South of the river Girvan there is a sequence from
Llandeilo--Caradoc to Llandovery--Tarannon strata, excellent sections of
which are seen on the shore north of Kennedy's Pass and in Penwhapple Glen
near Girvan. Llandovery strata again appear north of the Girvan at Dailly,
where they form an inlier surrounded by the Old Red Sandstone and
Carboniferous formations. Representatives of Wenlock rocks form a narrow
belt near the village of Straiton. Some of the Silurian sediments of the
Girvan province are highly fossiliferous, but the order of succession is
determined by the graptolites. Near Muirkirk and in the Douglas Water there
are inliers of Wenlock, Ludlow and Downtonian rocks, coming to the surface
along anticlines truncated by faults and surrounded by Old Red Sandstone
and Carboniferous strata. In the south-east of the county there is a part
of the large granite mass that stretches from Loch Doon south to Loch Dee,
giving rise to wild scenery and bounded by the high ground near the head of
the Girvan Water, boulders of which have been distributed over a wide area
during the glacial period. Along the northern margin of the uplands the
Lower Old Red Sandstone is usually faulted against the Silurian strata, but
on Hadyard Hill south of the Girvan valley they rest on the folded and
denuded members of the latter system. The three divisions of this formation
are well represented. The lower group of conglomerates and sandstones are
well displayed on Hadyard Hill and on the tract near Maybole; the middle
volcanic series on the shore south of the Heads of Ayr and from the
Stinchar valley along the Old Red belt towards Dalmellington and New
Cumnock; while the upper group, comprising conglomerates and sandstones,
form a well-marked synclinal ford at Corsancone north-east of New Cumnock.
The Upper Old Red Sandstone appears as a fringe round the south-west margin
of the Carboniferous rocks of the county, and it rises from beneath them on
the shore of the Firth of Clyde south of Wemyss Bay. The Carboniferous
strata of the central low ground form a great basin traversed by faults,
all the subdivisions of the system being represented save the Millstone
Grit. Round the north and north-east margin there is a great development of
volcanic rocks--lavas, tuffs and agglomerates--belonging to the Calciferous
Sandstone series, and passing upwards into the Carboniferous Limestone. The
lower limestones of the latter division are typically represented near
Dalry and Beith, where in one instance they reach a thickness of over 100
ft. They are followed by the coal-bearing group (Edge coals of Midlothian)
which have been wrought in the Dalry and Patna districts and at Dailly. The
position of the Millstone Grit is occupied by lavas and tuffs, extending
almost continually as a narrow fringe round the northern margin of the Coal
Measures from Saltcoats by Kilmaurs to the Crawfordland Water. The workable
coals of the true Coal Measures have a wide distribution from Kilwinning by
Kilmarnock to Galston and again in the districts of Coylton, Dalmellington,
Lugar and Cumnock. These members are overlaid by a set of upper barren red
sandstones, probably the equivalents of the red beds of Uddingston,
Dalkeith and Wemyss in Fife, visible in the ravines of Lugar near Ochiltree
and of Ayr at Catrine. In various parts of the Ayrshire coalfield the
coal-seams are rendered useless by intrusive sheets of dolerite as near
Kilmarnock and Dalmellington. In the central part of the field there is an
oval-shaped area of red sandstones now grouped with the Trias, extending
from near Tarbolton to Mauchline, where they are largely worked for
building stone. They are underlaid by a volcanic series which forms a
continuous belt between the underlying red sandstones of the Coal Measures
and the overlying Trias. In the north part of the county, as near Wemyss
Bay, the strata are traversed by dykes of dolerite and basalt trending in a
north-west direction and probably of Tertiary age.

_Agriculture._--There has been no lack of agricultural enterprise. With a
moist climate, and, generally, a rather heavy soil, drainage was necessary
for the successful growth of green crops. Up to about 1840, a green crop in
the rotation was seldom seen, except on porous river-side land, or on the
lighter farms of the lower districts. In the early part of the 19th century
lime was a powerful auxiliary in the inland districts, but with repeated
applications it gradually became of little avail. Thorough draining gave
the next great impetus. Enough had been done to test its efficacy before
the announcement of Sir Robert Peel's drainage loan, after which it was
rapidly extended throughout the county. Green-crop husbandry, and the
liberal use of guano and other manures, made a wonderful change in the
county, and immensely increased the amount of produce. Potatoes are now
extensively grown, the coast-lands supplying the markets of Scotland and
the north of England. Of roots, turnips, carrots and mangolds are widely
cultivated, heavy crops being obtained by early sowing and rich manuring.
Oats form the bulk of the cereal crop, but wheat and barley are also grown.
High farming has developed the land enormously. Dairying has received
particular attention. Dunlop cheese was once a well-known product. Part of
it was very good; but it was unequal in its general character, and
unsaleable in English markets. Dissatisfied with the inferior commercial
value of their cheese in comparison with some English varieties, the
Ayrshire Agricultural Association brought a Somerset farmer and his wife in
1855 to teach the Cheddar method, and their effort was most successful.
Cheddar cheese of first-rate quality is now made in Ayrshire, and the
annual cheese show at Kilmarnock is the most important in Scotland. The
Ayrshire breed of cows are famous for the quantity and excellence of their
milk. Great numbers of cattle, sheep and pigs are raised for the market,
and the Ayrshire horse is in high repute.

_Other Industries._--Ayrshire is the principal mining county in Scotland
and has the second largest coalfield. There is a heavy annual output also
of iron ore, pig iron and fire-clay. The chief coal districts are Ayr,
Dalmellington, Patna, Maybole, Drongan, Irvine, Coylton, Stevenston, Beith,
Kilwinning, [v.03 p.0076] Dalry, Kilbirnie, Dreghorn, Kilmarnock, Galston,
Hurlford, Muirkirk, Cumnock and New Cumnock. Ironstone occurs chiefly at
Patna, Coylton, Dalry, Kilbirnie, Dreghorn and Cumnock, and there are blast
furnaces at most of these towns. A valuable whetstone is quarried at Bridge
of Stair on the Ayr--the Water-of-Ayr stone. The leading manufactures are
important. At Catrine are cotton factories and bleachfields, and at Ayr and
Kilmarnock extensive engineering works, and carpet, blanket and woollens,
boot and shoe factories. Cotton, woollens, and other fabrics and hosiery
are also manufactured at Dalry, Kilbirnie, Kilmaurs, Beith and Stewarton.
An extensive trade in chemicals is carried on at Irvine. Near Stevenston
works have been erected in the sandhills for the making of dynamite and
other explosives. There are large lace curtain factories at Galston,
Newmilns and Darvel, and at Beith cabinet-making is a considerable
industry. Shipbuilding is conducted at Troon, Ayr, Irvine and Fairlie,
which is famous for its yachts. The leading ports are Ardrossan, Ayr,
Girvan, Irvine and Troon. Fishing is carried on in the harbours and creeks,
which are divided between the fishery districts of Greenock and Ballantrae.

_Communications_.--The Glasgow & South-Western railway owns most of the
lines within the shire, its system serving all the industrial towns, ports
and seaside resorts. Its trunk line via Girvan to Stranraer commands the
shortest sea passage to Belfast and the north of Ireland, and its main line
via Kilmarnock communicates with Dumfries and Carlisle and so with England.
The Lanarkshire & Ayrshire branch of the Caledonian railway company also
serves a part of the county. For passenger steamer traffic Ardrossan is the
principal port, there being services to Arran and Belfast and, during the
season, to Douglas in the Isle of Man. Millport, on Great Cumbrae, is
reached by steamer from Fairlie.

_Population and Administration_.--The population of Ayrshire in 1891 was
226,386, and in 1901, 254,468, or 223 to the sq. m. In 1901 the number of
persons speaking Gaelic only was 17. The chief towns, with populations in
1901 are: Ardrossan (6077), Auchinleck (2168), Ayr (29,101), Beith (4963),
Cumnock (3088), Dalry (5316), Darvel (3070), Galston (4876), Girvan (4024),
Hurlford (4601), Irvine (9618), Kilbirnie (4571), Kilmarnock (35,091),
Kilwinning (4440), Largs (3246), Maybole (5892), Muirkirk (3892), Newmilns
(4467), Saltcoats (8120), Stevenston (6554), Stewarton (2858), Troon
(4764). The county returns two members to parliament, who represent North
and South Ayrshire respectively. Ayr (the county town) and Irvine are royal
burghs and belong to the Ayr group of parliamentary burghs, and Kilmarnock
is a parliamentary burgh of the Kilmarnock group. Under the county council
special water districts, drainage districts, and lighting and scavenging
districts have been formed. The county forms a sheriffdom, and there are
resident sheriffs-substitute at Ayr and Kilmarnock, who sit also at Irvine,
Beith, Cumnock and Girvan. The shire is under school-board jurisdiction,
but there are a considerable number of voluntary schools, besides secondary
schools at Ayr, Irvine, Kilmarnock and Beith, while Kilmarnock Dairy School
is a part of the West of Scotland Agricultural College established in 1899.
In addition to grants earned by the schools, the county and borough
councils expend a good deal of money upon secondary and technical
education, towards which contributions are also made by the Glasgow and
West of Scotland Technical College and the Kilmarnock Dairy School. The
technical classes, subsidized at various local centres, embrace instruction
in agriculture, mining, engineering, plumbing, gardening, and various
science and art subjects.

_History_.--Traces of Roman occupation are found in Ayrshire. At the time
of Agricola's campaigns the country was held by the Damnonii, and their
town of Vandogara has been identified with a site at Loudoun Hill near
Darvel, where a serious encounter with the Scots took place. On the
withdrawal of the Romans, Ayrshire formed part of the kingdom of
Strathclyde and ultimately passed under the sway of the Northumbrian kings.
Save for occasional intertribal troubles, as that in which the Scottish
king Alpin was slain at Dalmellington in the 9th century, the annals are
silent until the battle of Largs in 1263, when the pretensions of Haakon of
Norway to the sovereignty of the Isles were crushed by the Scots under
Alexander III. A generation later William Wallace conducted a vigorous
campaign in the shire. He surprised the English garrison at Ardrossan, and
burned the barns of Ayr in which the forces of Edward I were lodged. Robert
Bruce is alleged to have been born at Turnberry Castle, some 12 m. S.W. of
Ayr. In 1307 he defeated the English at Loudoun Hill. Cromwell paid the
county a hurried visit, during which he demolished the castle of Ardrossan
and is said to have utilized the stones in rearing a fort at Ayr. Between
1660 and 1688 the sympathies of the county were almost wholly with the
Covenanters, who suffered one of their heaviest reverses at Airds Moss--a
morass between the Ayr and Lugar,--their leader, Richard Cameron, being
killed (20th of July 1680). The county was dragooned and the Highland host
ravaged wherever it went. The Hanoverian succession excited no active
hostility if it evoked no enthusiasm. Antiquarian remains include cairns in
Galston, Sorn and other localities; a road supposed to be a work of the
Romans, which extended from Ayr, through Dalrymple and Dalmellington,
towards the Solway; camps attributed to the Norwegians or Danes on the
hills of Knockgeorgan and Dundonald; and the castles of Loch Doon,
Turnberry, Dundonald, Portencross, Ardrossan and Dunure. There are ruins of
celebrated abbeys at Kilwinning and Crossraguel, and of Alloway's haunted
church, famous from their associations.

See James Paterson, "History of the County of Ayr." _Transactions of
Ayrshire and Galloway Archaeological Associations_, Edinburgh, 1879-1900;
John Smith, _Prehistoric Man in Ayrshire_ (London, 1895); William
Robertson, _History of Ayrshire_ (Edinburgh, 1894); Archibald Sturrock, "On
the Agriculture of Ayrshire," _Transactions of Highland and Agricultural
Society_; D. Landsborough, _Contributions to Local History_ (Kilmarnock,
1878).