AZALEA, a genus of popular hardy or greenhouse plants, belonging to the
heath order (Ericaceae), and scarcely separable botanically from
_Rhododendron_. The beautiful varieties now in cultivation have been bred
from a few originals, natives of the hilly regions of China and Japan, Asia
Minor, and the United States. They are perhaps unequalled as indoor
decorative plants. They are usually increased by grafting the half-ripened
shoots on the stronger-growing kinds, the shoots of the stock and the
grafts being in a similarly half-ripened condition, and the plants being
placed in a moist heat of 65°. Large plants of inferior kinds, if healthy,
may be grafted all over with the choicer sorts, so as to obtain a large
specimen in a short time. They require a rich and fibrous peat soil, with a
mixture of sand to prevent its getting water-logged. The best time to pot
azaleas is three or four weeks after the blooming is over. The soil should
be made quite solid to prevent its retaining too much water. To produce
handsome plants, they must while young be stopped as required. Specimens
that have got leggy may be cut back just before growth commences. The
lowest temperature for them during the winter is about 35°, and during
their season of growth from 55° to 65° at night, and 75° by day, the
atmosphere being at the same time well charged with moisture. They are
liable to the attacks of thrips and red spider, which do great mischief if
not promptly destroyed.

The following are some well-known species:--_A. arborescens_
(Pennsylvania), a deciduous shrub 10-20 ft. high; _A. calendulacea_
(Carolina to Pennsylvania), a beautiful deciduous shrub 2-6 ft. high, with
yellow, red, orange and copper-coloured flowers; _A. hispida_, a North
American shrub, 10-15 ft. high, flowers white edged with red; _A. indica_
(China), the so-called Indian azalea, a shrub 3-6 ft. or more high, the
original of numerous single and double varieties, many of the more vigorous
of which are hardy in southern England and Ireland; _A. nudiflora_, a North
American shrub, 3-4 ft. high, which hybridizes freely with _A.
calendulacea_, _A. pontica_ and others, to produce single and [v.03 p.0079]
double forms of a great variety of shades; _A. pontica_ (Levant, Caucasus,
&c.), 4-6 ft. high, with numerous varieties differing in the colour of the
flowers and the tint of the leaves; _A. sinensis_ (China and Japan), a
beautiful shrub, 3-4 ft. high, with orange-red or yellow bell-shaped
flowers, hardy in the southern half of England, large numbers of varieties
being in cultivation under the name of Japanese azaleas.