AZEGLIO, MASSIMO TAPARELLI, MARQUIS D' (1798-1866), Italian statesman and
author, was born at Turin in October 1798, descended from an ancient and
noble Piedmontese family. His father, Cesare d'Azeglio, was an officer in
the Piedmontese army and held a high position at court; on the return of
Pope [v.03 p.0080] Pius VII. to Rome after the fall of Napoleon, Cesare
d'Azeglio was sent as special envoy to the Vatican, and he took his son,
then sixteen years of age, with him as an extra attaché. Young Massimo was
given a commission in a cavalry regiment, which he soon relinquished on
account of his health. During his residence in Rome he had acquired a love
for art and music, and he now determined to become a painter, to the horror
of his family, who belonged to the stiff and narrow Piedmontese
aristocracy. His father reluctantly consented, and Massimo settled in Rome,
devoting himself to art. He led an abstemious life, maintaining himself by
his painting for several years. But he was constantly meditating on the
political state of Italy. In 1830 he returned to Turin, and after his
father's death in 1831 removed to Milan. There he remained for twelve
years, moving in the literary and artistic circles of the city. He became
the intimate of Alessandro Manzoni the novelist, whose daughter he married;
thenceforth literature became his chief occupation instead of art, and he
produced two historical novels, _Niccolò dei Lapi_ and _Ettore Fieramosca_,
in imitation of Manzoni, and with pronounced political tendencies, his
object being to point out the evils of foreign domination in Italy and to
reawaken national feeling. In 1845 he visited Romagna as an unauthorized
political envoy, to report on its conditions and the troubles which he
foresaw would break out on the death of Pope Gregory XVI. The following
year he published his famous pamphlet _Degli ultimi casi di Romagna_ at
Florence, in consequence of which he was expelled from Tuscany. He spent
the next few months in Rome, sharing the general enthusiasm over the
supposed liberalism of the new pope, Pius IX.; like V. Gioberti and Balbo
he believed in an Italian confederation under papal auspices, and was
opposed to the Radical wing of the Liberal party. His political activity
increased, and he wrote various other pamphlets, among which was _I lutti
di Lombardia_ (1848).

On the outbreak of the first war of independence, d'Azeglio donned the
papal uniform and took part under General Durando in the defence of
Vicenza, where he was severely wounded. He retired to Florence to recover,
but as he opposed the democrats who ruled in Tuscany, he was expelled from
that country for the second time. He was now a famous man, and early in
1849 Charles Albert, king of Sardinia, invited him to form a cabinet. But
realizing how impossible it was to renew the campaign, and "not having the
heart to sign, in such wretched internal and external conditions, a treaty
of peace with Austria" (_Correspondance politique_, by E. Rendu), he
refused. After the defeat of Novara (23rd of March 1849), Charles Albert
abdicated and was succeeded by Victor Emmanuel II. D'Azeglio was again
called on to form a cabinet, and this time, although the situation was even
more difficult, he accepted, concluded a treaty of peace, dissolved the
Chamber, and summoned a new one to ratify it. The treaty was accepted, and
d'Azeglio continued in office for the next three years. While all the rest
of Italy was a prey to despotism, in Piedmont the king maintained the
constitution intact in the face of the general wave of reaction. D'Azeglio
conducted the affairs of the country with tact and ability, improving its
diplomatic relations, and opposing the claims of the Roman Curia. He
invited Count Cavour, then a rising young politician, to enter the ministry
in 1850. Cavour and Farini, also a member of the cabinet, made certain
declarations in the Chamber (May 1852) which led the ministry in the
direction of an alliance with Rattazzi and the Left. Of this d'Azeglio
disapproved, and therefore resigned office, but on the king's request he
formed a new ministry, excluding both Cavour and Farini. In October,
however, owing to ill-health and dissatisfaction with some of his
colleagues, as well as for other reasons not quite clear, he resigned once
more and retired into private life, suggesting Cavour to the king as his
successor.

For the next four years he lived modestly at Turin, devoting himself once
more to art, although he also continued to take an active interest in
politics, Cavour always consulting him on matters of moment. In 1855 he was
appointed director of the Turin art gallery. In 1859 he was given various
political missions, including one to Paris and London to prepare the basis
for a general congress of the powers on the Italian question. When war
between Piedmont and Austria appeared inevitable he returned to Italy, and
was sent as royal commissioner by Cavour to Romagna, whence the papal
troops had been expelled. After the peace of Villafranca, d'Azeglio was
recalled with orders to withdraw the Piedmontese garrisons; but he saw the
danger of allowing the papal troops to reoccupy the province, and after a
severe inner struggle left Bologna without the troops, and interviewed the
king. The latter approved of his action, and said that his orders had not
been accurately expressed; thus Romagna was saved. That same year he
published a pamphlet in French entitled _De la Politique et du droit
chrétien au point de vue de la question italienne_, with the object of
inducing Napoleon III. to continue his pro-Italian policy. Early in 1860
Cavour appointed him governor of Milan, evacuated by the Austrians after
the battle of Magenta, a position which he held with great ability. But,
disapproving of the government's policy with regard to Garibaldi's Sicilian
expedition and the occupation by Piedmont of the kingdom of Naples as
inopportune, he resigned office.

The death of his two brothers in 1862 and of Cavour in 1861 caused Massimo
great grief, and he subsequently led a comparatively retired life. But he
took part in politics, both as a deputy and a writer, his two chief
subjects of interest being the Roman question and the relations of Piedmont
(now the kingdom of Italy) with Mazzini and the other revolutionists. In
his opinion Italy must be unified by means of the Franco-Piedmontese army
alone, all connexion with the conspirators being eschewed, while the pope
should enjoy nominal sovereignty over Rome, with full spiritual
independence, the capital of Italy being established elsewhere, but the
Romans being Italian citizens (see his letters to E. Rendu and his pamphlet
_Le questioni urgenti_). He strongly disapproved of the convention of 1864
between the Italian government and the pope. The last few years of
d'Azeglio's life were spent chiefly at his villa of Cannero, where he set
to work to write his own memoirs. He died of fever on the 15th of January
1866.

Massimo d'Azeglio was a very attractive personality, as well as an
absolutely honest patriot, and a characteristic example of the best type of
Piedmontese aristocrat. He was cautious and conservative; in his general
ideas on the liberation of Italy he was wrong, and to some extent he was an
amateur in politics, but of his sincerity there is no doubt. As an author
his political writings are trenchant and clear, but his novels are somewhat
heavy and old-fashioned, and are interesting only if one reads the
political allusions between the lines.

Besides a variety of newspaper articles and pamphlets, d'Azeglio's chief
works are the two novels _Ettore Fieramosca_ (1833) and _Niccolò dei Lapi_
(1841), and a volume of autobiographical memoirs entitled _I Miei Ricordi_,
a most charming work published after his death, in 1866, but unfortunately
incomplete. See in addition to the _Ricordi_, L. Carpi's _Il Risorgimento
Italiano_, vol. i. pp. 288 sq. and the _Souvenirs historiques_ of Constance
d'Azeglio, Massimo's niece (Turin, 1884).

(L. V.*)