AZORES (_Açores_), or WESTERN ISLANDS, an archipelago in the Atlantic
Ocean, belonging to the kingdom of Portugal. Pop. (1900) 256,291; area, 922
sq. m. The Azores extend in an oblique line from N.W. to S.E., between 36°
55' and 39° 55' N., and between 25° and 31° 16' W. They are divided into
three widely severed groups, rising from a depth of more than 2½ m. The
south-eastern group consists of St Michael's (São Miguel) and St Mary
(Santa Maria), with Formigas; the central, of Fayal (Faial), Pico, St
George (São Jorge), Terceira and Graciosa; the north-western, of Flores and
Corvo.

[Illustration]

The nearest continental land is Cape da Roca on the Portuguese coast, which
lies 830 m. E. of St Michael's; while Cape Cantin, the nearest point on the
African mainland, is more than 900 m. distant, and Cape Race in
Newfoundland, the nearest American headland, is more than 1000 m. Thus the
Azores are the farthest from any continent of all the island groups in the
Atlantic; but they are usually regarded as belonging to Europe, as their
climate and flora are European in character.

_Physical Description._--The aspect of all the islands is very similar in
general characteristics, presenting an elevated and [v.03 p.0084]
undulating outline, with little or no tableland, and rising into peaks, of
which the lowest, that of Corvo, is 350 ft., and the highest that of Pico,
7612 ft. above sea-level. The lines of sea-coast are, with few exceptions,
high and precipitous, with bases of accumulated masses of fallen rock, in
which open bays, or scarcely more enclosed inlets, form the harbours of the
trading towns. The volcanic character of the whole archipelago is obvious,
and has been abundantly confirmed by the numerous earthquakes and eruptions
which have taken place since its discovery. Basalt and scoria are the chief
erupted materials. Hitherto Flores, Corvo and Graciosa have been quite
exempt, and Fayal has only suffered from one eruption (1672). The centre of
activity has for the most part been St Michael's, while the neighbouring
island of St Mary has altogether escaped. In 1444-1445 there was a great
eruption at St Michael's, of which, however, the accounts that have been
preserved exaggerate the importance. In 1522 the town of Villa Franca, at
that time the capital of the island, was buried, with all its 6000
inhabitants, during a violent convulsion. In 1572 an eruption took place in
Pico; in 1580 St George was the scene of numerous outbursts; and in 1614 a
little town in Terceira was destroyed. In 1630, 1652, 1656, 1755, 1852,
&c., St Michael's was visited with successive eruptions and earthquakes,
several of them of great violence. On various occasions, as in 1638, 1720,
1811 and 1867, subterranean eruptions have taken place, which have
sometimes been accompanied by the appearance of temporary islands. Of these
the most remarkable was thrown up in June 1811, about half a league from
the western extremity of St Michael's. It was called Sabrina by the
commander of the British man-of-war of that name, who witnessed the
phenomenon.

_Climate._--The climate is particularly temperate, but the extremes of
sensible heat and cold are increased by the humidity. The range of the
thermometer is from 45° Fahr., the lowest known extreme, or 48°, the
ordinary lowest extreme of January, to 82°, the ordinary, or 86°, the
highest known extreme of July, near the level of the sea. Between these two
points (both taken in the shade) there is from month to month a pretty
regular gradation of increase or decrease, amounting to somewhat less than
four degrees. In winter the prevailing winds are from the north-west, west
and south; in summer the most frequent are the north, north-east and east.
The weather is often extremely stormy, and the winds from the west and
south-west render the navigation of the coasts very dangerous.

_Fauna._--The mammalia of the Azores are limited to the rabbit, weasel,
ferret, rat (brown and black), mouse and bat, in addition to domestic
animals. The game includes the woodcock, red partridge (introduced in the
16th century), quail and snipe. Owing to the damage inflicted on the crops
by the multitude of blackbirds, bullfinches, chaffinches and green
canaries, a reward was formerly paid for the destruction of birds in St
Michael's, and it is said that over 400,000 were destroyed in several
successive years between 1875 and 1885. There are valuable fisheries of
tunny, mullet and bonito. The porpoise, dolphin and whale are also common.
Whale-fishing is a profitable industry, with its headquarters at Fayal,
whence the sperm-oil is exported. Eels are found in the rivers. The only
indigenous reptile is the lizard. Fresh-water molluscs are unknown, and
near the coast the marine fauna is not rich; but terrestrial molluscs
abound, several species being peculiar to the Azores.

_Flora._--The general character of the flora is decidedly European, no
fewer than 400 out of the 478 species generally considered as indigenous
belonging likewise to that continent, while only four are found in America,
and forty are peculiar to the archipelago. Vegetation in most of the
islands is remarkably rich, especially in grasses, mosses, and ferns,
heath, juniper, and a variety of shrubs. Of tall-growing trees there was,
till the 19th century, an almost total lack; but the Bordeaux pine,
European poplar, African palm-tree, Australian eucalyptus, chestnut,
tulip-tree, elm, oak, and many others, were then successfully introduced.
The orange, apricot, banana, lemon, citron, Japanese medlar, and
pomegranate are the common fruits, and various other varieties are more or
less cultivated. At one time much attention was given to the growing of
sugar-cane, but it has now for the most part been abandoned. The culture of
indigo, introduced in the 16th century, also belongs to the past. A kind of
fern (_Dicksonia culcita_), called by the natives _cabellinho_, furnishes a
silky material for the stuffing of mattresses and is exported to Brazil and
Portugal.

_Population._--The inhabitants of the islands are mostly of Portuguese
origin, with a well-marked strain of Moorish and Flemish blood. There is a
high birth-rate and a low average of infant mortality. A large proportion
of the poorer classes, especially among the older men and women, are
totally illiterate, but education tends to spread more rapidly than in
Portugal itself, owing to the custom of sending children to the United
States, where they are taught in the state schools. Negroes, mulattoes,
English, Scottish and Irish immigrants are present in considerable numbers,
especially in Fayal and St Michael's. The total number of resident
foreigners in 1900 was 1490.

_Government._--The Azores are subdivided into three administrative
districts named after their chief towns, _i.e._ Ponta Delgada, the capital
of St Michael's; Angra, or Angra do Heroismo, the capital of Terceira; and
Horta, the capital of Fayal. St Michael's and St Mary are included in the
district of Ponta Delgada; Terceira, St George and Graciosa, in that of
Angra; Pico, Fayal, Flores and Corvo, in that of Horta. Four members are
returned by Ponta Delgada to the parliament in Lisbon, while each of the
other districts returns two members. Roman Catholicism is the creed of the
majority, and Angra is an episcopal see. For purposes of military
administration the islands form two commands, with their respective
headquarters at Angra and Ponta Delgada. Besides the frequent and regular
services of mails which connect the Azores with Portugal and other
countries, there is a cable from Lisbon to Villa Franca do Campo, in St
Michael's, and thence to Pico, Fayal, St George and Graciosa. Fayal is
connected with Waterville, in Ireland, by a cable laid in 1901. At Angra
and Ponta Delgada there are meteorological stations. The principal seaports
are Angra (pop. 1900, 10,788), Ponta Delgada (17,620), and Horta (6574).

_Trade._--The trade of the Azores, long a Portuguese monopoly, is now to a
great extent shared by the United Kingdom and Germany, and is chiefly
carried in British vessels. Textiles are imported from Portugal; coal from
Great Britain; sugar from Germany, Madeira and the United States;
stationery, hardware, chemicals, paints, oils, &c., from the United Kingdom
and Germany. The exports consist chiefly of fruit, wine, natural mineral
waters and provisions. The trade in pineapples is especially important. No
fewer than 940,000 pineapples were exported in 1902 and 1903, going in
almost equal quantities to London and Hamburg. The fruit is raised under
glass. Pottery, cotton fabrics, spirits, straw hats and tea are produced in
the district of Ponta Delgada; linen and woollen goods, cheese, butter,
soap, bricks and tiles, in that of Angra; baskets, mats, and various
ornamental articles made from straw, osier, and the pith of dried fig-wood,
in that of Horta.

The largest and most populous of the Azores is St Michael's, which has an
area of 297 sq. m., and in 1900 had 121,340 inhabitants. Graciosa (pop.
8385; area, 17 sq. m.) and St George (16,177; 40 sq. m.) form part of the
central group. Graciosa is noteworthy for the beauty of its scenery. Its
chief towns are Santa Cruz de Graciosa (2185) and Guadalupe (2717). The
chief towns of St George are Ribeira Seca (2817) and Velas (2009).

_History._--It does not appear that the ancient Greeks and Romans had any
knowledge of the Azores, but from the number of Carthaginian coins
discovered in Corvo it has been supposed that the islands must have been
visited by that adventurous people. The Arabian geographers, Edrisi in the
12th century, and Ibn-al-Wardi in the 14th, describe, after the Canaries,
nine other islands in the Western Ocean, which are in all probability the
Azores. This identification is supported by various considerations. The
number of islands is the same; the climate under which they are placed by
the Arabians makes them north of the Canaries; and special mention is made
of the hawks or buzzards, which were sufficiently numerous at a later
period to [v.03 p.0085] give rise to the present name (Port. _Açor_, a
hawk). The Arabian writers represent them as having been populous, and as
having contained cities of some magnitude; but they state that the
inhabitants had been greatly reduced by intestine warfare. The Azores are
first found distinctly marked in a map of 1351, the southern group being
named the Goat Islands (_Cabreras_); the middle group, the Wind or Dove
Islands (_De Ventura sive de Columbis_); and the western, the Brazil Island
(_De Brazi_)--the word Brazil at that time being employed for any red
dye-stuff. In a Catalan map of the year 1375 Corvo is found as _Corvi
Marini_, and Flores as _Li Conigi_; while St George is already designated
_San Zorze_. It has been conjectured that the discoverers were Genoese, but
of this there is not sufficient evidence. It is plain, however, that the
so-called Flemish discovery by van der Berg is only worthy of the name in a
very secondary sense. According to the usual account, he was driven on the
islands in 1432, and the news excited considerable interest at the court of
Lisbon. The navigator, Gonzalo Velho Cabral--not to be confounded with his
greater namesake, Pedro Alvarez Cabral--was sent to prosecute the
discovery. Another version relates that Prince Henry the Navigator of
Portugal had in his possession a map in which the islands were laid down,
and that he sent out Cabral through confidence in its accuracy. The map had
been presented to him by his brother, Dom Pedro, who had travelled as far
as Babylon. Be this as it may, Cabral reached the island, which he named
_Santa Maria_, in 1432, and in 1444 took possession of St Michael's. The
other islands were all discovered by 1457. Colonization had meanwhile been
going on prosperously; and in 1466 Fayal was presented by Alphonso V. to
his aunt, Isabella, the duchess of Burgundy. An influx of Flemish settlers
followed, and the islands became known for a time as the Flemish Islands.
From 1580 to 1640 they were subject, like the rest of the Portuguese
kingdom, to Spain. At that time the Azores were the grand rendezvous for
the fleets on their voyage home from the Indies; and hence they became a
theatre of that maritime warfare which was carried on by the English under
Queen Elizabeth against the Peninsular powers. One such expedition, which
took place in 1591, led to the famous sea-fight off Flores, between the
English ship "Revenge," commanded by Sir Richard Grenville, and a Spanish
fleet of fifty-three vessels. Under the active administration of the
marquis de Pombal (1690-1782), considerable efforts were made for the
improvement of the Azores, but the stupid and bigoted government which
followed rather tended to destroy these benefits. Towards the beginning of
the 19th century, the possession of the islands, was contested by the
claimants for the crown of Portugal. The adherents of the constitution, who
supported against Miguel the rights of Maria (II.) da Gloria, obtained
possession of Terceira in 1829, where they succeeded in maintaining
themselves, and after various struggles, Queen Maria's authority was
established over all the islands. She resided at Angra from 1830 to 1833.

For a general account of the islands, see _The Azores_, by W. F. Walker
(London, 1886), and _Madeira and the Canary Islands, with the Azores_, by
A. S. Brown (London, 1901). On the fauna and flora of the islands, the
following books by H. Drouet are useful:--_Eléments de la faune açoréenne_
(Paris, 1861); _Mollusques marins des îles Açores_ (1858), _Lettres
açoréennes_ (1862), and _Catalogue de la flore des îles Açores, précédé de
l'itinéraire d'une voyage dans cet archipel_ (1866). The progress of
Azorian commerce is best shown in the British and American consular
reports. For history, see _La Conquista de las Azores en 1583_, by C.
Fernandez Duro (Madrid, 1886), and _Histoire de la découverte des îles
Azores et de l'origine de leur dénomination d'îles flamandes_, by J. Mees
(Ghent, 1901).