AZURARA, GOMES EANNES DE (?-1474), the second notable Portuguese chronicler
in order of date. He adopted the career of letters in middle life. He
probably entered the royal library as assistant to Fernão Lopes (_q.v._)
during the reign of King Duarte (1433-1438), and he had sole charge of it
in 1452. His _Chronicle of the Siege and Capture of Ceuta_, a supplement to
the _Chronicle of King John I._, by Lopes, dates from 1450, and three years
later he completed the first draft of the _Chronicle of the Discovery and
Conquest of Guinea_, our authority for the early Portuguese voyages of
discovery down the African coast and in the ocean, more especially for
those undertaken under the auspices of Prince Henry the Navigator. It
contains some account of the life work of that prince, and has a
biographical as well as a geographical interest. On the 6th of June 1454
Azurara became chief keeper of the archives and royal chronicler in
succession to Fernão Lopes. In 1456 King Alphonso V. commissioned him to
write the history of Ceuta, "the land-gate of the East," under the
governorship of D. Pedro de Menezes, from its capture in 1415 until 1437,
and he had it ready in 1463. A year afterwards the king charged him with a
history of the deeds of D. Duarte de Menezes, captain of Alcacer, and,
proceeding to Africa, he spent a twelvemonth in the town collecting
materials and studying the scenes of the events he was to describe, and in
1468 he completed the chronicle. Alphonso corresponded with Azurara on
terms of affectionate intimacy, and no less than three _commendas_ of the
order of Christ rewarded his literary services. He has little of the
picturesque ingenuousness of Lopes, and loved to display his erudition by
quotations and philosophical reflections, showing that he wrote under the
influence of the first Renaissance. Nearly all the leading classical, early
Christian and medieval writers figure in his pages, and he was acquainted
with the notable chronicles and romances of Europe and had studied the best
Italian and Spanish authors. In addition, he had mastered the geographical
system of the ancients and their astrology. As an historian he is
laborious, accurate and conscientious, though his position did not allow
him to tell the whole truth about his hero, Prince Henry.

His works include: (1) _Chronica del Rei D. Joam I. Terceira parte em que
se contem a tomada de Ceuta_ (Lisbon, 1644); (2) _Chronica do Descobrimento
e Conquista de Guiné_ (Paris, 1841; Eng. version in 2 vols. issued by the
Hakluyt Society, London, 1896-1899); (3) _Chronica do Conde D. Pedro (de
Menezes)_, printed in the _Ineditos de Historia Portugueza_, vol. ii.
(Lisbon, 1792); (4) _Chronica do Conde D. Duarte de Menezes_, printed in
the _Ineditos_, vol. iii. (Lisbon, 1793). The preface to the English
version of the _Chronicle of Guinea_ contains a full account of the life
and writings of Azurara and cites all the authorities.

(E. PR.)