BACTRIA (_Bactriana_), the ancient name of the country between the range of
the Hindu Kush (Paropamisus) and the Oxus (Amu Darya), with the capital
Bactra (now Balkh); in the Persian inscriptions B[=a]khtri. It is a
mountainous country with a moderate climate. Water is abundant and the land
is very fertile. Bactria was the home of one of the Iranian tribes (see
PERSIA: _Ancient History_). Modern authors have often used the name in a
wider sense, as the designation of the whole eastern part of Iran. As there
can be scarcely any doubt that it was in these regions, where the fertile
soil of the mountainous country is everywhere surrounded and limited by the
Turanian desert, that the prophet Zoroaster preached and gained his first
adherents, and that his religion spread from here over the western parts of
Iran, the sacred language in which the Avesta, the holy book of
Zoroastrianism, is written, has often been called "old Bactrian." But there
is no reason for this extensive use of the name, and the term "old
Bactrian" is, therefore, at present completely abandoned by scholars. Still
less foundation exists for the belief, once widely spread, that Bactria was
the cradle of the Indo-European race; it was based on the supposition that
the nations of Europe had immigrated from Asia, and that the Aryan
languages (Indian and Iranian) stood nearest to the original language of
the Indo-Europeans. It is now acknowledged by all linguists that this
supposition is quite wrong, and that the Aryans probably came from Europe.
The eastern part of Iran seems to have been the region where the Aryans
lived as long as they formed one people, and whence they separated into
Indians and Iranians.

The Iranian tradition, preserved in the Avesta and in Firdousi's
_Shahnama_, localizes a part of its heroes and myths in the east of Iran,
and has transformed the old gods who fight with the great snake into kings
of Iran who fight with the Turanians. Many modern authors have attempted to
make history out of these stories, and have created an old Bactrian empire
of great extent, the kings of which had won great victories over the
Turanians. But this historical aspect of the myth is of late origin: it is
nothing but a reflex of the great Iranian empire founded by the Achaemenids
and restored by the Sassanids. The only historical fact which we can learn
from the Iranian tradition is that the contrast and the feud between the
peasants of Iran and the nomads of Turan was as great in old times as it is
now: it is indeed based upon the natural geographical conditions, and is
therefore eternal. But a great Bactrian empire certainly never existed; the
Bactrians and their neighbours were in old times ruled by petty local
kings, one of whom was Vishtaspa, the protector of Zoroaster. Ctesias in
his history of the Assyrian empire (Diodor. Sic. ii. 6 ff.) narrates a war
waged by Ninus and Semiram, against the king of Bactria (whom some later
authors, _e.g._ Justin i. 1, call Zoroaster). But the whole Assyrian
history of Ctesias is nothing but a fantastic fiction; from the Assyrian
inscriptions we know that the Assyrians never entered the eastern parts of
Iran.

Whether Bactria formed part of the Median empire, we do not know; but it
was subjugated by Cyrus and from then formed one of the satrapies of the
Persian empire. When Alexander had defeated Darius III., his murderer
Bessus, the satrap of Bactria, tried to organize a national resistance in
the east. But Bactria was conquered by Alexander without much difficulty;
it was only farther in the north, beyond the Oxus, in Sogdiana, that he met
with strong resistance. Bactria became a province of the Macedonian empire,
and soon came under the rule of Seleucus, king of Asia (see SELEUCID
DYNASTY and HELLENISM). The Macedonians (and especially Seleucus I. and his
son Antiochus I.) founded a great many Greek towns in eastern Iran, and the
Greek language became for some time dominant there. The many difficulties
against which the Seleucid kings had to fight and the attacks of Ptolemy
II., gave to Diodotus, satrap of Bactria, the opportunity of making himself
independent (about 255 B.C.) and of conquering Sogdiana. He was the founder
of the Graeco-Bactrian kingdom. Diodotus and his successors were able to
maintain themselves against the attacks of the Seleucids; and when
Antiochus III., "the Great," had been defeated by the Romans (190 B.C.),
the Bactrian king Euthydemus and his son Demetrius crossed the Hindu Kush
and began the conquest of eastern Iran and the Indus valley. For a short
time they wielded great power; a great Greek empire seemed to have arisen
far in the East. But this empire was torn by internal dissensions and
continual usurpations. When Demetrius advanced far into India one of his
generals, Eucratides, made himself king of Bactria, and soon in every
province there arose new usurpers, who proclaimed themselves kings and
fought one against the other. Most of them we know only by their coins, a
great many of which are found in Afghanistan and India. By these wars the
dominant position of the Greeks was undermined even more quickly than would
otherwise have been the case. After Demetrius and Eucratides, the kings
abandoned the Attic standard of coinage and introduced a native standard;
at the same time the native language came into use by the side of the
Greek. On the coins struck in India, the well-known Indian alphabet (called
Brahmi by the Indians, the older form of the Devanagari) is used; on the
coins struck in Afghanistan and in the Punjab the Kharosh[t.]hi alphabet,
which is derived directly from the Aramaic and was in common use in the
western parts of India, as is shown by one of the inscriptions of Asoka and
by the recent discovery of many fragments of Indian manuscripts, written in
Kharosh[t.]hi, in eastern Turkestan (formerly this alphabet has been called
Arianic or Bactrian Pali; the true name is derived from Indian sources).

The weakness of the Graeco-Bactrian kingdoms was shown by their sudden and
complete overthrow. In the west the Arsacid empire had risen, and
Mithradates I. and Phraates II. began to conquer some of their western
districts, especially Areia (Herat). But in the north a new race appeared,
Mongolian tribes, called [v.03 p.0181] Scythians by the Greeks, amongst
which the Tochari, identical with the Yue-chi (_q.v._) of the Chinese, were
the most important. In 159 B.C., according to Chinese sources, they entered
Sogdiana, in 139 they conquered Bactria, and during the next generation
they had made an end to the Greek rule in eastern Iran. Only in India the
Greek conquerors (Menander, Apollodotus) maintained themselves some time
longer. But in the middle of the 1st century B.C. the whole of eastern Iran
and western India belonged to the great "Indo-Scythian" empire. The ruling
dynasty had the name Kushan (Kushana), by which they are called on their
coins and in the Persian sources. The most famous of these kings is
Kanishka (ca. 123-153), the great protector of Buddhism. The principal seat
of the Tochari and the Kushan dynasty seems to have been Bactria; but they
always maintained the eastern parts of modern Afghanistan and Baluchistan,
while the western regions (Areia, _i.e._ Herat, Seistan and part of the
Helmund valley) were conquered by the Arsacids. In the 3rd century the
Kushan dynasty began to decay; about A.D. 320 the Gupta empire was founded
in India. Thus the Kushanas were reduced to eastern Iran, where they had to
fight against the Sassanids. In the 5th century a new people came from the
east, the Ephthalites (_q.v._) or "white Huns," who subjected Bactria
(about 450); and they were followed by the Turks, who first appear in
history about A.D. 560 and subjugated the country north of the Oxus. Most
of the small principalities of the Tochari or Kushan became subject to
them. But when the Sassanian empire was overthrown by the Arabs, the
conquerors immediately advanced eastwards, and in a few years Bactria and
the whole Iran to the banks of the Jaxartes had submitted to the rule of
the caliph and of Islam.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--For the earlier times see PERSIA. For the Graeco-Bactrian
and Indo-Scythian kingdoms see (beside articles on the separate
kings):--H. H. Wilson, _Ariana Antiqua_ (1841); Cunningham, "The Greeks of
Bactriana, Ariana and India" in _Numismatic Chronicle_, N. Ser. viii.-xii.;
A. von Sallet, _Die Nachfolger Alexanders des Grossen in Baktrien und
Indien_ (1879); P. Gardner, _The Coins of the Greek and Scythic Kings of
India_ (1886, Catalogue of Greek Coins in the British Museum, x.); A. von
Gutschmid, _Geschichte Irans und seiner Nachbarländer von Alexander dem
Grossen bis zum Untergang der Arsaciden_ (1888); A. Stein, "Zoroastrian
Deities on Indo-Scythian Coins," _Babylonian and Oriental Record_, i. 1887
(cf. Cunningham, _ib._ ii. 1888); Vincent A. Smith, "The Kush[=a]n or
Indo-Scythian Period of Indian History," _Journal of the R. Asiatic Soc._,
1903 (cf. his _Early History of India_, 2nd ed. 1908); W. W. Tarn, "Notes
on Hellenism in Bactria and India" in _Journ. of Hellenic Studies_, xxii.
1902. For the history and character of the Indian alphabet cf. J. Buhler,
"Indische Paläographie" (in _Grundriss der indo-arischen Philologie_, Bd.
i.). From the Greek authors only a few notices have been preserved,
especially by Justin (and in the prologues of Trogus) and Strabo; for the
later times we get some information from the Byzantine authors and from
Persian and Armenian sources; cf. Th. Nöldeke's translation of Tabari
(_Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden_, 1890) and J.
Marquart, "Er[=a]n[vs]ahr" (_Abhandlungen der königlichen Ges. d.
Wissenschaften zu Göttingen_, 1901). The Chinese sources are given by
Deguignes, "Recherches sur quelques événements qui concernent l'histoire
des rois grecs de la Bactriane," _Mém. de l'acad. des inscriptions_, xxv.;
E. Specht, "Études sur l'Asie centrale d'après les historiens chinois" in
_Journal asiatique_, 8 série, ii. 1883, 9 série, x. 1857; Sylvain Lévi,
"Notes sur les Indo-scythiens," _Journal asiatique_, 9 série ix., x. and
others.

(ED. M.)