BADAKSHAN, including WAKHAN, a province on the north-east frontier of
Afghanistan, adjoining Russian territory. Its north-eastern boundaries were
decided by the Anglo-Russian agreement of 1873, which expressly
acknowledged "Badakshan with its dependent district Wakhan" as "fully
belonging to the amir of Kabul," and limited it to the left or southern
bank of the Oxus. Much of the interior of the province is still unexplored.
On the west, Badakshan is bounded by a line which crosses the Turkestan
plains southwards from the junction of the Kunduz and Oxus rivers till it
touches the eastern water-divide of the Tashkurghan river (here called the
Koh-i-Chungar), and then runs south-east, crossing the Sarkhab affluent of
the Khanabad (Kunduz), till it strikes the Hindu Kush. The southern
boundary is carried along the crest of the Hindu Kush as far as the Khawak
pass, leading from Badakshan into the Panjshir valley. Beyond this it is
indefinite. It is known that the Kafirs occupy the crest of the Hindu Kush
eastwards of the Khawak, but how far they extend north of the main
watershed is not ascertainable. The southern limits of Badakshan become
definite again at the Dorah pass. The Dorah connects Zebak and Ishkashim at
the elbow, or bend, of the Oxus with the Lutku valley leading to Chitral.
From the Dorah eastwards the crest of the Hindu Kush again becomes the
boundary till it effects a junction with the Muztagh and Sarikol ranges,
which shut off China from Russia and India. Skirting round the head of the
Tagdumbash Pamir, it finally merges into the Pamir boundary, and turns
westwards, following the course of the Oxus, to the junction of that river
and the Khanabad (Kunduz). So far as the northern boundary follows the Oxus
stream, under the northern slopes of the Hindu Kush, it is only separated
by the length of these slopes (some 8 or 10 m.) from the southern boundary
along the crest. Thus Badakshan reaches out an arm into the Pamirs
eastwards--bottle-shaped--narrow at the neck (represented by the northern
slopes of the Hindu Kush), and swelling out eastwards so as to include a
part of the great and little Pamirs. Before the boundary settlement of 1873
the small states of Roshan and Shignan extended to the left bank of the
Oxus, and the province of Darwaz, on the other hand, extended to the right
bank. Now, however, the Darwaz extension northwards is exchanged for the
Russian Pamir extension westwards, and the river throughout is the boundary
between Russian and Afghan territory; the political boundaries of those
provinces and those of Wakhan being no longer coincident with their
geographical limits.

The following are the chief provincial subdivisions of Badakshan, omitting
Roshan and Shignan:--On the west Rustak, Kataghan, Ghori, Narin and
Anderab; on the north Darwaz, Ragh and Shiwa; on the east Charan,
Ishkashim, Zebak and Wakhan; and in the centre Faizabad, Farkhar, Minjan
and Kishm. There are others, but nothing certain is known about these minor
subdivisions.

The conformation of the mountain districts, which comprise all the southern
districts of Badakshan and the northern hills and valleys of Kafiristan, is
undoubtedly analogous to that of the rest of the Hindu Kush westwards. The
water-divide of the Hindu Kush from the Dorah to the Khawak pass, _i.e._
through the centre of Kafiristan, has never been accurately traced; but its
topographical conformation is evidently a continuation of that which has
been observed in the districts of Badakshan to the west of the Khawak. The
Hindu Kush represents the southern edge of a great central upheaval or
plateau. It breaks up into long spurs southwards, deep amongst which are
hidden the valleys of Kafiristan, almost isolated from each other by the
rugged and snow-capped altitudes which divide them. To the north the
plateau gradually slopes away towards the Oxus, falling from an average
altitude of 15,000 ft. to 4000 ft. about Faizabad, in the centre of
Badakshan, but tailing off to 1100 at Kunduz, in Kataghan, where it merges
into the flat plains bordering the Oxus.

The Kokcha river traverses Badakshan from south-east to north-west, and,
with the Kunduz, drains all the northern slopes of the Hindu Kush west of
the Dorah pass. Some of its sources are near Zebak, close to the great bend
of the Oxus northwards, so that it cuts off all the mountainous area
included within that bend from the rest of Badakshan. Its chief affluent is
the Minjan, which Sir George Robertson found to be a considerable stream
where it approaches the Hindu Kush close under the Dorah. Like the Kunduz,
it probably drains the northern slopes of the Hindu Kush by deep lateral
valleys, more or less parallel to the crest, reaching westwards towards the
Khawak pass. From the Oxus (1000 ft.) to Faizabad (4000 ft.) and Zebak
(8500 ft.) the course of the Kokcha offers a high road across Badakshan;
between Zebak and Ishkashim, at the Oxus bend, there is but an
insignificant pass of 9500 ft.; and from Ishkashim by the Panja, through
the Pamirs, is the continuation of what must once have been a
much-traversed trade route connecting Afghan Turkestan with Kashgar and
China. It is undoubtedly one of the great continental high-roads of Asia.
North of the Kokcha, within the Oxus bend, is the mountainous district of
Darwaz, of which the physiography belongs rather to the Pamir type than to
that of the Hindu Kush.

A very remarkable meridional range extends for 100 m. northwards from the
Hindu Kush (it is across this range that the route from Zebak to Ishkashim
lies), which determines the great bend of the Oxus river northwards from
Ishkashim, and narrows the valley of that river into the formation of a
trough as far as the next bend westwards at Kala Wamar. The western slopes
of this range drain to the Oxus either north-westwards, by the Kokcha and
the Ragh, or else they twist their streams into the Shiwa, which runs due
north across Darwaz. Here again we find the main routes which traverse the
country following the rivers closely. The valleys are narrow, but fertile
and populous. The mountains are rugged and difficult; but there is much of
the world-famous beauty of scenery, and of the almost phenomenal
agricultural wealth of the valleys of Bokhara and Ferghana to be found in
the as yet half-explored recesses of Badakshan.

[v.03 p.0183] The principal domesticated animal is the yak. There are also
large flocks of sheep, cows, goats, ponies, fine dogs and Bactrian camels.
The more important wild animals are a large wild sheep (_Ovis poli_),
foxes, wolves, jackals, bears, boars, deer and leopards; amongst birds,
there are partridges, pheasants, ravens, jays, sparrows, larks, a famous
breed of hawks, &c.

Badakshan proper is peopled by Tajiks, Turks and Arabs, who speak the
Persian and Turki languages, and profess the orthodox doctrines of the
Mahommedan law adopted by the Sunnite sect; while the mountainous districts
are inhabited by Tajiks, professing the Shi`ite creed and speaking distinct
dialects in different districts.

_History._--Badakshan, part of the Greek Bactria, was visited by Hsüan
Tsang in 630 and 644. The Arabian geographers of the 10th century speak of
its mines of ruby and lapis lazuli, and give notices of the flourishing
commerce and large towns of Waksh and Khotl, regions which appear to have
in part corresponded with Badakshan. In 1272-1273 Marco Polo and his
companions stayed for a time in Badakshan. During this and the following
centuries the country was governed by kings who claimed to be descendants
of Alexander the Great. The last of these kings was Shah Mahommed, who died
in the middle of the 15th century, leaving only his married daughters to
represent the royal line. Early in the middle of the 16th century the
Usbegs obtained possession of Badakshan, but were soon expelled, and then
the country was generally governed by descendants of the old royal dynasty
by the female line. About the middle of the 18th century the present
dynasty of Mirs established its footing in the place of the old one which
had become extinct. In 1765 the country was invaded and ravaged by the
ruler of Kabul. During the first three decades of the 19th century it was
overrun and depopulated by Kohan Beg and his son Murad Beg, chiefs of the
Kataghan Usbegs of Kunduz. When Murad Beg died, the power passed into the
hands of another Usbeg, Mahommed Amir Khan. In 1859 the Kataghan Usbegs
were expelled; and Mir Jahander Shah, the representative of the modern
royal line, was reinstated at Faizabad under the supremacy of the Afghans.
In 1867 he was expelled by Abdur Rahman and replaced by Mir Mahommed Shah,
and other representatives of the same family.

(T. H. H.*)