BADEN, a town in the Swiss canton of Aargau, on the left bank of the river
Limmat, 14 m. by rail N.W. of Zürich. It is now chiefly visited by reason
of its hot sulphur springs, which are mentioned by Tacitus (_Hist._ i. cap.
67) and were very fashionable in the 15th and 16th centuries. They are
especially efficacious in cases of gouty and rheumatic affections, and are
much frequented by Swiss invalids, foreign visitors being but few in
number. They lie a little north of the old town, with which they are now
connected by a fine boulevard. Many Roman remains have been found in the
gardens of the Kursaal. The town is very picturesque, with its steep and
narrow streets, and its one surviving gateway, while it is dominated on the
west by the ruined castle of Stein, formerly a stronghold of the Habsburgs,
but destroyed in 1415 and again in 1712. In 1415 Baden (with the Aargau)
was conquered by the Eight Swiss Confederates, whose bailiff inhabited the
other castle, on the right bank of the Limmat, which defends the ancient
bridge across that river. As the conquest of the Aargau was the first made
by the Confederates, their delegates (or the federal diet) naturally met at
Baden, from 1426 to about 1712, to settle matters relating to these subject
lands, so that during that period Baden was really the capital of
Switzerland. The diet sat in the old town-hall or _Rathaus_, where was also
signed in 1714 the treaty of Baden which put an end to the war between
France and the Empire, and thus completed the treaty of Utrecht (1713).
Baden was the capital of the canton of Baden, from 1798 to 1803, when the
canton of Aargau was created. To the N.W. of the baths a new industrial
quarter has sprung up of late years, the largest works being for electric
engineering. In 1900 the permanent population of Baden was 6050
(German-speaking, mainly Romanists, with many Jews), but it is greatly
swelled in summer by the influx of visitors.

One mile S. of Baden, on the Limmat, is the famous Cistercian monastery of
Wettingen (1227-1841--the monks are now at Mehrerau near Bregenz), with
splendid old painted glass in the cloisters and magnificent early
17th-century carved stalls in the choir of the church. Six miles W. of
Baden is the small town of Brugg (2345 inhabitants) in a fine position on
the Aar, and close to the remains of the Roman colony of _Vindonissa_
(Windisch), as well as to the monastery (founded 1310) of Königsfelden,
formerly the burial-place of the early Habsburgs (the castle of Habsburg is
but a short way off), still retaining much fine painted glass.

See Barth. Fricker, _Geschichte der Stadt und Bäder zu Baden_ (Aarau,
1880).

(W. A. B. C.)