BADEN, a town and watering-place of Austria, in lower Austria, 17 m. S. of
Vienna by rail. Pop. (1900) 12,447. It is beautifully situated at the mouth
of the romantic Helenenthal, on the banks of the Schwechat, and has become
the principal summer resort of the inhabitants of the neighbouring capital.
It possesses a new _Kurhaus_, fifteen bathing-establishments, a parish
church in late Gothic style, and a town-hall, which contains interesting
archives. The warm baths, which gave name to the town, are thirteen in
number, with a temperature of from 72° F. to 97° F., and contain, as chief
ingredient, sulphate of lime. They rise for the most part at the foot of
the Calvarienberg (1070 ft.), which is composed of dolomitic limestone, and
are mostly used for bathing purposes. Several members of the Austrian
imperial family have made Baden their summer residence and have built here
beautiful villas. There are about 20,000 visitors annually. Baden possesses
several parks and is surrounded by lovely and interesting spots, of which
the most frequented is the picturesque valley of the Helenenthal, which is
traversed by the Schwechat. Not far from Baden, the valley is crossed by
the magnificent aqueduct of the Vienna waterworks. At the entrance to the
valley, on the right bank of the river, lie the ruins of the 12th-century
castle of Rauheneck, and at its foot stands the Château Weilburg, built in
1820-1825 by Archduke Charles, the victor of Aspern. On the left bank, just
opposite, stands the ruined castle of Rauhenstein, dating also from the
12th century. About 4 m. up the valley is Mayerling, a hunting-lodge, where
the crown prince Rudolph of Austria was found dead in 1889. Farther up is
Alland, whence a road leads to the old and well-preserved abbey of
Heiligenkreuz. It possesses a church, in Romanesque style, dating from the
11th century, with fine cloisters and the tombs of several members of the
Babenberg family. The highest point in the neighbourhood of Baden is the
peak of the Hoher Lindkogel (2825 ft.), popularly called the Eiserne Thor,
which is ascended in about three hours.

The celebrity of Baden dates back to the days of the Romans, who knew it by
the name of _Thermae Pannonicae_, and remains of their occupation still
exist. It received its charter as a town [v.03 p.0184] in 1480, and
although sacked at various times by Hungarians and Turks, it soon
flourished again.

See J. Schwarz, _Die Heilquellen von Baden bei Wien_ (Vienna, 3rd ed.,
1900).