BADEN, or BADEN-BADEN (to distinguish it from other places of the name), a
town and fashionable watering-place of Germany, in the grand-duchy of
Baden, 23 m. S. by W. of Karlsruhe, with which it is connected by a branch
of the Mannheim and Basel railway. Its situation--on a hill 600 ft. high,
in the beautiful valley of the Black Forest--its extensive
pleasure-grounds, gardens and promenades, and the brilliancy of the life
that is led during the season, have long attracted crowds of visitors from
all parts of the world. The resident population was in 1885, 12,779; in
1895, 14,862; and in 1905, 16,238; but the number of visitors exceeds
70,000 annually. Until the war of 1870, the prevailing nationality was
French, but of late years Americans, Russians and English are the more
numerous. The hot springs are twenty-nine in number, and vary in
temperature from 37° to 54° R., _i.e._ from 115° to 153° Fahr. They flow
from the castle rock at the rate of 90 gallons per minute, and the water is
conveyed through the town in pipes to supply the different baths. There are
two chief bathing-establishments, accounted the most elegant in Europe. The
waters of Baden-Baden are specific in cases of chronic rheumatism and gout,
paralysis, neuralgia, skin diseases and various internal complaints, such
as stone and uric acid. The town proper is on the right bank of the Oos,
but the principal resorts of the visitors are en the left. A
_Conversationshaus_ and a _Trinkhalle_ or pump-room, a theatre and a
picture-gallery, library and reading-room are among the chief buildings.
The public gaming-tables, which for so many years were a striking feature,
are now abolished. The only building of much antiquarian interest, with the
exception of the castles, is the parish church, which dates from the 15th
century, and contains the tombs of several of the margraves. The churches
include a Lutheran, an English, in the Norman style of architecture, and a
Russian, with beautiful frescoes; while on the Michaelsberg is the Greek
chapel, with a gilded dome, which was erected over the tomb of a son of the
Rumanian prince Michel Stourdza, who died here in 1863.

The springs of Baden were known to the Romans, and the foundation of the
town is referred to the emperor Hadrian by an inscription of somewhat
doubtful authenticity. The name of _Aurelia Aquensis_ was given to it in
honour of Aurelius Severus, in whose reign it would seem to have been well
known. Fragments of its ancient sculptures are still to be seen, and in
1847 remains of Roman vapour baths, well preserved, were discovered just
below the New Castle. From the 14th century down to the close of the 17th,
Baden was the residence of the margraves, to whom it gave its name. They
first dwelt in the Old Castle, the ruins of which still occupy the summit
of a hill above the town, but in 1479 they removed to the New Castle, which
is situated on the hill-side nearer to the town, and is remarkable for its
subterranean dungeons. During the Thirty Years' War Baden suffered severely
from the various combatants, but especially from the French, who pillaged
it in 1643, and laid it in ashes in 1689. The margrave Louis William
removed to Rastatt in 1706. Since the beginning of the 19th century the
government has greatly fostered the growth of the town.

See Wettendorfer, _Der Kurort Baden-Baden_ (2nd ed., 1898); Schwarz, _Die
Heilquellen von Baden-Baden_ (4th ed., 1902).