BADEN, GRAND DUCHY OF, a sovereign state of Germany, lying in the
south-west corner of the empire, bounded N. by the kingdom of Bavaria and
the grand-duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt; W. and practically throughout its whole
length by the Rhine, which separates it from the Bavarian Palatinate and
the imperial province of Alsace-Lorraine; S. by Switzerland, and E. by the
kingdom of Württemberg and part of Bavaria. The country has an area of 5823
sq. m. and consists of a considerable portion of the eastern half of the
fertile valley of the Rhine and of the mountains which form its boundary.
The mountainous part is by far the most extensive, forming, indeed, nearly
80% of the whole area. From the Lake of Constance in the south to the river
Neckar in the north is a portion of the Black Forest or _Schwarzwald_,
which is divided by the valley of the Kinzig into two districts of
different elevation. To the south of the Kinzig the mean height is 3100
ft., and the loftiest summit, the Feldberg, reaches about 4898 ft., while
to the north the mean height is only 2100 ft., and the Belchen, the
culminating point of the whole, does not exceed 4480 ft. To the north of
the Neckar is the Odenwald Range, with a mean of 1440 ft., and in the
Katzenbuckel, an extreme of 1980 ft. Lying between the Rhine and the
Dreisam is the Kaiserstuhl, an independent volcanic group, nearly 10 m. in
length and 5 in breadth, the highest point of which is 1760 ft. The greater
part of Baden belongs to the basin of the Rhine, which receives upwards of
twenty tributaries from the highlands; the north-eastern portion of the
territory is also watered by the Main and the Neckar. A part, however, of
the eastern slope of the Black Forest belongs to the basin of the Danube,
which there takes its rise in a number of mountain streams. Among the
numerous lakes which belong to the duchy are the Mummel, Wilder, Eichener
and Schluch, but none of them is of any size. The Lake of Constance
(_Boden-See_) belongs partly to Bavaria and Switzerland.

Owing to its physical configuration Baden presents great extremes of heat
and cold. The Rhine valley is the warmest district in Germany, but the
higher elevations of the Black Forest record the greatest degrees of cold
experienced in the south. The mean temperature of the Rhine valley is
approximately 50° F. and that of the high table-land, 43° F. July is the
hottest and January the coldest month in the year.

[v.03 p.0185] The mineral wealth of Baden is not great; but iron, coal,
zinc and lead of excellent quality are produced, and silver, copper, gold,
cobalt, vitriol and sulphur are obtained in small quantities. Peat is found
in abundance, as well as gypsum, china-clay, potters' earth and salt. The
mineral springs of Baden are very numerous and have acquired great
celebrity, those of Baden-Baden, Badenweiler, Antogast, Griesbach,
Freiersbach and Petersthal being the most frequented.

In the valleys the soil is particularly fertile, yielding luxuriant crops
of wheat, maize, barley, spelt, beans, potatoes, flax, hemp, hops, beetroot
and tobacco; and even in the more mountainous parts rye, wheat and oats are
extensively cultivated. There is a considerable extent of pasture land, and
the rearing of cattle, sheep, pigs and goats is largely practised. Of game,
deer, wild boars, hares, snipe and partridges are fairly abundant, while
the mountain streams yield trout of excellent quality. The culture of the
vine increases, and the wines, which are characterized by a mildness of
flavour, are in good demand. The gardens and orchards supply great
abundance of fruits, especially almonds and walnuts; and bee-keeping is
common throughout the country. A greater proportion of Baden than of any
other of the south German states is occupied by forests. In these the
predominant trees are the fir and pine, but many others, such as the
chestnut, are well represented. A third, at least, of the annual supply of
timber is exported.

_Population._--At the beginning of the 19th century Baden was only a
margraviate, with an area little exceeding 1300 sq. m., and a population of
210,000. Since then it has from time to time acquired additional territory,
so that its area now amounts to 5823 sq. m., and its population (1905) to
2,009,320, of whom about 60% are Roman Catholics, 37% Protestants, 1½%
Jews, and the remainder of other confessions. Of the population, about
one-half may be classified as rural, _i.e._ living in communities of less
than 2000 inhabitants; while the density of the population is about 330 to
the square mile. The country is divided into the following districts, with
the respective chief towns and populations as shown:--

  District.                 Chief towns.      Pop. (1905)
  (1) Mannheim              Mannheim              162,607
                            Heidelberg             49,439
  (2) Karlsruhe             Karlsruhe             111,200
                            Pforzheim              59,307
  (3) Freiburg-im-Breisgau  Freiburg               74,102
  (4) Constance             Constance              24,818

The capital of the duchy is Karlsruhe, and among important towns other than
the above are Rastatt, Baden-Baden, Bruchsal and Lahr. The population is
most thickly clustered in the north and in the neighbourhood of the Swiss
town of Basel. The inhabitants of Baden are of various origin--those to the
north of the Murg being descended from the Alemanni and those to the south
from the Franks, while the Swabian plateau derives its name and its
population from another race. (See WÜRTTEMBERG.)

_Industries._--Of the area, 56.8% is cultivated and 38% forest, but the
agricultural industry, which formerly yielded the bulk of the wealth of the
country, is now equalled, if not surpassed, by the industrial output, which
has attained very considerable dimensions. The chief articles of
manufacture are machinery, woollen and cotton goods, silk ribbons, paper,
tobacco, leather, china, glass, clocks, jewellery and chemicals. Beet sugar
is also largely manufactured, and the inhabitants of the Black Forest have
long been celebrated for their dexterity in the manufacture of wooden
ornaments and toys, musical boxes and organs.

The exports of Baden, which coincide largely with the industries just
mentioned, are of considerable importance, but the bulk of its trade
consists in the transit of goods. The country is well furnished with roads
and railways, the greater proportion of the latter being in the hands of
the state. A line runs the whole length of the land, for the most part
parallel with the Rhine, while branches cross obliquely from east to west.
Mannheim is the great emporium for the export of goods down the Rhine and
has a large river traffic. It is also the chief manufacturing town of the
duchy and the seat of administrative government for the northern portion of
the country.

_Education and Religion._--The educational establishments of Baden are
numerous and flourishing, and public education is entirely in the hands of
the government. There are two universities, the Protestant at Heidelberg
and the Roman Catholic at Freiburg-im-Breisgau, and a celebrated technical
college at Karlsruhe. The grand-duke is a Protestant; under him the
Evangelical Church is governed by a nominated council and a synod
consisting of the "prelate," 48 elected, and 7 nominated lay and clerical
members. The Roman Catholic archbishop of Freiburg is metropolitan of the
Upper Rhine.

_Constitution and Government._--The government of Baden is an hereditary
monarchy, with the executive power vested in the grand-duke, while the
legislative authority is shared by him with a representative assembly
(_Landtag_) consisting of two chambers. The upper chamber is composed of
all the princes of the reigning family who are of full age; the chiefs of
the mediatized families; the archbishop of Freiburg; the president of the
Protestant Evangelical church; a deputy from each of the universities and
from the technical high school, eight members elected by the territorial
nobility for four years, three representatives of the chamber of commerce,
two of that of agriculture, one of that of trades, two mayors of
municipalities, one burgomaster of lesser towns, one member of a district
council, and eight members (two of them legal functionaries) nominated by
the grand-duke. The lower chamber consists of 73 popular representatives,
of whom 24 are elected by the burgesses of certain towns and 49 by the
rural communities. Every citizen of 25 years of age, who has not been
convicted and is not a pauper, has a vote. The elections are, however,
indirect; the citizens nominating the _Wahlmänner_ (deputy electors) and
the latter electing the representatives. The chambers meet at least every
two years. The members of the lower chamber are elected for four years,
half the number retiring at the expiration of every two years. The
executive consists of four departments of state--those of the interior, of
foreign affairs and of the grand-ducal house, of finance, and of justice,
ecclesiastical affairs and education. The chief sources of revenue are
direct and indirect taxes, domains and railways. The last are worked by the
state, and the sole public debt, amounting to about 22 millions sterling,
is attributable to this head. The supreme courts of justice of the duchy
are in Karlsruhe, Freiburg, Offenburg, Heidelberg, Mosbach, Waldshut,
Constance and Mannheim, whence appeals lie to the _Reichsgericht_ (supreme
tribunal of the empire) in Leipzig. By virtue of a convention with Prussia,
of 1871, the Baden army forms a portion of the Prussian army.

_History._--During the middle ages the district which now forms the
grand-duchy of Baden was ruled by various counts, prominent among whom were
the counts and dukes of Zähringen. In 1112 Hermann, a son of Hermann,
margrave of Verona (d. 1074), and grandson of Bertold, duke of Carinthia
and count of Zähringen, having inherited some of the German estates of his
family, called himself margrave of Baden, and from this date the separate
history of Baden may be said to begin. Hermann appears to have called
himself by the title of margrave, and not the more usual title of count,
owing to the connexion of his family with the margraviate of Verona. His
son and grandson, both named Hermann, added to their territories, which
about 1200 were divided, and the lines of Baden-Baden and Baden-Hochberg
were founded, the latter of which was divided about a century later into
the branches of Baden-Hochberg and Baden-Sausenberg. The family of
Baden-Baden was very successful in increasing the area of its possessions,
which after several divisions were united by the margrave Bernard I. in
1391. Bernard, a soldier of some renown, continued the work of his
predecessors, and obtained other districts, including Baden-Hochberg, the
ruling family of which died out in 1418.

During the 15th century a war with the count palatine of the Rhine deprived
Margrave Charles I. (d. 1475) of a part of his territories, but these
losses were more than repaired by his son and successor, Christopher I. In
1503 the family of [v.03 p.0186] Baden-Sausenberg became extinct, and the
whole of Baden was united by Christopher, who divided it, however, before
his death in 1527 among his three sons. One of these died childless in
1533, and in 1535 his remaining sons, Bernard and Ernest, having shared
their brother's territories, made a fresh division and founded the lines of
Baden-Baden and Baden-Pforzheim, called after 1565 Baden-Durlach. Further
divisions followed, and the weakness caused by these partitions was
accentuated by a rivalry between the two main branches of the family. This
culminated in open warfare, and from 1584 to 1622 Baden-Baden was in the
possession of one of the princes of Baden-Durlach. Religious differences
added to this rivalry. During the period of the Reformation some of the
rulers of Baden adhered to the older and some adopted the newer faith, and
the house was similarly divided during the Thirty Years' War. Baden
suffered severely during this struggle, and both branches of the family
were exiled in turn. The treaty of Westphalia in 1648 restored the _status
quo_, and the family rivalry gradually died out. During the wars of the
reign of Louis XIV. the margraviate was ravaged by the French troops, and
the margrave of Baden-Baden, Louis William (d. 1707), was prominent among
the soldiers who resisted the aggressions of France. In 1771 Augustus
George of Baden-Baden died without sons, and his territories passed to
Charles Frederick of Baden-Durlach, who thus became ruler of the whole of
Baden.

Although in 1771 Baden was united under a single ruler it did not form a
compact territory, and its total area was only about 1350 sq. m. Consisting
of a number of isolated districts lying on either bank of the upper Rhine,
it was the work of Charles Frederick to acquire the intervening stretches
of land, and so to give territorial unity to his country. Beginning to
reign in 1738 and coming of age in 1746, this prince is the most notable of
the rulers of Baden. He was interested in the development of agriculture
and commerce; sought to improve education and the administration of
justice, and was in general a wise and liberal ruler. His opportunity for
territorial aggrandizement came during the Napoleonic wars. When war broke
out between France and Austria in 1792 the Badenese fought for Austria;
consequently their country was devastated and in 1796 the margrave was
compelled to pay an indemnity, and to cede his territories, on the left
bank of the Rhine to France. Fortune, however, soon returned to his side.
In 1803, largely owing to the good offices of Alexander I., emperor of
Russia, he received the bishopric of Constance, part of the Rhenish
Palatinate, and other smaller districts, together with the dignity of a
prince elector. Changing sides in 1805 he fought for Napoleon, with the
result that by the peace of Pressburg in that year he obtained the Breisgau
and other territories at the expense of the Habsburgs. In 1806 he joined
the Confederation of the Rhine, declared himself a sovereign prince, became
a grand-duke, and received other additions of territory. The Baden
contingent continued to assist France, and by the peace of Vienna in 1809
the grand-duke was rewarded with accessions of territory at the expense of
the kingdom of Württemberg. Having quadrupled the area of Baden, Charles
Frederick died in June 1811, and was succeeded by his grandson, Charles,
who was married to Stephanie de Beauharnais (d. 1860), an adopted daughter
of Napoleon. Charles fought for his father-in-law until after the battle of
Leipzig in 1813, when he joined the Allies.

In 1815 Baden became a member of the Germanic confederation established by
the Act of the 8th of June, annexed to the Final Act of the congress of
Vienna of the 9th of June. In the hurry of the winding-up of the congress,
however, the vexed question of the succession to the grand-duchy had not
been settled. This was soon to become acute. By the treaty of the 16th of
April 1816, by which the territorial disputes between Austria and Bavaria
were settled, the succession to the Baden Palatinate was guaranteed to
Maximilian I., king of Bavaria, in the expected event of the extinction of
the line of Zähringen. As a counterblast to this the grand-duke Charles
issued in 1817 a pragmatic sanction (_Hausgesetz_) declaring the counts of
Hochberg, the issue of a morganatic marriage between the grand-duke Charles
Frederick and Luise Geyer von Geyersberg (created Countess Hochberg),
capable of succeeding to the crown. A controversy between Bavaria and Baden
resulted, which was only decided in favour of the Hochberg claims by the
treaty signed by the four great powers and Baden at Frankfort on the 10th
of July 1819. Meanwhile the dispute had produced important effects in
Baden. In order to secure popular support for the Hochberg heir, Charles in
1818 granted to the grand-duchy, under article xiii. of the Act of
Confederation, a liberal constitution, under which two chambers were
constituted and their assent declared necessary for legislation and
taxation. The outcome was of importance far beyond the narrow limits of the
duchy; for all Germany watched the constitutional experiments of the
southern states. In Baden the conditions were not favourable to success.
The people, belonging to the "Celtic fringe" of Germany, had fallen during
the revolutionary period completely under the influence of French ideas,
and this was sufficiently illustrated by the temper of the new chambers,
which tended to model their activity on the proceedings of the Convention
in the earlier days of the French Revolution. On the other hand, the new
grand-duke Louis, who had succeeded in 1818, was unpopular, and the
administration was in the hands of hide-bound and inefficient bureaucrats.
The result was a deadlock; and, even before the promulgation of the
Carlsbad decrees in October 1819 the grand-duke had prorogued the chambers,
after three months of sterile debate. The reaction that followed was as
severe in Baden as elsewhere in Germany, and culminated in 1823, when, on
the refusal of the chambers to vote the military budget, the grand-duke
dissolved them and levied the taxes on his own authority. In January 1825,
owing to official pressure, only three Liberals were returned to the
chamber; a law was passed making the budget presentable only every three
years, and the constitution ceased to have any active existence.

In 1830 Louis was succeeded as grand-duke by his half-brother Leopold, the
first of the Hochberg line. The July Revolution led to no disturbances in
Baden; but the new grand-duke from the first showed liberal tendencies. The
elections of 1830 were not interfered with; and the result was the return
of a Liberal majority. The next few years saw the introduction, under
successive ministries, of Liberal reforms in the constitution, in criminal
and civil law, and in education. In 1832 the adhesion of Baden to the
Prussian _Zollverein_ did much for the material prosperity of the country.
With the approach of the revolutionary year 1848, however, Radicalism once
more began to lift up its head. At a popular demonstration held at
Offenburg on the 12th of September 1847, resolutions were passed demanding
the conversion of the regular army into a national militia which should
take an oath to the constitution, a progressive income-tax and a fair
adjustment of the interests of capital and labour.

The news of the revolution of February 1848 in Paris brought this agitation
to a head. Numerous public meetings were held at which the Offenburg
programme was adopted, and on the 4th of March, under the influence of the
popular excitement, it was accepted almost unanimously by the lower
chamber. As in other German states, the government bowed to the storm,
proclaimed an amnesty and promised reforms. The ministry was remodelled in
a more Liberal direction; and a new delegate was sent to the federal diet
at Frankfort, empowered to vote for the establishment of a parliament for
united Germany. The disorders, fomented by republican agitators, none the
less continued; and the efforts of the government to suppress them with the
aid of federal troops led to an armed insurrection. For the time this was
mastered without much difficulty; the insurgents were beaten at Kandern on
the 20th of April; Freiburg, which they held, fell on the 24th; and on the
27th a Franco-German "legion," which had invaded Baden from Strassburg, was
routed at Dossenbach.

At the beginning of 1849, however, the issue of a new constitution, in
accordance with the resolutions of the Frankfort parliament, led to more
serious trouble. It did little to satisfy the Radicals, who were angered by
the refusal of the second chamber to agree to their proposal for the
summoning of a [v.03 p.0187] constituent assembly (10th of February 1849).
The new insurrection that now broke out was a more formidable affair than
the first. A military mutiny at Rastatt on the 11th of May showed that the
army sympathized with the revolution, which was proclaimed two days later
at Offenburg amid tumultuous scenes. On the same day (13th of May) a mutiny
at Karlsruhe forced the grand-duke to take to flight, and the next day he
was followed by the ministers, while a committee of the diet under Lorenz
Brentano (1813-1891), who represented the more moderate Radicals as against
the republicans, established itself in the capital to attempt to direct
affairs pending the establishment of a provisional government. This was
accomplished on the 1st of June, and on the 10th the "constituent diet,"
consisting entirely of the most "advanced" politicians, assembled. It had
little chance of doing more than make speeches; the country was in the
hands of an armed mob of civilians and mutinous soldiers; and, meanwhile,
the grand-duke of Baden had joined with Bavaria in requesting the armed
intervention of Prussia, which was granted on the condition that Baden
should join the League of the Three Kings.

From this moment the revolution in Baden was doomed, and with it the
revolution in all Germany. The Prussians, under Prince William (afterwards
emperor), invaded Baden in the middle of June. The insurgent forces were
under the command of the Pole, Ludwig von Mieroslawski (1814-1878), who
reduced them to some semblance of order. On the 20th he met the Prussians
at Waghäusel, and was completely defeated; on the 25th Prince William
entered Karlsruhe; and at the end of the month the members of the
provisional government, who had taken refuge at Freiburg, dispersed. Such
of the insurgent leaders as were caught, notably the ex-officers, suffered
military execution; the army was dispersed among Prussian garrison towns;
and Baden was occupied for the time by Prussian troops. The grand-duke
returned on the 19th of August, and at once dissolved the diet. The
elections resulted in a majority favourable to the new ministry, and a
series of laws were passed of a reactionary tendency with a view to
strengthening the government.

The grand-duke Leopold died on the 24th of April 1852, and was succeeded by
his second son, Frederick, as regent, the eldest, Louis (d. 22nd of January
1858), being incapable of ruling.[1] The internal affairs of Baden during
the period that followed have comparatively little general interest. In the
greater politics of Germany, Baden, between 1850 and 1866, was a consistent
supporter of Austria; and in the war of 1866 her contingents, under Prince
William, had two sharp engagements with the Prussian army of the Main. Two
days before the affair of Werbach (24th of July), however, the second
chamber had petitioned the grand-duke to end the war and enter into an
offensive and defensive alliance with Prussia. The grand-duke had from the
first been opposed to the war with Prussia, but had been forced to yield
owing to popular resentment at the policy of Prussia in the
Schleswig-Holstein question (_q.v._). The ministry, now at one, resigned;
Baden announced her withdrawal from the German confederation; and on the
17th of August a treaty of peace and alliance was signed with Prussia. The
adhesion of Baden to the North German confederation was prevented by
Bismarck himself, who had no wish to give Napoleon III. so good an excuse
for intervention; but it was the opposition of Baden to the formation of a
South German confederation that made the ultimate union inevitable. The
troops of Baden took a conspicuous share in the war of 1870; and it was the
grand-duke of Baden, who, in the historic assembly of the German princes at
Versailles, was the first to hail the king of Prussia as German emperor.

The internal politics of Baden, both before and after 1870, centre in the
main round the question of religion. The signing on the 28th of June 1859
of a concordat with the Holy See, by which education was placed under the
oversight of the clergy and the establishment of religious orders was
facilitated, led to a constitutional struggle, which ended in 1863 with the
victory of Liberal principles, the communes being made responsible for
education, though the priests were admitted to a share in the management.
The quarrel between Liberalism and Clericalism was, however, not ended. In
1867, on the accession to the premiership of Julius von Jolly (1823-1891),
several constitutional changes in a Liberal direction were made;
responsibility of ministers, freedom of the press, compulsory education. In
the same year (6th of September) a law was passed to compel all candidates
for the priesthood to pass the government examinations. The archbishop of
Freiburg resisted, and, on his death in April 1868, the see was left
vacant, In 1869 the introduction of civil marriage did not tend to allay
the strife, which reached its climax after the proclamation of the dogma of
papal infallibility in 1870. The "Kulturkampf" raged in Baden, as in the
rest of Germany; and here as elsewhere the government encouraged the
formation of Old Catholic communities. Not till 1880, after the fall of the
ministry of Jolly, was a reconciliation with Rome effected; in 1882 the
archbishopric of Freiburg was again filled up. The political tendency of
Baden, meanwhile, mirrored that of all Germany. In 1891 the National
Liberals had but a majority of one in the diet; from 1893 they could
maintain themselves only with the aid of the Conservatives; and in 1897 a
coalition of Ultramontanes, Socialists, Social-democrats and Radicals
(_Freisinnige_), won a majority for the opposition in the chamber.

Amid all these contests the wise and statesmanlike moderation of the
grand-duke Frederick won him universal esteem. By the treaty under which
Baden had become an integral part of the German empire, he had reserved
only the exclusive right to tax beer and spirits; the army, the
post-office, railways and the conduct of foreign relations were placed
under the effective control of Prussia. In his relations with the German
empire, too, Frederick proved himself rather a great German noble than a
sovereign prince actuated by particularist ambitions; and his position as
husband of the emperor William I.'s only daughter, Louise (whom he had
married in 1856), gave him a peculiar influence in the councils of Berlin.
When, on the 20th of September 1906, the grand-duke celebrated at once the
jubilee of his reign and his golden wedding, all Europe combined to do him
honour. King Edward VII. sent him, by the hands of the duke of Connaught,
the order of the Garter. But more significant, perhaps, was the tribute
paid by the _Temps_, the leading Parisian paper. "Nothing more clearly
demonstrates the sterile paradox of the Napoleonic work," it wrote, "than
the history of the grand-duchy. It was Napoleon, and he alone, who created
this whole state in 1803 to reward in the person of the little margrave of
Baden a relative of the emperor of Russia. It was he who after Austerlitz
aggrandized the margravate at the expense of Austria; transformed it into a
sovereign principality and raised it to a grand-duchy. It was he too who,
by the secularization on the one hand and by the dismemberment of
Württemberg on the other, gave the grand-duke 500,000 new subjects. He
believed that the recognition of the prince and the artificial ethnical
formation of the principality would be pledges of security for France. But
in 1813 Baden joined the coalition, and since then that nation created of
odds and ends (_de bric et de broc_) and always handsomely treated by us,
had not ceased to take a leading part in the struggles against our country.
The grand-duke Frederick, grand-duke by the will of Napoleon, has done
France all the harm he could. But French opinion itself renders justice to
the probity of his character and to the ardour of his patriotism, and
nobody will feel surprise at the homage with which Germany feels bound to
surround his old age." He died at Mainau on the 28th of September 1907, and
was succeeded by his son, the grand-duke Frederick II.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--_Das Grossherzogtum Baden in geographischer ... Hinsicht
dargestellt_ (Karlsruhe, 1885); Wielandt, _Das Staatsrecht des
Grossherzogtums Baden_ (Freiburg, 1895); F. von Weech, _Badische
Geschichte_ (Karlsruhe, 1890); _Die Zähringer in Baden_ (Karlsruhe, 1881);
_Baden unter den Grossherzögen Karl Friedrich, Karl Ludwig_ (Freiburg,
1863); _Geschichte der badischen Verfassung_ (Karlsruhe, 1868); and _Baden
in den Jahren 1852 bis 1877_ (Karlsruhe, 1877); C. F. Nebenius and F. von
Weech, _Karl Friedrich von Baden_ (Karlsruhe, 1868); L. H. Häusser,
_Denkwürdigkeiten sur Geschichte der badischen Revolution_ (Heidelberg,
1851); L. Müller, [v.03 p.0188] _Badische Landtagsgeschichte_ (Berlin,
1899-1902); E. von Chrismar, _Genealogie des Gesamthauses Baden vom 16.
Jahrhundert bis heute_ (Gotha, 1892); E. H. Meyer, _Badisches Volksleben im
19. Jahrhundert_ (Strassburg, 1900); F. J. Mone, _Quellensammlung zur
badischen Landesgeschichte_ (Karlsruhe, 1848-1867); _Badische Biographien_,
edited by F. von Weech (Karlsruhe, 1875-1891).

[1] Frederick assumed the title of grand-duke on the 5th of September 1856.