BAER, KARL ERNST VON (1792-1876), German biologist, was born at Piep, in
Esthonia, on the 29th of February 1792. His father, a small landowner, sent
him to school at Reval, which he left in his eighteenth year to study
medicine at Dorpat University. The lectures of K. F. Burdach (1776-1847)
suggested research in the wider field of life-history, and as at that time
Germany offered more facilities for, and greater encouragement to,
scientific work, von Baer went to Würzburg, where J. I. J. Döllinger
(1770-1841), father of the Catholic theologian, was professor of anatomy.
In teaching von Baer, Döllinger gave a direction to his studies which
secured his future pre-eminence in the science of organic development. He
collaborated with C. H. Pander (1794-1865) in researches on the evolution
of the chick, the results of which were first published in Burdach's
treatise on physiology. Continuing his investigations alone von Baer
extended them to the evolution of organisms generally, and after a sojourn
at Berlin he was invited by his old teacher Burdach, who had become
professor of anatomy at Königsberg, to join him as prosector and chief of
the new zoological museum (1817). Von Baer's great discovery of the human
ovum is the subject of his _Epistola de Ovo Mammalium et Hominis Genesi_
(Leipzig, 1827), and in the following year he published the first part of
his _History of the Evolution of Animals_ (_Ueber die
Entwickelungsgeschichte der Thiere_), the second part following in 1837. In
this work he demonstrated first, that the Graafian follicles in the ovary
are not the actual eggs, but that they contain the spherical vesicle, which
is the true ovum, a body about the one hundred and twentieth of an inch in
diameter, wherein lie the properties transmitting the physical and mental
characteristics of the parent or grandparent, or even of more remote
ancestors. He next showed that in all vertebrates the primary stage of
cleavage of the fertilized egg is followed by modification into leaf-like
germ layers--skin, muscular, vascular and mucous--whence arise the several
organs of the body by differentiation. He further discovered the
gelatinous, cylindrical cord, known as the _chorda dorsalis_, which passes
along the body of the embryo of vertebrates, in the lower types of which it
is limited to the entire inner skeleton, while in the higher the backbone
and skull are developed round it. His "law of corresponding stages" in the
development of vertebrate embryos was exemplified in the fact recorded by
him about certain specimens preserved in spirit which he had omitted to
label. "I am quite unable to say to what class they belong. They may be
lizards, or small birds, or very young mammalia, so complete is the
similarity in the mode of formation of the head and trunk in these animals.
The extremities are still absent, but even if they had existed in the
earliest stage of the development we should learn nothing, because all
arise from the same fundamental form." Again, in his _History of Evolution_
he suggests, "Are not all animals in the beginning of their development
essentially alike, and is there not a primary form common to all?" (i. p.
223). Notwithstanding this, the "telic" idea, with the archetypal theory
which it involved, possessed von Baer to the end of his life, and explains
his inability to accept the theory of unbroken descent with modification
when it was propounded by Charles Darwin and A. R. Wallace in 1858. The
influence of von Baer's discoveries has been far-reaching and abiding. Not
only was he the pioneer in that branch of biological science to which
Francis Balfour, gathering up the labours of many fellow-workers, gave
coherence in his _Comparative Embryology_ (1881), but the impetus to T. H.
Huxley's researches on the structure of the _medusae_ came from him
(_Life_, i. 163), and Herbert Spencer found in von Baer's "law of
development" the "law of all development" (_Essays_, i. 30). In 1834 von
Baer was appointed librarian of the Academy of Sciences of St Petersburg.
In 1835 he published his _Development of Fishes_, and as the result of
collection of all available information concerning the fauna and flora of
the Polar regions of the empire, he was appointed leader of an Arctic
expedition in 1837, The remainder of his active life was occupied in divers
fields of research, geological as well as biological, an outcome of the
latter being his fine monograph on the fishes of the Baltic and Caspian
Seas. One of the last works from his prolific pen was an interesting
autobiography published at the expense of the Esthonian nobles on the
celebration of the jubilee of his doctorate in 1864. Three years afterwards
he received the Copley medal. He died at Dorpat on the 28th of November
1876.

(E. CL.)