BAFFIN, WILLIAM (1584-1622), English navigator and discoverer. Nothing is
known of his early life, but it is conjectured that he was born in London
of humble origin, and gradually raised himself by his diligence and
perseverance. The earliest mention of his name occurs in 1612, in connexion
with an expedition in search of a North-West Passage, under the orders of
Captain James Hall, whom he accompanied as chief pilot. Captain Hall was
murdered in a fight with the natives on the west coast of Greenland, and
during the two following years Baffin served in the Spitsbergen
whale-fishery, at that time controlled by the Muscovy Company. In 1615 he
entered the service of the Company for the discovery of the North-West
Passage, and accompanied Captain Robert Bylot as pilot of the little ship
"Discovery," and now carefully examined Hudson Strait. The accuracy of
Baffin's tidal and astronomical observations on this voyage was confirmed
in a remarkable manner by Sir Edward Parry, when passing over the same
ground, two centuries later (1821). In the following year Baffin again
sailed as pilot of the "Discovery," and passing up Davis Strait discovered
the fine bay to the north which now bears his name, together with the
magnificent series of straits which radiate from its head and were named by
him Lancaster, Smith and Jones Sounds, in honour of the generous patrons of
his voyages. On this voyage he had sailed over 300 m. farther north than
his predecessor Davis, and for 236 years his farthest north (about lat. 77°
45') remained unsurpassed in that sea. All hopes, however, seemed now ended
of discovering a passage to India by this route, and in course of time even
Baffin's discoveries came to be doubted until they were re-discovered by
Captain Ross in 1818. Baffin next took service with the East India Company,
and in 1617-1619 performed a voyage to Surat in British India, and on his
return received the special recognition of the Company for certain valuable
surveys of the Red Sea and Persian Gulf which he had made in the course of
the voyage. Early in 1620 he again sailed to the East, and in the
Anglo-Persian attack on Kishm in the Persian Gulf, preparatory to the
reduction of Ormuz, he received his death-wound and died on the 23rd of
January 1622. Besides the importance of his geographical discoveries,
Baffin is to be remembered for the importance and accuracy of his numerous
scientific and magnetic observations, for one of which (the determination
of longitude at sea by lunar observation) the honour is claimed of being
the first of its kind on record.