BAGATELLE (French, from Ital. _bagatella_, _bagata_, a trifle), primarily a
thing of trifling importance. The name, though French, is given to a game
which is probably of English origin, though its connexion with the
_shovel-board_ of Cotton's _Complete Gamester_ is very doubtful. Strutt
does not mention it. The game is very likely a modification of billiards,
and is played on an oblong board or table varying in size from 6 ft. by 1½
ft. to 10 ft. by 3 ft. The bed of the table is generally made of slate,
although, in the smaller sizes, wood covered with green cloth is often
used. The sides are cushioned with india-rubber. The head is semicircular
and fitted with 9 numbered cups set into the bed, their numbers showing the
amount scored by putting a ball into them. An ordinary billiard-cue and
nine balls, one black, four red and four white, are used. The black ball is
placed upon a spot about 9 in. in front of hole 1, and about 18 in. from
the player's end of the board a line (the baulk) is drawn across it, behind
which is another spot for the player's ball. (These measurements of course
differ according to the size of the table.) Some modern tables have pockets
as well as cups.

_Bagatelle Proper._--The black ball having been placed on the upper spot,
the players "string" for the lead, the winner being that player who plays
his ball into the highest hole. Any number may play, either separately, or
in sides. Each player in turn plays all eight balls up the table, no score
being allowed until a ball has touched the black ball, the object being to
play as many balls as possible into the holes, the black ball counting
double. Balls missing the black at the beginning, those rolling back across
the baulk-line, and those forced off the table are "dead" for that round
and removed. The game is decided by the aggregate score made in an agreed
number of rounds.

_Sans Égal._--This is a French form of the game. Two players take part, one
using the red and one the white balls. After stringing for lead, the leader
plays at the black, forfeiting a ball if he misses. His opponent then plays
at the black if it has not been touched, otherwise any way he likes, and
each then plays alternately, the object being to hole the black and his own
balls, the winner being the one who scores the highest number of points. If
a player holes one of his opponent's balls it is scored for his opponent.
The game is decided by a certain number of rounds, or by points, usually 21
or 31. In other matters the rules of bagatelle apply.

_The Cannon Game._--This is usually considered the best and most scientific
of bagatelle varieties. Tables without cups are sometimes used. As in
billiards three balls are required, the white, spot-white and black, the
last being spotted and the non-striker's ball placed midway between holes 1
and 9. The object of the game is to make cannons (caroms), balls played
into holes, at the same time counting the number of the holes, but if a
ball falls into a hole during a play in which no cannon is made the score
counts for the adversary. If the striker's ball is holed he plays from
baulk; if an object-ball, it is spotted as at the beginning of the game. A
cannon counts 2; missing the white object-ball scores 1 to the adversary;
missing the black, 5 to the adversary. If there are pockets, the striker
scores 2 for holing the white object-ball and 3 for holing the black, but a
cannon must be made by the same stroke; otherwise the score counts for the
adversary.

_The Irish Cannon Game._--The rules of the _cannon game_ apply, except that
in all cases pocketed balls count for the adversary.

_Mississippi._--This variation is played with a bridge pierced with 9 on
more arches, according to the size of the table, the arches being numbered
from 1 upwards. All nine balls are usually played, though the black is
sometimes omitted, each player having a round, the object being to send the
balls through the arches. This may not be done directly, but the balls must
strike a cushion first, the black, if used, counting double the arch made.
If a ball is played through an arch, without first striking a cushion, the
score goes to the adversary, but another ball, lying in front of the
bridge, may be sent through by the cue-ball if the latter has struck a
cushion. If a ball falls into a cup the striker scores the value of the cup
as well as of the arch.

_Trou Madame._--This is a game similar to _Mississippi_, with the
exceptions that the ball need not be played on to a cushion, and that, if a
ball falls into a cup, the opponent scores the value of the cup and not the
striker.

_Bell-Bagatelle_ is played on a board provided with cups, arches from which
bells hang, and stalls each marked with a number. The ball is played up the
side and rolls down the board, which is slightly inclined, through the
arches or into a cup or stall, the winner scoring the highest with a
certain number of balls.