BAGDAD, or BAGHDAD, the capital of the Turkish vilayet of the same name. It
is the headquarters of the VI. Army Corps, which garrisons also the Basra
and Mosul vilayets. It lies on both sides of the river Tigris, in an
extensive desert plain which has scarcely a tree or village throughout its
whole extent, in latitude 33° 20' N., longitude 44° 24' E. At this point
the Tigris and the Euphrates approach each other most nearly, the distance
between them being little more than 25 m. At this point also the two rivers
are connected by a canal, the northernmost of a series of canals which
formerly united the two great waterways, and at the same time irrigated the
intervening plain. This canal, the Sakhlawieh (formerly Isa), leaves the
Euphrates a few miles above Feluja and the bridge of boats, near the ruins
of the ancient Anbar. As it approaches Bagdad it spreads out in a great
marsh, and finally, through the Masudi canal, which encircles western
Bagdad, enters the Tigris below the town. At the time of Chesney's survey
of the Euphrates in 1838 this canal was still navigable for craft of some
size. At present it serves no other purpose than to increase the floods
which periodically turn Bagdad into an island city, and sometimes threaten
to overwhelm the dikes which protect it and to submerge it entirely.

The original city of Bagdad was built on the western bank of the Tigris,
but this is now, and has been for centuries, little more than a suburb of
the larger and more important city on the eastern shore, the former
containing an area of only 146 acres within the walls, while the latter
extends over 591 acres. Both the eastern and the western part of the city
were formerly enclosed by brick walls, with large round towers at the
principal angles and smaller towers intervening at shorter distances, the
whole surrounded by a deep fosse. There were three gates in the [v.03
p.0195] western city and four in the eastern; one of the latter, however,
on the north side, called "Gate of the Talisman" from an Arabic inscription
bearing the date A.D. 1220, has remained closed since the capture of the
city by Murad IV. in 1638. These walls all fell into decay long since; at
places they were used as brick quarries, and finally the great reforming
governor, (1868-1872), Midhat Pasha, following the example set by many
European cities, undertook to destroy them altogether and utilize the free
space thus obtained as a public park and esplanade. His plans were only
partially carried out. At present fragments of the walls exist here and
there, with the great ditch about them, while elsewhere a line of mounds
marks their course. A great portion of the ground within the wall lines is
not occupied by buildings, especially in the north-western quarter; and
even in the more populous parts of the city, near the river, a considerable
space between the houses is occupied by gardens, where pomegranates, figs,
oranges, lemons and date-palms grow in great abundance, so that the city,
when seen at a distance, has the appearance of rising out of the midst of
trees.

Along the Tigris the city spreads out into suburbs, the most important of
which is Kazemain, on the western side of the river northward, opposite
which on the eastern side lies Muazzam. The former of these is connected
with western Bagdad by a very primitive horse-tramway, also a relic of
Midhat Pasha's reforms. The two parts of the city are joined by pontoon
bridges, one in the suburbs and one in the main city. The Tigris is at this
point some 275 yds. wide and very deep. Its banks are of mud, with no other
retaining walls than those formed by the foundations of the houses, which
are consequently always liable to be undermined by the action of the water.
The western part of the city, which is very irregular in shape, is occupied
entirely by Shi`as. It has its own shops, bazaars, mosques, &c., and
constitutes a quarter by itself. Beyond the wall line on that side vestiges
of ancient buildings are visible in various directions, and the plain is
strewn with fragments of bricks, tiles and rubbish. A burying-ground has
also extended itself over a large tract of land, formerly occupied by the
streets of the city. The form of the new or eastern city is that of an
irregular oblong, about 1500 paces in length by 800 in breadth. The town
has been built without the slightest regard to regularity; the streets are
even more intricate and winding than those in most other Eastern towns, and
with the exception of the bazaars and some open squares, the interior is
little else than a labyrinth of alleys and passages. The streets are
unpaved and in many places so narrow that two horsemen can scarcely pass
each other; as it is seldom that the houses have windows facing the
thoroughfares, and the doors are small and mean, they present on both sides
the gloomy appearance of dead walls. All the buildings, both public and
private, are constructed of furnace-burnt bricks of a yellowish-red colour,
principally derived from the ruins of other places, chiefly Madain
(Ctesiphon), Wasit and Babylon, which have been plundered at various times
to furnish materials for the construction of Bagdad.

The houses of the richer classes are regularly built about an interior
court. The ground floor, except for the _serdab_, is given up to kitchens,
store-rooms, servants' quarters, stables, &c. The principal rooms are on
the first floor and open directly from a covered veranda, which is reached
by an open staircase from the court. These constitute the winter residence
of the family, reception rooms, &c. The roofs of the houses are all flat,
surrounded by parapets of sufficient height to protect them from the
observation of the dwellers opposite, and separate them from their
neighbours. In the summer the population sleeps and dines upon the roofs,
which thus constitute to all intents a third storey. The remainder of the
day, so far as family life is concerned, is spent in the _serdab_, a cellar
sunk somewhat below the level of the courtyard, damp from frequent
wettings, with its half windows covered with hurdles thatched with camel
thorn and kept dripping with water. Occasionally the _serdabs_ are provided
with punkahs.

Sometimes, in the months of June, July and August, when the _sherki_ or
south wind is blowing, the thermometer at break of day is known to stand at
112° F., while at noon it rises to 119° and a little before two o'clock to
122°, standing at sunset at 114°, but this scale of temperature is
exceptional. Ordinarily during the summer months the thermometer averages
from about 75° at sunrise to 107° at the hottest time of the day. Owing to
the extreme dryness of the atmosphere and the fact that there is always a
breeze, usually from the N.W., this heat is felt much less than a greatly
lower temperature in a more humid atmosphere. Moreover, the nights are
almost invariably cool.

Formerly Bagdad was intersected by innumerable canals and aqueducts which
carried the water of both the Euphrates and the Tigris through the streets
and into the houses. To-day these have all vanished, with the exception of
one aqueduct which still conveys the water of the Tigris to the shrine of
Abd al-Qadir (ul-Kadir). The present population draws its water directly
from the Tigris, and it is distributed through the city in goat-skins
carried on the backs of men and asses. There is, of course, no sewerage
system, the surfaces of the streets serving that purpose, and what garbage
and refuse is not consumed by the dog scavengers washes down into the
Tigris at the same place from which the water for drinking is drawn. As a
consequence of these insanitary conditions the death-rate is very high, and
in case of epidemics the mortality is enormous. At such times a large part
of the population leaves the city and encamps in the desert northward.

The principal public buildings of the city, such as they are, lie in the
eastern section along the river bank. To the north, just within the old
wall line, stands the citadel, surrounded by a high wall, with a lofty
clock-tower which commands an excellent view. To the south of this, also on
the Tigris, is the _serai_ or palace of the Turkish governor, distinguished
rather for extent than grandeur. It is comparatively modern, built at
different periods, a large and confused structure without proportion,
beauty or strength. Somewhat farther southward, just below the pontoon
bridge, stands the custom house, which occupies the site and is built out
of the material of the medreseh or college of Mostansir (A.D. 1233). Of the
original building of the caliph Mostansir all that remains is a minaret and
a small portion of the outer walls. Farther down are the imposing buildings
of the British residency. The German consulate also is on the river-front.
As in all Mahommedan cities, the mosques are conspicuous objects. Of these
very few are old. The Marjanieh mosque, not far from the minaret of
Mostansir, although its body is modern, has some remains of old and very
rich arabesque work on its surface, dating from the 14th century. The door
is formed by a lofty arch of the pointed form guarded on both sides with
red bands exquisitely sculptured and having numerous inscriptions. The
mosque of Khaseki, supposed to have been an old Christian church, is
chiefly distinguished for its prayer niche, which, instead of being a
simple recess, is crowned by a Roman arch, with square pedestals, spirally
fluted shafts and a rich capital of flowers, with a fine fan or shell-top
in the Roman style. The building in its present form bears the date of A.D.
1682, but the sculptures which it contains belong probably to the time of
the caliphate. The minaret of Suk el-Ghazl, in the south-eastern part of
the city, dates from the 13th century. The other mosques, of which there
are about thirty within the walls, excluding the chapels and places of
prayer, are all of recent erection. Most of them are surmounted by
bright-coloured cupolas and minarets. The Mosque of the Vizier, on the
eastern side of the Tigris, near the pontoon bridge, has a fine dome and a
lofty minaret, and the Great Mosque in the square of el Meidan, in the
neighbourhood of the _serai_, is also a noble building.

The other mosques do not merit any particular attention, and in general it
may be said that Bagdad architecture is neither distinctive nor imposing.
Such attractions as the buildings possess are due rather to the richly
coloured tiles with which many of them are adorned, or to inscriptions,
like the Kufic inscription, dated A.D. 944, on the ruined _tekke_ of the
Bektash dervishes in western Bagdad. More important than the mosques [v.03
p.0196] proper are the tomb mosques. Of these, the most important and most
imposing is that of Kazemain, in the northern suburb of the western city.
Here are buried the seventh and ninth of the successors of Ali, recognized
by Shi`as, namely Musa Ibn Ja`far el-Kazim, and his grandson, Mahommed Ibn
Ali el-Jawad. In its present form this mosque dates from the 19th century.
The two great domes above the tombs, the four lofty minarets and part of
the facade of this shrine, are overlaid with gold, and from whatever
direction the traveler approaches Bagdad, its glittering domes and minarets
are the first objects which meet his eye. It is one of the four great
shrines of the Shi`ite Moslems in the vilayet of Bagdad. Christians are not
allowed to enter its precincts, and the population of the Kazemain quarter
is so fanatical that it is difficult and even dangerous to approach it.

In the suburb of Muazzam, on the western side of the river, is the tomb of
Ab[=u] [H.]anifa (_q.v._), the canon lawyer. There is a large mosque with a
painted dome connected with this tomb, which is an object of veneration to
the Sunni Moslems, but it seems cheap and unworthy in comparison with the
magnificent shrine of Kazemain. On the same side of the river, lower down,
is the shrine of Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani (of Jilan), founder of the
Q[=a]dirite (Kadaria) sect of dervishes, also a noted place of pilgrimage.
The original tomb was erected about A.D. 1253, but the present fine dome
above the grave is later by at least two or three centuries. The possessor
or controller of this wealthy mosque is the _nakib_, locally pronounced
_najeeb_, or marshal of the nobles, whose office is to determine who are
Se`ids, _i.e._ entitled to wear the green turban. He is second only to the
governor or vali pasha in power, and indeed his influence is often greater
than that of the official ruler of the vilayet. Just outside of the wall of
the western city lies the tomb and shrine of Ma`ruf Karkhi, dating from
A.D. 1215, which also is a place of pilgrimage. Close to this stands the
so-called tomb of Sitte Zobeide (Zobaida), with its octagonal base and
pineapple dome, one of the most conspicuous and curious objects in the
neighbourhood of Bagdad. Unfortunately it is rapidly falling into decay. K.
Niebuhr reports that in his day (A.D. 1750) this tomb bore an inscription
setting forth that Ayesha Khanum, the wife of the governor of Bagdad, was
buried here in 1488, her grave having been made in the ancient sepulchre of
the lady Zobeide (Zobaida), granddaughter of Caliph Mansur and wife of
Harun al-Rashid, who died in A.D. 831. The tomb was restored at the time of
her burial, at which date it was already ancient, and it was evidently
believed to be the tomb of Zobeide. Contemporary historians, however, state
that Zobeide was actually buried in Kazemain, and moreover, early writers,
who describe the neighbouring tomb and shrine of Ma`ruf Karkhi, make no
reference to this monument.

About 3 m. west of Bagdad, on the Euphrates road, in or by a grove of
trees, stands the shrine and tomb of Nabi Yusha or Kohen Yusha, a place of
monthly pilgrimage to the Jews, who believe it to be the place of sepulture
of Joshua, son of Josedech, the high priest at the close of the exilian
period. This is one of four similar Jewish shrines in Irak; the others
being the tomb of Ezra on the Shatt el-Arab near Korna, the tomb of Ezekiel
in the village of Kefil near Kufa, and the well of Daniel near Hillah. This
shrine is also venerated by Moslems, who call it the tomb of Yusuf
(Joseph). The Jews bury here their chief priests, a right the Moslems at
times contest, and in 1889 a serious conflict between Jews and Moslems
resulted from an attempt of the former to exercise this right.

There are said to be about thirty _khans_ or caravanserais in Bagdad for
the reception of pilgrims and merchants and their goods, none of which is
of any importance as a building, with the single exception of the khan
el-Aurtmeh adjoining the Marjanieh mosque, to which it formerly belonged.
This dates from A.D. 1356, and is said to occupy the site of an ancient
Christian church. Its vaulted roof is a fine specimen of Saracenic
brickwork. In recent years the demands of modern travel have led to the
establishment of a hotel, which affords comfortable accommodation according
to European methods. There is also an English club-house. There are said to
be about fifty baths in Bagdad, but in general they are inferior in
construction and accommodation. The bazaars of Bagdad are extensive and
well stocked, and while not so fine in construction as those of some other
Eastern cities, they are more interesting in their contents and industries,
because Bagdad has on the whole been less affected by foreign innovations.
Several of the bazaars are vaulted over with brickwork, but the greater
number are merely covered with flat beams which support roofs of dried
leaves or branches of trees and grass. The streets of the entire business
section of the city are roofed over in this manner, and in the summer
months the shelter from the sun is very grateful, but in the winter these
streets are extremely trying to the foreign visitor, owing to their
darkness and their damp and chilly atmosphere.

Bagdad is about 500 m. from the Persian Gulf, following the course of the
river. It maintains steam communication with Basra, its port, which is
situated on the Shatt el-Arab, somewhat more than 50 m. from the Persian
Gulf, by means of two lines of steamers, one English and one Turkish.
British steamers were first placed upon the Tigris as a result of the
expedition of Colonel F. R. Chesney, in 1836. Since that time, a British
gunboat has been stationed before the residency, and British steamers have
been allowed to navigate the river. Only two of these, however, maintain a
weekly connexion with Basra, and they are quite inadequate to the freight
traffic between the two cities. The more numerous vessels of the Turkish
service are so small, so inadequately equipped and so poorly handled, that
they are used for either passenger or freight transport only by those who
cannot secure the services of the British steamers. The navigation of the
Tigris during the greater party of its course from Bagdad to Korna is slow
and uncertain. The river, running through an absolutely flat country,
composed entirely of alluvial soil, is apt to change its channel. In flood
time the country at places becomes a huge lake, through which it is
extremely difficult to find the channel. In the dry season, the autumn and
winter, on the other hand, there is danger of grounding on the constantly
shifting flats and shoals. To add to the uncertainties of navigation, the
inhabitants along the eastern bank of the stream frequently dig new canals
for irrigation purposes, which both reduces the water of the river and
tends to make it shift its channel. Above Bagdad there are no steamers on
the Tigris, but sailing vessels of 30 tons and more navigate the river to
Samarra and beyond. The characteristic craft for local service in the
immediate environment of Bagdad is the _kufa_, a circular boat of
basket-work covered with bitumen, often of a size sufficient to carry five
or six horses and a dozen men. These boats have been employed from the
remotest antiquity through all this region, and are often depicted on the
old Assyrian monuments. Equally ancient are the rafts called _kellek_,
constructed of inflated goat-skins, covered with a framework of wood, often
supporting a small house for passengers, which descend the Tigris from
above Diarbekr. The wood of these rafts is sold in Bagdad, and constitutes,
in fact, the chief supply of wood in that city.

Bagdad also lies on a natural line of communication between Persia and the
west, the ancient caravan route from Khorasan debouching from the mountains
at this point, while another natural caravan route led up the Euphrates to
Syria and the Mediterranean and still another up the Tigris to Armenia and
the Black Sea. It was its situation at the centre of the lines of
communication between India and Persia and the west, both by land and
water, which gave the city its great importance in early times. With the
change of the methods of transportation its importance has naturally
declined. The trade of Persia with the west now passes either through the
ports of the Persian Gulf or northward over Trebizond, while India
communicates with the west directly through the Suez Canal. Bagdad is,
therefore, a decayed city. Money is scarce among all classes, and the wages
of common labourers are scarcely half what is paid in Syria. It is still,
however, the centre of distribution for a very large, if scantily
populated, country, and it also derives much profit from pilgrims, lying as
it does on the route which Shi`ite [v.03 p.0197] pilgrims from Persia must
take on their way to the sacred cities. It also possesses important shrines
of its own which cause many pilgrims to linger there, and wealthy Indians
not infrequently choose Bagdad as a suitable spot in which to end their
days in the odour of sanctity. There has also sprung up of late years
considerable direct trade between the European and American markets and
Bagdad, and several foreign houses, especially English, have established
themselves there. Germany also has invaded this market.

The staple articles of export are hides, wool and dates. The export trade
of Bagdad amounts to about £750,000 annually, and the import trade to about
£2,000,000. The imports consist of oil, cheap cottons, shoes and other
similar goods, which are taking the place of the picturesque native
manufactures. Even the Bedouin Arabs wear headdresses of cheap European
cotton stuff purchased in Bagdad or thereabouts, while the common water
vessels throughout the country are five-gallon petroleum tins, which also
furnish metal for the manufacture of various utensils in the native
bazaars.

Bagdad is in communication with Europe by means of two lines of telegraph,
one British and one Turkish, and two postal services. There is a British
consul-general, who is also political agent to the Indian government. His
state is second only to that of the British ambassador at Constantinople.
Besides the gunboat in the river, he has a guard of sepoys, and there is an
Indian post-office in the residency. Formerly the British government
maintained a camel-post across the desert to Damascus. This was abandoned
about 1880 when the Turks established a similar service. By means of the
Turkish camel-post letters reached Damascus in nine days. There is also a
Russian consul-general at Bagdad, and French, Austrian and American
consuls.

The Euphrates Valley (or Bagdad) railway scheme, which had previously been
discussed, was brought forward prominently in 1899, and Russian proposals
to undertake it were rejected. British proposals followed, but were opposed
by the Germans, who, as controlling the line to Konia in Asia Minor,
claimed preference in the matter. A provisional convention was granted to a
German company by the Porte, and an iradé was obtained in 1902. In 1903
there was considerable discussion as to the placing of the line under
international control, and the question aroused special interest in England
in view of the short route which the line would provide to India, in
connexion with fast steamship services in the Mediterranean and the Persian
Gulf. It was decided by the British government that the proposals made to
this effect did not offer sufficient security. The financial arrangement as
finally agreed upon was that German financiers should control 40% of the
capital of the line; French (through the Imperial Ottoman Bank), 30%;
Austrian, Swiss, Italian and Turkish, 20%; and the Anatolian Railway
Company, 10%. In 1904 the line was completed from Konia through Eregli to
Bulgurli. In 1908 an iradé sanctioned the extension across the Taurus to
Adana, and so to Helif near Mardin (522 m.).

The population of Bagdad is estimated variously from 70,000 to 200,000;
perhaps halfway between may represent approximately the reality. More than
two-thirds of the population are Moslems, mostly Shi`as, with the exception
of the official classes. There are about 34,000 Jews occupying a quarter of
their own in the north-western part of the city; while in a neighbouring
quarter dwell upwards of 6000 Christians, chiefly so-called Chaldaeans or
Nestorians. The Carmelites maintain a mission in Bagdad, as does also the
(English) Church Missionary Society. The Jews are the only part of the
population who are provided with schools. A school for boys was established
by the _Alliance Israélite_ in 1865, and one for girls in 1899. Besides
these, there is also an apprentice school for industrial training.

The Jews constitute the wealthiest and most intelligent portion of the
population. A large part of the foreign trade is in their hands, and at the
season of the sheep-shearing their agents and representatives are found
everywhere among the Bedouins and _Madan_ Arabs of the interior, purchasing
the wool and selling various commodities in return. They are the bankers of
the country, and it is through their communications that the traveller is
able to obtain credit. They are also the dealers in antiquities, both
genuine and fraudulent. Next to them in enterprise and prosperity are the
Persians. The porters of the town are all Kurds, the river-men Chaldaean
Christians. Every nation retains its peculiar dress. The characteristic,
but by no means attractive, street dress of the Moslem women of the better
class comprises a black horse-hair visor completely covering the face and
projecting like an enormous beak, the nether extremities being encased in
yellow boots reaching to the knee and fully displayed by the method of
draping the garments in front.

Bagdad is governed by a pasha, assisted by a council. The pasha and the
higher officials in general come from Constantinople, but a very large
portion of the other Turkish officials seem to come from the town of
Kerkuk. They constitute a class quite distinct from the native Arab
population, and they and the Turkish government in general are intensely
unpopular among the Arabs, an unpopularity increased by their religious
differences, the Arabs being as a rule Shi`ites, the Turks Sunnites.
Besides the court of superior officers, which assists the pasha in the
general administration of the province, there is also a _mejlis_ or mixed
tribunal for the settlement of municipal and commercial affairs, to which
both Christian and Jewish merchants are admitted. Besides these, there are
the religious heads of the community, especially the _nakib_ and Jewish
high priest, who possess an undefined and extensive authority in their own
communities. The Jewish chief priest may be said to be the successor of the
_exilarch_ or _resh galutha_ of the earlier period.

_History._--There are in or near Bagdad a few remains of a period
antedating Islam, the most conspicuous of which are the ruins of the palace
of Chosroes at Ctesiphon or Madain, about 15 m. below Bagdad on the east
side of the river. Almost equally conspicuous, and a landmark through the
whole region, is the ruin called Akerkuf, in the desert, about 9 m.
westward of Bagdad. This consists of a huge tower of unburned brick resting
on a small hill of debris, the whole rising to a height of 100 ft. or more
above the plain, in the centre of a network of ancient canals. Inscribed
bricks found in the neighbourhood seem to connect this ruin with Kurigalzu,
king of Babylon about 1300 B.C. Under substantially its present name,
Akukafa, it is mentioned as a place of importance in connexion with the
canals as late as the Abbasid caliphate. Within the limits of the city
itself, on the west bank of the Tigris, are the remains of a quay, first
observed by Sir Henry Rawlinson, at a period of low water, in 1849, built
of bricks laid in bitumen, and bearing an inscription of Nebuchadrezzar,
king of Babylon. _Baghdadu_ was an ancient Babylonian city, dating back
perhaps as far as 2000 B.C., the name occurring in lists in the library of
Assur-bani-pal. It is also mentioned on the Michaux stone, found on the
Tigris near the site of the present city, and dating from the time of
Tiglath-Pileser I. (1100 B.C.) The quay of Nebuchadrezzar, mentioned above,
establishes the fact that this ancient city of Baghdadu was located on the
site of western or old Bagdad (see further under CALIPHATE: _Abbasids_,
sections 2 foll.). References in the Jewish _Talmud_ show that this city
still continued to exist at and after the commencement of our era; but
according to Arabian writers, at the time when the Arab city of Bagdad was
founded by the caliph Mansur, there was nothing on that site except an old
convent. One may venture to doubt the literal accuracy of this statement.
It is clear that the ancient name, at least, still held firm possession of
the site and was hence inherited by the new city.

The Arab city, the old or round city of Bagdad, was founded by the caliph
Mansur of the Abbasid dynasty on the west side of the Tigris just north of
the Isa canal in A.D. 762. It was a mile in diameter, built in concentric
circles, with the mosque and palace of the caliph in the centre, and had
four gates toward the four points of the compass. It grew with great
rapidity. The suburb of Rusafa, on the eastern bank, sprang up almost
immediately, and after the siege and capture of the round city by Mamun, in
814, this became the most important part of the capital. The period of the
greatest prosperity of Bagdad was the period from its foundation until the
death of Mamun, the [v.03 p.0198] successor of Harun, in 833. During this
period the city, including both sides of the river, was 5 m. across within
the walls, and it is said to have had a population of 2,000,000 souls. In
literature, art and science, it divided the supremacy of the world with
Cordova; in commerce and wealth it far surpassed that city. How its
splendour impressed the imagination may be seen from the stories of the
_Arabian Nights_. It was the religious capital of all Islam, and the
political capital of the greater part of it, at a time when Islam bore the
same relation to civilization which Christendom does to-day. As in Spanish
Islam, so in the lands of the eastern caliphate, the Jews were treated
relatively with favour. The seat of the _exilarch_ or _resh galutha_ was
transferred from Pumbedita (Pumbeditha or Pombeditha) in Babylonia to
Bagdad, which thus became the capital of oriental Judaism; from then to the
present day the Jews have played no mean part in Bagdad.

Situated in a region where there is no stone, and practically no timber,
Bagdad was built, like all the cities of the Babylonian plain, of brick and
tiles. Its buildings depended for their effect principally on mass and
gorgeous colouring. Like old Babylon, also, Bagdad was celebrated
throughout the world for its brilliant-coloured textile fabrics. So famous
was the silk of Bagdad, manufactured in the Attabieh quarter (named after
Attab, a contemporary of the Prophet), that the place-name passed over into
Spanish, Italian, French and finally into English in the form of "tabby,"
as the designation of a rich-coloured watered silk. Depending on coloured
tiles and gorgeous fabrics for their rich effects, nothing of the buildings
of the times of Harun al-Rashid or Mamun, once counted so magnificent, have
come down to us. All have perished in the numerous sieges and inundations
which have devastated the city.

With the rise of the Turkish body-guard under Mamun's successor, Mo`tassim,
began the downfall of the Abbasid dynasty, and with it of the Abbasid
capital, Bagdad. Mo`tassim founded Samarra, and for fifty-eight years
caliph and court deserted Bagdad (see CALIPHATE, sect. C). Then, in A.D.
865, Mosta`in, attempting to escape from the tyranny of the Turkish guard,
fled back again to Bagdad. The attempt was futile, Bagdad was besieged and
taken, and from that time until their final downfall the Abbasid caliphs
were mere puppets, while the real rulers were successively the Turkish
guard, the Buyids and the Seljuks. But during all this period the caliphs
continued to be the religious heads of Islam and their residence its
capital. Bagdad, accordingly, although fallen from its first eminence,
continued to be a city of the first rank, and during most of that period
still the richest and most splendid city in the world. Its religious
importance is attested by the number of its great shrines dating from those
times; as for its wealth and size, while, as stated above, few remains of
the actual buildings of that period survive, we still have abundant records
describing their character, their size and their position. With the last
century of the caliphates began a more rapid decline. From the records of
that period it seems that the present city is identical in the position of
its walls and the space occupied by the town proper with Bagdad at the
close of the 12th century, the period when this rapid decline had already
advanced so far that the western city is described by travellers as almost
in ruins, and the eastern half as containing large uninhabited spaces. With
the capture of the city by the Mongols, under Hulagu (Hulaku), the grandson
of Jenghiz Khan, in 1258, and the extinction of the Abbasid caliphate of
Bagdad, its importance as the religious centre of Islam passed away, and it
ceased to be a city of the first rank, although the glamour of its former
grandeur still clung to it, so that even to-day in Turkish official
documents it is called the "glorious city."

The Tatars retained possession of Bagdad for a century and a half, until
about A.D. 1400. Then it was taken by Timur, from whom the sultan Ahmed Ben
Avis fled, and, finding refuge with the Greek emperor, contrived later to
repossess himself of the city, whence he was finally expelled by Kara Yusuf
of the Kara-Kuyunli ("Black Sheep") Mongols in 1417. About 1468 the
descendants of the latter were driven out by Uzun Hasan or Cassim of the
Ak-Kuyunli ("White Sheep") Mongols. He and his descendants reigned in
Bagdad until Shah Ismail I., the founder of the Safawid royal house of
Persia, made himself master of the place (_c._ 1502 or 1508). From that
time it continued for a long period an object of contention between the
Turks and the Persians. It was taken by Suleiman I. the Magnificent and
retaken by Shah Abbas the Great, in 1620. Eighteen years later, in 1638, it
was besieged by Sultan Murad IV., with an army of 300,000 men and, after an
obstinate resistance, forced to surrender, when, in defiance of the terms
of capitulation, most of the inhabitants were massacred.

Since that period it has remained nominally a part of the Turkish empire;
but with the decline of Turkish power, and the general disintegration of
the empire, in the first half of the 18th century, a then governor-general,
Ahmed Pasha, made it an independent pashalic. Nadir Shah, the able and
energetic usurper of the Persian throne, attempting to annex the province
once more to Persia, besieged the city, but Ahmed defended it with such
courage that the invader was compelled to raise the siege, after suffering
great loss. Turkish authority over the pashalic was again restored in the
first part of the 19th century.

AUTHORITIES.--Allen's _Indian Mail_ (1874); J. S. Buckingham _Travels in
Mesopotamia_ (1827); Sir R. K. Porter, _Travels in Georgia, Persia, Armenia
and Ancient Babylonia_ (1821-1822); J. M. Kinneir, _Geographical Memoir of
the Persian Empire_ (1813); F. R. Chesney, _Expedition_ (1850); J. B. L. J.
Rousseau, _Description du pachalik de Bagdad_ (1809); J. R. Wellsted, _City
of the Caliphs_; A. N. Groves, _Residence in Baghdad_ (1830-1832);
_Transactions of Bombay Geog. Soc._ (1856); G. le Strange, _Description of
Mesopotamia and Baghdad about A.D. 900_; "Greek Embassy to Baghdad in A.D.
917," in _Journal Royal Asiatic Society_, 1895, 1897; _Baghdad under the
Abbasid Caliphate_ (1901).

(H. C. R.; J. P. PE.)