BAGEHOT, WALTER (1826-1877), English publicist and economist, editor of the
_Economist_ newspaper from 1860 to his death, was born at Langport,
Somerset, on the 3rd of February 1826, his father being a banker at that
place. Bagehot was altogether a remarkable personality, his writings on
different subjects exhibiting the same bent of mind and
characteristics,--philosophic reflectiveness, practical common-sense, a
bright and buoyant humour, brilliant wit and always a calm and tolerant
judgment of men and things. Though he belonged to the Liberal party in
politics he was essentially of conservative disposition, and often spoke
with sarcastic boastfulness to his Liberal friends of the stupidity and
tenacity of the English mind in adhering to old ways, as displayed in city
and country alike. His life was comparatively uneventful, as he early gave
up to literature the energies which might have gained him a large fortune
in business or a great position in the political world. He took his degree
at the London University in 1848, and was called to the bar in 1852, but
from an early date he joined his father in the banking business of Stuckey
& Co. in the west of England, and during a great part of his life, while he
was editor of the _Economist_, he managed the London agency of the bank,
lending its surplus money in "Lombard Street," and otherwise attending to
its London affairs. He became also an underwriter at Lloyd's, taking no
part, however, in the active detailed business, which was done for him by
proxy.

Bagehot's connexion with the _Economist_ began in 1858, about which time he
married a daughter of the first editor, the Right Hon. James Wilson, at
that time secretary of the treasury, and afterwards secretary of finance in
India. Partly through this [v.03 p.0199] connexion he was brought into the
inside of the political life of the time. He was an intimate friend of Sir
George Cornewall Lewis, and was afterwards in constant communication with
many of the political chiefs, especially with Gladstone, Robert Lowe and
Grant Duff, and with the permanent heads of the great departments of state.
In the city in the same way he was intimate with the governor and directors
of the Bank of England, and with leading magnates in the banking and
commercial world; while his connexion with the Political Economy Club
brought him into contact in another way with both city and politics. His
active life in business and politics, however, was not of so absorbing a
kind as to prevent his real devotion to literature, but the literature
largely grew out of his activities, and of no one can it be said more truly
than of Bagehot that the atmosphere in which he lived gave tone and colour
and direction to his studies, one thing of course acting and reacting on
another. The special note of his books, apart from his remarkable gift of
conversational epigrammatic style, which gives a peculiar zest to the
writing, is the quality of scientific dispassionate description of matters
which were hardly thought of previously as subjects of scientific study.
This is specially the case with the two books which perhaps brought him the
most reputation, _The English Constitution_ (1867) and _Lombard Street_
(1873). They are both books of observation and description. The English
constitution is described, not from law books and as a lawyer would
describe it, but from the actual working, as Bagehot himself had witnessed
it, in his contact with ministers and the heads of government departments,
and with the life of the society in which the politicians moved. The true
springs and method of action are consequently described with a vivid
freshness which gives the book a wonderful charm, and makes it really a new
departure in the study of politics. It is the same with _Lombard Street_.
The money market is there pictured as it really was in 1850-1870, and as
Bagehot saw it with philosophic eyes. Beginning with the sentence, "The
objects which you see in Lombard Street are the Bank of England, the joint
stock banks, the private banks and the discount houses," he describes
briefly and clearly the respective functions of these different bodies in
the organism of the city, according to his own close observation as a
banker himself, knowing the ways and thoughts of the men he describes, and
as a man of business likewise in other ways, knowing at first hand the
relation of banking to the trade and commerce of the country. _Lombard
Street_ is perhaps a riper work than _The English Constitution_, as its
foundation was really laid in 1858 in a series of articles which Bagehot
then wrote in the _Economist_, though it was not published till the early
'seventies, after it had been twice rewritten and revised with infinite
labour and care. _Lombard Street_, like _The English Constitution_ in
political studies, is thus a new departure in economic and financial
studies, applying the same sort of keen observation which Adam Smith used
in the analysis of business generally to the special business of banking
and finance in the complex modern world. It is, perhaps, not going too far
to say that the whole theory of a one-reserve system of banking and how to
work it, and of the practical means of fixing an "apprehension minimum"
below which the reserve should not fall, originated in _Lombard Street_ and
the articles which were the foundation of it; and the subsequent conduct of
banking in England and throughout the world has been infinitely better and
safer in consequence. A like note is also struck in _Physics and Politics_
(1869), which is a description of the evolution of communities of men. The
materials here are derived mainly from books, the surface to be observed
being so extensive, but the attitude is precisely the same, that of a
scientific observer. To a certain extent the _Physics and Politics_ had
even a more remarkable influence on opinion, at least on foreign opinion,
than _The English Constitution_ or _Lombard Street_. It "caught on" as a
development of the theory of evolution in a new direction, and Darwin
himself was greatly interested, while one of the pleasures of Bagehot's
later years was to receive a translation of the book into the Russian
language. In _Literary Studies_ (1879) and _Economic Studies_ (1880),
published after his death, there is more scope than in the books already
mentioned for other characteristics besides those of the scientific
observer, but observation always comes to the front, as in the account of
Ricardo, whom Bagehot describes as often, when he is most theoretical,
really describing what a first-rate man of business would do and think in
actual transactions. The observation, of course, is that of a type of
business man in the city to which Ricardo as well as Bagehot belonged,
though Ricardo could hardly look at it from the outside as Bagehot was able
to do.

Bagehot had great city, political and literary influence, to which all his
activities contributed, and much of his influence was lasting. In politics
and economics especially his habit of scientific observation affected the
tone of discussion, and both the English constitution and the money market
have been better understood generally because he wrote and talked and
diffused his ideas in every possible way. He was unsuccessful in two or
three attempts to enter parliament, but he had the influence of far more
than an ordinary member, as director of the _Economist_ and as the adviser
behind the scenes of the ministers and permanent heads of departments who
consulted him. His death, on the 24th of March 1877, occurred at Langport
very suddenly, when he was in the fullest mental vigour and might have
looked forward to the accomplishment of much additional work and the
exercise of even wider influence.

It is impossible to give a full idea of the brightness and life of
Bagehot's conversation, although the conversational style of his writing
may help those who did not know him personally to understand it. With
winged words he would transfix a fallacy or stamp a true idea so that it
could not be forgotten. He was certainly greater than his books and always
full of ideas. The present writer recalls two notions he had, not for
writing new books himself, but as something that might be done. One was
that there might be a history of recent politics with new lights if some
one were to do it who knew the family connexions and history of English
politicians. This was _apropos_ of the passage of a certain bill through
parliament, when the head of the department in the House of Commons failed
and the management of the measure was taken by the chancellor of the
exchequer himself, a relative of the permanent head of the department
concerned, who was thus able to carry his own ideas in legislation
notwithstanding the failure of his political chief. Another book he wished
to see written was an account of the differences in the administrative
systems of England and Scotland, by which he had been greatly impressed,
the differences not being in detail, but in fundamental idea and in form,
so that no judicial or other officers in the one were represented in the
other by corresponding functionaries. Many other illustrations might be
given of his fulness of ideas which helped to make him an ideal editor.
Reference must also be made to the assistance which Bagehot gave as a
journalist to the study of statistics. From the manipulation of figures he
was most averse, and he rather boasted that he was unable to add up. But he
was a most excellent mathematician, and no one could be so careful as he
was about the logic of the figures got together for his articles, which he
always most carefully scrutinized. He would frequently point out that his
figures were illustrative merely, and did not by themselves establish an
argument. He was always anxious, again, to impress on those about him that
a subject could not be studied with the help of figures and accounts alone.
Whether it was insurance, or banking, or underwriting, or shipowning, he
insisted that some one who knew the business should see the writing before
it was published. Knowing so many departments of business from actual
experience, he was a host in himself as referee, but when in doubt he would
always consult some one who knew the facts; and he used his great influence
so well that in subsequent years it inspired indirectly not a few who were
hardly aware of his claims to be a statistician at all.

(R. GN.)