BAGGESEN, JENS IMMANUEL (1764-1826), Danish poet, was born on the 15th of
February 1764 at Korsör. His parents were very poor, and before he was
twelve he was sent to copy documents at the office of the clerk of the
district. He was a melancholy, feeble child, and before this he had
attempted suicide more than once. By dint of indomitable perseverance, he
managed to gain an education, and in 1782 entered the university of
Copenhagen. His success as a writer was coeval with his earliest
publication; his _Comical Tales_ in verse, poems that recall the _Broad
Grins_ that Colman the younger brought out a decade later, took the town by
storm, and the struggling young poet found himself a popular favourite at
twenty-one. He then tried serious lyrical writing, and his tact, elegance
of manner and versatility, gained him a place in the best society. This
sudden success received a blow in 1789, when a very poor opera, _Holge
Danske_, which he had produced, was received with mockery and a reaction
against him set in. He left Denmark in a rage and spent the next years in
Germany, France and Switzerland. He married at Berne in 1790, began to
write in German and published in that language his next poem, _Alpenlied_.
In the winter of the same year he returned to his mother-country, bringing
with him as a peace-offering his fine descriptive poem, the _Labyrinth_, in
Danish, and was received with unbounded homage. The next twenty years were
spent in incessant restless wanderings over the north of Europe, Paris
latterly becoming his nominal home. He continued to publish volumes
alternately in Danish and German. Of the latter the most important was the
idyllic epos in hexameters called _Parthenais_ (1803). In 1806 he returned
to Copenhagen to find the young Öhlenschläger installed as the great poet
of the day, and he himself beginning to lose his previously unbounded
popularity. Until 1820 he resided in Copenhagen, in almost unceasing
literary feud with some one or other, abusing and being abused, the most
important feature of the whole being Baggesen's determination not to allow
Öhlenschläger to be considered a greater poet than himself. He then left
Denmark for the last time and went back to his beloved Paris, where he lost
his second wife and youngest child in 1822, and after the miseries of an
imprisonment for debt, fell at last into a state of hopeless melancholy
madness. In 1826, having slightly recovered, he wished to see Denmark once
more, but died in the freemasons' hospital at Hamburg on his way, on the
3rd of October, and was buried at Kiel. His many-sided talents achieved
success in all forms of writing, but his domestic, philosophical and
critical works have long ceased to occupy attention. A little more power of
restraining his egotism and passion would have made him one of the wittiest
and keenest of modern satirists, and his comic poems are deathless. The
Danish literature owes Baggesen a great debt for the firmness, polish and
form which he introduced into it--his style being always finished and
elegant. With all his faults he stands as the greatest figure between
Holberg and Öhlenschläger. Of all his poems, however, the loveliest and
best is a little simple song, _There was a time when I was very little_,
which every Dane, high or low, knows by heart, and which is matchless in
its simplicity and pathos. It has outlived all his epics.

(E. G.)

[Illustration]