BAGNÈRES-DE-BIGORRE, a town of south-western France, capital of an
arrondissement in the department of Hautes-Pyrénées, 13 m. S.S.E. of Tarbes
on a branch line of the Southern railway. Pop. (1906) 6661. It is
beautifully situated on the left bank of the Adour, at the northern end of
the valley of Campan, and the vicinity abounds in picturesque mountain
scenery. The town is remarkably neat and clean and many of the houses are
built or ornamented with marble. It is one of the principal watering-places
in France, and has some fifty mineral springs, characterized chiefly by the
presence of sulphate of lime or iron. Their temperature ranges
approximately from 59° to 122° Fahr., and they are efficacious in cases of
rheumatism, nervous affections, indigestion and other maladies. The season
begins in May and terminates about the end of October, during which time
the population is more than doubled. The Promenade des Coustous is the
centre of the life of Bagnères. Close by stands the church of St Vincent of
the 14th and 15th centuries. The old quarter of the town, in which there
are several old houses, contains a graceful octagonal tower of the 15th
century, the remains of a Jacobin monastery. The Néothermes, occupying part
of the casino, and the Thermes (dating from 1824), which has a good
library, are the principal bathing-establishments; both are town property.
The other chief buildings include the Carmelite church, remains of the old
church of St Jean, a museum and the town-hall. Bagnères has tribunals of
first instance and of commerce, and a communal college. The manufacture of
_barège_, a light fabric of silk and wool, and the weaving and knitting of
woollen goods, wood-turning and the working of marble found in the
neighbourhood and imported from elsewhere, are among the industries, and
there are also slate quarries. Bagnères was much frequented by the Romans,
under whom it was known as _Vicus Aquensis_, but afterwards lost its
renown. It begins to appear again in history in the 12th century when
Centulle III., count of Bigorre, granted it a liberal charter. The baths
rose into permanent importance in the 16th century, when they were visited
by Jeanne d'Albret, mother of Henry IV., and by many other distinguished
persons.