BAGSHOT BEDS, in geology, a series of sands and clays of shallow-water
origin, some being fresh-water, some marine. They belong to the upper
Eocene formation of the London and Hampshire basins (England), and derive
their name from Bagshot Heath in Surrey; but they are also well developed
in Hampshire and the Isle of Wight. The following divisions are generally
accepted:--

  Upper Bagshot Beds       Barton sand, and Barton clay.
  Middle "      "          Bracklesham beds.
  Lower  "      "          Bournemouth beds, Alum Bay beds,
                           and Bovey Tracey beds (?).

The lower division consists of pale-yellow, current-bedded sand and loam,
with layers of pipeclay and occasional beds of flint pebbles. In the London
basin, wherever the junction of the Bagshot beds with the London clay is
exposed, it is clear that no sharp line can be drawn between these
formations. The Lower Bagshot beds may be observed at Brentwood, Billericay
and Highbeech in Essex; outliers, capping hills of London clay, occur at
Hampstead, Highgate and Harrow. In Surrey considerable tracts of London
clay are covered by heath-bearing Lower Bagshot beds, as at Weybridge,
Aldershot, Woking, &c. The "Ramsdell clay," N.W. of Basingstoke, belongs to
this formation. In the Isle of Wight the lower division is well exposed at
Alum Bay (660 ft.) and White Cliff Bay (140 ft.); here it consists of
unfossiliferous sands (white, yellow, brown, crimson and every intermediate
shade), and clays with layers of lignite and ferruginous sandstone. Similar
beds are visible at Bournemouth, and in the neighbourhood of Poole,
Wareham, Corfe and Studland.

The leaf-bearing clays of Alum Bay and Bournemouth are well known, and have
yielded a large and interesting series of plant remains, including
_Eucalyptus_, _Caesalpinia_, _Populus_, _Platanus_, _Sequoia_, _Aralia_,
_Polypodium_, _Osmunda_, _Nipadites_ and many others. The sands and clays
of Bovey Tracey (see BOVEY BEDS) are probably of the same age. The clays of
this formation are of great value for pottery manufacture; they are
extensively mined in the vicinity of Wareham and Corfe, whence they are
shipped from Poole and are consequently known as "Poole clays"; similarly,
"Teignmouth clay" is obtained from the Bovey beds. Alum was formerly
obtained from the clays of Alum Bay; and the lignites have been used as
fuel near Corfe and at Bovey.

The Bracklesham beds (_q.v._) are sometimes classed with the overlying
Barton clay as Middle Bagshot. In the London basin the Barton beds are
unknown. In Surrey and Berkshire the Bracklesham beds are from 20 to 50 ft.
thick; in Alum Bay they are 100 ft., with beds of lignite in the lower
portion; and about here they are sharply marked off from the Barton clay by
a bed of conglomerate formed of flint pebbles. The Upper Bagshot beds,
Barton sand and Barton clay, are from 140 to 200 ft. thick in the Isle of
Wight.

The Agglestone (or Haggerstone) rock and Puckstone rock, near Studland in
Dorsetshire, are formed of large indurated masses of the Lower Bagshot beds
that have resisted the weather; Creechbarrow near Corfe is another striking
feature due to the same beds. Many of the sarsen stones or greywethers of
S.E. England have been derived from Bagshot strata.

See _Memoirs of the Geological Survey_ (England):--"Geology of the Isle of
Wight," new edition (1889); "The Geology of London and Part of the Thames
Valley," vol. i. (1889); and "The Geology of the Country around
Bournemouth" (1898).