BAHAMAS (_Lucayos_), an archipelago of the British West Indies. It is
estimated to consist of 29 islands, 661 cays and 2387 rocks, and extends
along a line from Florida on the northwest to Haiti on the south-east,
between Cuba and the open Atlantic, over a distance of about 630 m., from
80° 50' to 72° 50' W., and 22° 25' to 26° 40' N. The total land area is
estimated at 5450 sq. m., of which the main islands occupy 4424 sq. m., and
the population was 43,521 in 1881 and 53,735 in 1901. Some 12,000 of these
are whites, the remainder coloured. The main islands and groups, beginning
from the north-west, are as follows: Little and Great Abaco, with Great
Bahama to the west; Eleuthera (a name probably corrupted from the Spanish
_Isla de Tierra_), Cat, Watling, or Guanahani, and Rum Cay on the outer
line towards the open ocean, with New Providence, the Exuma chain and Long
Island forming an inner line to the west, and still farther west Andros
(named from Sir Edmund Andros, governor of Massachusetts, &c., at the close
of the 17th century; often spoken of as one island, but actually divided
into several by narrow straits); and finally the Crooked Islands, Mayaguana
and Inagua. The Turks and Caicos islands continue the outer line, and
belong geographically to the archipelago, but not politically. The
surrounding seas are shallow for the most part, but there are three
well-defined channels--the Florida or New Bahama channel, between the
north-western islands and Florida, followed by the Gulf Stream, the
Providence channels (north-east and north-west) from which a depression
known as the Tongue of Ocean extends southward along the east side of
Andros, and the Old Bahama channel, between the archipelago and Cuba. The
Andros islands have a length of 95 m. and an area of 1600 sq. m.; Great
Abaco is 70 m. long and its area is 680 sq. m.; Great Inagua is 34 m. long
with an area of 530 sq. m., [v.03 p.0208] and Grand Bahama 66 m., with an
area of 430 sq. m. But the most important island, as containing the
capital, Nassau, is New Providence, which is only 19-3/8 m. in length, with
an area of 85 sq. m. This island supported a population in 1901 of 12,534.
In point of population the next most important island is Eleuthera (8733),
followed by the Andros Islands (5347) and Cat Island (4658). The Abaco and
Exuma groups and Long Island each support populations exceeding 3000, and
there are smaller populations on Grand Bahama, the Crooked Islands, Inagua,
Mayaguana, Watling, Rum Cay and the Biminis, though these last, which are
two very small north-western islands, are relatively densely populated with
545 persons.

_Physical Geography._--The islands are of coral formation and low-lying.
The rock on the surface is as hard as flint, but underneath it gradually
softens and furnishes an admirable stone for building which can be sawn
into blocks of any size, hardening on exposure to the atmosphere. The
highest hill in the whole range of the islands (in Cat Island) is only 400
ft. high. It is a remarkable fact that, except in the island of Andros, no
streams of running water are to be found in the whole group. The
inhabitants derive their water supply from wells. As a result of the
porosity of the rock, many of the wells feel the influence of the sea and
exhibit an ebb and flow. There is an extensive swampy lagoon in Eleuthera,
the water of which is fresh or nearly so; and brackish lagoons also occur,
as in Watling Island. An artificial lake in New Providence, constructed for
the use of the turtle-catchers, is noted as exhibiting an extraordinary
degree of phosphorescence. A remarkable natural phenomenon is that of the
so-called "banana holes," which frequently occur in the limestone. Their
formation has been attributed to the effect of rotting vegetation on the
rock, but without certainty. These holes are of various depths up to about
40 ft., and of curiously regular form. The Mermaid's Pool in New
Providence, which is deeper still, is partly filled with water.

_Geology_.--The Bahamas consist almost entirely of aeolian deposits (cf.
BERMUDAS) and coral reefs. The aeolian deposits, which form the greater
part of the islands, frequently rise in rounded hills and ridges to a
height of 100 or 200 ft., and in Cat Island nearly 400 ft. They vary in
texture from a fine-grained compact oolite to a coarse-grained rock
composed of angular or rounded fragments, and they commonly exhibit
strongly marked false bedding. The material is largely calcareous, and has
probably been derived from the disintegration of the reefs, and from the
shells of animals living in the shallows. When freshly exposed the rock is
soft, but by the action of rain and sea it becomes covered with a hard
crust. The surface is often remarkably honeycombed, and the rock weathers
into pinnacles, pillars and arches of extraordinary shapes. On the island
of Andros there is an extremely fine white marl almost resembling a chalky
ooze. The coral reefs are of especial interest from their bearing on the
general question of the formation of coral reefs.

_Nassau_.--The scenery of the islands is picturesque, gaining beauty from
the fine colouring of the sea and the rich vegetation. Nassau is a winter
health-resort for many visitors from the United States and Canada. The town
lies on a safe harbour on the north shore of New Providence, sheltered by
the small Hog Island. There is a depth of 14 ft. at low-water spring-tide
on the bar. The town extends along the shore, and up a slightly elevated
ridge behind it. It contains the principal public buildings, and some
interesting old forts, dating from the middle and close of the 18th
century, though the subterranean works below Fort Charlotte are attributed
to an earlier period. From the same century dates the octagonal building
which, formerly a gaol, now contains a good public library. The sea-bathing
is excellent. The months of February and March are the principal season for
visitors. There is direct connexion with New York by steamers, which make
the journey in about four days; and there is also connexion with Miami in
Florida.

_Climate, Flora, Fauna_.--The climate of the Bahamas adds to their
attractions. The mean temperature of the hottest months (June to September)
is 88° F., and that of the coldest (January to March) 66°. In a series of
observations of winds about one half have been found to indicate a
direction from north-east or east. Hurricanes occur from July to October,
and May to October are reckoned as the rainy months. The rainfall recorded
in 1901 at Nassau amounted to 63.32 in. Where a mantle of soil covers the
rock it is generally thin but very fertile. A well-defined area in New
Providence is known as the "pine barrens," from the tree which principally
grows in this rocky soil. Elsewhere three types of soil are
distinguished--a black soil, of decayed vegetable matter, where the land is
under forest, a reddish clay, and a white soil occurring along the shores.
Andros Island and the Abaco Islands may be specially noted for their
profusion of large timber, including mahogany, mastic, lignum vitae, iron
and bullet woods, and many others. Unfortunately the want both of labour
and of roads renders it impossible to turn much of this valuable timber to
useful account, although attempts have been made to work it in Abaco. The
fruits and spices of the Bahamas are very numerous, the fruit equalling any
in the world. The produce of the islands includes tamarinds, olives,
oranges, lemons, limes, citrons, pomegranates, pine-apples, figs,
sapodillas, bananas, sour-sops, melons, yams, potatoes, gourds, cucumbers,
pepper, cassava, prickly pears, sugar-cane, ginger, coffee, indigo, Guinea
corn and pease. Tobacco and cascarilla bark also flourish; and cotton is
indigenous and was woven into cloth by the aborigines. But although
oranges, pine-apples and some other fruits form important articles of
commerce, it is only rarely that systematic and thorough methods of
cultivation are prosecuted. Cotton has been found to suffer much from
insect pests. Sisal is grown in increasing quantity. The Bahamas are far
poorer in their fauna than in their flora. It is said that the aborigines
had a breed of dogs which did not bark, and a small coney is also
mentioned. The guana also is indigenous to the islands. Oxen, sheep, horses
and other live-stock introduced from Europe thrive well, but little
attention is paid to stock-rearing. There are many varieties of birds to be
found in the woods of the Bahamas; they include flamingoes and the
beautiful hummingbird, as well as wild geese, ducks, pigeons, hawks, green
parrots and doves. The waters of the Bahamas swarm with fish; the turtle
procured here is particularly fine, and the sponge fishery is of
importance. In some islands there are rich salt ponds, but their working
has decreased. The portion of Nassau harbour known as the Sea Gardens
exhibits an extraordinarily beautiful development of marine organisms.

_Government, Trade, &c_.--The colony of the Bahamas is under a British
governor, who is assisted by an executive council of nine members, partly
official, partly unofficial; and by a legislative council of nine members
nominated by the crown. There is also a legislative assembly of 29 members,
representing 15 electoral districts; the franchise being extended to white
and coloured men of 21 years of age at least, resident in the colony for
not less than twelve months, and possessing land of a value of £5 or more,
or being householders for six months at a rental not less than £2:18s. in
New Providence, or £1:4s. in other islands. The members' qualification is
the possession of real or personal estate to the value of £200. The average
annual revenue and expenditure may be set down at about £75,000,
expenditure somewhat exceeding revenue. There is a public debt of about
£105,000. The average annual value of imports is somewhat over £300,000,
and of exports £200,000. The average annual tonnage of shipping, entering
and clearing, exceeds 1,000,000. The government supports elementary free
schools, controlled by a nominated board of education, while committees
partly elected exercise local supervision. There are higher schools and a
Queen's College in Nassau. Nassau is the seat of a bishopric of the Church
of England created in 1861. The Bahamas are without railways, but there are
good roads in New Providence, and a few elsewhere. A cable connects Nassau
with West Jupiter in Florida.

_History_.--The story of the Bahamas is a singular one, and bears
principally upon the fortunes of New Providence, which, from the fact that
it alone possesses a perfectly safe harbour for vessels drawing more than 9
ft., has always been the seat of [v.03 p.0209] government when it was not
the headquarters of lawlessness. San Salvador, however, claims historical
precedence as the landfall of Columbus on his memorable voyage. Cat Island
was long supposed to be the island first reached by Columbus (12th October
1492) and named by him San Salvador. Then the distinction was successively
transferred to the neighbouring Watling, Great Turk, and Mariguana; but in
1880 the American marine surveyor, G. V. Fox, identified San Salvador, on
seemingly good grounds, with Samana (Atwood Cay), which lies about midway
between Watling and Mariguana. The chief difficulty is its size, for, if
Samana is the true San Salvador, it must have been considerably larger then
than now. Watling Island is generally accepted as the landfall.

Columbus passed through the islands, and in one of his letters to Ferdinand
and Isabella he said, "This country excels all others as far as the day
surpasses the night in splendour; the natives love their neighbours as
themselves; their conversation is the sweetest imaginable; their faces
always smiling; and so gentle and so affectionate are they, that I swear to
your highness there is not a better people in the world." But the natives,
innocent as they appeared, were doomed to utter destruction. Ovando, the
governor of Hispaniola (Haiti), who had exhausted the labour of that
island, turned his thoughts to the Bahamas, and in 1509 Ferdinand
authorized him to procure labourers from these islands. It is said that
reverence and love for their departed relatives was a marked feature in the
character of the aborigines, and that the Spaniards made use of this as a
bait to trap the unhappy natives. They promised to convey the ignorant
savages in their ships to the "heavenly shores" where their departed
friends now dwelt, and about 40,000 were transported to Hispaniola to
perish miserably in the mines. From that date, until after the colonization
of New Providence by the British, there is no record of a Spanish visit to
the Bahamas, with the exception of the extraordinary cruise of Juan Ponce
de Leon, the conqueror of Porto Rico, who passed months searching the
islands for Bimini, which was reported to contain the miraculous "Fountain
of Youth." This is in South Bimini, and has still a local reputation for
healing powers.

It is commonly stated that in 1629 the British formed a settlement in New
Providence, which they held till 1641, when the Spaniards expelled them.
This, however, refers to the Providence Island off the Mosquito Coast; it
was only in 1646 that Eleuthera was colonized, and in 1666 New Providence,
by settlers from the Bermudas. In 1670 Charles II. made a grant of the
islands to Christopher, duke of Albemarle, and others. Governors were
appointed by the lords proprietors, and there are copious records in the
state papers of the attempts made to develop the resources of the islands.
But the buccaneers or pirates who had made their retreat here offered heavy
opposition; in 1680 there was an attack by the Spaniards, and in July 1703
the French and Spaniards made a descent on New Providence, blew up the
fort, spiked the guns, burnt the church and carried off the governor, with
the principal inhabitants, to Havana. In October the Spaniards made a
second descent and completed the work of destruction. It is said that when
the last of the governors appointed by the lords proprietors, in ignorance
of the Spanish raid, arrived in New Providence, he found the island without
an inhabitant. It again, however, became the resort of pirates, and the
names of many of the worst of these ruffians are associated with New
Providence; the notorious Edward Teach, called Blackbeard, who was
afterwards killed in action against two American ships in 1718, being chief
among the number.

At last matters became so intolerable that the merchants of London and
Bristol petitioned the crown to take possession and restore order, and
Captain Woodes Rogers was sent out as the first crown governor and arrived
at New Providence in 1718. Many families of good character now settled at
the Bahamas, and some progress was made in developing the resources of the
colony, although this was interrupted by the tyrannical conduct of some of
the governors who succeeded Captain Woodes Rogers. At this time the
pine-apple was introduced as an article of cultivation at Eleuthera; and a
few years subsequently, during the American war of independence, colonists
arrived in great numbers, bringing with them wealth and also slave labour.
Cotton cultivation was now attempted on a large scale. In 1783, at Long
Island, 800 slaves were at work, and nearly 4000 acres of land under
cultivation. But the usual bad luck of the Bahamas prevailed; the red bug
destroyed the cotton crops in 1788 and again in 1794, and by the year 1800
cotton cultivation was almost abandoned. There were also other causes that
tended to retard the progress of the colony. In 1776 Commodore Hopkins, of
the American navy, took the island of New Providence; he soon, however,
abandoned it as untenable, but in 1781 it was retaken by the Spanish
governor of Cuba. The Spaniards retained nominal possession of the Bahamas
until 1783, but before peace was notified New Providence was recaptured by
a loyalist, Lieutenant-Colonel Deveaux, of the South Carolina militia, in
June 1783.

In 1784 and 1786 sums were voted in parliament to indemnify the descendants
of the old lords proprietors, and the islands were formally reconveyed to
the crown. The Bahamas began again to make a little progress, until the
separation of Turks and Caicos Islands in 1848, which had been hitherto the
most productive of the salt-producing islands, unfavourably affected the
finances. Probably the abolition of the slave-trade in 1834 was not without
its effect upon the fortunes of the landed proprietors. The next event of
importance in the history of the Bahamas was the rise of the
blockade-running trade, consequent on the closing of the southern ports of
America by the Federals in 1861. At the commencement of 1865 this trade was
at its highest point. In January and February 1865 no less than 20 steamers
arrived at Nassau, importing 14,182 bales of cotton, valued at £554,675.
The extraordinary difference between the normal trade of the islands and
that due to blockade-running will be seen by comparing the imports and
exports before the closing of the southern ports in 1860 with those of
1864. In the first year the imports were £234,029, and the exports
£157,350, while in the second year the imports were £5,346,112, and the
exports £4,672,398. The excitement, extravagance and waste existing at
Nassau during the days of blockade-running exceed belief. Individuals may
have profited largely, but the Bahamas probably benefited little. The
government managed to pay its debt amounting to £43,786, but crime
increased and sickness became very prevalent. The cessation of the trade
was marked, however, by hardly any disturbance; there were no local
failures, and in a few months the steamers and their crews departed, and
New Providence subsided into its usual state of quietude. This, however,
was not fated to last long, for in October 1866 a most violent hurricane
passed over the island, injuring the orchards, destroying the fruit-trees,
and damaging the sponges, which had proved hitherto a source of profit. The
hurricane, too, was followed by repeated droughts, and the inhabitants of
the out-islands were reduced to indigence and want, a condition which is
still, in some measure, in evidence.

See the valuable _General Descriptive Report on the Bahama Islands_, by Sir
G. T. Carter (governor, 1898-1904), issued in place of the ordinary annual
report by the Colonial Office, London, 1902; also Governor R. W. Rawson's
_Report_, 1866; Stark's _History and Guide to the Bahama Islands_ (Boston,
Mass., 1891); _Bahama Islands_ (Geog. Soc. of Baltimore), ed. G. B.
Shattuck (New York, 1905). For geology see A. Agassiz, "A Reconnaissance of
the Bahamas and of the Elevated Reefs of Cuba in the steam yacht 'Wild
Duck,' January to April 1893," _Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. Harvard_, vol. xxvi.
no. 1, 1894.