BAHREIN ISLANDS, a group of islands situated about 20 m. east of the coast
of El Hasa, in the Persian Gulf, a little to the south of the port of El
Katif, which, if rightly identified with the ancient Gerrha, has been
celebrated throughout history as the mart of Indian trade, the
starting-point of caravans across Arabia. The largest of the group is
called Bahrein. It is about 27 m. long from north to south and about 10
wide--a low flat space of sandy waste with cultivated oases and palm groves
of great luxuriance and beauty. The rocky hill of Jebel Dukhan (the
"mountain of the mist") rises in the midst of it to a height of 400 ft. The
rest of the group are of coral formation. The next island in size to
Bahrein is Moharek, curved in shape, and about 5 m. long by ½ m. in
breadth. It lies 1 m. to the north of Bahrein. Sitrah (4 m. long) Nebbi,
Saleh, Sayeh, Khasifeh and Arad (¾ m. long) complete the group. Of these
minor islands Arad alone retains its classical name.

The climate is mild, but humid, and rather unhealthy. The soil is for the
most part fertile, and produces rice, pot herbs and fruits, of which the
citrons are especially good. Water is abundant. Fish of all kinds abound
off the coast, and are very cheap in the markets. The inhabitants are a
mixed race of Arab, Omanite and Persian blood, slender and small in their
physical appearance; they possess great activity and intelligence, and are
known in all the ports of the Persian Gulf for their commercial and
industrial ability.

The sea around the Bahrein islands is shallow, so shallow as to admit only
of the approach of native craft, and the harbour is closely shut in by
reefs. There is very little doubt that it was from these islands that the
Puni, or Phoenicians, emigrated northwards to the Mediterranean. Bahrein
has always been the centre of the pearl fishing industry of the Persian
Gulf. There are about 400 boats now employed in the pearl fisheries, each
of them paying a tax to the Sheik. The pearl export from Linja is valued at
about £30,000 to £35,000 per annum.

The capital town of Bahrein is _Manameh_, a long, straggling, narrow town
of about 8000 inhabitants, chiefly of the Wahabi sect. Manameh is adjacent
to the most northern point of the island, and looks across the narrow
strait to Moharek.

Fish and sea-weed form the staple food of the islanders. The water-supply
of Moharek is probably unique. It is derived from springs which burst
through the beds below sea-level with such force as to retain their
freshness in the midst of the surrounding salt water. Scattered through the
islands are some fifty villages, each possessing its own date groves and
cultivation, forming features in the landscape of great fertility and
beauty. Most of these villages are walled in for protection.

The Portuguese obtained possession of the islands in 1507, but were driven
from their settlements in that quarter by Shah Abbas in 1622. The islands
afterwards became an object of contention between the Persians and Arabs,
and at last the Arabian tribe of the Athubis made themselves masters of
them in 1784.

The present Sheik of Bahrein (who lives chiefly at Moharek) is of the
family of El Kalifa. This ruling race was driven from the mainland (where
they held great possessions) by the Turks about 1850. In the year 1867 the
Persians threatened Bahrein, and in 1875 the Turks laid their hands on it.
British interference in both cases was successful in maintaining the
integrity of Arab rule, and the Bahrein islands are now under British
protection.

To the south-west of the picturesque belts of palm trees which stretch
inland from the northern coast of Bahrein, is a wide space of open sandy
plain filled with gigantic tumuli or earth mounds, of which the outer
layers of gravel and clay have been hardened by the weather action of
centuries to the consistency of conglomerate. Within these mounds are
two-chambered sepulchres, built of huge slabs of limestone, several of
which have been opened and examined by Durand, Bent and others, and found
to contain relics of undoubted Phoenician design. Scattered here and there
throughout the islands are isolated mounds, or smaller groups, all of which
are of the same appearance, and probably of similar origin.

(T. H. H.*)