BAIAE, an ancient city of Campania, Italy, 10 m. W. of Neapolis, on the
_Sinus Baianus_, a bay on the W. coast of the Gulf of Puteoli. It is said
to derive its name from [Greek: Baios], the helmsman of Ulysses, whose
grave was shown there; it was originally, perhaps, the harbour of Cumae. It
was principally famous, however, for its warm sulphur springs, remarkable
for their variety and curative properties (Pliny, _Hist. Nat_ xxxi. 4), its
mild climate, and its luxuriant vegetation (though in summer there was some
malaria in the low ground). It was already frequented, especially by the
rich, at the end of the republican period; and in Strabo's day it was as
large as Puteoli. Julius Caesar possessed a villa here, the remains of
which are probably to be recognized in some large substructures on the
ridge above the 16th-century castle. Baiae was a favourite residence of the
emperors. Nero built a huge villa probably on the site now occupied by the
castle. Hadrian died in Caesar's villa in A.D. 138, and Alexander Severus
erected large buildings for his mother. Baiae never became, however, an
independent town, but formed part of the territory of Cumae. Three glass
vases with views of the coast and its buildings were published by H. Jordan
in _Archäologische Zeitung_ (1868, 91). The luxury and immorality of the
life of Baiae under both the republic and the empire are frequently spoken
of by ancient writers.

Near Baiae was the villa resort of Bauli, so called from the [Greek:
Boaulia] (stalls) in which the oxen of Geryon were concealed by Hercules.
By some it is identified with the modern village of Bacoli (owing to a
presumed similarity to the ancient name), 2 m. S.S.E. of Baiae; by others
with the Punta dell' Epitaffio, 1 m. N.E. of Baiae (see G. B. de Rossi in
_Notizie degli scavi_, 1888, 709). At Bauli, Pompey and Hortensius
possessed villas, the former on the hills, while that of the latter, on the
shores of the Lacus Lucrinus, was remarkable for its tame lampreys and as
the scene of the dialogue in the second book of Cicero's _Academica
Priora_; it afterwards became imperial property and was the scene of
Agrippina's murder by Nero. It was from Bauli to Puteoli that Caligula
built his bridge of boats.

Of the once splendid villas and baths of Baiae and its district, the
foundations of which were often thrown far out into the sea, considerable,
though fragmentary, remains exist. It is not, as a rule, possible to
identify the various buildings, and the names which have been applied to
the ruins are not authenticated. At Baiae itself there exist three large
and lofty domed buildings, two octagonal, one circular, and all circular in
the interior, of _opus reticulatum_ and brick, which, though popularly
called temples, are remains of baths or _nymphaea_. The Punta dell'
Epitaffio also is covered with remains, while at Bacoli are several
ruins--to the north of the village a small theatre, called the tomb of
Agrippina; under the village the remains of a large villa; to the E. the
remains of a large water reservoir, the so-called Cento Camerelle; to the
S. another with a vaulted ceiling, known as the _piscina mirabilis_,
measuring 230 by 85 ft. The villa of Marius, which was bought by Lucullus,
and afterwards came into the possession of the imperial house, was the
scene of the death of Tiberius. It is sometimes spoken of as _Baiana_,
sometimes as _Misenensis_, and is perhaps to be sought at Bacoli (Th.
Mommsen in _Corp. Inscrip. Latin_., x., Berlin, 1883, 1748), though Beloch
inclines to place it on the promontory S. of Misenum, and this perhaps
agrees better with the description given by Phaedrus.

Baiae was devastated by the Saracens in the 8th century and entirely
deserted on account of malaria in 1500.

See J. Beloch, _Campanien_ (2nd ed., Breslau, 1890), 180 seq.

(T. AS.)