BAIKIE, WILLIAM BALFOUR (1824-1864), Scottish explorer, naturalist and
philologist, eldest son of Captain John Baikie, R.N., was born at Kirkwall,
Orkney, on the 21st of August 1824. He studied medicine at Edinburgh, and,
on obtaining his M.D. degree, joined the royal navy in 1848. He early
attracted the notice of Sir Roderick Murchison, through whom he was
appointed surgeon and naturalist to the Niger expedition sent out in 1854
by Macgregor Laird with government support. The death of the senior officer
(Consul Beecroft) occurring at Fernando Po, Baikie succeeded to the
command. Ascending the Benue about 250 m. beyond the point reached by
former explorers, the little steamer "Pleiad" returned and reached the
mouth of the Niger, after a voyage of 118 days, without the loss of a
single man. The expedition had been instructed to endeavour to afford
assistance to Heinrich Barth (_q.v._), who had in 1851 crossed the Benue in
its upper course, but Baikie was unable to gain any trustworthy information
concerning him. Returning to England, Baikie gave an account of his work in
his _Narrative of an Exploring Voyage up the Rivers Kwora and Binue ... _
(London, 1856). In March 1857 Baikie--with the rank of British
consul--started on another expedition in the "Pleiad." After two years
spent in exploring the Niger, the navigating vessel was wrecked in passing
through some of the rapids of the river, and Baikie was unable longer to
keep his party together. All returned home but himself; in no way daunted,
he determined single-handed to carry out the purposes of the expedition.
Landing from a small boat, with one or two native followers, at the
confluence of the Niger and Benue, he chose Lokoja as the base of his
future operations, it being the site of the model farm established by the
expedition sent by the British government in 1841, and abandoned within a
twelve-month on the death of most of the white settlers (see Capt. W.
Alien, R.N., and T. R. H. Thomson, M.D., _A Narrative of the Expedition ...
to the River Niger in 1841_, London, 1848). After purchasing the site, and
concluding a treaty with the Fula emir of Nupe, he proceeded to clear the
ground, build houses, form enclosures and pave the way for a future city.
Numbers flocked to him from all neighbouring districts, and in his
settlement were representatives of almost all the tribes of West-Central
Africa. To the motley commonwealth thus formed he acted not merely as
ruler, but also as physician, teacher and priest. In less than five years
he had opened up the navigation of the Niger, made roads, and established a
market to which the native produce was brought for sale and barter. He had
also collected vocabularies of nearly fifty African dialects, and
translated portions of the Bible and prayer-book into Hausa. Once only
during his residence had he to employ armed force against the surrounding
tribes. While on his way home, on leave of absence, he died at Sierra Leone
on the 30th of November 1864. He had done much to establish British
influence on the Niger, but after his death the British government
abolished the consulate (1866), and it was through private enterprise that
some twenty years later the district where Baikie had worked so
successfully was finally secured for Great Britain (see NIGERIA).

Baikie's _Observations on the Hausa and Fulfulde_ (_i.e._ Fula) _Languages_
was privately printed in 1861, and his translation of the Psalms into Hausa
was published by the Bible Society in 1881. He was also the author of
various works concerning Orkney and Shetland. A monument to his memory was
placed in the nave of the ancient cathedral of St Magnus, Kirkwall.