BAIKAL (known to the Mongols as _Dalai-nor_, and to the Turkish tribes as
_Bai-kul_), a lake of East Siberia, the sixth in size of all the lakes of
the world and the largest fresh-water basin of Eurasia. It stretches from
S.W. to N.E. (51° 29' to 55° 50' N. lat. and 103° 40' to 110° E. long.),
separating the government of Irkutsk from that of Transbaikalia, and has a
length of 386 m. and a width of from 20 m. to 50 m. Its southern extremity
penetrates into the high plateau of Asia, and the lake lies entirely in the
Alpine zone which fringes that plateau on the north-west. Its area is
13,200 sq. m., _i.e._ nearly as great as Switzerland. The length of its
coast-line is 525 m. along the western, and 640 m. along the eastern shore.
Its altitude has been estimated at 1587 ft. (Chersky) and at 1679 ft.
(Suess)--118 ft. above the level of the Angara at Irkutsk (_Zapiski Russ.
Geog. Soc._ xv., 1885); but 1500 ft. would seem to be a more correct
altitude (_Izvestia East Sib. Branch_, xxviii. 1, 1897). Its level is
subject to slight oscillations, and after a heavy five weeks' rain in 1869
it rose 7 ft., an immense territory at the mouth of the Selenga being
submerged.

A hydrographic survey of this lake was made by Drizhenko in 1897-1902. The
elongated hilly island of Olkhon, and the peninsula of Svyatoi Nos, which
forms its continuation on the opposite eastern shore, divide the lake into
two basins. The deepest part is in the south-east, at the foot of the
Khamar-daban border-ridge of the high plateau. An elongated trough, 66 m.
long, reaches there a depth of over 600 fathoms, with a maximum depth of
880 fathoms, _i.e._ about 5280 ft. below the level of the ocean. As a rule
the bottom of the lake has very steep slopes: the 100-fathom and even the
250-fathom lines run close to the shores, that is to say, the steepness of
the surrounding mountains (4600 to 6000 ft.) continues beneath the surface.
At the mouth of the Selenga, however, which enters from the south-east,
pouring into it the waters and the alluvial deposits from a drainage area
of 173,500 sq. m., a wide delta is thrust out into the lake, reducing its
width to 20 m. and spreading under its waters, so as to leave only a narrow
channel, 230 to 247 fathoms deep, along the opposite coast. The depth of
the middle portion of the lake has not yet been measured, but must exceed
500 fathoms. It was expected that an underground ridge would be found
connecting Olkhon with Svyatoi Nos; but depths exceeding 622 fathoms have
been sounded even along that line. As to the northern basin, the
configuration of its bottom is in accordance with the high mountains which
surround it, and most of its area has a depth exceeding 400 fathoms, the
maximum depths along three lines of soundings taken across it being 491,
485, and 476 fathoms respectively. The water is beautifully clear.

_Temperature_.--The surface-layers of this immense basin are heated in the
summer up to temperatures of 55½° to 57° F., both close to the shores and
at some distance from the mouth of the Selenga; but these warmer layers are
not deep, and a uniform temperature of nearly 39° F. is generally found at
a depth of 20 fathoms, as also on the surface in the middle of the lake. At
a depth of 500 fathoms there is a nearly uniform temperature of 38°. At
various places round the shores, _e.g._ the mouth of the Barguzin, hot
springs exist. The lake freezes usually at the end of December, or in the
beginning of January, so solidly that a temporary post-horse station is
erected on the ice in the middle of the lake, and it remains frozen till
the second half of May. The evaporation from this large basin exercises a
certain influence on the climate of the surrounding country, while the
absorption of heat for the thawing of the ice has a notable cooling effect
in early summer.

_Rivers_.--Lake Baikal receives over 300 streams, mostly short mountain
torrents, besides the Upper Angara, which enters its north-east extremity,
the Barguzin, on the east, and the Selenga on the south-east. Its only
outflow is the lower Angara, which issues through a rocky cleft on the west
shore. The Irkut no longer reaches the Baikal, though it once did so. After
approaching its south-west extremity it abandons the broad valley which
leads to the lake, and makes its way northwards through a narrow gap in the
mountains and joins the Angara at Irkutsk.

_Mountains_.--With the exception of the delta of the Selenga, Lake Baikal
is surrounded by lofty mountains. The Khamar-daban border-ridge (the summit
of a mountain of the same name is 5300 ft. above the lake), falling with
steep cliffs towards the lake, fringes it on the south; a massive,
deeply-ravined highland occupies the space between the Irkut and the
Angara; the Onot and Baikal ridges (also Primorskiy) run along its
north-west shore, striking it diagonally; an Alpine complex of yet
unexplored mountains rises on its north-east shore; the Barguzin range
impinges upon it obliquely in the east; and the Ulanburgasu mountains
intrude into the delta of the Selenga.

_Geology_.--It is certain that in previous geological ages Lake Baikal had
a much greater extension. It stretched westwards into the valley of the
Irkut, and up the lower valleys of the Upper Angara and the Barguzin.
Volcanic activity took place around its shores at the end of the Tertiary
or during the Quaternary Age, and great streams of lava cover the Sayan and
Khamar-daban mountains, as well as the valley of Irkut. Earthquakes are
still frequent along its shores.

_Fauna_.--The fauna, explored by Dybowski and Godlewski, and in 1900-2 by
Korotnev, is much richer than it was supposed to be, and has quite an
original character; but hypotheses as to a direct communication having
existed between Lake Baikal and the Arctic Ocean during the Post-Tertiary
or Tertiary ages are not proved. Still, Lake Baikal has a seal (_Phoca
vitulina_, _Phoca baikalensis_ of Dybowski) quite akin to the seals of
Spitsbergen, marine sponges, polychaetes, a marine mollusc (_ancilodoris_),
and some marine gammarids. The waters of the lake swarm with fish
(sturgeons and _salmonidae_), and its herring (_Salmo omul_) is the chief
product of the fisheries, though notably fewer have been taken within the
last forty or fifty years. Plankton is very abundant. The little Lake
Frolikha, situated close to the northern extremity of Lake Baikal and
communicating with it by means of a river of the same name, contains a
peculiar species of trout, _Salmo erythreas_, which is not known elsewhere.
Generally, while there is a relative poverty of zoological groups, there is
a great wealth of species within the group. Of gammarids, there are as many
as 300 species, and those living at great depths (330 to 380 fathoms) tend
to assume abyssal characters similar to those displayed by the deep-sea
fauna of the ocean.

_Navigation._--Navigation of the lake is rendered difficult both by sudden
storms and by the absence of good bays and ports. [v.03 p.0216] The
principal port on the western shore, Listvinichnoe, near the outflow of the
Angara, is an open roadstead at the foot of steep mountains. Steamers ply
from it weekly to Misovaya (Posolskoe) on the opposite shore, a few times a
year to Verkhne-Angarsk, at the northern extremity of the lake, and
frequently to the mouth of the Selenga. Steamers ascend this river as far
as Bilyutai, near the Mongolian frontier, and bring back tea, imported via
Kiakhta, while grain, cedar nuts, salt, soda, wool and timber are shipped
on rafts down the Khilok, Chikoi and Uda (tributaries of the Selenga), and
manufactured goods are taken up the river for export to China. Attempts are
being made to render the Angara navigable below Irkutsk down to the
Yenisei. In winter, when the lake is covered with ice 3 ft. to 4 ft. thick,
it is crossed on sledges from Listvinichnoe to Misovaya. But a highway,
available all the year round, was made in 1863-1864 around its southern
shore, partly by blasting the cliffs, and it is now (since 1905) followed
by the trans-Siberian railway. Further, a powerful ice-breaker is used to
ferry trains across from Listvinichnoe to Misovaya.

AUTHORITIES.--Drizhenko, "Hydrographic Reconnoitring of Lake Baikal," in
_Izvestia Russ. Geogr. Soc._ (1897, 2); Russian Addenda to Ritter's _Asia,
East Siberia, Baikal,_ &c. (1895); Chersky's Geological Map of Shores of
Lake Baikal, 6-2/3 m. to the inch, in _Zapiski_ of _Russ. Geogr. Soc._ xv.
(1886); "Report of Geological Exploration of Shores of Lake Baikal," in
_Zapiski_ of _East Siberian Branch_ of _Russ. Geogr. Soc._ xii. (1886);
Obruchev, "Geology of Baikal Mountains," _Izvestia_ of same Society (1890,
xxi. 4 and 5); Dybowski and Godlewski on "Fauna," in same periodical
(1876); Witkowski, on "Seals"; Yakovlev's "Fishes of Angara," in same
periodical (1890-1893); "Fishing in Lake Baikal and its Tributaries," in
same periodical (1886-1890); and _La Géographie_ (No. 3, 1904).

(P. A. K.; J. T. BE.)