BAILIFF and BAILIE (from Late Lat. _bajulivus_, adjectival form of
_bajulus_, a governor or custodian; cf. BAIL), a legal officer to whom some
degree of authority, care or jurisdiction is committed. Bailiffs are of
various kinds and their offices and duties vary greatly.

The term was first applied in England to the king's officers generally,
such as sheriffs, mayors, &c., and more particularly to the chief officer
of a hundred. The county within which the sheriff exercises his
jurisdiction is still called his bailiwick, while the term bailiff is
retained as a title by the chief magistrates of various towns and the
keepers of royal castles, as the high bailiff of Westminster, the bailiff
of Dover Castle, &c. Under the manorial system, the bailiff, the steward
and the reeve were important officers; the bailiff managed the property of
the manor and superintended its cultivation (see Walter of Henley,
_Husbandry_, R. Hist. Soc., 1890).

The bailiff of a franchise or liberty is the officer who executes writs and
processes, and impanels juries within the franchise. He is appointed by the
lord of such franchise (who, in the Sheriffs Act 1887, § 34, is referred to
as the bailiff of the franchise).

The bailiff of a sheriff is an under-officer employed by a sheriff within a
county for the purpose of executing writs, processes, distraints and
arrests. As a sheriff is liable for the acts of his officers acting under
his warrant, his bailiffs are annually bound to him in an obligation with
sureties for the faithful discharge of their office, and thence are called
_bound_ bailiffs. They are also often called _bum-bailiffs_, or, shortly,
_bums_. The origin of this word is uncertain; the _New English Dictionary_
suggests that it is in allusion to the mode of catching the offender.
Special bailiffs are officers appointed by the sheriff at the request of a
plaintiff for the purpose of executing a particular process. The
appointment of a special bailiff relieves the sheriff from all
responsibility until the party is arrested and delivered into the sheriff's
actual custody.

By the County Courts Act 1888, it is provided that there shall be one or
more high-bailiffs, appointed by the judge and removable by the
lord-chancellor; and every person discharging the duties of high-bailiff is
empowered to appoint a sufficient number of able and fit persons as
bailiffs to assist him, whom he can dismiss at his pleasure. The duty of
the high-bailiff is to serve all summonses and orders, and execute all the
warrants, precepts and writs issued out of the court. The high bailiff is
responsible for all the acts and defaults of himself, and of the bailiffs
appointed to assist him, in the same way as a sheriff of a county is
responsible for the acts and defaults of himself and his officers. By the
same act (§49) bailiffs are answerable for any connivance, omission or
neglect to levy any such execution. No action can be brought against a
bailiff acting under order of the court without six days' notice (§54). Any
warrant to a bailiff to give possession of a tenement justifies him in
entering upon the premises named in the warrant, and giving possession,
provided the entry be made between the hours of 9 A.M. and 4 P.M. (§ 142).
The Law of Distress Amendment Act 1888 enacts that no person may act as a
bailiff to levy any distress for rent, unless he is authorized by a
county-court judge to act as a bailiff.

In the Channel Islands the bailiff is the first civil officer in each
island. He is appointed by the crown, and generally holds office for life.
He presides at the royal court, and takes the opinions of the jurats; he
also presides over the states, and represents the crown in all civil
matters. Though he need not necessarily have had legal training, he is
usually selected from among those who have held some appointment at the
island bar.

In the United States the word bailiff has no special significance. It is
sometimes applied to the officer who takes charge of juries and waits upon
the court. The officer who corresponds to the English sheriff's bailiff is
termed a deputy or under-sheriff.

_Bailie._--In Scotland the word bailiff has taken the form of "bailie,"
signifying a superior officer or magistrate of a municipal corporation.
Bailies, by virtue of their office, are invested with certain judicial and
administrative powers within the burgh for which they are appointed. They
sit as police-court magistrates, being assisted usually by a paid legal
adviser, called an "assessor," and, in the larger burghs, act as a
licensing court. It is usually said that a bailie is analogous to the
English alderman, but this is only in so far as he is a person of superior
dignity in the council, for, unlike an alderman, he continues to sit for
the ward for which he has been elected after selection as a bailie. He is
always appointed from within the council, and his term of office is only
that of an ordinary councillor, that is, for not more than three years.
_Bailie to give sasine_ was the person who appeared for the superior at the
ceremony of giving sasine. This ceremony was abolished in 1845. The _Bailie
of Holyrood_, or _Bailie of the Abbey_, was the official who had
jurisdiction in all civil debts contracted within the precincts of the
sanctuary (_q.v._).

(T. A. I.)

_Bailli_.--In France the bailiff (_bailli_), or seneschal in feudal days,
was the principal officer of any noble importance. He it was who held the
feudal court of assizes when the lord was not present himself. A great
noble often also had a _prévôté_, where small matters were settled, and the
preparatory steps taken relative to the more important cases reserved for
the assizes. Among the great officers of the crown of France a
grand-seneschal formerly figured until the reign of Philip Augustus, when
the last holder of the office was not replaced by a successor. It is also
under Philip Augustus that local bailiffs first make a definite appearance.
In the ordinance of 1190, by which the king, about to set forth on the
crusade, arranged for the administration of the kingdom during his absence,
they figure as part of a general system. Probably the first royal bailiffs
or seneschals were the seigniorial bailiffs of certain great fiefs that had
been reunited to the crown, their functions still continuing after the
annexation. Their essential function was at first the surveillance of the
royal provosts (_prévôts_), who until then had had the sole administration
of the various parts of the domain. They concentrated in their own hands
the produce of the provostships, and they organized and led the men who by
feudal rules owed military service to the king. They had also judicial
functions, which, at first narrowly restricted in application, became much
enlarged as time went on, and they held periodical assizes in the principal
centres of their districts. When the right of appeal was instituted, it was
they who heard the appeals from sentences pronounced by inferior royal
judges and by the seigniorial justices. Royal cases, and cases in which a
noble was defendant, were also reserved for them. The royal _bailli_ or
seneschal (no real difference existed between the two offices, the names
merely changing according to the district), was for long the king's
principal representative in the provinces, [v.03 p.0219] and the
_bailliage_ or the _sénéchaussée_ was then as important administratively as
judicially. But the political power of the bailiffs was greatly lessened
when the provincial governors were created. They had already lost their
financial powers, and their judicial functions now passed from them to
their lieutenants.

By his origin the bailiff had a military character; he was an officer of
the "short robe" and not of the "long robe," which in those days was no
obstacle to his being well versed in precedents. But when, under the
influence of Roman and canon law, the legal procedure of the civil courts
became _learned_, the bailiff often availed himself of a right granted him
by ancient public law: that of delegating the exercise of his functions to
whomsoever he thought fit. He delegated his judicial functions to
lieutenants, whom he selected and discharged at will. But as this
delegation became habitual, the position of the lieutenants was
strengthened; in the 16th century they became royal officers by title, and
even dispossessed the bailiffs of their judiciary prerogatives. The
tribunal of the _bailliage_ or _sénéchaussée_ underwent yet another
transformation, becoming a stationary court of justice, the seat of which
was fixed at the chief town. During the 15th and 16th centuries ambulatory
assizes diminished in both frequency and importance. In the 17th and 18th
centuries they were no more than a survival, the _lieutenant_ of such a
_bailliage_ having preserved the right to hold one assize each year at a
certain locality in his district. The ancient bailiff or _bailli d'épée_
still existed, however; the judgments in the tribunal of the bailliage were
delivered in his name, and he was responsible for their execution. So long
as the military service of the _ban_ and _arrière ban_, due to the king
from all fief-holders, was maintained (and it was still in force at the end
of the 17th century), it was the bailiffs who organized it. Finally the
_bailliage_ became in principle the electoral district for the
states-general, the unit represented therein by its three estates. The
justiciary nobles retained their judges, often called bailiffs, until the
Revolution. These judges, who were competent to decide questions as to the
payment of seigniorial dues could not, legally at all events, themselves
farm those revenues.

See Dupont Ferrier, _Les Officiers royaux des bailliages et sénéchaussées
et les institutions monarchiques locales en France à la fin du moyen âge_
(1902); Armand Brette, _Recueil de documents relatifs à la convocation des
états-généraux de 1789_ (3 vols. 1904) (vol. iii. gives the condition of
the _bailliages_ and _sénéchaussées_ in 1789).

(J. P. E.)