BAIL,[1] in English common law, the freeing or setting at liberty of one
arrested or imprisoned upon any action, either civil or criminal, on surety
taken for his appearance on a certain day and at a place named. The surety
is termed bail, because the person arrested or imprisoned is placed in the
custody of those who bind themselves or become bail for his due appearance
when required. So he may be released by them if they suspect that he is
about to escape and surrendered to the court, when they are discharged from
further liability. The sureties must be sufficient in the opinion of the
court, and, as a rule, only householders are accepted; in criminal cases
the solicitor or an accomplice of the person to be bailed, a married woman
or an infant would not be accepted. Bail is obligatory in all summary
cases. It is also obligatory in all misdemeanours, except such as have been
placed on the level of felonies, viz. obtaining or attempting to obtain
property on false pretences, receiving property so obtained or stolen,
perjury or subornation of perjury, concealment of birth, wilful or indecent
exposure of the person, riot, assault in pursuance of a conspiracy to raise
wages, assault upon a peace-officer in the execution of his duty or upon
any one assisting him, neglect or breach of duty as a peace-officer, any
prosecution of which the costs are payable out of the county or borough
rate or fund. In cases of treason, bail can only be granted by a secretary
of state or the king's bench division. A person charged with felony is not
entitled as of right to be released on bail. The power of admitting a
prisoner to bail is discretionary and not ministerial, and the chief
consideration in the exercise of that discretion must be the likelihood of
the prisoner failing to appear at the trial. This must be gauged from the
nature of the evidence in support of the accusation, the position of the
accused and the severity of the punishment which his conviction will
entail, as well as the independence of the sureties. The Bail Act 1898
gives a magistrate power, where a person is charged with felony or certain
misdemeanours, or where he is committed for trial for any indictable
offence, to dispense with sureties, if in his opinion the so dispensing
will not tend to defeat the ends of justice. A surety may be examined on
oath as to his means, while the court may also require notice to be given
to the plaintiff, prosecutor or police. A person who has been taken into
custody for an offence without a warrant, and cannot be brought before a
court of summary jurisdiction within twenty-four hours, may be admitted to
bail by a superintendent or inspector of police; and in a borough, if a
person is arrested for a petty misdemeanour, he may be bailed by the
constable in charge of the police-station. Bail in civil matters, since the
abolition of arrest on mesne process, is virtually extinct. It took the
form of an instrument termed a [v.03 p.0217] _bail-bond_, which was
prepared in the sheriff's office after arrest, and executed by two
sufficient sureties, and the person arrested.

In admiralty proceedings _in rem_, bail is often required for procuring the
release of arrested ships or cargo. It is also given without the arrest of
the ship, as a substitution of personal security for that of the _res_,
generally in an amount to cover the claim and costs.

In the United States, bail (in a sum fixed by the committing magistrate) is
a matter of right in all cases where a sentence of death cannot be
inflicted (Rev. Stat. § 1015). In those where such a sentence can be
inflicted, it may be allowed by one of the judges of the United States
courts at his discretion (_ibid_. § 1016).

[1] The ultimate origin of this and cognate words is the Lat. _bajulus_,
properly a bearer of burdens or porter, later a tutor or guardian, and
hence a governor or custodian, from which comes "bailiff"; from _bajulare_
is derived the French _bailler_, to take charge of, or to place in charge
of, and "bail" thus means "custody," and is applied to the person who gives
security for the appearance of the prisoner, the security given, or the
release of the prisoner on such security.