BAILLIE, ROBERT (1602-1662), Scottish divine, was born at Glasgow. Having
graduated there in 1620, he gave himself to the study of divinity. In 1631,
after he had been ordained and had acted for some years as regent in the
university, he was appointed to the living of Kilwinning in Ayrshire. In
1638 he was a member of the famous Glasgow Assembly, and soon after he
accompanied Leslie and the Scottish army as chaplain or preacher. In 1642
he was made professor of divinity at Glasgow, and in the following year was
selected as one of the five Scottish clergymen who were sent to the
Westminster Assembly. In 1649 he was one of the commissioners sent to
Holland for the purpose of inviting Charles II. to Scotland, and of
settling the terms of his admission to the government. He continued to take
an active part in all the minor disputes of the church, and in 1661 was
made principal of Glasgow University. He died in August of the following
year, his death being probably hastened by his mortification at the
apparently firm establishment of episcopacy in Scotland. Baillie was a man
of learning and ability; his views were not extreme, and he played but a
secondary part in the stirring events of the time. His _Letters_, by which
he is now chiefly remembered, are of first-rate historical importance, and
give a very lively picture of the period.

A complete memoir and a full notice of all his writings will be found in D.
Laing's edition of the _Letters and Journals of Robert Baillie_
(1637-1662), Bannatyne Club, 3 vols. (Edinburgh, 1841-1842). Among his
works are _Ladensium_ [Greek: autokatakrisis], an answer to _Lysimachus
Nicanor_, an attack on Laud and his system, in reply to a publication which
charged the Covenanters with Jesuitry; _Anabaptism, the true Fountain of
Independency, Brownisme, Antinomy, Familisme, &c._, a sermon; _An
Historical Vindication of the Government of the Church of Scotland; The
Life of William (Laud) now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Examined_ (London,
1643); _A Parallel of the Liturgy with the Mass Book, the Breviary, the
Ceremonial and other Romish Rituals_ (London, 1661).