BAIN, ALEXANDER (1818-1903), Scottish philosopher and educationalist, was
born on the 11th of June 1818 in Aberdeen, where he received his first
schooling. In early life he was a weaver, hence the punning description of
him as _Weevir, rex philosophorum_. In 1836 he entered Marischal College,
and came under the influence of John Cruickshank, professor of mathematics,
Thomas Clark, professor of chemistry, and William Knight, professor of
natural philosophy. His college career was distinguished, especially in
mental philosophy, mathematics and physics. Towards the end of his arts
course he became a contributor to the _Westminster Review_ (first article
"Electrotype and Daguerreotype," September 1840). This was the beginning of
his connexion with John Stuart Mill, which led to a life-long friendship.
In 1841 he became substitute for Dr Glennie, the professor of moral
philosophy, who, through ill-health, was unable to discharge the active
duties of the chair. This post he occupied for three successive sessions,
during which he continued writing for the _Westminster_, and also in 1842
helped Mill with the revision of the MS. of his _System of Logic_. In 1843
he contributed the first review of the book to the _London and
Westminster_. In 1845 he was appointed professor of mathematics and natural
philosophy in the Andersonian University of Glasgow. A year later,
preferring a wider field, he resigned the position and devoted himself to
literary work. In 1848 he removed to London to fill a post in the board of
health, under Edwin Chadwick, and became a prominent member of the
brilliant circle which included George Grote and John Stuart Mill. In 1855
he published his first large work, _The Senses and the Intellect_, followed
in 1859 by _The Emotions and the Will_. These treatises won for him a
position among independent thinkers. He was examiner in logical and moral
philosophy (1857-1862 and 1864-1869) to the university of London, and in
moral science in the Indian Civil Service examinations.

In 1860 he was appointed by the crown to the new chair of [v.03 p.0222]
logic and English in the university of Aberdeen (created on the
amalgamation of the two colleges, King's and Marischal, by the Scottish
Universities Commission of 1858). Up to this date neither logic nor English
had received adequate attention in Aberdeen, and Bain devoted himself to
supplying these deficiencies. He succeeded not only in raising the standard
of education generally in the north of Scotland, but also in forming a
school of philosophy and in widely influencing the teaching of English
grammar and composition. His efforts were first directed to the preparation
of English textbooks: _Higher English Grammar_ (1863), followed in 1866 by
the _Manual of Rhetoric_, in 1872 by _A First English Grammar_, and in 1874
by the _Companion to the Higher Grammar_. These works covered a large field
and their original views and methods met with wide acceptance. But the
other subject of his chair also called for attention. His own philosophical
writings already published, especially _The Senses and the Intellect_ (to
which was added, in 1861, _The Study of Character_, including an _Estimate
of Phrenology_), were too large for effective use in the class-room.
Accordingly in 1868, he published his _Manual of Mental and Moral Science_,
mainly a condensed form of his treatises, with the doctrines re-stated, and
in many instances freshly illustrated, and with many important additions.
The year 1870 saw the publication of the _Logic_. This, too, was a work
designed for the use of students; it was based on J. S. Mill, but differed
from him in many particulars, and had as distinctive features the treatment
of the doctrine of the conservation of energy in connexion with causation
and the detailed application of the principles of logic to the various
sciences. His services to education in Scotland were now recognized by the
conferment of the honorary degree of doctor of laws by the university of
Edinburgh in 1871. Next came two publications in "The International
Scientific Series," namely, _Mind and Body_ (1872), and _Education as a
Science_ (1879).

All these works, from the _Higher English Grammar_ downwards, were written
by Bain during his twenty years' professoriate at Aberdeen. To the same
period belongs his institution of the philosophical journal _Mind_; the
first number appeared in January 1876, under the editorship of a former
pupil, G. Croom Robertson, of University College, London. To this journal
Bain contributed many important articles and discussions; and in fact he
bore the whole expenses of it till Robertson, owing to ill-health, resigned
the editorship in 1891, when it passed into other hands. Bain resigned his
professorship in 1880 and was succeeded by William Minto, one of his most
brilliant pupils. Nevertheless his interest in thought, and his desire to
complete the scheme of work mapped out in earlier years, remained as keen
as ever. Accordingly, in 1882 appeared the _Biography of James Mill_, and
accompanying it _John Stuart Mill: a Criticism, with Personal
Recollections_. Next came (1884) a collection of articles and papers, most
of which had appeared in magazines, under the title of _Practical Essays_.
This was succeeded (1887, 1888) by a new edition of the _Rhetoric_, and
along with it, a book _On Teaching English_, being an exhaustive
application of the principles of rhetoric to the criticism of style, for
the use of teachers; and in 1894 he published a revised edition of _The
Senses and the Intellect_, which contains his last word on psychology. In
1894 also appeared his last contribution to _Mind_. His last years were
spent in privacy at Aberdeen, where he died on the 18th of September 1903.
He married twice but left no children.

Bain's life was mainly that of a thinker and a man of letters. But he also
took a keen interest and frequently an active part in the political and
social movements of the day; and so highly did the students of Aberdeen
rate his practical ability, that, after his retirement from the chair of
logic, they twice in succession elected him lord rector of the university,
each term of office extending over three years. He was a strenuous advocate
of reform, especially in the teaching of sciences, and supported the claims
of modern languages to a place in the curriculum. A marble bust of him
stands in the public library and his portrait hangs in the Marischal
College.

Wide as Bain's influence has been as a logician, a grammarian and a writer
on rhetoric, his reputation rests on his psychology. At one with Johannes
Müller in the conviction _psychologus nemo nisi physiologus_, he was the
first in Great Britain during the 19th century to apply physiology in a
thoroughgoing fashion to the elucidation of mental states. He was the
originator of the theory of psycho-physical parallelism, which is used so
widely as a working basis by modern psychologists. His idea of applying the
natural history method of classification to psychical phenomena gave
scientific character to his work, the value of which was enhanced by his
methodical exposition and his command of illustration. In line with this,
too, is his demand that psychology shall be cleared of metaphysics; and to
his lead is no doubt due in great measure the position that psychology has
now acquired as a distinct positive science. Prof. Wm. James calls his work
the "last word" of the earlier stage of psychology, but he was in reality
the pioneer of the new. Subsequent psycho-physical investigations have all
been in the spirit of his work; and although he consistently advocated the
introspective method in psychological investigation, he was among the first
to appreciate the help that may be given to it by animal and social and
infant psychology. He may justly claim the merit of having guided the
awakened psychological interest of British thinkers of the second half of
the 19th century into fruitful channels. He emphasized the importance of
our active experiences of movement and effort, and though his theory of a
central innervation sense is no longer held as he propounded it, its value
as a suggestion to later psychologists is great. His autobiography,
published in 1904, contains a full list of his works, and also the history
of the last thirteen years of his life by W. L. Davidson of Aberdeen
University, who further contributed to _Mind_ (April 1904) a review of
Bain's services to philosophy.

Works (beside the above):--Edition with notes of Paley's _Moral Philosophy_
(1852); _Education as a Science_ (1879); _Dissertations on leading
philosophical topics_ (1903, mainly reprints of papers in _Mind_); he
collaborated with J. S. Mill and Grote in editing James Mill's _Analysis of
the Phenomena of the Human Mind_ (1869), and assisted in editing Grote's
_Aristotle_ and _Minor Works_; he also wrote a memoir prefixed to G. Croom
Robertson's _Philosophical Remains_ (1894). (See PSYCHOLOGY and ASSOCIATION
OF IDEAS.)

(W. L. D.)