BAINBRIDGE, WILLIAM (1774-1833), commodore in the United States navy, was
born on the 7th of May 1774 in Princeton, New Jersey. At the age of
fourteen he went to sea in the merchant service, and was in command of a
trading schooner at an early age. The American trading vessels of that
period were supposed to be excluded by the navigation laws from commerce
with the British West Indian Islands, though with the concealed or very
slightly disguised assistance of the planters, they engaged in a good deal
of contraband commerce. The war between France and Great Britain tended
further to make the carrying trade of neutrals difficult. Bainbridge had
therefore to expect, and when he could to elude or beat off, much
interference on the part of French and British cruisers alike. He is said
to have forced a British schooner, probably a privateer, which attacked him
when on his way from Bordeaux to St Thomas, to strike, but he did not take
possession. On another occasion he is said to have taken a man out of a
British ship in retaliation for the impressment of an American seaman by
H.M.S. "Indefatigable," then commanded by Sir Edward Pellew. When the
United States navy was organized in 1798 he was included in the corps of
naval officers, and appointed to the schooner "Retaliation." She was on one
occasion seized by the French but afterwards released. As captain of the
brig "Norfolk" of 18 guns, he was employed in cruising against the French,
who were as aggressive against American commerce as the English. He was
also sent to carry the tribute which the United States still condescended
to pay to the dey of Algiers, in order to secure exemption from capture for
its merchant ships in the Mediterranean--a service which he performed
punctually, though with great disgust. When the United States found that
bribing the pirate Barbary states did not secure exemption from their
outrages, and was constrained at last to use force, he served against
Algiers and Tunis. His ship, the "Philadelphia," ran aground on the
Tunisian coast, and he was for a time imprisoned. On his release he
returned for a time to the merchant service in order to make good the
pecuniary loss caused by his captivity. When the war of 1812 broke out
between Great Britain and the United States, Bainbridge was appointed to
command the United States frigate "Constitution" (44), in succession to
Captain Isaac Hull (_q.v._). The "Constitution" was a very fine ship of
1533 tons, which had already captured the "Guerrière." Under Bainbridge she
was sent to cruise in the South Atlantic. On the 29th of December 1812 he
fell in with H.M.S. "Java," a vessel of 1073 tons, formerly the French
frigate "Renommée" (40). She was on her way to the East Indies, carrying
the newly appointed lieutenant-governor of Bombay. She had a very raw crew,
including very few real seamen, and her men had only had one day's gunnery
drill. The United States navy paid great attention to its gunnery, which
the British navy, misled by its easy victories over the French, had greatly
neglected. In these conditions the fate of the "Java" was soon sealed. She
was cut to pieces and forced to surrender, after suffering heavy loss, and
inflicting very little on the "Constitution." After the conclusion of the
war with Great Britain, Bainbridge served against the Barbary pirates once
more. During his later years he served on the board of navy commissioners.
He died on the 28th of July 1833.

(D. H.)