BAIRD, SPENCER FULLERTON (1823-1887), American naturalist, was born in
Reading, Pennsylvania, on the 3rd of [v.03 p.0225] February 1823. He
graduated at Dickinson College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania in 1840, and next
year made an ornithological excursion through the mountains of
Pennsylvania, walking, says one of his biographers, "400 m. in twenty-one
days, and the last day 60 m." In 1838 he met J. J. Audubon, and
thenceforward his studies were largely ornithological, Audubon giving him a
part of his own collection of birds. After studying medicine for a time,
Baird became professor of natural history in Dickinson College in 1845,
assuming also the duties of the chair of chemistry, and giving instruction
in physiology and mathematics. This variety of duties in a small college
tended to give him that breadth of scientific interest which characterized
him through life, and made him perhaps the most representative general man
of science in America. For the long period between 1850 and 1878 he was
assistant-secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, and on the
death of Joseph Henry he became secretary. From 1871 till his death he was
U.S. Commissioner of Fish and Fisheries. While an officer of the
Smithsonian, Baird's duties included the superintendence of the labour of
workers in widely different lines. Thus, apart from his assistance to
others, his own studies and published writings cover a broad range:
iconography, geology, mineralogy, botany, anthropology, general zoology,
and, in particular, ornithology; while for a series of years he edited an
annual volume summarizing progress in all scientific lines of
investigation. He gave general superintendence, between 1850 and 1860, to
several government expeditions for scientific exploration of the western
territories of the United States, preparing for them a manual of
_Instructions to Collectors_. Of his own publications, the bibliography by
G. Brown Goode, from 1843 to the close of 1882, includes 1063 entries, of
which 775 were short articles in his _Annual Record_. His most important
volumes, on the whole, were _Birds_, in the series of reports of
explorations and surveys for a railway route from the Mississippi river to
the Pacific ocean (1858), of which Dr Elliott Coues says (as quoted in the
_Popular Science Monthly_, xxxiii. 553) that it "exerted an influence
perhaps stronger and more widely felt than that of any of its predecessors,
Audubon's and Wilson's not excepted, and marked an epoch in the history of
American ornithology"; _Mammals of North America: Descriptions based on
Collections in the Smithsonian Institution_ (Philadelphia, 1859); and the
monumental work (with Thomas Mayo Brewer and Robert Ridgway) _History of
North American Birds_ (Boston, 1875-1884; "Land Birds," 3 vols., "Water
Birds," 2 vols). He died on the 19th of August 1887 at the great marine
biological laboratory at Woods Hole, Massachusetts, an institution which
was largely the result of his own efforts, and which has exercised a wide
effect upon both scientific and economic ichthyology.