BAKER, VALENTINE [BAKER PASHA] (1827-1887), British soldier, was a younger
brother of Sir Samuel Baker (_q.v._). He was educated at Gloucester and in
Ceylon, and in 1848 entered the Ceylon Rifles as an ensign. Soon
transferred to the 12th Lancers, he saw active service with that regiment
in the Kaffir war of 1852-53. In the Crimean War Baker was present at the
action of Traktir (or Tchernaya) and at the fall of Sevastopol, and in 1859
he became major in the 10th Hussars, succeeding only a year later to the
command. This position he held for thirteen years, during which period the
highest efficiency of his men was reached, and outside the regiment he did
good service to his arm by his writings. He went through the wars of 1866
and 1870 as a spectator with the German armies, and in 1873 he started upon
a famous journey through Khorassan. Though he was unable to reach Khiva the
results of the journey afforded a great deal of political, geographical and
military information, especially as to the advance of Russia in central
Asia. In 1874 he was back in England and took up a staff appointment at
Aldershot. Less than a year later Colonel Baker's career in the British
army came to an untimely end. He was arrested on a charge of indecent
assault upon a young woman in a railway carriage, and was sentenced to a
year's imprisonment and a fine. His dismissal from the service was an
inevitable consequence; it must be stated, however, that the view taken of
the circumstances by good authorities was that Baker's conduct, when judged
by conventional standards, admitted of considerable extenuation. He himself
never opened his mouth in self-defence. Two years later, having meanwhile
left England, he entered the service of Turkey in the war with Russia. At
first in a high position in the gendarmerie, he was soon transferred to
Mehemet's staff, and thence took over the command of a division of
infantry. With this division Baker sustained the brilliant rearguard action
of Tashkessan against the troops of Gourko. Promoted _Ferik_
(lieutenant-general) for this feat, he continued to command Suleiman's
rearguard with distinction. After the peace he was employed in an
administrative post in Armenia, where he remained until 1882. In this year
he was offered the command of the newly formed Egyptian army, which he
accepted. On his arrival at Cairo, however, the offer was withdrawn and he
only obtained the command of the Egyptian police. In this post he devoted
by far the greater amount of his energy to the training of the gendarmerie,
which he realized would be the reserve of the purely military forces.

When the Sudan War broke out, Baker, hastening with 3500 men to relieve
Tokar, encountered the enemy under Osman Digna at El Teb. His men became
panic-stricken at the first rush and allowed themselves to be slaughtered
like sheep. Baker himself with a few of his officers succeeded by hard
fighting in cutting a way out, but his force was annihilated. British
troops soon afterwards arrived at Suakin, and Sir Gerald Graham took the
offensive. Baker Pasha accompanied the British force, and guided it in its
march to the scene of his defeat, and at the desperately-fought second
battle of El Teb he was wounded. He remained in command of the Egyptian
police until his death in 1887. Amongst his works may be mentioned _Our
National Defences_ (1860), _War in Bulgaria, a Narrative of Personal
Experience_ (London, 1879), _Clouds in the East_ (London, 1876).