BAKÓCZ, TAMÁS, CARDINAL (1442-1521), Hungarian ecclesiastic and statesman,
was the son of a wagoner, adopted by his uncle, who trained him for the
priesthood and whom he succeeded as rector of Tétel (1480). Shortly
afterwards he became one of the secretaries of King Matthias I., who made
him bishop of Gyor and a member of the royal council (1490). Under
Wladislaus II. (1490-1516) he became successively bishop of Eger, the
richest of the Hungarian sees, archbishop of Esztergom (1497), cardinal
(1500), and titular patriarch of Constantinople (1510). From 1490 to his
death in 1521 he was the leading statesman of Hungary and mainly
responsible for her foreign policy. It was solely through his efforts that
Hungary did not accede to the league of Cambrai, was consistently friendly
with Venice, and formed a family compact with the Habsburgs. He was also
the only Magyar prelate who seriously aspired to the papal throne. In 1513,
on the death of Julius II., he went to Rome for the express purpose of
bringing about his own election as pope. He was received with more than
princely pomp, and all but succeeded in his design, thanks to his
extraordinary adroitness and the command of an almost unlimited
bribing-fund. But Venice and the emperor played him false, and he failed.
He returned to Hungary as papal legate, bringing with him the bull of Leo
X. proclaiming a fresh crusade against the Turks. But the crusade
degenerated into a _jacquerie_ which ravaged the whole kingdom, and much
discredited Bakócz. He lost some of his influence at first after the death
of Wladislaus, but continued to be the guiding spirit at court, till age
and infirmity confined him almost entirely to his house in the last three
years of his life. Bakócz was a man of great ability but of no moral
principle whatever. His whole life was a tissue of treachery. He was false
to his benefactor Matthias, false to Matthias's son János Corvinus
(_q.v._), whom he chicaned out of the throne, and false to his accomplice
in that transaction, Queen Beatrice. His rapacity disgusted even an age in
which every one could be bought and sold. His attempt to incorporate the
wealthy diocese of Transylvania with his own primatial province was one of
the principal causes of the spread of the Reformation in Hungary. He left a
fortune of many millions. His one redeeming feature was a love of art; his
own cathedral was a veritable Pantheon.

See Vilmos Fraknoi, _Tamás Bakócz_ (Hung.) (Budapest, 1889).

(R. N. B.)