BALAGUER, VICTOR (1824-1901), Spanish politician and author, was born at
Barcelona on the 11th of December 1824, and was educated at the university
of his native town. His precocity was remarkable; his first dramatic essay,
_Pepin el jorobado_, was placed on the Barcelona stage when he was fourteen
years of age, and at nineteen he was publicly "crowned" after the
production of his second play, _Don Enrique el Dadivoso_. From 1843 to 1868
he was the chief of the Liberal party in Barcelona, and as proprietor and
editor of _El Conseller_ did much to promote the growth of local patriotism
in Catalonia. But it was not till 1857 that he wrote his first poem in
Catalan--a copy of verses to the Virgin of Montserrat. Henceforward he
frequently adopted the pseudonym of "lo Trovador de Montserrat"; in 1859 he
helped to restore the "Juegos Florales," and in 1861 was proclaimed _mestre
de gay saber_. He was removed to Madrid, took a prominent part in political
life, and in 1867 emigrated to Provence. On the expulsion of Queen
Isabella, he returned to Spain, represented Manresa in the Cortes, and in
1871-1872 was successively minister of the colonies and of finance. He
resigned office at the restoration, but finally followed his party in
rallying to the dynasty; he was appointed vice-president of congress, and
was subsequently a senator. He died at Madrid on the 14th of January 1901.
Long before his death he had become alienated from the advanced school of
Catalan nationalists, and endeavoured to explain away the severe criticism
of Castile in which his _Historia de Cataluña y de la Corona de Aragon_
(1860-1863) abounds. This work, like his _Historia politica y literaria de
los trovadores_ (1878-1879), is inaccurate, partial and unscientific; but
both books are attractively written and have done great service to the
cause which Balaguer once upheld. As a poet he is imitative: reminiscences
of Quintana are noticeable in his patriotic songs, of Zorrilla in his
historical ballads, of Byron in his lyrical poems. He wrote too hastily to
satisfy artistic canons; but if he has the faults he has also the merits of
a pioneer, and in Catalonia his name will endure.

[v.03 p.0234] BALAKIREV, MILI ALEXEIVICH (1836- ), Russian musical
composer, was born at Nijni-Novgorod on the 31st of December 1836. He had
the advantage as a boy of living with Oulibichev, author of a _Life of
Mozart_, who had a private band, and from whom Balakirev obtained a
valuable education in music. At eighteen, after a university course in
mathematics, he went to St Petersburg, full of national ardour, and there
made the acquaintance of Glinka. Round him gathered César Cui (b. 1835),
and others, and in 1862 the Free School of Music was established, by which,
and by Balakirev's personal zeal, the modern school of Russian music was
largely stimulated. In 1869 Balakirev was appointed director of the
imperial chapel and conductor of the Imperial Musical Society. His
influence as a conductor, and as an organizer of Russian music, give him
the place of a founder of a new movement, apart even from his own
compositions, which though few in number are remarkable in themselves. His
works consist largely of songs and collections of folk-songs, but include a
symphony (first played in England in 1901), two symphonic poems ("Russia"
and "Tamara"), and four overtures, besides pianoforte pieces. His
orchestral works are of the "programme-music" order, but all are brilliant
examples of the highly coloured, elaborate style characteristic of modern
Russian composers, and developed by Balakirev's disciples, such as Borodin
and Rimsky-Korsakov.