BALANOGLOSSUS, the general name given to certain peculiar, opaque,
worm-like animals which live an obscure life under stones, and burrow in
the sand from between tide-marks down to the abyssal regions of the sea.
Their colour is usually some tone of yellow with dashes of red, brown and
green, and they frequently emit a pungent odour. The name has reference to
the tongue-shaped muscular proboscis by which the animal works its way
through the sand. The proboscis is not the only organ of locomotion, being
assisted by the succeeding segment of the body, the buccal segment or
collar. By the waves of contraction executed by the proboscis accompanied
by inflation of the collar, progression is effected, sometimes with
marvellous rapidity. The third body region or trunk may attain a great
length, one or two feet, or even more, and is also muscular, but the
truncal muscles are of subordinate importance in locomotion, serving
principally to promote the peristaltic contractions of the body by which
the food is carried through the gut. The function of alimentation is
closely associated with that of locomotion, somewhat as in the burrowing
earthworm; in the excavation of its burrows the sand is passed through the
body, and any nutrient matter that may adhere to it is extracted during its
passage through the intestine, the exhausted sand being finally ejected
through the vent at the orifice of the burrow and appearing at low tide as
a worm casting. In accordance with this manner of feeding, the mouth is
kept permanently open and prevented from collapsing by a pair of skeletal
cornua belonging to a sustentacular apparatus (the nuchal skeleton), the
body of which lies within the narrow neck of the proboscis; the latter is
inserted into the collar and surrounded by the anterior free flap of this
segment of the body.

When first discovered by J. F. Eschscholtz at the Marshall Islands in 1825,
_Balanoglossus_ was described as a worm-like animal belonging to the
Echinoderm order of Holothurians or sea-cucumbers. In 1865 Kowalevsky
discovered that the organs of respiration consist of numerous pairs of
gill-slits leading from the digestive canal through the thickness of the
body-wall to the exterior. On this account the animal was subsequently
placed by Gegenbaur in a special class of Vermes, the Enteropneusta. In
1883-1886 Bateson showed by his embryological researches that the
Enteropneusta exhibit chordate (vertebrate) affinities in respect of the
coelomic, skeletal and nervous systems as well as in regard to the
respiratory system, and, further, that the gill-slits are formed upon a
plan similar to that of the gill-slits of _Amphioxus_, being subdivided by
tongue-bars which depend from the dorsal borders of the slits.

_Coelom and Pore-canals_.--In correspondence with the tri-regional
differentiation of the body in its external configuration, the coelom
(body-cavity, perivisceral cavity) is divided into three portions
completely separated from one another by septa:--(1) proboscis-coelom, or
first body-cavity; (2) the collar-coelom, or second body-cavity; (3)
truncal coelom, or third body-cavity. Of these divisions of the coelom the
first two communicate with the exterior by means of a pair of ciliated
pore-canals placed at the posterior end of their respective segments. The
proboscis-pores are highly variable, and frequently only one is present,
that on the left side; sometimes the pore-canals of the proboscis unite to
open by a common median orifice, and sometimes their communication with the
proboscis-coelom appears to be occluded, and finally the pore-canals may be
quite vestigial. The collar-pores are remarkable for their constancy; this
is probably owing co the fact that they have become adapted to a special
function, the inhalation of water to render the collar turgid during
progression. There are reasons for supposing that the truncal coelom was at
one time provided with pore-canals, but supposed vestiges of these
structures have only been described for one genus, _Spengelia_, in which
they lie near the anterior end of the truncal coelom.

_Enteron_.--Not only is the coelom thus subdivided, but the enteron (gut,
alimentary canal, digestive tube) itself shows indications of three main
subsections in continuity with one another:--(1) proboscis-gut
(_Eicheldarm_, stomochord, _vide infra_); (2) collar-gut (buccal cavity,
throat); (3) truncal gut extending from the collar to the vent.

_Stomochord_.--The proboscis-gut occurs as an outgrowth from the anterior
dorsal wall of the collar-gut, and extends forward into the basal
(posterior) region of the proboscis, through the neck into the
proboscis-coelom, ending blindly in front. Although an integral portion of
the gut, it has ceased to assist in alimentation, its epithelium undergoes
vacuolar differentiation and hypertrophy, and its lumen becomes more or
less vestigial. It has, in fact, become metamorphosed into a resistant
supporting structure resembling in some respects the notochord of the true
Chordata, but probably not directly comparable with the latter structure,
being related to it solely by way of substitution. On account of the
presence and mode of origin (from the gut-wall) of this organ Bateson
introduced the term hemichorda as a phyletic name for the class
Enteropneusta. As the proboscis-gut appears to have undoubtedly skeletal
properties, and as it also has topographical relations with the mouth, it
has been designated in English by the non-committal term stomochord. It is
not a simple diverticulum of the collar-gut, but a complex structure
possessing paired lateral pouches and a ventral convexity (ventral caecum)
which rests in a concavity at the front end of the body of the nuchal
skeleton (fig. 3). In some species (_Spengelidae_) there is a long
capillary vermiform extension of the stomochord in front. The nuchal
skeleton is a non-cellular laminated thickening of basement-membrane
underlying that portion of the stomochord which lies between the
above-mentioned pouches and the orifice into the throat. At the point where
the stomochord opens into the buccal cavity the nuchal skeleton bifurcates,
and the two cornua thus produced pass obliquely backwards and downwards
embedded in the wall of the throat, often giving rise to projecting ridges
that bound a dorsal groove of the collar-gut which is in continuity with
the wall of the stomochord (fig. 3).

_Nervous System_.--At the base of the epidermis (which is in general
ciliated) there is over the entire surface of the body a layer of
nerve-fibres, occurring immediately outside the basement-membrane which
separates the epidermis from the subjacent musculature. The nervous system
is thus essentially epidermal in position and diffuse in distribution; but
an interesting concentration of nerve-cells and fibres has taken place in
the collar-region, where a medullary tube, closed in from the outside,
opens in front and behind by anterior and posterior neuropores. This is the
collar nerve-tube. Sometimes the central canal is wide and uninterrupted
between the two neuropores; in other cases it becomes broken up into a
large number of small closed medullary cavities, and in others again it is
obsolete. In one family, the _Ptychoderidae_, the medullary tube of the
collar is connected at intermediate points with the epidermis by means of a
variable number of unpaired outgrowths from its dorsal wall, generally
containing an axial lumen derived from and in continuity with the central
canal. These hollow roots terminate blindly in the dorsal epidermis of the
collar, and place the nervous layer of the latter in direct connexion with
the fibres of the nerve-tube. The exact significance of these roots is a
matter for speculation, but it seems possible that they are epiphysial
structures remotely comparable with the epiphysial (pineal) complex of the
craniate vertebrates. In accordance with this view there would be also some
probability in favour of regarding the collar nerve-tube of the
Enteropneusta as the equivalent of the cerebral vesicle only of _Amphioxus_
and the Ascidian tadpole, and also of the primary fore-brain of
vertebrates.

Special thickenings of the diffuse nervous layer of the epidermis occur in
certain regions and along certain lines. In the neck of the proboscis the
fibrous layer is greatly thickened, and other intensifications of this
layer occur in the dorsal and ventral middle lines of the trunk extending
to the posterior end of the body. The dorsal epidermal nerve-tract is
continued in front into the ventral wall of the collar nerve-tube, and at
the point of junction there is a circular commissural thickening following
the posterior rim of the collar and affording a special connexion between
the dorsal and ventral nerve-tracts. From the ventral surface of the collar
nerve-tube numerous motor fibres may be seen passing to the subjacent
musculature. These fibres are not aggregated into roots.

[v.03 p.0238] [Illustration: FIG. 2.--Structure of branchial region.

_bc_, coelom.
_tb_, tongue-bars.
_ds_, mesentery.
_pr_, ridge.
_vv_, vessel.
_gp_, gill-pore.
_dn_, dorsal nerve.
_dv_, vessel.
_oe_, oesophagus.
_vs_, mesentery.
_vn_, ventral nerve. ]

_Gill-slits_.--The possession of gill-slits is as interesting a feature in
the organization of _Balanoglossus_ as is the presence of tracheae in
_Peripatus_. These gill-slits occupy a variable extent of the anterior
portion of the trunk, commencing immediately behind the collar-trunk
septum. The branchial bars which constitute the borders of the clefts are
of two kinds:--(1) Septal bars between two contiguous clefts, corresponding
to the primary bars in _Amphioxus_; (2) Tongue-bars. The chief resemblances
between _Balanoglossus_ and _Amphioxus_ in respect of the gill-slits may be
stated briefly as follows:--([alpha]) the presence of two kinds of
branchial bars in all species and also of small crossbars (synapticula) in
many species; ([beta]) numerous gill-slits, from forty to more than a
hundred pairs; ([gamma]) the addition of new gill-slits by fresh
perforation at the posterior end of the pharynx throughout life. The chief
differences are, that (a) the tongue-bar is the essential organ of the
gill-slit in _Balanoglossus_, and exceeds the septal bars in bulk, while in
_Amphioxus_ the reverse is the case; (b) the tongue-bar contains a large
coelomic space in _Balanoglossus_, but is solid in _Amphioxus_; (c) the
skeletal rods in the tongue-bars of _Balanoglossus_ are double; (d) the
tongue-bar in _Balanoglossus_ does not fuse with the ventral border of the
cleft, but ends freely below, thus producing a continuous U-shaped cleft.
The meaning of this singular contrast between the two animals may be that
we have here an instance of an interesting gradation in evolution. From
serving primitively as the essential organ of the cleft the tongue-bar may
have undergone reduction and modification, becoming a secondary bar in
_Amphioxus_, subordinate to the primary bars in size, vascularity and
development; finally, in the craniate vertebrates it would then have
completed its involution, the suggestion having been made that the
tongue-bars are represented by the thymus-primordia.

_Gill-pouches and Gill-pores_.--Only rarely do the gill-slits open freely
and directly to the exterior (fig. 1). In most species of _Balanoglossus_
each gill-slit may be said to open into its own atrial chamber or
gill-pouch; this in its turn opens to the exterior by a minute gill-pore.
There are, therefore, as many gill-pouches as there are gill-slits and as
many gill-pores as pouches. The gill-pores occur on each side of the dorsal
aspect of the worm in a longitudinal series at the base of a shallow
groove, the branchial groove. The respiratory current of water is therefore
conducted to the exterior by different means from that adopted by
_Amphioxus_, and this difference is so great that the theory which seeks to
explain it has to postulate radical changes of structure, function and
topography.

_Excretory and Vascular Systems_.--It seems likely that the coelomic
pore-canals were originally excretory organs, but in the existing
Enteropneusta the pore-canals (especially the collar canals) have, as we
have seen, acquired new functions or become vestigial, and the function of
excretion is now mainly accomplished by a structure peculiar to the
Enteropneusta called the glomerulus, a vascular complex placed on either
side of the anterior portion of the stomochord, projecting into the
proboscis-coelom. The vascular system itself is quite peculiar, consisting
of lacunae and channels destitute of endothelium, situated within the
thickness of the basement-membrane of the body-wall, of the gut-wall and of
the mesenteries. The blood, which is a non-corpuscular fluid, is propelled
forwards by the contractile dorsal vessel and collected into the central
blood-sinus; this lies over the stomochord, and is surrounded on three
sides by a closed vesicle, with contractile walls, called the pericardium
(_Herzblase_). By the pulsation of the pericardial vesicle (best observed
in the larva) the blood is driven into the glomerulus, from which it issues
by efferent vessels which effect a junction with the ventral
(sub-intestinal) vessel in the trunk. The vascular system does not readily
lend itself to morphological comparison between such widely different
animals as _Balanoglossus_ and _Amphioxus_, and the reader is therefore
referred to the memoirs cited at the end of this article for further
details.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Structure of anterior end.

a, Arrow from proboscis-cavity (pc) passing to left of pericardium (per)
and out through proboscis pore-canal.
b^1, arrow from central canal of neurochord (cnc) passed out through
anterior neuropore.
b^2, ditto; through posterior neuropore.
c, arrow intended to pass from 1st gill-pouch through collar pore-canal
into collar-coelom (cc).
cts, posterior limit of collar.
dv, dorsal vessel passing into central sinus (bs).
ev, efferent vessel passing into ventral vessel (vv).
epr, epiphysial tubes.
st, stomochord.
vs, ventral septum of proboscis.
sk, body of nuchal skeleton.
m, mouth.
th, throat.
tb, tongue-bars.
tc, trunk coelom. ]

_Reproductive System_.--The sexes are separate, and when mature are
sometimes distinguished by small differences of colour in the genital
region. Both male and female gonads consist of more or less lobulated
hollow sacs connected with the epidermis by short ducts. In their
disposition they are either uniserial, biserial or multiserial. They occur
in the branchial region, and also extend to a variable distance behind it.
In exceptional cases they are either confined to the branchial region or
excluded from it. When they are arranged in uniserial or biserial rows the
genital ducts open into or near the branchial grooves in the region of the
pharynx and in a corresponding position in the post-branchial region. An
important feature is the occurrence in some species (_Ptychoderidae_) of
paired longitudinal pleural or lateral folds of the body which are mobile,
and can be approximated at their free edges so as to close in the dorsal
surface, embracing both the median dorsal nerve-tract and the branchial
grooves with the gill-pores, so as to form a temporary peri-branchial and
medullary tube, open behind where the folds cease. On the other hand, they
can be spread out horizontally so as to expose their own upper side as well
as the dorsal surface of the body (fig. 1). These folds are called the
genital pleurae because they contain the bulk of the gonads. Correlated
with the presence of the genital pleurae there is a pair of vascular folds
of the basement membrane proceeding from the dorsal wall of the gut in the
post-branchial portion of the branchio-genital region, and from the dorsal
angles made by the pleural folds with the body-wall in the pharyngeal
region; they pass, in their most fully developed condition, to the free
border of the genital pleurae. These vascular membranes are called the
lateral septa. Since there are many species which do not possess these
genital pleurae, the question arises as to whether their presence or their
absence is the more primitive condition. Without attempting to answer this
question categorically, it may be pointed out that within the limits of the
family (_Ptychoderidae_) which is especially characterized by their
presence there are some species in [v.03 p.0239] which the genital pleurae
are quite obsolete, and yet lateral septa occur (_e.g._ _Ptychodera
ruficollis_), seeming to indicate that the pleural folds have in such cases
been secondarily suppressed.

_Development_.--The development of _Balanoglossus_ takes place according to
two different schemes, known as direct and indirect, correlated with the
occurrence in the group of two kinds of ova, large and small. Direct
development, in which the adult form is achieved without striking
metamorphosis by a gradual succession of stages, seems to be confined to
the family _Balanoglossidae_. The remaining two families of Enteropneusta,
_Ptychoderidae_ and _Spengelidae_, contain species of which probably all
pursue an indirect course of development, culminating in a metamorphosis by
which the adult form is attained. In these cases the larva, called
_Tornaria_, is pelagic and transparent, and possesses a complicated
ciliated seam, the longitudinal ciliated band, often drawn out into
convoluted bays and lappets. In addition to this ciliated band the form of
the _Tornaria_ is quite characteristic and unlike the adult. The Tornaria
larva offers a certain similarity to larvae of Echinoderms (sea-urchins,
star-fishes, and sea-cucumbers), and when first discovered was so
described. It is within the bounds of possibility that _Tornaria_ actually
does indicate a remote affinity on the part of the Enteropneusta to the
Echinoderms, not only on account of its external form, but also by reason
of the possession of a dorsal water-pore communicating with the anterior
body-cavity. In the direct development Bateson showed that the three
divisions of the coelom arise as pouches constricted off from the
archenteron or primitive gut, thus resembling the development of the
mesoblastic somites of _Amphioxus_. It would appear that while the direct
development throws light upon the special plan of organization of the
Enteropneusta, the indirect development affords a clue to their possible
derivation. However this may be, it is sufficiently remarkable that a small
and circumscribed group like the Enteropneusta, which presents such a
comparatively uniform plan of composition and of external form, should
follow two such diverse methods of development.

_Distribution_.--Some thirty species of _Balanoglossus_ are known,
distributed among all the principal marine provinces from Greenland to New
Zealand. The species which occurs in the English Channel is _Ptychodera
sarniensis_. The _Ptychoderidae_ and _Spengelidae_ are predominantly
tropical and subtropical, while the _Balanoglossidae_ are predominantly
arctic and temperate in their distribution. One of the most singular facts
concerning the geographical distribution of Enteropneusta has recently been
brought to light by Benham, who found a species of _Balanoglossus_, _sensu
stricto_, on the coast of New Zealand hardly distinguishable from one
occurring off Japan. Finally, _Glandiceps abyssicola_ (_Spengelidae_) was
dredged during the "Challenger" expedition in the Atlantic Ocean off the
coast of Africa at a depth of 2500 fathoms.

AUTHORITIES.--W. Bateson, "Memoirs on the Direct Development of
Balanoglossus," _Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci._ (vols. xxiv.-xxvi., 1884-1886);
W. B. Benham, "Balanoglossus otagoensis, n. sp," _Q. J. M. S._ (vol. xlii.
p. 497, 1899); Yves Delage and Éd. Hérouard, _Traité de zoologie concrète_
(t. viii.), "Les Procordés" (1898); S. F. Harmer, "Note on the Name
Balanoglossus," _Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc._ (x. p. 190, 1900); T. H. Morgan,
"Memoirs on the Indirect Development of Balanoglossus," _Journ. Morph._
(vol. v., 1891, and vol. ix., 1894); W. E. Ritter, "_Harrimania maculosa_,
a new Genus and Species of Enteropneusta from Alaska," Papers from the
Harriman Alaska Exhibition (ii.), _Proc. Washington Ac._ (ii. p. 111,
1900); J. W. Spengel, "Die Enteropneusten," _Eighteenth Monograph on the
Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel_ (1893); A. Willey, "Enteropneusta
from the South Pacific, with Notes on the West Indian Species," _Zool.
Results_ (Willey), part iii., 1899; see also _Q. J. M. S._ (vol. xlii. p.
223, 1899); J. P. Hill, "The Enteropneusta of Funafuti," _Mem. Austral.
Mus._ (iii., 1897-1898); M. Caullery and F. Mesnil, "Balanoglossus
Kochleri, n. sp. English Channel," _C. R. Soc. Biol._ lii. p. 256 (1900).

(A. W.*)