BALAKLAVA, a village in the Crimea, east of Sevastopol, famous for a battle
in the Crimean War. The action of Balaklava (October 25th, 1854) was
brought about by the advance of a Russian field army under General Liprandi
to attack the allied English, French and Turkish forces besieging
Sevastopol. The ground on which the engagement took place was the Vorontsov
ridge (see CRIMEAN WAR), and the valleys on either side of it. Liprandi's
corps formed near Traktir Bridge, and early on the 25th of October its
advanced guard moved southward to attack the ridge, which was weakly
occupied by Turkish battalions behind slight entrenchments. The two nearest
British divisions were put into motion as soon as the firing became
serious, but were prevented by their orders from descending at once into
the plain, and the Turks had to meet the assault of greatly superior
numbers. They made a gallant resistance, but the Russians quickly cleared
the ridge, capturing several guns, and their first line was followed by a
heavy mass of cavalry which crossed the ridge and descended into the
Balaklava plain. At this moment the British cavalry division under the earl
of Lucan was in the plain, but their commander was prevented from engaging
the Russians by the tenor of his orders. One of his brigades, the Heavy
(4th and 5th Dragoon Guards, 1st, 2nd and 6th Dragoons) under
Brigadier-General J. Y. Scarlett, was in the Balaklava plain; the other,
the Light Brigade under Lord Cardigan (4th and 13th Light Dragoons now
Hussars, 8th and 11th Hussars and 17th Lancers) in the valley to the north
of the Vorontsov ridge. All these regiments were very weak in numbers. The
Russian cavalry mass, after crossing the ridge, moved towards Balaklava; a
few shots were fired into it by a Turkish battery and a moment later the
Heavy Brigade charged. The attack was impeded at first by obstacles of
ground, but in the _mêlée_ the weight of the British troopers gradually
broke up the enemy, and the charge of the 4th Dragoon Guards, delivered
against the flank of the Russian mass, was decisive. The whole of the
Russian cavalry broke and fled to the ridge. This famous charge occupied
less than five minutes from first to last, and at the same time some of the
Russian squadrons, attempting to charge the 93rd Highlanders (who were near
Balaklava) were met by the steady volleys of the "thin red line," and fled
with the rest. The defeated troops retreated past the still inactive Light
Brigade, on whose left a French cavalry brigade was now posted. The
Russians were at this juncture reinforced by a mixed force on the Fedukhine
heights; Liprandi's infantry occupied the captured ridge, and manned the
guns taken from the Turks. The cavalry defeated by the Heavy Brigade was
re-formed in the northern valley behind the field guns, and infantry,
cavalry and artillery were on both the Fedukhine and the Vorontsov heights.
Thus, in front of the Light Brigade was a valley over a mile long, at the
end of which was the enemy's cavalry and twelve guns, and on the ridges on
either side there were in all twenty-two guns, with cavalry and infantry.
It was under these circumstances that an order was given by the British
headquarters, which led to the charge for which above all Balaklava is
remembered. It was carried to Lord Lucan by Captain L. E. Nolan, 15th
Hussars, and ran as follows:--"Lord Raglan wishes the cavalry to advance
rapidly to the front and try to prevent the enemy carrying away the guns
... French cavalry is on your left." Lucan, seeing no attempt on the part
of the enemy to move guns, questioned Nolan, who is said to have pointed
down the valley to the artillery on the plain; whereupon Lucan rode to Lord
Cardigan, the commander of the Light Brigade, and repeated Lord Raglan's
order and Nolan's explanation. The Light Brigade then advanced straight to
its front, and soon came under fire from the guns on both flanks. Nolan was
killed as he rode across the front of the brigade, perhaps with the
intention of changing its direction to the Vorontsov ridge. Five minutes
later the guns in front began to fire with telling effect. The pace was
increased, though the "charge" was not sounded, and Cardigan and those of
his men who remained mounted, rode up to and through the Russian line of
guns. Small parties even charged the Russian cavalry in rear and on either
flank. The French 4th _Chasseurs d' Afrique_ made a dashing charge which
drove the Russians off the Fedukhine heights, though at considerable loss.
Lucan had meanwhile called up the Heavy Brigade to support the Light, but
it lost many men and horses and was quickly withdrawn. Only two formed
bodies of the Light Brigade found their way back. The 13th Light Dragoons
mustered but ten mounted men at the evening parade; the brigade as a whole
had lost 247 men and 497 horses out of a total strength of 673 engaged in
the charge, which lasted twenty minutes from first to last. The two
infantry divisions which now approached the field were again halted, and
Liprandi was left undisturbed on the Vorontsov ridge and in possession of
the captured guns. The result of the day was thus unfavourable to the
allies, but the three chief incidents of the engagement--the two cavalry
charges and the fight of the 93rd Highlanders--gave to it all the prestige
of a victory. The impression created by the conduct of the Light Brigade
was forcibly expressed in Tennyson's well-known ballad, and in spite of the
equally celebrated remark of the French general Bosquet, _C'est magnifique
mais ce n'est pas la guerre_, it may be questioned whether the moral effect
of the charge did not outweigh the very serious loss in trained men and
horses involved.