BALANCE OF POWER, a phrase in international law for such a "just
equilibrium" between the members of the family of nations as should prevent
any one of them from becoming sufficiently strong to enforce its will upon
the rest. The principle involved in this, as Hume pointed out in his _Essay
on the Balance of Power_, is as old as history, and was perfectly familiar
to the ancients both as political theorists and as practical statesmen. In
its essence it is no more than a precept of commonsense born of experience
and the instinct of self-preservation; for, as Polybius very clearly puts
it (lib. i. cap. 83): "Nor is such a principle to be despised, nor should
so great a power be allowed to any one as to make it impossible for you
afterwards to dispute with him on equal terms concerning your manifest
rights." It was not, however, till the beginning of the 17th century, when
the science of international law took shape at the hands of Grotius and his
successors, that the theory of the balance of power was formulated as a
fundamental principle of diplomacy. According to this the European states
formed a sort of federal community, the fundamental condition of which was
the preservation of the balance of power, _i.e._ such a disposition of
things that no one state or potentate should be able absolutely to
predominate and prescribe laws to the rest; and, since all were equally
interested in this settlement, it was held to be the interest, the right
and the duty of every power to interfere, even by force of arms, when any
of the conditions of this settlement were infringed or assailed by any
other member of the community.[1] This principle, once formulated, became
an axiom of political science. It was impressed as such by Fénelon, in his
_Instructions_, on the young duke of Burgundy; it was proclaimed to the
world by Frederick the Great in his _Anti-Machiavel_; it was re-stated with
admirable clearness in 1806 by Friedrich von Gentz in his _Fragments on the
Balance of Power_. It formed the basis of the coalitions against Louis XIV.
and Napoleon, and the occasion, or the excuse, for most of the wars which
desolated Europe between the congress of Münster in 1648 and that of Vienna
in 1814. During the greater part of the 19th century it was obscured by the
series of national upheavals which have remodelled the map of Europe; yet
it underlay all the efforts of diplomacy to stay or to direct the elemental
forces let loose by the Revolution, and with the restoration of comparative
calm it has once more emerged as the motive for the various political
alliances of which the ostensible object is the preservation of peace (see
EUROPE: _History_).

An equilibrium between the various powers which form the family of nations
is, in fact,--as Professor L. Oppenheim (_Internat. Law_, i. 73) justly
points out--essential to the very existence of any international law. In
the absence of any central authority, the only sanction behind the code of
rules established by custom or defined in treaties, known as "international
law," is the capacity of the powers to hold each other in check. Were this
to fail, nothing could prevent any state sufficiently powerful from
ignoring the law and acting solely according to its convenience and its
interests.

See, besides the works quoted in the article, the standard books on
International Law (_q.v._).

(W. A. P.)

[1] Emerich de Vattel, _Le Droit des gens_ (Leiden, 1758).