BALANCE OF TRADE, a term in economics belonging originally to the period
when the "mercantile theory" prevailed, but still in use, though not quite
perhaps in the same way as at its origin. The "balance of trade" was then
identified with the sum of the precious metals which a country received in
the course of its trading with other countries or with particular
countries. There was no doubt an idea that somehow or other the amount of
the precious metals received represented profit on the trading, and each
country desired as much profit as possible. Princes and sovereigns,
however, with political aims in view, were not close students of mercantile
profits, and would probably have urged the acquisition of the precious
metals as an object of trade even if they had realized that the country as
a whole was exporting "money's worth" in order to buy the precious metals
which were desired for political objects. The "mercantile theory" was
exploded by Adam Smith's demonstration that gold and silver were only
commodities like others with no special virtue in them, and that they would
come into a country when there was a demand for them, according to the
amount, in proportion to other demands, which the country could afford to
pay; but the ideas in which the theory itself has originated have not died
out, and the idea especially of a "balance of trade" to which the rulers of
a country should give attention is to be found in popular discussions of
business topics and in politics, the general notion being that a nation is
prosperous when its statistics show a "trade balance" in its favour and
unprosperous when the reverse is shown. In modern times the excess of
imports over exports or of exports over imports, shown in the statistics of
foreign trade, has also come to be identified in popular speech with the
"balance of trade," and many minds are no doubt imbued with the ideas (1)
that an excess of imports over exports is bad, and (2) an excess of exports
over imports is the reverse, because the former indicates an "unfavourable"
and the latter a "favourable" trade balance. In the former case it is urged
that a nation so circumstanced is living on its capital. Exact remedies are
not suggested, although the idea of preventing or hampering foreign imports
as a means of developing home trade and of thus altering the supposed
disastrous trade balance is obviously the logical inference from the
arguments. A consideration of these ideas and of recent discussions about
imports and exports, appears accordingly to be needed, although the
"mercantile theory" is itself exploded.

The phrase "balance of trade," then, appears to be an application of a
trader's language in his own business to the larger affairs of nations or
rather of the aggregate of individuals in a nation engaged in foreign
trade. A trader in his own books sets his sales against his purchases, and
the amount by which the former exceed the latter is his trade balance or
profit. What is true of the individual, it is assumed, must be true of a
nation or of the aggregate of individual traders in a nation engaged in the
foreign trade. If their collective sales amount to more than their
collective purchases the trade balance will be in their favour, and they
will have money to receive. Contrariwise, if their purchases amount to more
than their sales, they will have to pay money, and they will presumably be
living on their capital. The argument fails, however, in many ways. Even as
regards the experience of the individual trader, it is to be observed that
he may or may not receive his profit, if any, in money. As a rule he does
not do so. As the profit accrues he may invest it either by employing
labour to add to his machinery or warehouses, or by increasing his
stock-in-trade, or by adding to his book debts, or by a purchase of stocks
or shares outside his regular business. At the end of a given period he may
or may not have an increased cash balance to show as the result of his
profitable trading. Even if he has an increased cash balance, according to
the modern system of business, this might be a balance at his bankers', and
they in turn may have invested the amount so that there is no stock of the
precious metals, of "hard money," anywhere to represent it. And the
argument fails still further when applied to the transactions between
nations, or rather, to use the phrase already employed, between the
aggregate of individuals in nations engaged in the foreign trade. It is
quite clear that if a nation, or the individuals of a nation, do make
profit in their foreign trading, the amount may be invested as it
accrues--in machinery, or warehouses, or stock-in-trade, or book debts, or
stocks and shares purchased abroad, so that there may be no corresponding
"balance of trade" to bring home. There is no doubt also that what may be
is in reality what largely happens. A prosperous foreign trade carried on
by any country implies a continuous investment by that country either
abroad or at home, and there may or may not be a balance receivable in
actual gold and silver.

[v.03 p.0236] In another particular the argument also fails. In the
aggregate of individual trading with various countries, there may sometimes
be purchases and sales as far as the individuals are concerned, but not
purchases and sales as between the nations. For example, goods are exported
from the United Kingdom, ammunition and stores and ships, which appear in
the British returns as exports, and which have really been sold by
individual British traders to individuals abroad; but these sales are not
set off by any purchases on the other side which come into the
international account, as the set-off is a loan by the people of one
country to the people or government of another. The same with the export of
railway and other material when goods are exported for the purpose of
constructing railways or other works abroad. The sales are made by
individuals in the United Kingdom to individuals abroad; but there is no
set-off of purchases on the other side. _Mutatis mutandis_ the same
explanation applies to the remittance of goods by one country to another,
or by individuals in one country to individuals in another to pay the
interest or repay the capital of loans which have been received in former
times. These are all cases of the movement of goods irrespective of
international sales and purchases, though the movements themselves appear
in the international records of imports and exports, and therefore it seems
to be assumed, though without any warrant, in the international records of
the balance of trade. There is yet another failure in the comparison. The
individual trader would include in his sales and purchases services such as
repairs performed by him for others, and similar services which others do
for himself; but no similar accounts are kept of the corresponding portions
of international trade such as the earning of freights and commissions,
although in strictness, it is obvious, they belong as much to international
trade as the imports and exports themselves, which cannot therefore show a
complete "balance of trade."

The illusions which may result then from the confusion of ideas between a
balance of trade or profit, and a balance of cash paid or received, and
from the identification of an excess of imports over exports or of exports
over imports with the balance of trade itself, though they are not the same
things, hardly need description. The believers in such illusions are not
entitled to any hearing as economists, however, much they may be accepted
in the market-place or among politicians.

The "balance of trade" and "the excess of imports over exports" are thus
simply pitfalls for the amateur and the unwary. On the statistical side,
moreover, there is a good deal more to be urged in order to impress the
student with care and attention. The records of imports and exports
themselves may vary from the actual facts of international purchases and
sales. The actual values of the goods imported and paid for by the nation
may vary from the published returns of imports, which are, by the necessity
of the case, only estimated values. And so with the exports. The actual
purchases and sales may be something very different. A so-called sale may
prove abortive through its not being paid for at all, the debtor failing
altogether. In any case the purchases of a year may not be paid for by the
sales of the year, and the "squaring" of the account may take a long time.
Still more the estimates of value may be so taken as not to give even an
approximately correct account as far as the records go. Thus in the plan
followed in the United Kingdom imports are valued as at the port where they
arrive and exports at the port where they are despatched from--a plan which
so far places them on an equal footing for the purpose of striking a
balance of trade. But in the import and export records of the United States
a different plan is followed. The imports are no longer valued as at the
port of arrival with the freight and other charges included, but as at the
port of shipment. The results on the balance of trade drawn out must
accordingly be quite different in the two cases. With other countries
similar differences arise. To deduce then from records of imports and
exports any conclusions as to the excess of imports or exports at different
times is a work of enormous statistical difficulty. Excellent illustrations
will be found in J. Holt Schooling's _British Trade Book_ (1908).

The country which presents the most interesting questions in connexion with
the study is the United Kingdom, with its largely preponderating foreign
trade. Its annual imports and exports, excluding bullion, exceed 800
millions sterling, and the bullion one year with another is 100 millions
more. Its excess of imports, moreover, between the middle and end of the
19th century gradually rose from a small figure to 180 millions sterling
annually, and occasioned the popular discussion referred to respecting an
"adverse" balance of trade, and particularly the belief existing in many
quarters that the nation is living on its capital. The result has been a
new investigation of the subject, so as to bring out and present the
credits to which the country is entitled in its trade as a shipowner and
commission merchant, and to exhibit at the same time the magnitude of
British foreign investments, which cannot be less than 2000 millions
sterling and must bring in an enormous annual income. Other countries such
as France, Germany, Belgium, Holland, Denmark, Norway and Sweden, are in
the same condition, though their foreign trade is not on the same scale,
and similar rules apply to the reading of their import and export accounts.
The United States is a conspicuous instance of a country which in the first
decade of the 20th century was still in the position of a borrower and had
a large excess of exports, though there were signs of a change in the
opposite direction. New countries generally, such as Canada, Australia and
the South American countries, resemble the United States. Comparisons are
made difficult by the want of uniformity in the methods of stating the
figures, but that different countries have to be grouped according as they
are indebted or creditor countries is undeniable, and no study of the trade
statistics is possible without recognition of the underlying economic
circumstances.

In conclusion it may be useful to repeat the main propositions laid down as
to the balance of trade, (1) A "balance of trade" to the individual trader,
from whose experience the phrase comes, is not necessarily, as is supposed,
a balance received or receivable in the precious metals. It may be invested
as it accrues--in machinery, or warehouses, or stock-in-trade, or in book
debts, or in stocks and shares or other property outside the trader's
business, as well as in cash. (2) What is true of the individual trader is
also true of the aggregate of individuals engaged in the foreign trade of a
country. Cash is only one of the forms in which they may elect to be paid.
(3) The imports and exports recorded in the statistical returns of a
country do not correspond with the purchases and sales of individual
traders, as the sales especially may be set off by loans, while the
so-called imports may include remittances of interest and of capital
repaid. (4) When capital is repaid the country receiving it need not be
living on it, but may be investing it at home. (5) The foreign trading of
countries may also comprise many transactions, such as the earning of
freights and commissions, which ought to appear in a proper account showing
a balance of trade, as similar transactions appear in an individual
trader's account, but which are not treated as imports or exports in the
statistical returns of a nation's foreign trade. (6) Import and export
returns themselves are not the same as accounts of purchases and sales; the
values are only estimates, and must not be relied on literally without
study of the actual facts. (7) Import and export returns in different
countries are not in all cases taken at the same point, there being
important variations, for instance, in this respect between the returns of
two great countries, the United Kingdom and the United States, which are
often compared, but are really most difficult to compare. (8) The United
Kingdom is a conspicuous instance of a country which has a great excess of
imports over exports in consequence of its large lending abroad in former
times; while its accounts are specially affected by the magnitude of its
services as a trading nation carrying passengers and goods all over the
world, which do not result, however, in so-called "exports." The United
States, on the other hand, is a conspicuous instance of an indebted nation,
which has or had until lately few or no sums to its credit in foreign trade
except the visible exports. (9) The various countries of the world
naturally fall into groups. The nations of western Europe, such as France,
Germany, Belgium, Holland, Sweden and Norway, fall into a [v.03 p.0237]
group with Great Britain as creditor nations, while Canada, Australasia and
the South American countries fall into a group with the United States as
undeveloped and indebted countries, So also of other countries, each
belongs naturally to one group or another. (10) The excess of imports or
exports may vary indefinitely at different times according as a creditor
country is receiving or lending at the time, or according as a debtor
country is borrowing or paying off its debts at the time, but the permanent
characteristics are always to be considered.

(R. GN.)

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--_Ptychodera flava_ (New Caledonia), from above;
about life size.]