BALBUS, literally "stammerer," the name of several Roman families. Of the
Acilii Balbi, one Manius Acilius Balbus was consul in 150 B.C., another in
114. To another family belonged T. Ampius Balbus, a supporter of Pompey,
but afterwards pardoned by Julius Caesar (cf. Cic. _ad Fam._ vi. 12 and
xiii. 70). We know also of Q. Antonius Balbus, praetor in Sicily in 82
B.C., and Marcus Atius Balbus, who married Julia, a sister of Caesar, and
had a daughter Atia, mother of Augustus. The most important of the name
were the two Cornelii Balbi, natives of Gades (Cadiz).

1. LUCIUS CORNELIUS BALBUS (called _Major_ to distinguish him from his
nephew) was born early in the last century B.C. He is generally considered
to have been of Phoenician origin. For his services against Sertorius in
Spain, the Roman citizenship was conferred upon him and his family by
Pompey. Becoming friendly with all parties, he had much to do with the
formation of the First Triumvirate, and was one of the chief financiers in
Rome. He was careful to ingratiate himself with Caesar, whom he accompanied
when propraetor to Spain (61), and to Gaul (58) as chief engineer
(_praefectus fabrum_). His position as a naturalized foreigner, his
influence and his wealth naturally made Balbus many enemies, who in 56 put
up a native of Gades to prosecute him for illegally assuming the rights of
a Roman citizen, a charge directed against the triumvirs equally with
himself. Cicero, Pompey and Crassus all spoke on his behalf, and he was
acquitted. During the civil war he endeavoured to get Cicero to mediate
between Caesar and Pompey, with the object of preventing him from
definitely siding with the latter; and Cicero admits that he was dissuaded
from doing so, against his better judgment. Subsequently, Balbus became
Caesar's private secretary, and Cicero was obliged to ask for his good
offices with Caesar. After Caesar's murder, Balbus seems to have attached
himself to Octavian; in 43 or 42 he was praetor, and in 40 consul--an
honour then for the first time conferred on an alien. The year of his death
is not known. Balbus kept a diary of the chief events in his own and
Caesar's life (Suetonius, _Caesar_, 81). The 8th book of the _Bell. Gall._,
which was probably written by his friend Hirtius at his instigation, was
dedicated to him.

Cicero, _Letters_ (ed. Tyrrell and Purser, iv. introd. p. 62) and _Pro
Balbo_; see also E. Jullien, _De L. Cornelia Balbo Maiore_ (1886).

2. LUCIUS CORNELIUS BALBUS (called _Minor_), nephew of the above, received
the Roman citizenship at the same time as his uncle. During the civil war,
he served under Caesar, by whom he was entrusted with several important
missions. He also took part in the Alexandrian and Spanish wars. He was
rewarded for his services by being admitted into the college of pontiffs.
In 43 he was quaestor in Further Spain, where he amassed a large fortune by
plundering the inhabitants. In the same year he crossed over to Bogud, king
of Mauretania, and is not heard of again until 21, when he appears as
proconsul of Africa. Mommsen thinks that he had incurred the displeasure of
Augustus by his conduct as praetor, and that his African appointment after
so many years was due to his exceptional fitness for the post. In 19 Balbus
defeated the Garamantes, and on the 27th of March in that year received the
honour of a triumph, which was then for the first time granted to one who
was not a Roman citizen by birth, and for the last time to a private
individual. He built a theatre in the capital, which was dedicated on the
return of Augustus from Gaul in 13 (Dio Cassius liv. 25; Pliny, _Nat.
Hist._ xxxvi. 12, 60). Balbus appears to have given some attention to
literature. He wrote a play of which the subject was his visit to Lentulus
in the camp of Pompey at Dyrrhachium, and, according to Macrobius
(_Saturnalia_, iii. 6), was the author of a work called [Greek: Exêgêtika],
dealing with the gods and their worship.

See Velleius Paterculus ii. 51; Cicero, _ad Att._ viii. 9; and on both the
above the exhaustive articles in Pauly-Wissowa, _Realencyclopadie_, iv. pt.
i. (1900).