BALBO, CESARE, COUNT (1789-1853), Italian writer and statesman, was born at
Turin on the 21st of November 1789. His father, Prospero Balbo, who
belonged to a noble Piedmontese family, held a high position in the
Sardinian court, and at the time of Cesare's birth was mayor of the
capital. His mother, a member of the Azeglio family, died when he was three
years old; and he was brought up in the house of his great-grandmother, the
countess of Bugino. In 1798 he joined his father at Paris. From 1808 to
1814 Balbo served in various capacities under the Napoleonic empire at
Florence, Rome, Paris and in Illyria. On the fall of Napoleon he entered
the service of his native country. While his father was appointed minister
of the interior, he entered the army, and undertook political missions to
Paris and London. On the outbreak of the revolution of 1821, of which he
disapproved, although he was suspected of sympathizing with it, he was
forced into exile; and though not long after he was allowed to return to
Piedmont, all public service was denied him. Reluctantly, and with frequent
endeavours to obtain some appointment, he gave himself up to literature as
the only means left him to influence the destinies of his country. This
accounts for the fitfulness and incompleteness of so much of his literary
work, and for the practical, and in many cases temporary, element which
runs through even his most elaborate productions. The great object of his
labours was to help in securing the independence of Italy from foreign
control. Of true Italian unity he had no expectation and no desire, but he
was devoted to the house of Savoy, which he foresaw was destined to change
the fate of Italy. A confederation of separate states under the supremacy
of the pope was the genuine ideal of Balbo, as it was the ostensible one of
Gioberti. But Gioberti, in his _Primato_, seemed to him to neglect the
first essential of independence, which he accordingly inculcated in his
_Speranze_ or _Hopes of Italy_, in which he suggests that Austria should
seek compensation in the Balkans for the inevitable loss of her Italian
provinces. Preparation, both military and moral, alertness and patience
were his constant theme. He did not desire revolution, but reform; and thus
he became the leader of a moderate party, and the steady opponent not only
of despotism but of democracy. At last in 1848 his hopes were to some
extent satisfied by the constitution granted by the king. He was appointed
a member of the commission on the electoral law, and became first
constitutional prime-minister of Piedmont, but only held office a few
months. With the ministry of d'Azeglio, which soon after got into power, he
was on friendly terms, and his pen continued the active defence of his
political principles till his death on the 3rd of June 1853. The most
important of his writings are historico-political, and derive at once their
majesty and their weakness from his theocratic theory of Christianity. His
style is clear and vigorous, and not unfrequently terse and epigrammatic.
He published _Quattro Novelle_ in 1829; _Storia d'Italia sotto i Barbari_
in 1830; _Vita di Dante_, 1839; _Meditazioni Storiche_, 1842-1845; _Le
Speranze d'Italia_, 1844; _Pensieri sulla Storia d'Italia_, 1858; _Della
Monarchia rappresentativa in Italia_ (Florence, 1857).

See E. Ricotti, _Della Vita e degli Scritti di Cesare Balbo_ (1856); A.
Vismara, _Bibliografia di Cesare Balbo_ (Milan, 1882).