BALBOA, VASCO NUÑEZ DE (_c._ 1475-1517), the discoverer of the Pacific, a
leading figure among the Spanish explorers and conquerors of America, was
born at Jerez de los Caballeros, in Estremadura, about 1475. Though poor,
he was by birth a gentleman (_hidalgo_). Little is known of his life till
1501, when he followed Rodrigo de Bastidas in his voyage of discovery to
the western seas. He appears to have settled in Hispaniola, and took to
cultivating land in the neighbourhood of Salvatierra, but with no great
success, as his debts soon became oppressive. In 1509 the famous Ojeda
(Hojeda) sailed from San Domingo with an expedition and founded the
settlement of San Sebastian. He had left orders with Enciso, an adventurous
lawyer of the town, to fit out two ships and convey provisions to the new
settlement. Enciso set sail in 1510, and Balboa, whose debts made the town
unpleasant to him, managed to accompany him by concealing himself, it is
said, in a cask of "victuals for the voyage," which was conveyed from his
farm to the ship. The expedition reached San Sebastian to find Ojeda gone
and the settlement in ruins. While Enciso was undecided how to act, Balboa
proposed that they should sail for Darien, on the Gulf of Uraba, where he
had touched when with Bastidas. His proposal was accepted and a new town
was founded, named Sta Maria de la Antigua del Darien; but quarrels soon
broke out among the adventurers, and Enciso was deposed, thrown into prison
and finally sent off to Spain with Balboa's ally, the alcalde Zamudio.
Being thus left in authority, Balboa began to conquer the surrounding
country, and by his bravery, courtesy, kindness of heart and just dealing
gained the friendship of several native chiefs. On one of these excursions
he heard for the first time, from the cacique Comogre, of the ocean on the
other side of the mountains and of the gold of Peru. Soon after his return
to Darien he received letters from Zamudio, informing him that Enciso had
complained to the king, and had obtained a sentence condemning Balboa and
summoning him to Spain. In his despair at this message Vasco Nuñez resolved
to attempt some great enterprise, the success of which he trusted would
conciliate his sovereign. On the 1st of September 1513 he set out with one
hundred and ninety Spaniards (Francisco Pizarro among them) and one
thousand natives; on the 25th or 26th of September he reached the summit of
the range, and sighted the Pacific. Pizarro and two others were sent on to
reconnoitre; one of these scouts, Alonzo Martin, was the first European
actually to embark upon the new-found ocean, in St Michael's Gulf. On the
29th of September Balboa himself arrived upon the shore, and formally took
possession of the "Great South Sea" in the name of the Spanish monarch. He
remained on the coast for some time, heard again of Peru, visited the Pearl
Islands, and thence returned to Darien, which he entered in triumph with a
great booty on the 18th of January 1514. He at once sent messengers to
Spain bearing presents, to give an account of his discoveries; and the
king, Ferdinand the Catholic, partly reconciled to his daring subject,
named him _Adelantado of the South Sea_, or admiral of the Pacific, and
governor of Panama and Coyba. None the less an expedition sailed from Spain
under Don Pedro Arias de Ávila (generally called Pedrarias Dávila) to
replace Balboa in the government of the Darien colony itself. Meanwhile the
latter had crossed the isthmus and revisited the Pacific several (some say
more than twenty) times; plans of the conquest of Peru and of the
exploration of the western ocean began to shape themselves in his mind; and
with a view to these projects, materials for shipbuilding were gathered
together upon the Pacific coast, and two light brigantines were built,
launched and armed. With these Vasco Nuñez now took possession of the Pearl
Islands, and, had it not been for the weather, would have reached the coast
of Peru. But his career was stopped by the jealousy of Pedrarias, who
pretended that Balboa proposed to throw off his allegiance, and enticed him
to Acla, near Darien, by a crafty message. As soon as he had him in his
power, he threw [v.03 p.0242] him into prison, had him tried for treason,
and forced the judge to condemn him to death. The sentence was carried into
execution on the public square of Acla in 1517. From a reckless adventurer,
Balboa had developed into an able general, an excellent colonial
administrator, and a statesman of mature judgment and brilliant foresight.

See G. F. de Oviedo, _Historia general ... de las Indias_ (1526, bk. xxxix.
chs. 2, 3); D. M. T. Quintana, _Vidas de Españoles celebres_; M. F. de
Navarrete, _Coleccion de los Viajes y Descubrimientos_ (1825-1837); J.
Acosta, _Compendio historico de la Nueva Granada_ (1848); O. Peschel,
_Geschichte der Erdkunde_ (1865, p. 237), and _Zeitalter der Entdeckungen_,
pp. 442-3 &c.; Washington Irving's _Voyages and Discoveries of the
Companions of Columbus_ (1831), and Varela's notes on the same in
_Biblioteca del Comercio del Plata_ (Monte Video); Ferdinand Denis, art.
"Vasco Nuñez de Balboa," in _Nouv. Biog. Gén._