BALDWIN II., count of Edessa (1100-1118), king of Jerusalem (1118-1131),
originally known as Baldwin de Burg, was a son of Count Hugh of Rethel, and
a nephew of Godfrey of Bouillon and Baldwin I. He appears on the first
crusade at Constantinople as one of Godfrey's men; and he helped Tancred to
occupy Bethlehem in June 1099. After the capture of Jerusalem he served for
a time with Bohemund at Antioch; but when Baldwin of Edessa became king of
Jerusalem, he summoned Baldwin de Burg, and left him as count in Edessa.
From Edessa Baldwin conducted continual forays against the Mahommedan
princes; and in the great foray of 1104, in which he was joined by
Bohemund, he was defeated and captured at Balich. Tancred became guardian
of Edessa during Baldwin's captivity, and did not trouble himself greatly
to procure his release. Baldwin, however, recovered his liberty at the
beginning of 1108, and at once entered upon a struggle with Tancred for the
recovery of Edessa. In September 1108 he regained his principality; but the
struggle with Tancred continued, until it was composed by Baldwin in 1109.
For the next ten years Baldwin ruled his principality with success, if not
without severity. Planted in the farthest Christian outpost in northern
Syria, he had to meet many attacks, especially from Mardin and Mosul, in
revenge for the provocation offered by his own forays and those of the
restless Tancred. In 1110 he was besieged in Edessa, and relieved by
Baldwin I.; in 1114 he repelled an attack by Aksunkur of Mosul; in 1115 he
helped to defeat Aksunkur at Danith. At the same time, if Matthew of Edessa
may be trusted, he also carried his arms against the Armenians, and
plundered in his avarice every Armenian of wealth and position. In 1118 he
was on his way to spend Easter at Jerusalem, when he received the news of
the death of Baldwin I.; and when he arrived at Jerusalem, he was made
king, chiefly by the influence of the patriarch Arnulf. In a reign of
thirteen years, Baldwin II. extended the kingdom of Jerusalem to its widest
limits. His reign is marked by almost incessant fighting in northern Syria.
In 1119, after the defeat and death of Roger of Antioch, he defeated the
amirs of Mardin and Damascus at Danith; in subsequent years he extended his
sway to the very gates of Aleppo. In 1123 he was captured by Balak of
Mardin, and confined in Kharput with Joscelin, his successor in the county
of Edessa, who had been captured in the previous year. During his captivity
Eustace Graverius became regent of Jerusalem, and succeeded, with the aid
of the Venetians, in repelling an Egyptian attack, and even in capturing
Tyre, 1124. In 1124 Baldwin II. succeeded in securing his liberty, under
conditions which he instantly broke; and he at once embarked on strenuous
and not unsuccessful hostilities against Aleppo and Damascus (1124-1127),
exacting tribute from both. During his reign he twice acted as regent in
Antioch (1119, 1130), and in 1126 he married his daughter Alice to Bohemund
II. In 1128 he offered the hand of his eldest daughter, Melisinda, to Fulk
of Anjou, who had been recommended to him by Honorius II. In 1129 Fulk came
and married Melisinda, and in 1131, on the death of Baldwin, he succeeded
to the crown.

Baldwin II. had much of the churchmanship of Godfrey and Baldwin I.; but he
appears most decidedly as an incessant warrior, under whom the Latin
domination in the East stretched, as Ibn al-Athir writes, in a long line
from Mardin in the North to el-Arish on the Red Sea--a line only broken by
the Mahommedan powers of Aleppo, Hamah, Homs and Damascus. The Franks
controlled the great routes of trade, and took tolls of the traders; and in
1130 their power may be regarded as having reached its height.

LITERATURE.--Fulcher of Chartres narrates the reign of Baldwin II. down to
1127; for the rest of the reign the authority is William of Tyre. R.
Röhricht, _Geschichte des Königreichs Jerusalem_ (Innsbruck, 1898), C.
vii.-x., is the chief modern authority.

(E. BR.)