BALDWIN I. (d. 1205), emperor of Romania, count of Flanders and Hainaut,
was one of the most prominent leaders of the fourth crusade, which resulted
in the capture of Constantinople, the conquest of the greater part of the
East Roman empire, and the foundation of the Latin empire of Romania. The
imperial crown was offered to, and refused by, Henry Dandolo, doge of
Venice. The choice then lay between Baldwin and Boniface of Montferrat.
Baldwin was elected (9th of May 1204), and crowned a week later. He was
young, gallant, pious and virtuous, one of the few who interpreted and
observed his crusading vows strictly; the most popular leader in the host.
The empire of Romania was organized on feudal principles; the emperor was
feudal superior of the princes who received portions of the conquered
territory. His own special portion consisted of Constantinople, the
adjacent regions both on the European and the Asiatic side, along with some
outlying districts, and several islands including Lemnos, Lesbos, Chios and
Tenos. The territories had still to be conquered; and first of all it was
necessary to break the resistance of the Greeks in Thrace and secure
Thessalonica. In this enterprise (summer of 1204) Baldwin came into
collision with Boniface of Montferrat, the rival candidate for the empire,
who was to receive a large territory in Macedonia with the title of king of
Saloniki. He hoped to make himself quite independent of the empire, to do
no homage for his kingdom, and he opposed Baldwin's proposal to march to
Thessalonica. The antagonism between Flemings and Lombards aggravated the
quarrel. Baldwin insisted on going to Thessalonica; Boniface laid siege to
Hadrianople, where Baldwin had established a governor; civil war seemed
inevitable. An agreement was effected by the efforts of Dandolo and the
count of Blois. Boniface received Thessalonica as a fief from the emperor,
and was appointed commander of the forces which were to march to the
conquest of Greece.

During the following winter (1204-1205) the Franks prosecuted conquests in
Bithynia, in which Henry, Baldwin's brother, took part. But in February the
Greeks revolted in Thrace, relying on the assistance of John (Kaloyan),
king of Bulgaria, whose overtures of alliance had been unwisely rejected by
the emperor. The garrison of Hadrianople was expelled. Baldwin along with
Dandolo, the count of Blois, and Marshal Villehardouin, the historian,
marched to besiege that city. The Bulgarian king led to its relief an army
which far outnumbered that of the crusaders. The Frank knights fought
desperately, but were utterly defeated (14th of April 1205); the count of
Blois was slain, and the emperor captured. For some time his fate was
uncertain, and in the meanwhile Henry, his brother, assumed the regency.
Not till the middle of July was it definitely ascertained that he was dead.
It seems that he was at first treated well as a valuable hostage, but was
sacrificed by the Bulgarian monarch in a sudden outburst of rage, perhaps
in consequence of the revolt of Philippopolis, which passed into the hands
of the Franks. One contemporary writer says that his hands and feet were
cut off, and he was thrown into a valley where he died on the third day;
but the manner of his death is obscure. King John himself wrote to Pope
Innocent III. that he died in prison. His brother Henry was crowned emperor
in August.

AUTHORITIES.--Villehardouin, _La Conquête de Constantinople_ (ed. De
Wailly, Paris, 1872; ed. Bouchet, 2 vols., Paris, 1891); Robert [v.03
p.0245] de Clari, _La Prise de Constantinople_ (in Hopf's _Chroniques
gréco-romaines_); Ernoul, _Chronique_ (ed. Mas Latrie, Paris, 1871);
Nicetas (ed. Bonn, 1835); George Acropolites, vol. i. (ed. Heisenberg,
Leipzig, 1903); Documents in Tafel and Thomas, _Urkunden zur älteren
Handels- und Staatsgeschichte der Republik Venedig_ (Vienna, 1856).

MODERN WORKS.--Ducange, _Histoire de l'empire de Constantinople sous les
empereurs français_ (Paris, 1657); Gibbon, _Decline and Fall_, vol. vi.
(ed. Bury, 1898); G. Finlay, _History of Greece_, vol. iv. (Oxford, 1877);
Pears, _The Fall of Constantinople_ (London, 1885); Hopf, "Griechische
Geschichte," in Ersch and Gruber's _Encyklopädie_, vol. lxxxv. (Leipzig,
1870); Gerland, _Geschichte des lateinischen Kaiserreiches von
Konstantinopel_, part i. (Homburg v. d. Höhe, 1905).

(J. B. B.)