BALDWIN II. (1217-1273), emperor of Romania, was a younger son of Yolande,
sister of Baldwin I. Her husband, Peter of Courtenay, was third emperor of
Romania, and had been followed by his son Robert, on whose death in 1228
the succession passed to Baldwin, a boy of eleven years old. The barons
chose John of Brienne (titular king of Jerusalem) as emperor-regent for
life; Baldwin was to rule the Asiatic possessions of the empire when he
reached the age of twenty, was to marry John's daughter Mary, and on John's
death to enjoy the full imperial sovereignty. The marriage contract was
carried out in 1234. Since the death of the emperor Henry in 1216, the
Latin empire had declined and the Greek power advanced; and the hopes that
John of Brienne might restore it were disappointed. He died in 1237. The
realm which Baldwin governed was little more than Constantinople. His
financial situation was desperate, and his life was chiefly occupied in
begging at European courts. He went to the West in 1236, visited Rome,
France and Flanders, trying to raise money and men to recover the lost
territory of his realm. His efforts met with success, and in 1240 he
returned to Constantinople (through Germany and Hungary) at the head of a
considerable army. Circumstances hindered him from accomplishing anything
with this help, and in 1245 he travelled again to the West, first to Italy
and then to France, where he spent two years. The empress Maria and Philip
of Toucy governed during his absence. He was happy to be able to get money
from King Louis IX. in exchange for relics. In 1249 he was with King Louis
at Damietta. The extremity of his financial straits reduced him soon
afterwards to handing over his only son Philip to merchants as a pledge for
loans of money. Louis IX. redeemed the hostage. The rest of his inglorious
reign was spent by Baldwin in mendicant tours in western Europe. In 1261
Constantinople was captured by Michael Palaeologus, and Baldwin's rule came
to an end. He escaped in a Venetian galley to Negropont, and then proceeded
to Athens, thence to Apulia, finally to France. As titular emperor, his
rôle was still the same, to beg help from the western powers. In 1267 he
went to Italy; his hopes were centred in Charles of Anjou. Charles
seriously entertained the idea of conquering Constantinople, though various
complications hindered him from realizing it. He made a definite treaty
with Baldwin to this intent (May 1267). During the next year Baldwin and
his son Philip lived on pensions from Charles. In October 1273 Philip
married Beatrice, daughter of Charles, at Foggia. A few days later Baldwin
died.

See authorities for BALDWIN I. above; also Norden, _Das Papsttum und
Byzanz_ (Berlin 1903).

(J. B. B.)