BALDOVINETTI, ALESSIO (1427-1499), Florentine painter, was born on the 14th
of October 1427, and died on the 29th of August 1499. He was a follower of
the group of scientific realists and naturalists in art which included
Andrea del Castagno, Paolo Uccello and Domenico Veneziano, the influence of
the last-named master being particularly manifest in his work. Tradition,
probable in itself though not attested by contemporary records, says that
he assisted in the decorations of the chapel of S. Egidio in Santa Maria
Nuova, carried out during the years 1441-1451 by Domenico Veneziano and in
conjunction with Andrea del Castagno. That he was commissioned to complete
the series at a later date (1460) is certain. In 1462 Alessio was employed
to paint the great fresco of the Annunciation in the cloister of the
Annunziata, which still exists in ruined condition. The remains as we see
them give evidence of the artist's power both of imitating natural detail
with minute fidelity and of spacing his figures in a landscape with a large
sense of air and distance; and they amply verify two separate statements of
Vasari concerning him: that "he delighted in drawing landscapes from nature
exactly as they are, whence we see in his paintings rivers, bridges, rocks,
plants, fruits, roads, fields, cities, exercise-grounds, and an infinity of
other such things," and that he was an inveterate experimentalist in
technical matters. His favourite method in wall-painting was to lay in his
compositions in fresco and finish them _a secco_ with a mixture of yolk of
egg and liquid varnish. This, says Vasari, was with the view of protecting
the painting from damp; but in course of time the parts executed with this
vehicle scaled away, so that the great secret he hoped to have discovered
turned out a failure. In 1463 he furnished a cartoon of the Nativity, which
was executed in tarsia by Giuliano de Maiano in the sacristy of the
cathedral and still exists. From 1466 date the groups of four Evangelists
and four Fathers of the Church in fresco, together with the Annunciation on
an oblong panel, which still decorate the Portuguese chapel in the church
of S. Miniato, and are given in error by Vasari to Pietro Pollaiuolo. A
fresco of the risen Christ between angels inside a Holy Sepulchre in the
chapel of the Rucellai family, also still existing, belongs to 1467. In
1471 Alessio undertook important works for the church of Sta Trinità on the
commission of Bongianni Gianfigliazzi. First, to paint an altar-piece of
the [v.03 p.0244] Virgin and Child with six saints; this was finished in
1472 and is now in the Academy at Florence: next, a series of frescoes from
the Old Testament which was to be completed according to contract within
five years, but actually remained on hand for fully sixteen. In 1497 the
finished series, which contained many portraits of leading Florentine
citizens, was valued at a thousand gold florins by a committee consisting
of Cosimo Rosselli, Benozzo Gozzoli, Perugino and Filippino Lippi; only
some defaced fragments of it now remain. Meanwhile Alessio had been much
occupied with other technical pursuits and researches apart from painting.
He was regarded by his contemporaries as the one craftsman who had
rediscovered and fully understood the long disused art of mosaic, and was
employed accordingly between 1481 and 1483 to repair the mosaics over the
door of the church of S. Miniato, as well as several of those both within
and without the baptistery of the cathedral.

These are the recorded and datable works of the master; others attributed
to him on good and sufficient internal evidences are as follows:--A small
panel in the Florence Academy, with the three subjects of the Baptism, the
Marriage of Cana and the Transfiguration; this was long attributed to Fra
Angelico, but is to all appearance early work of Baldovinetti: an
Annunciation in the Uffizi, formerly in the church of S. Giorgio;
unmistakably by the master's hand though given by Vasari to Peselino:
several Madonnas of peculiarly fine and characteristic quality; one in the
collection of Madame André at Paris acquired direct from the descendants of
the painter, a second, formerly in the Duchâtel collection and now in the
Louvre, a third in the possession of Mr Berenson at Florence. All these are
executed with the determined patience and precision characteristic of
Baldovinetti; two, those at the Louvre and in the André collection, are
distinguished by beautiful landscape backgrounds; and all, but especially
the example in the Louvre, add a peculiar and delicate charm to the quality
of grave majesty which Alessio's works share with those of Piero della
Francesca and others of Domenico Veneziano's following. They probably
belong to the years 1460-1465. In the later of his preserved works, while
there is no abatement of precise and laborious finish, we find beginning to
prevail a certain harshness and commonness of type, and a lack of care for
beauty in composition, the technical and scientific searcher seeming more
and more to predominate over the artist.

See also Vasari, ed. Milanesi, vol. ii.; Crowe-Cavalcaselle, _Hist. of
Painting in Italy_, vol. ii.; Bernhard Berenson, _Study and Criticism of
Italian Art_, 2nd series.

(S. C.)