BALE, JOHN (1495-1563), bishop of Ossory, English author, was born at Cove,
near Dunwich in Suffolk, on the 21st of November 1495. At the age of twelve
he entered the Carmelite monastery at Norwich, removing later to the house
of "Holme," probably the abbey of the Whitefriars at Hulne near Alnwick.
Later he entered Jesus College, Cambridge, and took his degree of B.D. in
1529. At Cambridge he came under the influence of Cranmer and of Thomas
Wentworth, 1st Baron Wentworth, and became an ardent partisan of the
Reformers. He laid aside his monastic habit, and, as he himself puts it
with characteristically brutal violence, "that I might never more serve so
execrable a beast, I took to wife the faithful Dorothy." He obtained the
living of Thornden, Suffolk, but in 1534 was summoned before the archbishop
of York for a sermon against the invocation of saints preached at
Doncaster, and afterwards before Stokesley, bishop of London, but he
escaped through the powerful protection of Thomas Cromwell, whose notice he
is said to have attracted by his miracle plays. He was an unscrupulous
controversialist, and in these plays he allows no considerations of decency
to stand in the way of his denunciations of the monastic system and its
supporters. The prayer of Infidelitas which opens the second act of his
_Thre Laws_ (quoted by T. Warton, _Hist. Eng. Poetry_, sect. 41) is an
example of the lengths to which he went in profane parody. These coarse and
violent productions were well calculated to impress popular feeling, and no
doubt Cromwell found in him an invaluable instrument. But on his patron's
fall in 1540 Bale fled with his wife and children to Germany. He returned
on the accession of Edward VI. He received the living of Bishopstoke,
Hampshire, being promoted in 1552 to the Irish see of Ossory. He refused to
be consecrated by the Roman rite, which still obtained in the Irish church,
and won his point, though the dean of Dublin entered a protest against the
revised office during the ceremony (see his _Vocacyon of John Bale to the
Bishopperycke of Ossorie, Harl. Misc._ vol. vi.). He pushed his Protestant
propaganda in Ireland with no regard to expediency, and when the accession
of Mary inaugurated a reaction in matters of religion, it was with
difficulty that he was got safely out of the country. He tried to escape to
Scotland, but on the voyage was captured by a Dutch man-of-war, which was
driven by stress of weather to St. Ives in Cornwall. Bale was arrested on
suspicion of treason, but soon released. At Dover he had another narrow
escape, but he eventually made his way to Holland and thence to Frankfort
and Basel. During his exile he devoted himself to writing. After his
return, on the accession of Elizabeth, he received (1560) a prebendal stall
at Canterbury. He died in November 1563 and was buried in the cathedral.

The scurrility and vehemence with which "foul-mouthed Bale," as Wood calls
him, attacked his enemies does not destroy the value of his contributions
to literature, though his strong bias against Roman Catholic writers does
detract from the critical value of his works. Of his mysteries and miracle
plays only five have been preserved, but the titles of the others, quoted
by himself in his _Catalogus_, show that they were animated by the same
political and religious aims. The _Thre Laws of Nature, Moses and Christ,
corrupted by the Sodomytes, Pharisees and Papystes most wicked_ (pr. 1538
and again in 1562) was a morality play. The direction for the dressing of
the parts is instructive: "Let Idolatry be decked like an old witch, Sodomy
like a monk of all sects, Ambition like a bishop, Covetousness like a
Pharisee or spiritual lawyer, False Doctrine like a popish doctor, and
Hypocrisy like a gray friar." _A Tragedye; or enterlude manyfesting the
chief promyses of God unto Man ..._ (1538, printed in Dodsley's _Old
Plays_, vol. 1), _The Temptacyon of our Lorde_ (ed. A. B. Grosart in
_Miscellanies of the Fuller Worthies Library_, vol. i., 1870), and _A brefe
Comedy or Enterlude of Johan Baptystes preachynge in the Wyldernesse, &c._
(_Harl. Misc._ vol. i.) were all written in 1538. His plays are doggerel,
but he is a figure of some dramatic importance as the author of _Kynge
Johan_ (_c._ 1548), which marks the transition between the old morality
play and the English historical drama. It does not appear to have directly
influenced the creators of the chronicle histories. To the authors of the
_Troublesome Raigne of King John_ (1591) it was apparently unknown, but it
is noteworthy that an attempt, however feeble, at historical drama was made
fourteen years before the production of _Gorboduc_. _Kynge Johan_ (ed.
J. P. Collier, Camden Soc. 1838) is itself a polemic against the Roman
Catholic Church. King John is represented as the champion of English rites
against the Roman see:--

 "This noble Kynge Johan, as a faythfull Moses
  Withstode proude Pharao for his poore Israel."

But the English people remained in the bondage of Rome,--

 "Tyll that duke Josue, whych was our late Kynge Henrye,
  Clerely brought us out in to the lande of mylke and honye."

Elsewhere John is called a Lollard and accused of "heretycall langage," and
he is finally poisoned by a monk of Swinestead. Allegorical characters are
mixed with the real persons. Ynglonde _vidua_, represents the nation, and
the jocular element is provided by Sedwyson (sedition), who would have been
the Vice in a pure morality play. One actor was obviously intended to play
many parts, for stage directions such as "Go out Ynglond, and dress for
Clargy" are by no means uncommon. The MS. of _Kynge Johan_ was discovered
between 1831 and 1838 among the corporation papers at Ipswich, where it was
probably performed, for there are references to charitable foundations by
King John in the town and neighbourhood. It is described at the end of the
MS. as two plays, but there is no obvious division, the end of the first
act alone being noted. The first part is corrected by Bale and the latter
half is in his handwriting, but his name nowhere occurs. In the list of his
works, however, he gives a play _De Joanne Anglorum Rege_, written _in
idiomate materno_.

But Bale's most important work is _Illustrium majoris Britanniae
scriptorum, hoc est, Angliae, Cambriae, ac Scotiae Summarium ..._ (Ipswich
and Wesel, for John Overton, 1548, 1549). This contained five centuries,
but another edition, almost entirely rewritten and containing fourteen
centuries, was printed at Basel with the title _Scriptorum illustrium
majoris Britanniae ... Catalogus_ (1557-1559). The chronological catalogue
of British authors and their works was partly founded on the _Collectanea_
and _Commentarii_ of John Leland, but Bale was an indefatigable collector
and worker, and himself examined many of the valuable libraries of the
Augustinian and Carmelite houses before their dissolution. In his notebook
he records as an instance of the wholesale destruction in progress: "I have
bene also at Norwyche, our second citye of name, and there all the library
monuments are turned to the use of their grossers, candelmakers,
sopesellers, and other worldly occupiers ... As much have I saved there and
in certen other places in Northfolke and Southfolke concerning the authors
names and titles of their workes, as I could, and as much wold I have done
through out the whole realm, yf I had been able to have borne the charges,
as I am not." His work is therefore invaluable, in spite of the
inaccuracies and the abuse lavished on Catholic writers, for it contains
much information that would otherwise have been hopelessly lost.

A list of Bale's works is to be found in _Athenae Cantabrigienses_ (vol. i.
pp. 227 et seq.). Beside the reprints already mentioned, _The Examinations
of Lord Cobham, William Thorpe and Anne Askewe, &c._ were edited by the
Rev. H. Christmas for the Parker Society in 1849. Bale's autograph
note-book is preserved in the Selden Collection of the Bodleian Library,
Oxford. It contains the materials he collected for his two published
catalogues arranged alphabetically, with no attempt at ornament of any
kind, and without the personalities which deface his completed work. He
also gives in most cases the sources from which his information was
derived. This book was prepared for publication with notes by Dr R. Lane
Poole, with the help of Miss Mary Bateson, as _Index Britanniae Scriptorum
quos ... collegit Ioannes Baleus_ (Clarendon Press, 1902), forming part ix.
of _Anecdota Oxoniensia_.

John Pits or Pitseus (1560-1616), an English Catholic exile, founded on
Bale's work his _Relationum historicarum de rebus anglicis tomus primus_
(Paris, 1619), better known by its running title of [v.03 p.0249] _De
illustribus Angliae scriptoribus_. This is really the fourth book of a more
extensive work. He omits the Wycliffite and Protestant divines mentioned by
Bale, and the most valuable section is the lives of the Catholic exiles
resident in Douai and other French towns. He does not scruple to assert
(_Nota de Joanne Bale_) that Bale's _Catalogus_ was a misrepresentation of
Leland's matter, though there is every reason to believe that he was only
acquainted with Leland's work at second-hand, through Bale.