BALEARIC ISLANDS (_Baleáres_), an archipelago of four large and eleven
small islands in the Mediterranean Sea, off the east coast of Spain, of
which country it forms a province. Pop. (1900) 311,649; area, 1935 sq. m.
The archipelago, which lies between 38° 40' and 40° 5' N., and between 1°
and 5° E., comprises two distinct groups. The eastern and larger group,
corresponding with the ancient Insulae Baleares, comprises the two
principal members of the archipelago, Majorca (Spanish, Mallorca) and
Minorca (Spanish, Menorca), with seven islets:--Aire, Aucanada, Botafoch,
Cabrera, Dragonera, Pinto and El Rey. The western group, corresponding with
the ancient Pityusae or Pine Islands, also comprises two relatively large
islands, Iviza (Spanish, Ibiza or, formerly, Ivica) and Formentera, with
the islets of Ahorcados, Conejera, Pou and Espalmador. Majorca, Minorca and
Iviza are described in separate articles. Formentera is described with
Iviza. The total population of the eleven islets only amounted to 171 in
1900, but all were inhabited. None of them is of any importance except
Cabrera, which is full of caverns, and was formerly used as a place of
banishment. In 1808 a large body of Frenchmen were landed here by their
Spanish captors, and allowed almost to perish of starvation.

The origin of the name Baleáres is a mere matter of conjecture; it is
obvious, however, that the modern Majorca and Minorca are obtained from the
Latin _Major_ and _Minor_, through the Byzantine forms [Greek: Maiorika]
and [Greek: Minorika]; while Iviza is plainly the older Ebusus, a name
probably of Carthaginian origin. The Ophiusa of the Greeks (Colubraria of
the Romans) is now known as Formentera.

_Geology._--The strata which form the Balearic Isles fall naturally into
two divisions. There is an older series, ranging from the Devonian to the
Cretaceous, which is folded and faulted and forms all the higher hills, and
there is a newer series of Tertiary age, which lies nearly horizontal and
rests unconformably upon the older beds. The direction of the folds in the
older series is in Iviza nearly west to east, in Majorca south-west to
north-east, and in Minorca south to north, thus forming an arc convex
towards the south-east. The Devonian is visible only in Minorca, the Trias
being the oldest system represented in the other islands. The higher part
of the Cretaceous is absent, and it appears to have been during this period
that the principal folding of the older beds took place. The Eocene beds
are nummulitic. There is a lacustrine group which has usually been placed
in the Lower Eocene, but the discovery of _Anthracotherium magnum_ in the
interbedded lignites proves it to be Oligocene, in part at least. The
Miocene included a limestone with _Clypeaster_. Pliocene beds also occur.

_Climate, Fauna, Flora._--The climate of the archipelago, though generally
mild, healthy and favourable to plant life, is by no means uniform, owing
to the differences of altitude and shelter from wind in different islands.
The fauna and flora resemble those of the Mediterranean coasts of Spain or
France.

_Inhabitants._--The islanders are a Spanish race, very closely akin to the
Catalans; but the long period of Moorish rule has left its mark on their
physical type and customs. In character they are industrious and
hospitable, and pique themselves on their loyalty and orthodoxy. Crime is
rare. There are higher schools in the principal towns, and the standard of
primary education is well up to the average of Spain. Vaccination is common
except in the cities,--the women often performing the operation themselves
when medical assistance cannot be got. Castilian is spoken by the upper and
commercial classes; the lower and agricultural employ a dialect resembling
that of the Catalans.

_Commerce._--Fruit, grain, wine and oil are produced in the islands, and
there is an active trade with Barcelona in fresh fish, including large
quantities of lobsters. Shoemaking is one of the most prosperous
industries. There is not a very active trade direct with foreign countries,
as the principal imports--cotton, leather, petroleum, sugar, coal and
timber--are introduced through Barcelona. The export trade is chiefly with
the Peninsula, France, Italy, Algeria and with Cuba and Porto Rico. Most of
the agricultural products are sent to the Peninsula; wine, figs, marble,
almonds, lemons and rice to Europe and Africa.

_Administration._--The administration of the Balearic Islands differs in no
respect from that of the other Spanish provinces on the mainland. There are
five judicial districts (_partidos judiciales_), named after their chief
towns--Inca, Iviza, Manacor, Palma and Port Mahon.

_History._--Of the origin of the early inhabitants of the Balearic Islands
nothing is certainly known, though Greek and Roman writers refer to the
Boeotian and Rhodian settlements. There are numerous sepulchral and other
monuments, which are generally believed to be of prehistoric origin.
According to general tradition the natives, from whatever quarter derived,
were a strange and savage people till they received some tincture of
civilization from the Carthaginians, who early took possession of the
islands and built themselves cities on their coasts. Of these cities, Port
Mahon, the most important, still retains the name which is derived from the
family of Mago. About twenty-three years after the destruction of Carthage
the Romans accused the islanders of piracy, and sent against them Q.
Caecilius Metellus, who soon reduced them to obedience, settled amongst
them 3000 Roman and Spanish colonists, founded the cities of Palma and
Pollentia (Pollensa), and introduced the cultivation of the olive. Besides
valuable contingents of the celebrated Balearic slingers, the Romans
derived from their new conquest mules (from Minorca), edible snails, sinope
and pitch. Of their occupation numerous traces still exist,--the most
remarkable being the aqueduct at Pollensa. In A.D. 423 the islands were
seized by the Vandals and in 798 by the Moors. They became a separate
Moorish kingdom in 1009, which, becoming extremely obnoxious for piracy,
was the object of a crusade directed against it by Pope Paschal II., in
which the Catalans took the lead. This expedition was frustrated at the
time, but was resumed by James I. of Aragon, and the Moors were expelled in
1232. During their occupation the island was populous and productive, and
an active commerce was carried on with Spain and Africa. King James
conferred the sovereignty of the isles on his third son, under whom and his
successor they formed an independent kingdom up to 1349, from which time
their history merges in that of Spain. In 1521 an insurrection of the
peasantry against the nobility, whom they massacred, took place in Majorca,
and was not suppressed without much bloodshed. In the War of the Spanish
Succession all the islands declared for Charles; the duke of Anjou had no
footing anywhere save in the citadel of Mahon. Minorca was reduced by Count
Villars in 1707; but it was not till June 1715 that Majorca was subjugated,
and meanwhile Port Mahon was captured by the English under General Stanhope
in 1708. In 1713 the island was secured to them by the peace of Utrecht;
but in 1756 it was invaded by a force of 12,000 French, who, after
defeating the British under Admiral Byng, captured Port Mahon. Restored to
England in [v.03 p.0250] 1763, the island remained in possession of the
British till 1782, when it was retaken by the Spaniards. Again seized by
the British in 1798, it was finally ceded to Spain by the peace of Amiens
in 1803. When the French invaded Spain in 1808, the Mallorquins did not
remain indifferent; the governor, D. Juan Miguel de Vives, announced, amid
universal acclamation, his resolution to support Ferdinand VII. At first
the Junta would take no active part in the war, retaining the corps of
volunteers that was formed for the defence of the island; but finding it
quite secure, they transferred a succession of them to the Peninsula to
reinforce the allies. Such was the animosity excited against the French
when their excesses were known to the Mallorquins, that some of the French
prisoners, conducted thither in 1810, had to be transferred with all speed
to the island of Cabrera, a transference which was not effected before some
of them had been killed.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--For a general account of the islands, the most valuable
books are _Die Balearen geschildert in Wort und Bild_, by the archduke
Ludwig Salvator of Austria (Leipzig, 1896); _Les Îles oubliées_, by G.
Vuillier (Paris, 1904), the first edition of which has been translated
under the title of _The Forgotten Isles_ (London, 1896)--and _Islas
Baleáres_, an illustrated volume of 1423 pages, by P. Pifferrer, in the
series "España" (Barcelona, 1888). An article by George Sand in the _Revue
des deux mondes_ (1841) also deserves notice. The following are monographs
on special subjects:--_The Story of Majorca and Minorca_, by Sir C. R.
Markham (London, 1908); _Illustrationes florae insularum Balearium_, by M.
Willkomm (Stuttgart, 1881-1892); _Monuments primitifs des îles baléares_,
by E. Cartailhac (_Mission scientifique du ministère de l'instruction
publique_, Toulouse, 1892). The _British Foreign Office Reports for the
Consular District of Barcelona_ give some account of the movement of
commerce (London, annual). Much of the material available for a scientific
history will be found in _La Historia general del regno baleárico_, by J.
Dameto and V. Mut (Majorca, 1632-1650). For the period of Moorish rule, see
_Bosquejo histórico de la dominacion islamita en las islas Baleáres_, by A.
Campaner y Fuertes (Palma, 1888). See also the elaborate treatise _Les
Relations de la France avec le royaume de Majorque_, by A. Lecoy de la
Marche (Paris, 1892).