BALFOUR, SIR JAMES (of Pittendreich) (d. 1583 or 1584), Scottish judge and
politician, son of Sir Michael Balfour of Montquhanny, was educated for the
legal branch of the church of Scotland. In June 1547, together with Knox
and others taken at St Andrews, he was condemned to the French galleys, but
was released in 1549, abjured the reformers, entered the service of Mary of
Guise, and was rewarded with some considerable legal appointments.
Subsequently he went over to the lords of the congregation and then
betrayed their plans. After Mary's arrival in Scotland he became one of her
secretaries, in 1565 being reported as her greatest favourite after
Rizzio.[1] He obtained the parsonage of Flisk in Fife in 1561, was
nominated a lord of session, and in 1563 one of the commissaries of the
court which now took the place of the former ecclesiastical tribunal; in
1565 he was made a privy-councillor, and in 1566 lord-clerk-register, and
was knighted. According to Mary his murder was intended together with
Rizzio's in 1566. An adherent of Bothwell, he was deeply implicated in
Darnley's murder, though not present at the commission of the crime. By his
means Darnley was lodged at Kirk o' Field, his brothers' house. He was
supposed to have drawn up the bond at Craigmillar for the murder; he signed
it, was made under Bothwell deputy-governor of Edinburgh Castle, and is
said to have drawn up the marriage-contract between Bothwell and Mary.
When, however, the fall of Bothwell was seen to be impending he rapidly
changed sides and surrendered the castle to Murray, stipulating for his
pardon for Darnley's murder, the retention of the priory of Pittenweem, and
pecuniary rewards. He was appointed president of the court of session on
resigning the office of lord-clerk-register. He was present at the battle
of Langside with the regent in 1568, and was accused of having advised Mary
to leave Dunbar to her ruin, and of having betrayed to her enemies the
casket letters. The same year, however, in consequence of renewed intrigues
with Mary's faction, he was dismissed, and next year was imprisoned on the
charge of complicity in Darnley's murder. He succeeded in effecting his
escape by means of bribery, the expenses of which he is said to have paid
by intercepting the money sent from France to Mary's aid. In August 1571,
during the regency of Lennox, an act of forfeiture was passed against him,
but next year he was again playing traitor and discovering the secrets of
his party to Morton, and he obtained a pardon from the latter in 1573 and
negotiated the pacification of Perth the same year. Distrusted by all
parties, he fled to France, where he seems to have remained till 1580. In
1579 his forfeiture was renewed by act of parliament. In January 1580 he
wrote to Mary offering her his services, and in June protested his desire
to be useful to Elizabeth, lamented the influence of the Jesuits, and
intended a journey to Dieppe to hear some good Protestant preaching.[2] On
the 27th of December of the same year he returned to Scotland and effected
the downfall and execution of Morton by producing a bond, probably that in
defence of Bothwell and to promote his marriage with Mary, and giving
evidence of the latter's knowledge of Bothwell's intention to murder
Darnley. In July 1581 his cause was reheard; he was acquitted of murder by
assize, and shortly afterwards in 1581 or 1582 he was restored to his
estates and received at court. His career, one of the blackest in the
annals of political perfidy and crime, closed shortly before the 24th of
January 1584. He was the greatest lawyer of his day, and part-author at
least of Balfour's _Practicks_, the earliest text-book of Scottish law, not
published, however, till 1754. He married Margaret, daughter and heir of
Michael Balfour of Burleigh, by whom, besides three daughters, he had six
sons, the eldest of whom was created Baron Balfour of Burleigh in 1607.[3]

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--See article in the _Dict. of Nat. Biog._ and authorities
there quoted; Balfour's _Practicks_ (1754) and introductory preface; A.
Lang's _Hist. of Scotland_, vol. ii. and authorities (1902); Sir J.
Melville's _Memoirs_ (Bannatyne Club, 1827); _Cal. of State
Papers--Register of Privy Council of Scotland_, i.-iii.; _Scottish Series_
(Thorpe), i. and ii. (Bain), ii.-iv.; _The Border Papers_, i.; _Hamilton
Papers_, ii. (_Foreign_).

(P. C. Y.)

[1] _Cal. of State Pap. (Scottish)_, ii. 218, 250.

[2] _Cal. of State Pap. (Foreign)_, 1579-1580, p. 294.

[3] The title was attainted in 1716, through the 5th baron's complicity in
the Jacobite rising of 1715. In 1869 it was restored to Alexander Hugh
Bruce (b. 1849), as 6th baron; he became one of the most influential of
contemporary Scottish noblemen, on the Conservative side in politics, and
was secretary for Scotland from 1895 to 1903.