BALIKISRI (_Balukiser_), a town of Asia Minor, capital of the Karasi sanjak
in the vilayet of Brusa, altitude 575 ft., situated on rising ground above
a fertile plain which drains to the Sea of Marmora. Pop. 20,000 (Moslems,
15,000; Christians, 5000). It is a centre of trade in opium, silk and
cereals, communicating by carriage roads with Panderma. The sanjak is rich
in mineral wealth; silver mines are worked at Balia and boracite mines at
Susurlu. At or near Balikisri was the Roman town of Hadrianutherae,
founded, as its name commemorates, by the emperor Hadrian.

[v.03 p.0257] BALIOL, the name of a family which played an important part
in the history of Scotland. The founder of the family in England was a
Norman baron, Guy or Guido de Baliol, who held the fiefs of Bailleul,
Dampierre, Harcourt and Vinoy in Normandy. Coming to England with William
the Conqueror, he received lands in the north of England from William II.,
and his son, or grandson, Bernard or Barnard de Baliol, built a fortress in
Durham called Castle Barnard, around which the town of Barnard Castle grew.
The first burgesses probably obtained their privileges from him. Bernard
fought for King Stephen during the civil war, was present at the battle of
the Standard in August 1138, and was taken prisoner at the battle of
Lincoln in February 1141. The date of his death is uncertain. Dugdale only
believes in the existence of one Bernard de Baliol, but it seems more
probable that the Bernard de Baliol referred to after 1167 was a son of the
elder Bernard, and not the same individual. If so the younger Bernard was
one of the northern barons who raised the siege of Alnwick, and took
William the Lion, king of Scotland, prisoner in July 1174. He also
confirmed the privileges granted by his father to the burgesses of Barnard
Castle, and was succeeded by his son Eustace. Practically nothing is known
of Eustace, or of his son Hugh who succeeded about 1215. Hugh's son and
successor, John de Baliol, who increased his wealth and position by a
marriage with Dervorguila (d. 1290), daughter of Alan, earl of Galloway, is
said to have possessed thirty knights' fees in England and one half of the
lands in Galloway. He was one of the regents of Scotland during the
minority of Alexander III., but in 1255 was deprived of this office and his
lands forfeited for treason. He then appeared in England fighting for Henry
III. against Simon de Montfort, and was taken prisoner at the battle of
Lewes in 1264. About 1263 he established several scholarships at Oxford,
and after his death in 1269 his widow founded the college which bears the
name of the family. He left four sons, three of whom died without issue,
and in 1278 his lands came to his son, John de Baliol (_q.v._), who was
king of Scotland from 1292 to 1296, and who died in Normandy in 1315.
John's eldest son by his marriage with Isabel, daughter of John de Warenne,
earl of Surrey, was Edward de Baliol who shared his father's captivity in
England in 1296. Subsequently crossing over to France, he appears to have
lived mainly on his lands in Normandy until 1324, when he was invited to
England by King Edward II., who hoped to bring him forward as a candidate
for the Scottish crown. A favourable opportunity, however, did not arise
until after the death of King Robert the Bruce in 1329, when Edward III.
had succeeded his father on the English throne. Although Edward did not
give Baliol any active assistance, the claimant placed himself at the head
of some disinherited Scottish nobles, raised a small army and sailed from
Ravenspur. Landing at Kinghorn in Fifeshire in August 1332, he gained a
complete victory over the Scots under Donald, earl of Mar, at Dupplin Moor,
took Perth, and on the 24th of September was crowned king of Scotland at
Scone. He then acknowledged Edward III. as his superior, but soon
afterwards was defeated at Annan (where his brother, Henry de Baliol, was
slain) and compelled to fly to England. Regaining his kingdom after the
defeat of the Scots at Halidon Hill in July 1333, Baliol surrendered the
whole of the district formerly known as Lothian to Edward, and did homage
for Scotland to the English king. His party, however, was weakened by
disunion, and he won no serious support in Scotland. Entirely dependent on
Edward, he again sought refuge in England, and took a very slight part in
the war waged on his behalf. He returned to Scotland after the defeat of
King David II. at Neville's Cross in 1346. After making an absolute
surrender of Scotland to Edward III. in 1356 at Roxburgh in return for a
pension, Edward de Baliol died at Wheatley near Doncaster in 1367.

A cadet branch of the Baliol family was descended from Ingelram, or
Engelram, a son of the younger Bernard de Baliol. Ingelram's wife was the
daughter and heiress of William de Berkeley, lord of Reidcastle in
Forfarshire, and chamberlain of Scotland, and by her he had a son Henry,
who became chamberlain about 1223. Henry married Lora or Lauretta, a
daughter of Philip de Valoines (Valsques), lord of Panmure, and in 1234
inherited part of the rich English fiefs of the Valoines family. He sided
with the English barons against John in 1215, and accompanied Henry III. to
France in 1242. He died in 1246. It is probable but not certain that
Henry's son was Alexander de Baliol, lord of Cavers in Teviotdale, and
chamberlain of Scotland. Alexander took a leading part in Scottish affairs
during the latter part of the 13th century, and is first mentioned as
chamberlain in 1287. He shared in the negotiations between the Scottish
nobles and Edward I. of England which culminated in the treaty of Salisbury
in 1289, and the treaty of Brigham in 1290. Probably deprived of his office
as chamberlain about 1296 he may have shared the imprisonment of his
kinsman, John de Baliol the king. He then fought in Scotland for Edward,
and was summoned to several English parliaments. His wife was Isabella de
Chilham, through whom he obtained lands in Kent. He died about 1309,
leaving a son, Alexander, whose son, Thomas, sold the estate of Cavers to
William, earl of Douglas, in 1368. Thomas is the last of the Baliols
mentioned in the Scottish records.

A late and dubious tradition asserts that the family name became so
discredited owing to the pusillanimous conduct of John and Edward Baliol
that it was abandoned by its owners in favour of the form Baillie.

See John of Fordun, _Chronica gentis Scotorum_, edited by W. F. Skene
(Edinburgh, 1871-1872); Andrew of Wyntoun, _The Orygynale Cronykil of
Scotland_, edited by David Laing (Edinburgh, 1872-1879); _Gesta Edwardi de
Carnarvan_, by a canon of Bridlington, edited by W. Stubbs (London, 1883);
W. Dugdale, _The Baronage of England_ (London, 1675-1676); R. Surtees, _The
History of Durham_ (London, 1816-1840); _Documents and Records illustrating
the History of Scotland_, edited by F. T. Palgrave (London, 1837);
_Documents illustrative of the History of Scotland_ (1286-1306), edited by
J. Stevenson (Edinburgh, 1870); _Calendar of Documents relating to
Scotland_, edited by J. Bain (Edinburgh, 1881-1888).