BALIOL, JOHN DE (1249-1315), king of Scotland, was a son of John de Baliol
(d. 1269) of Barnard Castle, Durham, by his wife Dervorguila, daughter of
Alan, earl of Galloway, and became head of the Baliol family (see above)
and lord of extensive lands in England, France and Scotland on his elder
brother's death in 1278. Little else, however, is known of his early life.
He came into prominence when the Scottish throne became vacant in 1290
owing to the death of Margaret, the "maid of Norway," a granddaughter of
King Alexander III., and was one of the three candidates for the crown
whose pretensions were seriously considered. Claiming through his maternal
grandmother, Margaret, the eldest daughter of David, earl of Huntingdon (d.
1219), who was a grandson of King David I., Baliol's principal rival was
Robert Bruce, earl of Annandale, and the dispute was the somewhat familiar
one of the eldest by descent against the nearest of kin. Meanwhile the
English king, Edward I., was closely watching the trend of affairs in
Scotland and was invited to settle this dispute. It is doubtful what
rights, if any, the English kings had over Scotland, but when Edward met
the Scottish nobles at Norham in May 1291, he demanded a formal recognition
of his position as overlord of Scotland. After some delay this was tacitly
admitted by the nobles, and acknowledged by Baliol and the other
competitors, who all agreed to abide by his decision. A court of eighty
Scotsmen and twenty-four Englishmen was then appointed to try the question.
Traversing the statements made in favour of Bruce, Baliol claimed by the
principles of feudal law for an indivisible inheritance, and on the advice
of the court Edward decided in his favour. Having sworn fealty to the
English king, Baliol was crowned king of Scotland at Scone on the 30th of
November 1292; in his new capacity he did homage to Edward at Newcastle,
and in January 1293 released the English king from all promises and
obligations made while the kingdom of Scotland was in his hands. These
amicable relations were soon disturbed. A Scottish vassal carried his case
to Edward as Baliol's overlord, and Baliol himself was soon summoned to the
English court to answer a suit brought against him. After a short struggle
he admitted Edward's right, and in May 1294 attended a parliament in
London. He soon quarrelled with his overlord, the exact point at issue
being doubtful, and returned [v.03 p.0258] to Scotland. Consequent on the
dispute which had broken out between England and France, a council of
twelve was appointed to assist him, and it was decided to defy Edward.
Englishmen were dismissed from the Scottish court, their fiefs were
confiscated, and an alliance was concluded with Philip IV., king of France.
War broke out, but Baliol did not take the field in person. Invading
Scotland, Edward met with a feeble resistance, and at Brechin in July 1296
Baliol surrendered his kingdom to Antony Bek, bishop of Durham, as the
representative of the English king. About the same time he appeared before
Edward at Montrose, and delivered to him a white rod, the feudal token of
resignation. With his son, Edward, he was taken a prisoner to England,
remaining in captivity until July 1299, when he was released at the request
of Pope Boniface VIII. He lived for some time under the pope's supervision,
and seems to have passed his remaining days quietly on his French estates.
He died in Normandy early in 1315, leaving several children by his wife,
Isabel, a daughter of John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (d. 1304).

See _Documents and Records illustrating the History of Scotland_, edited by
F. T. Palgrave (London, 1837); _Documents illustrative of the History of
Scotland_, 1286-1306, edited by J. Stevenson (Edinburgh, 1870), J. H.
Burton, _History of Scotland_, vol. ii. (Edinburgh, 1905); A. Lang,
_History of Scotland_, vol. i. (Edinburgh, 1904); Sir H. Maxwell, _Robert
the Bruce_ (London, 1897); _Calendar of Documents relating to Scotland_,
edited by J. Bain (Edinburgh, 1881-1888). Also SCOTLAND: _History_.