BALI, an island of the East Indies, E. of Java, from which it is separated
by Bali Strait, which is shallow, and scarcely over a mile in width at its
narrowest point. Bali is 93 m. in length, and its greatest breadth is 50 m.
The area is 2095 sq. m. In 1882, for administrative purposes, Bali was
separated from Java and combined with the island of Lombok to form the
Dutch residency of Lombok and Bali. Politically its divisions are two:--(1)
the two districts, Buleleng and Jembrana, on Dutch territory; and (2) the
autonomous states of Klung Lung, Bangli, Mengui, Badung and Tabanan.
Buleleng, on the north-west, is the chief town. The population on Dutch
territory in the whole residency in the year 1905 was 523,535. Bali belongs
physically to Java; the climate and soil are the same and it has mountains
of proportionate height. There are several lakes of great depth and streams
well fitted for the purposes of irrigation, of which full advantage is
taken by the natives. The geological formation includes (like that of Java)
three regions--the central volcanic, the southern peninsula of Tertiary
limestone, and alluvial plains between the older formations. The highest
volcanoes, Tabanan, Batur and Gunung Agung (Bali Beak), have respectively
heights of 7545 ft., 7383 ft., and 10,497 ft., the central chain having an
average altitude of 3282 ft. As regards flora and fauna Bali is associated
with Java. The deep strait which separates it on the east from Lombok was
taken by A. R. Wallace (_q.v._) as representing the so-called Wallace's
Line, whereby he demarcated the Asiatic from the Australian fauna.

The natives of Bali, though of the same stock as the Javanese, and
resembling them in general appearance, exceed them in stature and muscular
power, as well as in activity and enterprise. They are skilful
agriculturists and artisans, especially in textile fabrics and the
manufacture of arms. Though native rule is tyrannical and arbitrary,
especially in the principalities of Badung and Tabanan, trade and industry
could not flourish if insecurity of persons and property existed to any
great extent. The natives have also a remedy against the aggression of
their rulers in their own hands; it is called _Metilas_, consists in a
general rising and renunciation of allegiance, and proves mostly
successful. Justice is administered from a written civil and criminal code.
Slavery is abolished. Hinduism, which was once the religion of Java, but
has been extinct there for four centuries, is still in vogue in the islands
of Bali and Lombok, where the cruel custom of widow-burning (suttee) is
still practised, and the Hindu system of the four castes, with a fifth or
Pariah caste (called _Chandala_), adhered to. It appears partly blended
with Buddhism, partly overgrown with a belief in _Kalas_, or evil spirits.
To appease these, offerings are made to them either direct or through the
mediation of the _Devas_ (domestic or agrarian deities); and if these avail
not, the _Menyepi_ or Great Sacrifice is resorted to. In the course of this
ceremony, after the sacrifice, men rush in all directions carrying torches;
the women also carry fire-brands, or knock on the houses with rice-crushers
and other heavy implements, and thus the evil spirits are considered to be
driven away. The Mahommedan religion occurs among the coastal population.
The Balinese language belongs to the same group of the Malayan class as the
Javanese, Sundanese, Madurese, &c., but is as distinct from each of these
as French is from Italian. It is most nearly akin to the Sasak language
spoken in Lombok and on the east coast of Bali. The literary language has
embodied many of its ingredients from the Old Javanese, as spoken in Java
at the time of the fall of Majapahit (15th century), while the vulgar
dialect has kept free from such admixture. Javanese influence is also
traceable in the use of three varieties of speech, as in the Javanese
language, according to the rank of the people addressed. The alphabet is
with some modifications the same as the Javanese, but more complicated. The
material universally used for writing on is the prepared leaf of the lontar
palm. The sacred literature of the Balinese is written in the ancient
Javanese or _Kawi_ language, which appears to be better understood here
than it is in Java. A general decline in culture is manifest in the
Balinese. Of the early history of their island the Balinese know nothing.
The oldest tradition they possess refers to a time shortly after the
overthrow of the Majapahit dynasty in Java, about the middle of the 15th
century; but it has been supposed that there must have been Indian settlers
here before the middle of the 1st century, by whom the present name,
probably cognate with the Sanskrit _balin_, strong, was in all likelihood
imposed. It was not till 1633 that the Dutch attempted to enter into
alliance with the native princes, and their earliest permanent settlement
at Port Badung only dates from 1845. Their influence was extended by the
results of the war which they waged with the natives about 1847-49.

The only roadstead safe all the year round is Temukus on the north coast.
The rivers are not navigable. Agriculture is the chief means of
subsistence; rice being a crop of particular importance. Other crops grown
for export are coffee, tobacco, cocoa and indigo. Gold-working, the making
of arms and musical instruments, wood-carving, cotton, silk and gold thread
weaving are of importance. There are numerous Arab and Chinese traders.

See R. Van Eck, _Schetsen van het eiland Bali_, Tijdsch. van Nederl. Indie
(1878-1879); J. Jacobs, _Eeenigen tijd onder de Baliers_ (Batavia, 1883);
H. Tonkes, _Volkskunde von Bali_ (Halle, 1888); Liefrinck, _De rijst
cultuur op Bali_, Indische Gids. (1886).