BALKAN PENINSULA, the most easterly of the three large peninsulas which
form the southern extremities of the European continent. Its area, 184,779
sq. m., is about 35,000 sq. m. less than that of the Iberian Peninsula, but
more than twice that of the Italian. Its northern boundary stretches from
the Kilia mouth of the Danube to the Adriatic Sea near Fiume, and is
generally regarded as marked by the courses of the rivers Danube, Save and
Kulpa. On the E. it is bounded by the Black Sea, the Sea of Marmora, and
the Aegean; on the S. by the Mediterranean; on the W. by the Ionian Sea and
the Adriatic. With the exception of the Black Sea coast and the Albanian
littoral, its shores are considerably indented and flanked by groups of
islands. The Peninsula in its general contour resembles an inverted pyramid
or triangle, terminating at its apex in a subsidiary peninsula, the
Peloponnesus or Morea. Its surface is almost entirely mountainous, the only
extensive plains being those formed by the valleys of the Danube and
Maritza, and the basin of Thessaly drained by the Salambria (ancient
_Peneus_). The Danubian plain, lying, for the most part, outside the
Peninsula, is enclosed, on the north, by the Carpathians; and on the south
by the Balkans, from which the Peninsula derives its name. These ranges
form together the great semicircular mountain-chain, known as the
anti-Dacian system, through which the Danube finds a passage at the Iron
Gates. The other mountain-systems display great complexity of formation;
beginning with the Dinaric Alps and the parallel ranges of Bosnia, they
run, as a rule, from north-west to south-east; the great chain of Rhodope
traverses the centre of the Peninsula, throwing out spurs towards the Black
Sea and the Aegean; farther west are the lofty Shar Dagh and the mountains
of Montenegro and Albania, continued by the Pindus range and the heights of
Acarnania and Aetolia. The principal summits are Olympus (9794 ft.),
overlooking the Gulf of Salonica; Musallá (9631) and Popova Shapka (8855),
both in the Rhodope system; Liubotrn in the Shar Dagh (8989); Elin, in the
Perin Planina (8794); Belmeken in southern Bulgaria (chain of Dospat,
8562); Smolika in the Pindus range (8445); Dormitor in northern Montenegro
(8294); Kaimakchalan in central Macedonia (8255); and Kiona in Aetolia
(8235). Owing to the distribution of the mountain-chains, the principal
rivers flow in an easterly or south-easterly direction; the Danube falls
into the Black Sea, the Maritza, Mesta, Struma (_Strymon_), Vardar and
Salambria into the Aegean. The only considerable rivers flowing into the
Adriatic are the Narenta, Drin and Viossa. The principal lakes are those of
Ochrida, Prespa, Scutari and Iannina. The climate is more severe than that
of the sister peninsulas, and the temperature is liable to sudden changes.
The winter, though short, is often intensely cold, especially in the
Danubian plain and in Thrace, the rigorous climate of which is frequently
alluded to by the Latin poets. Bitter north-easterly winds prevail in the
spring, and snow is not uncommon even in the low-lying districts of Greece.
The autumn weather is generally fine and clear.

[Illustration] _Geology_.--Broadly speaking, the Balkan Peninsula may be
divided into four areas which geologically are distinct. There is a central
region, roughly triangular in shape, with its base resting upon the Aegean
Sea and its apex in Servia. On two sides this area is bordered by belts of
folded beds which form on the west the mountain ranges of the Adriatic and
Ionian coasts, and on the north the chain of the Balkans. Finally, beyond
the Balkans lies the great Rumanian depression, occupied chiefly by
undisturbed Cretaceous and Tertiary strata. The _central region_, although
wedged in between two belts of folding, is not affected by the folds of
either, excepting near its margins. It consists largely of crystalline and
schistose rocks. The core is formed by the mountain masses of Rhodope,
Belasitza, Perin and Rila; and here Palaeozoic and Mesozoic beds are
absent, and the earliest sedimentary deposits belong to the Tertiary period
and lie flat upon the crystalline rocks. Upon the margins, however,
Cretaceous beds are found. The eastern parts of Greece are composed almost
entirely of Cretaceous beds, but nevertheless they must be considered to
belong to the central area, for the folds which affect them are nearly at
right angles to those of the western chains. In general, however, the
central area is one of faulting rather than of folding, and the sedimentary
beds sometimes lie in troughs formed by faults. Extensive volcanic
outbursts occurred in this region during the Tertiary period. In the
_western folded belt_ the strike of the folds is N.W.-S.E., or
N.N.W.-S.S.E. There are many local irregularities, but the general
direction is maintained as far as the southern extremity of Greece, where
the folds show a tendency to curve towards Crete. In the north,
Carboniferous beds are present, and the Trias and the Jura take a
considerable part in the formation of the chain. The Sarmatian beds are
also involved in the folds, indicating that the folding was not completed
till Pliocene times. In the south, the older beds disappear and the whole
chain is formed chiefly of Cretaceous beds, though Eocene and probably
Jurassic rocks are [v.03 p.0259] present. The Eocene beds are folded, but
the marginal Pliocene beds are not, and the final folding seems to have
taken place during the Miocene period. (For the Balkans, see BULGARIA.)

_Area and Population_.--The following figures show the area and population
of the various political divisions of the Balkan Peninsula in 1909; see
also the articles on the separate countries.

                                                               Pop. per
          Political Divisions      Area in sq. m. Pop. in 1909  sq. m.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Croatia-Slavonia (south of the
  Save and Kulpa) .   .   .   .    (about)8,200  (about)1,200,000 146.3
  Servia  .   .   .   .   .   .          18,782         2,493,770 132.2
  Bulgaria (with Eastern Rumelia)        37,240         4,028,239  88.
  The Dobrudja (Rumania)  .   .           5,896           258,242  43.9
  Dalmatia (Austria)  .   .   .           4,923           591,597 120.1
  Montenegro   .  .   .   .   .           3,255           311,564  94
  Bosnia and Herzegovina (Austria-
  Hungary)     .  .   .   .   .          19,696         1,568,092  70.9
  Sanjak of Novibazar (Turkish)           2,840           153,000  53.5
  Albania, Macedonia and other
  Turkish possessions .   .   .          62,744         5,812,300  92.6
  Greece       .  .   .   .   .          24,400         2,631,952 107.8

                                        187,976        19,048,756 101.3

For full details as to the physical features, natural products, population,
customs, trade, finance, government, religion, education, language,
literature, antiquities, history, politics, &c., of the Balkan lands, see
ALBANIA, BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA, BULGARIA, CROATIA-SLAVONIA, DALMATIA,
DOBRUDJA, GREECE, ILLYRIA, MACEDONIA, MONTENEGRO, NOVIBAZAR, SERVIA and
TURKEY.

[Illustration]

_Races_.--The Peninsula is inhabited by a great variety of races, whose
ethnological limits are far from corresponding with the existing political
boundaries. The Turkish population, descended in part from the Ottoman
invaders of the 14th and 15th centuries, in part from colonists introduced
at various epochs from Asia by the Turkish government, declined
considerably during the 19th century, especially in the countries withdrawn
from the sultan's authority. It is diminishing in Thessaly; it has entirely
disappeared in the rest of Greece, almost entirely in Servia; and it
continues to decrease in Bulgaria notwithstanding the efforts of the
authorities to check emigration. It is nowhere found in compact masses
except in north-eastern Bulgaria and the region between Adrianople, the
Black Sea and the Sea of Marmora. Elsewhere it appears in separate villages
and isolated districts, or in the larger towns and their immediate
neighbourhood. The total Turkish population of the Peninsula scarcely
exceeds 1,800,000. The Slavonic population, including the Serbo-Croats and
Bulgars, is by far the most numerous; its total aggregate exceeds
10,000,000. The majority of the Serbo-Croats left their homes among the
Carpathians and settled in the Balkan Peninsula in the 7th century. The
distinction between the Serbs of the more central region and the Croats of
the north-west, was first drawn by the early Byzantine chroniclers, and was
well established by the 12th century. It does not correspond with any valid
linguistic or racial difference; but in the course of time a strong
religious difference arose. Along the Croatian and Dalmatian coast there
existed a well-developed Latin civilization, which was sustained by
constant intercourse with Italy; and, under its influence, the
Serbo-Croatian immigrants were converted to the Roman Catholic Church. In
the wild and mountainous interior, however, the Byzantine Church had few or
no rivals and the Orthodox creed prevailed. The Orthodox Serbs inhabit the
kingdom of Servia, Old Servia (or Novibazar and north-western Macedonia),
Montenegro, Herzegovina and parts of Bosnia. The Roman Catholic Croats
predominate in Dalmatia, north-western Bosnia and Croatia-Slavonia.
Montenegro, like the other mountainous regions, adhered to the Greek
Church; it received a number of Orthodox Servian refugees at the beginning
of the 15th century, when the Turks occupied Servia. The numbers of the
Serbo-Croats may be estimated at about 5,600,000. The Bulgars, who descend
from a fusion of the Slavonic element with a later Ugro-Finnish
immigration, inhabit the kingdom of Bulgaria (including Eastern Rumelia),
parts of the Dobrudja and the greater part of Macedonia, except Old Servia
and the Aegean littoral. Apart from their colonies in Bessarabia and
elsewhere, they may be reckoned at 4,400,000. Only a portion of the
widely-spread Ruman or Vlach race, which extends over a great part of
Transylvania, south Hungary and Bessarabia, as well as the Rumanian
kingdom, falls within the limits of the Peninsula. It is found in numerous
detached settlements in Macedonia, Albania and northern Greece, and in
colonies of recent date in Servia and Bulgaria. The nomad Vlachs or
Tzintzars of these countries call themselves Arumani or "Romans"; they are
a remnant of the native Latinized population which received an increase
from the immigration of Daco-Roman refugees, who fled southwards during the
3rd century, after the abandonment of Dacia by Aurelian. (See VLACHS.) The
entire Ruman population of the Balkan countries may be set down
approximately at 600,000. The Albanians, who call themselves _Shküpetar_ or
_Arber_, are the representatives of the primitive Illyrian population; they
inhabit the Adriatic littoral from the southern frontier of Montenegro to
the northern boundary of Greece, in which country they are found in
considerable numbers. They have shown a tendency to advance in a
north-easterly direction towards the Servian frontier, and the movement has
been encouraged for political reasons by the Turkish government. The whole
Albanian nation possibly numbers from 1,500,000 to 1,600,000. The Greeks,
whose immigration from Asia Minor took place in pre-historic times, are,
next to the Albanians, the oldest race in the Peninsula. Their maritime and
commercial instincts have led them from the earliest times to found
settlements on the sea-coast and the islands. They inhabit the Black Sea
littoral from Varna to the Bosporus, the shores of the Sea of Marmora and
the Aegean, the Aegean archipelago, the mainland of Greece, Epirus and the
western islands as far north as Corfu. In Constantinople they [v.03 p.0260]
probably exceed 300,000. They are seldom found in large numbers at any
great distance from the sea, and usually congregate in the principal towns
and commercial centres, such as Adrianople, Constantza, Varna and
Philippopolis; there are also detached colonies at Melnik, Stanimaka,
Kavakly, Niegush and elsewhere. The Greek inhabitants of the Peninsula and
adjacent islands probably number 4,500,000. The remainder of the population
is for the most part composed of Armenians, Jews and gipsies. The
Armenians, like the Greeks, congregate in the principal centres of trade,
especially at Constantinople; their numbers were greatly reduced by the
massacres of 1896. The Jews are most numerous at Salonica where they form
half the population. The gipsies are scattered widely throughout the
Peninsula; they are found not only in wandering troops, as elsewhere in
Europe, but in settlements or cantonments in the neighbourhood of towns and
villages.

_Religions._--Owing to the numerous conversions to Islam which followed the
Turkish conquest, the Mahommedan population of the Peninsula is largely in
excess of the purely Turkish element. More than half the Albanian nation
and 35% of the inhabitants of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the creed of
the conquering race. Among the Bulgars and Greeks the conversions were less
numerous. The Bulgarian Mahommedans, or Pomaks, who inhabit the valleys of
Rhodope and certain districts in northern Bulgaria, are numerically
insignificant; the Greek followers of Islam are almost confined to Crete.
The whole Moslem population of the Peninsula is about 3,300,000. The great
bulk of the Christian population belongs to the Orthodox Church, of which
the oecumenical patriarch at Constantinople is the nominal head, having
precedence over all other ecclesiastical dignitaries. The Bulgarian,
Servian, Montenegrin and Greek churches are, however, in reality
autocephalous. The Bulgarian church enjoys an exceptional position,
inasmuch as its spiritual chief, the exarch, who resides at Constantinople,
controls the Bulgarian prelates in European Turkey as well as those in the
kingdom of Bulgaria. On the other hand, the Greek prelates in Bulgaria are
subject to the patriarch. Religious and political questions are intimately
connected in eastern Europe. The heads of the various religious communities
are the only representatives of the Christian population recognized by the
Turkish government; they possess a seat in the local administrative
councils and supervise the Christian schools. The efforts of the several
branches of the Orthodox Church to obtain a separate organization in the
Turkish dominions are to be attributed exclusively to political motives, as
no difference of dogma divides them. The Serbo-Croats of Dalmatia, and
Croatia-Slavonia, some of the Gheg tribes in Albania, about 21% of the
Bosnians, a still smaller number of Bulgarians in the kingdom and in
Macedonia and a few Greeks in the islands belong to the Roman Catholic
Church. A certain number of Bulgars at Kukush in Macedonia and elsewhere
form a "uniate" church, which accepts the authority and dogma of Rome, but
preserves the Orthodox rite and discipline. The Armenians are divided
between the Gregorian and Uniate-Armenian churches, each under a patriarch.
The other Christian confessions are numerically inconsiderable. The Gagaüzi
in Eastern Bulgaria, a Turanian and Turkish-speaking race, profess
Christianity.

_Languages._--Until comparatively recent times Turkish and Greek were the
only languages systematically taught or officially recognized in the Balkan
lands subject to Turkish rule. The first, the speech of the conquering
race, was the official language; the second, owing to the intellectual and
literary superiority of the Greeks, their educational zeal and the
privileges acquired by their church, became the language of the upper
classes among the Christians. The Slavonic masses, however, both Servian
and Bulgarian, preserved their language, which saved these nationalities
from extinction. The Servian dialect extending into regions which escaped
the Turkish yoke, enjoyed certain advantages denied to the Bulgarian: in
free Montenegro the first Slavonic printing-press was founded in 1493; at
Ragusa, a century later, Servian literature attained a high degree of
excellence. Bulgarian, for nearly four centuries, ceased to be a written
language except in a few monasteries; a literary revival, which began about
the middle of the 18th century, was the first symptom of returning national
consciousness. The Servian, Bulgarian and Rumanian languages have borrowed
largely from the Turkish in their vocabularies, but not in their structural
forms, and have adopted many words from the Greek. Modern Greek has also a
large number of Turkish words which are rejected in the artificial literary
language. The revival of the various Balkan nationalities was in every case
accompanied or preceded by a literary movement; in Servian literature,
under the influence of Obradovich and Vuk Karajich, the popular idiom,
notwithstanding the opposition of the priesthood, superseded the
ecclesiastical Russian-Slavonic; in Bulgaria the eastern dialect, that of
the Sredna Gora, prevailed. Among the Greeks, whose literature never
suffered a complete eclipse, a similar effort to restore the classical
tongue resulted in a kind of compromise; the conventional literary
language, which is neither ancient nor modern, differs widely from the
vernacular. Albanian, the only surviving remnant of the ancient
Thraco-Illyrian speech, affords an interesting study to philologists. It
undoubtedly belongs to the Indo-European family, but its earlier forms
cannot, unfortunately, be ascertained owing to the absence of literary
monuments. Certain remarkable analogies between Albanian and the other
languages of the Peninsula, especially Bulgarian and Rumanian, have been
supposed to point to the influence exercised by the primitive speech upon
the idioms of the immigrant races.

_History._--The great Slavonic immigration, which changed the ethnographic
face of the Peninsula, began in the 3rd century A.D. and continued at
intervals throughout the following four centuries. At the beginning of this
movement the Byzantine empire was in actual or nominal possession of all
the regions south of the Danube; the greater part of the native
Thraco-Illyrian population of the interior had been romanized and spoke
Latin. The Thracians, the progenitors of the Vlachs, took refuge in the
mountainous districts and for some centuries disappeared from history:
originally an agricultural people, they became nomad shepherds. In Albania
the aboriginal Illyrian element, which preserved its ancient language,
maintained itself in the mountains and eventually forced back the immigrant
race. The Greeks, who occupied the maritime and southern regions, were
driven to the sea-coast, the islands and the fortified towns. Slavonic
place-names, still existing in every portion of the Peninsula, bear witness
to the multitude of the invaders and the permanency of their settlements.
In the 6th century the Slavs penetrated to the Morea, where a Slavonic
dialect was spoken down to the middle of the 15th century. In the 7th the
Serbo-Croats invaded the north-western regions (Croatia, Servia, Bosnia,
Herzegovina, Montenegro and northern Albania); they expelled or assimilated
the Illyrian population, now represented in Dalmatia by the slavonized
Morlachs or Mavro-Vlachs, and appropriated the old Roman colonies on the
Adriatic coast. At the end of the 7th century the Bulgars, a Turanian race,
crossed the Danube and subjected the Slavonic inhabitants of Moesia and
Thrace, but were soon assimilated by the conquered population, which had
already become partly civilized. Under their tsar Krum (802-815) the
Bulgars invaded the districts of Adrianople and central Macedonia; under
Simeon (893-927), who fixed his capital at Preslav, their empire extended
from the Adriatic to the Black Sea. In 971 "the first Bulgarian empire" was
overthrown by the emperor John Zimisces, but Bulgarian power was soon
revived under the Shishman dynasty at Ochrida. In 1014 Tsar Samuel of
Ochrida, who had conquered the greater part of the Peninsula, was defeated
at Belasitza by the Greek emperor Basil II., and the "western Bulgarian
empire" came to an end. In the 10th century the Vlachs reappear as an
independent power in Southern Macedonia and the Pindus district, which were
known as Great Walachia ([Greek: Megalê Blachia]). The Serbs, who owing to
the dissensions of their zhupans or chiefs, had hitherto failed to take a
prominent part in the history of the Peninsula, attained unity under
Stephen Nemanya (1169-1195), the founder of the Nemanyich dynasty. A new
Bulgarian power, known as the "second" or "Bulgaro-Vlach empire," was
founded at Trnovo in 1186 under the brothers Ivan and Peter Asên, who led a
revolt of Vlachs and Bulgars against the Greeks. In 1204 Constantinople was
captured by the Latins of the Fourth Crusade, and Baldwin of Flanders was
crowned emperor; the Venetians acquired several maritime towns and islands,
and Frankish feudal dynasties were established in Salonica, Athens, Achaea
and elsewhere. Greek rule, however, survived in the despotate of Epirus
under princes of the imperial house of the Angeli. The Latin tenure of
Constantinople lasted only 57 years; the imperial city was recaptured in
1261 by Michael VIII. Palaeologus, but most of the feudal Latin states
continued to exist till the Turkish conquest; the Venetians retained their
possessions for several centuries later and waged continual wars with the
Turks. In 1230 Theodore of Epirus, who had conquered Albania, Great
Walachia and Macedonia, was overthrown at Klokotnitza by Ivan Asên II., the
greatest of Bulgarian monarchs (1218-1241), who defeated Baldwin at
Adrianople and extended his sway over most of the Peninsula. The Bulgarian
power declined after [v.03 p.0261] his death and was extinguished at the
battle of Velbûzhd (1330) by the Servians under Stephen Urosh III. A short
period of Servian predominance followed under Stephen Dushan (1331-1355)
whose realm included Albania, Macedonia, Epirus, Thessaly and northern
Greece. The Servian incursion was followed by a great Albanian emigration
to the southern regions of the Peninsula. After Dushan's death his empire
disappeared, and Servia fell a prey to anarchy. For a short time the
Bosnians, under their king Stephen Tvrtko (1353-1391), became the principal
power in the west of the Peninsula. The disorganization and internecine
feuds of the various states prepared the way for the Ottoman invasion. In
1356 the Turks seized Gallipoli; in 1361 the sultan Murad I. established
his capital at Adrianople; in 1389 the fate of the Slavonic states was
decided by the rout of the Servians and their allies at Kossovo. The last
remnant of Bulgarian national existence disappeared with the fall of Trnovo
in 1393, and Great Walachia was conquered in the same year. Under Mahommed
II. (1451-1481) the Turks completed the conquest of the Peninsula. The
despotate of Epirus succumbed in 1449, the duchy of Athens in 1456; in 1453
Constantinople was taken and the decrepit Byzantine empire perished; the
greater part of Bosnia submitted in 1463; the heroic resistance of the
Albanians under Scanderbeg collapsed with the fall of Croia (1466), and
Venetian supremacy in Upper Albania ended with the capture of Scutari
(1478). Only the mountain stronghold of Montenegro and the Italian
city-states on the Adriatic coast escaped subjection. In the 16th century
under Solyman the Magnificent (1520-1566) the Ottoman power attained its
greatest height; after the unsuccessful siege of Vienna (1683) it began to
decline. The period of decadence was marked in the latter half of the 18th
century by the formation of practically independent pashaliks or fiefs,
such as those of Scutari under Mahommed of Bushat, Iannina under Ali of
Tepelen, and Viden under Pasvan-oglu. The detachment of the outlying
portions of the empire followed. Owing to the uncompromising character of
the Mahommedan religion and the contemptuous attitude of the dominant race,
the subject nationalities underwent no process of assimilation during the
four centuries of Turkish rule; they retained not only their language but
their religion, manners and peculiar characteristics, and when the power of
the central authority waned they still possessed the germs of a national
existence. The independence of Greece was acknowledged in 1829, that of
Servia (as a tributary principality) in 1830. No territorial changes within
the Peninsula followed the Crimean War; but the continuance of the weakened
authority of the Porte tended indirectly to the independent development of
the various nationalities. The Ionian Islands were ceded by Great Britain
to Greece in 1864. The great break-up came in 1878. The abortive treaty of
San Stefano, concluded in that year, reduced the Turkish possessions in the
Peninsula to Albania, Epirus, Thessaly and a portion of southern Thrace. A
large Bulgarian principality was created extending from the Danube to the
Aegean and from the Black Sea to the river Drin in Albania; it received a
considerable coast-line on the Aegean and abutted on the Gulf of Salonica
under the walls of that town. At the same time the frontiers of Servia and
Montenegro were enlarged so as to become almost contiguous, and Montenegro
received the ports of Antivari and Dulcigno on the Adriatic. From a
strategical point of view the Bulgaria of the San Stefano treaty threatened
Salonica, Adrianople and Constantinople itself; and the great powers,
anticipating that the new state would become a Russian dependency, refused
their sanction to its provisions. The treaty of Berlin followed, which
limited the principality to the country between the Danube and the Balkans,
created the autonomous province of Eastern Rumelia south of the Balkans,
and left the remainder of the proposed Bulgarian state under Turkish rule.
The Montenegrin frontier laid down at San Stefano was considerably
curtailed, Dulcigno, the district north-east of the Tara, and other
territories being restored to Turkey; in addition to Nish, Servia received
the districts of Pirot and Vranya on the east instead of the Ibar valley on
the west; the Dobrudja, somewhat enlarged, was ceded to Rumania, which
surrendered southern Bessarabia to Russia. Bosnia and Herzegovina were
handed over to Austrian administration; under a subsequent convention with
Turkey, Austria sent troops into the sanjak of Novibazar. The complete
independence of the principalities of Servia, Rumania and Montenegro was
recognized. The claims of Greece, ignored at San Stefano, were admitted at
Berlin; an extension of frontier, including Epirus as well as Thessaly, was
finally sanctioned by the powers in 1880, but owing to the tenacious
resistance of Turkey only Thessaly and the district of Arta were acquired
by Greece in 1881. Rumania was proclaimed a kingdom in that year, Servia in
1882. In 1880, after a naval demonstration by the powers, Dulcigno was
surrendered to Montenegro in compensation for the districts of Plava and
Gusinye restored to Turkey. In 1886 the informal union of Eastern Rumelia
with Bulgaria was sanctioned by Europe, the districts of Tumrush (Rhodope)
and Krjali being given back to the sultan. In 1897 Crete was withdrawn from
Turkish administration, and the Greco-Turkish War of that year was followed
by the cession to Turkey of a few strategical points on the Thessalian
frontier. In 1908 Bosnia and Herzegovina were annexed to the Dual Monarchy,
and Bulgaria (including Eastern Rumelia) was proclaimed an independent
kingdom.

[Sidenote: A Balkan confederation.]

The growth and development of the Balkan nations have, to a great extent,
been retarded by the international jealousies arising from the Eastern
Question. The possibility of the young states entering into a combination
which would enable them to offer a united resistance to foreign
interference while simultaneously effecting a compromise in regard to their
national aims, has at various times occupied the attention of Balkan
politicians. Among the earliest advocates of this idea was Ristich, the
Servian statesman. During the reaction against Russia which followed the
war of 1877 informal discussions were conducted with this object, and it
was even suggested that a reformed or constitutional Turkey might find a
place in the confederation. The movement was favourably regarded by King
Charles of Rumania and Prince Alexander of Bulgaria. But the revolt of
Eastern Rumelia, followed by the Servo-Bulgarian War and the coercion of
Greece by the powers, embittered the rivalry of the various races, and the
project was laid aside. It was revived in a somewhat modified form in 1891
by Tricoupis, who suggested an offensive alliance of the Balkan states,
directed against Turkey and aiming at a partition of the Sultan's
possessions in Europe. The scheme, which found favour in Servia, was
frustrated by the opposition of Stamboloff, who denounced it to the Porte.
In 1897 a Bulgarian proposal for joint pacific action with a view to
obtaining reforms in Macedonia was rejected by Greece.

AUTHORITIES.--Special bibliographies are appended to the separate articles
which deal with the various political divisions of the Peninsula. For a
general description of the whole region, its inhabitants, political
problems, &c., see "Odysseus," _Turkey in Europe_ (London, 1900), a work of
exceptional interest and value. See also _The Balkan Question_, ed. L.
Villari (London, 1905); W. Miller, _Travels and Politics in the Near East_
(London, 1898); L. Lamouche, _La Péninsule balkanique_ (Paris, 1899); H. C.
Thomson, _The Outgoing Turk_ (London, 1897); T. Joanne, _États du Danube et
des Balkans_ (Paris, 1895); R. Millet, _Souvenirs des Balkans_ (Paris,
1891); V. Cambon, _Autour des Balkans_ (Paris, 1890); P. J. Hamard, _Par
delà l'Adriatique et les Balkans_ (Paris, 1890); E. de Laveleye, _La
Péninsule des Balkans_ (Brussels, 1886). For geology see F. Toula,
"Materialien zu einer Geologic der Balkan-halbinsel," _Jahr. k.-k. geol.
Reichsanst._ (Vienna, vol. xxxiii. 1883), pp. 61-114; A. Bittnel. M.
Neumayr, &c., _Denks. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, math.-nat. Cl._, vol. xl.
(1880); A. Philippson, _Der Peloponnes_ (Berlin, 1892); J. Cviji['c], "Die
Tektonik der Balkanhalbinsel," _C. R. IX. Cong. géol. inter. Vienne_, pp.
347-370 (1904). For the condition of the Peninsula before the Treaty of
Berlin, see E. Rüffer, _Die Balkanhalbinsel und ihre Volker_ (Bautzen,
1869); Mackenzie and Irby, _Travels in the Slavonic Provinces of Turkey_
(London, 1866); and A. Boué, _La Turquie d'Europe_ (Paris, 1840). W.
Miller, _The Balkans_ (London, 1896), sketches the history of Bulgaria,
Montenegro, Rumania and Servia. See also Sir E. Hertslet, _The Map of
Europe by Treaty_, esp. vol. iv. (London, 1875-1891); J. D. Bourchier, "A
Balkan Confederation," in the _Fortnightly Review_ (London, September
1891); the Austrian and Russian staff maps, and the ethnographical maps of
Kiepert and Peucker.

(J. D. B.)

[v.03 p.0262] BALKASH, or BALKHASH (called by the Kirghiz _Ak-denghiz_ or
_Ala-denghiz_ and by the Chinese _Si-hai_), a lake of Asiatic Russia, in
the Kirghiz steppes, between the governments of Semipalatinsk and
Semiryechensk, in 45° to 47° N. and 73° 30' to 79° E., about 600 m. to the
east of Lake Aral. It is fourth in size of the lakes in Eurasia, having an
area of 7115 sq. m., and lies at an altitude of 900 ft. It has the shape of
a broad crescent, about 430 m. long from W.S.W. to E.N.E., having its
concave side turned southwards; its width varies from 36 to 53 m. Its
north-western shore is bordered by a dreary plateau, known as the Famine
Steppe (_Bek-pak-dala_). The south-east shore, on the contrary, is low, and
bears traces of having extended formerly as far as the Sasyk-kul and the
Ala-kul. The Kirghiz in 1903 declared that its surface had been rising
steadily during the preceding ten years, though prior to that it was
dropping. The chief feeder of the lake is the Ili, which rises in the
Khantengri group of the Tian-shan Mountains. The Karatal, the Aksu and the
Lepsa also enter from the south-east, and the Ayaguz from the north-east.
The first three rivers make their way with difficulty through the sands and
reeds, which at a quite recent time were covered by the lake. Although it
has no outlet, its waters are relatively fresh. It freezes generally from
November to April. Its greatest depth, 35 ft., is along the north-west
shore. The fauna of the lake and of its tributaries--explored by
Nikolsky--is more akin to the fauna of the rivers of the Tarim basin than
to that of the Aral; it also does not contain the common frog. It seems,
therefore, probable that Lake Balkash stood formerly in communication
through lakes Ebi-nor and Ayar (Telli-nor) with the lake that formerly
filled the Lukchun depression (in 89½° E. long, and 42½° N. lat.), but
researches show that a connexion with Lake Aral--at least in recent
times--was improbable. The lake has been investigated by L. S. Berg (see
_Petermanns Mitteilungen_, 1903).