BALLADS. The word "ballad" is derived from the O. Fr. _baller_, to dance,
and originally meant a song sung to the rhythmic movement of a dancing
chorus. Later, the word, in the form of _ballade_ (_q.v._), became the
technical term for a particular form of old-fashioned French poetry,
remarkable for its involved and [v.03 p.0265] recurring rhymes. "Laisse moi
aux Jeux Floraux de Toulouse toutes ces vieux poésies Françoises comme
_ballades_," says Joachim du Bellay in 1550; and Philaminte, the lady
pedant of Molière's _Femmes Savantes_, observes--

 "La ballade, à mon goût, est une chose fade,
  Ce n'en est plus la mode, elle sent son vieux temps."

In England the term has usually been applied to any simple tale told in
simple verse, though attempts have been made to confine it to the subject
of this article, namely, the literary form of popular songs, the folk-tunes
associated with them being treated in the article SONG. By popular songs we
understand what the Germans call _Volkslieder_, that is, songs with words
composed by members of the people, for the people, handed down by oral
tradition, and in style, taste and even incident, common to the people in
all European countries. The beauty of these purely popular ballads, their
directness and freshness, has made them admired even by the artificial
critics of the most artificial periods in literature. Thus Sir Philip
Sydney confesses that the ballad of _Chevy Chase_, when chanted by "a blind
crowder," stirred his blood like the sound of trumpet. Addison devoted two
articles in the _Spectator_ to a critique of the same poem. Montaigne
praised the _naïveté_ of the village carols; and Malherbe preferred a
rustic _chansonnette_ to all the poems of Ronsard. These, however, are rare
instances of the taste for popular poetry, and though the Danish ballads
were collected and printed in the middle of the 16th century, and some
Scottish collections date from the beginning of the 18th, it was not till
the publication of Allan Ramsay's _Evergreen and Tea Table Miscellany_, and
of Bishop Percy's _Reliques_ (1765), that a serious effort was made to
recover Scottish and English folk-songs from the recitation of the old
people who still knew them by heart. At the time when Percy was editing the
_Reliques_, Madame de Chénier, the mother of the celebrated French poet of
that name, composed an essay on the ballads of her native land, modern
Greece; and later, Herder and Grimm and Goethe, in Germany, did for the
songs of their country what Scott did for those of Liddesdale and the
Forest. It was fortunate, perhaps, for poetry, though unlucky for the
scientific study of the ballads, that they were mainly regarded from the
literary point of view. The influence of their artless melody and
straightforward diction may be felt in the lyrics of Goethe and of
Coleridge, of Wordsworth, of Heine and of André Chénier. Chénier, in the
most affected age even of French poetry, translated some of the Romaic
ballads; one, as it chanced, being almost identical with that which
Shakespeare borrowed from some English reciter, and put into the mouth of
the mad Ophelia. The beauty of the ballads and the interest they excited
led to numerous forgeries and modern interpolations, which it is seldom
difficult to detect with certainty. Editors could not resist the temptation
to interpolate, to restore, and to improve the fragments that came in their
way. The marquis de la Villemarqué, who first drew attention to the ballads
of Brittany, is not wholly free from this fault. Thus a very general
scepticism was awakened, and when questions came to be asked as to the date
and authorship of the Scottish traditional ballads, it is scarcely to be
wondered at that Dr Chambers attributed most of them to the accomplished
Lady Wardlaw, who lived in the middle of the 18th century.

The vexed and dull controversy as to the origin of Scottish folk-songs was
due to ignorance of the comparative method, and of the ballad literature of
Europe in general. The result of the discussion was to leave a vague
impression that the Scottish ballads were perhaps as old as the time of
Dunbar, and were the production of a class of professional minstrels. These
minstrels are a stumbling-block in the way of the student of the growth of
ballads. The domestic annals of Scotland show that her kings used to keep
court-bards, and also that strollers, _jongleurs_, as they were called,
went about singing at the doors of farm-houses and in the streets of towns.
Here were two sets of minstrels who had apparently left no poetry; and, on
the other side, there was a number of ballads that claimed no author. It
was the easiest and most satisfactory inference that the courtly minstrels
made the verses, which the wandering crowders imitated or corrupted. But
this theory fails to account, among other things, for the universal
sameness of tone, of incident, of legend, of primitive poetical formulae,
which the Scottish ballad possesses, in common with the ballads of Greece,
of France, of Provence, of Portugal, of Denmark and of Italy. The object,
therefore, of this article is to prove that what has long been acknowledged
of nursery tales, of what the Germans call _Märchen_, namely, that they are
the immemorial inheritance at least of all European peoples, is true also
of some ballads. Their present form, of course, is relatively recent: in
centuries of oral recitation the language altered automatically, but the
stock situations and ideas of many romantic ballads are of dateless age and
world-wide diffusion. The main incidents and plots of the fairy tales of
Celts and Germans and Slavonic and Indian peoples, their unknown antiquity
and mysterious origin, are universally recognized. No one any longer
attributes them to this or that author, or to this or that date. The
attempt to find date or author for a genuine popular song is as futile as a
similar search in the case of a _Märchen_. It is to be asked, then, whether
what is confessedly true of folk-tales,--of such stories as the _Sleeping
Beauty_ and _Cinderella_,--is true also of folk-songs. Are they, or have
they been, as universally sung as the fairy tales have been narrated? Do
they, too, bear traces of the survival of primitive creeds and primitive
forms of consciousness and of imagination? Are they, like _Märchen_, for
the most part, little influenced by the higher religions, Christian or
polytheistic? Do they turn, as _Märchen_ do, on the same incidents, repeat
the same stories, employ the same machinery of talking birds and beasts?
Lastly, are any specimens of ballad literature capable of being traced back
to extreme antiquity? It appears that all these questions may be answered
in the affirmative; that the great age and universal diffusion of the
ballad may be proved; and that its birth, from the lips and heart of the
people, may be contrasted with the origin of an artistic poetry in the
demand of an aristocracy for a separate epic literature destined to be its
own possession, and to be the first development of a poetry of
personality,--a record of individual passions and emotions. After bringing
forward examples of the identity of features in European ballad poetry, we
shall proceed to show that the earlier genre of ballads with refrain sprang
from the same primitive custom of dance, accompanied by improvised song,
which still exists in Greece and Russia, and even in valleys of the
Pyrenees.

There can scarcely be a better guide in the examination of the _notes_ or
marks of popular poetry than the instructions which M. Ampère gave to the
committee appointed in 1852-1853 to search for the remains of ballads in
France. M. Ampère bade the collectors look for the following
characteristics:--"The use of assonance in place of rhyme, the brusque
character of the recital, the textual repetition, as in Homer, of the
speeches of the persons, the constant use of certain numbers,--as three and
seven,--and the representation of the commonest objects of every-day life
as being made of gold and silver." M. Ampère might have added that French
ballads would probably employ a "bird chorus," the use of talking-birds as
messengers; that they would repeat the plots current in other countries,
and display the same non-Christian idea of death and of the future world
(see "The Lyke-wake Dirge"), the same ghostly superstitions and stories of
metamorphosis, and the same belief in elves and fairies, as are found in
the ballads of Greece, of Provence, of Brittany, Denmark and Scotland. We
shall now examine these supposed common notes of all genuine popular song,
supplying a few out of the many instances of curious identity. As to
brusqueness of recital, and the use of assonance instead of rhyme, as well
as the aid to memory given by reproducing speeches verbally, these are
almost unavoidable in all simple poetry preserved by oral tradition. In the
matter of recurring numbers, we have the eternal--

         "Trois belles filles
  L'y en a'z une plus belle que le jour,"

who appear in old French ballads, as well as the "Three Sailors," whose
adventures are related in the Lithuanian and Provençal originals of
Thackeray's _Little Billee_. Then there is "the league, [v.03 p.0266] the
league, the league, but barely three," of Scottish ballads; and the [Greek:
tria poulakia], three golden birds, which sing the prelude to Greek
folk-songs, and so on. A more curious note of primitive poetry is the
lavish and reckless use of gold and silver. H. F. Tozer, in his account of
ballads in the _Highlands of Turkey_, remarks on this fact, and attributes
it to Eastern influences. But the horses' shoes of silver, the knives of
fine gold, the talking "birds with gold on their wings," as in
Aristophanes, are common to all folk-song. Everything almost is gold in the
_Kalewala_ (_q.v._), a so-called epic formed by putting into juxtaposition
all the popular songs of Finland. Gold is used as freely in the ballads,
real or spurious, which M. Verkovitch has had collected in the wilds of
Mount Rhodope. The Captain in the French song is as lavish in his treatment
of his runaway bride,--

 "Son amant l'habille,
  Tout en or et argent";

and the rustic in a song from Poitou talks of his _faucille d'or_, just as
a variant of Hugh of Lincoln introduces gold chairs and tables. Again, when
the lover, in a ballad common to France and to Scotland, cuts the
winding-sheet from about his living bride--"il tira ses ciseaux d'or fin."
If the horses of the Klephts in Romaic ballads are gold shod, the steed in
_Willie's Lady_ is no less splendidly accoutred,--

 "Silver shod before,
  And gowden shod behind."

Readers of Homer, and of the Chanson de Roland, must have observed the same
primitive luxury of gold in these early epics, in Homer reflecting perhaps
the radiance of the actual "golden Mycenae."

Next as to talking-birds. These are not so common as in _Märchen_, but
still are very general, and cause no surprise to their human listeners. The
omniscient popinjay, who "up and spoke" in the Border minstrelsy, is of the
same family of birds as those that, according to Talvj, pervade Servian
song; as the [Greek: tria poulakia] which introduce the story in the Romaic
ballads; as the wise birds whose speech is still understood by
exceptionally gifted Zulus; as the wicked dove that whispers temptation in
the sweet French folk-song; as the "bird that came out of a bush, on water
for to dine," in the _Water o' Wearies Well_.

In the matter of identity of plot and incident in the ballads of various
lands, it is to be regretted that no such comparative tables exist as Von
Hahn tried, not very exhaustively, to make of the "story-roots" of
_Märchen_. Such tables might be compiled from the learned notes and
introductions of Prof. Child to his _English and Scottish Popular Ballads_
(1898). A common plot is the story of the faithful leman, whose lord brings
home "a braw new bride," and who recovers his affection at the eleventh
hour. In Scotland this is the ballad of Lord Thomas and Fair Annie; in
Danish it is Skiaen Anna. It occurs twice in M. Fauriel's collection of
Romaic songs. Again, there is the familiar ballad about a girl who pretends
to be dead, that she may be borne on a bier to meet her lover. This occurs
not only in Scotland, but in the popular songs of Provence (collected by
Damase Arbaud) and in those of Metz (Puymaigre), and in both countries an
incongruous sequel tells how the lover tried to murder his bride, and how
she was too cunning, and drowned him. Another familiar feature is the bush
and briar, or the two rose trees, which meet and plait over the graves of
unhappy lovers, so that all passers-by see them, and say in the
Provençal,--

 "Diou ague l'amo
  Des paures amourous."

Another example of a very widespread theme brings us to the ideas of the
state of the dead revealed in folk-songs. _The Night Journey_, in M.
Fauriel's Romaic collection, tells how a dead brother, wakened from his
sleep of death by the longing of love, bore his living sister on his
saddle-bow, in one night, from Bagdad to Constantinople. In Scotland this
is the story of Proud Lady Margaret; in Germany it is the song which Bürger
converted into Lenore; in Denmark it is Aagé und Elsé; in Brittany the dead
foster-brother carries his sister to the apple close of the Celtic paradise
(_Barzaz Breiz_). Only in Brittany do the sad-hearted people think of the
land of death as an island of Avalon, with the eternal sunset lingering
behind the flowering apple trees, and gleaming on the fountain of
forgetfulness. In Scotland the channering worm doth chide even the souls
that come from where, "beside the gate of Paradise, the birk grows fair
enough." The Romaic idea of the place of the dead, the garden of Charon,
whence "neither in spring or summer, nor when grapes are gleaned in autumn,
can warrior or maiden escape," is likewise pre-Christian. In Provençal and
Danish folk-song, the cries of children ill-treated by a cruel step-mother
awaken the departed mother,--

 "'Twas cold at night and the bairnies grat,
  The mother below the mouls heard that."

She reappears in her old home, and henceforth, "when dogs howl in the
night, the step-mother trembles, and is kind to the children." To this
identity of superstition we may add the less tangible fact of identity of
tone. The ballads of Klephtic exploits in Greece match the Border songs of
Dick of the Cow and Kinmont Willie. The same simple delight of living
animates the short Greek _Scolia_ and their counterparts in France.
Everywhere in these happier climes, as in southern Italy, there are
snatches of popular verse that make but one song of rose trees, and apple
blossom, and the nightingale that sings for maidens loverless,--

 "Il ne chante pas pour moi,
  J'en ai un, Dieu merci,"

says the gay French refrain.

It would not be difficult to multiply instances of resemblance between the
different folk-songs of Europe; but enough has, perhaps, been said to
support the position that some of them are popular and primitive in the
same sense as _Märchen_. They are composed by peoples of an early stage who
find, in a natural improvisation, a natural utterance of modulated and
rhythmic speech, the appropriate relief of their emotions, in moments of
high-wrought feeling or on solemn occasions. "Poesie" (as Puttenham well
says in his _Art of English Poesie_, 1589) "is more ancient than the
artificiall of the Greeks and Latines, and used of the savage and uncivill,
who were before all science and civilitie. This is proved by certificate of
merchants and travellers, who by late navigations have surveyed the whole
world, and discovered large countries, and wild people strange and savage,
affirming that the American, the Perusine, and the very Canniball do sing
and also say their highest and holiest matters in certain riming
versicles." In the same way Aristotle, discoursing of the origin of poetry,
says (_Poet_. c. iv.), [Greek: egennêsan tên poiêsin ek tôn
autoschediasmatôn] M. de la Villemarqué in Brittany, M. Pitré in Italy,
Herr Ulrich in Greece, have described the process of improvisation, how it
grows out of the custom of dancing in large bands and accompanying the
figure of the dance with song. "If the people," says M. Pitré, "find out
who is the composer of a _canzone_, they will not sing it." Now in those
lands where a blithe peasant life still exists with its dances, like the
_kolos_ of Russia, we find ballads identical in many respects with those
which have died out of oral tradition in these islands. It is natural to
conclude that originally some of the British ballads too were first
improvised, and circulated in rustic dances. We learn from M. Bujeaud and
M. de Puymaigre in France, that all ballads there have their air or tune,
and that every dance has its own words, for if a new dance comes in,
perhaps a fashionable one from Paris, words are fitted to it. Is there any
trace of such an operatic, lyrical, dancing peasantry in austere Scotland?
We find it in Gawin Douglas's account of--

 "Sic as we clepe wenches and damosels,
  In gersy greens, wandering by spring wells,
  Of bloomed branches, and flowers white and red,
  Plettand their lusty chaplets for their head,
  Some sang ring-sangs, dances, ledes, and rounds."

Now, ring-sangs are ballads, dancing songs; and _Young Tamlane_, for
instance, was doubtless once danced to, as we know it possessed an
appropriate air. Again, Fabyan, the chronicler (quoted by Ritson) says that
the song of triumph over Edward II., "was after many days sung _in dances_,
to the carols of the [v.03 p.0267] maidens and minstrels of Scotland." We
might quote the _Complaynt of Scotland_ to the same effect. "The shepherds,
and their wyvis sang mony other melodi sangs, ... than efter this sueit
celestial harmony, tha began to dance in ane ring." It is natural to
conjecture that, if we find identical ballads in Scotland, and in Greece
and Italy, and traces of identical customs--customs crushed by the
Reformation, by Puritanism, by modern so-called civilization,--the ballads
sprang out of the institution of dances, as they still do in warmer and
pleasanter climates. It may be supposed that legends on which the ballads
are composed, being found as they are from the White Sea to Cape Matapan,
are part of the stock of primitive folk-lore. Thus we have an immemorial
antiquity for the legends, and for the lyrical choruses in which their
musical rendering was improvised. We are still at a loss to discover the
possibly mythological germs of the legends; but, at all events, some
ballads may be claimed as distinctly popular, and, so to speak, impersonal
in matter and in origin. It would be easy to show that survivals out of
this stage of inartistic lyric poetry linger in the early epic poetry of
Homer and in the French _épopées_, and that the Greek drama sprang from the
sacred choruses of village vintagers. In the great early epics, as in
popular ballads, there is the same directness and simplicity, the same use
of recurring epithets, the "green grass," the "salt sea," the "shadowy
hills," the same repetition of speeches and something of the same barbaric
profusion in the use of gold and silver. But these resemblances must not
lead us into the mistake of supposing Homer to be a collection of ballads,
or that he can be properly translated into ballad metre. The _Iliad_ and
the _Odyssey_ are the highest form of an artistic epic, not composed by
piecing together ballads, but developed by a long series of noble [Greek:
aoidoi], for the benefit of the great houses which entertain them, out of
the method and materials of popular song.

We have here spoken mainly of romantic ballads, which retain in the refrain
a vestige of the custom of singing and dancing; of a period when "dance,
song and poetry itself began with a communal consent" (Gummere, _The
Beginnings of Poetry_, p. 93, 1901). The custom by which a singer in a
dancing-circle chants a few words, the dancers chiming in with the refrain,
is found by M. Junod among the tribes of Delagoa Bay (Junod, _Chantes et
contes des Ba Ronga_, 1897). Other instances are the Australian song-dances
(Siebert, in Howitt's _Native Tribes of South-East Australia_, Appendix
1904; and Dennett, _Folk-Lore of the Fiort_). We must not infer that even
among the aborigines of Australia song is entirely "communal." Known men,
inspired, they say, in dreams, or by the All Father, devise new forms of
song with dance, which are carried all over the country; and Mr Howitt
gives a few examples of individual lyric. The history of the much
exaggerated opinion that a whole people, as a people, composed its own
ballads is traced by Prof. Gummere in _The Beginnings of Poetry_, pp.
116-163. Some British ballads retain traces of the early dance-song, and
most are so far "communal" in that, as they stand, they have been modified
and interpolated by many reciters in various ages, and finally (in _The
Border Minstrelsy_) by Sir Walter Scott, and by hands much weaker than his
(see _The Young Tamlane_). There are cases in which the matter of a ballad
has been derived by a popular singer from medieval literary romance (as in
the Arthurian ballads), while the author of the romance again usually
borrowed, like Homer in the _Odyssey_, from popular _Märchen_ of dateless
antiquity. It would be an error to suppose that most romantic folk-songs
are vulgarizations of literary romance--a view to which Mr Courthope, in
his _History of English Poetry_, and Mr Henderson in _The Border
Minstrelsy_ (1902), incline--and the opposite error would be to hold that
this process of borrowing from and vulgarization of literary medieval
romance never occurred. A good illustration of the true state of the case
will be found in Child's introduction to the ballad of _Young Beichan_.

Gaston Paris, a great authority, holds that early popular poetry is
"improvised and contemporary with its facts" (_Histoire poétique de
Charlemagne_). If this dictum be applied to such ballads as "The Bonny Earl
o' Murray," "Kinmont Willie," "Jamie Telfer" and "Jock o' the Side," it
must appear that the contemporary poets often knew little of the events and
knew that little wrong. We gather the true facts from contemporary letters
and despatches. In the ballads the facts are confused and distorted to such
a degree that we must suppose them to have been composed in a later
generation on the basis of erroneous oral tradition; or, as in the case of
_The Queen's Marie_, to have been later defaced by the fantastic
interpolations of reciters. To prove this it is only necessary to compare
the historical Border ballads (especially those of 1595-1600) with Bain's
_Border Papers_ (1894-1896). Even down to 1750, the ballads on Rob Roy's
sons are more or less mythopoeic. It seems probable that the existing form
of most of our border ballads is not earlier than the generation of
1603-1633, after the union of the crowns. Even when the ballads have been
taken from recitation, the reciter has sometimes been inspired by a "stall
copy," or printed broadsheet.

AUTHORITIES.--The indispensable book for the student of ballads is Child's
_English and Scottish Popular Ballads_, published in 1897-1898 (Boston,
U.S.A.). Professor Child unfortunately died without summing up his ideas in
a separate essay, and they must be sought in his introductions, which have
never been analysed. He did not give much attention to such materials for
the study of ancient poetry as exist copiously in anthropological
treatises. In knowledge of the ballads of all European peoples he was
unrivalled, and his bibliography of collections of ballads contains some
four hundred titles, (Child, vol. v., pp. 455-468). The most copious ballad
makers have been the Scots and English, the German, Slavic, Danish, French
and Italian peoples; for the Gaelic there is but one entry, Campbell of
Islay's _Lea har na Feinne_ (London, 1872). The general bibliography
occupies over sixty pages, and to this the reader must be referred, while
Prof. Gummere's book, _The Beginnings of Poetry_, is an adequate
introduction to the literature, mainly continental, of the ballad question,
which has received but scanty attention in England. For the relation of
ballad to epic there is no better guide than Comparetti's _The Kalewala_,
of which there is an English translation. For purely literary purposes the
best collection of ballads is Scott's _Border Minstrelsy_ in any complete
edition. The best critical modern edition is that of Mr T. F. Henderson;
his theory of ballad origins is not that which may be gathered from
Professor Child's introductions.

(A. L.)