BALLANCHE, PIERRE SIMON (1776-1847), French philosopher of the theocratic
school, was born at Lyons. Naturally delicate and highly-strung, he was
profoundly stirred by the horrors of the siege of Lyons. His sensitiveness
received a second blow in an unsuccessful love affair, which, however, he
bore with fortitude. He devoted himself to an examination of the nature of
society and his work brought him into connexion with the literary circle of
Châteaubriand and Madame Récamier. His great work is the _Palingénésie_,
which is divided into three parts, _L'orphée_, _La formule_, _La ville des
expiations_. The first deals with the prehistoric period of the world,
before the rise of religion; the second was to be an endeavour to deduce a
universal law from known historical facts; the third to sketch the ultimate
state of perfection to which humanity is moving. Of these the first alone
was completed, but fragments of the other parts exist. Perhaps the most
valuable part, of the work is the general introduction. His last work,
_Vision d'Hébal_, intended as part of the _Ville des expiations_, describes
the chief of a Scottish clan, who, gifted with second sight, gives
semi-prophetic utterances as to the course of world-history. In 1841
Ballanche was elected a member of the French Academy. He died in 1847. A
collected edition of his works in nine volumes was begun in 1830. Four only
appeared. In 1833 a second edition in six volumes was published. As a man,
Ballanche was warm-hearted and enthusiastic, but he was endowed with a
too-vivid imagination and his strange thoughts are expressed in equally
bizarre language. To give a connected account of his views is difficult;
their full development should be studied in relation with his life-history,
the stages of which are curiously parallel to his theory of the progress of
man, the fall, the trial, the perfection.

As has been said, he belonged to the theocratic school, who, in opposition
to the rationalism of the preceding age, emphasized the principle of
authority, placing revelation above individual reason, order above freedom
and progress. But Ballanche made a sincere endeavour to unite in one system
what was valuable in the opposed modes of thinking. He held with the
theocratists that individualism was an impracticable view; man, according
to him, exists only in and through society. He agreed further with them
that the origin of society was to be explained, not by human desire and
efforts, but by a direct revelation from God. Lastly, with De Bonald, he
reduced the problem of the origin of society to that of the origin of
language, and held that language was a divine gift. But at this point he
parts company with the theocratists, and in this very revelation of
language finds a germ of progress. Originally, in the primitive state of
man, speech and thought are identical; but gradually the two separate;
language is no longer only spoken, it is also written and finally is
printed. Thus the primitive unity is broken up; the original social order
which co-existed with, and was dependent on it, breaks up also. New
institutions spring up, upon which thought acts, and in and through which
it even draws nearer to a final unity, a _palingenesis_. The volition of
primitive man was one with that of God but it becomes broken up into
separate volitions which oppose themselves to the divine will, and through
the oppositions and trials of this world work onward to a second and
completer harmony. Humanity, therefore, passes through three stages, the
fall from perfection, the period of trial and the final re-birth or return
to perfection. In the dim records of mythical times may be traced the
obscure outlines of primitive society and of its fall. Actual history
exhibits the conflict of two great principles, which may be said to be
realized in the patricians and plebeians of Rome. Such a distinction of
caste is regarded by Ballanche as the original state of historical society;
and history, as a whole, he considers to have followed the same course as
that taken by the Roman plebs in its attempts to attain equality with the
patriciate. On the events through which the human race is to achieve its
destiny Ballanche gives few intelligible hints. The sudden flash which
disclosed to the eyes of Hébal the whole epic of humanity cannot be
reproduced in language trammelled by time and space. Scattered throughout
the works of Ballanche are many valuable ideas on the connexion of events
which makes possible a philosophy of history; but his own theory does not
seem likely to find more favour than it has already received. Besides the
_Palingénésie_, Ballanche wrote a poem on the siege at Lyons (unpublished);
_Du sentiment considéré dans la littérature et dans les arts_ (1801);
_Antigone_, a prose poem (1814); _Essai sur les institutions sociales_
(1818), intended as a prelude to his great work; _Le Vieillard et le jeune
homme_, a philosophical dialogue (1819); _L'Homme sans nom_, a novel
(1820).

See Ampère, _Ballanche_ (Paris, 1848); Ste Beuve, _Portraits
contemporains_, vol. ii.; Damiron, _Philosophie de XIX^e siècle_; Eugène
Blum, "Essai sur Ballanche" (in _Critique Philos._, 30th June 1887); Gaston
Frainnet, _Essai sur la philos de P. S. Ballanche_ (Paris, 1903, containing
unpublished letters, portraits and full bibliography); C. Huit, _La Vie et
les oeuvres de Ballanche_ (1904). An admirable analysis of the works
composing the _Palingénésie_ is given by Barchou, _Revue des deux mondes_
(1831), t. 2. pp. 410-456.