BALNEOTHERAPEUTICS (Lat. _balneum_, a bath, and Gr. [Greek: therapeuein],
to treat medically). The medical treatment of disease by internal and
external use of mineral waters is quite distinct from "hydrotherapy," or
the therapeutic uses of pure water. But the term "balneotherapeutics" has
gradually come to be applied to everything relating to spa treatment,
including the drinking of waters and the use of hot baths and natural
vapour baths, as well as of the various kinds of mud and sand used for hot
applications. The principal constituents found in mineral waters are
sodium, magnesium, calcium and iron, in combination with the acids to form
chlorides, sulphates, sulphides and carbonates. Other substances
occasionally present in sufficient quantity to exert a therapeutic
influence are arsenic, lithium, potassium, manganese, bromine, iodine, &c.
The chief gases in solution are oxygen, nitrogen, carbonic acid and
sulphuretted hydrogen. Argon and helium occur in some of the "simple
thermal" and "thermal sulphur waters." There are few doctors who would deny
the great value of special bathing and drinking cures in certain morbid
conditions. In the employment of the various mineral waters, many of the
spas adopt special means by which they increase or modify their influence,
_e.g._ the so-called "aromatic" or "medicated" baths, in which substances
are mixed to exert a special influence on the skin and peripheral nerves.
Of these the "pine-needle" bath has the greatest repute; it is made by
adding a decoction of the needles or young shoots of firs and pines. Fir
wood oil (a mixture of ethereal oils) or the tincture of an alcoholic
extract acts equally well. The volatile ethereal constituents are supposed
to penetrate the skin and to stimulate the cutaneous [v.03 p.0284]
circulation and peripheral nerves, being eliminated later by the ordinary
channels. Similar effects follow the addition to the bath of aromatic
herbs, such as camomile, thyme, &c. For a full-sized bath 1½ to 2 lb of
herbs are tied in a muslin bag and infused in a gallon of boiling water;
the juices are then expressed and the infusion added to the bath.
Astringent baths are prepared in a similar way from decoctions of oak bark,
walnut leaves, &c. In many spas on the European continent baths are
prepared from peat or mud mixed with hot mineral water. Mineral peat
consists of decomposing vegetable soil that has been so long in the
neighbourhood of the medicinal spring that it has undergone peculiar and
variable chemical changes. This is mixed with the hot mineral water until
the bath has the desired consistency, the effect on the patient being in
almost direct proportion to the density. These baths vary greatly in
composition. Mud baths are chiefly prepared from muddy deposits found in
the neighbourhood of the springs, as at St Amand. They act like a large
poultice applied to the surface of the body, and in addition to the
influence of the temperature, they exert a considerable mechanical effect.
The pulse is accelerated some 6 to 12 beats a minute, the respiration
number rises, and the patient is thrown into a profuse perspiration. They
have very great value in gouty and rheumatic conditions and in some of the
special troubles of women.

There are certain conditions in which mineral water treatment is distinctly
contra-indicated. Advanced cardiac disease and cardiac cases with failure
of compensation must pre-eminently be treated at home, not at a spa.
Advanced arterio-sclerosis, any form of serious organic visceral disease,
advanced cirrhosis, pulmonary tuberculosis with a tendency to haemoptysis,
much elevation of temperature or emaciation, are all entirely unsuited for
this form of treatment. Serious organic nervous diseases, great nervous
depression and old cases of paralysis are all contra-indicated. Any
trouble, however suited in itself for spa treatment, must be considered
inapplicable if complicated with pregnancy.

In advising balneotherapeutic treatment in any case, all the conditions and
habits of the patient--pecuniary, physical and psychical--must be
considered, as the spa must be fitted to the patient, not the patient to
the spa. Besides the particular disease, the idiosyncrasy of the patient
must be considered, the same morbid condition in different people requiring
very different treatment. Retarded convalescence is a condition often
treated at the spas, although hygienic surroundings, both mental and
physical, are usually all that is necessary to ensure complete recovery.
After rheumatic fever, however, if the joints remain painful and the heart
is dilated, the thermal gaseous saline water of Nauheim, augmented by
Schott's resistance movements, will often appear to work wonders. Chronic
rheumatism, where there is much exudation round a joint or incipient
stiffness of a joint, may be relieved by hot thermal treatment, especially
when combined with various forms of massage and exercises. Simple thermal
waters, hot sulphur springs and hot muriated waters are all successful in
different cases. Chronic muscular rheumatism can also be benefited in a
similar manner. Diseases of the nervous system are on the whole treated by
these means with small success. Mental diseases other than very mild cases
of depression should be considered inapplicable. Neurasthenics are
sometimes treated at chalybeate or thermal muriated saline spas; but such
treatment is entirely secondary to the general management of the case.
Neuralgic affections and the later stages of neuritis, especially when
dependent on gout or rheumatism, are often relieved or cured. Abdominal
venosity (abdominal plethora), a feature of obesity, glycosuria, &c., are
extremely well fitted for this form of treatment. The alkaline sulphated
waters, the bitter waters and the common salt waters can all be prescribed,
and after a short course can be supplemented with various forms of active
and passive exercises. Diseases of the respiratory organs are far more
suited for climatic treatment than for treatment by baths. Anaemia can
usually be better or equally well treated at home, or by seaside residence
or a sea voyage, though many physicians prescribe chloride of sodium
waters, followed by a course of iron waters at some suitably situated spa.
In the anaemia dependent on malarial infection, the muriated or alkaline
sulphated waters at spas of considerable elevation and combined with iron
and arsenic are often very beneficial. Gravel and stone, if of the uric
acid variety, can be treated with the alkaline waters, but the case must be
under constant observation lest the urine become too alkaline and a
deposition of phosphates take place on the already formed uric acid stone.
Gout is so variable both in cause and effect that much discrimination is
required in its treatment. Where the patient is of "full habit," with
portal stagnation, the sulphated alkaline or mild bitter waters are
indicated, especially those of Carlsbad and Marienbad; but the use of these
strong waters must be followed by a long rest under strict hygienic
conditions. Where this is impossible, a milder course must be advised, as
at Homburg, Kissingen, Harrogate, Wiesbaden, Baden-Baden, &c. For very
delicate patients, and where time is limited, the simple thermal waters are
preferable.

For radiant heat and light baths and electric baths of all kinds, see
ELECTROTHERAPEUTICS; and for compressed air baths, AEROTHERAPEUTICS. (See
also BATHS, THERAPEUTICS, and the articles on diseases.)