BALTIC SEA (Scand. and Ger. _Ostsee_; Russ. _Baltiyskoe More_), a sea
extending between 54° and 66° N. lat., and 9° and 30° E. long., surrounded
by the territories of Sweden, Russia, Germany and Denmark. Its greatest
length is about 960 m.; greatest breadth about 400 m.; and length of
coast-line, 5000 m.; the central axis runs approximately from south-west to
north-east. The Baltic is connected with North Sea by the winding channel
between the south of Scandinavia and the Cimbrian peninsula. This channel
is usually included in the Baltic. The part of it west of a line joining
the Skaw with Christiania fjord receives the name of Skagerrak; the part
east of this line is called the Kattegat. At its southern end the Kattegat
is blocked by the Danish islands, and it communicates with the Baltic
proper by narrow channels called the Sound, the Great Belt and the Little
Belt. The real physical boundary between the North Sea and the Baltic is
formed by the plateau on which the islands Zealand, Fünen and Laaland are
situated, and its prolongation from the islands Falster and Möen to the
coasts of Mecklenburg and Rügen.

East of this plateau the Baltic proper forms a series of hollows or
troughs. The first, or Bornholm deep, lies east of the island of Bornholm,
and is separated from the next, or Gotland deep, by the Middelbank. Beyond
the Middelbank the Danziger Tiefe, an isolated depression, lies to the
south-east, while to the northeast the Gotland basin, the largest and
deepest of all, extends north-eastwards to the Gulf of Finland. Along the
Swedish coast a deep channel runs northward from outside the island of
Öland; this is entirely cut off to the south and east by a bank which
sweeps eastward and northward from near Karlskrona, and on which the island
of Gotland stands, but it communicates at its northern end with the Gotland
deep, and near the junction opposite Landsort is the deepest hole in the
Baltic (420 metres = 230 fathoms).

An unbroken ridge, extending from Stockholm to Hangö in Finland, separates
the Baltic basin proper from the depression between Sweden and the Åland
Isles, to which the name Åland Haf has been given. North of the Åland Haf a
ridge defines the southern edge of another depression, the Bothnian Sea,
which in turn is separated from the most northerly division, the Gulf of
Bothnia, by a ridge across the narrow Quarken or Kvarken Strait. The
Gotland deep may be said to extend directly into the Gulf of Finland, an
arm of the Baltic, running eastwards for about 250 m., and separating
Finland from Esthonia. Between Esthonia and Courland is the Gulf of Riga, a
shallow inlet of roughly circular form, about 100 m. in diameter, and
nowhere more than 27 fathoms deep.

According to recent computations the total area of the Baltic, including
the Skagerrak and Kattegat, is 166,397 sq. m., and its volume 6907 cub. m.,
giving a mean depth of 36 fathoms, which is markedly less than that of any
other arm of the sea of similar area.

In the deeper hollows in the south part of the Baltic the bottom consists
almost invariably of either soft brown or grey mud or hard clay, while on
the shallow banks and near the low coasts fine sand, of white, yellow or
brown colour with small pebbles, is usually found.

[v.03 p.0286]

[Sidenote: Coasts--changes and character.]

At the time of the last great subsidence, in glacial times, an arm of the
sea extended across Sweden, submerging a great part of the littoral up to
the Gulf of Bothnia, and including the present lakes Vener, Hjelmar and
Mälar. During this period the waters of the northern Baltic were
sufficiently salt for oysters to flourish. The subsequent upheaval
restricted direct communication with the open sea to the Danish channels,
and the Baltic waters became fresher: the oyster disappeared, but a number
of cold salt-water fishes and crustaceans, and even seals, became
acclimatized. It has been suggested that the presence of the remains of
these animals indicates a communication to the north with the Arctic Ocean;
but in view of the severe climatic conditions still prevailing at the time,
this seems an unnecessary assumption. In the next stage of its history the
Baltic is transformed by further elevation into a vast freshwater lake, the
_Ancylus_ lake of G. de Geer (named from the remains of the mollusc
_Ancylus fluviatilis_), which is supposed to have covered an area of about
220,000 sq. m., including the whole of the present Baltic area and a large
part of Finland, with Lake Ladoga. Then followed a subsidence, which not
only re-established communication through the Danish channels, but allowed
the Baltic to become sufficiently salt for such forms as _Cardium edule_
and _Littorina littorea_. At this time the Gulf of Bothnia must have
suffered greater depression than the Baltic proper, for the deposits of
that epoch show a thickness of 100 metres (328 ft.) near Hernösand, but of
only 25 metres (82 ft.) in the neighbourhood of Gotland. After this period
of subsidence the process of elevation set in which gave the Baltic its
present form and physical condition, and appears to be still in progress.
Dr R. Sieger has traced a series of isobasic lines, or lines of equal rate
of elevation, for portions of Sweden and Finland; these indicate that the
movement is now almost _nil_ along the axial lines of the Baltic and the
Gulf of Finland, but increases in amplitude northwards to the Gulf of
Bothnia and in the direction of the main ridge of the _massif_ of southern
Sweden. At Stockholm the rate of elevation is approximately 0.47 metre (=
1.54 ft.) in a century.

The coast of the Baltic is rocky only in the island-studded region at the
head of the Baltic basin proper--a submerged lake-district--and the
littoral generally is a typical morainic land, the work of the last great
Baltic glacier. The southern margin of the Baltic is of peculiar interest.
From Schleswig eastwards to Lübeck Bay the coast is pierced by a number of
narrow openings or _Fohrden_, the result of encroachment of the sea caused
by subsidence. East of Lübeck, as far as the mouth of the Oder, these give
place to _Bodden_, ramified openings studded with islands: the structure
here resembles that of Scania in southern Sweden, a region once joined to
both Denmark and Pomerania by an isthmus which was severed by tectonic
movements. Beyond the Oder the coast-line is unbroken as far as the Gulf of
Danzig. It is then cut into by the estuaries of the Vistula, the Pregel and
the Memel. Here the westerly winds have full play, and the coast is rimmed
by a continuous line of dunes, which cut off the two great lagoons of the
_Frisches Haff_ and _Kurisches Haff_ by sandspits or _Nehrungen_.

The drainage area of the Baltic is relatively large. According to the
measurements of Sir J. Murray it extends to 461,450 sq. sea m. ( = 611,700
sq. English m.) The largest river-basin included in it is that of the Neva
in the east, and next in size come the Vistula and the Oder in the south.
The narrow parallel troughs, at right angles to the coast, which form the
drainage-system of Sweden and western Finland, are a remarkable feature.

[Sidenote: Level.]

Levellings from Swinemünde show that the mean level of the surface of the
Baltic at that point is 0.093 metres (= .305 ft.) below the surface of the
North Sea at Amsterdam, and 0.066 metres ( = .216 ft.) below its level at
Ostend. A line of levels from Swinemünde through Eger to the Adriatic
showed the mean level of the surface of the Baltic to be 0.499 metres (1.6
ft.) above that of the Adriatic Sea. The mean level of the surface of the
Baltic rises about 0.5 metres (1.6 ft.) from the coast of Holstein to
Memel, probably as a result of the prevailing westerly winds; this mean
difference is exceeded with strong westerly winds, and disappears or is
reversed with easterly winds. The waves of the Baltic are usually short and
irregular, often dangerous to navigation. Destructive waves, probably
caused by distant earthquakes, called _Seebaren_ (cf. English "bores") have
been recorded.

The range of the tides is about one foot at Copenhagen; within the Baltic
proper ordinary tides are scarcely perceptible. There is, however, a
distinctly marked annual rise and fall due to meteorological influences
having a mean range of about 11.4 cm. (0.37 ft.), at Travemünde, and 13.9
cm. (0.46 ft.) at Swinemünde, the maximum occurring at the end of the
summer rainy period in August.

[Sidenote: Circulation.]

The circulation of water in the Baltic proper must be considered apart from
the circulation in the channels connecting it with the North Sea; and in
this relation the plateau connecting the islands Falster and Möen with the
coast of Mecklenburg and Rügen must be taken as the dividing line. In the
great basins and hollows from Rügen to the Gulfs of Bothnia and Finland the
upper layers of water, from 30 to 70 metres (16 to 38 fathoms) in
thickness, have almost the same salinity throughout. In these waters a
vertical circulation is kept up by convection currents. Beneath these
layers are masses of salter water, through which a thermal wave of small
amplitude is slowly propagated to the bottom by conduction. These strata
are practically stagnant, deficient in oxygen and surcharged with carbonic
acid. Their salter waters must have been originally derived from outside,
and must therefore have passed over the plateau between Falster and
Mecklenburg, but their horizontal extension is checked by the ridges
separating the deep hollows in the Baltic from each other. The inflow to
the deep basins is intermittent, probably with a long period of flux and
reflux.

The circulation in the channels connecting the Baltic proper with the North
Sea is of a complex character. It is necessary in the first place to
distinguish clearly between outflowing and inflowing waters; in practice
this is easily done, as the outflowing water always contains less than 30
parts _pro mille_ of salt, and the inflowing water more than 32 _pro
mille_. The Baltic receives much more water by rainfall, discharge of
rivers, &c., than it loses by evaporation; hence a surplus must be got rid
of by an outflowing current which may be named the "Baltic Stream." The
following general laws may be laid down with regard to this:--

1. That the Baltic Stream must be a surface current, because it originates
from a redundancy of fresh water.

2. That, on account of the earth's rotation, the main part of the Baltic
Stream must keep close to the coast of the Scandinavian peninsula.

3. That it must be a periodic stream, because the discharge of the rivers
into the Baltic varies with the season of the year. In spring and summer
the water from the Baltic is sufficiently abundant to inundate the whole
surface of the Kattegat and Skagerrak, but in winter the sources of the
Baltic current are for the most part dried up by the freezing of the land
water.

All the waters which enter the Skagerrak or Kattegat as undercurrents can
be found at the surface of the North Sea (_q.v._). They may be divided
according to their origin and salinity as follows:--

(a) _Ocean water_ of 35 _pro mille_ salinity or more.

(b) _North Sea water_, the predominant water in the North Sea area, of 34
to 35 _pro mille_ salinity.

(c) _Bank water_, 32 to 34 _pro mille_, which forms a broad edging covering
the coast banks of Holland, Germany, Denmark and Norway.

The deepest water stratum in the Skagerrak is certainly of oceanic origin;
it has been found to suffer changes of long period, and it is probably not
always composed of water derived from the same part or the same depth of
the North Atlantic; this water is, as a rule, deficient in oxygen. The
"North Sea" water, of 34 to 35 _pro mille_ salinity, does not appear at the
surface in the Skagerrak, except as a strip along part of the coast of
Jutland, but it is always found as an undercurrent overlying the oceanic
water. It enters into all the deep coast channels, and into the Christiania
fjord, but it is not always found in the deep channels of the Kattegat. The
principal time of inflow of North Sea water is during spring and summer.
The bank-water of 32 to 34 _pro mille_ salinity is found all along the
continental coast of the North Sea and North Atlantic, and it may therefore
enter the Skagerrak either from the North Sea or from the north along the
coast of Norway. It is probable indeed that an influx of this water occurs
from both directions--in August and September from the south, and in the
late winter and early spring from the north. The seasonal changes in the
distribution of the bank-waters in different parts of the coast are too
complex to be briefly explained; their relations to the times of occurrence
of various fisheries of the region present many remarkable features, which
have been investigated in recent years by the Swedish Commission.

On the west and south coasts of Sweden, and in the Skagerrak south-east of
Norway, navigation is interfered with by ice only in severe winters, and
then the ice is usually drifting, compact sea-ice being very rare. Between
Stockholm and Visby navigation usually ceases at the end of December and
begins again about the 10th of April. During very severe winters the Åland
Sea is covered with thick ice available for traffic. The south part of the
Gulf of Bothnia is covered with ice every winter along the coasts, but
rarely, if ever, in its central part. Navigation is interrupted by drifting
ice from about the middle of November to the beginning of May, though the
port of Hernösand has been known to remain open during a whole winter. The
northern Quarken is covered with traversable ice every third or fourth
year. The northern part of the Gulf of Bothnia is frozen every winter. In
the Gulf of Finland the sea is closed to navigation by ice for about 150
days in the year; but navigation is rendered possible throughout the winter
by the use of ice-breakers.

See references to different parts of the subject in the standard books of
A. Penck, A. de Lapparent, E. Suess and others. Also Credner, _Die
Entstehung der Ostsee_ (Leipzig, 1895); G. de Geer, _Om Skandinaviens
nivåforändringar under quartärperioden_ (Stockholm, 1888); R. Sieger,
_Seeenschwankungen und Strandverschiebungen in Skandinavien_ (Berlin,
1893); O. Pettersson, "Review of Swedish Hydrographic Research," _Scottish
Geographical Magazine_ (1894); N. Ekholm, _Om klimatets ändringar i
geologisk och historisk tid. Ymer_ (Stockholm, 1899); _Publications of the
International Council for the Study of the Sea_ (Copenhagen, since 1902).

(H. N. D.)

[v.03 p.0287] BALTIMORE, GEORGE CALVERT, 1ST BARON (_c._ 1580-1632),
English statesman, son of Leonard Calvert, and Alice, daughter of John
Crosland of Crosland, was born at Kipling in Yorkshire and educated at
Trinity College, Oxford. After travelling on the continent, he entered the
public service as secretary to Robert Cecil, afterwards earl of Salisbury.
In 1606 he was appointed clerk of the crown in Connaught and Clare, in 1608
a clerk of the council, and was returned to parliament for Bossiney in
1609. He assisted James I. in his discourse against Vorstius, the Arminian
theological professor of Leiden, and in 1613 took charge of the Spanish and
Italian correspondence. The same year he was sent on a mission to Ireland
to investigate grievances. For these services he was rewarded by knighthood
in 1617, followed by a secretaryship of state in 1619 and a pension of
£2000 a year in 1620. He represented successively Yorkshire (1621) and
Oxford University (1624) in the House of Commons, where it fell to him in
his official capacity to communicate the king's policy and to obtain
supplies. He was distrusted by the parliament, and was in favour of the
unpopular alliance with Spain and the Spanish marriage. Shortly after the
failure of the scheme he declared himself a Roman Catholic, and on the 12th
of February 1625 threw up his office, when he was created Baron Baltimore
of Baltimore and received a grant of large estates in Ireland. Henceforth
he was seen little in public life and his attention was directed to
colonial enterprise, with which his name will be always associated. He had
established a small settlement in Newfoundland in 1621, for which under the
name of Avalon he procured a charter in 1623, and which he himself visited
in 1627. In consequence of disputes and the unsuitable nature of the
climate he sailed thence for Virginia, but was forbidden to settle there
unless he took the oaths of allegiance and supremacy. He returned home, and
died on the 15th of April 1632 before a new concession was secured, the
charter of Maryland passing the great seal on the 20th of June 1632 in
favour of his son Cecilius, second Lord Baltimore, who founded the colony.
Baltimore married Anne, daughter of George Mynne of Hurlingfordbury,
Hertfordshire, by whom he had six sons and five daughters. He wrote _Carmen
funebre in D. Hen. Untonum_ (1596); _The Answer to Tom Tell-Troth ..._
(1642) is also attributed to him, and Wood mentions Baltimore as having
composed "something concerning Maryland." His letters are to be found in
various publications, including Strafford's _Letters_, _Clarendon State
Papers_ and the _Calendars of State Papers_.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.--_George and Cecilius Calvert_ by William Hand Browne (1890);
article by C. H. Firth in the _Dict. of Nat. Biog._ with references there
given; Wood's _Athenae Oxonienses_ (Bliss) ii. 522; Doyle's, _The English
in America_; _Discourse on the Life and Character of Sir G. Calvert_ by
J. P. Kennedy (1845), with the _Review_ and the _Reply_ to the same;
_London Magazine_, June 1768; "Sir G. Calvert," by L. W. Wilhelm (_Maryland
Hist. Soc_., 14th April 1884); _The Nation_, vol. 70, p. 95; _American
Historical Review_, vol. 5, p. 577.