BALUCHISTAN, a country within the borders of British India which, like
Afghanistan, derives its name from its dominant race of inhabitants. It
extends from the Gomal river to the Arabian Sea, and from the borders of
Persia and Afghanistan to those of the Punjab and Sind. It is divided into
two main divisions, British Baluchistan, which is a portion of British
India under the chief commissioner, and the foreign territories under the
administration or superintendence of the same officer as agent to the
governor-general. The former portion, with an area of 9403 sq. m., consists
principally of tracts ceded to the British government by Afghanistan under
the treaty of Gandamak (1879), and formally declared to be part of British
India in 1887. The second class comprises three subdivisions, namely areas
directly administered, native states and tribal areas. The
directly-administered districts include areas acquired in various ways.
Some portions are held on lease from the khan of Kalat; while others are
tribal areas in which it has been decided for various reasons that revenue
shall be taken. They include the whole of the Zhob and Chagai political
agencies, the eastern portion of the Quetta tahsil and other tracts, among
which may be mentioned the Bolan Pass, comprising 36,401 sq. m. in all. The
whole of the northern boundary, with the north-eastern corner and the
railway which traverses Baluchistan through Quetta up to New Chaman on the
Afghan-Baluch frontier, is therefore in one form or other under direct
British control. The remainder of the territory (79,382 sq. m.) belongs to
the native states of Kalat (including Makran and Kharan) and Las Bela.
Tribal areas, in the possession of the Marri and Bugti tribes, cover 7129
sq. m.

Baluchistan as a whole is a sparsely populated tract covering a larger area
than any Indian province save Burma, Madras and Bengal. Three hundred miles
of its mountain walls facing the Indus are south of the railway from the
Indus to Quetta, and about 250 north of it. The railway with the passes and
plains about it, and the dominant hills which surround Quetta, divide
Baluchistan into two distinct parts. North of the railway line, hedged in
between Afghanistan and the plains of the Indus, stretch the long ridges of
rough but picturesque highlands, which embrace the central ranges of the
Suliman system (the prehistoric home of the Pathan highlander), where
vegetation is often alpine, and the climate clear and bracing and subject
to no great extremes of temperature. The average breadth of this northern
Pathan district is 150 m., but it narrows to less than 100 m. on the line
of the Gomal, and expands to more than 200 m. on the line of the railway.
Here all the main drainage either runs northwards to the Gomal, passing
through the uplands that lie west of the Suliman Range; or it gathers
locally in narrow lateral valleys at the back of these mountains and then
bursts directly eastwards through the limestone axis of the hills, making
for the Indus by the shortest transverse route. South of the railway lies a
square block of territory, measuring roughly 300 m. by 300, primarily the
home of the Brahui and the Baluch; but within that block are included
almost every conceivable phase of climate and representatives of half the
great races of Asia. Here, throughout the elevated highlands of the Kalat
plateau which are called Jalawan, the drainage gathers into channels which
cut deep gorges in the hills, and passes eastwards into the plains of Sind.
Beyond and south of the hydrographical area of the Jalawan highlands the
rivers and streams of the hills either run in long straight lines to the
Arabian Sea, north of Karachi, or, curving gradually westwards, they
disappear in the inland swamps which form so prominent a feature in this
part of south-west Asia. A narrow width of the coast districts collects its
waters for discharge into the Arabian Sea direct. This section includes
Makran. Baluchistan thus becomes naturally divided into two districts,
north and south, by an intervening space which contains the Sind-Pishin
railway. This intervening space comprises the wedge-shaped desert of Kach
Gandava (Gandava), which is thrust westwards from the Indus as a deep
indentation into the mountains, and, above it, the central uplands which
figure on the map as "British Baluchistan"--where lies Quetta. All
Baluchistan has now been surveyed. From the great Indus series of triangles
bases have been selected at intervals which have supported minor chains of
triangulation reaching into the heart of the country. These again have been
connected by links of more or less regularity, so that, if the Baluchistan
triangulation lacks the rigid accuracy of a "first [v.03 p.0291] class"
system, it at least supports good topography on geographical scales.

[Sidenote: Northern.]

From Domandi, at the junction of the Gomal and Kundar rivers, the boundary
between Baluchistan and Afghanistan follows the Kundar stream for about 40
m. to the south-west. It then leaves the river and diverges northwards, so
as to include a section of the plain country stretching away towards Lake
Ab-i-Istada, before returning to the skirts of the hills. After about 100
m. of this divergence it strikes the Kadanai river, turning the northern
spurs of the Toba plateau (the base of the Kwaja Amran (Kojak) Range), and
winds through the open plains west of the Kojak. Here, however, the
boundary does not follow the river. It deserts it for the western edge of
the Toba plateau (8000 ft. high at this point), till it nears the little
railway station of New Chaman. It then descends to the plains, returns
again to the hills 40 m. south of Chaman, and thenceforward is defined by
hill ranges southwards to Nushki. The eastern boundary of this northern
section of Baluchistan is the "red line" at the foot of the frontier hills,
which defines the border of British India. This part of Baluchistan thus
presents a buffer system of independent tribes between the British frontier
and Afghanistan. But the independence of the Pathan people south of the
Gomal is not as the independence of the Pathans (Waziris, Afridis, &c.) who
live north of it. It is true that the Indian government interferes as
little with the internal jurisdiction of the tribal chiefs amongst the
Pathans of the Suliman Range as it does with that of the northern chiefs;
but the occupation of a line of posts on the Zhob river, which flanks that
range almost from end to end on the west, places the doors of communication
with Afghanistan in British hands, and gives command of their hills. It
thus tends to the maintenance of peace and order on the southern frontier
to a degree that does not exist in the north.

The central range of the Suliman hills is the dominant feature in the
geography of northern Baluchistan. The central line or axis of the range
lies a little east of the meridian of 70° E., and it is geologically
composed of one or more great folds of the Cretaceous series. Towards the
northern extremity of the range occur a group of peaks, which together form
an oblong block or "massif" amongst the neighbouring ridges known as
"Kaisargarh" amongst the Sherani clansmen who occupy it; and as the
"Takht-i-Suliman" (Solomon's throne), generally, on the frontier, from the
fact of a celebrated shrine of that name existing near its southern
abutment. The massif of the Takht is a high tableland (about 8000 ft. above
sea-level), bounded on its eastern and western edges by high, rugged and
steep parallel ridges. The western ridge culminates on the north in the
peak of Kaisargarh (11,300 ft.), and the eastern in a block, or detached
headland, on the south, where rests the immortal "zirat" or shrine (11,070
ft.). This tableland is formed by a huge cap of coral limestone, estimated
by Griesbach at from 4000 to 5000 ft. in thickness. At each end the
tableland is rent by gorges which deepen, amidst stupendous precipices, to
the channel of the Draband or "Gat" on the north, and of the Dhana on the
south. These two channels carry the rush of mountain streams from the
western slopes of the massif right across the axis of the mountains and
through the intervening barrier of minor ridges to the plains of the Indus.
The plateau is covered with a fairly thick growth of the chilghosa or
"edible" pine, and a sprinkling of juniper, on the higher slopes. It was
ascended and surveyed for the first time in 1883.

From the summit of the Kaisargarh peak a magnificent view is obtained which
practically embraces the whole width of northern Baluchistan. Westwards,
looking towards Afghanistan, line upon line of broken jagged ridges and
ranges, folds in the Cretaceous series overlaid by coarse sandstones and
shales, follow each other in order, preserving their approximate
parallelism until they touch the borders of Baluchistan. Immediately on the
west of the Kaisargarh there towers the Shingarh Mountain, a geological
repetition of the Kaisargarh ridge, black with pines towards the summit and
crowned with crags of coral limestone. Beyond it are the grey outlines of
the close-packed ridges which enclose the lower reaches of the Zhob and the
Kundar. As they pass away southwards this grid-iron formation strikes with
a gentle curve westwards, the narrow enclosed valleys widening out towards
the sources of the rivers, where ages of denudation have worn down the
folds and filled up the hollows with fruitful soil, until at last they
touch the central water-divide, the key of the whole system, on the Quetta
plateau. Thus the upper parts of the Zhob valley are comparatively open and
fertile, with flourishing villages, and a cultivation which has been
greatly developed under British rule, and are bounded by long, sweeping,
gentle spurs clothed with wild olive woods containing trees of immense
size. The lower reaches of the Zhob and Kundar are hemmed in by rugged
limestone walls, serrated and banded with deep clefts and gorges, a
wilderness of stony desolation. Looking eastwards from the Kaisargarh, one
can again count the backs of innumerable minor ridges, smaller wrinkles or
folds formed during a process of upheaval of the Suliman Mountains, at the
close of a great volcanic epoch which has hardly yet ceased to give
evidence of its existence. On the outside edge, facing the Indus plains, is
a more strictly regular, but higher and more rugged, ridge of hills which
marks the Siwaliks. The Baluch Siwaliks afford us strange glimpses into a
recent geological past, when the same gigantic mammals roamed along the
foot of these wild hills as once inhabited the tangled forests below the
Himalaya. Between the Takht Mountain and the Siwaliks, the intervening belt
of ridge and furrow has been greatly denuded by transverse drainage--a
system of drainage which we now know to have existed before the formation
of the hills, and to have continued to cut through them as they gradually
rose above the plain level. Where this intervening band is not covered by
recent gravel deposits, it exhibits beds of limestone, clays and sandstone
with fossils, which, in age, range from the Lower Eocene to the Miocene.
Beyond the Siwaliks, still looking eastwards, are the sand waves of the
Indus plain; a yellow sea broken here and there with the shadow of village
orchards and the sheen of cultivation, extending to the long black sinuous
line which denotes the fringe of trees bordering the Indus. Such is the
scene which Solomon is said to have invited his Indian bride to gaze upon
for the last time, as they rested on the crags of the southern buttress of
the Takht--where his shrine exists to this day. To that shrine thousands of
pilgrims, Mahommedans and Hindus alike, resort on their yearly pilgrimages,
in spite of its dangerous approach. All this country, so far, is
independent Baluchistan within the jurisdiction of the Baluchistan Agency,
with the exception of certain clans of the Sheranis on the eastern slopes
of the Takht-i-Suliman, north of the Vihowa, who are under the North-West
Frontier Province administration. Wedged in between the railway and the
Indus, but still north of the railway, is a curious mass of rough mountain
country, which forms the southern abutment of the Suliman system. The
strike of the main ridges forming that system is almost due north and south
till it touches 30° N. lat. Here it assumes a westerly curve, till it
points north-west, and finally merges into the broad band of mountains
which hedge in the Quetta and Pishin uplands on the north and east.

At this point, as might be expected, are some of the grandest peaks and
precipices in Baluchistan. Khalifat on the east of Quetta, flanking the
Harnai loop of the Sind-Pishin railway; Takatu to the north; Chahiltan
(Chiltan) on the south-west; and the great square-headed Murdar to the
south--all overlook the pretty cantonment from heights which range from
10,500 to 11,500 ft. Lying in the midst of them, on an open plain formed by
the high-level tributaries of the Lora (which have also raised the Pishin
valley to the north), 5500 ft. above the sea, is Quetta. The mass of
twisted flexures, the curved wrinkles that end the Suliman system, is
occupied by true Baluchis, the Marri and Bugti sections of the great Rind
confederation of tribes owning an Arabic origin. There are no Pathans here.
To the north of them are the Bozdars, another Rind clan; and these Rind
tribes form the exception to the general rule of Pathan occupation of
northern Baluchistan. Amongst the Pathans, the Kakars and Dumars of Pishin,
with the Mando Khel of Zhob, are the most prominent tribal divisions.

[Sidenote: Central.]

The curved recession of the Suliman Ranges to the north-west leaves a space
of flat alluvial desert to the south, which forms a sort of inlet or bay
striking into the Baluchistan mountain system. The point of this desert
inlet receives the drainage of two local basins, the Bolan and the Nari.
Both drain south-eastwards from the central Quetta-Pishin plateau and both
have served for railway alignment. Being fed by tributaries which for the
most part drain narrow valleys where gradual denudation has washed bare the
flat-backed slopes of limestone ridges, and which consequently send down
torrents of rapidly accumulating rainfall, both these central lines of
water-course are liable to terrific floods. The drainage of the Bolan and
Nari finally disappears in the irrigated flats of the alluvial bay (Kach
Gandava), which extends 130 m. from the Indus to Sibi at the foot of the
hills, and which offers (in spite of periodic Indus floods) an opportunity
for railway approach to Baluchistan such as occurs nowhere else on the
frontier. Kach Gandava, whilst its agricultural development has in no way
receded, is now rivalled by many of the valleys of the highlands. Its
climate debars it from European occupation. It is a land of dust-storms and
poisonous winds; a land where the thermometer never sinks below 100° F. in
summer, and drops below freezing-point in winter; where there is a deadly
monotony of dust-coloured scenery for the greater part of the year, with
the minimum of rain and the maximum of heat. The Quetta and Pishin plateau
to which it leads is the central dominant water-divide of Baluchistan and
the base of the Kandahar highway.

[Sidenote: British.]

An irregularly-shaped block of upland territory, which includes all the
upper Lora tributaries, and the Toba plateau beyond them; resting on the
Kwaja Amran (Kojak) Range (with an advanced loop to include the Chaman
railway terminus) on the west; reaching south through Shorarud to Nushki;
including the basins of the Bolan and Nari as far as Sibi to the
south-east; stretching out an arm to embrace the Thal Chotiali valley on
the east, and following the main water-divide between the Zhob and Lora on
the north, is called British Baluchistan. It is leased from Kalat, and
forms a distinctive province, being brought under the ordinary forms of
civil administration in British India. Beyond it, north and south, lies
independent Baluchistan, which is under British political control. Its
administrative staff is usually composed of military officers. The degree
of independence enjoyed by the various districts of Baluchistan may be said
to vary in direct proportion to their [v.03 p.0292] distance from Quetta.
No part of Baluchistan is beyond the reach of the political officer, but
there are many parts where he is not often seen. The climate of British
Baluchistan is dry and bracing--even exhilarating--but the extremes of
temperature lead to the development of fever in very severe forms. On the
whole it is favourable to European existence.

[Sidenote: Southern.]

South-west of the dividing railway lies the great block of Southern
Baluchistan. Within this area the drainage generally trends south and west,
either to the Arabian Sea or to the central swamps of Lora and Mashkel. The
Hab river, which forms the boundary west of Karachi; the Purali (the
ancient _Arabus_), which drains the low-lying flats of Las Bela; the Hingol
(the ancient _Tomerus_) and the Dasht, which drain Makran, are all
considerable streams, draining into the Arabian Sea and forming important
arteries in the network of internal communication. An exception to the
general rule is found in the Mulla, which carries the floods of the Kalat
highlands into the Gandava basin and forms one of the most important of the
ancient highways from the Indus plains to Kandahar. The fortress of Kalat
is situated about midway between the sources of the Bolan and the Mulla,
near a small tributary of the Lora (the river of Pishin and Quetta), about
6800 ft. above sea-level, on the western edge of a cultivated plain in the
very midst of hills. (See KALAT.) To the north are the long sweeping lines
of the Sarawan ridges, enclosing narrow fertile valleys, and passing away
to the south-west to the edge of the Kharan desert. East and south are the
rugged bands of Jalawan, amongst which the Mulla rises, and through which
it breaks in a series of magnificent defiles in order to reach the Gandava
plain. Routes which converge on Kalat from the south pass for the most part
through narrow wooded valleys, enclosed between steep ridges of denuded
hills, and, following the general strike of these ridges, they run from
valley to valley with easy grades. Kalat is the "hub" or centre, from which
radiate the Bolan, the Mulla and the southern Lora affluents; but the Lora
drains also the Pishin valley on the north; the two systems uniting in
Shorawak, to lose themselves in the desert and swamps to the west of
Nushki, on the road to Seistan. Sixty miles south of Kalat, and beyond the
Mulla sources, commences another remarkable hydrographic system which
includes all southern and south-western Baluchistan. To the west lies the
Kharan desert, with intermittent river channels enclosed and often lost in
sand-waves ere they reach the Mashkel swamps on the far borders of Persia.
To the south-west are the long sweeping valleys of Rakshan and Panjgur,
which, curving northwards, likewise discharge their drainage into the
Mashkel. Directly south are the beginnings of the meridional arteries, the
Hab, the Purali and the Hingol, which end in the Arabian Sea, leaving a
space of mountainous seaboard (Makran) south of the Panjgur and west of the
Hingol, which is watered (so far as it is watered at all) by the long
lateral Kej river and several smaller mountain streams. Thus southern
Baluchistan comprises four hydrographical sections. First is the long
extension from Kalat, southwards, of that inconceivably wild highland
country which faces the desert of Sind, the foot of which forms the Indian
frontier. This is the land of the Brahui, and the flat wall of its frontier
limestone barrier is one of the most remarkable features in the
configuration of the whole line of Indian borderland. For the first 60 m.
from the sea near Karachi the Hab river is the boundary of Sind, and here,
across the enclosing desolation of outcropping ridges and intervening sand,
a road may be found into Makran. But from the point where the boundary
leaves the Hab to follow the Kirthar range not a break occurs (save one) in
150 m. of solid rock wall, rising many thousands of feet straight from the
sandy plain. The one break, or gorge, which allows the Kej waters to pass,
only forms a local gateway into a mass of impracticable hills. Secondly, to
the west of this mountain wilderness, stretching upwards from the sea in a
wedge form between the Brahui highlands and the group of towering peaks
which enclose the Hingol river and abut on the sea at Malan, are the
alluvial flats and delta of the Purali, forming the little province of Las
Bela, the home of the Las Rajput. In this hot and thirsty corner of
Baluchistan, ruled by the Jam or Cham, there is a fairly wide stretch of
cultivation, nourished by the alluvial detritus of the Purali and well
irrigated. In a little garden to the south of the modern town of Bela (the
ancient _Armabel_) is the tomb of Sir Robert Sandeman, who spent the best
part of an energetic and active life in the making of Baluchistan.

[Sidenote: Western boundary.]

The boundary between Baluchistan and Afghanistan, starting from Nushki,
cuts across the Lora hamun, leaving the frontier post of Chagai to
Baluchistan, and from this point to the Malik Siah Koh it is based partly
on the central mountainous water-divide already referred to, and partly
runs in straight lines through the desert south of the salt swamps of the
Gaud-i-Zirreh. It thus passes 50 m. to the south of the Helmund, entirely
shutting off that valley and the approach to Seistan between the Helmund
and the Gaud-i-Zirreh (the only approach from the east in seasons of flood)
from Baluchistan. But it leaves a connected line of desert route between
Nushki and Seistan, which is open in all ordinary seasons, to the south,
and this route has been largely developed, posts or serais having been
established at intervals and wells having been dug. There is already a
promising khafila traffic along it and the railway has been extended from
Quetta to Nushki.

_Geology._[1]--The mountain ranges of Baluchistan consist chiefly of
Cretaceous and Tertiary beds, which are thrown into a series of folds
running approximately parallel to the mountain ridges. The folds are part
of an extensive system arranged as if in a festoon hanging southwards
between Peshawar and Mount Ararat, but with the outer folds looped up at
Sibi so as to form the subsidiary festoon of the Suliman and Bugti Hills.
Outside the folds lie the horizontal deposits of the Makran coast, and
within them lies the stony desert of north-western Baluchistan. In the
broader depressions between the mountain ridges the beds are said to be but
little disturbed. Besides the Cretaceous and Tertiary beds, Jurassic rocks
are known to take a considerable part in the formation of the hills of
British Baluchistan. Triassic beds lie along the south side of the upper
Zhob, and _Fusulina_ limestone has also been found there. With the
exception of the later Tertiary beds the deposits are mostly marine. But in
the upper Cretaceous and lower Tertiary, especially in north-western
Baluchistan, there is an extensive development of volcanic tuffs and
conglomerates, which are probably contemporaneous with the Deccan Traps of
India. Great masses of syenite and diorite were intruded during the
Tertiary period, and within the curve of the folded belt a line of recent
volcanic cones stretches from western Baluchistan into eastern Persia. In
Baluchistan these volcanoes appear to be extinct; though the Koh-i-Tafdan,
beyond the Persian frontier, still emits vapours at frequent intervals. The
lavas and ashes which form these cones are mostly andesitic. Mud
"volcanoes" occur upon the Makran coast, but it is doubtful whether these
are in any way connected with true volcanic agencies.

So far as is known, the mineral wealth of Baluchistan is inconsiderable.
Coal has been worked in the Tertiary beds along the Harnai route to Quetta,
but the seams are thin and the quality poor. A somewhat thick and viscid
form of mineral oil is met with at Khattan in the Marri country; and
petroleum of excellent quality has been found in the Sherani hills and
probably occurs in other portions of the Suliman Range. Sulphur has long
been worked on a small scale in the Koh-i-Sultan, the largest of the
volcanoes of western Baluchistan.

_Races._--Within the Baluchistan half of the desert are to be found
scattered tribes of nomads, called Rekis (or desert people), the Mohamadani
being the most numerous. They are probably of Arab origin. This central
desert is the Kir, Kej, Katz or Kash Kaian of Arabic medieval geography and
a part of the ancient Kaiani kingdom; the prefix Kej or Kach always
denoting low-level flats or valleys, in contradistinction to mountains or
hills. The Mohamadani nomads occupy the central mountain region, to the
south of which lie the Mashkel and Kharan deserts, inhabited by a people of
quite different origin, who possess something approaching to historical
records. These are the Naushirwanis, a purely Persian race, who passed into
Baluchistan within historic times, although the exact date is uncertain.
The Naushirwanis appear to be identical with the Tahuki or Tahukani who are
found in Perso-Baluchistan. (A place Taoce is mentioned by Nearchus, by
Strabo and by Ptolemy.) They are a fine manly race of people, in many
respects superior to their modern compatriots of Iran. Between the
Naushirwanis of the Kharan desert and Mashkel, and the fish-eating
population of the coast, enclosed in the narrow valleys of the Rakshan and
Kej tributaries, or about the sources of the Hingol, are tribes
innumerable, remnants of races which may be recognized in the works of
Herodotus, or may be traced in the records of recent immigration. Equally
scattered through the whole country, and almost everywhere recognizable, is
the underlying Persian population (Tajik), which is sometimes represented
by a locally dominant tribe, but more frequently by the agricultural slave
and bondsman of the general community. Such are the Dehwars or Dehkans, and
the Durzadas (_Derusiaei_ of Herod. i. 125), who extend all through Makran,
and, as slaves, are called Nakibs. The Arabs have naturally left their mark
most strongly impressed on the ethnography of Baluchistan. All Rind tribes
claim to be of Arab origin and of Koraish extraction. As the Arabs occupied
all southern Baluchistan and Seistan from a very early date, and finally
spread through the Sind valley, where they remained till the 12th century,
their genealogical records have become much obscured and it is probable
that there is not [v.03 p.0293] now a pure Arab in the country. It is as
builders or engineers that they have established their most permanent
records, Makran being full of the relics of their irrigation works
constructed in times when the climatic conditions of Baluchistan must have
been very different from what they are now. Lower Sind also contains a
great wealth of architectural remains, which may be found to the west of
the Indus as well as in the delta. One particular tribe (the Kalmats), who
left their name on the Makran coast and subsequently dominated Bela and
Sind, west of the Indus, for a considerable period, exhibit great power of
artistic design in their sepulchral monuments. The Dravidian races
(Brahuis), who are chiefly represented by the Kambaranis and Mingals or
Mongals (the latter are doubtless of Tatar origin), spread through southern
Baluchistan as well as the eastern hills, and are scattered irregularly
through the mountain tracts south of Kharan. The ancient Oreitae mentioned
by Arrian are probably represented by the tribe of Hot, who, as original
masters of the soil, are exempt from taxation. The name Brahui is
(according to Bellew) but a corruption of Ba-rohi (or "hillmen") in a
language derived from Sanskrit which would represent the same term by
Parva-ka. So that the [Greek: Parikanioi] (Herod, iii. 92) may be
recognized as surviving in the Brahui, and in the name (Parkan) of a
mountain-bred stream which is a tributary of the Hingol. Amongst other
aboriginal tribes to whom reference is made by very early writers are the
Bolédi, who give their name to the Bolida valley, a tributary of the Kej.
The Bolédi were once the ruling race of southern Baluchistan, which was
originally called Boledistan, and it seems possible that this may be the
real origin of the much-disputed name of the country generally. Bola was an
Assyrian term for Bael or Bel, the god of the Phoenicians and Druids. The
Bolédi ruling family were in 1906 represented by but one living member, a
lady, who was a government pensioner. The fast-diminishing Sajidis
(Sajittae) and Saka (Sacae) are others of the more ancient races of
Baluchistan easily recognizable in classical geography. Most recent of all
are the Gitchkis. The Gitchkis derive from a Rajput adventurer who
flourished in the early part of the 17th century. They are now the dominant
race in Panjgur and Kej, from whence they ousted the Boledis. For three
generations they remained Hindus; since then there has arisen amongst them
a strange new sect called Zikari, with exceedingly loose notions of
morality. The sect, however, appears to be fast merging into orthodox
Mahommedanism. A Baluch (or rather Makran) race which deserves attention is
that of the Gadaras, who once gave the name Gadrosia to Southern
Baluchistan. According to Tate the Gadaras are now represented by Sidi
half-castes--those Makrani "boys" who are so well known in the mercantile
marine as stokers and firemen. It seems unlikely that this modern admixture
of Asiatic and African blood represents the "Asiatic Ethiopian" of
Herodotus, which was more probably a direct connexion of the Himyaritic
Arab builders of "bunds" and revetments who spread eastwards from Arabia.
Bellew finds in the Gadara the Garuda (eagles) of Sanskrit, who were ever
in opposition to the Naga (snakes) of Scythic origin. Southern Baluchistan
affords a most interesting field for the ethnographer. It has never yet
been thoroughly explored in the interests of ethnographical science.

The Baluch character is influenced by its environment as much as by its
origin, so that it is impossible to select any one section of the general
community as affording a satisfactory sample of popular Baluch
idiosyncrasies. They are not a homogeneous race. Peoples of Arab extraction
intermixed with people of Dravidian and Persian stock are all lumped
together under the name of Baluch. The Marri and Bugti tribes, who occupy
the most southern buttresses of the Suliman Mountains, are Rind Baluchis,
almost certainly of Arab extraction. They came to Sind either with the Arab
conquerors or after them, and remained there mixed up with the original
Hindu inhabitants. The Arab type of Baluch extends through the whole
country at intervals, and includes all the finest and best of Baluch
humanity. Taking the Rind Baluch as the type opposed to the Afridi Pathan,
the Baluch is easier to deal with and to control than the Pathan, owing to
his tribal organization and his freedom from bigoted fanaticism or blind
allegiance to his priest. The Baluch is less turbulent, less treacherous,
less bloodthirsty and less fanatical than the Pathan. His frame is shorter
and more spare and wiry than that of his neighbour to the north, though
generations have given to him too a bold and manly bearing. It would be
difficult to match the stately dignity and imposing presence of a Baluch
chief of the Marri or Bugti clans. His Semitic features are those of the
Bedouin and he carries himself as straight and as loftily as any Arab
gentleman. Frank and open in his manners, fairly truthful, faithful to his
word, temperate and enduring, and looking upon courage as the highest
virtue, the true Baluch of the Derajat is a pleasant man to have dealings
with. As a revenue payer he is not so satisfactory, his want of industry
and the pride which looks upon manual labour as degrading making him but a
poor husbandman. He is an expert rider; horse-racing is his national
amusement, and the Baluch breed of horses is celebrated throughout northern
India. Like the Pathan he is a bandit by tradition and descent and makes a
first-rate fighting man, but he rarely enlists in the Indian army. He is
nominally a Mahommedan, but is neglectful of the practices of his religion.
The relations of the modern Baluch with the government of India were
entirely transformed by the life work of Sir Robert Sandeman. (_q.v._).

[Sidenote: Strategic interest.]

The strategical position of Great Britain in Baluchistan is a very
important factor in the problem of maintaining order and good
administration in the country. The ever-restless Pathan tribes of the
Suliman hills are held in check by the occupation of the Zhob valley;
whilst the central dominant position at Quetta safeguards the peace and
security of Kalat, and of the wildest of the Baluch hills occupied by the
Marris and Bugtis, no less than it bars the way to an advance upon India by
way of Kandahar. Nominally all the provinces and districts of Baluchistan,
with the exception of the ceded territory which we call British
Baluchistan, are under the khan of Kalat, and all chiefs acknowledge him as
their suzerain. But it may be doubted if this suzerainty was ever complete,
or could be maintained at all but for the assistance of the British
government. The Baluch is still essentially a robber and a raider (a trait
which is common to all tribes), and the history of Baluchistan is nothing
but a story of successful robberies, of lawless rapine and bloodshed, for
which plunder and devastation were accounted a worthy and honourable
return.

[Sidenote: Climate.]

Extensive changes have taken place in the climatic condition of the
country--changes which are some of them so recent as to be noted by
surveyors who have found the remains of forests in districts now entirely
desiccated. Possibly the ordinary processes of denudation and erosion,
acting on those recent deposits which overlie the harder beds of the older
series, may have much to say to these climatic changes, and the wanton
destruction of forests may have assisted the efforts of nature; but it is
difficult to understand the widespread desiccation of large areas of the
Baluch highlands, where evidences of Arab irrigation works and of
cultivation still attest to a once flourishing agricultural condition,
without appealing to more rapidly destructive principles for the change.
There is ample proof throughout the country of alterations of level within
recent geologic periods; and there have even been compressions, resulting
in a relative rise of the ground, over the crests of anticlinal folds,
within historic record. "Proof that this compression is still going on was
given on 20th December 1892, when a severe earthquake resulted from the
sudden yielding of the earth's crust along what appears to be an old line
of fault, west of the Kawaja Amran range, whereby an adjustment took place
indicated by a shortening of some 2½ ft. on the railway line which crossed
the fault." Nor should the evidences of active volcanic agency afforded by
the mud volcanoes of the coast be overlooked. It is probably to climatic
changes (whatever their origin may have been), rather than to the effects
of tribal disturbances, that the Arab's disappearance from the field of
trade and agriculture must be attributed.

[Sidenote: Population.]

The total area of Baluchistan is 132,315 sq. m. and its population in 1901
was 914,551. The population is largely nomadic. The fact that so many as
15,000 camels have been counted in the Bolan Pass during one month of the
annual Brahui migration indicates the dimensions which the movement
assumes. The religion of the country is so overwhelmingly Mahommedan that
out of every 100,000 inhabitants 94,403 are Mussulman, and only 4706
Hindus, while the balance is made up by Christians, Sikhs and other
denominations. Out of the total number 280 in the thousand are literates.
The chief languages spoken are vernaculars of Baluchistan, Pushtu, Panjabi,
Urdu and Sindhi, The [v.03 p.0294] Baluchi language belongs to the Iranian
branch of the Aryan subfamily of the Indo-European family. It is divided
into two main dialects which are so different that speakers of the one are
almost unintelligible to speakers of the other. These two dialects are
separated by the belt of Brahui and Sindhi speakers who occupy the Sarawan
and Jalawan hills, and Las Bela. Owing probably to the fact that Makran was
for many generations under the rule of the Persian kings, the Baluchi
spoken on the west of the province, which is also called Makrani, is more
largely impregnated with Persian words and expressions than the Eastern
dialect. In the latter the words in use for common objects and acts are
nearly all pure Baluchi, the remainder of the language being borrowed from
Persian, Sindhi and Panjabi. There is no indigenous literature, but many
specimens of poetry exist in which heroes and brave deeds are commemorated,
and a good many of these have been collected from time to time. The
philological classification of the Brahui dialect has been much disputed,
but the latest enquiries, conducted by Dr G. A. Grierson, have resulted in
his placing it among the Dravidian languages. It is remarkable to find in
Baluchistan a Dravidian tongue, surrounded on all sides by Aryan languages,
and with the next nearest branch of the same family located so far away as
the Gond hills of central India. Brahui has no literature of its own, and
such knowledge as we possess of it is due to European scholars, such as
Bellew, Trumpp and Caldwell. Numerically the Brahuis are the strongest race
in Baluchistan. They number nearly 300,000 souls. Next to them and
numbering nearly 200,000 are Pathans. After this there is a drop to 80,000
mixed Baluchis and less than 40,000 Lasis (Lumris) of Las Bela. There are
thirteen indigenous tribes of Pathan origin, of which the Kakars (_q.v._)
are by far the most important, numbering more than 100,000 souls. They are
to be found in the largest numbers in Zhob, Quetta, Pishin and
Thal-Chotiali, but there are a few of them in Kalat and Chagai also. The
most important Baluch tribes are the Marris, the Bughtis, the Boledis, the
Domkis, the Magassis and the Rinds. Owing partly to the tribal system, and
partly to the levelling effect of Islam, nothing similar to the Brahmanical
system of social precedent is to be found in Baluchistan.

_History._--Of the early history of this portion of the Asiatic continent
little or nothing is known. The poverty and natural strength of the
country, combined with the ferocious habits of the natives, seem to have
equally repelled the friendly visits of inquisitive strangers and the
hostile incursions of invading armies. The first distinct account which we
have is from Arrian, who, with his usual brevity and severe veracity,
narrates the march of Alexander through this region, which he calls the
country of the Oreitae and Gadrosii.[2] He gives a very accurate account of
this forlorn tract, its general aridity and the necessity of obtaining
water by digging in the beds of torrents; describes the food of the
inhabitants as dates and fish; and adverts to the occasional occurrence of
fertile spots, the abundance of aromatic and thorny shrubs and fragrant
plants, and the violence of the monsoon in the western part of Makran. He
notices also the impossibility of supporting a large army, and the
consequent destruction of the greater part of the men and beasts which
accompanied the expedition of Alexander. In the 8th century this country
was traversed by an army of the Caliphate.

The precise period at which the Brahuis gained the mastery cannot be
accurately ascertained; but it was probably about two and a half centuries
ago. The last raja of the Hindu dynasty found himself compelled to call for
the assistance of the mountain shepherds, with their leader, Kambar, in
order to check the encroachments of a horde of depredators, headed by an
Afghan chief, who infested the country and even threatened to attack the
seat of government. Kambar successfully performed the service for which he
had been engaged; but having in a few years quelled the robbers against
whom he had been called in, and finding himself at the head of the only
military tribe in the country, he formally deposed the raja and assumed the
government.

The history of the country after the accession of Kambar is as obscure as
during the Hindu dynasty. It would appear, however, that the sceptre was
quietly transmitted to Abdulla Khan, the fourth in descent from Kambar,
who, being an intrepid and ambitious soldier, turned his thoughts towards
the conquest of Kach Gandava, then held by different petty chiefs under the
authority of the nawabs of Sind.

After various success, the Kambaranis at length possessed themselves of the
sovereignty of a considerable portion of that fruitful plain, including the
chief town, Gandava. It was during this contest that the famous Nadir Shah
advanced from Persia to the invasion of Hindustan; and while at Kandahar he
despatched several detachments into Baluchistan and established his
authority in that province. Abdulla Khan, however, was continued in the
government of the country by Nadir's orders; but he was soon after killed
in a battle with the forces of the nawabs of Sind. He was succeeded by his
eldest son, Haji Mahommed Khan, who abandoned himself to the most
tyrannical and licentious way of life and alienated his subjects by
oppressive taxation. In these circumstances Nasir Khan, the second son of
Abdulla Khan, who had accompanied the victorious Nadir to Delhi, and
acquired the favour and confidence of that monarch, returned to Kalat and
was hailed by the whole population as their deliverer. Finding that
expostulation had no effect upon his brother, he one day entered his
apartment and stabbed him to the heart. As soon as the tyrant was dead,
Nasir Khan mounted the _musnud_ amidst the universal joy of his subjects;
and immediately transmitted a report of the events which had taken place to
Nadir Shah, who was then encamped near Kandahar. The shah received the
intelligence with satisfaction, and despatched a firman, by return of the
messenger, appointing Nasir Khan beglar begi (prince of princes) of all
Baluchistan. This event took place in the year 1739.

Nasir Khan proved an active, politic and warlike prince. He took great
pains to re-establish the internal government of all the provinces in his
dominions, and improved and fortified the city of Kalat. On the death of
Nadir Shah in 1747, he acknowledged the title of the king of Kabul, Ahmad
Shah (Durani). In 1758 he declared himself entirely independent; upon which
Ahmad Shah despatched a force against him under one of his ministers. The
khan, however, raised an army and totally routed the Afghan army. On
receiving intelligence of this discomfiture, the king himself marched with
strong reinforcements, and a pitched battle was fought in which Nasir Khan
was worsted. He retired in good order to Kalat, whither he was followed by
the victor, who invested the place with his whole army. The khan made a
vigorous defence; and, after the royal troops had been foiled in their
attempts to take the city by storm or surprise, a negotiation was proposed
by the king which terminated in a treaty of peace. By this treaty it was
stipulated that the king was to receive the cousin of Nasir Khan in
marriage; and that the khan was to pay no tribute, but only, when called
upon, to furnish troops to assist the armies, for which he was to receive
an allowance in cash equal to half their pay. The khan frequently
distinguished himself in the subsequent wars of Kabul; and, as a reward for
his services, the king bestowed upon him several districts in perpetual and
entire sovereignty. Having succeeded in quelling a dangerous rebellion
headed by his cousin Behram Khan, this able prince at length died in
extreme old age in the month of June 1795, leaving three sons and five
daughters. He was succeeded by his eldest son, Mahmud Khan, then a boy of
about fourteen years. During the reign of this prince, who has been
described as a very humane and indolent man, the country was distracted by
sanguinary broils; the governors of several provinces and districts
withdrew their allegiance; and the dominions of the khans of Kalat
gradually so diminished that they now comprehend only a small portion of
the provinces formerly subject to Nasir Khan.

In 1839, when the British army advanced through the Bolan Pass towards
Afghanistan, the conduct of Mehrab Khan, the ruler of Baluchistan, was
considered so treacherous and dangerous as to require "the exaction of
retribution from that chieftain," and "the execution of such arrangements
as would establish future security in that quarter." General Willshire was
accordingly detached from the army of the Indus with 1050 men to assault
Kalat. A gate was knocked in by the field-pieces, and the town and citadel
were stormed in a few minutes. Above 400 Baluches were slain, among them
Mehrab Khan himself; and 2000 prisoners were taken. Subsequent inquiries
have, however, proved that the treachery towards the British was not [v.03
p.0295] on the part of Mehrab Khan, but on that of his vizier, Mahommed
Hussein, and certain chiefs with whom he was in league, and at whose
instigation the British convoys were plundered in their passage through
Kach Gandava and in the Bolan Pass. The treacherous vizier, however, made
our too credulous political officers believe that Mehrab Khan was to blame;
his object being to bring his master to ruin and to obtain for himself all
power in the state, knowing that Mehrab's successor was only a child. How
far he succeeded in his object history has shown. In the following year
Kalat changed hands, the governor established by the British, together with
a feeble garrison, being overpowered. At the close of the same year it was
reoccupied by the British under General Nott. In 1841 Nasir Khan II., the
youthful son of the slain Mehrab Khan, was recognized by the British, who
soon after evacuated the country.

From the conquest of Sind by the British troops under the command of
General Sir Charles Napier in 1843 up to 1854 no diplomatic intercourse
occurred worthy of note between the British and Baluch states. In the
latter year, however, under the governor-generalship of the marquess of
Dalhousie, General John Jacob, C.B., at the time political superintendent
and commandant on the Sind frontier, was deputed to arrange and conclude a
treaty between the Kalat state, then under the chieftainship of Nasir Khan
and the British government. This treaty was executed on the 14th of May
1854 and was to the following effect:--

    "That the former offensive and defensive treaty, concluded in 1841 by
    Major Outram between the British government and Nasir Khan II., chief
    of Kalat, was to be annulled.

    "That Nasir Khan II., his heirs and successors, bound themselves to
    oppose to the utmost all the enemies of the British government, and in
    all cases to act in subordinate co-operation with that government, and
    to enter into no negotiations with other states without its consent.

    "That should it be deemed necessary to station British troops in any
    part of the territory of Kalat, they shall occupy such positions as may
    be thought advisable by the British authorities.

    "That the Baluch chief was to prevent all plundering on the part of his
    subjects within or in the neighbourhood of British territory.

    "That he was further to protect all merchants passing through his
    territory, and only to exact from them a transit duty, fixed by
    schedule attached to the treaty; and that, on condition of a faithful
    performance of these duties, he was to receive from the British
    government an annual subsidy of Rs.50,000 (£5000)."

The provisions of the above treaty were most loyally performed by Nasir
Khan up to the time of his death in 1856. He was succeeded by his brother,
Mir Khodadud Khan, when a youth of twelve years of age, who, however, did
not obtain his position before he had put down by force a rebellion on the
part of his turbulent chiefs, who had first elected him, but, not receiving
what they considered an adequate reward from his treasury, sought to depose
him in favour of his cousin Sher dil Khan. In the latter part of 1857, the
Indian rebellion being at its height and the city of Delhi still in the
hands of the rebels, a British officer (Major Henry Green) was deputed, on
the part of the British government, to reside as political agent with the
Khan at Kalat and to assist him by his advice in maintaining control over
his turbulent tribes. This duty was successfully performed until 1863,
when, during the temporary absence of Major Malcolm Green, the then
political agent, Khodadad Khan was, at the instigation of some of his
principal chiefs, attacked while out riding by his cousin, Sher dil Khan,
and severely wounded. Khodadad fled in safety to a residence close to the
British border, and Sher dil Khan was elected and proclaimed Khan. His rule
was, however, a short one, for early in 1864, when proceeding to Kalat, he
was murdered in the Gandava Pass; and Khodadad was again elected chief by
the very men who had only the previous year caused his overthrow, and who
had lately been accomplices to the murder of his cousin. After the above
events Khodadad maintained his precarious position with great difficulty;
but owing to his inability to govern his unruly subjects without material
assistance from the British government, which they were not disposed to
give, his country gradually fell into the greatest anarchy; and,
consequently, some of the provisions of the treaty of 1854 having been
broken, diplomatic relations were discontinued with the Kalat state after
the end of 1874.

After this the chiefs of Las and Wad, the Marris and Bugtis, Kej and Makran
all threw off their allegiance, and anarchy became so widespread that the
British government again interfered. The treaty of 1854 was renewed in 1876
by Lord Lytton (under Sandeman's advice), and the khan received substantial
aid from the government in the form of an annual subsidy of a lakh of
rupees, instead of the Rs.50,000 previously assigned to him. The treaty of
1854 was a treaty of alliance offensive and defensive. The treaty of 1876
renewed these terms, but utterly changed the policy of non-intervention
which was maintained by the former, by the recognition of the sirdars as
well as the khan, and by the appointment of the British government as
referee in cases of dispute between them. British troops were to be located
in the khan's country; Quetta was founded; telegraphs and railways were
projected; roads were made; and the reign of law and order established. The
nebulous claims of Afghanistan to Sibi and Pishin were disposed of by the
treaty of Gandamak in the spring of 1879, and the final consolidation of
the existing form of Kalat administration was effected by Sandeman's
expedition to Kharan in 1883, and the reconciliation of Azad Khan, the
great Naushirwani chief, with the khan of Kalat. British Baluchistan was
incorporated with British India by the resolution of 1st November 1887, and
divided into two districts--Quetta-Pishin and Thai Chotiali--to be
administered by a deputy-commissioner and a regular staff.

In 1890 and 1891 were carried out that series of politico-military
expeditions which resulted in the occupation of the Zhob valley, the
foundation of the central cantonment of Fort Sandeman, and the extension of
a line of outposts which, commencing at Quetta, may be said to rest on Wana
north of the Gomal. The effect of these expeditions, and of this extension
of military occupation, has been to reduce the independent Pathan tribes of
the Suliman mountains to effective order, and to put a stop to border
raiding on the Indus plains south of the Gomal. In 1893 serious differences
arose between the khan of Kalat and Sir James Browne, who succeeded Sir
Robert Sandeman as agent to the governor-general in Baluchistan, arising
out of Mir Khodadad Khan's outrageous conduct in the management of his own
court, and the treatment of his officials. Finally, the khan was deposed,
and his son Mir Mahmud Khan succeeded in November 1893. Since then the most
important change in Baluch administration has been the perpetual lease and
transfer of management to British agency of the Nushki district and Niabat,
with all rights, jurisdiction and administrative power, in lieu of a
perpetual rent of Rs.9000 per annum. This was effected in July 1899. This
secures the direct control of the great highway to Seistan which has been
opened to khafila and railway traffic.

The revenues of the khan of Kalat consist partly of subsidies and partly of
agricultural revenue, the total value being about Rs.500,000 per annum.
Since 1882 he has received Rs.25,000 as government rent for the Quetta
district, besides Rs.30,000 in lieu of transit duties in the Boian; this
has been increased lately by Rs.9000 as already stated. In 1899 the total
imports of Kalat were valued at Rs.700,000, and the exports at Rs.505,000.

AUTHORITIES.--The Seistan Boundary Report of 1873 by Sir F. Goldsmid;
Floyer, _Unexplored Baluchistan_ (London, 1882); T. Thornton, _Life of
Sandeman_ (London, 1896); G. P. Tate, _Kalat, a Memoir_ (Calcutta, 1896);
Sir T. Holdich, "Ethnographic and Historical Notes on Makran," Calcutta,
1892 (_Survey Report_); "Antiquities, Ethnography, &c., of Las Bela and
Makran," Calcutta, 1894 (_Survey Report_); "Ancient and Medieval Makran,"
vol. vii. _R.G.S. Journal_ (1896); "Perso-Baluch Boundary," vol. ix.
_R.G.S. Journal_ (1897); McMahon, "The Southern Borderland of Afghanistan,"
vol. x. _Journal R.G.S_. (1897). Notes on Sir R. Sandeman's tours in
Baluchistan will be found in vols. v., xii., xiii. and xiv. of the _R.G.S.
Proceedings_; _Popular Poetry of the Baloches_, by M. Longworth-Dames (2
vols., _Roy. As. Soc._ 1907).

(T. H. H.*)

[1] See W. T. Blanford, "Geological Notes on the Hills in the neighbourhood
of the Sind and Punjab Frontier between Quetta and Dera Ghazi Khan," _Mem.
Geol. Surv. India_, vol. xx. pt. 2 (1883); E. Vredenburg, "A Geological
Sketch of the Baluchistan Desert, and part of Eastern Persia," _Mem. Geol.
Surv. India_, vol. xxxi. pt. 2 (1901); E. Vredenburg, "On the Occurrence of
a Species of Halorites in the Trias of Baluchistan," _Rec. Geol. Surv.
India_, vol. xxxi. (1904), pp. 162-166, pls. 17, 18.

[2] See V. A. Smith, _Early Hist. of India_ (ed. 1908), p. 103 seq.