BAMBOO, the popular name for a tribe of grasses, _Bambuseae_, which are
large, often tree-like, with woody stems. The stems spring from an
underground root-stock and are often crowded to form dense clumps; the
largest species reach 120 ft. in height. The slender stem is hollow, and,
as generally in grasses, has well-marked joints or nodes, at which the
cavity is closed by a strong diaphragm. The branches are numerous and in
some species spiny; the narrow, often short, leaf-blade is usually jointed
at the base and has a short stalk, by which it is attached to the long
sheath. The spikelets are usually many-flowered and variously arranged in
racemes or panicles. The flower differs from that of the majority of
grasses in having usually three lodicules and six stamens. Many species
bloom annually, but others only at intervals sometimes of many years, when
the individuals of one and the same species are found in bloom over large
areas. Thus on the west coast of India the simultaneous blooming of
_Bambusa arundinacea_ (fig. 1), one of the largest species, has been
observed at intervals of thirty-two years. After ripening of the seed, the
leafless flowering culms always die down.

The _Bambuseae_ contain twenty-three genera and occur throughout the
tropical zone, but very unevenly distributed; they also extend into the
sub-tropical and even into the temperate zone. Tropical Asia is richest in
species; in Africa there are very few. In Asia they extend into Japan and
to 10,000 ft. or more on the [v.03 p.0302] Himalayas; and in the Andes of
South America they reach the snow-line.

The fruit in _Bambusa_, _Arundinaria_ and other genera resembles the grain
generally characteristic of grasses, but in _Dendrocalamus_ and others it
is a nut, while rarely, as in _Melocanna_, it is fleshy and suggests an
apple in size and appearance. The uses to which all the parts and products
of the bamboo are applied in Oriental countries are almost endless. The
soft and succulent shoots, when just beginning to spring, are cut off and
served up at table like asparagus. Like that vegetable, also, they are
earthed over to keep them longer fit for consumption; and they afford a
continuous supply during the whole year, though it is more abundant in
autumn. They are also salted and eaten with rice, prepared in the form of
pickles or candied and preserved in sugar. As the plant grows older, a
species of fluid is secreted in the hollow joints, in which a concrete
substance once highly valued in the East for its medicinal qualities,
called _tabaxir_ or _tabascheer_, is gradually developed. This substance,
which has been found to be a purely siliceous concretion, is possessed of
peculiar optical properties. As a medicinal agent the bamboo is entirely
inert, and it has never been received into the European materia medica.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Bamboo (_Bambusa vulgaris_), very much reduced.
Grows 20 to 50 ft high.]

The grains of the bamboo are available for food, and the Chinese have a
proverb that it produces seed more abundantly in years when the rice crop
fails, which means, probably, that in times of dearth the natives look more
after such a source of food. The Hindus eat it mixed with honey as a
delicacy, equal quantities being put into a hollow joint, coated externally
with clay, and thus roasted over a fire. The fleshly fruit of _Melocanna_
is baked and eaten. The plant is a native of India, but is sometimes
cultivated as in Mauritius. It is, however, the stem of the bamboo which is
applied to the greatest variety of uses. Joints of sufficient size form
water buckets; smaller ones are used as bottles, and among the Dyaks of
Borneo they are employed as cooking vessels. Bamboo is extensively used as
a timber wood, and houses are frequently made entirely out of the products
of the plant; complete sections of the stem form posts or columns; split
up, it serves for floors or rafters; and, interwoven in lattice-work, it is
employed for the sides of rooms, admitting light and air. The roof is
sometimes of bamboo solely, and when split, which is accomplished with the
greatest ease, it can be formed into laths or planks. It is employed in
shipping of all kinds; some of the strongest plants are selected for masts
of boats of moderate size, and the masts of larger vessels are sometimes
formed by the union of several bamboos built up and joined together.

The bamboo is employed in the construction of all kinds of agricultural and
domestic implements and in the materials and implements required in
fishery. Bows are made of it by the union of two pieces with many bands;
and, the septa being bored out and the lengths joined together, it is
employed, as we use leaden pipes, in transmitting water to reservoirs or
gardens. From the light and slender stalks shafts for arrows are obtained;
and in the south-west of Asia there is a certain species of equally slender
growth, from which writing-pens or reeds are made. A joint forms a holder
for papers or pens, and it was in a joint of bamboo that silk-worm eggs
were carried from China to Constantinople during the reign of Justinian.
The outer cuticle of Oriental species is so hard that it forms a sharp and
durable cutting edge, and it is so siliceous that it can be used as a
whetstone. This outer cuticle, cut into thin strips, is one of the most
durable and beautiful materials for basket-making, and both in China and
Japan it is largely so employed. Strips are also woven into cages, chairs,
beds and other articles of furniture, Oriental wicker-work in bamboo being
unequalled for beauty and neatness of workmanship. In China the interior
portions of the stem are beaten into a pulp and used for the manufacture of
the finer varieties of paper. Bamboos are imported to a considerable extent
into Europe for the use of basket-makers, and for umbrella and
walking-sticks. In short, the purposes to which the bamboo is applicable
are almost endless, and well justify the opinion that "it is one of the
most wonderful and most beautiful productions of the tropics, and one of
Nature's most valuable gifts to uncivilized man" (A. R. Wallace, _The Malay
Archipelago_).

A number of species of bamboo are hardy under cultivation in the British
Isles. A useful and interesting account of these and their cultivation will
be found in the _Bamboo Garden_, by A. B. Freeman-Mitford. They are mostly
natives of China and Japan and belong to the genera _Arundinaria_,
_Bambusa_ and _Phyllostachys_; but include a few Himalayan species of
_Arundinaria_. They may be propagated by seed (though owing to the rare
occurrence of fruit, this method is seldom applicable), by division and by
cuttings. They are described as hungry plants which well repay generous
treatment, and will flourish in a rich, not too stiff loam, and for the
first year or two should be well mulched. They should be sheltered from
winds and well watered during the growing period. When being transplanted
the roots must be disturbed as little as possible. The following may be
mentioned; _Arundinaria simoni_, a fine plant which in the bamboo garden at
Kew has reached 18 ft. in height, and not infrequently flowers and fruits
in Britain; _A. japonica_, a tall and handsome plant generally grown in
gardens under the name _Bambusa métaké_; _A. nitida_, "by far the daintiest
and most attractive of all its genus, and remarkably hardy"; _Bambusa
palmata_, with leaves a foot or more long and three inches broad; _B.
tesselata_; _B. quadrangularis_, remarkable for its square stems;
_Phyllostachys mitis_, growing to 60 ft. high in its native home, China and
Japan; and _P. nigra_, so called from the black stem, a handsome species.