BAN, a word taken from the root of a verb common to many Teutonic languages
and meaning originally "to proclaim" or "to announce." The Late Lat. form
of the word is _bannum_.

In the laws of the Franks and kindred tribes the word had three main uses:
first in the general sense of a proclamation, secondly, for the fine
incurred for disobeying such proclamation, and thirdly for the district
over which proclamations were issued.

It was the frequent use of proclamations or bans, commanding or forbidding
certain actions under a threat of punishment, which caused the second of
these uses to arise out of the first, as the idea of wrong-doing became
associated with the proclamation or ban. This _bannum dominicum_, as it was
called, was employed by all feudal lords, from the king downwards, against
offenders, and played an important part in the administration of justice in
feudal times. It usually took the form of an order to make some amend for
wrong-doing, which, if not complied with, was followed by the withdrawal of
all protection from the offender, _i.e._ by outlawry.

After the break-up of the Carolingian empire another use of the word arose
in France. "Ban" had occasionally been used in a restricted sense referring
only to the summons calling out the host; and as France became separated
from the Empire, French law and custom seized upon this use, and soon the
men liable to military service were known as "the ban." A variant form of
this word was _heriban_ or _ariban_, and it is possible that some confusion
between the early syllables of this word and the word _arrière_ led to a
distinction between the _ban_ and the _arrière-ban_ or _retro-bannum_. At
all events this distinction arose; the _ban_ referring to the vassals
called out by the king, and the _arrière-ban_ to the sub-vassals called
upon by the vassals in their turn. As in England, the liability to military
service was often commuted for a monetary payment, and there were various
exemptions. In the 17th and 18th centuries the ban and arrière-ban were
lacking in discipline when called out, and were last summoned in 1758.
Local levies, however, called out between this date and the Revolution were
sometimes referred to by these names.

In the medieval Empire and in Germany the word "ban" retained the special
sense of punishment. The German equivalent of ban is _Acht_, and the
sentence soon became practically one of outlawry. Connected possibly with
the power enjoyed in earlier times by the assemblies of freemen of
outlawing an offender, it was frequently used by the emperor, or German
king, and the phrase "under the ban" is very common in medieval history.
The execution of this sentence of placing an offender under the imperial
ban, or _Reichsacht_, was usually entrusted to some prince or noble, who
was often rewarded with a portion of the outlaw's lands. It was, however,
only a serious punishment when the king or his supporters were strong
enough to enforce its execution. Employed not only against individuals but
also against towns and districts, it was sometimes divided into the _Acht_
and the _Oberacht_, _i.e._ partial or complete outlawry. Documents of the
time show that the person placed under the imperial ban drew down absolute
destitution upon his relatives and frequently death upon himself. At first
this sentence was the act of the [v.03 p.0305] emperor or king himself, but
as the Empire became more German, and its administration less personal, it
was entrusted to the imperial aulic council (_Reichshofrat_), and to the
imperial court of justice or imperial chamber (_Reichskammergericht_).
These courts were deprived of this power in 1711, retaining only the right
of suggesting its use. The imperial ban had, however, been used for the
last time in 1706, when Maximilian Emanuel, elector of Bavaria, was placed
under it.

There are many other uses of the word in the sense of a prohibition. In
earlier French law the ban of wine or _bannum vini_, was the exclusive
right of a lord to sell wine during a stated number of days, and the ban of
March and April forbade the pasturing of cattle in certain fields during
these months. There were also other similar uses dating from feudal times.
In modern French law the phrase _rupture de ban_ described, previous to
1885, the departure without notice of any released criminal living under
the special surveillance of the police. The French government still retains
the rights of appointing an obligatory place of residence for any criminal,
and any escape from this place is a _rupture de ban_. A Scandinavian use of
the word gives it the sense of a curse. This usage mingling with the use
which spiritual lords shared with temporal lords of issuing the ban over
their dependents, has become in a special sense ecclesiastical, and the
sentence of excommunication is frequently referred to as "under the papal
ban." The word is also used in this way by Shakespeare and Milton. The
modern English use of the phrase "under the ban" refers to any line of
conduct condemned by custom or public opinion. In its earlier and general
sense as a proclamation, the ban may be said to have been suspended by the
writ. The word, however, survives in the sense of a proclamation in the
"banns of marriage" (_q.v._).

The Persian word _ban_, meaning lord or master, was brought into Europe by
the Avars. It was long used in many parts of south-eastern Europe,
especially in southern Hungary, to denote the governors of military
districts called _banats_, and is almost equivalent to the German
_margrave_. After enjoying very extensive powers the bans were gradually
reduced, both in numbers and importance. Since 1868, however, the governor
of Croatia and Slavonia has been known as the ban of Croatia, Slavonia and
Dalmatia, but his duties are civil and not military. He is appointed by the
emperor of Austria, as king of Hungary, and has a seat in the upper house
of the Hungarian parliament.

See Du Cange, _Glossarium_, tome i. (Niort, 1883); H. Brunner, _Grundzuge
der deutschen Rechtsgeschichte_ (Leipzig, 1901); E. P. Boutaric,
_Institutions militaires de la France_ (Paris, 1863); Père G. Daniel,
_Histoire de la milice française_ (Paris, 1721).