BANCROFT, GEORGE (1800-1891), American historian and statesman, was born in
Worcester, Mass., on the 3rd of October 1800. His family had been in
America since 1632, and his father, Aaron Bancroft, was distinguished as a
revolutionary soldier, clergyman and author. The son was educated at
Phillips Academy, Exeter, at Harvard University, at Heidelberg, Göttingen
and Berlin. At Göttingen he studied Plato with Heeren, New Testament Greek
with Eichhorn and natural science with Blumenbach. His heart was in the
work of Heeren, easily the greatest of historical critics then living, and
the forerunner of the modern school; it was from this master that Bancroft
caught his enthusiasm for minute pains-taking erudition. He concluded his
years of preparation by a European tour, in the [v.03 p.0307] course of
which he received kind attention from almost every distinguished man in the
world of letters, science and art; among others, from Goethe, Humboldt,
Schleiermacher, Hegel, Byron, Niebuhr, Bunsen, Savigny, Cousin, Constant
and Manzoni. Bancroft's father was a Unitarian, and he had devoted his son
to the work of the ministry; but the young man's first experiments at
preaching, shortly after his return from Europe in 1822, were
unsatisfactory, the theological teaching of the time having substituted
criticism and literature for faith. His first position was that of tutor in
Harvard. Instinctively a humanist, he had little patience with the narrow
curriculum of Harvard in his day and the rather pedantic spirit with which
classical studies were there pursued. Moreover, he had brought from Europe
a new manner, full of the affections of ardent youth, and this he wore
without ease in a society highly satisfied with itself; the young
knight-errant was therefore subjected to considerable ridicule. A little
volume of poetry, translations and original pieces, published in 1823 gave
its author no fame. As time passed, and custom created familiarity, his
style, personal and literary, was seen to be the outward symbol of a firm
resolve to preserve a philosophic calm, and of an enormous underlying
energy which spent itself in labour, "ohne Hast, aber auch ohne Rast." He
found the conventional atmosphere of Cambridge uncongenial, and with a
friend he established the Round Hill school at Northampton, Mass. This was
the first serious effort made in the United States to elevate secondary
education to the plane on which it belonged.

Although born into a Whig family, yet Bancroft's studies carried him
irresistibly into the Democratic party. While a teacher in his own school
he was elected to the state legislature as a Democrat, but under pressure
from the family of his first wife, who were ardent Whigs, he refused to
serve. In 1831 he likewise declined the nomination of the Massachusetts
Democrats for secretary of state. By this time he was influential in the
councils of his party, and President Van Buren appointed him collector of
the port of Boston, a position which he filled with success. Two of his
appointees were Orestes Brownson and Nathaniel Hawthorne. In 1844 he was
the Democratic candidate for the governorship, but he was defeated. In 1845
he entered Polk's cabinet as secretary of the navy, serving until 1846,
when for a month he was acting secretary of war. During this short period
in the cabinet he established the naval academy at Annapolis, gave the
orders which led to the occupation of California, and sent Zachary Taylor
into the debatable land between Texas and Mexico. He also continued his
pleadings for the annexation of Texas, as extending "the area of freedom,"
and though a Democrat, took high moral ground as to slavery; he likewise
made himself the authority on the North-Western Boundary question. In 1846
he was sent as minister to London, where he lived in constant companionship
with Macaulay and Hallam. On his return in 1849 he withdrew from public
life, residing in New York. In 1866 he was chosen by Congress to deliver
the special eulogy on Lincoln; and in 1867 he was appointed minister to
Berlin, where he remained until his resignation in 1874. Thenceforward he
lived in Washington and Newport, dying at Washington on the 17th of January
1891. His latest official achievements were the greatest. In the San Juan
arbitration he displayed great versatility and skill, winning his case
before the emperor with brilliant ease. The naturalization treaties which
he negotiated successively with Prussia and the other north German states
were the first international recognition of the right of expatriation, a
principle since incorporated in the law of nations.

In spite of the exacting and severe routine of the Round Hill school,
Bancroft contributed frequently to the _North American Review_ and to
Walsh's _American Quarterly_; he also made a translation of Heeren's work
on _The Politics of Ancient Greece_. In 1834 appeared the first volume of
the _History of the United States_. The second followed in 1837, and others
as the exigencies of public life permitted. Supplementary to the first
volume was an article published by him in the _North American Review_ for
1835 on "The Documentary History of the Revolution." This article not
merely brought the new method to the notice of the reading public, but
revealed to it the wealth of material available. The nature and extent of
his studies, the solidity of his work, and the philosophic spirit which
animates both, explain the enthusiasm with which the earlier volumes of
Bancroft were received. Their sale at home was very large; they were
reprinted in England and translated immediately into Danish, Italian,
German and French. The latest volumes were considered by all competent
judges quite as important as their predecessors. When the author was
preparing to return from Berlin, the Royal Academy made him their guest at
a public dinner, an unprecedented honour; and the universities of Berlin,
Heidelberg and Munich united in a testimonial of regard. At Washington he
was the confidential advisor of statesmen to the end of his life and the
unofficial dean of the best society.

Bancroft's historical creed is best set forth in the address he delivered
on the semi-centennial of the New York Historical Society in 1854. In
philosophy he found the basis for positing a collective human will,
revealing in its activities the materials for determining ethical laws.
Since there must be the same conservation of energy in morals as elsewhere,
the eternal reason is the divine Logos. History, therefore, is God working
in examples. It must be a unit, its forces constant and its totality an
organic whole. Within this the individual moves and acts with liberty and
responsibility; for each, in will, affection and intellect is
consubstantial with the rest. Truth, morals and justice are subject to no
evolution; but the collective man evolves better forms of knowledge and
behaviour. The organization of society, therefore, produces successive
states, in each of which the principle of freedom is better established
than in the antecedent. Permanency in republican government is, therefore,
based upon corresponding experience and culture, and its possibilities grow
ever stronger. The relation of American democracy to the systems which have
preceded it forms the latest proof of these contentions. As Heeren's pupil,
he laid enormous stress on the importance of original authorities. In
dealing with documentary evidence he sought to apply very stringent
rules:--(1) Carefully distinguish between original authority and historical
memorials or aids; for example, between a fact recorded at first- or
second-hand knowledge, and a decision of principle by authority. (2)
Represent every man from his own standpoint; judge him from your own. His
collections of original materials were vast; beginning with his residence
in England, he brought together at enormous pains and expense the
authenticated copies of archives, family papers, and personal journals
written by historic personages, which now constitute an invaluable treasure
in the New York public library. They are from every land and from every
people with which American origins are connected. His use of this material
was not always according to accepted standards. To avoid dryness and
prolixity he condensed quotations, and occasionally employed the
Thucydidean method of abridgment or representation in place of fact
catalogues. During his long life enormous strides were made by others in
collecting the materials of American history, and while in the main he kept
pace with them by ruthless revision, yet even the latest edition of his
work disregards some minor facts which others knew for the insertion of
much which the author alone knew.

Bancroft's imagination and enthusiasm were alike exuberant. His pages
abound in fine and acute insight. His generalizations are vivid and
enlightening. He spared no pains to acquire true style, frequently
rewriting his chapters, and sometimes testing passages of philosophy and
description in eight different forms. Yet to a certain extent he lacked the
representative power and often failed to conceal his art, many pages
ringing with artificial tones. But, after making all allowances, it remains
true that he had a perfect sense of proportion, sound maxims and thorough
common-sense. He was of that greatest human type: a man of the present,
valuing justly the past and no dreamer. In the nature and extent of his
studies, in the solidity of his work, and in the philosophic spirit which
animated his life he ranks as the foremost historian of the United States,
and as an American historian second to none of his European contemporaries
in [v.03 p.0308] the same line. He displayed the heroic, epic value of
American history, its unity with the great central stream, and dispelled
for ever the extravagant conceptions of a sentimental world just emerging
from the visionary philosophy of the 18th century.

See M. A. de Wolfe Howe, _The Life and Letters of George Bancroft_ (New
York, 1908).

(W. M. S.)