BANDIERA, ATTILIO (1811-1844) and EMILIO (1819-1844), Italian patriots. The
brothers Bandiera, sons of Baron Bandiera, an admiral in the Austrian navy,
were themselves members of that service, but at an early age they were won
over to the ideas of Italian freedom and unity, and corresponded with
Giuseppe Mazzini and other members of the _Giovane Italia_ (Young Italy), a
patriotic and revolutionary secret society. During the year 1843 the air
was full of conspiracies, and various ill-starred attempts at rising
against the Italian despots were made. The Bandieras began to make
propaganda among the officers and men of the Austrian navy, nearly all
Italians, and actually planned to seize a warship and bombard Messina. But
having been betrayed they fled to Corfu early in 1844. Rumours reached them
there of agitation in the Neapolitan kingdom, where the people were
represented as ready to rise _en masse_ at the first appearance of a
leader; the Bandieras, encouraged by Mazzini, consequently determined to
make a raid on the Calabrian coast. They got together a band of about
twenty men ready to sacrifice their lives for an idea, and set sail on
their desperate venture on the 12th of June 1844. Four days later they
landed near Cotrone, intending to go to Cosenza, liberate the political
prisoners and issue their proclamations. But they did not find the
insurgent band which they had been told awaited them, and were betrayed by
one of their party, the Corsican Boccheciampe, and by some peasants who
believed them to be Turkish pirates. A detachment of gendarmes and
volunteers was sent against them, and after a short fight the whole band
were taken prisoners and escorted to Cosenza, where a number of Calabrians
who had taken part in a previous rising were also under arrest. First the
Calabrians were tried by court-martial, and a large number condemned to
death or the galleys. The raiders' turn came next, and the whole party,
save the traitor Boccheciampe, were condemned to be shot, but in the case
of eight of them the sentence was commuted to the galleys. On the 23rd of
July the two Bandieras and their nine companions were executed; they cried
_Viva l'Italia!_ as they fell.

The Neapolitan government was undoubtedly within its right in executing the
Bandieras, and the material results of this heroic but unpractical attempt
were nil. But the moral effect was enormous throughout Italy, the action of
the authorities was universally condemned, and the martyrdom of the
Bandieras bore fruit in subsequent revolutions. It also created a great
impression in England, where it was believed that the Bandieras'
correspondence with Mazzini (_q.v._) had been tampered with, and that
information as to the proposed expedition had been forwarded to the
Austrian and Neapolitan governments by the British foreign office; recent
publications, however, especially the biography of Sir James Graham, tend
to exculpate the British government.

See G. Ricciardi, _Storia dei Fratelli Bandiera_ (Florence, 1863); F.
Venosta, _I Fratelli Bandiera_ (Milan, 1863); and Carlo Tivaroni's
_L'Italia durante il dominio austriaco_, vol. iii. p. 149 (Turin, 1894).

(L. V.*)