BANÉR (BANNER, BANIER), JOHAN (1596-1641), Swedish soldier in the Thirty
Years' War, was born at Djursholm Castle on the 23rd of June 1596. Entering
the Swedish army, he served with distinction in the wars with Russia and
Poland, and had reached high rank when, in 1630, Gustavus Adolphus landed
in Germany. As one of the king's chief subordinates, Banér served in the
campaign of north Germany, and at the first battle of Breitenfeld he led
the right wing of Swedish horse. He was present at the taking of Augsburg
and of Munich, and rendered conspicuous service at the Lech and at
Donauwörth. At the unsuccessful assault on Wallenstein's camp at the Alte
Veste Banér received a wound, and, soon afterwards, when Gustavus marched
towards Lützen, his general was left in command in the west, where he was
opposed to the imperial general Aldringer. Two years later, as Swedish
field-marshal, Banér, with 16,000 men, entered Bohemia, and, combined with
the Saxon army, marched on Prague. But the complete defeat of Bernhard of
Saxe-Weimar in the first battle of Nördlingen stopped his victorious
advance. After this event the peace of Prague placed the Swedish army in a
very precarious position, but the victories won by the united forces of
Banér, Wrangel and Torstensson, at Kyritz and Wittstock (4th Oct. 1636),
restored the paramount influence of Sweden in central Germany. Even the
three combined armies, however, were decidedly inferior in force to those
they defeated, and in 1637 Banér was completely unable to make headway
against the enemy. Rescuing with great difficulty the beleaguered garrison
of Torgau, he retreated beyond the Oder into Pomerania. In 1639, however,
he again overran northern Germany, defeated the Saxons at Chemnitz and
invaded Bohemia itself. The winter of 1640-1641 Banér spent in the west.
His last achievement was an audacious _coup-de-main_ on the Danube.
Breaking camp in mid-winter (a very rare event in the 17th century) he
united with the French under the comte de Guébriant and surprised
Regensburg, where the diet was sitting. Only the break-up of the ice
prevented the capture of the place. Banér thereupon had to retreat to
Halberstadt. Here, on the 10th of May 1641, he died, after designating
Torstensson as his successor. He was much beloved by his men, who bore his
body with them on the field of Wölfenbuttel. Banér was regarded as the best
of Gustavus's generals, and tempting offers (which he refused) were made
him by the emperor to induce him to enter his service. His son received the
dignity of count.

See _Banérs Bref till Axel Oxenstjerna_ (Stockholm, 1893); B. P. von
Chemnitz, _Königlichen Schwedscher in Deutschland geführten Kriegs_; Martin
Veibull, _Sveriges Storhedsted_ (Stockholm, 1881); Lundblad, _Johan Banér_
(Stockholm, 1823); Ardwisson, _Trittioariga Krigets maerkvaerdigaste
personer_ (Stockholm, 1861).