BANFFSHIRE, a north-eastern county of Scotland, bounded N. by the Moray
Firth, E. and S. by Aberdeenshire, and W. by Elgin and Inverness. It has an
area of 403,364 acres, or 633½ sq. m. The surface is diversified. The
northern half is mostly a fine, open, undulating country of rich,
highly-cultivated soil. The southern is mountainous, but extensive farms
are found in its fertile glens. Some of the mountains are thick with
forests, some present a beautiful intermixture of rock and copse, while
others are covered with brown heath. The principal mountains are all in the
south; among them are Cairngorm, on the confines [v.03 p.0313] of the
shires of Banff and Inverness (4084 ft.), famous for its amber-coloured
quartz crystals, the "cairngorms" of Scots jewelry; Ben Rinnes (2775 ft.);
Corryhabbie (2563); Cook's Cairn (2478); Carn an t-Saidhe (2401); and the
Buck of Cabrach (2368). No great rivers belong wholly to Banffshire. For a
considerable part of their courses the Spey forms the western and the
Deveron the eastern boundary of the county. But Banffshire streams are
comparatively short, the chief being the Avon, Fiddich, Isla, Buckie,
Deskford--with a series of cascades--and Livet. Most of them are stocked
with trout and the Spey and Deveron are famous for their salmon. The great
glens are distinguished for their romantic scenery, the chief being Glen
Avon, Glen Barry, Glen Fiddich, Glen Isla, Glen Livet, and Glen Rinnes. The
largest lochs are in the extreme south: Loch Avon (2300 ft. above the sea),
Loch Builg (1586) and Loch Etchachan (3100).

_Geology_.--The geology of Banffshire is closely connected with that of the
neighbouring counties of Aberdeen and Elgin, from which it is divided by no
natural boundaries. The greater portion is occupied by crystalline schists
of sedimentary origin belonging to the Eastern Highland sequence. The
groups which are typically developed comprise (1) slates, black schists and
phyllites with thin black limestone, sometimes containing tremolite, (2)
the main limestone, (3) the quartzite (Schiehallion). These form
subparallel belts trending north-east and south-west from the seacoast
between Cullen and Portsoy southwards by Keith and Dufftown to the head
waters of the Avon beyond Tomintoul. Some excellent sections of the
phyllites are to be seen on the shore between Sandend, near Portsoy, and
Findlater Castle, near Cullen, and in the railway cutting near Mulben, west
of Keith. The main limestone has been worked at Fordyce, near Grange east
of Keith, and at Keith and Dufftown. The quartzite, which is regarded as
probably the highest member of the series, forms prominent ridges due to
the more rapid erosion of the phyllites, mica-schists and limestones
occupying the intervening hollows. It appears on the coast between Cullen
and Buckie, it forms the Durn Hill near Portsoy, the Binn of Cullen, the
Knock Hill, Ben Aigan and various ridges trending southwards from Grange by
Glen Fiddich towards Tomintoul. In the north-east part of the county there
is a large development of slate with interbedded greywackes and pebbly
grits, which occupies the coast section between Macduff and Troup Head
except a small part at Gamrie. The slate has been quarried for roofing
purposes. No fossils have been found in these strata and their age is
uncertain. The metamorphic sediments have been pierced by acid and basic
igneous intrusions, partly before and partly after the folding and
metamorphism of the strata. The older acid and basic materials appear as
sheets injected along the lines of bedding of the sediments and are
traceable for considerable distances. They are foliated in places, the
planes of schistosity being more or less parallel with the planes of
bedding in the schists. The older acid rocks are represented by the sills
of granite and augen-gneiss occurring west of Portsoy, south of Fordyce and
near Keith, while the older basic rocks are illustrated by the belt of
gabbro, epidiorite and hornblende-schist which stretches southwards from
the coast at Portsoy, by Rothiemay to Huntly in Aberdeenshire. Veins and
bosses of serpentine are associated with these basic intrusions at Portsoy
and near Grange, one of the veins being traceable at intervals from the
shore southwards in the direction of Knock Hill. The later intrusions are
represented by the Ben Rinnes mass of granite and its basic modification,
the Netherly diorite, east of Rothes. Various mineral localities occur
throughout the county, of which some of the most important occur on the
shore at Portsoy, as for example the gabbro masses in Portsoy Bay with
enstatite, hypersthene and labradorite, the graphic granite with
microcline, muscovite and tourmaline at East Head, the chiastolite-schist
west of the marble quarry, the mottled serpentine with strings of
chrysotile. Resting unconformably on these metamorphic rocks, Old Red
sandstone strata are met with in a few places. Thus, they cross the Spey
and appear in the Tynet Burn east of Fochabers, and extend eastwards to
Buckie. Outliers of these beds appear on the shore near Cullen and south of
Fordyce, while the largest area extends from Gamrie east by Pennan on the
north coast of Aberdeenshire to Aberdeen. The strata consist mainly of
conglomerates and red sandstones, which, at Gamrie and at Tynet, are
associated with a band of limestone nodules embedded in a clayey matrix,
containing fish remains. The more abundant species occurring at Gamrie, as
determined by Dr R. H. Traquair, are _Diplacanthus striatus_,
_Rhadinacanthus_, _Cheiracanthus Murchisoni_, _Pterichthys Milleri_,
_Coccosteus decipiens_. In view of the fossil evidence these beds have been
referred to the middle or Orcadian division of this formation. In the
interior near Tomintoul, another large deposit, composed of conglomerate
and sandstone, occurs, which may be of the same age, though no fossils have
as yet been obtained from these beds. There is a widespread covering of
boulder clay especially in the northern part bordering the shore, where it
contains fragments of shells and includes numerous boulders which have been
carried eastwards from the high grounds west of the Moray Firth. In the
brickclays at Blackpots to the north-west of Banff, fragments of shells
also occur together with Jurassic fossils. Shelly sands have been recorded
near the Ord south of Tillynaught near Portsoy, and shells have been found
in stratified deposits on the shore near Gamrie.

_Agriculture_.--The soil is in general rich and productive, yielding fair
crops of wheat, and excellent crops of barley, oats, &c.; and the grass and
green crops are equally abundant. Oats is the predominant crop, but the
demands of distillers keep up the acreage of barley. The cattle and stock
hold a high character and form the staple agricultural industry. There is
also a considerable amount of dairy farming. Among landlords who did much
to encourage agricultural enterprise and to plant and reclaim lands, were
the earls of Fife and the earls of Findlater, afterwards earls of Seafield.
It was a Seafield who, in 1846, received the honorary gold medal of the
Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland, for his immense and thriving
plantations of useful timber-trees, in the counties of Banff, Moray and
Nairn. From the year 1811 to 1845, he had planted 18,938,224 Scots firs,
11,904,798 larches, 843,450 hardwoods; making the enormous aggregate of
31,686,472 forest trees, planted in 8223 acres of enclosed ground. The
Banffshire Agricultural Association holds shows periodically for all sorts
of stock and produce and agricultural implements.

_Manufactures and Trade_.--Woollen factories are found in Dufftown,
Rothiemay and Gollachy, and engineering works in Banff, Portsoy and Keith.
Distilleries are numerous and their product has a high repute. A fishing
and miscellaneous trade is done at the harbours of Banff, Macduff, Buckie,
Gardenstown, Portsoy, Cullen and Port Gordon; but fishing is also carried
on at numerous creeks or harbours along the coast. The herring season lasts
from June to September, white fishing all the year round. The fishery
districts centre in Banff and Buckie. Banffshire contains large limestone
deposits, and granite is also quarried.

The systems of the Great North of Scotland and the Highland railways serve
the chief towns of the county and provide communication in one direction
with Aberdeen, and in another with Elgin, Nairn and Inverness.

The population of Banffshire in 1891 was 61,684, and in 1901 61,488, or 97
to the square mile. In 1901 there were 499 persons speaking Gaelic and
English. The chief towns are Banff (pop. in 1901, 7161), Buckie (6549), and
Keith (4753), with Cullen (1936), Portsoy (1878) and Dufftown (1823). The
county returns one member to parliament; the royal burghs, Banff and
Cullen, belonging to the Elgin group of parliamentary burghs. Banffshire,
with Aberdeen and Kincardine shires, forms a sheriffdom, and there is a
resident sheriff-substitute at Banff, who sits also at Keith, Buckie and
Dufftown. Most of the schools are under school-board jurisdiction. Several
of them earn grants for higher education, and the county council, out of
the "residue grant," subsidizes classes in agriculture, navigation,
veterinary science and cookery and laundry work. The teachers of the
county, with those of the shires of Aberdeen and Elgin, benefit by the
bequest of James Dick (1743-1828), a West India merchant, who left over
£110,000 to promote the higher learning of the schoolmasters of these
shires. The annual income of £4000 is distributed among the dominies who
have qualified by examination to become beneficiaries.

_History_.--Of the northern Picts who originally possessed the land few
remains now exist beyond the cairns that are found in the districts of
Rothiemay, Ballindalloch, Boharm, Glen Livet and elsewhere. "Cairn" also
occurs in many place names. The advance of the Romans was practically
prevented by the mountains in the south, but what is believed to have been
a Roman camp may still be made out in Glen Barry. Danish invaders were more
persevering and more successful. Many bloody conflicts took place between
them and the Scots. Near Cullen a fierce encounter occurred in 960, and a
sculptured stone at Mortlach is said to commemorate a signal victory gained
by Malcolm II. over the Norsemen in 1010. The shire was the scene of much
strife after the Reformation. In Glen Livet the Roman Catholics, under the
marquess of Huntly, worsted the Protestants under the earl of Argyll. From
1624 to 1645 was a period of almost incessant struggle, and the Covenanting
troubles, combined with the frequent conflicts of the clans, were
productive of serious evils. But the Jacobite risings of 1715 and 1745 left
the county comparatively untouched, and thereafter it became settled.

See W. Cramond, _Annals of Banff_ (New Spalding Club) (Aberdeen, 1891); Dr
Gordon, _Chronicles of Keith, Grange, &c._ (Glasgow, 1880); _Banffshire
Year-Book_ (Banff); Professor Dickie, _Botanist's Guide to Aberdeen, Banff,
&c._ (Aberdeen, 1860); _Inventory of Charters of Cullen_ (Banff, 1887); and
_Inventory of Charters of Banff_ (Banff); Robertson's _Collections for a
History of the Shires of Aberdeen and Banff_ (Spalding Club); W. Watt,
_Aberdeenshire and Banff_ (Edinburgh, 1900).

[v.03 p.0314] BÁNFFY, DEZSÖ [DESIDERIUS], BARON (1843- ), Hungarian
statesman, the son of Baron Daniel Bánffy and Anna Gyárfás, was born at
Klausenburg on the 28th of October 1843, and educated at the Berlin and
Leipzig universities. As lord lieutenant of the county of Belsö-Szolnok,
chief captain of Kövár and curator of the Calvinistic church of
Transylvania, Bánffy exercised considerable political influence outside
parliament from 1875 onwards, but his public career may be said to have
begun in 1892, when he became speaker of the house of deputies. As speaker
he continued, however, to be a party-man (he had always been a member of
the left-centre or government party) and materially assisted the government
by his rulings. He was a stringent adversary of the radicals, and caused
some sensation by absenting himself from the capital on the occasion of
Kossuth's funeral on the 1st of April 1894. On the 14th of January 1895,
the king, after the fall of the Széll ministry, entrusted him with the
formation of a cabinet. His programme, in brief, was the carrying through
of the church reform laws with all due regard to clerical susceptibilities,
and the maintenance of the Composition of 1867, whilst fully guaranteeing
the predominance of Hungary. He succeeded in carrying the remaining
ecclesiastical bills through the Upper House, despite the vehement
opposition of the papal nuncio Agliardi, a triumph which brought about the
fall of Kalnóky, the minister for foreign affairs, but greatly strengthened
the ministry in Hungary. In the ensuing elections of 1896 the government
won a gigantic majority. The drastic electoral methods of Bánffy had,
however, contributed somewhat to this result, and the corrupt practices
were the pretext for the fierce opposition in the House which he henceforth
had to encounter, though the measures which he now introduced (the Honved
Officers' Schools Bill) would, in normal circumstances, have been received
with general enthusiasm. Bánffy's resoluteness enabled him to weather all
these storms, and his subsequent negotiations with Austria as to the quota
and commercial treaties, to the considerable political advantage of
Hungary, even enabled him for a time to live at peace with the opposition.
But in 1898 the opposition, now animated by personal hatred, took advantage
of the ever-increasing difficulties of the government in the negotiations
with Austria, and refused to pass the budget till a definite understanding
had been arrived at. They refused to be satisfied with anything short of
the dismissal of Bánffy, and passion ran so high that on the 3rd of January
1899 Bánffy fought a duel with his most bitter opponent, Horánszky. On the
26th of February Bánffy resigned, to save the country from its "ex-lex," or
unconstitutional situation; he was decorated by the king and received the
freedom of the city of Buda. Subsequently he contributed to overthrow the
Stephen Tisza administration, and in May 1905 joined the Kossuth ministry.

See article "Bánffy," by Marczall, in _Pallas Nagy Lexikona,_ Köt 17.

(R. N. B.)