BANFF, a royal, municipal and police burgh, seaport and capital of
Banffshire, Scotland. Pop. (1901) 7161. It is beautifully situated on high
ground, on the left bank of the mouth of the Deveron, 50 m. N.W. of
Aberdeen by the Great North of Scotland railway. It is a place of great
antiquity, its first charter having been granted by Malcolm IV. in 1163,
and further privileges were conferred by Robert Bruce in 1324 and Robert
II. in 1372. Of the old castle on the hill by the sea, in which Archbishop
Sharp was born, scarcely a trace remains; but upon its site was erected the
modern Banff Castle, belonging to the earl of Seafield. The chief public
edifices include the county buildings; town hall, surmounted by a spire 100
ft. high; Chalmers hospital (founded by Alexander Chalmers of Clunie, a
merchant and shipowner of the town); a masonic hall of tasteful design; and
the academy, a modern structure in the Grecian style, to which there is
attached an extensive museum, containing examples of the early mechanical
genius of James Ferguson, the astronomer. Of the museum, which originally
belonged to the defunct Banff Institution and was afterwards taken over by
the town council, Thomas Edward--the "working naturalist," whose life was
so sympathetically written by Samuel Smiles--was curator for a few years.
The principal manufactures comprise woollens, leather, rope and sails, and
there are also breweries, distilleries, iron foundries, brick-yards and
timber-yards, besides some ship-building. The fishing trade is also
important. The exports mainly consist of grain, cattle, fish, dairy produce
and potatoes; the imports of coal and timber. There is a railway station at
Bridge of Banff communicating, via Inveramsay, with Aberdeen, and another
at the harbour, communicating with Portsoy and Keith. The burgh is under
the jurisdiction of a provost and council, and unites with Macduff, Elgin,
Cullen, Inverurie, Kintore and Peterhead in returning one member to
parliament. The Cassie Gift arose out of a bequest by Alexander Cassie of
London, a native of Banff, who left £20,000 to the poor of the town--the
interest being divided twice a year. Duff House, immediately adjoining the
town, is a seat of the duke of Fife. It was built in 1740-1745, after
designs by Robert Adam, at a cost of £70,000. The duke of Cumberland rested
here on the way to Culloden. The house contains a fine collection of
pictures and an interesting armoury. The park is nearly ten miles in
circumference. The house, together with that portion of the park
immediately surrounding it (about 140 acres), was presented to the towns of
Banff and Macduff by the duke of Fife in November 1906.