BANGKOK, the capital of Siam, on the river Me Nam, about 20 m. from its
mouth, in 100° 30' E., 13° 45' N. Until modern times the city was built
largely on floating pontoons or on piles at the edges of the innumerable
canals and water-courses which formed the thoroughfares, but to meet the
requirements of modern life, well-planned roads and streets have been
constructed in all directions, crossing the old canals at many points and
lined with well-built houses, for the most part of brick, in which the
greater part of the erstwhile riparian population now resides. The centre
of the city is the royal palace (see SIAM), situated in a bend of the river
and enclosed by walls. At a radius of nearly a mile is another wall within
which lies the closely-packed city proper, and beyond which the town
stretches away to the royal parks on the north and to the business quarter,
the warehouses, rice-mills, harbour and docks on the south. The whole town
covers an area of over 10 sq. m. Two companies provide Bangkok with a
complete system of electric tramways, and the streets are lined with
shade-trees and lit by electricity. All over the town are scattered
beautiful Buddhist temples, which with their coloured tile roofs and gilded
spires give it a peculiar and notable appearance. Many fine buildings are
to be seen--the various public offices, the arsenal, the mint, the palaces
of various princes and, in addition to these, schools, hospitals, markets
and Christian churches of many denominations, chiefly Roman Catholic. There
are four railway stations in Bangkok, the termini of the lines which
connect the provinces with the capital.

The climate of Bangkok has without doubt recently changed. It has become
hotter and less humid. Though a minimum temperature below 60° F. is still
recorded in January and December, a maximum of over 100° is reached during
the hot weather months and at the beginning of the rains, whereas up to the
year 1900 a maximum of 93° was considered unusually high. The cause of this
change is not known, but it is attributed to extensive drainage and removal
of vegetation in the immediate neighbourhood of the town. The annual
rainfall amounts to rather over 50 in.

A four-mile reach of the Me Nam, immediately below the city proper, forms
the port of Bangkok. From 250 to 400 yds. broad and of good depth right up
to the banks, the river offers every convenience for the berthing and
loading of ships, though a bar at its mouth, which prevents the passage of
vessels drawing more than 12 ft., necessitates in the case of large ships a
partial loading and unloading from lighters outside. The banks of the port
are closely lined with the offices, warehouses and wharves of commercial
houses, with timber yards and innumerable rice-mills, while the custom
house, the harbour master's office and many of the foreign legations and
consulates are also situated here. Of the 750 steamships which cleared the
port in 1904, three out of every seven were German, two were Norwegian and
one was British, but in 1905 two new companies, one British and the other
Japanese, arranged for regular services to Bangkok, thereby altering these
proportions. It is notable that the heavy trade with Singapore shows a
tendency to decrease in favour of direct trade with Europe. A fleet of
small steamers, schooners and junks, carries on trade with the towns and
districts on the east and west coasts of the Gulf of Siam. The trade of
Bangkok is almost entirely in the hands of Europeans and Chinese. The
principal exports are rice and teak, and the principal imports, cotton and
silk goods and gold-leaf. The value of trade, which more than doubled
between the years 1900 and 1907, amounted in the latter year to £5,600,000
imports and £7,100,000 exports. Of the total trade, 75% is with the British
empire. Many of the best known mercantile firms and banks of the Far East
have branches in Bangkok. The unit of currency is the _tical_ (see SIAM).

The government of Bangkok is entrusted to the minister of the capital, a
member of the cabinet. Under this minister are the police, sanitary,
harbour master's and revenue offices. The police force is an efficient and
well-organized body of 3000 men headed by a European commissioner of
police. The sanitary department consists of a board of health, a
bacteriological laboratory and an engineer's office, all managed with
expert European assistance. Under the act of 1905, the want of which was
long felt, the port and the city water-ways are controlled by the harbour
master. Local revenues are collected by the revenue office. The ordinary
law courts are under the control of the ministry of justice, but in
accordance with the extra-territorial rights enjoyed by foreign powers in
Siam, each consulate has attached to it a court, having jurisdiction in all
cases in which a subject of the power represented by such consulate is
defendant.

The population, which is estimated at 450,000, is mixed. Mingling with
Siamese and Chinese, who form the major part, may be seen persons of almost
every race to be found between Bombay and Japan, while Europeans of
different nationalities number over 1000. The death-rate is high,
especially among children, owing to the prevalence of cholera, smallpox and
fevers during the dry weather. Sanitation, however, is improving and much
good has resulted from the boring of numerous artesian wells which yield
good water.

Before 1769 Bangkok was nothing but an agricultural village with a fort on
the river bank. In that year, however, it was seized by the warrior, Paya
Tak, as a convenient point from which to attack the Burmese army then in
occupation of Siam, and upon his becoming king it was chosen as the capital
of the country. (See SIAM.)

(W. A. G.)