BANKER-MARKS, or Masons' Marks. The "banker" is the stone bed or bench upon
which a mason works, hence the term (so well known to the trade) of
banker-marks, which, as Mr Whitley has pointed out, is more appropriate
than that of masons' marks, since the setters, who are usually selected
from amongst the best workmen, make no marks upon the stone (_Leamington
Spa Courier_, 11th of August 1888). These must not be confused with other
marks sometimes cut on stones as directions to the setters, and so used and
employed to the present time. Banker-marks are met with throughout the
civilized world, and in fact are to be found on all old buildings of
consequence, ecclesiastical or otherwise. Professor T. Hayter Lewis well
observed, "Go where you will, in England, France, Sicily, Palestine, you
will find all through the buildings of the 12th century the same carefully
worked masonry, the same masons' tool-marks, the same way of making them."
Such masons' marks are to be traced graved on all the chief stones of what
is known as Norman work. Norman tooling, so far as Hayter Lewis could
discover, came from the north and west of Europe. Since then we get marks
made with a "toothed chisel," but however or wherever chiselled the
intention was the same. The system followed provided an infallible means of
connecting the individual craftsman with his work, an evidence of identity
that could not be gainsaid.

Naturally, because of their simplicity, certain designs were followed much
more frequently than others, while occasionally some of a very elaborate
character are to be detected. Undoubtedly not a few were suggestive of the
initials of the names of the masons, and others were reminiscent of certain
animals, objects, &c., but no proof has yet been offered of their being
alphabetical in design, or arranged so as to distinguish the members of
different lodges or companies; the journeymen selected any design they
cared to adopt.

Singular to state, marks were chosen by gentlemen and others [v.03 p.0319]
who joined the operative masonic lodges of the 16th and later centuries,
and they were as carefully registered in the mark-books as those selected
by operatives for trade purposes. The same marks are to be seen in the
registers used by fathers and sons, and not always with a slight
difference, as some have stated, to secure identification. What should be
noted also is that other trades used precisely similar marks and for a like
object, so that the idea of their having a mystical meaning, or being
utilized for any other object but the one named, seems groundless.

The late George Godwin, F.R.S., F.S.A., &c., drew attention to the subject
of "masons' marks in various countries" in a communication to the Society
of Antiquaries in 1841, and also at a little later period (vide
_Archaeologia_, vol. xxx. p. 113). To him is the credit due of first
drawing attention to "these signs" in England. It is noteworthy how little
such marks are noticed, even in buildings which are visited by
archaeologists quite frequently, until a few are pointed out, and then they
meet the eye to an astonishing number. In the _Sessional Papers_,
1868-1869, of the Royal Institute of British Architects, No. 9, may be
found numerous samples of the marks from various parts of Europe in
illustration of the paper by Godwin.

No better plan has been followed in modern times to connect the work done
with the worker in stone, and it is probable that a second mark, observable
on some blocks, may serve to indicate the overseer. There are even three or
more sometimes.

The same system was adopted at the building of Truro cathedral, only the
marks were inserted on the bed of each stone instead of at the side as
usual, the result being that they ceased to be seen after being placed _in
situ_. Mr Hughan obtained copies of these marks from Mr James Bubb, the
first clerk of the works, and from his successor, Mr Robert Swain, and had
them published in the _Freemason_, 13th of November 1886. He remarked at
the same time that "many of these designs will be familiar to students of
ancient ecclesiastical and other buildings at home and abroad." Some are
interesting specimens.

_A Historical Treatise on Early Builders' Marks_ (Philadelphia, U.S.A.,
1885) by Mr G. F. Fort, and _Masons' Marks from Buildings in the Counties
of Lancaster and Chester, with Notes on the General History of Masons'
Marks_ (Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire, vol. vii. N.S.), by W.
Harry Rylands, F.S.A., may be consulted with advantage. The latter declares
that "the Runic theory is as unlikely and as untenable as that which places
the origin of these marks in the absurd alphabets given by Cornelius
Agrippa, who died early in the 16th century." Victor Didron copied some
4000 during a tour in France in 1836 and pointed out their value (_Ann.
Arch_., 1845).

(W. J. H.*)