BANK-NOTES. For our present purpose we include in this description all
paper substitutes for metallic currency whether issued by banks,
governments or other financial institutes.

Early bank-notes were simply printed forms in which the amounts were
written by hand. They were usually for large amounts (£40 and upwards) and
were printed upon water-marked paper; and, although no precautions were
taken in the engraving to prevent fraudulent imitation, forgeries were
comparatively rare. But, when at the end of the 18th century small notes
for £1 and £2 were put in circulation, forgery became rife, as many as 352
persons being convicted of this crime in England in a single year; and from
that time to the present a constant trial of skill has been going on
between the makers of bank-notes and the counterfeiters. Engine-turned
ornaments and emblematical figures or views introduced in the engraving, in
conjunction with special water-marks in the paper, held the forgers
somewhat in check until the discovery of photography put into the hands of
the counterfeiter a most dangerous weapon, by the aid of which complicated
patterns and vignettes could be perfectly reproduced. To prevent such
reproduction Henry Bradbury in 1856 introduced anti-photographic bank-note
printing, in which the essential portions of the note were printed in one
colour and over this another protective colour was placed. A photograph of
a note printed in this way presented a confused mingling of the two
colours; but with the advance of photographic knowledge means were found of
obtaining a photograph of either colour separate from the other, and it
consequently became necessary to introduce a third colour and to secure a
special photographic relation between the three colours to prevent their
separation.

Photography, however, although the most dangerous weapon of the
counterfeiter, is not the only means of imitation available, a fact which
is sometimes overlooked. A note may be perfectly secure against
photographic reproduction, but from the absence of other necessary features
may be easily copied by an engraver of ordinary skill. There are two
systems of engraving employed in bank-notes:--(1) line-engraving in which
the lines are cut into the steel or copper plates; and (2) relief-engraving
in which the lines stand up above the plate as in wood-engraving. In the
former, adapted to the process called plate-printing, the ink is delivered
from the lines in the plate to the paper pressed upon it; in the latter,
adapted to surface-printing, the ink is spread upon the face of the lines
and printed as in typography. Plate-printing gives by far the finer and
sharper impression, but as there is a perceptible body of ink transferred
to the paper from the cut lines, it has been supposed that an impression
from plate would [v.03 p.0320] be more easily photographed than one from
surface where only a film of ink is spread upon the top of the raised
lines. But surface-printing being much less sharp and distinct than
plate-printing, imperfect copies of notes for which that process is used
are the more likely to escape detection. The plates upon which the early
notes were engraved being of copper quickly wore out and had to be
constantly replaced. The result was great difference in the appearance of
the notes, those printed from new plates being sharp and clear, while
others, printed from old plates, were pale and blurred. These differences
were a great assistance to the forger, as the public, being accustomed to
variations of appearance between different genuine notes, were less apt to
remark the difference between these and counterfeits.

In the early part of the 19th century, Jacob Perkins (1766-1849) introduced
into England from America what is known as the transfer-process, in which
the original engraving on steel is hardened and an impression taken from it
on a soft steel cylinder, which in its turn is hardened and pressed into a
soft printing-plate. By this means as many absolutely identical plates can
be produced as may be required, and being hardened they will yield a very
large number of prints without any appreciable deterioration. Another
method of securing uniformity is the multiplication of plates by
electro-deposition, the surface of the copper-electrotype plates being
protected by the deposit of a film of steel which effectually prevents the
wearing of the copper and can be renewed at will.

The water-mark of the paper, on which formerly reliance was placed almost
exclusively, puts a difficulty in the way of the counterfeiter, but
experience has shown that in ordinary circumstances it does not in itself
afford adequate protection. The means by which it can be imitated are well
known, and, since a distinct water-mark is incompatible with strong paper,
the life of a water-marked note is much shorter than that of one printed
upon plain paper. The best bank-note paper is made from pure linen rags and
was formerly made by hand. Machine-made paper is however now largely used,
as it possesses all the strength of hand-made and is much more uniform in
thickness and texture.

In documents which pass current as money it is obviously the duty of the
bank or government issuing them to take all reasonable means to prevent the
public from being defrauded by the substitution of counterfeits; and a bank
whose circulation depends upon the confidence of the public must do so in
its own interests to insure the acceptance of its notes. This principle is
now recognized by all issuing institutions, but in practice there is room
for improvement in the issues of many important establishments, partly
because of the disinclination of the directors of a bank to change the form
of an issue to which the public is accustomed, partly because of the
difficulty of deciding what is really a secure note, and in certain cases
because, owing to exceptional circumstances, an issue may be practically
immune from forgery although the notes themselves present little or no
difficulty in imitation. The features essential to the security of an issue
are (1) absolute identity in appearance of all notes of the issue; (2)
adequate protection by properly-selected colours against photographic
reproduction; and (3) high-class engraving comprising geometric lathe work
and well-executed vignettes. In addition it is important that the design of
the note should be striking and pleasing to the eye, and the inscription
legible.

The notes of the Bank of England are printed in the bank from
surface-plates in black without colour or special protection except the
water-mark in the paper. They are never reissued after being once returned
to the bank, and their average life is very short, about six weeks, so that
a dirty or worn Bank of England note is practically never seen. This
arrangement, coupled with the difficulty of negotiating forged notes in
England, the lowest denomination being £5, accounts for the comparative
immunity from forgery of the bank's issues.