BANKRUPTCY (from Lat. _bancus_ or Fr. _banque_, table or counter, and Lat.
_ruptus_, broken), the status of a debtor who has been declared by judicial
process to be unable to pay his debts. Although the terms "bankruptcy" and
"insolvency" are sometimes used indiscriminately, they have in legal and
commercial usage distinct significations. When a person's financial
liabilities are greater than his means of meeting them, he is said to be
"insolvent"; but he may nevertheless be able to carry on his business
affairs by means of credit, paying old debts by incurring new ones, and he
may even, if fortunate, regain a position of solvency without his creditors
ever being aware of his true condition. And even when his insolvency
becomes public and default occurs, a debtor may still avert bankruptcy if
he is able to effect a voluntary arrangement with his creditors. A debtor
may thus be insolvent without becoming bankrupt, but he cannot be a
bankrupt without being insolvent, for bankruptcy is a legal declaration of
his insolvency and operates as a statutory system for the administration of
his property, which is thereby taken out of his personal control.

[Sidenote: Early methods.]

In primitive communities bankruptcy systems were unknown. Individual
creditors were left to pursue their remedies by such means as the law or
practice of the community might sanction, and these were generally of a
very drastic character. Under the Roman law of the Twelve Tables, the
creditors might, as a last resort, cut the debtor's body into pieces, each
of them taking his proportionate share; and although Blackstone in quoting
this law appears to cast some doubt upon its too literal interpretation,
there can be no doubt that the power of selling the debtor and his family
into slavery was one which was habitually exercised in Greece, Rome, and
generally among the nations of antiquity. Even among the Jews, whose
legislation was of a comparatively humane character, this practice is
illustrated by the Old Testament story of the woman who sought the help of
Elisha, saying, "Thy servant my husband is dead ... and the creditor is
come to take unto him my two children to be bondmen." The savage severity
of these earlier laws was, however, found to be inconsistent with the
development of more humane ideas and the growth of popular rights; and
tended, as in the case of Greece and Rome, to create serious disturbance in
political relations between the patricians, who generally composed the
wealthier or creditor class, and the plebeians, in whose ranks the majority
of debtors were to be found. Later legislation consequently substituted
imprisonment in a public prison for the right of selling the person of the
debtor. Under the feudal systems of Europe the state generally insisted on
its subjects being left free for military service, and debts could not
therefore be enforced against the person of the debtor; but as trade began
to develop it was found necessary to provide some means of bringing
personal pressure to bear upon debtors for the purpose of compelling them
to meet their obligations, and under the practice of the English courts of
law the right of a creditor to enforce his claims by the imprisonment of
his debtor was gradually evolved (although no express legal enactment to
that effect appears at any time to have existed), and this practice
continued until comparatively recent times.

[Sidenote: Commercial objects.]

Without some system of enforcing payment of debts it would have been
impossible for the commerce of the world to have attained its present
proportions; for modern commerce is necessarily founded largely on credit,
and credit could not have existed without the power of enforcing the
fulfilment of financial contracts. On the other hand remedies against a
debtor's person, and still more against the persons of his family, are not
only inconsistent with the growth of opinion among civilized communities,
but are in themselves worse than futile, inasmuch as they strike at the
root of all personal effort on the part of a debtor to retrieve his
position and render a return to solvency impossible. Hence the necessity of
devising some system which is just to creditors while not unduly harsh upon
debtors, which discriminates between involuntary inability to meet
obligations and wilful [v.03 p.0321] refusal or neglect, and which secures
to creditors as between themselves an equitable share of such of the
debtor's assets as may be available for the payment of his liabilites.
These are the objects which the bankruptcy laws have primarily in view.
Another object, which has not always been so fully recognized as it might
appear to deserve, has marked the most recent legislation, namely, the
fostering of a higher tone of commercial morality and the protection of the
trading community at large from the evils arising through the reckless
abuse of credit and the unnatural trade competition thereby engendered. It
must be admitted that these objects are of a somewhat conflicting
character, and wherever the state has interfered with the view of securing
an efficient system of bankruptcy legislation the task has been found to be
extremely difficult. Not only have the conflicting interests of the debtor
and his creditors to be taken into account, but the method to be adopted in
dealing with his property has also given rise to much conflict of opinion,
and to a lack of uniformity and consistency in the legislation which dealt
with it. The debtor's property was naturally regarded as belonging to the
creditors, but it could not be distributed among them until it was
realized, and until their respective right and interests were determined by
competent authority. In some cases claims to rank as creditors are of
doubtful validity. In others the creditor holds securities, the value of
which requires investigation, or he claims a preference to which he may or
may not be legally entitled. Creditors have thus conflicting interests as
between themselves, and are therefore incapable of acting together as a
homogeneous body. Hence the necessity for calling in the aid of
professional assignees or trustees, solicitors and other agents, who made
it their special business to deal with such matters, exercising both
administrative and quasi-judicial functions, in return for the remuneration
which they receive out of the property for their services. Professional
interests, which are not always identical with the interests of the debtor
or the creditors, are thus called into existence, and these interests have
from time to time exercised a powerful influence in shaping the course of
legislation.

While the law of bankruptcy has therefore been largely the product of
commercial development, it has necessarily been of slow and gradual growth,
tentative in its character, and subject to oscillation between the extremes
of conflicting interests according to the temporary and varying
predominance of each of these interests from time to time. No intelligible
grasp of the principles which underlie the history of bankruptcy
legislation in England, and no satisfactory explanation of the fluctuating
tendencies which have marked its progress, are possible without bearing
these considerations in view.

_Bankruptcy in England._

[Sidenote: History.]

The subject was originally dealt with in the sole interest of creditors; it
was considered fraudulent for a debtor to procure his own bankruptcy. Thus
the earliest English statute on the subject, 34 & 35 Henry VIII. c. 4 (A.D.
1542), was directed against fraudulent debtors, and gave power to the lord
chancellor and other high officers to seize their estates and divide them
among the creditors, but afforded no relief to the debtor from his
liabilities. Subsequent legislation modified this attitude and introduced
the principle of granting relief to the bankrupt with or without the
consent of the creditors, where he conformed to the provisions of the
bankruptcy law, and under the act of 1825 the debtor was allowed himself to
initiate proceedings. Since 1542 about forty acts of parliament have been
passed, dealing with the many aspects of the subject, and slowly expanding,
modifying and building up the highly complex system of administration which
now exists.

[Sidenote: Court of 1831.]

The courts exercising jurisdiction originally, consisted of commissioners
appointed by the lord chancellor. But in 1831 a special court of bankruptcy
was established, consisting of six commissioners with four judges as a
court of review, and official assignees attached to the court for the
purpose of getting in the distributing the bankrupt's assets. Non-traders
were originally excluded from the bankruptcy court, and a special court
called the "court for relief of insolvent debtors" was instituted for their
benefit, in which relief from the liability to imprisonment could be
obtained on surrender of their property, but they were not discharged from
their debts, subsequently-acquired property remaining liable. Both of these
courts were subsequently abolished, non-traders were permitted to obtain
the benefit of the bankruptcy laws, including a discharge, and in 1869 the
system of official assignees was swept away, and a new court of bankruptcy
created with one of the vice-chancellors at its head as chief judge, and a
number of subordinate registrars or inferior judges under him. This court
has also now been abolished, and the business is administered by a judge of
the high court specially appointed for the purpose by the lord chancellor,
with registrars of the high court, who deal with the ordinary judicial
routine of bankruptcy procedure in the London district, while similar
duties are performed by the county-court judges throughout the country.

[Sidenote: Rights of creditors.]

But the questions which have proved the most difficult to deal with, and
which more than any others have been the cause of fluctuating and
inconsistent legislation, have undoubtedly been those relating to the share
which the creditors ought to have in the administration of the proceedings,
and to special arrangements effected between a debtor and his creditors
under conditions more or less beyond the control of the court. These two
questions are largely intermixed, and the history of English legislation on
these points and its results throw much light on the causes of the failure
of the many attempts which have been made by the most eminent legal
authorities to bring the law into a satisfactory condition. The right of
creditors to exercise some control in bankruptcy over the realization of
the debtor's property through an assignee chosen by themselves was
recognized at an early date, but this right was exercised subject to the
supervision of the court which investigated the claims of creditors and
determined who were entitled to take part in the proceedings. Provision was
also made for the interim protection of the debtor's property by official
assignees attached to the court, who took possession until the creditors
could be consulted, and under the supervision of the court audited the
accounts of the creditor's assignee. So long as this system continued
substantial justice was generally secured; the claims of creditors were
strictly investigated and only those who clearly proved their right before
a competent court were entitled to take part in the proceedings. The
bankrupt was released from his obligations, but only after strict inquiries
into his conduct and under the exercise of judicial discretion. The
accounts of assignees were also strictly investigated, and the costs of
solicitors and other agents were taxed by officers of the court. But the
system was found to be cumbrous, to lead to delay and too often to the
absorption of a large part of the estate in costs, over the incurring of
which there was a very ineffective control. Hence arose a demand for larger
powers on the part of creditors, and the introduction into the bankruptcy
procedure of the system of "arrangements" between the debtor and his
creditors, either for the payment of a composition, or for the liquidation
of the estate _free from the control of the court_. [Sidenote: Acts of
1825, 1831, 1842, 1849.] At first these arrangements were carefully
guarded. Under the act of 1825 a proposal for payment of a composition
might be adopted only after the debtor had passed his examination in court,
and with the consent of nine-tenths in number and value of his creditors
assembled at a meeting. Upon such adoption the bankruptcy proceedings were
superseded. Dissenting creditors, however, were not bound by the
resolution, but could still take action against the debtor's
subsequently-acquired property. These powers were not found to be
sufficiently elastic and the act failed to give public satisfaction.
Attempts were made by the acts of 1831 and 1842 to remedy the defects
complained of by a reconstitution of the bankruptcy court and its official
system. But these measures also failed because they were based on the
assumption that judicial bodies could exercise effective control over
administrative [v.03 p.0322] action, a control for which they are naturally
unsuited, and which they could only carry out by cumbrous and expensive
methods of procedure. Under the act of 1849 a totally new principle was
introduced by the provision that a deed of arrangement executed by
six-sevenths in number and value of the creditors for £10 and upwards
should be binding upon _all_ the creditors without any proceedings in or
supervision by the court. But the determination of the question who were or
were not creditors was practically left to the debtor himself, without any
opportunity for testing by independent investigation the claims of those
who signed the deed to control the administration of the estate. It is not
difficult to see, in the light of subsequent experience, how likely this
provision was to encourage fraudulent arrangements, and to introduce laxity
in the administration of debtors' estates. A modification of the too
stringent conditions of the act of 1825, which would have enabled a
bankrupt to pay a composition on his debts, with the consent of a large
proportion of his bona-fide creditors, and subject to the approval of the
court, after hearing the objections of dissenting creditors, would
doubtless have proved a beneficial reform, but the act of 1849 proceeded on
a very different principle. Instead of reforming, it practically abolished
judicial control. By avoiding Scylla it fell into Charybdis. To give _any_
majority of creditors the power to release a debtor from his obligations to
non-assenting creditors without full disclosure of his affairs, and without
any exercise of judicial discretion or any investigation into the causes of
the failure, or the conduct of the debtor, would in any circumstances have
been to introduce a new and mischievous principle into legislation, for it
would necessarily destroy the essential feature of such arrangements, that
they are _voluntary_ contracts, the responsibility for which lies solely
with the parties entering into them. But to give such a power to creditors
whose claims were subject to no independent investigation was to invite
inevitable confusion and failure.

[Sidenote: 1861.]

Yet this was the dominating principle of English bankruptcy legislation for
nearly thirty-five years. Its effect under the act of 1849 was, however, to
some extent modified by subsequent decisions of the courts that to make a
composition arrangement binding it must be accompanied by a complete
_cessio bonorum_; but this qualification was removed by the act of 1861
which made such arrangements binding without a _cessio_ and reduced the
majority required to make a deed of arrangement binding on all the
creditors, to a majority in number and three-fourths in value of those
whose claims amounted to £10 and upwards. The result was an enormous
increase in fraudulent arrangements. The then attorney-general, Sir Robert
Collier, in introducing an amending act in 1869, described the abuses which
had grown up under the 1849 and 1861 acts, as having the effect of enabling
a bankrupt to "defraud those to whom he was indebted and to set them at
defiance"; while Lord Cairns, the lord chancellor, in the House of Lords
expressed the opinion that the large increase which had taken place in the
annual insolvency of the country during the preceding years could not "be
attributed to depression of trade but must be traced to the enormous
facilities which are given to debtors who wish to be released from their
debts on easy terms." And yet in the legislation which ensued these facts
were entirely ignored or lost sight of.

[Sidenote: 1869.]

It is indeed a curious illustration of the difficulties which have attended
bankruptcy legislation in England that the very measure (the act of 1869)
which was introduced to remedy this deplorable condition of affairs, was
twelve years afterwards denounced in parliament by the president of the
Board of Trade (Mr Joseph Chamberlain) as "the most unsatisfactory and most
unfortunate of the many attempts which had been made to deal with the
subject" and as "the object of the almost unanimous condemnation of all
classes." How was this? Under the act of 1869, the procedure under a
bankruptcy petition was certainly rendered effective. Meetings of creditors
were presided over and creditors' claims were, for voting purposes,
adjudicated upon by the registrar of the court; the bankrupt had to pass a
public examination in court, which although chiefly left to the trustee
appointed by the creditors, afforded some opportunity for investigation;
and the bankrupt could not obtain his discharge without the approval of the
court and in certain circumstances the consent of the creditors. An
independent official, the comptroller in bankruptcy, was appointed, whose
duty it was to examine the accounts of trustees, call them to account for
any misfeasance, neglect or omission, and refer the matter to the court for
the exercise of disciplinary powers where necessary. These provisions were
well calculated to promote sound administration, but they were,
unfortunately, rendered nugatory by provisions relating to what were
practically private arrangements on similar lines to those which had
rendered previous legislation ineffective. In some respects the evil was
aggravated. Deeds of arrangements were nominally abolished, but under
sections 125 and 126 of the act a debtor was empowered to present a
petition to the court for liquidation of his affairs by "arrangement," or
for payment of a composition, whereupon a meeting of creditors was summoned
from a list furnished by the debtor, and without any judicial investigation
of claims, a majority in number and three-fourths in value of those who
lodged proofs of debt, and who were present in person or by proxy at the
meeting, might by resolution agree to liquidation by arrangement or to the
acceptance of the composition. Such resolution thereupon became binding
upon all the creditors, without any act of approval by the court, any
judicial examination of the debtor, or any official supervision over the
trustee's accounts. The debtor was not permitted to present a bankruptcy
petition against himself, and consequently his only method of procedure was
that which thus removed the matter from the supervision and control of the
court, and as about nine-tenths of all the proceedings under the act of
1869 were initiated by debtors, it followed that only about one-tenth was
submitted to proper investigation. It is true that the creditors might
refuse to assent to the debtor's proposal, and that any creditor for £50 or
upwards could present a petition in bankruptcy, but even where this course
was adopted, the proceedings under the petition were, as a rule, stayed by
the court if the debtor subsequently presented a proposal for liquidation
or composition, and the creditor was left to pay the expenses of his
petition if the requisite majority voted for the debtor's proposal. So far,
therefore, as the act was concerned, every inducement was held out to the
adoption of a course which took the examination of the debtor, the
conditions of his discharge and the audit of the trustee's accounts, out of
the control of the court.

[Sidenote: Causes of failures of Acts.]

The establishment of a bankruptcy court, with its searching powers of
investigation and its power of enforcing penalties on misconduct, can only
be defended on the ground that the administration of justice is a matter
affecting the interests of the community at large. But apart from the
injury done to these interests by reducing the administration of justice to
a question of barter and arrangement between the individuals immediately
concerned, one of the chief reasons why the acts of 1849, 1861 and 1869
proved failures, lies in the obvious fact that the creditors of a
particular estate are not, as appears to have been assumed, a homogeneous
or organized body capable of acting together in the administration of a
bankrupt estate. In the case of a few special and highly organized trades
it may be otherwise, but in the great majority of cases the creditors have
but little knowledge of each other or means of organized action, while they
have neither the time nor the inclination to investigate the complicated
questions which frequently arise, and which are therefore left in the hands
of professional trustees or legal agents. But the appointment of trustees
under these acts, instead of being the spontaneous act of the creditors,
was frequently due to touting on the part of such agents themselves, or to
individual creditors whose interests were not always identical with those
of the general body. According to G. Y. Robson, the author of a standard
work on the subject, the arbitrary powers conferred by the act of 1861 "led
to great abuses, and in many cases creditors were forced to accept a
composition, the approval of which had been obtained by a secret
understanding between the debtor and favoured creditors, and not
unfrequently by the creation of fictitious debts." These evils [v.03
p.0323] were greatly aggravated by the decisions of the court relating to
proofs on bills of exchange, under which it was held that the holder of a
current bill could prove on the bankrupt estate of an indorser, although
the bill was not yet due, and the acceptor was perfectly solvent and able
to meet it at maturity. Thus in large mercantile failures, bankers and
other holders of first-class bills could prove and vote on the estates of
their customers, for whom the bills had been discounted, and thus control
the entire proceedings, although they had no ultimate interest in the
estate. But probably the greatest source of the abuses which arose under
the act of 1869 was the proxy system established by the act and by the
rules which were subsequently made to carry it out. The introduction of
proxies was no doubt intended to give absent creditors an opportunity of
expressing their opinions upon any question which might arise. But the
system was too often used for the purpose of stifling the views of those
who took an independent part in the proceedings. The form of proxy
prescribed by the rules contained no limitation of the powers of the
proxy-holder and no impression of the opinion of the creditor. It simply
appointed the person named in it as "my proxy," and these magic words gave
the holder power to act in the creditor's name on all questions that might
be raised at any time during the bankruptcy. Hence arose a practice of
canvassing for proxies, which were readily given under the influence of
plausible representations, such as the holding out of the prospect of a
large composition, but which, when once obtained, could be used for any
purpose whatsoever except the receipt of a dividend. Thus it frequently
happened that the entire proceedings were controlled by professional
proxy-holders, in whose hands these documents acquired a marketable value.
They were not only used to vote for liquidation by arrangement instead of
bankruptcy proceedings, but not infrequently the matter took the form of a
bargain between an accountant and a solicitor, under which the former
became trustee and the latter the solicitor in the liquidation, without any
provision for control over expenditure or for any audit of the accounts.
Even where a committee of inspection was appointed to exercise functions of
control and audit, they too were often appointed by the proxy-holders, and
not infrequently shared in the benefits. On the other hand, where the
amount of debts represented by the proxy-holder was insufficient to carry
the appointment of a trustee and committee, the votes could be sold to
swell the chances of some other candidate. Hence ensued a system of
trafficking in these instruments, the cost of which had in the long run to
come out of the estate. The result was that undesirable persons were too
frequently appointed, whose main object was to extract from the estate as
much as possible in the shape of costs of administration. The debtor was
practically powerless to prevent this result. If he attempted to do so he
sometimes became a target for the exercise of revenge. His discharge, which
under liquidation by arrangement was entirely a matter for the creditors,
might be refused indefinitely; and so largely and harshly was this power
exercised under the proxy system, especially where it was supposed that the
debtor had friends who could be induced to come to his aid, that a special
act of parliament was passed in 1887, authorizing the court to deal with
cases where, under the act of 1869, a debtor had not been able to obtain a
release from his creditors. On the other hand, the complaisant debtor,
although he had incurred large obligations in the most reckless manner,
often succeeded in stifling investigation and obtaining his release without
difficulty as a return for his aid in carrying out the arrangement.

The result of such a system could not be other than a failure. After the
act of 1869 had been in operation for ten years, the comptroller in
bankruptcy reported that out of 13,000 annual failures in England and
Wales, there were only 1000 cases (or about 8%) "to which the more
important provisions of the act for preventing abuses by insolvent debtors
and professional agents applied; the other 12,000 cases (or 92%) escaping
the provisions which refer to the examination and discharge of bankrupts,
and to the accounts, charges and conduct of the agents employed." It is not
to be supposed that all the cases in the latter class were marked by the
abuses which have been here described. In a large number the proceedings
were conducted by agents of high character and standing, and with a due
regard to the interests of the creditors. But the facilities for fraudulent
and collusive arrangements afforded by the act, and the want of effective
control over administration, inevitably tended to lower the morale of the
latter, and to throw it into the hands of the less scrupulous members of
the profession. The demand for reform, therefore, came from all classes of
the business community. No fewer than thirteen bills dealing with the
subject were introduced into the House of Commons during the ten years
succeeding 1869. At length in 1879 a memorial, which was authoritatively
described as "one of the most influential memorials ever presented to any
government," was forwarded to the prime minister by a large body of bankers
and merchants in the city of London. The matter was then referred to the
president of the Board of Trade (Mr Chamberlain), who made exhaustive
inquiries, and in 1881 introduced a measure which, with some amendments,
finally became law under the title of the Bankruptcy Act 1883.

[Sidenote: Act of 1883.]

Hitherto the question had been dealt with as one of legal procedure; it was
now treated as an act of commercial legislation, the main object of which,
while providing by carefully framed regulations for the equitable
distribution of a debtor's assets, was to promote and enforce the
principles of commercial morality in the general interests of the trading
community. One of the chief features of the act of 1883 is the separation
which it has effected between the judicial and the administrative functions
which had previously been exercised by the court, and the transfer of the
latter to the Board of Trade as a public department of the state directly
responsible to parliament. Under the powers conferred by the act a new
department was subsequently created under the title of the bankruptcy
department of the Board of Trade, with an officer at its head called the
inspector-general in bankruptcy. This department exercises, under the
direction of the Board of Trade, a general supervision over all the
administrative work arising under the act. It has extensive powers of
control over the appointment of trustees, and conducts an audit of their
accounts; and it may, subject to appeal to the court, remove them from
office for misconduct, neglect or unfitness. A report upon the proceedings
under the act is annually presented to parliament by the Board of Trade,
and although the department is practically self-supporting, a nominal vote
is each year placed upon the public estimates, thus bringing the
administration under direct parliamentary criticism and control. The act
also provides for the appointment and removal by the Board of Trade of a
body of officers entitled official receivers, with certain prescribed
duties having relation both to the conduct of bankrupts and to
administration of their estates, including the interim management of the
latter until the creditors can be consulted. These officers act in their
respective districts under the general authority and directions of the
Board of Trade, being also clothed with the status of officers of the
courts to which they are attached. While effecting this supervision and
control by a public department directly responsible to parliament, the main
objects of the measure were to secure--(1) An independent and public
investigation of the debtor's conduct; (2) The punishment of commercial
misconduct and fraud in the interests of public morality; (3) The summary
and inexpensive administration of small estates where the assets do not
exceed £300 by the official receiver, unless a majority in number and
three-fourths in value of the creditors voting resolve to appoint a
trustee; (4) Full control in other cases by a majority in value, over the
appointment of a trustee and a committee of inspection; (5) Strict
investigation of proofs of debt, with regulations as to proxies and votes
of creditors; (6) An independent audit and general supervision of the
proceedings and control of the funds in all cases. Besides amending and
consolidating previous bankruptcy legislation, the measure also contains
special provisions for the administration under bankruptcy law of the
estates of persons dying insolvent (§ 125); and for enabling county courts
to make administration orders for payment by instalments in lieu of
immediate committal to prison, in the case of judgment debtors whose total
indebtedness does [v.03 p.0324] not exceed £50 (§ 122). It also provides
for the getting in and administration by the Board of Trade of unclaimed
dividends and undistributed balances on estates wound up under previous
bankruptcy acts (§ 162). Lastly, it amends the procedure under the Debtors
Act of 1869, dealing with criminal offences committed by bankrupts (which,
prior to 1869, had been treated as part of the bankruptcy law), by enacting
that when the court orders a prosecution of any person for an offence under
that act, it shall be the duty of the director of public prosecutions to
institute and carry on the prosecution.

[Sidenote: Act of 1890.]

An amending act, under the title of the Bankruptcy Act 1890 was passed in
that year, mainly with the view of supplementing and strengthening some of
the provisions of the act of 1883, more particularly with regard to the
conditions under which a bankrupt should be discharged or schemes of
arrangement or composition be approved by the court. It also dealt with a
variety of matters of detail which experience had shown to require
amendment, with the view of more fully carrying out the intentions of the
legislature as embodied in the principal act. These two acts are to be
construed as one and may be cited collectively as the Bankruptcy Acts 1883
and 1890. They are further supplemented by a large body of general rules
made by the lord chancellor with the concurrence of the president of the
Board of Trade, which may be added to, revoked or altered from time to time
by the same authority. These rules are laid before parliament and have the
force of law.

[Sidenote: Special Acts.]

Besides these general acts, various measures dealing with special interests
connected with bankruptcy procedure have from time to time been passed
since 1883, the chief of which are as follows, _viz_., the Bankruptcy
Appeals (County Courts) Act 1884; the Preferential Payments in Bankruptcy
Act 1888, regulating the priority of the claims of workmen and clerks, &c.
for wages and salaries; and the Bankruptcy (Discharge and Closure) Act
1887, dealing with unclosed bankruptcies under previous acts.

[Sidenote: Inquiry of 1906.]

It would be out of place in this article to attempt to answer the question
how far later legislation has solved the difficult problems which prior to
1883 were found so intractable, but it may be mentioned that in 1906 the
Board of Trade appointed a committee to inquire into and report upon the
effect of the provisions of the laws in force at the time in the United
Kingdom in relation to bankruptcy, deeds of arrangement and composition by
insolvent debtors with their creditors, and the prevention and punishment
of frauds by debtors on their creditors, and any points and matters upon
which the existing laws seemed to require amendment. The committee received
a vast amount of evidence as well as documents and memoranda from chambers
of commerce, trade protection societies and influential public bodies. The
scope of the inquiry was not limited to English law and procedure, but also
embraced that of Germany, France, Australia, Scotland and Ireland. The
report of the committee was issued in 1908 (Cd. 4068), and reference may be
made to it for much valuable information. The committee reported that the
result of their inquiry did not disclose any dissatisfaction on the part of
the commercial community with the main features of the existing law and
procedure. But there were certain special incidents of the law and branches
of its administration upon which the committee made recommendations. One
was the prosecution and punishment of debtors who had committed fraud on
their creditors or caused loss to them by improper and reckless trading.
The existing procedure was complained of as being dilatory, cumbersome and
expensive, and the committee were of an opinion that where a debtor had
committed an offence for which he could and ought to be prosecuted,
prosecution and conviction, with adequate punishment, ought to follow
speedily and decisively, and the chief recommendation of the committee was
that, while the existing procedure should be left untouched, offences ought
also to be punishable on summary conviction before magistrates and
justices, and the provisions of the Summary Jurisdiction Acts applied to
them, and that where an order for a prosecution is made on an application
by the official receiver of a bankruptcy court and based on his report,
that court should have power to order the official receiver to conduct the
prosecution before the court of summary jurisdiction. The committee also
reported that numerous delinquencies by insolvent debtors in the conduct of
their affairs, or which had contributed to the losses sustained by their
creditors, were not punishable or even cognizable by courts having
bankruptcy jurisdiction unless or until a debtor who had a receiving order
against him, or became a bankrupt, applied for an order sanctioning a
composition or scheme of arrangement with his creditors, or for an order
discharging him from his debts. The most prominent of these delinquencies
which were brought to the notice of the committee were--failure by a debtor
to keep any books or any proper or adequate books of account in his
business; trading with knowledge of insolvency; gambling and speculation
leading to, or contributing to, the debtor's insolvency or bankruptcy;
failure properly to account for any substantial deficiency of assets. The
committee received a large body of evidence in favour of making
delinquencies such as have been described punishable by imprisonment.
Evidence was also given as to the laws in force in Germany, France and
Scotland, from which it appeared that such delinquencies, especially that
of keeping no books of account, can be severely dealt with as criminal
offences.

After carefully weighing the evidence on both sides the committee
recommended that the failure or omission by a debtor who becomes bankrupt
to have kept any books of account, or proper books of account, within two
years next preceding his bankruptcy, in a trade or business carried on by
him, if without excuse, should be made by law an offence punishable on
summary conviction by imprisonment, subject to four important limitations,
namely, that the law should define what books of account a person carrying
on a trade or business must keep, following in this respect the law in
force in France and Germany; that failure or omission by a debtor to have
kept the required books should only be punishable in the event of a debtor
becoming bankrupt and of the liquidated debts proved in the bankruptcy
exceeding £200 in amount; that no prosecution of a debtor for failure or
omission to keep books of account should take place before the lapse of two
years from the passing of the law; that a debtor should not be punished if
he could show that his failure or omission to keep proper books was honest
and excusable and did not contribute to his insolvency, and that no
prosecution should be instituted for the offence except by order of the
bankruptcy court. The committee made recommendations of much the same
character with regard to punishing some of the other delinquencies
mentioned above. There were also recommendations by the committee as to
trading by undischarged bankrupts, as to the realization of estate on
bankruptcy, as to the operation of the law of relation back of a bankruptcy
trustee's title, as to the law relating to the after-acquired property of
an undischarged bankrupt, and dealings with such property, and with respect
to married women and their liabilities under bankruptcy law. The committee
also reported on the law and practice relating to voluntary deeds of
arrangement between a debtor and his creditors and on the compulsory
regulation of assignments of book debts, and of agreements for the hire and
purchase of chattels.

[Sidenote: Results of legislation.]

In addition to this report the annual reports of the Board of Trade, which
are accompanied by elaborate tables of statistics, and by copious
illustrations both of the working of the system and of the characteristic
features and causes of current insolvency, are published as parliamentary
papers, and may be usefully consulted by those interested in the subject.
It appears from these reports that the total number of insolvencies dealt
with under the bankruptcy acts during the ten years ending 31st December
1905, was 43,141, involving estimated liabilities amounting to £61,685,678,
and estimated assets amounting to £26,001,417. It may also be pointed out
that according to the official figures, the cost of bankruptcy
administration under the present system has very considerably decreased as
compared with that under the act of 1869. Estates are also closed at much
shorter intervals, and, what is more important from a public point of view,
it appears [v.03 p.0325] that while the estimated liabilities of bankrupt
estates during the ten years ending 1883 amounted on an average to
£22,380,000 per annum, the estimated liabilities during the ten years
ending 1905 only averaged £6,168,567 per annum. But during the latter
period there was an annual average of 3426 private arrangements involving a
further estimated annual liability of £4,166,354 entered into outside of
the Bankruptcy Acts by insolvent debtors. There are no means of
ascertaining the corresponding amount of liabilities on private
arrangements outside of the Bankruptcy Acts prior to 1883, and therefore a
complete comparison is impossible; but it is evident that on any method of
computation there has been a very great diminution in the trading
insolvency of England and Wales, while it is also clear as a matter of
general knowledge in commercial circles, that a great decrease in the
proportion of fraudulent trade and reckless speculation has been a marked
feature of private trading during the period in question.

The cost of bankruptcy administration is provided for: (1) by fees charged
to bankrupt estates, (2) by interest on balances at the credit of such
estates with the bankruptcy estates account, and (3) by interest on
unclaimed funds at the credit of estates under former Bankruptcy Acts.

Out of this are paid the salaries of all the officers of the department,
including the official receivers; the remuneration due in respect of
bankruptcy services to the county court registrars; pensions, &c., payable
to retired officers under the present and previous Bankruptcy Acts; cost of
bankruptcy prosecutions; and rents, stationery, travelling and other
incidental expenses. The system is self-supporting and involves no charge
upon the tax-payers of the country. It has been objected that inasmuch as
the act professes to be based on the principle of enforcing commercial
morality in the interests of the general community, the cost of
administering it should not be charged entirely to the bankruptcy estates
concerned. But when it is considered that a large part of the revenue of
the department is derived from funds to which estates administered under
the present act have contributed nothing, this objection does not appear to
be well founded.

[Sidenote: Summary of procedure.]

For the convenience of readers who may require more detailed information,
the accompanying summary of some of the more important provisions of the
law relating to bankruptcy procedure is submitted. It must be borne in
mind, however, that the subject is in some of its branches extremely
intricate, and that both the law and the procedure are being constantly
affected by a considerable body of judicial interpretation, while the acts
also contain detailed provisions with regard to many questions incident to
the administration of bankruptcy. A reference to the latest textbooks or
competent professional advice will always be advisable for those who have
the misfortune to be practically interested either as debtors or as
creditors in bankruptcy proceedings.

[Sidenote: Deeds of arrangement.]

The Deeds of Arrangement Act 1887, although not falling strictly within the
scope of the bankruptcy law, may also, in consequence of its important
bearing upon the question of insolvency in England and Wales, be here
noticed. It has been pointed out that, under the Bankruptcy Acts of 1849
and 1861, non-official arrangements by deed between a debtor and the
general body of his creditors were not only officially recognized, but were
in certain circumstances made binding on all the creditors, including those
who refused to assent to them. Under the act of 1869, although such deeds
were no longer recognized or made binding on non-assenting creditors, the
proceedings under the "liquidation by arrangement" and "composition"
clauses were practically private arrangements by resolution instead of
deed, and were proved by experience to be open to the same abuses. It has
also been shown that under the act of 1883 no arrangements either by deed
or by resolution have any force against dissenting creditors, unless
confirmed after full investigation and approval of the bankruptcy courts.
Private arrangements, therefore, cease to form any part of the bankruptcy
system. But they are, nevertheless, binding as voluntary contracts between
the debtor and such creditors as assent to them. Being, however, in the
nature of assignments of the debtor's property, they are either deemed
fraudulent if the benefit of the assignment is limited to a portion of the
creditors, or, if it is extended to all they become acts of bankruptcy,
and, like any other voluntary assignment, are liable to be invalidated if
made within three months prior to the petition on which a receiving order
is made against the debtor. Treated as voluntary assignments, which are not
binding on those who do not assent to them, such arrangements, where
honestly entered into and carried out by capable administration, in many
cases form a useful and expeditious method of liquidating a debtor's
affairs, and where the debtor's insolvency has been brought about without
any gross misconduct they will probably always be largely resorted to. The
danger attending them is that even in cases where the debtor has been
guilty of misconduct, a private arrangement may be used to screen his
conduct from investigation, while in many cases it may be made the medium
for the concealment of fraudulent preferences. The absence of any
independent audit of the trustees' accounts may also encourage or conceal
irregularities in administration. Previous to 1887, however, much
inconvenience arose from the fact that the execution of these private
arrangements was frequently kept secret, and fresh credit was obtained by
the debtor without any opportunity being afforded for the new creditors
becoming acquainted with the fact that they were dealing with an insolvent
person, and that in many cases they were simply supplying the means for
meeting past obligations in respect of which the debtor had already
committed default. The Deeds of Arrangement Act 1887 was therefore passed
to compel the disclosure of such arrangements, by declaring them void
unless registered within seven days after the first execution by the debtor
or by any creditor. Registration is effected by lodging with the registrar
of bills of sale at the central office of the Supreme Court a true copy of
the deed and of every inventory and schedule attached thereto, together
with an affidavit by the debtor, stating the total estimated amount of
property and liabilities, the total amount of composition, if any, and the
names and addresses of the creditors. Where the debtor's residence or place
of business is outside the London bankruptcy district, the registrar is
required to forward a copy of the deed to the registrar of the county court
of the district where the debtor's residence or place of business is
situated. Both the central and the local registers are open to public
inspection on payment of a small fee and general publicity is secured by
the action of various trade agencies, which make a practice of extracting
and publishing the information for the benefit of those interested. By
section 25 of the Bankruptcy Act 1890, every trustee under a deed of
arrangement is required to transmit to the Board of Trade within thirty
days of the 1st of January in each year an account of his receipts and
payments and such accounts are open to the inspection of any creditor on
payment of a small fee. They are not, however, subject to any kind of audit
or control by the department. The registrar is also required to make
periodical returns of the deeds thus registered to the Board of Trade, in
order that a report of proceedings under the Deeds of Arrangement Act may
be included in the annual report which the department is required to make
on proceedings under the Bankruptcy Acts. Full statistics of such
proceedings are accordingly included in these reports, from which it
appears that during the ten years ended 31st December 1905 the total number
of registered deeds of arrangement was 34,273, with estimated liabilities
amounting to £41,663,541, and estimated assets to £23,020,483.

_Summary of Bankruptcy Procedure._--Subject to certain special provisions
in the case of what are termed "small bankruptcies" (see below), the
following summary sets forth some of the more important provisions of the
various acts and rules relating to bankruptcy administration grouped under
convenient heads to facilitate reference. In some cases the effect of legal
decisions has been embodied in the summary.

_Preliminary Proceedings._

_Petition and Receiving Order._--Any court exercising bankruptcy
jurisdiction in the district in which he resides or carries on business
[v.03 p.0326] in England or Wales may make a receiving order against a
debtor, whether a trader or not, either on his own petition or on that of a
creditor or creditors whose claims aggregate not less than £50. In the case
of a creditor's petition proof must be given of the debt, and of the
commission of an act of bankruptcy within three months preceding the date
of the petition. An act of bankruptcy is committed if the debtor fails to
satisfy the creditor's claim upon a bankruptcy notice; if he makes an
assignment for the benefit of his creditors generally; if he absconds or
keeps house; if he gives notice of suspension of payments; if his goods are
sold or seized under execution; if he files in court a declaration of
inability to pay his debts; or if he grants a fraudulent preference or
conveyance. These acts are here enumerated in the order in which they most
frequently occur in practice.

_Object and Effect of Receiving Order_.--The object of the order is to
protect the debtor's property until the first meeting of creditors, and to
bring the debtor and his affairs within the jurisdiction of the court. Its
effect is to stay all separate action against the debtor, and to constitute
the official receiver attached to the court receiver of the debtor's
property, although the legal title still remains in the debtor. Where there
is an estate or business to be managed the official receiver may appoint a
special manager, who receives such remuneration as the creditors, or
failing them the Board of Trade, may determine. As a consequence of the
order the following obligations are imposed upon the debtor:--He must make
out and submit to the official receiver within a prescribed period a
statement of his affairs, containing the names and addresses of his
creditors, the amount of their claims and the securities held by them, and
the nature and value of his assets; and accounting for his deficiency. Any
material omission or false statement of his losses or expenses is a
misdemeanour under the Debtors Act, unless he can prove that he had no
intention to defraud. The statement is open to the inspection of creditors.
He must also in every case submit to a public examination in court, in
which the official receiver, the trustee and any creditor who has proved
his debt may take part. His evidence may be used against him. He may
further be specially examined by the court at any time with reference to
his dealings or property. He must attend the first meeting of creditors,
wait upon the official receiver, trustee and special manager, and give all
necessary information, and generally do all acts which may reasonably be
required of him with the view of securing a full investigation of his
affairs. He may be arrested if there is reasonable ground for believing
that he is about to abscond, destroy papers or remove goods, or if he fails
without good cause to attend any examination ordered by the court. The
court may also for a period of three months order his letters to be
re-addressed by the post-office to the official receiver or trustee. With
regard to persons other than the debtor, any person capable of giving
information respecting the debtor, his dealings or property, may be
examined by the court, and a summary order may be made against such person
for delivery of any property belonging to the debtor.

_First Meeting of Creditors._

This meeting is summoned by the official receiver, notice being given in
the _London Gazette_ and in a local paper, and sent by post to each
creditor. A summary of the statement of affairs should accompany the
notice, with any observations by the official receiver which he may think
fit to make. The object of the meeting is to decide whether any proposal
for payment of a composition or for a scheme of arrangement submitted by
the debtor is to be entertained, or whether an application should be made
to the court to adjudicate the debtor bankrupt. In the latter case the
meeting may by an ordinary resolution appoint a trustee with or without a
committee of inspection. It may also give any directions as to the
administration of the estate. The meeting should be held at the place most
convenient for the majority of the creditors. It is presided over by the
official receiver or his deputy, who, subject to appeal to the court,
admits or rejects proofs for the purpose of voting. For the transaction of
business three creditors qualified to vote, or all the creditors if fewer
than three, must be present or represented. Only persons who have proved
their debts are entitled to vote, and detailed regulations respecting
proofs and the valuation of securities are laid down in the first and
second schedules to the act of 1883. One of the chief alterations in the
law on this point is the condition imposed on creditors on bills of
exchange to deduct from their claims the value of the liability of prior
obligants before voting, thus cancelling the power of controlling the
proceedings previously possessed by persons who had no real interest in the
estate. Votes may be given in person or by proxy, and stringent regulations
are laid down with the view of preventing the abuse of proxies. General
proxies entitling the holder to exercise all the powers which the creditor
could exercise if present may be given to the official receiver or to any
person in the regular employment of the creditor. Special proxies may be
given to any person to vote for specified resolutions, or for the
appointment of specified persons as trustee and committee. Only official
forms can be used, and the blanks must be filled up in the handwriting of
the creditor or some person in his regular employment, including the
authorized agent of a creditor resident abroad. A proxy must be lodged with
the official receiver not later than four o'clock on the day before the
meeting or adjourned meeting at which it is to be used. Resolutions are
ordinary, special or extraordinary. An ordinary resolution is carried by a
majority in value of the creditors voting; a special resolution by a
majority in number and three-fourths in value of such creditors. The only
instance of a resolution other than these is that required for the approval
of a composition or scheme which requires a majority in number and
three-fourths in value of all the creditors who have proved. The majority
of questions arising at a meeting are decided by an ordinary resolution.

_Adjudication._

If the creditors so resolve, or if a composition or scheme of arrangement
is not proposed by the debtor or entertained by the creditors, or if
entertained is not approved by the court, or if without reasonable excuse
the debtor fails to furnish a proper statement of his affairs, or if his
public examination is adjourned _sine die_, the court adjudicates the
debtor bankrupt and thereupon his property vests in a trustee, and, subject
to the payment of the costs and fees of administration, is divisible among
his creditors until all his debts are paid in full with interest at the
rate of 4% per annum.

_Effect on Bankrupt_.--The bankrupt is bound to aid the trustee in his
administration, and if he wilfully fails to deliver up any part of his
property he is guilty of contempt of court. He is also liable to criminal
prosecution under the Debtors Act if with intent to defraud he conceals or
removes property to the value of £10 or upwards; or if he fails to deliver
to the trustee all his property, books, documents, &c.; or if he knowingly
permits false debts to be proved on his estate without disclosure; or
mutilates, falsifies, destroys or parts with books or accounts; or attempts
to account for his property by fictitious losses; or if within four months
next before presentation of a bankruptcy petition, he obtains property on
credit by false representation; or pledges or disposes of, otherwise than
in the ordinary way of his trade, any property which has not been paid for;
or by misrepresentation obtains the assent of his creditors to any
agreement with reference to his affairs. He is also under the act of 1883,
guilty of misdemeanour if before his discharge he obtains credit for more
than £20 from any person without informing such person that he is an
undischarged bankrupt. It is the duty of the official receiver to report
any such facts to the court, and if the court is satisfied that there is a
reasonable probability of conviction, it is required to order a prosecution
which is then conducted by the director of public prosecutions.

_Disqualifications_.--A bankrupt cannot during his bankruptcy or until five
years after his discharge, unless the bankruptcy is annulled or he obtains
his discharge with a certificate by the court that the bankruptcy was
caused by misfortune without misconduct, act as a member of the
legislature, or as a justice of the peace, mayor, alderman, councillor,
guardian or overseer of the poor, member of a sanitary authority, school,
highway or burial board, or select vestry in any part of the United
Kingdom.

_Annulment_.--An order of adjudication may be annulled if the court is of
opinion that it should not have been made, or that the bankrupt's debts are
paid in full, or if a composition or scheme of arrangement is approved by
the court after adjudication.

_Discharge_.--The court may also at any time after the conclusion of the
bankrupt's public examination, and after hearing the official receiver, the
trustee and any creditor, to all of whom previous notice of the application
must be given, grant the bankrupt a discharge either absolutely or under
conditions, but subject to the following qualifications, viz.:--(1) If the
bankrupt has committed a criminal offence connected with the bankruptcy,
the application must be refused unless for special reasons the court
determines otherwise. (2) If the assets are not equal in value to ten
shillings in the pound of the unsecured liabilities (unless the bankrupt
can show that he is not responsible); or if proper books have not been
kept; or if the bankrupt has traded after knowledge of insolvency; or has
contracted debts without reasonable probability of payment; or failed to
account for his deficiency; or contributed to the bankruptcy by rash
speculation, gambling, culpable neglect or by unjustifiable expenses; or
has taken or defended legal proceedings on frivolous grounds; or has within
three months preceding the receiving order given an undue preference; or
has increased his liabilities with the view of making his assets equal to
ten shillings in the pound; or has previously been bankrupt or made an
arrangement with creditors; or has been guilty of any fraud or fraudulent
breach of trust; then the court shall, on proof of any of these facts,
either (a) refuse the discharge, or (b) suspend it for a period of not less
than two years, or until a dividend of not less than ten shillings in the
pound has been paid; or (c) qualify the order by the condition that
judgment is entered up against the bankrupt for payment of any unpaid
balance of his debts, or of part of such balance out of his future earnings
or property. The bankrupt may, however, after two years apply to the court
to modify the conditions if he is unable to comply with them. An order of
discharge releases the debtor from all his obligations except debts due to
the crown, and other obligations of a public character which can only be
discharged with the consent of the Treasury, debts incurred by fraud, and
judgment debts in an action for seduction or as a co-respondent in a
matrimonial suit or under an affiliation order, which are only released to
such extent and subject to such conditions as the court may expressly
order. The release of the bankrupt does not operate as a release [v.03
p.0327] of any partner or co-obligant with him. Neither does it release the
bankrupt from liability to criminal prosecution.

_Composition or Scheme of Arrangement._

After a receiving order has been made the debtor may submit a proposal for
the payment of a composition, or for the liquidation of his affairs, by a
trustee or otherwise, without adjudication. The proposal must be lodged
with the official receiver in sufficient time to allow notice, together
with a report by that officer, to be sent to the creditors before the
meeting is held at which it is to be considered. If the proposal is
entertained at the meeting by a majority in number and three-fourths in
value of all the creditors who have proved their debts, and if it is
thereafter approved by the court, it becomes binding upon all creditors who
would be bound by an order of discharge had the debtor been adjudicated
bankrupt. A similar proposal may be made after adjudication, and if
entertained by the creditors and approved by the court, the adjudication
may be annulled. The debtor's release will be subject to the terms of the
scheme, but his future acquired property will not pass to the creditors
unless there is an express stipulation to that effect. If default is made
in carrying out the scheme, or if it is found that it cannot proceed
without injustice or undue delay, the court may at any time adjudicate the
debtor bankrupt, in which case the scheme will fall to the ground, except
in respect of past transactions under it. The approval of a composition or
scheme does not release the debtor from his liabilities under the criminal
law, nor from the necessity of undergoing a public examination which must,
in fact, be held and concluded before the approval of the court is applied
for. Also before such approval is given a report must be filed by the
official receiver upon its terms and on the conduct of the debtor, and the
court must be satisfied after hearing that officer and any creditor, that
the proposal is reasonable and calculated to benefit the creditors, and
that no criminal offences connected with the bankruptcy have been committed
by the debtor. Further, if any fact is proved which would have prevented
the debtor from obtaining an absolute or unconditional order of discharge
had he been adjudged bankrupt, the composition or scheme cannot be approved
unless it provides reasonable security for the payment of not less than
seven shillings and sixpence in the pound on all the unsecured debts. Where
a trustee is appointed to carry out the composition or scheme, all the
provisions of the act with reference to the remuneration of the trustee,
the custody of funds, the audit of his accounts and the control exercised
by the Board of Trade apply in the same manner as they would under an
adjudication. Further, the provisions relating to the administration of
property, proof of debts, dividends, &c., will also apply, so far as the
nature of the case and the terms of the arrangement admit.

_Property divisible among the Creditors._

No part of the law of bankruptcy is more intricate, or has been the subject
of more litigation than this, and any detailed view of the effect of legal
decisions can only be gathered by a perusal of the cases; but the following
general principles may be stated:--The term "property" includes not only
property of which the bankrupt is the true owner, but property in his
possession, order or disposition in his trade or business with the consent
of the true owner, in such circumstances that he is the reputed owner
thereof. The application of the doctrine of reputed ownership has been
considerably restricted in recent years by the growth of alleged trade
customs, in accordance with which property is frequently lent under a
contract of "hire and purchase" or otherwise; and by the decisions of the
courts that where such custom is sufficiently proved the doctrine does not
apply. Further, the trustee's title not only includes property in the
actual possession of the bankrupt, but relates back to the date of the
first act of bankruptcy committed by him within the three months preceding
the presentation of the bankruptcy petition, and thus invalidates all
payments and assignments to creditors made during that period with
knowledge on the part of the creditor or assignee of the commission of the
act of bankruptcy. In such cases the trustee may, therefore, require the
money or property to be restored to the estate. And even where no prior act
of bankruptcy is proved, any payment made to a creditor with the view of
giving such creditor a preference over the other creditors, within the
three months preceding the presentation of the petition on which the payer
is made bankrupt, is rendered void as against his trustee. Settlements of
property within the two years preceding the bankruptcy, unless made before
and in consideration of marriage, or made in good faith for valuable
consideration, are also void, as are similar settlements within ten years,
unless it is proved that the settlor was (independently of the settled
property) solvent at the date of the settlement, and that the interest in
the property passed to the trustees on the execution of the deed. The same
rule applies to covenants to settle in consideration of marriage
future-acquired property in which the debtor had no interest at the date of
the marriage (other than property acquired by the bankrupt through his
wife), if such property is not actually transferred before the bankruptcy.
Executions by a creditor not completed at the date of the receiving order
are also void, and the proceeds of an execution in the hands of the sheriff
must, with certain exceptions and subject to deduction of costs, be handed
over to the trustee. But all property held by the bankrupt on trust, and
tools of trade, wearing apparel and bedding to a total value not exceeding
£20, are excluded from the property divisible among the creditors. With
respect to property acquired by the bankrupt, whether by gift or legacy, or
consisting of accumulations of business or other profits after the
commencement of the bankruptcy, and before he obtains his discharge, the
trustee's title also prevails; but bona-fide transactions by the debtor for
value, other than transactions relating to freehold property, appear to be
valid. Where the bankrupt is a beneficed clergyman the trustee may, subject
to certain provisions for the due discharge of the duties of the office,
apply for the sequestration of the profits of the benefice; and where he is
in receipt of a salary, income or pension, &c., the court may order any
part thereof to be paid to the trustee, but where he is an officer of the
army, navy or civil service, such order is only to be made with the consent
of the chief of the department concerned.

_Claims of Creditors and Dividends._

In the distribution of the debtor's property certain claims are entitled to
priority over others. Thus the landlord, although not entitled to a
preference out of the funds in the hands of the trustee, can distrain for
unpaid rent on the goods and effects of the debtor remaining on the
landlord's premises, but where the distraint is levied after the
commencement of the bankruptcy this right is limited by the act of 1890 to
six months' rent due before adjudication, the remainder of his claim
ranking for dividend with the claims of other creditors. Various gas and
water companies have also statutory powers of distraint under special acts,
but the policy of recent legislation has been to discourage any extension
of such privileges. Where the bankrupt holds an office of trust in any
savings bank or friendly society, any balance in his hands due to such bank
or society has been held under the acts relating to these bodies to be
payable in preference to any other claim against the estate. Other
preferential claims are regulated by the Bankruptcy Acts and by the
Preferential Payments in Bankruptcy Act of 1888, and include taxes,
parochial and other local rates for not more than one year, wages and
salaries for four months, but not exceeding £50 (limited in the case of
ordinary labourers and workmen to two months' wages not exceeding £25), and
agricultural labourers' claims not exceeding one year's wages, if hired by
special contract for payment of a lump sum at the end of a year. These
claims are entitled to preference not only over funds in the hands of the
trustee, but also over the proceeds of any distraint levied by the landlord
within the three months prior to the receiving order, the latter in that
case becoming a preferred creditor for the amount so paid. Articled clerks
and apprentices may also be allowed repayment of a proportion of the
premium on their unexpired agreements. On the other hand, usual trade
discounts (exceeding 5%) must be deducted from traders' proofs, and the
following claims are postponed until the general creditors are paid in
full, viz. claims by a married woman for loans to the husband for the
purposes of his business, claims for loans advanced to any person in
business at a rate of interest varying with the profits, and claims for
interest in excess of 5% per annum. Subject to these exceptions all debts
proved in the bankruptcy must be paid _pari passu_. Any surplus after
payment of 20s. in the pound and interest at the rate of 4% per annum, from
the date of the receiving order, is payable to the bankrupt.

_Proofs of Debt._--All claims and liabilities present or future, certain or
contingent, arising out of obligations incurred before the date of the
receiving order are provable in the bankruptcy, an estimate of the
liability in the case of contingent debts being made by the trustee subject
to appeal to the court. But demands in the nature of unliquidated damages
arising otherwise than by reason of a contract, promise or breach of trust
are not provable. A secured creditor if he proves must either surrender his
security, or value the security and prove for the balance; and the trustee
can thereupon, subject to the creditor's power in certain circumstances to
amend the valuation, take over the security by paying the amount of the
valuation, or may require it to be realized. He may be required by the
creditor to elect which of these courses he will adopt, failing which the
equity of redemption will vest in the creditor. For further regulations as
to proofs, the time within which they must be lodged for voting and for
dividend, and the manner of dealing with them, reference should be made to
the first and second schedules of the act of 1883 and the rules relating
thereto.

_Dividends._--After payment of costs of administration and preferential
debts, it is the duty of the trustee to distribute the estate with all
convenient speed,--the first dividend within four months after the first
meeting of creditors, and subsequent dividends at intervals of not more
than six months, but the declaration may be postponed for sufficient reason
by the committee of inspection. Notice of the intention to declare a
dividend is gazetted and sent to each creditor mentioned in the bankrupt's
statement of affairs who has not proved. The notice should state the last
day for proving in order to participate in the distribution, and should be
given not more than two months before the declaration. When the dividend is
declared, notice of the amount due, and of the place where the same is
payable, is sent to each creditor who has proved, with a statement showing
particulars of the estate. And provision must be made for creditors at a
distance, who have not had time to prove, for disputed claims, and for
debts the subject of claims not [v.03 p.0328] yet determined. Creditors who
fail to prove before the declaration of a dividend are entitled to receive
their dividends on proving before any subsequent dividend is declared, but
cannot disturb the distribution of any dividend already declared. Before
distributing a final dividend notice is sent to every creditor whose claim
has been notified to the trustee, but not finally established, with an
intimation that unless so established within a specified period he will be
excluded from participation in the estate. In the case of a bankrupt firm
the joint creditors are not entitled to receive a dividend out of the
separate property of the bankrupts until all the separate creditors are
paid in full.

_Trustee's Administration._

While the interim preservation and management of the estate is conducted by
or under the direct supervision of officers appointed by and responsible to
the Board of Trade, the ultimate realization and distribution of the assets
devolve upon the trustee appointed by the creditors. But besides acting as
receiver prior to the first meeting of creditors, the official receiver
also becomes trustee by operation of law on the making of an order of
adjudication. He vacates the office when a trustee is appointed by the
creditors, and certified by the Board of Trade, but again becomes trustee
on the creditors' trustee being released, dying, resigning or being removed
from office. As the bankrupt's property vests in the trustee for the time
being, and passes from trustee to trustee by operation of law, and without
any formal act of conveyance, the continuity of the office is thus secured.

_Appointment of Trustee._--A trustee may be appointed by a majority in
value of the creditors voting, at the first or any subsequent meeting, or
the appointment may be left to the committee of inspection. In either case
the appointment is subject to confirmation by the Board of Trade, who may
object on the ground that the creditors have not acted in good faith in the
interests of the general body, or that the person appointed is not fit to
act, or occupies such a position in relation to the debtor, to any
creditor, or to the estate, as makes it difficult for him to act with
impartiality, or that in any previous case he has been removed from office
for misconduct or for failure without good cause to render his accounts for
audit. An appeal from such objection to the High Court lies at the instance
of a majority in value of the creditors, but in the absence of an appeal it
is fatal to the appointment. Before being confirmed, the trustee-elect must
also furnish security to the satisfaction of the Board of Trade, and such
security must be kept up to the amount originally fixed, or to such lesser
amount as that department may require throughout the tenure of the
trusteeship, failing which the trustee is liable to be removed from office.
Where the creditors fail to appoint a trustee, the Board of Trade may do
so, but such appointment may at any time be superseded by the creditors.

_Removal._--The trustee may be removed by the creditors at a meeting
summoned for the purpose without reason assigned, or by the Board of Trade
for misconduct, or for incapacity or failure to perform his duties, or on
either of the other personal grounds of objection to which the appointment
is open. But the removal is in like manner subject to appeal at the
instance of creditors. If a receiving order is made against a trustee he
thereby vacates office. He may also, with the consent of a general meeting
of creditors, resign, but his resignation does not operate as a release
from his liability to account for his administration.

_Powers and Duties._--The trustee is required to take immediate possession
of the bankrupt's property, including deeds, books and accounts, and has
the powers of a receiver in the High Court for the purpose of enforcing
delivery. After payment of the costs of administration it is his duty to
distribute the estate in dividends as speedily as possible. He may also,
and with the sanction of the committee, or, where there is none, with that
of the Board of Trade, carry on the business so far as is necessary to a
beneficial winding-up, institute or defend legal proceedings, employ a
solicitor to do any business previously sanctioned by the same authority,
compromise debts and claims, raise money on mortgage, sell property on
credit, or divide the estate where practicable among the creditors in its
existing form. He may, without special sanction, but subject to any
directions which may be given by the creditors in general meeting, or
failing them by the committee, sell the property or any part of it for
cash, including business goodwill and book debts, and either by public
auction or private treaty, and generally exercise all the powers which the
bankrupt might before adjudication have exercised in relation to the
property, or which are by the Bankruptcy Act conferred on the trustee.

Where any part of the property is held subject to onerous obligations, such
as the payment of rent, &c., the trustee may disclaim the same, subject in
certain cases to the leave of the court, and the disclaimer operates to
determine all interest in or liability in respect of the property on the
part of the estate. The trustee is required to keep a record book (which is
commenced by the official receiver), containing minutes of the proceedings
in the bankruptcy, and a cash book in the prescribed form, in which all
receipts and payments by him must be entered. All monies received must
forthwith be paid into an account at the Bank of England, entitled the
"Bankruptcy Estates Account," which is under the control of the Board of
Trade, unless where in special circumstances the sanction of that
department is obtained to the opening of a local banking account, but in no
circumstances must estate monies be paid to the trustee's private account.
When monies are required for the purpose of the estate, special cheques or
money orders are issued by the Board of Trade on the application of the
trustee.

_Control over Trustee._--In his administration of the estate the trustee is
subject to control by the committee of inspection, the creditors, the court
and the Board of Trade. The committee is appointed by the creditors, and
must consist of not more than five nor less than three creditors or
authorized representatives of creditors. It acts by a majority present at a
meeting, and should be convened once a month unless it otherwise directs.
If no committee is appointed, the Board of Trade may give any direction or
permission which might have been given by a committee. Directions given by
the committee, if not inconsistent with the provisions of the act, are
binding on the trustee, unless contrary to or overruled by those of the
creditors or of the court. The official receiver or trustee may summon a
meeting of the creditors at any time to ascertain their wishes, and must do
so when so required by one-sixth in value of the creditors or when directed
by the court. The Board of Trade may also direct the official receiver to
summon a meeting for the purpose of reviewing any act done by the trustee
or any resolution of the committee of inspection. Further, the trustee may
apply to the court for directions in any particular matter, and the court
may also, on the application of any person aggrieved reverse or modify any
act of the trustee, or make such order as it deems just. The directions of
the court override those of the creditors. The Board of Trade is required
to take general cognizance of the conduct of trustees, to inquire into any
complaints by creditors, and in the event of any trustee not faithfully
performing his duties, to take such action, including the power of removal,
as may be expedient. It may also direct a local investigation of the
trustee's books and accounts, and may require him to answer any inquiries,
or may apply to the court to examine him on oath. If any loss has arisen to
the estate from any misfeasance, neglect or omission of the trustee, it may
require him to make it good. The orders of the Board of Trade under the
powers conferred by the act may be enforced by the court by committal of
the trustee or otherwise.

_Audit of Accounts._--The trustee's accounts must be audited by the
committee of inspection not less than once in every three months; and once
in every six months, as well as at the close of the administration, the
record and cash books must also be submitted with the vouchers, and the
committee's certificate of audit to the Board of Trade for final audit. If
it appears that the trustee has retained more than £50 in hand for more
than ten days without a satisfactory explanation, he may be removed from
office, surcharged with interest at the rate of 20% per annum and lose all
claim to remuneration.

_Remuneration._--The trustee's remuneration is fixed by the creditors or by
the committee if so authorized by them. It must be in the nature of a
percentage on the amount of the realization and on the dividends. If
one-fourth of the creditors in number or value dissent from the resolution,
or if the bankrupt satisfies the Board of Trade that the remuneration is
excessive, the Board may review the same and fix the remuneration. A
trustee may not receive any remuneration for services rendered in any other
capacity, _e.g._ as solicitor, auctioneer, &c., beyond that voted to him as
trustee; nor may he share his remuneration with the bankrupt, the solicitor
or other person employed about the bankruptcy; or receive from any person
any gift, or other pecuniary or personal benefit in connexion therewith.

_Costs._--A trustee receiving remuneration is not allowed the costs of any
other person in respect of duties which ought to be performed by himself.
All bills of solicitors and other agents employed must be taxed before
payment, as being in accordance with the prescribed scales of costs; and
the taxing master must satisfy himself that the employment has been
properly authorized before the work was done. All bills of costs must be
delivered to the trustee within seven days of the request for the same,
otherwise the estate may be distributed without regard to such costs.

_Release._--When the property, so far as it is capable of realization, has
been realized and distributed, the trustee must apply to the Board of Trade
for his release, forwarding to each creditor a notice of his having done
so, together with a copy of his final accounts, and the Board of Trade,
after preparing and considering a report on the same, and the objections of
any person interested, may, subject to appeal to the High Court, grant or
withhold the release. If a release is withheld, the court may, on the
application of any person interested, make such order against the trustee
as it thinks just. The release when granted operates as a removal from
office, and thereupon the official receiver again becomes trustee, and is
thus in a position, even after the nominal close of the bankruptcy, to deal
with any circumstances which may arise, or which have not been foreseen and
provided for.

_Small Bankruptcies._

When the official receiver reports, or the court is otherwise satisfied
that the debtor's property is not likely to realize more than £300, the
court may make an order for the summary administration of the estate, in
which case, if the debtor is adjudged bankrupt, the official receiver in
the ordinary course becomes and remains trustee, and certain other
modifications are effected with the view of simplifying [v.03 p.0329] and
accelerating the procedure. The chief of these modifications are as
follows, viz. the Board of Trade acts as committee of inspection; there is
no advertisement of the proceedings in a local paper; in legal proceedings
all questions of law and fact are determined by the court without a jury;
adjudication may be made on a report by the official receiver before the
first meeting of creditors where no composition or scheme is proposed;
meetings of creditors may be held in the town where the court sits or the
official receiver's office is situated; notice to creditors of meetings
other than the first meeting, or of application by a debtor for his
discharge, are dispensed with in the case of creditors for amounts not
exceeding £2. Costs, other than a solicitor's charges, may be paid without
taxation; and the time for declaring the first dividend is extended to six
months, but the whole estate must be realized and distributed within this
period if practicable. No modification, however, is permitted in the
procedure relating to the public examination and discharge of the bankrupt.
Notwithstanding that an order has been made for summary administration, the
creditors may at any time by a resolution passed by a majority in number
and three-fourths in value of those voting at the meeting, appoint a
trustee in place of the official receiver, in which case the summary order
ceases to be operative.

_Scottish Bankruptcy Legislation._

In Scotland, as in England, the law of bankruptcy arose as a remedy against
the frauds of insolvent debtors. It was declared by an act of the Scottish
parliament (1621, c. 18) that no debtor after insolvency should
fraudulently diminish the fund belonging to his creditors, and if a deed of
assignment was gratuitously executed after the contracting of debt in
favour of a near relation or a confidential friend, fraudulent dealing was
to be presumed. The act 1696, c. 5, settled the definition of a notour or
notorious bankrupt, a question which had previously engaged the attention
of the judges of the court of session. The statute defines "a notour
bankrupt" to be any debtor who, being under diligence by horning or
caption, at the instance of his creditors, shall be either imprisoned, or
retire to the abbey or any other privileged place, or flee or abscond for
his personal security, or defend his person by force, and who shall
afterwards be found, by sentence of the lords of session, to be insolvent.
Bankruptcy as thus defined was, it is said, intended to afford a remedy
against fraudulent preference by debtors, and not as the ground-work of a
general process of distribution, although by later statutes it became a
necessary requisite of every such process. The exceptions recognized in the
act of 1696, of persons absent from Scotland and therefore not liable to
imprisonment, or of persons exempted therefrom by special privileges, were
removed by later legislation. The old English distinction between traders
and non-traders, it will be observed, is not recognized in Scottish law.
The statute made null and void all voluntary dispositions, assignations and
other deeds made after or within sixty days before bankruptcy.

In 1856 was passed the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act, by which the law of
bankruptcy in Scotland is mainly regulated. By this act, notour (_i.e._
legally declared) bankruptcy was constituted:--

1. By sequestration (or adjudication in England and Ireland); and

2. By insolvency concurring either--(a) with a duly executed charge for
payment or (b) with sale of effects belonging to the debtor under a
poinding or under a sequestration for rent, or making application for the
benefit of _cessio bonorum_.

Notour bankruptcy continues, in cases of sequestration, until the debtor
has obtained his discharge and in other cases until insolvency ceases.
Sequestration may be awarded of the estate of any person in the following
cases:--

1. Living debtor subject to jurisdiction of Scottish courts--(a) on his own
petition with concurrence of qualified creditors, or (b) on petition of
qualified creditors, provided he be a notour bankrupt, and have had a
dwelling-house or place of business in Scotland within the previous year.

2. In the case of a deceased debtor, subject at his death to the
jurisdiction of the court--(a) on the petition of his mandatory; or (b) on
the petition of qualified creditors (§ 13).

Sequestration may be awarded either by the court of session or by the
sheriff. A sequestration may be recalled by a majority in number and
four-fifths in value of the creditors, who may prefer to wind up the estate
by private arrangement. If the sequestration proceeds, the creditors hold a
meeting, and by a majority _in value_ elect a trustee to administer the
estate, and three commissioners (being creditors or their mandatories) to
assist and control the administration and declare the dividends. The
bankrupt (under pain of imprisonment) must give all the information in his
power regarding his estate and he must be publicly examined on oath before
the sheriff; and "conjunct and confident persons" may likewise be examined.
The bankrupt may be discharged either by composition or without
composition. In the latter case (1) by petition with concurrence of all the
creditors, or (2) after six months with concurrence of a majority and
four-fifths in value of the creditors, or (3) after eighteen months with
concurrence of a bare majority in number and value, or (4) after two years
without concurrence. In the last case the judge may refuse the application
if he thinks the bankrupt has fraudulently concealed his effects or
wilfully failed to comply with the law. This act was amended by the
Bankruptcy and Real Securities Act 1857, which deals with the cost of
competition for trusteeships; the Bankruptcy Amendment (Scotland) Act 1860,
which enables the court to recall a sequestration where it is more
convenient that the estate should be wound up in England or Ireland; and
the Bankruptcy Amendment Act (Scotland) 1875, which makes the wages of
clerks, shopmen and servants preferential claims for a period not exceeding
four months and an amount not exceeding £50, while the claims of workmen
are placed on a similar footing for a period not exceeding two months. Some
important changes were subsequently introduced, one of the principal being
that effected by the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1880, which abolished
imprisonment for debt, but which, like its English prototype (the Debtors
Act 1869), contains a series of important provisions for the punishment of
fraudulent bankrupts. Under these provisions the laws of the two countries
on that subject are practically assimilated, although some minor
differences still survive. One of the most important of these differences
is, that while the Scottish act makes the failure, within the three years
prior to the sequestration, to keep "such books and accounts as, according
to the usual course of any trade or business in which he (the debtor) may
have been engaged, are necessary to exhibit or explain his transactions" a
criminal offence, the English act contains no provision of an analogous
character; the non-keeping of such books being treated as a fact to be
taken into account in dealing with the debtor's application for his
discharge but not coming within the scope of the criminal law. On the other
hand, there are a few minor trading irregularities dealt with in the
English act which are not specifically included in that of Scotland.
Another important distinction is that under the Scottish act the same
offences may be treated differently, according as they are brought for
trial before the court of justiciary or a sheriff and jury, in which case
the maximum penalty is two years' imprisonment; or before a sheriff without
a jury, in which case the penalty is limited to imprisonment for a period
not exceeding sixty days. This distinction admits of a useful elasticity in
the administration of the law, having regard to the comparative importance
of the case, which is hardly possible under the English act.

Another most important modification of the law is effected by the Debtors
Act 1880, combined with the Bankruptcy and Cessio Act 1881, and the Act of
Sederunt anent Cessios of the 22nd of December 1882. Under the law existing
prior to these enactments, the process of _cessio bonorum_ operated chiefly
as a means for obtaining release from imprisonment for debt on a formal
surrender by a debtor of all his goods and estate. But under this process
the debtor was not entitled to a discharge, and his future-acquired
property was still subject to diligence at the instance of unsatisfied
creditors. By abolishing imprisonment for debt (except in regard to crown
debts and public rates and assessments), the legislature also practically
abolished this use of the process of cessio, and the process itself would
probably have become obsolete, but for certain changes effected by the act
of 1881, which have given it a different and more extended scope. Among
these changes may be noted (1) [v.03 p.0330] the extension to "any creditor
of a debtor who is notour bankrupt," without reference to the amount of his
debt, of the right hitherto limited to the debtor himself, to petition the
court for a decree of cessio, the prayer of the petition, whether presented
by the debtor or by a creditor, being "to appoint a trustee to take the
management and disposal of the debtor's estate for behoof of his
creditors"; (2) the discretionary power given to the court upon such
petition to award sequestration under the bankruptcy act, in any case where
the liabilities of the debtor exceed £200; and (3) the right of the debtor
to apply for his discharge under similar conditions to those obtaining in
the case of sequestration. An important modification of the law relating to
discharge which equally affects a debtor under the Bankruptcy and Cessio
Acts, is also effected by the provision of the act of 1881, which requires,
in addition to the concurrence of creditors, the fulfilment of one of the
following conditions, viz., "(a) That a dividend of five shillings in the
pound has been paid out of the estate of the debtor, or that security for
payment thereof has been found to the satisfaction of the creditors; or (b)
that the failure to pay five shillings in the pound has, in the opinion of
the sheriff, arisen from circumstances for which the debtor cannot justly
be held responsible." Orders of cessio are only made in the sheriff courts,
and when made, the court also appoints a trustee, who conducts the
proceedings without the control exercised by the creditors in a
sequestration. Under these conditions it will be seen that the original
purpose and constitution of the process of cessio has entirely disappeared,
and it has now become a modified form of official bankruptcy procedure,
with a less elaborate routine than in the case of sequestration, and one
perhaps more suitable to the smaller class of cases, to which in practice
it is limited.

The Bankruptcy Frauds and Disabilities (Scotland) Act 1884 applies to
sequestrations and decrees of cessio the criminal provisions of § 31 of the
English Bankruptcy Act 1883, relating to the obtaining of credit for £20
and upwards by an undischarged bankrupt, without disclosure of his
position. It also places the law relating to the disqualifications
attaching to such bankrupts on a similar footing to that of the English
act.

The Judicial Factors Act of 1889 contains a provision calculated to check
excessive costs of administration, by requiring that where the remuneration
of a trustee under a sequestration is to be fixed by the commissioners,
intimation of the rate of remuneration is to be given to the creditors and
to the accountant of court before being acted on, and the latter officer is
empowered, subject to appeal, to modify the same if he deems it expedient.

It may be pointed out that the Deeds of Arrangement Act 1887, which applies
to England and Ireland, does not apply to Scotland, and there is no
analogous provision requiring registration of private deeds of assignment
for the benefit of creditors as a condition of their validity in that
country.

Finally, it is to be noted that the office of accountant in bankruptcy,
which was established by the Bankruptcy Act of 1856, has under the Judicial
Factors Act 1889 been abolished, the duties being merged in those of the
office of accountant of the court of session.

_Irish Bankruptcy Legislation._

The Irish law of bankruptcy is regulated by the two leading Irish statutes
of 1857 and 1872, together with the Irish Debtors Act 1872, and corresponds
in its main features to some of the older English enactments, with
modifications adopted from the English act of 1869. It may be pointed out,
however, that the system of liquidation by arrangement and composition
without the approval or control of the court, which proved fatal to the
success of the latter, has not at any time been imported into the Irish
law. A special act was passed in 1888 for establishing local bankruptcy
courts in certain districts in Ireland, and an act was also passed in 1889,
applying the main provisions of the English Act of 1888, relating to
preferential payments in bankruptcy, to Ireland.

The Deeds of Arrangement Act 1887, which has been already discussed above
under the head of English bankruptcy legislation, also applies in its main
provisions to Ireland, and as supplemented by the Irish Deeds of
Arrangement Amendment Act 1890, places the law relating to this branch of
insolvency procedure upon a similar footing in both countries, so far as
regards the publicity of such deeds. The last-mentioned act also requires a
similar registration of all petitions for arrangement under the Bankruptcy
Act 1857.

(J. SM.*)

COMPARATIVE LAW

_British Empire_.--In most parts of the British empire the law of
bankruptcy has been modelled upon the English system. This is particularly
the case in Australia and New Zealand. Victoria, South Australia, Western
Australia and New Zealand follow the lines of the existing English acts. In
Queensland, Tasmania and New South Wales the system is rather that of the
English act of 1869, leaving more to the creditors' management and less to
officialism.

One point may be mentioned in which the Australian colonies have improved
on the English system. Under the English acts a bankrupt is under no
obligation to apply for his discharge. The result is that the United
Kingdom contains a population of 70,000 undischarged bankrupts--a manifest
danger to the trading community. Under the bankruptcy systems of New South
Wales, Victoria and New Zealand, a bankrupt is bound to apply for his
discharge within a fixed period, otherwise he is guilty of a contempt of
court.

In Canada, under the British North America Act 1867, the Dominion
parliament has exclusive legislative power in regard to bankruptcy and
insolvency: but there is no existing Dominion act on the subject. A
Dominion act was passed in 1875, but repealed in 1880. The failure of this
act may perhaps be ascribed to the diversity of the pre-existing provincial
systems, embracing such contrasts as the English law of Ontario, and the
French code based on _cessio bonorum_--which ruled in Quebec. Bankruptcy is
dealt with in a fragmentary way by the provincial legislatures by acts
regulating such matters as priority of execution creditors, fraudulent
assignments and preferences, imprisonment of debtors, administration of
estates of deceased insolvents.

In Cape Colony and Natal English law is substantially followed. In the
Transvaal, where Roman-Dutch law prevails, the law governing the subject is
the Insolvency Law, No. 13 of 1895. It provides for voluntary surrender and
compulsory sequestration. The law of the Orange River Colony is similar.

In British Guiana, Gambia, Jamaica, Hong Kong, Mauritius, Grenada,
Trinidad, Tobago and the Straits Settlements the law is modelled on the
English pattern.

In India insolvency is regulated by the Indian Insolvency Act 1848,
extended by the Act XI. of 1889.

An English bankrupt, it may be added, is entitled to plead his discharge in
England as a defence in a colonial court. The explanation is this. The
English act vests all the bankrupt's property, whether in the United
Kingdom or in the colonies, in his trustee in bankruptcy. Having thus
denuded him of everything, it has been held to follow that the bankrupt's
discharge must also receive recognition in a colonial court.

_France_.--Bankruptcy in France is regulated by the Commercial Code of
1807, amended and supplemented by the law of 9th June 1838. By Article 437
of the code bankruptcy is defined as the state of a trader who is unable to
meet his commercial engagements. Simple insolvency of this kind is known in
France as _faillite_. Insolvency attended with circumstances of misconduct
or fraud is known as _banqueroute simple_ or _banqueroute frauduleuse_.
Only a trader can become bankrupt. The debt, too, for obtaining
adjudication must be a commercial debt, the laws regulating bankruptcy
being designed exclusively for the protection of commerce. To be made a
bankrupt a trader need not be insolvent: it is sufficient that he has
suspended payment. Commercial companies of all kinds are liable to be
declared bankrupt in the same manner as individual traders. A trader-debtor
can be adjudicated bankrupt upon his own petition, or upon the petition of
a creditor, or by the court itself _proprio motu_. A petitioning debtor
must within fifteen days file at the [v.03 p.0331] office of the Tribunal
of Commerce of the district, a declaration of suspension, with a true
account of his conduct and of the state of his affairs, showing his assets,
debts, profits and losses and personal expenses. On adjudication the
Tribunal of Commerce appoints a person, called a _syndic provisoire_, to
manage the bankrupt's estate, and a _juge commissaire_ is also named to
supervise the syndic. A bankruptcy terminates by an ordinary composition
(_concordat_), a sale of the debtor's assets (_union_), or a composition by
relinquishment of assets. It is a striking feature of the French system,
and highly creditable to French commercial integrity, that a discharge in
bankruptcy, even when accompanied by a _declaration d'excusabilité_, leaves
the unpaid balance a debt of honour. At the time of the French Revolution
the National Convention passed a resolution that any man who contracted a
debt should never be free from liability to pay it. The spirit of this
resolution still survives, for until a trader has paid every penny that he
owes he is not rehabilitated and remains under the stigma of various
disabilities: he has no political rights, he cannot hold any public office,
or act as a stockbroker, or sit on a jury. _Banqueroute simple_ is where
the bankrupt has been guilty of grave faults in the conduct of his
business, such as extravagance in living, hazardous speculation or
preferring creditors. _Banqueroute frauduleuse_ involves the worse
delinquency of fraud. Both _banqueroute simple_ and _banqueroute
frauduleuse_ are punishable,--the latter with penal servitude ranging from
five to twenty years.

_Germany._--Bankruptcy in Germany is governed by a code passed in 1877.
Prior to this each state had its system and the law was "wholly chaotic."
The same distinction is drawn in Germany as in France between mere
commercial failure and bankruptcy, simple or fraudulent. Simple bankruptcy
is established by such offences as gambling, dealing in "futures,"
disorderly book-keeping or extravagance in living: fraudulent bankruptcy,
by offences of a deeper dye--the concealment of property, the falsifying of
books, the manufacture of fictitious debts and the giving of illegal
preferences. Both kinds of bankruptcy are punishable, fraudulent bankruptcy
by penal servitude, or in case of mitigating circumstances, by imprisonment
for not less than three months. Accessories in fraudulent bankruptcies are
liable to penal servitude--for instance, a creditor who conspires with the
debtor to secure an advantage to the prejudice of the other debtors. The
creditors are called together within one month from the date of
adjudication, and at their meeting they may appoint a committee of their
number to advise with the trustee. It is the duty of the court to see that
the trustee performs his functions. Estates are liquidated with great
rapidity. In order that the creditors may receive dividends at the earliest
moment, it is customary to sell the assets by auction. The creditors by a
majority in number and three-fourths in value may accept a composition, but
such an arrangement must have the approval of the court. The fees are very
moderate: in an ordinary bankruptcy the attorney's fees do not, it is said,
exceed £5.

_Italy._--Bankruptcy in Italy is regulated by the Commercial Code of 1883
(Part III.). Only merchants can pass through the bankruptcy court.
Merchants are defined by the code as those who, as an habitual profession,
engage in commercial business. This definition includes merchant companies.
Bankruptcy proceedings may be taken either by the debtor or by a creditor
for a _commercial_ debt, or may be ordered by the court. The amount of the
debt is immaterial: a small sum will suffice, provided its non-payment is
proof of insolvency. Bankruptcy can only be declared where there is
insolvency. The judgment adjudicating a debtor bankrupt deprives the
bankrupt of the right to administer his affairs, and nominates a trustee to
realize the property under the superintendence of a judge and a commission
of creditors. All the property of the bankrupt, movable and immovable, is
sold by auction and distributed in dividends. This is one way of closing
the bankruptcy, but it may also be closed by an arrangement. No minimum
percentage is required for such arrangement, but it must have the assent of
creditors representing three-fourths of the bankrupt's indebtedness.
Composition before bankruptcy is not recognized by Italian law. Bankrupts
are liable to criminal proceedings involving punishments more or less heavy
for offences against the law, _e.g._ for not keeping books in the way
prescribed by law.

_United States._--After much fragmentary legislation the bankruptcy system
of the United States is now embodied in the National Bankruptcy Act of
1898, as amended by the act of 1903. The acts of bankruptcy under the act
may be summarized as follows: where a debtor (1) removes any of his
property to hinder or delay his creditors; (2) being insolvent, transfers
property with intent to prefer a creditor; (3) suffers any creditor to
obtain a preference; (4) makes a general assignment for the benefit of his
creditors; (5) "admits in writing his inability to pay his debts and his
willingness to be adjudicated a bankrupt on that ground." These acts of
bankruptcy do not include, it will be observed, non-payment by a debtor of
his debts. A debtor can therefore only be adjudicated a bankrupt on the
ground of indebtedness with his own consent in writing. Presumably the
legislature thought that the desire to obtain the protection and privilege
of bankruptcy would be a sufficient inducement to confess insolvency, where
such insolvency, in fact, exists.

To constitute a fraudulent preference it is not necessary, as it is under
English law, that the payment should be made "with a view to prefer" the
favoured creditor. It is enough that the creditor is preferred. This avoids
the nice questions of legal casuistry which have embarrassed the English
courts, and it is the more rational rule, for creditors are not concerned
with a debtor's intention. Any person, trader or non-trader, may avail
himself of the act, but, in the case of a corporation, there is this
peculiarity: it may be petitioned against but cannot petition.

Insolvency is construed in a practical sense; that is, a person is
insolvent where the aggregate of his property, at a fair valuation, is
insufficient to pay his debts; but he is not necessarily insolvent because
his realized assets are insufficient to meet his liabilities.

Involuntary proceedings can only be taken against debtors owing $1000 or
over, with certain exceptions. A petitioning creditor's debt must amount to
$500.

The administration of the law of bankruptcy is entrusted to the district
courts and is exercised through the medium of certain officers appointed by
the courts and called referees. The creditors appoint a trustee or trustees
of the estate.

So soon as his judicial examination is over the bankrupt may offer his
creditors a composition, but to take effect the composition must be
approved by the court after hearing objections.

The discharge is the key to the efficiency of every bankruptcy system. By
the control which the court thus holds, it is enabled to bring its moral
censorship to bear on a debtor's conduct and so maintain a high standard of
commercial integrity. Under the United States system the judge is to
investigate the merits of the application and to discharge the bankrupt,
unless he has (1) committed an offence punishable by imprisonment; (2) with
intent to conceal his financial condition, destroyed, concealed, or failed
to keep books of account or records from which such condition might be
ascertained; or (3) _obtained property on credit from any person upon a
materially false statement in writing made to such person for the purpose
of obtaining such property on credit; or_ (4) _at any time, subsequent to
the first day of the four months immediately preceding the filing of the
petition, transferred, removed, destroyed or concealed any of his property
with intent to hinder, delay or defraud his creditors; or_ (5) _in
voluntary proceedings been granted a discharge in bankruptcy within six
years; or_ (6) _in the course of proceedings in bankruptcy refused to obey
any lawful order of or to answer any material question approved by the
court._

It is significant that the italicized qualifications were added to the act
of 1898 by the experience of five years of its working.

(E. MA.)