NAVY and NAVIES. The navy of a country was in its 
original meaning the total body of its shipping, whether used 
for war, for oversea and coasting traffic, or for fishing — the 
total in fact of its ships (Lat. naves). By custom, however, the 
word has come to be used only of that part of the whole which 
is set aside for purposes of war and police. Every navy consists 
of a material part (see Ship), i.e. the vessels, with their means 
of propulsion and their armament, and of a human organization, 
namely the crews of all ranks, by which the vessels are handled. 
Ships and men are combined in divisions, and are ruled by an 
organ of the government to which they belong (see Admiralty 
Administration). 

Personnel 

The personnel of the British navy is composed of two different 
bodies of men, the seamen and the marines, each of which has its 
appropriate officers. The marines are the subject of a separate 
article. 

The officers of the navy are classed as follows in the order of their 
rank^ flag-officers (see Admiral), commodores, captains, staff 
captains, commanders, staff commanders, lieutenants, navigating 
lieutenants, sub-lieutenants, chief gunners, chief boatswains, chief 
carpenters, gunners, boatswains, carpenters, midshipmen, naval 

Flag-officers are divided into three ranks, viz. rear-admiral, vice- 
admiral, admiral. There is also the rank of " admiral of the fleet ": 
such an officer, if in command, would carry the union flag at the main. 

All flag-officers, commanders-in-chief, are considered as responsible 
for the conduct of the fleet or squadron under their command. They 
are bound to keep them in perfect condition for service; to exercise 
them frequently in forming orders of sailing and lines of battle, and 
in performing all such evolutions as may occur in the presence of an 
enemy; to direct the commanders of squadrons and divisions to 
inspect the state of each ship under their command ; to see that the 
established rules for good order, discipline and cleanliness are ob- 
served; and occasionally to inquire into these and other matters 
themselves. They are required to correspond with the secretary of 
the admiralty, and report to him all their proceedings. 

Every flag-officer serving in a fleet, but not commanding it, is 
required to superintend all the ships of the squadron or division 
placed under his orders — to see that their crews are properly 
disciplined, that all orders are punctually attended to, that the 
stores, provisions and water are kept as complete as circumstances 
will admit, that the seamen and marines are frequently exercised, 
and that every precaution is taken for preserving the health of their 
crews. When at sea, he is to take care that every ship in his division 
preserves her station in whatever line or order of sailing the fleet 
may be formed; and in battle he is to observe attentively the 
conduct of every ship near him, whether of the squadron or division 
under his immediate command or not; and at the end of the battle 
he is to report it to the commander-in-chief, in order that commenda- 
tion or censure may be passed, as the case may appear to merit; and 
he is empowered to send an officer to supersede any captain who may 
misbehave in battle, or whose ship is evidently avoiding the en- 
gagement. If any flag-officer be killed in battle his flag is to be kept 
flying, and signals to be repeated, in the same manner as if he were 
still alive, until the battle shall be ended; but the death of a flag- 
officer, or his being rendered incapable of attending to his duty, is to 
be conveyed as expeditiously as possible to the commander-in-chief. 

The captain of the fleet is a temporary rank, where a commander- 
in-chief has ten or more ships of the line under his command ; it may 
be compared with that of adjutant-general in the army. He may 
either be a flag-officer or one of the senior captains; in the former 
case, he takes his rank with the flag-officers of the fleet ; in the latter, 
he ranks next to the junior rear-admiral, and is entitled to the pay 
and allowance of a rear-admiral. All orders of the commander-in- 
chief are issued through him, all returns of the fleet are made through 
him to the commander-in-chief, and he keeps a journal of the pro- 
ceedings of the fleet, which he transmits to the admiralty. He is 
appointed and can be removed from this situation only by the lords 
commissioners of the admiralty. 

A commodore is a temporary rank, and of two kinds — the one 
having a captain under him in the same ship, and the other without a 
captain. The former has the rank, pay and allowances of a rear- 
admiral, the latter the pay and allowances of a captain and special 
allowance as the lords of the admiralty may direct. They both carry 
distinguishing pennants. 

When a captain is appointed to command a ship of war he com- 
missions the ship by hoisting his pennant; and if fresh out of the 
dock, and from the hands of the dockyard officers, he proceeds im- 
mediately to prepare her for sea, by demanding her stores, provisions, 
guns and ammunition from the respective departments, according 
to her establishment. He enters such petty officers, leading seamen, 
able seamen, ordinary seamen, artificers, stokers, firemen and boys 
as may be sent to him from the flag or receiving ship. If he be 
appointed to succeed the captain of a ship already in commission, he 
passes a receipt to the said captain for the ship's books, papersand 
stores, and becomes responsible for the whole of the remaining stores 
and provisions. 

The duty of the captain of a ship, with regard to the several books 
and accounts, pay-books, entry, musters, discharges, &c, is regulated 
by various acts of parliament; but the state of the internal discipline, 
the order, regularity, cleanliness and the health of the crews will 
depend mainly on himself and his officers. In all these respects the 
general printed orders for his guidance contained in the King's 
Regulations and Admiralty Instructions are particularly precise and 
minute. And, for the information of the ship's company, he is 
directed to cause the articles of war, and abstracts of all acts of 
parliament for the encouragement of seamen, and all such orders and 
regulations for discipline as may be established, to be hung up in 
some public part of the ship, to which the men may at all times have 
access. He is also to direct that they be read to the ship's company, 
all the officers being present, once at least in every month. He is 
desired to be particularly careful that the chaplain have shown to 
him the attention and respect due to his sacred office by all the 
officers and men, and that divine service be performed every Sunday. 
He is not authorized to inflict summary punishment on any com- 
missioned or warrant-officer, but he may place them under arrest, 
and suspend any; officer who shall misbehave, until an opportunity 
shall offer of trying such officer by a court-martial. He is enjoined 
to be very careful not to suffer the inferior officers or men to be 
treated with cruelty and oppression by their superiors. He is the 
authority who can order punishment to be inflicted, which he is 
never to do without sufficient cause, nor ever with greater severity 
than the offence may really deserve, nor until twenty-four hours after 
the crime has been committed, which must be specified in the warrant 
ordering the punishment. He may delegate this authority to a 
limited extent to certain officers. All the officers and the whole 
ship's company are to be present at every punishment, which must 
be inserted in the log-book, and an abstract sent to the admiralty 
every quarter. 

The commander has the chief command in small vessels. In larger 
vessels he is chief of the staff to the captain and assists him in main- 
taining discipline, and in sailing and fighting the ship. 

The lieutenants take the watch by turns, and are at such times 
entrusted, in the absence of the captain, with the command of the 
ship. The one on duty is to inform the captain of all important 
occurrences which take place during his watch. He is to see that the 
whole of the duties of the ship are carried on with the same punctu- 
ality as if the captain himself were present. In the absence^ of the 
captain, the commander or senior executive officer is responsible for 
everything done on board. 

The navigating officer receives his orders from the captain or the 
senior executive officer. He is entrusted, under the command of the 
captain, with the charge of navigating the ship, bringing her to 
anchor, ascertaining the latitude and longitude of her place at sea, 
surveying harbours, and making such^ nautical remarks and observa- 
tions as may be useful to navigation in general. 

The warrant-officers of the navy may he compared with the non- 
commissioned officers of the army. They take rank as follows, viz. 
gunner, boatswain, carpenter; and, compared with other officers, 
they take rank after sub-lieutenants and before midshipmen.- 

The midshipmen are the principal subordinate officers, but have no 
specific duties assigned to them. In the smaller vessels some of the 
senior ones are entrusted with the watch; they attend parties of 
men sent on shore, pass the word of command on board, and see that 
the orders of their superiors are carried into effect ; in short, they are 
exercised in all the duties of their profession, so as, after five years' 
service as cadets and midshipmen, to qualify them to become 
lieutenants, and are then rated sub-lieutenants provided they have 
passed the requisite examination. 

The duties and relative positions of these officers remain practi- 
cally unaffected by recent changes; but a profound modification was 
made in the constitution of the corps of officers at the close of 1902. 
Up to the end of that year, officers who belonged to the " executive " 
branch, ue. from midshipmen to admiral, to the marines and the 
engineers, had entered at different ages, had been traineo*in separate 
schools, and had formed three co-operating but independent lines. 
For reasons set forth in a memorandum by Lord Selborne (December 
16, 1902) — from the desire to give a more scientific .character 
to naval education, and to achieve complete unity among all classes 
of officers — it was decided to replace the triple by a single system of 
entry, and to coalesce all classes of officers, apart from the purely 
civil lines — surgeons and paymasters (formerly " pursers ") — into 
one. Lads were in future to be entered together, and at ope training 
establishment at Osborne in the Isle of Wight, on the distinct under- 
standing that it was to be at the discretion of the admiralty to assign 
them to executive, marine or engineer duties at a later period. After 
two years' training at Osborne, and at the Naval College at Dart- 
mouth, all alike were to go through the rank of midshipman and to 
pass the same examination for lieutenant. When in the intermediate 
position of sub-lieutenant, they were to be assigned to their respec- 
tive branches as executive officer, marine or engineer. The engineers 
under this new system were to cease to be a civil branch, as they had 
been before, and become known as lieutenant, commander, captain 
or rear-admiral E. (Engineer). 

The crew of a ship of war consistsof leading seamen, able seamen, 
ordinary seamen, engine-room artificers, other artificers, leading 
stokers, stokers, coal-trimmers, boys and marines. The artificers 
and stokers and the marines are always entered voluntarily, the 
latter in the same manner as soldiers, by enlisting into the corps, the 
former at some rendezvous or on board particular ships. The supply 
of boys for the navy, from whom the seamen class of men and petty 
officers is recruited, is also obtained by voluntary entry. 

Merchant seamen arc admitted into the royal naval reserve, receive 
an annual payment by way of retainer, perform drill on board His 
Majesty's ships, and are engaged to serve in the navy in case of war 
or emergency. 

There are two schemes for forming reserves. The Royal Naval 
Reserve^ scheme draws men from the mercantile marine and fishing 
population of the United Kingdom. The Royal Fleet Reserve 
scheme, introduced in 1901, whileit gave a better system of training 
to the pensioners, was mainly designed to obtain the services in war 
of the men who had quitted the navy after the expiration of their 
twelve years' service. 

So far as other countries are concerned, the staff of officers does not 
differ materially from one navy to another. In all it consists of 
admirals, captains, lieutenants, midshipmen and cadets receiving 
their training in special schools. With the exception of the navy of 
the United States, all the important naval forces of the world are 
raised by conscription. 

The strength and general condition of navies at any given time 
must be learnt from the official publications of the various powers, 
and from privately composed books founded on them. The yearly 
statements of the First Lord of the Admiralty in Great Britain, the 
Reports of the Secretary of the Navy in the United States, and the 
Reports of the Budget Committees of the French-Chamber contain 
masses of information. The Naval Annual, founded by Lord Brassey 
in 1886, is the model of publications which appear in nearly every 
country which possesses a navy. MrF. T. jane's All the World's 
Fighting Ships is a survey of the materiel of navies since 1898. 

History of Navies 

Every navy was at its beginning formed of the fighting men 
of the tribe, or city, serving in the ship or large boat, which was 
used indifferently for fishing, trade, war or piracy. The develop- 
ment of the warship as a special type, and the formation of 
organized bodies of men set aside for military service on the sea 
came later. We can follow the process from its starting-point 
in the case of the naval powers of the dark and middle ages, 
the Norsemen, the Venetians, the French, the English fleet and 
others. But centuries, and indeed millenniums, before the 
modern world emerged from darkness the nations of antiquity 
who lived on the shores of the Mediterranean had formed 
navies and had seen them culminate and decline. The adven- 
tures of the Argonauts and of Ulysses give a legendary and 
poetic picture of an " age of the Vikings " which was coming 
to an end two thousand years before the Norsemen first vexed 
the west of Europe. At a period anterior to written history 
necessity had dictated the formation of vessels adapted to the 
purposes of the warrior. Long ships built for speed {fxaKpal jjtjcs, 
naves longae) as distinguished from round ships for burden 
(orpoyyvkat Wjes, naves onerariae) are of extreme antiquity 
(see Ship). Greek tradition credited the Corinthians with the 
invention, but it is probable that the Hellenic peoples, in this 
as in other respects, had a Phoenician model before them. So 
little is known of the other early navies, whether Hellenic or 
non-Hellenic, that we must be content to take the Athenian 
as our example of them all, with a constant recognition of the 
fact that it was certainly the most highly developed, and that 
we cannot safely argue from it to the rest. 

The Athenian navy began with the provision of warships 
by the state, because private citizens could not supply them 
in sufficient numbers. The approach of the Persian 
attack in 483 B.C. drove Athens to raise its establish- 
ment from 50 to 100 long ships, which were paid for out of 
the profits of the mines of Moroneia (see Themistocles). The 
Persian danger compelled the Greeks to form a league for their 
common naval defence. The League had its first headquarters 
at Delos, where its treasury was guarded and administered by 
the % EXh}vorafjLiai (Hellenotamiai), or trustees of the Hellenic 
fund. Her superiority .in maritime strength gave Athens a 
predominance over the other members of* the League like that 
which Holland enjoyed for the same reason in the Seven United 
Provinces. The Hellenotamiai were chosen from among her 
citizens, and Pericles transferred the fund to Athens, which 
became the mistress of the League. The allies sank in fact to 
subjects, and their contributions, aided by the produce of the 
mines, went to the support of the Athenian navy. The hundred 
long ships of the Persian War grew to three hundred by the end 
of the 5th century b.c. (see Peloponnesian War), and at a 
later period (when, however, the quality of ships and men alike 
had sunk) to three hundred and sixty. The ancient world did 
not attain to the formation of a civil service — at least until the 
time of the Roman Empire — and Athens had no admiralty 
or navy office. In peace the war-vessels were kept on slips under 
cover in sheds. In war a slralegos was appointed to the general 
command, and he chose the trierarchs, whose duty it was to 
commission them partly at their own expense, under supervision 
of the state exercised by special inspectors (dTroaroXets). The 
hulls, oars, rigging and pay of the crews were provided by the 
state, but it is certain that heavy charges fell upon the trierarchs, 
who had to fit the ships for sea and return them in good condi- 
tion. The burden became so heavy that the trierarchies were 
divided, first between two citizens in the Peloponnesian War, 
and then among groups (synleleiai) consisting of from five to 
sixteen persons. Individual Athenians who were wealthy and 
patriotic or ambitious might fit out ships or spend freely on 
their command. But these voluntary gifts were insufficient 
to maintain a great navy. The necessity which compelled 
modern nations to form permanent state navies, instead of 
relying on a levy of ships from the ports, and such vessels as 
English nobles and gentlemen sent to fight the Armada, prevailed 
in Athens also. The organization of the crews bore a close 
resemblance in the general lines to that of the English navy as 
it was till the 16th and even the 17th century. The trierarch v 
either the citizen named to discharge the duty, or some one whom 
he paid to replace him, answered to the captain. There was 
a sailing master (Kv&epvfjrris) , a body of petty officers, mariners 
and oarsmen (inrrjpeaia), with the soldiers or marines (e7rt/3drat). 
As the ancient warship was a galley, the number of rowers 
required was immense. A hundred triremes would require 
twenty thousand men in all, or more than the total number of 
crews of the twenty-seven British line of battleships which 
fought at Trafalgar. And yet this would not have been a great 
fleet, as compared with the Roman and Carthaginian forces, 
which contended with hundreds of vessels and multitudes of 
men, numbering one hundred and fifty thousand or so, on each 
side, in the first Punic War. 

Until the use of broadside artillery and the sail became 
universal at the end of the 16th century, all navies were forcibly 
organized on much the same lines as the Athenian, even in the 
western seas. In the Mediterranean the differences were in 
names and in details. The war fleets of the successors of 
Alexander, of Carthage, of Rome, of Byzantium, of the Italian 
republics, of the Arabs and of Aragon, were galleys relying on 
their power to ram or board. Therefore they present the same 
elements — a chief who is a general, captains who were soldiers, 
or knights, sailing masters and deck hands who navigate and 
tend the few sails used, marines and rowers. A few words may, 
however, be said of Rome, which transmitted the tradition of 
the ancient world to Constantinople, and of the Constantino- 
politan or Byzantine navy, which in turn transmitted the tradi- 
tion to the Italian cities, and had one peculiar point of interest. 

As a trading city Rome was early concerned in the struggle 
for predominance in the western Mediterranean between the 
Etruscans, the Greek colonies and the Carthaginians. 
Its care of its naval interests was shown by the appoint- 
ment of navy commissioners as early as 31 1 B.C. (Duoviri novates) . 
In the first Punic War it had to raise great fleets from its own 
resources, or from the dependent Greek colonies of southern Italy. 
After the fall of Carthage it had no opponent who was able to force 
it to the same efforts. The prevalence of piracy in the 1st century 
B.C. again compelled it to attend to its navy (see Pompey). The 
obligation to keep the peace on sea as well as on land required 
the emperors to maintain a navy for police purposes. The 
organization was very complete. Two main fleets, called the 
Praetorian, guarded the coasts of Italy at Ravenna and Misenum 
(classes Praetorian), other squadrons were stationed at Forum 
Julii (Frejus), Seleucia at the mouth of the Orontes (Nahr-el-Asy), 
called the classis Syriaca, at Alexandria (classis Augusta Alex- 
andrine), at Carpathos (Scarpanto, between Crete and Rhodes), 
Aquileia (the classis Venettim at the head of the Adriatic), 
the Blac^ Sea (classis Pontica), and Britain (classis Britannica). 
River flotillas were maintained on the Rhine (classis Germanica), 
on the Danube (classis Pannonica and Maesica) and in later days 
at least on the Euphrates. All these squadrons did not exist 
at the same time. The station at Forum Julii was given up 
soon after the reign of Augustus, and the classis Venetum was 
formed later. But an organized navy always existed. A body 
of soldiers, the classici, was assigned for its service. The 
commander was the Praefectus Classis. 

When Constantine founded his New Rome on the site of 
Byzantium, the navy of the Eastern Empire may be said to have 
Byzantine ^ )e ? un * * ts history is obscure and it suffered several 
* eclipses. While the Vandal kingdom of Carthage 
lasted (428-534), the eastern emperors were compelled to 
attend to their fleet. After its fall their navy fell into neglect 
till the rise of the Mahommedan power at the end of the 7th 
century again compelled them to guard their coasts. The 
eastern caliphs had fleets for purposes of conquest, and so had 
the emirs and caliphs of Cordova. The Byzantine navy reached 
its highest point under the able sovereigns of the Macedonian 
dynasty (867-1056). It was divided into the imperial fleet, 
commanded by the Great Drungarios, the first recorded lord high 
admiral, and the provincial or thematic squadrons, under their 
strategoi. Of these there were three, the Cibyrhaeotic (Cyprus 
and Rhodes), the Samian and the Aegean. The thematic 
squadrons were maintained permanently for police purposes. 
The imperial fleet, which was more powerful when in commission 
than all three, was kept for war. A peculiar feature of the 
Byzantine navy was the presence in it of a corps answering to the 
seaman gunners and gunnery officers of modern navies. These 
were the siphonarioi, who worked the siphons (vup&vts) used for 
discharging the " Greek fire." When the Turkish invasions 
disorganized the Eastern Empire in the 12th century, the 
Byzantine navy withered, and the emperors were driven to rely 
on the help of the Venetians. 

The Italian republics of the middle ages, and the monarchical 
states bordering on the Mediterranean, always possessed fleets 
which did not differ in essential particulars from that 
of Athens. There is, however, one fact which must not 
be overlooked. It is that the seamen of some of them, and 
more especially of Genoa, served the powers of western Europe 
from a very early date. Diego Gelmirez, the first archbishop of 
Santiago in Galiicia, employed Genoese to construct a dockyard 
and build a squadron at Vigo in the 12th century. 

Edward III. of England employed Genoese, and others were 
engaged to create a dockyard for the French kings at Rouen. 
By them the naval science of the Mediterranean was carried 
to the nations on the shores of the Atlantic. The Mediterranean 
navies made their last great appearance in history at the battle 
of Lepanto (1571). Thenceforth the main scene of naval activity 
was on the ocean, with very different ships, other armaments 
and organizations. 

The great navies of modern history may best be discussed by 
taking first certain specially important national navies in their 
earlier evolution, and then considering those which are of present 
day interest in their relations to one another. 

The British Navy. 

The Royal Navy of Great Britain stands at the head of the 
navies of the modern world, not only by virtue of its strength, 
but because it has the longest and the most consistent historical 
development. The Norse invasions of the 9th century forced the 
English people to provide for their defence against attack from 
oversea. Though their efforts were but partially successful, 
and great Norse settlements were made on the eastern side of 
the island, a national organization was formed. Every shire was 
called upon to supply ships " in proportion to the number of 
hundreds and from the produce of what had been the folkland 
contained in it " (Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 116). Alfred and his 
successors had also ships of their own, maintained out of the 
royal revenue of which they had complete control. Before the 
Conquest the system of contribution by the shires had largely 
broken down. Yet in its main lines the method of providing a 
navy adopted by Alfred and his immediate successors remained 
in existence. There were the people's ships which represented the 
naval side of the fyrd — i.e. the general obligation to defend the 
realm; and there were the king's own vessels which were his 
property. By the nth century a third source of supply had 
been found. This was the feudal array. Towns on the sea coast 
were endowed with privileges and franchises, and rendered 
definite services in return. 

The Norman Conquest introduced no fundamental difference. 
In the 1 2th century the kings of the Angevine dynasty made the 
military resources of their kingdom available in three ways; 
the feudal array, the national militia and the mercenaries. 
Dover, Sandwich, Romney, and the other towns on the south- 
east coast which formed the Cinque Ports represented the naval 
part of the feudal array. In the reign of Henry III. (1216-1272) 
their service was fixed at 57 ships, with 1197 men and boys, for 
fifteen days in any year, to count from the time when they weighed 
anchor. During these fifteen days they served at the expense 
of the towns. Beyond that date they were maintained by the 
king. The Cinque Ports Squadron has been spoken of as the 
foundation of the Royal Navy. But a feudal array is wholly 
alien in character to a national force. The Cinque Ports, after 
playing a prominent part in the 13th century, sank into in- 
significance. They were always inclined to piracy at the expense 
of other English towns. In 1297, during one of the expeditions to 
Flanders, they attacked and burnt twenty ships belonging to 
Yarmouth under the eyes of Edward I. (1 272-1307). The 
national militia had a longer life. The obligation of the coast 
towns and counties to provide ships and men for the defence 
of the realm was enforced till the 17th century. Nor did the 
method of enforcing that obligation differ materially. In the 
reign of King John (1100-1216), when the records began to be 
regularly kept, but when there was no radical change in system, 
the reeves and bailiffs of the seaports were bound to ascertain 
by a juryjhejiumber, size and quality of all ships belonging to 
the port. When the ships were required for the king's service 
they were embargoed. The local authorities were then bound 
to see that they were properly equipped and manned. It was 
the duty of the reeves and bailiffs to arrange that they should 
reach the place named by the king as rendezvous at the tune 
fixed by him. These embargoes inflicted heavy loss even when 
they were honestly imposed, and loud complaints were heard 
in Parliament from the later years of Edward III. (13 2 7-13 7 7) 
that they afforded the king's officers many openings for oppression 
and corruption. 

The true ancestors of the modern navy must be sought in 
the third element of the navy of the middle ages — the king's 
ships and his " mercenaries." Under King John we find the 
full record of a regular organization of a Royal Navy as apart 
from the feudal array of the Cinque Ports or the/y/J. In 1205 
he had in all 50 " galleys " — long ships for war-distributed in 
various ports. William of Wrotham, archdeacon of Taunton, 
one of the king's " clerks," or ecclesiastical persons who formed 
his civil service, is named, sometimes in combination with 
others, as " keeper of the king's ships," " keeper of the king's 
galleys " and " keeper of the king's seaports." The royal 
vessels cannot have differed from the 57 warships of the Cinque 
Ports, and at first his navy was preferable to the feudal array, 
or the levy from the counties, mainly because it was more fully 
under his own control. They were indeed so wholly his that 
he could hire them out to the counties, and at a much later 
period the ships of Henry V. (14 13-14 2 2) were sold to pay his 
personal debts after his death. Yet though the process by which 
the king's ships became the national navy was slow, the affilia- 
tion is direct from them to the fleet of to-day, while the permanent 
officials at Whitehall are no less the "direct descendants of 
William of Wrotham and the king's clerks of the 13th century. 
When on active service the command was exercised by repre- 
sentatives of the king, who were not required to be bred to the 
sea or even always to be laymen. In the crusade of 1190 the 
fleet of Richard the Lion Hearted (1180-1199), drawn partly 
from England and partly from his continental possessions, was 
governed by a body of which two of the members were church- 
men. They and their lay colleagues were described as the 
ductores et gubernatorcs totius navigii Regis. The first commanders 
of squadrons were known as justiciarii navigii Regis, ductores et 
constabularii Regis. 

The crusade of 11 90 doubtless made Englishmen acquainted 
with the title of "admiral"; but it was not till much later 
that the word became, first as " admiral and captain," then as 
" admiral " alone, the title of an officer commanding a squadron. 
The first admiral of all England was Sir John Beau champ, 
appointed for a year in 1360. The permanent appointment 
of a lord admiral dates from 1406, when John Beaufort, natural 
son of John of Gaunt, and marquess of Somerset and Dorset, 
was named to the post. The crews consisted of the two elements 
which, in varying proportions and under different names, have 
been and are common to all navies — the mariners whose business 
it was to navigate the ship, and the soldiers who were put in 
to fight. Until the vessel had been developed and the epoch of 
ocean voyages began, the first were few and subordinate. As 
the seas of Britain were ill adapted for the use of the galley 
in the proper sense, though the French employed them, English 
ships relied mainly on the sail. They used the oar indeed but 
never as a main resource, and had therefore no use .for the 
" turma " (ciurma in Italian, chiourme in French, and chusma 
in Spanish) of rowers formed in the Mediterranean craft. Crews 
were obtained partly by free enlistment, but also to a great 
extent, by the press (see Impressment). The code of naval 
discipline was the laws of Oleron (see Sea Laws), which embodied 
the general " custom of the sea." By the reign of Edward III. 
(13 27-1377) the duties and jurisdiction of the admiral were 
fixed. He controlled the returns of the ships made by the 
reeves, selected them for service, and chose his officers, who 
had their commission from him. A rudimentary code of signals 
by lights or flags was in use. 

The history of the middle ages bears testimony to the general 
efficiency and energy of the navy. Under weak kings, and at 
certain periods, for instance in the latter years of Edward III. 
and the reign of his grandson Richard II. (1377-1399), it fell 
into decay, and the coast was ravaged by the French and their 
allies the Basque seamen, who manned the navy of Castile. 
Henry IV. (1390-1413), though an astute and vigorous ruler, 
was driven to make a contract with the merchants, mariners 
and shipowners, to take over the duty of guarding the coast 
in 1 406-1 407. Their admirals Richard Clitherow and Nicholas 
Blackburne were appointed, and exercised their commands. 
But the experiment was not a success, and was not renewed. 
Apart from these periods of eclipse, the navy in all its elements, 
feudal, national and royal, was more than a match for its enemies. 
The destruction of the fleet prepared by Philip Augustus, the 
French king, for the invasion of England in 12 13 at Damme, 
the defeat of Eustace the Monk in 1217 off Dover, the victory 
over the French fleet at Sluys in 1340, and the defeat of the 
Spaniards off Winchelsea in 1350, were triumphs never quite 
counterbalanced by any equivalent overthrow. Still better 
proofs of the ability of any navy to discharge its duties 
\vere the long retention of Calais, and the constant success 
of the rulers of England in their invasions of France. The 
claim to the sovereignty of the seas has been attributed on 
insufficient evidence to King John, but it was enforced by 
Edward III. 

Under the sovereigns of the Tudor dynasty (1485-1603) the 
development of the navy was steady. Though Henry VII. 
(1485-1509) made little use of his fleet in war, he huilt ships. 
His son Henry VIII. (1 500-1 547) took a keen interest in his 
navy. Shipbuilding was improved by the. importation of Italian 
workmen. The large resources he obtained by the plunder of 
the Church enabled Henry VIII. to spend on a scale which had 
been impossible for his predecessors, and was to be impossible 
for his successors without the aid of grants from Parliament. 
But the most vital sendee which he rendered to the navy was the 
formation of, or rather the organization of existing officials 
into, the navy office. This measure was taken at the very end 
of his reign, when the board was constituted by letters patent 
dated 24th of April 1546. It consisted of a lieutenant of the 
admiralty, a treasurer, a comptroller, a surveyor, a clerk of the 
ships, and two officials without special title. A master of the 
ordnance for the ships was also appointed. Henry's board, 
commonly known as the navy board, continued, with some 
periods of suspension,' and with the addition of different de- 
partments — the victualling board, the transport board, the 
pay office, &c, added at various times — to be the administrative 
machinery of the navy till 1832. They were all theoretically 
subject to the authority of the lord high admiral, or the com- 
missioners for discharging his office, who had the military and 
political control of the navy and issued all commissions to its 
officers. In practice the boards were very independent. The 
double government of the navy, though it lasted long, was 
undoubtedly the cause of much waste — partly by the creation 
of superfluous officials, hut more by the opening it provided 
for corruption. 

The 1 6th century in England as elsewhere saw a great develop- 
ment in the size and capacity of ships, in the length of voyages, 
and consequently in the sciences of navigation and seamanship, 
which brought with them the predominance of the seaman 
element hitherto subordinate. In the reign of Henry VIII., 
when a squadron was commissioned in 1512, out of a total of 
3000 men, 1750 were soldiers. By the end of the reign of his 
daughter Elizabeth (1558-1603) it was calculated that of the 
8 $46 men required to man her fleet 5534 were seamen, 804 
were gunners, and only 2008 were soldiers. In the early years 
of his reign Henry VIII. equipped his squadrons on a system 
which bears some resemblance to the Athenian trierarchies. 
He made a contract with his admiral Sir Edward Howard (1477- 
1513)? by which the king supplied ships, guns and a sum of 
money. The admiral, who had full power to " press," named the 
officers and collected the crews. Among them are named 
contingents from particular towns — the representatives of the 
fyrd. With the exception of the captain, who received eighteen 
pence a day, all were paid at the same rate, 5s. wages and 5s. for 
rations per month. Extra sums called " dead shares," the 
wages of so many imaginary men, and rewards, were provided 
for the master and warrant officers. Until the regular returns 
known as the " weekly progress of the dockyards" and the 
" monthly lists of ships in sea pay " were established in 1773, 
no constant strict account of the strength of the navy was kept. 
The figure must therefore be accepted as subject to correction, 
but King Henry's navy is estimated to have consisted of 53 
vessels of 11,268 tons, carrying 237 brass guns and 1848 of iron. 
It sank somewhat during the agitated reigns of his successors 
Edward VI. (1547-1553) and Mary (1553-1558). By Elizabeth 
it was well restored. In mere numbers her navy never equalled 
her father's. At the end of her reign it was composed of 42 
vessels, but they were of 17,055 tons, and therefore on the average 
much larger. The military services rendered by the great 
queen's fleet were brilliant. No organic change was introduced, 
and fleets continued to be made up by including vessels belonging 
to the different ports. 

The two most notable advances in organization were the 
establishment of a graduated scale of pay by rank in 1582, and 
the formation of a fund for the relief of sick and wounded 
seamen. This was not a grant from the state but a species of 
compulsory insurance. All men employed by the navy, including 
shipwrights, were subject to a small deduction from their pay. 
The amount was kept in the chest at Chatham, from which the 
fund took its name, and was managed by a committee of five, 
each of whom had a key, and of whom four were elected by the 
contributors. The commissioner of the dockyard presided. 

It was between the accession and the fall of the House of 
Stuart (1603-1688) that the navy became a truly national force, 
maintained out of the revenue voted by parliament, and acting 
without the co-operation of temporary levies of trading ships. 
The reign of James I. (1603-1625) is a period of great importance 
in its history. The policy of the king was peaceful, and he only 
once sent out a strong fleet — in 1620 when an expedition was 
despatched against the Barbary pirates. He took, however, 
a lively interest in shipbuilding, and supported his master ship- 
wright Phineas Pett (1 507-1647) against the rivals whom he 
offended by disregarding their rules of thumb. Under the lax 
administration of the lord high admiral Nottingham, better 
known as Lord Howard of Effingham, many abuses crept into 
the navy. Though more money was spent on it than in the 
reign of the queen, it had sunk to a very low level of effective 
strength in 1618. In 1619 the old lord admiral was persuaded 
to retire, and was succeeded by George Villiers, duke of Bucking- 
ham, the king's favourite. Nottingham's retirement was made 
compulsory by the report of a committee appointed to inquire 
into the condition of the navy in 1618. They reported that 
while numbers of new offices had been created at a cost treble 
the whole expense of the permanent staff of Queen Elizabeth's 
time, the dockyards had become nests of pilfering and corruption. 
Ships were rotting, and money was yearly drawn for vessels 
which had ceased to exist. The committee undertook to meet 
the whole ordinary and extraordinary charges of the navy 
(upkeep and new building) for £30,000 a year. The ships in 
commission at that time during peace were confined to the 
diminutive winter and summer guards, whose duty was to 
transport ambassadors to and fro across the Channel and to 
hunt the pirates who still swarmed on the coast. Buckingham 
left the administration of the navy in the hands of the com- 
missioners, who by dismissing superfluous officers and paying 
better salaries had by 1624 fulfilled their promise to restore 
the fleet. The establishment they proposed was only of 30 ships, 
but they were larger in aggregate tonnage by 3050 tons than 
Queen Elizabeth's. 

Charles I. (1625-1649) carried on the work of his father as far 
as his limited resources allowed. The pay of the sailors, fixed 
in 1585 at 1 os., was increased to 15s. A captain received from 
£4, 6s. 8d. a month of 28 days (the standard of the navy) to £14, 
according to the size of his ship. Lieutenants, who were only 
carried in the larger ships, received from £2, 16s. to £3, 10s., the 
sailing-master from £2, 6s. 8d. to £4, 13s. 9d., and the warrant 
officers from £1, 3s. to £2, 4s. The rating of ships by the number 
of men carried was introduced in this reign. Vessels of good 
quality were built for the king, and he showed a real understand- 
ing of the necessity for maintaining a strong fleet. 

But the time was coming when the hereditary royal revenue 
was no longer adequate to meet the expense of a navy. By the 
middle of the 17th century a costly warship, far larger than the 
trading-ship in size and much more strongly built, had been 
developed. The extension of British commerce called for 
protection which an establishment of 40 to 50 vessels could not 
give. When the Great Rebellion broke out in 1641 the navy 
of King Charles consisted of only 42 vessels of 22,411 tons. At 
the Restoration (1660) it had grown to 154 ships for sea service, 
of 57,463 tons. Such a force could only be maintained out of 
taxes granted by the parliament. The efforts of King Charles 
to obtain funds for his navy had a large influence in provoking 
the rebellion (see Ship Money). The government of the navy 
during this reign remained in the hands of the committee of 
1618, under the lord high admiral Buckingham, till he was 
murdered in 1628. It was then entrusted to a special commission, 
who were to have held it till the king's second son James, duke 
of York, was of age. In 1638 the king restored the office of lord 
high admiral " during pleasure " in favour of Algernon Percy, 
10th earl of Northumberland, by whom the fleet was handed 
over to the parliament. 

During the Great Rebellion and the Protectorate the navy 
was governed by parliamentary committees, or by a committee 
named by the Council of State, or by Cromwell. The need, 
first for cutting the king off from foreign support, and then for 
conducting successive struggles in Ireland, or with the king's 
partisans on the sea, with the Dutch and with the Spaniards 
during the Protectorate, led to a great increase in its size. These, 
too, were years of much internal development. Blake and the 
other parliamentary officers found that the pressed or hired 
merchant ships were' untrustworthy in action. The ships were 
not strong enough, and the officers had no military spirit. 
Parliament therefore provided its own vessels and its own 
officers. The staff was strengthened by the appointment of 
second lieutenants. The Dutch War of 1652-53 may be said 
to have seen the last of the national militia, fyrd or levy of ships 
from the ports for warlike purposes. After the war a code of 
" fighting instructions " was issued. During it a cede of discipline 
in 39 articles was established. Both embodied ancient practices 
rather than new principles, yet it marked a notable advance in 
the progress of the navy towards complete organization that 
it should pass from the state of being governed by traditional 
use and wont, or by the will of the commander for the time 
being, to the condition of being ruled by fixed and published 
codes to which all were subject. The high military command 
during the interregnum 1640-1660 was entrusted to committees 
of admirals and generals at sea. 

With the restoration of Charles II. (1660-1685) the modern 
period in the history of the navy began. The first steps were 
taken to form a corps of officers. Lads of gentle birth were 
sent on board ships in commission with a letter of service — from 
which came their popular name of " king's letter boys " — to 
the captain, instructing him to treat them on the footing of 
gentlemen and train them to become officers. After the Dutch 
War of 1664-67 a body of flag-officers were retained by fixed 
allowances from the crown. This was the beginning of the half- 
pay list, which was extended by successive steps to include 
select bodies of captains and lieutenants, and then all com- 
missioned officers. The process of forming the corps was not 
complete till the end of the reign of Queen Anne (1702-1714). 
Special training and a right to permanent payment are the 
essentials of a state service. The fleet was, at least in the earlier 
part of the reign, used for the promotion of British interests and 
the protection of trade in distant seas. One squadron was sent 
to take possession of Bombay, which formed part of the dower 
of Queen Catherine. Tangier, which was acquired in the same 
way, was occupied as a naval station till the cost of maintaining 
it proved excessive and it was evacuated in 1685. A series 
of effective attacks was made on the Barbary pirates, and ships 
were stationed in the West Indies to check piracy and buccaneer- 
ing. Until 1673, when he was driven out of office by the Test 
Act, the king's brother James, duke of York, afterwards James 
II., held office as lord high admiral. He proved an able admini- 
strator. The navy office was thoroughly organized on the lines 
laid down by the earl of Northumberland, and revised " sailing 
and fighting instructions," as well as a code of discipline, were 
issued. During the latter years of the reign of Charles II. the 
administrative corruption of the time affected the navy severely. 
The fixed charge for ordinary and extraordinary expenses which 
had risen to £300,000 a year was mostly wasted, under the lax 
or dishonest supervision of the commission appointed by the 
king after his brother left office. James II. (1685-1688), who 
kept the admiralship in his own hands and governed largely 
through his able secretary, the diarist Samuel Pepys, did much 
to restore its efficiency. The navy he left was estimated to 
consist of 173 ships of 101,892 tons carrying when in commission 
42,003 men and armed with 6930 guns. 

The evolution of the navy was completed by the Revolution 
of 1688. It now, though still called royal, became a purely 
national force, supported by the yearly votes of parliament, 
and governed by parliamentary committees, known as the com- 
mission for discharging the office of lord high admiral. A lord 
high admiral has occasionally been appointed, as in the case 
of Prince George of Denmark, husband of Queen Anne, or the 
duke of Clarence, afterwards King William IV. But these were 
formal restorations. As no organic change was made till 1832, 
it will now be enough to describe the organization as it was 
during this century and a half. 

The discipline of the navy was based on the Navy Discipline 
Act of 1660 (13th of Charles II.). The act was found to require 
amending acts, and the whole of them were combined, and 
revised by the 22nd of George II., passed in 1749. Some scandals 
of the previous years had caused great popular anger, and the 
alternative to death was taken from the punishment threatened 
against officers who failed to show sufficient zeal in the presence 
of the enemy. It was under this severe code that Admiral Byng 
was executed. In 1780 an amending act was passed which 
allowed a court martial to assign a lighter penalty. 

The government, political and military, was in the hands of the 
admiralty. The administration was carried on in subordination 
to the admiralty by the navy board and the other civil depart- 
ments, the victualling board, the board of transport, the pay 
office, the sick and hurt office and some others. At the head 
were the flag-officers, who were divided as follows: — 

	Admiral of the Fleet. 
	White. 
	Blue. 

	Vice-Admiral Red. I 
	White, 
	tt ., Blue. I 

	Rear-Admiral Red. 
	„ White. 
	Blue. 

The Red, White and Blue squadrons had been the divisions of the 
great fleets of the 17th century, but they became formal terms 
indicating only the seniority of the flag-officers. It was the 
intention of parliament to confine the flag list to these nine 
officers, but as the navy grew this was found to be impossible. 
The rank of admiral of the fleet remained a solitary distinction. 
The captains, commanders and lieutenants were the com- 
missioned officers and received their commissions from the 
admiralty. Promotion from them to flag rank was not at first 
limited by strict rules, but it tended to be by seniority. During 
the war of the Austrian Succession, in 1747, a regular system 
was introduced by which when a captain was promoted for 
active service — to hoist his flag, as the phrase went — he was made 
rear-admiral of the Blue squadron. Captains senior to him 
were promoted rear-admiral in general terms, and were placed on 
the retired list. They were familiarly called " yellow " admirals, 
and to be promoted in this way was to be " yellowed." Pro- 
motion to a lieutenant's commission could be obtained by any one 
who had served, or whose name had been on the books of a sea- 
going ship, for five years. Whether he entered with a king's letter 
of service or from the naval academy at Portsmouth, as a sailor 
or as a ship's boy, he was equally qualified to hold a commission 
if he had fulfilled the necessary conditions and could pass an 
examining board of captains, a test which in the case of lads who 
had interest was generally a pure formality. He was supposed 
to show that he knew some navigation, and was a practical sea- 
man who could hand, reef and steer. As captains were allowed 
a retinue of servants, a custom arose by which they put the 
names of absent or imaginary lads on the books as servants 
and drew the pay allowance for them. It was quite illegal, 
and constituted the offence known as " false musters," punish- 
able by dismissal from the service. But this regulation was even 
less punctually observed than the rule which forbade the carry- 
ing of women. Till the beginning of the 19th century many 
distinguished officers were borne on a ship's books for two or 
three years before they went to sea. The navigation was en- 
trusted to the sailing-master and his mates. He had often been 
a merchant captain or sailor. The captains and lieutenants 
were supposed to understand navigation, but it was notorious 
that many of them had forgotten the little they had learnt in 
order to pass their qualifying examination. As the navy was 
cut down to the quick in peace, the supply of officers was in- 
sufficient at the beginning of a war, and it was found necessary 
to give commissions to men who were illiterate but were good 
practical seamen. Officers who had not begun as gentlemen 
" on the quarter deck " were said to have come in " through 
the hawse hole " — the hole by which the cable runs out at the 
bow. Some among them rose to distinction. The accountant's 
work was done by' the purser, who in bad times was said to be 
often in league with the captain to defraud both the government 
and the crew. The medical service in the navy during the 
1 8th century was bad. The position of the surgeons who were 
appointed by the navy office was not an enviable one, and the 
medical staff of the navy was much recruited from licentiates 
of Edinburgh, or Apothecaries Hall. Finally it is to be observed 
that when a ship was paid off only the commissioned officers, 
masters and surgeons were entitled to half-pay, or had any 
further necessary connexion with the navy. 

The crews were formed partly by free enlistment and partly 
by impressment. When these resources failed, prisoners, 
criminal and political, were allowed to volunteer or were drafted 
from the jails. The Patriotic Society, formed at the beginning 
of the Seven Years' War, educated boys for the navy. During 
the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars the counties were called 
upon to supply quotas, which they commonly secured from the 
debtors' prison or the workhouse. A ship was supposed to 
be well manned when she had one-fifth of her crew of marines, 
and one-third of men bred to the sea. This proportion of seamen 
was rarely reached. As the navy did not train its men from 
boyhood in peace, the genuine sailors, known as " prime seamen " 
and " sailormen," who were the skilled artificers of the time, 
had to be sought for among those who had served their apprentice- 
ship in the merchant service. They never enlisted voluntarily, 
for they disliked the discipline of the navy, and the pay was 
both bad and given in an oppressive way. The pay of a seaman 
was 22s. 6d. a month for able seamen, the rate fixed in the reign 
of Charles II., and 19s. for ordinary seamen. This sum was not 
paid at fixed dates, but at first only at the end of a commission, 
and after 1758 whenever a ship which had been a year in com- 
mission returned home — up to six months before the date of her 
arrival, the balance being kept as a security against desertion, 
which was then incessant and enormous. As men were often 
turned over from ship to ship they had a sheaf of pay notes to 
present on reaching home. The task of making up accounts 
was slow, and the men were often driven to sell their pay notes 
to low class speculators at a heavy discount. Discipline was 
mainly enforced by the lash, and the abuse of their power by 
captains was often gross. 

These grievances led to a long series of single ship mutinies, 
which culminated in the great mutiny of 1797. The fleets at 
Spithead, the Nore, Plymouth, the South of Ireland and Cape of 
Good Hope mutinied one after another. The government had 
aggravated the danger by drafting numbers of the United 
Irish into the fleet, and the quotas from the counties contained 
many dangerous characters. The crisis which seemed to threaten 
the country with ruin passed away. Concessions were made 
to the just claims of the men. When political agitators en- 
deavoured to make use of the discontent of the sailors for treason- 
able ends, the government stood firm, and the patriotism of the 
great bulk of the men enabled it to restore discipline. The 
I breeze at Spithead," as the mutiny was nicknamed in the navy, 
was the beginning of the reforms which made the service as 
popular as it was once hateful. 

The administration of the navy throughout the 18th century, 
and in a less degree after 1806 up to 1832, was in many respects 
slovenly, and was generally corrupt. The different hranches, 
military and civil, were scattered and worked in practical 
independence, though the hoard of admiralty was supposed to 
have absolute authority over all. The admiralty was at White- 
hall, the navy office in Seething Lane near the Tower, and after 
1780 at Somerset House. The victualling office was on Tower 
Hill, the pay office in Broad Street, where also was the Sick and 
Hurt office. In 1749, when the state of the navy excited just 
discontent, the admiralty first established regular visitations 
of the dockyards which in a time of general laxity had become 
nests of corruption. These visitations were, however, not 
regularly made. By the end of the century, and in spite of 
sporadic efforts at reform, the evil had become so generally 
recognized that Earl St Vincent, then first lord, persuaded 
parliament in 1802 to appoint a parliamentary commission of 
inquiry. Its reports, thirteen in number, were given between 
1804 and 1806. They revealed much waste, bad management 
and corruption. The tenth report showed that money voted 
for the navy was used by the then treasurer, Henry Dundas 
(Lord Melville), for purposes which he refused to reveal. In 
1806 another commission was appointed to revise and digest the 
civil affairs of the navy, and a considerable improvement was 
effected. Much remained to be done. There was no strict 
appropriation of money. Accounts were kept in complicated, 
old-fashioned ways which made it impossible to strike a balance. 

In 1832 Sir James Graham, first lord in Earl Grey's adminis- 
tration, obtained the support of parliament for his policy of 
sweeping away the double administration of the navy, by 
admiralty and navy office, and combining them into one divided 
into five departments. With this great organic change the navy 
entered on its modern stage. 

Subject to the warning that for the reason given above, the figures 
do not deserve absolute confidence, the material strength of the 
British navy from the death of Queen Anne to the fall of Napoleon 
was : Ships. Tons. 

At the death of Queen Anne, 1714 . 247 167,219 

f George I., 1727 . 233 170,862 
,, „ George II., 1760 . 412 321,104 
In 1783 617 500,781 
J nI 793 4*1 402,555 
In 1816 776 724,810 " 

The^ figures for 1783, and for 1816, are swollen by prizes and worn 
out ships. All the figures include vessels unfit for service, or useful 
only for harbour work, or ordered to be built, but not actually in 
existence. The number of men varied enormously from a peace to 
war establishment. Thus in 1755 on the eve of the Seven Years* 
War parliament voted 12,000 seamen. In 1762 the vote was for 
70,000 men, including 19,061 marines — the corps having been created 
in the interval. In 1775, on the eve of the American War of Inde- 
pendence, the vote was for 18,000 men for the sea service, including 
4354 marines. At the close of the war in 1 783 the vote was for 1 10,000 
men, including 25,291 marines, from which it fell in 1784 to 26,000 
(marines 4495 included) and in 1786 to 18,000 men, of whom 3860 
were marines. In 18 12, when the navy was at the highest level of 
strength it reached, the vote was for 113,000 seamen and 31,400 
marines. From this level it fell in 1816 to 24,000 seamen and 9000 
marines. These figures represent paper strength. ^ Owing to the 
prevalence of desertion, and the difficulty of obtaining men, the 
actual strength was always appreciably lower. 

The French Navy. 

Before the French monarchy could possess a fleet, its early kings, 
whose rule was effective only in the centre of the country, had 
first to conquer their sea coast from their great vassals. Philip 
Augustus (1 180-1223) began by expelling King John of England 
from Normandy and Poitou. The process was not completed 
until Louis XII. (1498-1515) united the duchy of Brittany to the 
crown by his marriage with the duchess Anne. Long before the 
centralization of authority had been completed the French kings 
possessed a fleet, or rather two fleets of very distinct character. 
Her geographical position has always compelled France to draw 
her navy from two widely different sources — from the Channel 
and the coast of the Atlantic on the north and west and on 
the south from the Mediterranean. This separation has imposed 
on her the difficult task of concentrating her forces at times of 
crisis, and the concentration has always been hazardous. Like 
their English rivals, the French kings of the middle ages drew 
their naval forces from the feudal array, the national levy and 
their own ships. But the proportion of the elements was not the 
same. Many of the great vassals owed the service of ships, and 
their obedience was always less certain than that of the Cinque 
Ports. The trading towns were less able, and commonly less 
willing, than the English to supply the king with ships. He was 
thus driven to trust mainly to his own vessels — and they were 
drawn at first exclusively, and always to a great extent, from the 
Mediterranean seaboard. His own territories in the south were 
insufficiently provided with seamen, and the French king had 
therefore to seek his captains, his men and his vessels by purchase 
or by subsidies from Genoa, or in a less degree from Aragon. 
When Saint Louis (1 226-1 270) sailed on his first crusade in 1249, 
he formed the first French royal fleet, and created the first French 
dockyard at Aigues Mortes. Ships and dockyard were bought 
from, or were built by, the Genoese at the king's expense. His 
admirals, the first appointed by the French crown, Ugo Lercari 
and Jacobo di Levante, were Genoese. Saint Louis created the 
office of admiral of France. When in later times Aigues Mortes 
was cut off from the sea by the encroachment of the land, 
Narbonne and Marseilles were used as ports of war. This fleet 
was purely Mediterranean in character. It consisted of galleys, 
and though the sail was used it was dependent on the oar, and 
therefore on the " turma " (ckiourme) of rowers, who in earlier 
times were hired men, but from the middle of the 15th century 
began to be composed of galley slaves — prisoners of war, slaves 
purchased in Africa, criminals and vagabonds condemned by the 
magistrate to the chain and the oar. Philip IV. le Bel (1285- 
13 14) was led by his rivalry with Edward I. of England to create 
a naval establishment on the Channel. He found his materials 
in the existing Mediterranean fleet. A dockyard was built for 
him at Rouen, again by the Genoese Enrico Marchese, Lanfranc 
Tartaro and Albertino Spinola. It was officially known as the 
Tersenal or Dorsenal, but was commonly called the clos des gallies 
or galley yard, and it existed from 1294 to 1419. The French 
navy has always suffered from alternations of attention and 
neglect. In times of disastrous wars on land it has fallen into 
confusion and obscurity. Except when Francis I. (1515-1547) 
made a vigorous attempt to revive it at the very close of his. 
reign, the French navy languished till the 1 7th century. Its very 
unity of administration disappeared in the 15th century, when 
the jurisdiction of the admiral of France was invaded and defied 
by the admiralties of Guyenne, Brittany and the Levant. These 
local admiralties were suppressed by Francis I. 

Richelieu, the great minister of Louis XIII., found the navy 
extinct. He was reduced to seeking the help of English ships 
against the Huguenots. From him dates the creation of the 
modern French navy. In 1626 he abolished the office of admiral 
of France, which had long been no more than a lucrative place held 
by a noble who was too great a man to obey orders. He himself 
assumed the title of grand maitre et surirttendant de la navigation, 
and the military command was entrusted to the* admirals du 
Ponant, i.e. of the west or Atlantic and Channel, and du Levant, 
i. e. of the Mediterranean. But Richelieu's establishment 
shrivelled after his death. It was raised from its ruins by the 
pride and policy of Louis XIV. (1643-1715). Under his direc- 
tion a numerous and strongly organized navy was created. A 
very full code of laws — the ordonnance — was framed by Colbert 
and Lyonne with the advice of the ablest officers, and was 
promulgated on the 5th of April 1689. Though modified by other 
ordonnances in 1765, 1772, 1774, 1776 and 17S6, in the main lines 
it governed the French navy till the Revolution. 

By this code the French navy was based on the Inscription 
maritime, a very severe law of compulsory service, affecting the 
inhabitants of the coast and of the valleys of rivers as far up as 
they were capable of floating a lighter. The whole body of 
officials and officers was divided into the civil branch known as 
la plume, and the military branch called Vepie. The first had 
the entire control of the finances, and the dockyards of Toulon, 
Brest and Rochfort, with an intendant de la marine at the head 
of each. The general chief was the sous secretaire au departement 
de la marine, the title of the French minister of marine till the 
Revolution. Under Louis XIV. a civil officer, the intendant des 
armies navales, who ranked as an admiral, sat on councils of war 
and reported on the conduct of the naval officers. He must not 
be confused with the intendant de la marine. The military branch 
had at its head the admiral of France, the office having been 
re-created in 1669 by Louis XIV. in favour of his natural son the 
due de Vermandois. In theory the admiral was the administra- 
tive military and judicial head of the admiralty. In practice 
the admirals were princes of the blood, who drew pay and fees, 
but who never went to sea, with the one exception of the count 
of Toulouse, another natural son of Louis XIV. Two vice- 
admirals of France du Ponant and du Levant commanded in the 
Mediterranean and on the ocean. A third office of vice-admiral 
of France was created for Suffren, The lieutenant giniral (vice- 
admiral) came next, and below him4he chef d'escadre (rear- 
admiral), capitaine de vaisseau (post captain), capitaine de br&lol 
(fircship) or de frigate (commander), and the major, a chief of the 
staff on beard who commanded all landing parties. There was 
no permanent body of marines in the French navy, the infanterie 
de la marine being troops for service in the colonies, which were 
administratively connected with the navy and governed by 
naval officers. The lieutenant needs no explanation, and the 
enseigne was a sub-lieutenant. The corps of officers was recruited 
from les gardes de la marine, answering more or less to the English 
midshipmen — who received a careful professional education and 
were required to be of noble birth. Besides the grand corps 
de la marine there was a fleet of galleys with a general at its head, 
and a staff of officers also of noble birth. It was suppressed in 
1748 as being a useless expense. Officers not belonging to the 
grand corps were sometimes taken in from the merchant service. 
They were known as officiers bleus, because their uniform was 
all blue, and not, as in the case of the noble corps, blue and red. 
On paper the organization of the French royal navy was very 
thorough. In reality it worked ill; the severity of the inscription 
maritime made it odious, and owing to the prevailing financial 
embarrassment of the crown after 1692 the sailors were ill-paid, 
ill-fed and defrauded of the pensions promised them. They fled 
abroad, or went inland and took up other trades. The military 
and civil branches were always in a state of hostility to one 
another, and their pay also was commonly in arrears. The noble 
corps was tenacious of its privileges, and extremely insolent 
towards the officiers bleus. By Louis XV. (1715-1774) the navy 
was neglected till the last years of his reign, when it was revived 
by the due de Choiseul. Under Louis XVI. (1774-1792) when 
the Revolution broke out the long accumulated hatred felt for 
the noble officers had free play. Louis XVI. had indeed relaxed 
the rule imposing the presentation of proofs of nobility on all 
naval officers, but the change was made only in 1786 and it came 
too late. The majority of the noble officers were massacred by 
the Jacobins or driven into exile. 

The Revolution subjected the French navy to a series of. 
disorganizations and reorganizations by which all tradition and 
discipline were destroyed. Old privileges and the office of Grand 
Admiral were suppressed. The attempt to revive the navy in 
the face of the superior power of England was hopeless. Neither 
the Republic nor the Empire was able to create an effective navy. 
They had no opportunity to form a new body of officers out of 
the lads they educated. 

m The strength of the French Royal Navy is difficult to estimate, 
since for long periods of the 18th century it was rotting in harbour 
and its ships were rarely commissioned. Louis XIV. is credited with 
95 ships of the line and 29 frigates, together with many smaller 
vessels, in 1692. At the close of the Seven Years' War it had sunk 
to 44 ships of the line and 9 frigates. By 1778 the French navy 
had risen to 78 of the line with frigates and femallcr vessels which 
brought the total to 264. In 1793 on the outbreak of the revolution- 
ary war, it was estimated to consist of 82 ships of the line, mostly 
fine vessels, and of frigates with lesser craft which brought it to a 
total of 250. Under Napoleon the mere number was very much 
more considerable and included ships built in the annexed territories, 
but they were largely constructed of green timber, were meant 
merely to force England to maintain blockades, and were never sent 
to sea. 

Spanish Navy. 

The administrative history of the Spanish navy is singularly 
confused and broken. It might almost be said that the country 
had no navy in the full sense of the word — that is to say, no 
organized maritime force provided and governed by the state 
for warlike purposes only — until one was created on the French 
model by the sovereigns of the Bourbon dynasty i.e. after 1700. 
Yet the kings of the Spanish peninsula, whether they wore the 
crown of Castile and Leon or of Aragon, had fleets, formed, like 
all the others of the middle ages, partly of ships supplied by the 
coast towns and populations, partly of the royal vessels. Aragon 
was a purely Mediterranean power. Its fleets, which were chiefly 
supported by Barcelona, a flourishing commercial city, were 
composed of galleys. With the union of the crown in 1479 
Aragon fell into the background, and its navy continued to be 
represented only by a few galleys, for service in the Mediterranean 
against the pirates. The dominions of Castile stretched from 
the Bay of Biscay to the Mediterranean. Its kings, therefore, 
had need both of ships (naos) and galleys. The first beginnings 
of the Castilian navy were not due to the king, but to the foresight 
and enterprise of Diego Gelmirez, bishop and afterwards first 
archbishop of Santiago in Gallicia. In or about 1 1 20 he employed 
the Genoese Ogerio to form a dockyard at Iria, and to build 
vessels. The naval activity of the coast of the Bay of Biscay 
developed so rapidly that in 1 147 a squadron from the northern 
ports took part in the conquest of Almeria by Alfonso VII. 
(11 20-1 1 57) in alliance with the Pisans. A century later (1248) 
another squadron constructed at the expense of the king 
Fernando III. El Santo (1217-1252), and commanded by Count 
Ramon Bonifaz of Burgos, the first admiral of Castile, took a 
decisive part in the conquest of Seville. The annexation of Anda- 
lucia and the necessity for guarding against invasions from Africa 
called for a great extension of the navy of Castile. Alfonso X. 
El Sabio (1 252-1 284) founded the great galley dockyards of 
Seville — the arenal. It was also the work of Genoese builders 
and administrators. In the course of the 13th century the 
towns of the northern coast formed one of the associations so 
common in Spanish history, and known as hermandades (brother- 
hoods). The first meeting of its delegates took place at 
Castrourdiales near Bilbao in 1 296, when the towns of Santander, 
Laredo, Bermeo, Guetaria, San Sebastian and Vitoria were 
represented. The hermandad de la marisma (of the seafarers) 
of Castile supplied the squadrons which took an active part 
in the wars of the 14th and 15th centuries between France and 
England as allies of the French. Its history is obscure, and 
it came to an end with the establishment of the full authority 
of the crown by the Catholic sovereigns Ferdinand and Isabel. 

The discovery of America, the acquisition by marriage or 
conquest of Sicily, Naples and Flanders, gave the kings of 
Spain a yet stronger motive for maintaining a powerful navy. 
The maxim that their ships were the bridges which joined their 
widely scattered dominions was fully accepted by them and 
their servants. But neither the Catholic sovereigns nor the 
Habsburgs who held the throne till 1700, made any attempt 
to organize a common navy. The sources from which the naval 
armaments of Spain were drawn during the greatness and 
decline of the country were these. Galleys were maintained 
in the Mediterranean, but they were mainly found by Sicily 
and Naples, or by the contracts which the kings of Spain made 
with the Genoese house of Doria. On the ocean the chief object 
of the Spanish government was to conduct and protect the severely 
regulated trade with America. Thus it was mainly concerned 
for long to obtain the lumbering and roomy vessels called 
"galleons," first designed by Alvaro de Bazan, marquess of 
Santa Cruz, which were rather armed traders than real warships. 
The crown did not build its own ships, but contracted for 
them with its admirals. The American convoys sailed from and 
returned to the Bay of Cadiz. One squadron, the flota, 
carried the trade, was navigated by the admiral, with whom was 
associated a general, who commanded the few warships proper, 
and was answerable for the protection of the whole. Another 
squadron, called of Cantabria, was maintained on the north 
coast, and was employed to see the convoy on its way and meet 
it on its return home. It had its own admiral and general,,. 
The ships were always treated as if they were transports for 
carrying soldiers. The seamen element was neglected. The 
command was divided between the capitan de mar (sea captain) 
who was responsible for the navigation and the capitan de guerra 
(soldier captain) who fought the ship. The same division went 
through all ranks. The soldiers would neither help to work 
the ship nor fight the guns. They used musketry only, or 
relied on a chance to board with sword and pike. Properly 
speaking there was no class of naval officers, and the overworked 
and depressed seamen could not supply good gunners. No 
general naval administration existed. The office of admiral 
of Castile became purely ornamental and hereditary in the 
family of Henriquez. It was not replaced by a navy office. 
One of the innumerable juntas or boards, through which the 
Spanish kings governed, looked after the making of contracts, 
and co-operated with the council of the Indes which was specially 
concerned with the American convoys. After the disasters 
of the later years of Philip II. (see Armada) some efforts at 
improvement were made. Better ships were built, and something 
was done to raise the condition of the seamen. But no thorough- 
going organization was ever created, and in the utter decadence 
of the 17th century the Spanish navy and seafaring population 
alike practically disappeared. 

Under the Bourbon dynasty which attained the throne in 
1700 the Spanish navy was revived, or rather a navy was created 
on the French model. Don Jose Patino, a very able man, was 
named intendente de la marina in 171 5, and in 1717 he drew up 
a draft naval organization and code, founded on the French 
ordonnance of 1689. Patino J s draft was the basis of the 
ordenanzas generates (general code) issued in 1 748. The Spaniards 
even set up a squadron of galleys with a separate staff of officers, 
also on the French model, which was, however, suppressed in 
the year of the issue of the ordenanzas generates. Fine arsenals 
were organized at Ferrol and Carthagena. The navy thus 
created produced some distinguished officers, and fought some 
brilliant single ship actions. But the embarrassments of the 
treasury, the tendency of several of the kings to sacrifice their 
navy to political schemes requiring mainly the employment 
of troops and the ruin of the seafaring population during the 
17th century, prevented it from ever attaining to a high level 
of efficiency. During the Peninsular War the new navy all 
but disappeared as the old had done. The want of pecuniary 
resources and internal instability have prevented its revival 
on any considerable scale. 

The navy created by Patino consisted in 1737 of 56 ships in all, of 
which 28 were of the line, of from 50 to 80 guns, with one of 114 

funs. In 1746 the number of ships of the line had increased to 37. 
n 1759 the list of line of battle ships was 50— of which the majority, 
if not all, had been constructed by English shipbuilders, in the service 
pf the Spanish government. In 1778, when at the height of its power, 
it contained 62 ships of the line. 

Dutch Navy. 

The Dutch fleet arose out of the great struggle with Spain in 
the 1 6th century. The Netherlanders had been a maritime 
people from the earliest antiquity. Under their medieval 
rulers, the counts of Holland and of Flanders and the House of 
Burgundy, they had rendered service at sea. The freemen 
owed the service known as the riemtal (riem, an oar). An 
admiralty office was established in 1397. But during the revolt 
against Philip II. of Spain, new naval forces were formed which 
had no connexion with the medieval navy, save in so far as the 
governments established in the different states which afterwards 
formed the Seven Provinces took possession of the jurisdiction 
and the dues of the medieval admiralty. The naval part of 
the war with Spain was for long conducted by the adventurers 
known as the " beggars of the sea," and was mainly confined 
to the coasts and rivers. In 1597, when the Confederation was 
formed and had provided itself with a common government 
in the states-general, the need for a regularly organized sea- 
going fleet was felt. In that year the banner of the states- 
general, the red lion with the arrows in its paw, was first hoisted 
during the expedition to Cadiz in alliance with England. On 
the 13th of August 1597 the states-general issued the decree 
(Instructie) which regulated the naval administration of the 
Republic until 1795. The attachment of the Netherlanders 
to their local franchises was too strong to permit of trie establish- 
ment of a central authority with absolute powers. It was 
therefore necessary to make a compromise by which some 
measure of unity was secured while the freedom of the various 
confederate states was effectually guarded. Five boards of 
admiralty (Admiraliteits collegien) were recognized. They were: 
South Holland, or the Maas, sitting at Rotterdam; North 
Holland, or Amsterdam; Westfriesland (the western side of 
the Zuyder Zee), at Hoorn or Enkhuizen on alternate years; 
Zealand at Middleburg; and Friesland at Dokhum, or after 
1645 at Harlingen. These-bodies enjoyed all the rights of the 
admiralty and collected the port dues, out of which they provided 
for the current expenses of their respective squadrons. Extra- 
ordinary charges for war were met by grants from the province 
to which each board belonged. Some measure of unity was 
secured among these five independent authorities by three 
devices. Each board consisted of seven persons, of whom four 
were named by the province and required confirmation by the 
states-general, while three were chosen from other provinces 
to secure a representation of the common wealt h J The members 
of the boards took an oath of fealty to the states-general. The 
stadtholdcr was admiral-general. He presided at the board, 
and commanded the squadron. In his absence his place was 
taken by his lieutenant admiral -general. An oath of fealty 
was also taken to him, and all armed ships whether men-of-war 
or privateers sailed with his commission. He chose the captains 
from two candidates presented to him by the board. Delegates 
from the boards met twice a year to consult on the general 
interest. When the stadtholdership was suspended in 1650 
the powers of the admiral-general were absorbed by their high 
mightinesses (Hunne Hogen Mogen) of the states-general. 
The staff of officers began with the lieutenant admiral-general 
and descended through the vice-admiral, the quaintly named 
Sckout-Mj-nacktj who was and is the rear-admiral, and whose 
title means " commander by night." These flag officers were 
named by the admiral-general or states-general. The captain 
(ZeecapitUn) was selected from the provincial list. The lieutenants 
were appointed by the local boards. No regular method of 
recruiting the corps of officers existed. 

This compromise was in itself a bad system. With the 
exception of the board of North Holland, which was supported 
by the wealth of Amsterdam, the admiralties were commonly 
distressed for money. Unity of action was difficult to obtain. 
Much of the work of convoy which the state squadrons should 
have performed was thrown in the 17th century on directorates 
(Directien) of merchants who fitted out privateers at their own 
expense. When there was no stadtholder, the local governing 
bodies trenched on the authority of the states-general, and 
indulged in a great deal of favouritism. In one respect the navy 
of the Dutch republic might have been taken as a model by its 
neighbours. The feeding of the crews was contracted for by the 
captains, who were required to enter into securities for the 
execution of the contract, and who had a reputation for probity. 
The Dutch crews, being better fed and looked after than the 
English, suffered less from disease. The clumsy organization 
of the Dutch navy put it at a disadvantage in its wars with 
England, but the seamanship of the crews, their good gunnery, 
and the great ability of many of their admirals made them at 
all times formidable enemies. No organic change was made 
till 1795, when the victories of the French revolutionary armies 
led to the formation of the Batavian republic. The five 
admiralties were then swept away and replaced by a committee 
for the direction of naval affairs, with a unified administration, 
organized by Pieter Paulus, a former official of the board of the 
Maas. As Holland was now swept into the general convulsion 
of the French Revolution, it followed the fortunes of France. 
Its navy, after belonging to the Batavian republic, passed to 
the ephemeral kingdom of Holland, created by Napoleon in 
favour of his brother Louis in 1806 and annexed to France in 
1 810. The Dutch navy then became absorbed in the French. 
After the fall of Napoleon a navy was created for the kingdom 
of the Netherlands out of the Dutch fragments of the Imperial 
force. 

- The United States. 

The American navy came into existence shortly after the 
Declaration of Independence. As early as October 1775 Congress 
authorized the construction of two national cruisers, and, at the 
same time, appointed a marine committee to administer naval 
affairs. The first force, consisting of purchased vessels, badly 
fitted and built, and insufficiently equipped and manned, 
embraced two ships of 24 guns each, six brigs carrying from 
10 to 12 guns, two schooners each with 8 guns, and four sloops, 
three of 10 guns and one of 4 guns. On December 22nd a 
personnel of officers was selected, one of the lieutenants being 
the well-known Paul Jones. Esek Hopkins was made com- 
mander-in-chief, but, having incurred the censure of Congress, 
he was dismissed early in 1777, and since then the title has never 
been revived except in the person of the president. In November 
1776 the grades of admiral, vice-admiral, rear-admiral and 
commodore were assimilated in rank and precedence to relative 
army titles, but they were never created by law until 1862. 
During the war a number of spirited engagements occurred, 
but there was a great lack of efficient material at home, and 
agents. abroad were not able to enlist the active sympathies 
of nations or rulers. Benjamin Franklin did manage to equip 
one good squadron, but this was rendered almost useless by 
internal dissensions, and it required the victory of Paul Jones 
in the " Bon Homme Richard " over the " Serapis " to bring 
about any tangible result for the risk taken. During the war 
800 vessels of all classes were made prizes, but the navy lost 
by capture n vessels of war and a little squadron of gunboats 
on the lakes; and, with 13 ships destroyed to avoid capture 
by the British, 5 condemned, and 3 wrecked at sea, the country 
was practically without a naval force between 1780 and 1785. 

Owing to the depredations upon commerce of the Barbary 
powers, Congress in 1794 ordered the construction of six frigates, 
prescribing that four of them should be armed with 44 guns 
and two with 36 guns; but, the Berbers having made peace, 
the number of vessels was reduced one-half, and no additious 
were made until 1797, when the " Constitution," " United 
States " and " Constellation " were built. The navy was at 
first placed under the war department, but a navy department 
with a secretary of its own was created in 1798. From 181 5 
to 1842 the secretary was aided by a board of commissioners 
chosen from among the naval officers, but in the latter year the 
department was reorganized into five bureaus, which were 
increased to eight in 1862. Each has a naval officer at its head. 
They deal with navigation, ordnance, equipment, navy yards, 
medicines, provisions, steam engineering and construction. 
The excellent naval academy at Annapolis was founded in 1845 
by the then secretary of the navy, G. Bancroft. The war college 
for officers at -Coasters Harbor, Newport, R.I., dates from 1884. 

The Balance oj Navies in History. 

The five navies above discussed claim special notice on various 
grounds: the British, Dutch and French because they have 
been leaders and models; the Spanish because it has been 
closely associated with the others; the American because it 
was the first of the extra-European sea forces. But these great 
examples by no means exhaust the list of navies, old and new, 
which have played or now play a part. Every state which has - 
a coast has also desired to possess forces on the sea. Even the 
papacy maintained a fighting force of galleys which took part 
in the naval transactions of the Mediterranean for centuries. 
The Turkish sultans have fitted out fleets which once were a ■ 
menace to southern Europe. But in a survey of general naval 
history it is not necessary to give all these navies special mention, 
even though some of them have a certain intrinsic interest. 
Some, the Scandinavian navies for instance, have been confined 
to narrow limits, and have had no influence either by their 
organization, nor, save locally, by action. Others again have 
been the purely artificial creation of governments. Instances of 
these on a small scale are the navies of the grand duchy of 
Tuscany, or of the Bourbon kings of Naples. 

A much greater instance is the navy of Russia. Founded by 
Peter the Great (1680-17 2 5), it has been mainly organized and 
has been most successfully led by foreigners. When „ . 
the Russian government has desired for political 
reasons to make a show of naval strength, it has been numerous. 
In 1770, during the reign of Catherine II. (1762-1796), a Russian 
fleet, nominally commanded by the empress's favourite Orloff, 
but in reality directed by two former officers of the British 
navy, John Elphinston (1722-1785) and Samuel Greig (1735- 
1788), gained some successes against the Turks in the Levant. 
But when opposed to formidable enemies, as in the Crimean 
War, it has either remained in port, or. has, as in the case of the 
war with Japan (1904-1905), proved that its vitality was not 
in proportion to its size. 

The innumerable navies of South American repubh'cs are 
small copies of older forces. 

The 19th century did indeed see the rise of three navies, which 
are of a very different character — the Italian, which was the result 
of the unification of Italy, the German, which followed /M/ 
the creation of the German Empire, and the Japanese. Germany, 
But all three are contemporary in their origin, and Japan, \ 
have inevitably been modelled on older forces — the Au9tri ** 
British and the French. With them must go the Austrian navy, 
excellent but unavoidably small. 

If we look set the relations which the navies of the modern 
world have had to one another, it will be seen that the great 
discoveries of the later 15th century shifted the seat 
of naval power to the ocean for two reasons. In the ^f™*** 
first place they imposed on all who wished to sail the power. 
wider seas opened to European enterprise by Vasco 
de Gama and Columbus the obligation to use a vessel which 
could carry water and provisions sufficient for a large crew during 
a long voyage. The Mediterranean states and their seamen 
were not prepared by resources or habit to meet the call. But 
there was a second and equally effective reason. The powers 
which had -an Atlantic coast were incomparably better placed 
than the Italian states, or the cities of the Baltic, tc take 
advantage of the maritime discoveries of the great epoch which 
stretches from 1402 to 1 526. In the natural course the leadership 
fell to Portugal and Spain. Both owed much to Italian science 
and capital, but the profit fell inevitably to them. The reasons 
why Spain failed to found a permanent naval power have been 
given, and they apply equally to Portugal. Neither achieved 
the formation of a solid navy. The claim of both to retain a 
monopoly of the right to settle in, or trade with, the New World 
and Asia was in due course contested by neighbouring nations. 
France was torn by internal dissensions (the Wars of Religion and 
the Fronde) and could not compete except through a few private 
adventurers. England and Holland were able to prove the 
essential weakness of the Spaniards at sea before the end of the 
1 6th century. In the 17th century the late allies against Spain 
now fought against one another. Her insular position, her 
security against having to bear the immense burden of a war 
on a land frontier, and the superiority of her naval organization 
over the divided administration of Holland, gave the victory to 
Great Britain. She was materially helped by the fact that the 
French monarch attacked Holland on land, and exhausted its 
resources. Great Britain and France now became the com- 
petitors for superiority at sea, and so remained from 1689 till 
the fall of Napoleon in 181 5. 

During this period of a century and a quarter Great Britain 
had again the most material advantage : that her enemy was not 
only contending with her at sea, but was engaged in endeavouring 
to establish and maintain a military preponderance over her 
neighbours on the continent of Europe. Hence the necessity for 
her to support great and costly armies, which led to the sacrifice 
of her fleet, and drove Holland into alliance with Great Britain 
(Wars of the League of Augsburg, of the Spanish Succession, 
of the Austrian Succession and the Seven Years' War). During 
the War of American Independence France was in alliance with 
Spain and Holland, and at peace on land. She and her allies 
were able to impose terms of peace by which Great Britain 
surrendered positions gained in former wars. But the strength 
of the British navy was not broken, and in quality it was shown 
to be essentially superior. 

The French Revolution undid all that the government of 
France had gained between 1778 and 1783 by attention to its 
navy and abstinence from wars on land. The result of the 
upheaval in France was to launch her into schemes of universal 
conquest. Other nations were driven to fight for existence with 
the help of Great Britain. In that long struggle all the navies 
of Europe disappeared except the French, which was broken 
by defeat and rendered inept by inaction, and the victorious 
British navy. When Napoleon fell, the navy of Great Britain 
was not merely the first in the world; it was the only powerful 
navy in existence. 

The pre-eminent position which the disappearance of possible 
rivals had given to Great Britain lasted for several years un- 
challenged. But it was too much the consequence of a com- 
bination of circumstances which could neither recur nor endure. 
The French navy was vigorously revived under the Restoration 
and the government of Louis Philippe (the periods from 18 15 
to 1830 and 1830 to 1848). The emperor Nicholas I. of Russia 

((1825-1855) built ships in considerable numbers. As early as 
1838 the fear that the naval superiority of Great Britain would 
be destroyed had already begun to agitate some observers. 
The " extremely reduced state " of the British navy, and the 
danger that an overwhelming force would be suddenly thrown 
on the English coast, were vehemently set forth by Commander 
W. H. Craufurd, and by an anonymous flag-officer. The peril 
to be feared, it was argued, was an alliance* between France and 
Russia. In 1838 the British navy contained, built and building, 
00 ships of the line, 93 frigates and 1 2 war steamers ; the French, 
49 of the line, 60 frigates and 37 war steamers, including armed 
packets; Russia, 50 of the line, 25 frigates and 8 steamers; the 
United States, 15 of the line, 35 frigates and 16 war steamers. 
The agitation of 1838 passed away, and the Crimean War, 
entailing as it did the destruction of a great part of the Russian 
fleet at Sebastopol, and proving the weakness of the Baltic 
fleet, and having, moreover, been conducted by an alliance of 
France and Great Britain against Russia, would seem to have 
shown that the anxieties of 1838 were exaggerated. But the 
rivalry which is inherent in the very position of states possessing 
sea coasts and maritime interests could not cease. The French 
imperial government was anxious to develop its navy. By the 
construction of the armoured floating batteries employed in 
bombardment of Kinburn in October 1855, and by the launch 
of the first seagoing ironclad " La Gloire " in 1859, it began a 
new race for superiority at* sea, which has shown no sign of 
slackening since. The launch of the " Gloire " was foDowed by 
political events in Europe which brought forward new com- 
petitors, while great navies were developed in America and Asia. 

The year 1871 was the beginning of a vast growth of naval 
armaments. It saw the completion of the unity of Italy and the 
formation of the German empire, two powers which a . 
could not dispense with strong fleets. But for some modern 
years the Italian and German navies, though already rivalry in 
in existence, were still in a youthful stage. The rapid armam 
growth of the United States navy dates from about ments% 
1890, and the Japanese is a few years younger. France, Russia 
and Great Britain, in answer to them, began the race in which 
the efforts of each had a stimulating effect on the others. Though 
the alliance between France and Russia was not formed till 
later, their common interests had marked them out as allies 
from the first, and it will be no less convenient than accurate to 
treat Great Britain and the partners in the Dual Alliance as for 
some time opposed to one another. 

In the general reorganization of her armaments undertaken 
by France after the war of 1870-71, her navy was not neglected. 
Large schemes of construction were taken in hand. « tan - 
The instability of French ministries, and the differences and the 
of principle which divided the authorities who favoured Oust 
the construction of battleships from those who were Alliance. 
partisans of cruisers and torpedo-vessels, militated against a 
coherent policy. Yet the French navy grew in strength, and 
Russia began to build strong vessels. As early as 1874 the 
approaching launch of a coast-defence ironclad at Kronstadt 
(the " Peter the Great " designed by the English constructor 
Sir E. J. Reed) caused one of the successive " naval scares " 
which recurred frequently in the coming years. It was, however, 
largely fictitious, and passed away without producing much 
effect. In 1878 the prospect of a war arising out of the Russian 
and Turkish conflict of that year, again stirred doubts as to the 
sufficiency of her naval armaments in England. Yet it was not 
till about 1885 that an agitation for the increase of the British 
fleet was begun in a consistent and continuous way. The con- 
troversy of the succeeding years was boundless, and was perhaps 
the more heated because the controversialists were not con- 
trolled by the necessity for using terms of definite meaning, and 
because the lists published for the purpose of making comparisons 
were inevitably of doubtful value; when ships built, building 
and ordered to be built, but not begun, were counted together — 
or as not infrequently happened, were all added on one side, 
but not on the other. The belief that the British navy was not 
so strong as it should be, in view of the dependence of the British 
empire on strength at sea, spread steadily. Measures were first 
taken to improve the opportunities for practice allowed to the 
fleet by the establishment of yearly naval manoeuvres in 1885, 
and the lessons they afforded were utilized to enforce the necessity 
for an increase of the British fleet. In 1888 a committee of three 
admirals (Sir W.Dowell, Sir Vesey Hamilton and Sir R. Richards), 
appointed to report on the manoeuvres of that year, gave it as 
their opinion that " no time should be lost in placing the British 
navy beyond comparison with that of any two powers." This 
verdict met a ready acceptance by the nation, and in 1889 
Lord George Hamilton, then first lord of the admiralty, intro- 
duced the Naval Defence Act, which provided for the addition to 
the navy within four and a half years of 70 vessels of 318,000 tons 
at a cost of £21,500,000. The object was to obviate the risk of 
sudden reductions for reasons of economy in the building vote. 
Later experience proved that the practice of fixing the amount to 
be spent for a period of years operated to restrict the freedom of 
government to make Additions, for which the necessity had not 
been foreseen when the money was voted. But the act of 1889 
did effect an immediate addition to the British fleet, while as was 
inevitable it stimulated other powers to increased efforts. 

The rivalry between Great Britain and the states composing 
the Dual Alliance may be said to have lasted till 1904, when the 
course of the war in the Far East removed Russia from the field. 
It must be borne in mind that during the latter part of these 
twenty years Russia was largely influenced by the desire to arm 
against the growing navy of Japan. Comparisons between the 
additions to the fleets made on cither side, even when supported 
by a great display of figures, are of uncertain value. Number 
is no sufficient test of strength when taken apart from quality, 
distribution, the command of coaling stations — which are of 
extreme value to a modern fleet — and other considerations. 
But the respective lists of battleships supply a rough and ready 
standard, and when taken with the number of men employed 
and the size of the budgets (both subject to qualifications to 
be mentioned) does enable us to see with some approximation to 
accuracy how far the rivals have attained their desired aims. 
In 1889, before the passing of the Naval Defence Act, the British 
navy contained 32 battleships of 262,340 tons. The united 
French and Russian fleets had 22 of 150,653 tons: of these 17 
were French, 7 being vessels of wood plated with iron and 
therefore of no value when exposed to the fire of modern ex- 
plosives. This is but one of many examples which might be 
given of the fallacious character of mere lists of figures. In 1894, 
when the Naval Defence Act had produced its effect, the com- 
parative figures were: for Great Britain, 46 ironclads (or battle- 
ships) of 441,640 tons, and for the Dual Alliance 35 of 270,953 — in 
which, however, the seven wooden vessels were still included. 
France and Russia had then large schemes of new construction — 
60,300 tons of ships over 10,000 tons for France, and 78,000 tons 
for Russia. The British figure was 70,000 tons. But the French 
and Russian list included mere names of vessels, of which the 
plans were not then drafted. 

The rivalry in building went on as eagerly after 1894 as before. 
At the beginning of 1904 Great Britain had 67 battleships of 
^95)370 tons, as against 57 of 635,500 belonging to the powers 
of the Dual Alliance. The difference in favour of Great Britain 
was therefore 10 battleships, and 259,870 tons. Vessels not 
ready for service were included in the list, which therefore in- 
cludes potential as well as actual strength. The balance in favour 
of Great Britain was less in 1904 than it had been in 1885 in mere 
numbers. During this period the naval budget of Great Britain 
had risen from £12,000,000 in 1885 to £34,457,500 in 1 903-1904. 
The number of men employed had grown from 57,000 to 127,000. 
The figures for the Dual Alliance cannot be given with equal 
confidence. France had transferred the troupes de la marine or 
colonial troops from the navy to the army, which introduced 
a confusing element into the comparison, and the figures for 
Russian expenditure are very questionable. The total credit 
demanded for the Frerurh navy in 1890, the year after the passing 
of the British Naval Defence Act, was frs. 217,147,462. By 
1903 the sum had risen to frs. 351,471,524. The Russian figures 
for 1890 are not attainable, but her budget for 1903 was 
£1 1,067,889 sterling. A comparison in numbers of men available 
is wholly misleading, since the British navy contains a large 
number o{ voluntarily enlisted men who serve for many years, 
and a small voluntary reserve, while France and Russia include 
all who are liable to be called out for compulsory service during 
a short period. There is no equality between them and the highly 
trained men of the British navy. The immense increase in its 
staff represents an addition to real power to which there is 
nothing to correspond in the case of continental states. 

While this vast growth of naval power was going on in Great 
Britain, France and Russia, other rivals were entering into the 
lists with various fortunes. Italy may be said to have been the 
first comer. Her national navy, formed out of the existing 
squadrons of Sardinia, Tuscany and Naples, had stood the strain 
of war in 1866" very ill. The conditions in which the unity of 
the country had been achieved during the Franco-Prussian War 
of 1870-71, together with the obvious need for a navy competi- 
in the case of a nation with a very extended sea coast, tJoa / 
animated the Italians to great and even excessive ' new 
efforts. Their policy was controlled by the knowledge navies: 
that they could not hope to rival France in numbers, iUly * 
and they therefore aimed at obtaining individual vessels of a 
high level of strength. Italy may be said to have set the example 
of building monster ships, armed with monster guns. But she 
was unable to maintain her position in the race. The too hopeful 
finance in which she had indulged in the first enthusiasm of 
complete political unification led to serious embarrassment in 
1894. Her naval budget sank from £4,960,000 in 1891 to 
£31776,845 in 1897-1898, and only rose slowly to £5,037,642 in 
1 905-1 906. As a candidate in the race for naval strength she 
necessarily held a subordinate place, though always to be ranked 
among the important sea powers. In 1903, when the rivalry of 
Great Britain and the Dual Alliance was at its height, her 
strength in battleships was 18, of 226,630 tons. In number, 
therefore, they did more than cover the balance in favour of 
Great Britain as against the Dual Alliance, but not in tonnage, 
in which the difference in favour of Great Britain was 259,870. 
The history of the German navy is one of foresight, calculation, 
consistency and therefore steady growth. The small naval force 
maintained by Prussia became the navy of the North 
German Federation after the war of 1866, and the 
Imperial navy after 187 1. Until 1853 it had been wholly de- 
pendent on the war office. In that year an admiralty was created 
in favour of Prince Albrecht, but this office was abolished in 1861, 
and the navy was again placed under the war office. The first 
ministers of the navy under the North German Federation were 
generals; so was the first imperial minister, General Stosch (1871). 
Admiral Tirpitz, appointed in 1897, was the first minister who 
was bred a seaman. His predecessor, General Stosch, had been 
an excellent organizer and had done much for the efficiency of 
the service. It has been the rule of the German government, 
both before and since the foundation of the empire, to advance 
by carefully framed plans, without adhering to them pedantically 
when circumstances called for a modification of their lines. As 
early as 1867 a scheme had been formed for the construction of 
a navy of 16 ironclads and 50 smaller vessels, at a cost of 
£5,395,833. It was not sufficiently advanced in execution to 
allow Germany to make any efforts at sea in the war of 1870-71. 
In 1872 a supplementary grant of £3,791,666 was made for 
construction in view of the increased cost of armour and arma- 
ments. In 1882 a revised scheme was made which contemplated 
the construction of 100 vessels, and it was completed in 1888 
by another which provided for the construction of 28 vessels, 
of which 4 should be battleships of the largest size, within the 
next six years. In 1894 and for some years afterwards the Reich- 
stag showed itself hostile to a heavy expenditure on the navy, 
and refused many votes asked for by the government. Under 
the pressure of ambition and of the real needs of a nation with 
an extensive and growing maritime commerce, the expenditure 
grew in spite of the opposition of the Reichstag. Between 1874 
and 1889 it rose from £1,950,000 to £2,750,000, and was increased 
in the following year to £3,600,000, from which figure it advanced 
by 1898 to £5,756,135. Another building scheme was framed 
in that year, but it was swept aside in 1000, under the combined 
influence of the exhortations of the emperor William II., and of 
the anger caused in Germany through the arrest by a British 
cruiser of a German steamer (the " Bundesrath ") on the coast of 
Africa on a charge of carrying contraband of war to the Boers. 
The emperor was now able to obtain the consent of the Reichstag 
to an extended Naval Defence Act. By the terms of this measure 
it was proposed to spend £74,000,000 on construction, and 
£20,000,000 on the dockyards. With this money, by the year 
191 7 Germany was to be provided with a fleet of 38 battleships, 
together with a proportionate number of cruisers and other 
smaller vessels. Rapid progress was made not only with the 
programme itself but with the equipment of German dockyards 
and other establishments for providing the materiel of a great 
navy. In the spring of 1909 the serious menace to British 
supremacy at sea, represented by the growth of the new German 
fleet of battleships, led in England to a " scare " which recalled 
that of 1888, and to an energetic campaign for additional 
expenditure on the British navy. 

During the years following on the American Civil War (1862- 
66) the United States paid small attention to the navy. In 
1881 a board was appointed to advise on the needs 
spates. °i t ^ ie navv > anc ^ in 1890, the board recommended
the formation of a fleet of 100 vessels of which 20 
should be battleships of the largest class. The reviving interest 
in the navy was greatly stimulated by the diplomatic difference 
with Great Britain which arose over the frontier question between 
her and the republic of Venezuela in 1896. Resolutions were 
passed in -congress approving of an increase of the navy. The 
war with Spain in 1898 completed the revival of American 
interest in the navy. The acquisition of Porto Rico, and the 
protectorate of Cuba in the West Indies, together with the annexa- 
tion of the Philippines, and the visible approach of the time 
when the relations of the powers interested in the Pacific would 
call for regulation, confirmed the conviction that a powerful 
fleet must be maintained. In 1889 the United States possessed 
no modern battleship. In 1899 there were 4 built and 8 building. 
At the close of 1903 there were built and building 27 of 353,260 
tons, only two of them being of less than 10,000 tons. From 
£5,119,850 in 1890 the expenditure grew to £16,355,380 in 1903. 
The navy of Japan, the last comer among the great naval 
forces of the world, may be said to date from 1895, from, in 

	r„ „-
	Japan, ' . , 

fact, the eve of the war with China. As an insular 
power with a large seafaring population, Japan is 
called upon to possess a fleet. Even in the days of its voluntary 
isolation it had a known capacity for maritime warfare. Its 
capacity for assimilating the ideas and mastering the mechanical 
skill of Europe have been in no respect better shown than in 
naval matters. From the moment it was compelled to open 
its ports it began not only to acquire steamers but to apply 
itself under European guidance to learning how to make and 
use them. A navy on the western model was already organized 
by 1895, but it was still of trifling proportions. In 1896 the 
Japanese navy had become an object of serious attention to 
the world. A plan was drafted in that year, and confirmed 
in the next, by which Japan arranged to supply itself, mainly 
by purchase in Europe, with a fleet containing 4 of the most 
powerful battleships. The scheme was modified in detail in 
1898, when the decision was taken to increase the tonnage of the 
vessels. A little later additions were arranged for, and vessels 
building for South America states in English ports were purchased. 
The British model was carefully followed in naval organization, 
the alliance with England giving special facilities for this. And 
by 1904, when the war with Russia began, the unknown Japanese 
fleet proved its competence by victories at sea which put the 
seal on her position as a naval power. 

Conclusion. — When we look over the whole period from 
the end of the Napoleonic wars, one great fact is patent to our 
view. It is that this was an epoch of revival or development 
in the naval power of the whole world, in the course of which 
the position held by Great Britain in 1816 was partially lost 
simply by the growth of other powers. The situation in that 
year was by its very nature temporary, and a quotation of the 
respective numbers of warships then possessed by the world 
would have no value. An instructive comparison can, however, 
be made between the year 1838, when Great Britain began to 
be seriously concerned with the rise of possible enemies at sea, 
1 and the eve of the war between Russia and Japan. Battleships 
may again be taken as the test of strength, since nothing happened 
in the Russo-Japanese War to show that they do not still form 
the most vital element of naval power. We may also leave 
aside the many small fleets which cannot act collectively, and 
which individually do not weigh in the balance. The figures 
for 1838 are given above, but may be repeated for comparison. 
In that year Great Britain possessed, built and building, 90 
ships of the line; France 49; Russia 50; the United States 
15. In 1903 the number of vessels recognized as battleships, 
possessed by the great powers, was for Great Britain 67; for 
France 39; for Russia 18; for the United States 27; for Germany 
27; for Italy 18; for Japan 5. At the first date the British 
fleet was among great powers as 90 to 114. At the latter it 
was as 67 to 134. 

Such comparisons, however, as these become much more 
complicated in later years, when the importance of the preponder- 
ance of " Dreadnoughts " — the new type of battleship — (see 
Ship and Shipbuilding) — was realized. By the invention 
of this type Great Britain appeared to obtain a new lead; and 
in 1907, when it was calculated that by 1910 there would be 
ten British " Dreadnoughts " actually in commission while 
neither in Europe nor America would a single similar ship have 
been completed by any foreign power, the situation seemed 
to be entirely in favour of complete supremacy at sea for the 
British fleet. But the progress of German and American con- 
struction, and particularly the experience gained of German 
ability to build and equip much more rapidly than had been 
supposed, showed by 1909 that, so far as " Dreadnoughts " 
were concerned at all events, the lead of Great Britain could only 
be maintained by exceptional effort and exceptional expenditure. 
It was admitted in parliament by the prime minister, first lord 
of the admiralty and foreign secretary — themselves Liberals 
who had flirted with proposals for disarmament, and who de- 
pended for office on the support of more extreme "pacifists" who 
objected on principle to heavy military and naval expenditure — 
that, while for the moment the British " two-power standard " 
was still in existence, the revelations as to German shipbuilding 
showed that it could only be maintained in the future by the 
creation of a new fleet on a scale previously not contemplated. 
The supremacy of Great Britain in ships of the older types 
would be of no avail as years went by and other powers were 
equalling her in the output of ships of the new type, and a new 
race thus began, of which it is impossible here to indicate more 
than the start. It was no longer a question of completed ships, 
but one still more of programmes for building and of the rate 
at which these programmes could be accomplished. At the 
beginning of 1910, while Great Britain had her ten " Dread- 
noughts," it was not the case that other powers had none: 
Germany already had four and the United States two; and 
a knowledge of the naval programmes of both these countries, 
to speak of no others, showed that, unless either their policy 
changed or the British shipbuilding programme was modified 
so as to keep up with their progress, it would not take many 
years before the theory of the equality of the British fleet in 
" capital ships " to those of the next two naval powers would 
have to be abandoned. In England this situation created a pro- 
found sensation in 1909, since it was common ground that her 
fleet was her all in all, on which her empire depended; and the 
result was seen, not only in a considerable increase in the Naval 
Estimates of 1910-1911, but also in the beginning of a serious ■ 
attempt to organize their fleets on the part of the British colonial 
dominions, which should co-operate with the mother country. 

The British Admiralty figures for the state of the principal 
fleets as on March 31st, 1910, are summarized below. The 
letters at the heads of the columns have the following significa- 
tion: E., England; F., France; R., Russia; G., Germany; 
L, Italy; U., United States; and J., Japan: — 
Ships Built 

	E. 
	F. 
	R. 
	G. 
	I. 
	U. 
	J. 
	Battleships 
	56 
	17 
	7 
	33 
	10 
	30 
	H 
	Armd. CD. Vessels . 
	8 
	2 
	7 
	10 
	Armd. Cruisers 
	38 
	20 
	4 
	9 
	'8 
	15 
	12 
	Protected Cruisers, I. 
	18 
	5 
	7 
	3 
	2 
	II. 
	35 
	9 
	2 
	23 
	3 
	16 
	11 
	III. 
	16 
	8 
	2 
	12 
	11 
	2 
	6 
	Unprotected Cruisers 
	2 
	\" 
	10 
	5 
	6 
	Scouts . . . 
	8 
	3 
	Torpedo Vessels . 
	23 
	10 
	6 
	1 
	5 
	2 
	2 
	T.B. Destroyers . . 
	150 
	60 
	97 
	85 
	21 
	25 
	57 
	Torpedo Boats 
	116 246 
	63 
	82 
	96 
	30 
	69 
	Submarines 
	63 
	56 
	30 
	8 
	7 
	18 
	9 
	312 
	Ships Building 
	Battleships 
	Armd. Cruisers 
	Protected Cruisers, II. 
	Unprotected Cruisers 
	T.B. Destroyers 
	Submarines 
	E. 
	9 
	3 
	9 
	2 
	37 
	ii 
	F. 
	6 
	2 
	R. 
	8 
	2 
	G. 
	8 
	3 
	5 
	I. 
	2 
	2 
	u. 
	4 
	J- 
	3 
	I 
	3 
	17 
	23 
	15 
	10 
	* Number uncertain. 

Bibliography. — Ancient and General: — Accounts of the naval 
organizations of the ancient world, and of the sea fighting of the time 
are to be found in the historians of Greece and Rome: Signor 
G. Corazzini has written a Storia delta marina militare antica (Livorno, 
1882). Valuable details of the Imperial Roman navy and of the 
Byzantine naw will be found in Professor Bury's appendices to his 
edition of Gibbon's Decline and Fall, vol. i. apx. 5, and vol. vi. 
apx. 5. General histories of the navies of the world have been 
written, but they are inevitably apt to be little more than jejune 
reviews of the dates, and results of battles. This is certainly the 
case with the great folio of the English writer Josiah Burchett, A 
Complete History of the most remarkable transactions at Sea, from the 
earliest accounts of time to the conclusion of the last war with France, 
wherein is given an account of the most considerable Naval Expeditions, 
Sea Fights, Stratagems, Discoveries and otJier Maritime Occurrences 
that have happened among all nations that have flourished at Sea; and 
in a more particular manner of Great Britain from the time of the 
Revolution %n 1688 to the aforesaid period (1720). The later part is 
however valuable, for Burchett, who was secretary to the admiralty, 
had access to good authorities for his own time, and had served at 
sea as secretary to Russell, Lord Orford. There is an Histoire de la 
marine de tous les peuples, by M._A. du Sein (Paris, 1879) which is of 
no great value. 

Medieval : — As regards the medieval navies the first place may be 
allowed to the Italians. A general bibliography of Italian nautical 
literature, Saggio de una bibliografia martttima italiana, occupying 
fifty-eight pages, drawn up by Signor Enrico Celani, will be foundin 
the Revista maritiima, supplement for 1894 (Rome). The histories 
of the different Republics of the middle ages record their maritime 
enterprises. An excellent book, which gives far more than its title 
promises, is the Storiadella marina pontificia of A.puglielmotti.O.P., 
in 10 volumes published at different times, and in two editions, at 
Florence 1856, &c. The general maritime history of the Mediter- 
ranean in the middle ages is well illustrated in the Memorias sobre 
la marina comercio y artes de Barcelona (1779-1792) by Don A. 
Capmany. The naval enterprises of the^ Norsemen are dealt with in 
a scholarly fashion by M. G. B. Depping, Histoire des expeditions 
maritimes des Normands (1826); and with newer knowledge by Mr 
C. F. Keary, The Vikings of Western Christendom (1891). The 
medieval periods of Western navies are treated in their respective 
naval histories. 

Great Britain: — The History of the Royal Navy to the French 
Revolution , by Sir N. Harris Nicolas (1847), is unfortunately in- 
complete. It ends at the year 1422, but is the work of a most labori- 
ous and exact antiquary, who had been a naval officer in his vouth. 
The administrative history of the British navy until 1660 is the 
subject of the History of the Administration of the Navy and of 
Merchant Shipping in relation to the Navy (1896) by Mr M. Oppenheim 
— a most valuable collection of materials. The campaigns and battles 
of the navy are told, generally from the public letters of the admirals, 
and with no great measure of criticism in several compilations. 
The Naval History of England (1735) by Mr T. Lediard, is copious and 
useful. The Naval Chronology, or an Historical Summary of Naval 
and Maritime Events from the Time of the Romans to the Treaty of 
Peace 1802, by Captain Isaac Schomberg (1802), contains a mass of 
valuable information, lists of ships, dates of construction, &c, and 
some administrative details. Less comprehensive, but still useful, is 
such a compilation as The General History of the Late War (that is, 
the Seven Years' War), by Dr John Entick " and other gentlemen " 
(1763). A much better book is The Naval and Military Memoirs of 
Great Britain 1727 to 1783 (1804) by Mr R. Beatson, a very careful 
and well-informed writer who had seen some service as a marine 
officer. The Lives of the British Admirals, containing a new and 
accurate Naval History from the earliest periods, by Dr T. Campbell 
( J 779)» ma Y be profitably consulted, with caution, for it by no means 
justifies its claim to novelty and accuracy in all parts. The Naval 
History of Great Britain, from 1793 to the accession of George IV., 
by Mr W. James (1827), republished with a continuation by Captain 
Chamier in 1837, is a standard authority. A far less useful work, 
which, however, is in parts written from first-hand knowledge, is The 
Naval History of Great Britain by Captain W. P. Brenton, first 
published in 1823, and republished in 1836. The Field of Mars, a 
compilation in dictionary form published in 1781, with an enormous 
title-page, is not without value for some of the naval transactions of 
the 1 8th century. The History of tlie British Navy from the Earliest 
Period to tlie Present Time (1863) by Dr C. D. Yonge, contains some 
original matter for the naval transactions of the 19th century. t The 
Royal Navy, in 7 large volumes (1897-1903), edited and partly written 
by Sir W. L. Clowes, is a compilation of unequal value. Some of 
Sir W. L. Clowes's coadjutors, notably Captain Mahan and Sir C. R. 
Markham, are of high standing and authority. The book is copiously 
illustrated. The Naval Chronicle, 1799-1818, a magazine, contains 
masses of useful matter, for the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars. 
The Royal Naval Biography of Captain John Marshall, giving the 
lives of all officers on the list in 1823 or promoted later (1 823-1 835), 
with a supplement (1827-1830), may be consulted, but is too un- 
critical and too uniformly laudatory. The Naval Biographical 
Dictionary; life and services of every living officer (1846), by Lieutenant 
W. R. O'Bryne, is a solid book of reference. The publications of the 
Navy Record Society (1894 and subsequent years) contain large and 
valuable publications of original matter, with some reprints of old 
authorities, such as Sir W. Monson's Tracts, which were difficult of 
access. See also A Short History of the Royal Navy, by David 
Hannay. 

France: — The naval history of France has been much written 
about since i8ao. Not many of the books published have been of 
considerable value. The Histoire maritime de la France of M. L£on 
Guerin (1844), was meant to meet a popular demand and satisfy 
national vanity. The Histoire de la marine frangaise of M. Eugene 
Sue (1845-1846) is mainly a romance, but it contains some useful 
evidence. The Histoire de la marine francaise of Le Comte de Bonfils 
Lablenie (1845), a naval officer, is of more value, but is somewhat 
wanting in criticism. The Precis historique de la marine francaise 
of M. Chasseriau (1845); the Histoire ginerale de la marine (1853); 
the Histoire de la marine franchise of M. le Saint (1877); and the 
Histoire nationale de la marine francaise depuis Jean Bart (1878) 
of M. Trousset are compilations. La Marine de guerre, ses institu- 
tions militaires depuis son origine jusqu'ti nos jours, by Cap™ 
Gougeard (1877); the Essai sur Vhistoire de V administration de la 
martne francaise of M. Lambert de Sainte Croix (1892); and the 
excellent little book of M. Loir on La Marine ro'yale, 1789 (n.d.), 
may be consulted with pleasure and profit. The three books of 
M. Jal, Archiologie novate (1840), Glossaire nautique (1848) and 
Abraham du Quesne et la marine de son temps (1872) are all of high 
value. Les Batailles navales de la France of Cap™ Troude (1867), 
is a carefully written account of naval actions. The Histoire de la 
marine frangaise, pendant la guerre de Vindependence amhicaine 
(1877); Sous la premiere ripublique (1886); Sous le consulat et 
Vempire (1886); De 1815 b\ 1870 (1900); and La Marine francaise et 
la marine allemande, 1870-1871 (1873) of Cap™ Chevalier, are 
thorough and critical. M. G. Lacour-Gayet, Professor at L'Ecole 
supeneure de la Marine, has published two books of serious research, 
but marked by some national prejudice, La Marine militaire de la 
France sous le regne de Louis XV. (1902), and La Marine militaire de 
la France sous le regne de Louis XVL (1905). The Recherches sur 
Vancien clos des galees de Rouen (1864) of M. C. de Robillard de 
Beaurepairc, and the life of Jean de Vienne by the Marquis Terrier de 
Loray (1878), are valuable monographs on passages of early French 
naval history. The Projets et tentatives de debarquement aux lies 
britanniques by Cap™ Desbrierc (1900 seq.) is a most valuable 
authority. A' very scholarly Histoire de la marine francaise was 
begun in 1899 by M. C. de la Ronciere. 

Miscellaneous : — The standard authorities for Spanish naval history 
are, La Marina de Costilla (1892), and La Armada Espanola desde la 
union de Castilla y Aragon (1895-1901), of Captain Cesareo Fernandez 
Duro. The Geschienes van het Nederlandsche Zeewezen of Mr J. C. de 
Jonghe (1858), is an admirable and exhaustive history of the Dutch 
navy. The History of the Maritime Wars of the Turks, by Haji 
Khalfa (or Hugji Chalifa), translated by Mr J. Mitchell for the 
Oriental Translation Fund (1831), may be read with curiosity and 
some profit. There are two general histories of the navy of the 
United States by Fenimore Cooper (1839), and by Mr E. S. Maclay 
(1894); the second is the fuller, and the more critical. Captain 
Mahan's Influence of Sea Power on History 1660-1783 (1890), and his 
Influence of Sea Power upon the French Revolution and Empire 1703- 
1812 (1892), must be classed apart as studies of the general inter- 
action of navies on one another and on international relations. 
The long series of readable monographs by Admiral Jurien de la 
Graviere, covering the whole field of naval warfare from the 
Peloponnesian War to his own time, contain much information and 
sound criticism. (D. H.) 

Naval Strategy and Tactics 

Historical Evolution. — That the methods of conducting war 
at sea have been conditioned by the capacity of the ships and 
their armament, and that capacity and armament have interacted 
upon one another, may appear to be platitudes. But they are 
none the less truths which must always be borne in mind when 
we are considering the history of naval strategy, that is, of the 
large movements by which a commander secures the advantage 
of fighting at a place convenient to himself, or of tactics — which 
are the movements he makes in battle. Throughout antiquity 
and the middle ages till the 16th century, the weapons relied 
on were — (1) the ship itself, used as a ram, (2) the swords of the 
crew, (3) such missile weapons as bolts from heavy crossbows 

	Early history. 

fixed on the bulwarks, bows and arrows, weights dropped from 
a yard or pole rigged out, and the various means of setting an 
enemy alight; by shooting arrows with burning tow or by 
Greek fire or wild fire, blown through tubes (cannae, whence 
f cannon "). The nature of the " Greek fire " is still an unsettled 
question, and it is believed by some authorities that the Byzan- 
tines of the middle ages were acquainted with the use of gun- 
powder. However that may be, it is certain that even after 
the introduction of artillery in the 14th century, the 
means of injuring an enemy at a distance were nil, or 
were very feeble. All actions, therefore, were fought 
at close quarters, where ramming and boarding were possible. 
But the use of the ram was only available for a vessel driven by 
oars. A sailing vessel could not ram unless she were running 
before a good breeze. In a light wind her charge would be 
ineffective, and it could not be made at all from leeward. There- 
fore, while fleets depended on the methods of battle at close 
quarters, two conditions were imposed on the warship. She 
must be small and light, so that her crew could row her with 
effect, and she must carry a v numerous crew to work her oars 
and board or repel boarders. Sails were used by the triremes 
and other classes of warship, ancient and medieval, when going 
from point to point — to relieve the rowers from absolutely 
exhausting toil. They were lowered in action, and when the 
combatant had a secure port at hand, they were left ashore 
before battle. These conditions applied alike to Phormio, the 
Athenian admiral of the 5th century B.C., to the Norse king Olaf 
Tryggveson of the 10th century a.d., and to the chiefs of the 
Christian and Turkish fleets which fought the battle of Lepanto 
in a.d. 1571. There might be, and were, differences of degree 
in the use made of oar and sail respectively. Outside the 
Mediterranean, the sea was unfavourable to the long, narrow 
and light galley of 120 ft. long and 20 ft. of beam. But the Norse 
ship found at Gokstad, though her beam is a third of her length, 
and she is well adapted for rough seas, is also a light and shallow 
craft, to be easily rowed or hauled up on a beach. Some medieval 
vessels were of considerable size, but these were the exception; 
they were awkward, and were rather transports than warships. 
Given a warship which is of moderate size and crowded with 
men, it follows that prolonged cruises, and blockade in the full 
sense of the word, were beyond the power of the sea commanders 
of antiquity and the middle ages. There were ships used for 
trade which with a favourable wind could rely on making six 
knots an hour — that is to say, twice the average speed attained 
by Captain Cook in his voyages of exploration. But a war fleet 
could not provide the cover, or carry the water and food, needed 
to keep the crews efficient during a long cruise. So long as galleys 
were used, that is to say, till the middle of the 18th century, they 
were kept in port as much as possible, and a tent was rigged over 
the deck to house the rowers. The fleet was compelled to hug 
the shore in order to find supplies. ' It always endeavoured to 
secure a basis on shore to store provisions and rest the crews. 
Therefore the wider operations were slowly made. Therefore 
too, when the enemy was to be waited for, or a port watched, 
some point on shore was secured and the ships were drawn up. 
It was by holding such a point that the Corinthian allies of the 
Syracusans were able to pin in the Athenians. The Romans 
watched Lilybeum in the same way, and Hannibal the Rhodian 
could run the blockade before they were launched and ready to 
stop him. The Norsemen hauled their ships on shore, stockaded 
them and marched inland. The Greeks of Homer had done the 
same and could do nothing else. Roger di Lauria, in a.d. i 285, 
waited at the Hormigas with his galleys on the beach till the 
French were seen to be coming past him. Edward III. in 
a.d. 1350, stayed at Winchelsea till the Spaniards were sighted. 
The allies at Lepanto remained at anchor near Dragon era till 
the last moment. 

Given again that the fighting was at close quarters with ram, 
stroke of sword, crossbow bolt, arrow, pigs of iron or lead and 
wild fire blown through tubes, it follows that the formations 
and tactics were equally imposed on the combatants. The 
formation was inevitably the line abreast — the ships going side 
by side — for the object was to bring all the rams, or all the 
boarders into action at once. It was quite as necessary to strike 
with the prow when boarding as when ramming. If the vessels 
were laid side by side the oars would have prevented them 
from touching. It may be added that this rule prevailed equally 
with the sailing ship of later times, since they were built with 
what is technically called " a tumble home," that is to say, their 
sides sloped inwards from the water line, and the space from 
the top of the bulwarks of one to the other was too great to be 
jumped. The extent to which ramming or boarding would be 
used respectively would depend on the skill of the rowers. The 
highly trained Athenian crews of the early Pelopon- 
nesian War relied mainly on the ram. They aimed at « nc/ l fl * 
dashing through an enemy's line, and shaving off the m€ thods. 
oars from one side of an opponent. When successfully 
practised, this manoeuvre would be equivalent to the dismasting 
of a sailing line of battle ship. It was the 5ukit\ov$, and it 
enabled the assailant to turn, and ram his crippled enemy in 
the stern (7repi7r\ovs) But an attack with the ram might be 
exceedingly dangerous to the assailant, if he were not very 
solidly built. His ram might be broken off in the shock. The 
Athenians found this a very real peril, and were compelled to 
construct their triremes with stronger bows, to contend with the 
more heavily built Peloponnesian vessels — whereby they lost 
much of their mobility. In fact success in ramming depended 
so much on a combination of skill and good fortune that it 
played a somewhat subordinate part in most ancient sea fights. 
The Romans baffled the ramming tactics of the Carthaginians 
by the invention of the corva or crow, which grappled the prow 
of the rammer, and provided a gangway for boarders. After 
the introduction of artillery in the 14th century, when guns 
were carried in the bows of the galley, it was considered bad 
management to fire them until the prow was actually touching 
the enemy. If they were discharged before the shock there 
was always a risk that they would be fired too soon, and the guns 
of the time could not be rapidly reloaded. The officer-like course 
was to keep the fire for the last moment, and use it to clear the 
way for the boarders. As a defence against boarding, the ships 
of a weaker fleet were sometimes tied side to one another, in the ■ 
middle ages, and a barrier made with oars and spars. But this 
defensive arrangement, which was adopted by Olaf Tryggveson of 
Norway at Swolder (a.d. iooo), and by the French at Sluys 
(a.d. 1340), could be turned by an enemy who attacked on the 
flank. To meet the shock of ramming and to ram, medieval 
ships were sometimes " bearded," i.e. fortified with iron bands 
across the bows. 

The principles of naval warfare known to the ancient world 
descended through Byzantium to the Italian Republics and from 
them to the West. With the growth of ships, the 
development of artillery, and the beginning of the great S hipsf 
sailing fleets capable of keeping the sea for long 
periods together, came the need for a new adaptation of old 
principles. A ship which depended on the wind for its motive 
power could not hope to ram. It could still board, and the 
Spaniards did for long make it their main object to run their 
bow over an enemy's sides, and invade his deck. In order to 
carry out this kind of attack they would naturally try to get 
to windward and then bear down before the wind in line abreast 
ship upon ship. But an opponent to leeward could always baffle 
this attack by edging away, and in the meantime fire with his 
broadside to cripple his opponent's spars. Experience soon 
showed the more intelligent sea officers of all nations, that a 
ship which relied on broadside fire, must present her broadside 
to the enemy; it was also soon seen that in order to give full 
play to the guns of the fleet, the ships must follow one another. 
Thus there arose the practice of arranging ships in the line 
ahead j one behind the other. For a time sea-officers were 
inclined to doubt whether order could be maintained among 
vessels subject to the forces of wind and tide. But in the very 
first years of the 16th century, a Spanish writer of the name of 
Alonso de Chaves argued with force that even an approach to 
order is superior to none — and that, given the accidents of 
wind and tide, the advantage would rest with him who took 
his precautions. The truth was so obvious that it could not but 
be universally accepted. The line ahead then became 
btttie."* " the Kne o* "battle." This term has a double mean- 
ing. It may mean the formation, but it may also 
mean the ships which are fit to form parts of the line in action. 
The practice of sorting out ships, so as to class those fit to be 
in a line of battle apart from others, dates from the second 
half of the 17th century. Its advantages had been seen before, 
but the classification was not made universal till then. The 
excessive number of ships collected in those naval wars, their 
variety in size, and the presence in the fleets of a large proportion 
of pressed or hired merchant ships had led to much bad execu- 
tion. But in the final battles of the first war between England 
and the Dutch Republic (1652-53), the Parliamentary admirals 
enforced the formation of the line by strong measures. On the 
conclusion of the war, they drew up the first published code of 
fighting instructions. These give the basis of the whole tactical 
system of the 17th and 18th centuries in naval warfare. The 
treatises of Paul Hoste, Bigot de Morogues and Bourde de 
Villehuet, which were the text-books of the time, all French in 
origin but all translated into other languages, are commentaries 
•upon and developments of this traditional code of practice. 

The governing principles were simple and were essentially 
sound. The ships were arranged in a line, in order that each 
should have her broadside free to fire into the enemy 
^ifi^htl* w ^ tnout running the risk of firing into her own friends. 
tactfcs. ° g I n order to remove the danger that they would 
touch each other, a competent space, to allow for a 
change of course in case of need, was left between them. It 
was fixed at two cables — that is, 200 fathoms, or 400 yds. 
— though less room was occasionally taken. To reduce the 
number of men required to handle the sails, and leave them 
free to fight the guns, the ships fought under reduced canvas. 
But it was necessary to retain the power to increase the speed of 
a ship rapidly. This was secured by not sheeting home one of the 
sails — that is to say, it was left loose, and the wind was "spilt 
out of it." When the vessel was required to shoot ahead it was 
easy to sheet the sail home, and " let all draw." The fleets would 
fight " on the wind " — that is to say, with the wind on the side, 
because they were then under better control. With the wind 
blowing 'from behind they would take the wind out of one 
another's sails. When the course had to be altered, the ships 
turned by tacking — that is, head to wind — or by wearing — 
that is, stern to wind, cither together or in succession. To tack 
or wear a large fleet in succession was a very lengthy operation. 
The second ship did not tack, or wear, till she had reached the 
place where the first had turned, and so on, down the whole line. 
By tacking or wearing together the order of a fleet was reversed, 
the van becoming the rear, and the rear the van. It must be 
remembered that a fleet was divided into van, centre and rear, 
which kept their names even when the order was reversed. 
Orders were given by signals from the flag-ship, but as they 
could not be seen by the ships in a line with her, frigates were 
stationed on the side of the line opposite to that facing the 
enemy " to repeat signals." 

A main object which the admirals who drafted the orders 
had before them was to obviate the risk that the enemy would 
double on one end of the line and put it between two fires. 
It is obvious that if two fleets, A and B, are sailing, both with 
the wind on the right side, and the leading ship of A comes 
into action with the seventh or eighth of B, then six or seven 
leading ships of B's line will be free to turn and surround the 
head of A's line. This did actually happen at the battle of 
Beachy Head. Therefore, the orders enjoin on the admiral the 
strict obligation to come into action in such a way that his leading 
ship shall steer with the leading ship of the enemy, and his rear 
with the rear. The familiar expression of the British navy was 
" to take every man his bird." 

The regular method of fighting battles was thus set up. In 
itself it was founded on sound principles. As it was framed when 
the enemies kept in view were the Dutch, who in seamanship 
and gunnery were fully equal to the British, its authors were 
justified in prescribing the safe course. Unhappily they added 
the direction that a British admiral was to keep his fleet, through- 
out the battle, in the order in which it was begun. Therefore 
he could take no advantage of any disorder which might occur 
in the enemy's lines. When therefore the conflict came to be 
between the British and the French in the 18th century, battles 
between equal or approximately equal forces were for long 
inconclusive. The French, who had fewer ships than the British, 
were anxious to fight at the least possible cost, lest their fleet 
should be worn out by severe action, leaving Great Britain 
with an untouched balance. Therefore, they preferred to engage 
to leeward, a position which left them free to retreat before the 
wind. They allowed the British fleet to get to windward, and, 
when it was parallel with them and bore up before the wind to 
attack, they moved onwards. The attacking fleet had then to 
advance, not directly before the wind with .its ships moving 
along lines perpendicular to the line attacked, but in slanting 
or curving lines. The assailants would be thrown into " a bow 
and quarter line " — that is to say? with the bow of the second 
level with the after part of the first and so on from end to end. 
In the case of a number of ships of various powers of sailing, it 
was a difficult formation to maintain. The result was that the 
ships of the assailing line which were steering to attack the 
enemy's van came into action first and were liable to be crippled 
in the rigging. If the same formation was to be maintained, 
the others were now limited to the speed of the injured vessels, 
and the enemy to leeward slipped away. At all times a fleet 
advancing from windward was liable to injury in spars, even if 
the leeward fleet did not deliberately aim at them. The leeward 
ships would be leaning away from the wind, and their shot would 
always have a tendency to fly high. So long as the assailant 
remained to windward, the ships to leeward could always slip 
off. 

The inconclusive results of so many battles at sea excited 
the attentions of a Scottish gentleman, Mr Clerk of Eldin (1728- 
181 2), in the middle of the 1 8th century. He began a 
series of speculations and calculations, which he em- ttJorhs* 
bodied in pamphlets and distributed among naval 
officers. They were finally published in book form in 1790 and 
1797. The hypothesis which governs all Clerk's demonstrations 
is that as the British navy was superior in gunnery and seaman- 
ship to their enemy, it was their interest to produce a melee. 
He advanced various ingenious suggestions for concentrating 
superior forces on parts of the enemy's line — by preference on 
the rear, since the van must lose time in turning to its support. 
They are all open to the criticism that an expert opponent could 
find an answer to each of them. But that must be always the 
case, and victory is never the fruit of a skilful movement alone, 
but of that superiority of skill or of moral strength which enables 
one combatant to forestall or to crush another by more rapid 
movement or greater force of blow. Clerk's theories had at 
least this merit that they must infallibly tend to make battles 
decisive by throwing the combatants into a furious mingled 
strife. 

The unsatisfactory character of the accepted method of 
fighting battles at sea had begun to be obvious to naval officers, 
both French and English, who were Clerk's contemporaries. 
The great French admiral Suffren condemned naval tactics as 
being little better than so many excuses for avoiding a real 
fight. He endeavoured to find a better method, by concentrating 
superior forces on parts of his opponent's line in some of his 
actions with the British fleet in the East Indies in 1782 and 1783. 
But his orders were ill obeyed, and the quality of his fleet was 
not superior to the British. Rodney, in his first battle in the 
West Indies in 1780, endeavoured to concentrate a superior 
force on part of his enemy's line by throwing a greater number 
of British ships on the rear of the French line. But his directions 
were misunderstood and not properly executed. Moreover he 
did not then go beyond trying to place a larger number of ships 
in action to windward against a smaller number to leeward by 
arranging them at a less distance than two-cables length. But 
an enemy who took the simple and obvious course of closing his 
line could baffle the attack, and while the retreat to leeward 
remained open could still slip away. On the 12th of April 1782 
(battle of Dominica) Rodney was induced, by the disorder in the 
French line, to break his own formation and pass through the 
enemy. He took the French flag-ship and five other vessels. 
The favourable result of this departure from the old practice of 
keeping the formation intact throughout the battle ruined the 
moral authority of the orthodox system of tactics. In the French 
war which began in 1793 Lord Howe (battle of 1st of June) 
ordered his fleet to steer through the enemy, and to put them- 
selves on his line only as a means of bringing his fleet into action, 
and then played to produce a melee in which the individual 
superiority of his vessels would have free play. Throughout the 
war, which lasted, with a brief interval of peace, from 1793 
to 18 1 5, British admirals grew constantly bolder in the method 
they adopted for producing the desired mel6e (battles of St 
Vincent, Camperdown, Trafalgar). It has sometimes been argued 
that their line of attack was rash and would have proved 
disastrous if tried against more skilful opponents. But this 
is one of those criticisms which are of value only against those 
who think that there can be a magic efficacy in any particular 
attack, which makes its success infallible. That the tactics of 
British admirals of the great wars of 1793-1815 had in themselves 
no such virtue was amply demonstrated at the engagement 
off Lissa in 181 1. They were justified because the reliance of 
admirals on the quality of their fleets was well founded. It 
should be borne in mind that a vessel while bearing down on an 
enemy's line could not be exposed to the fire of three enemies 
at once when at a less distance than 750 yds., because the guns 
could not be trained to converge on a nearer point. The whole 
range of effective fire was only a thousand yards or a very little 
over. The chance that a ship would be dismasted and stopped 
before reaching the enemy's line was small. 

The improvements in the construction of ships, which had so 
much influence on the development of tactics, had its effect also 
influence on strate &y- The great aims of a fleet in war must be 
otim» to keep the coast of its own country free from attack, 
proved to secure the freedom of its trade, and to destroy 

	A^z/rf/ *^e

enemy,

	s A ee t

or confine it to port. The first and 
second of these purposes can be attained by the 
successful achievement of the third — the destruction or paralysis 
of the hostile fleet. But till after the end of the 17th century 
it was thought impossible, or at least very rash, to keep the great 
ships out of port between September and May or June. Therefore 
continuous watch on an enemy by blockading his ports was 
beyond the power of any navy. Therefore too, as the opponent 
might be at sea before he could be stopped, the movements of 
fleets were much subordinated to the need for providing convoy 
to the trade. It was not till the middle of the 18th century that 
the continuous blockade first* carried out by Lord Hawke in 
"1758-59, and then brought to perfection by Earl St Vincent 
and other 3ritish admirals between 1793 and 181 5, became 
possible. 

Modern Times. — The interval of ninety years between 181 5 
and 1904 (the opening of the Russo-Japanese conflict) was 
marked by no naval war. There was fighting at sea, and there 
were prolonged blockades, but there were no encounters between 
large and well appointed navies. During this period an entire 
revolution took place in the means of propulsion, armament and 
material of construction of ships. Steam was applied to war- 
« ships, at first as an auxiliary force, in the second quarter of the 
19th century. The Crimean War gave a great stimulus to the 
development of the guns. It also brought about the application 
of iron to ships as a cuirass. Very soon metal was adopted as the 
material out of which ships were made. The extended use of 
shells, by immensely increasing the danger of fire, rendered so 
inflammable a substance as wood too dangerous for employment 
in a war-ship. France has the honour of having set the example 
of employing iron as a cuirass, while England was the first to 
take it as the sole material. Changes so sweeping as these could 
not take place without affecting all the established ideas as to 
the conduct of war at sea. The time of revolution in means of 
propulsion, armament and construction was also a time of much 
speculation. Doubts and obscurities remained unsolved because 
they had never been brought to the test of actual fighting on 
an adequate scale. As the 19th century drew to a close, another 
element of uncertainty was introduced by the development of 
the torpedo. A weapon which is a floating and moving mine, 
capable up to a certain point of being directed on its course, 
invisible or very hard to trace, and able to deliver its blow 
beneath the water-line, was so complete a novelty that its action 
was hard indeed to foresee and therefore particularly liable to 
be exaggerated. From the torpedo sprang too the submarine 
vessel, which aims at striking below the surface, where it itself 
is, like its weapon, invisible, or nearly so. 

How to solve the problems which science has set has been the 
task of thoughtful naval officers — and of the governments which 
the military seaman serves. The questions to be solved may be 
stated in the following order. What would be the effect: 1st, 
of the employment of steam, or of any substitute for steam other 
than the wind or the oar; 2nd, of the development of the gun; 
3rd, of the use of metal as a material of construction; 4th, of 
the use of a weapon and a vessel acting below the surface of the 
water, and if not wholly invisible at least very much hidden? r 

The belief that steam had given the lesser fleet an advantage 
over the greater — that it had, in a phrase once popular among 
Englishmen, " bridged the Channel," — need only be touched 
on for its historical interest. It was an intelligible, perhaps 
pardonable, example of the confusion produced by a novelty of 
improved capacity on the minds of those who were not prepared 
to consider it in all its bearings. A moment's thought ought to 
have shown that where both sides had the command of steam, 
the proportion between them would remain what it was before. 
The only exception would be that the fleet which was steering in 
a direction already laid down would have a somewhat greater 
advantage than of old, over another which was endeavouring to 
detect its presence and course. Its movements would be more 
rapid, and it could steam through a fog by which it would be 
hidden in a way impossible for a sailing ship. On the other 
hand, such a fleet could be much more rapidly pursued and" 
interrupted when once its course was known. The influence 
which the freedom and certainty of movement conferred by 
steam would have on the powers of fleets and ships presented 
a problem less easy to dispose of. Against the advantage they 
conferred was to be set the limitation they imposed. The 
necessity for replacing indispensable fuel was a restriction 
unknown to the sailing ship, which needed only to renew its 
provisions and water — stores more easily obtained all the world 
over than coal. Hence doubts naturally arose as to how far a 
state which did not possess coaling stations in all parts of the 
world could conduct extensive operations over great distances. 
The events of the recent Russo-Japanese War lead to the con- 
clusion that the obligation to obtain coal has not materially 
limited the freedom of movement of fleets. By carrying store 
vessels with him, by coaling at sea, and taking advantage of the 
friendly neutrality of certain ports on his route, the Russian 
admiral, Rojdesvensky, reached the Far East in 1905 in less time 
and with less difficulty than he could have done in days when 
he would have been liable to delay by calms, contrary winds and 
loss of spars in gales. The amount of skill on the part of the 
crews required to carry a fleet a" long distance would even appear 
to be less than it was of old. From this it would seem to follow 
that modern fleets possess no less capacity than the old sailing 
fleets for the great operations of war at a distance, or for main- 
taining blockades. Advantage and disadvantage counterbalance 
one another, and the proportion remains the same. Blockade 
is only another name for the maintenance of a watch on an 
enemy's squadron in port by a force capable of fighting him if 
he comes out. Admiral Togo blockaded the Russian squadron at 
Port Arthur in 1904 as effectually as any admiral has done the 
work in the past. The mobility given to the blockaded fleet by 
steam has been exactly counterbalanced by the increased 
mobility of the watch. The proportions remain the same. 

But if the power to undertake far-ranging operations, and to 
confine an enemy to port by keeping him under observation, 
and driving him back when he comes out remains the same, the 
strategy of war at sea cannot have undergone any material altera- 
tion. The possession of ports where stores can be accumulated 
and repairs effected is an advantage as it always was. But a 
powerful fleet when operating far from its own country can supply 
itself with a store-house (a base) on the enemy's coast, or can be 
served at sea by store-ships, as of old. If beaten, it will suffer 
from the want of places of refuge as it always did. 

Among the speculations of recent years, a good deal has been 
heard of the " fleet in being." If this phrase is only used to 
mean that, so long as any part of an enemy's navy 

	ihriar"* 8 * s ca P a ^ e °* actm S w * tn

effect, its existence cannot be 
ignored with the certainty of safety, then the words 
convey a truth which applies to all war whether by land or 
sea. If it means, as it was at least sometimes clearly intended 
to mean, that no such operation as the transport of troops 
oversea can be undertaken with success, so long as the naval 
forces of an opponent are not wholly destroyed, it is con- 
trary to ancient experience. The Japanese in' the beginning of 
1904 hegan transporting troops to Korea before they had beaten 
♦the Russians, and they continued to send them in spite of the 
risk of interruption by the Vladivostok squadron. There was a 
risk, but risk is inseparable from war. The degree which can be 
incurred with sanity depends on the stake at issue, the nature of 
the circumstance and the capacity of the persons, which vary 
infinitely and must be separately judged. 

The war of 1904-05 may also be said to have shown that the 
vast change in the construction of ships, together with the develop- 
ment of old and the invention of new weapons, has 

	amm ng. ^ QnG £ ar j ess tQ a j ter ^ e

course of battles at sea than 
had been thought likely. Two calculations have been successively 
made and have hcen supported with plausibility. The first was 
that steam would enable the ship herself to be used as a projectile 
and that the use of the ram would again become common. 
The sinking of the " Re d 'Italia " by the Austrian ironclad 
Ferdinand Max at the battle of Lissa in 1866 seemed to give 
force to this supposition. Accidental collisions such as those 
between the British war-ships " Vanguard " and " Iron Duke," 
" Victoria " and " Camperdown " have also shown how fatal a 
wound may be given by the ram of a modern ship. But the 
sinking of the " Re d'ltalia " was largely an accident. As 
between vessels both under full control, a collision is easily 
avoided where there is space to move. In a melee, or pell-mell 
battle, to employ Nelson's phrase, opportunities would occur for 
the use of the ram. But the activity of science has developed 
one weapon to counterbalance another. The torpedo has made 
it very dangerous for one fleet to rush at another. A vessel 
To does cannot nre torpedoes ahead, and when charging home 
* at an opponent presenting his broadside would be liable 
to be struck by one. The torpedo may be said therefore to have 
excluded the pell-mell battle and the use of the ram except 
on rare occasions. But then arose the question whether the 
torpedo itself would not become the decisive weapon in naval 
warfare. It is undoubtedly capable of producing a great effect 
when its power can be fully exerted. A school arose, having 
its most convinced partisans in France, which argued that, as a 
small vessel could with a torpedo destroy a great battle-ship, the 
first would drive the second off the sea. The battle-ship was to 
give place to the torpedo-boat or torpedo-boat-destroyer which 
was itself only a torpedo-boat of a larger growth. But the 
torpedo is subject to close restrictions. It cannot be used with 
effect at more than two thousand yards. It ^passes through 
a resisting medium, which renders its course uncertain and 
comparatively slow, so that a moving opponent can avoid it. 
The vessel built to use it can be easily sunk by gun-fire. By 
night the risk from gun-fire is less, but science has nullified 
what she had done. The invention of the search-light has made 
it possible to keep the waters round a ship under observation 
all night. In the war between Russia and Japan the torpedo 
was at first used with success, but the injury it produced fell 
below expectations, even when allowance is made for the fact that 
the Russian squadron at Port Arthur had the means of repair close 
at hand. In the sea fights of the war it was of subordinate use, 
and indeed was not employed except to give the final stroke to, 
or force the surrender of, an already crippled ship. This war 
(and as much may be said for the war hetween the United States 
and Spain) confirmed an old experience. A resolute attempt 
was made by the Americans to block or hlind (in the modern 
phrase to " bottle-up ") the entrance to Santiago de Cuba by 
sinking a ship in it. The Japanese renewed the attempt on a 
great scale, and with the utmost intrepidity, at Port Arthur; 
but though a steamer can move with a speed and precision im- 
possible to a sailing ship, and can therefore be sunk more surely 
at a chosen spot, the experiment failed. Neither Americans 
nor Japanese succeeded in preventing their enemy from coming 
out when he wished to come. 

Since neither ram nor torpedo has established the claim made 
for it, the cannon remains " the queen of battles at sea." It 
can still deliver its blows at the greatest distance, and Q Unm fi re 
in the greatest variety of circumstances. The change 
has hcen in the method in which its power is applied. Now, 
as in former times, the aim of a skilful officer is to concentrate 
a superior force on a part of his opponent's formation. When 
the range of effective fire was a thousand or twelve hundred 
yards, and when guns could only be trained over a small segment 
of a circle because they were fired out of ports, concentration 
could only be effected by bringing a larger number of ships into 
close action with a smaller. To-day when gun-fire is effective even 
at seven thousand yards, and when guns fired from turrets and 
barbettes have a far wider sweep, concentration can be effected 
from a distance. The power to effect it must be sought by a 
judicious choice of position. It is true that greater rapidity and 
precision of fire produce concentration in one way. If of two 
forces engaged one can bring forty guns to bear on a chosen 
point of its opponent's formations, while that opponent can 
bring fifty guns to bear on a part of it, the superiority would 
seem to-be with the larger number. But this is by no means 
necessarily the case. The smaller number of guns may give 
the greater number of blows if fired with greater speed and 
accuracy. Yet no commander has a right to rely on such a 
superiority as this till it has been demonstrated, as it had been 
in the case of the British fleet by the time that Trafalgar was 
fought. Therefore an able chief will always play for position. 
He will do so all the more because an advantage of position adds 
to any other which he may possess. He may dispense with it 
for a particular reason at a given moment and in reliance on 
other sources of strength, but he will not throw it away. 

When position is to be secured the first condition to be thought 
of is the order in which it is to be sought for. The " line ahead " 
was imposed on the sailing fleets by the peremptory p m 
need for bringing, or at least retaining the power to 
bring, all their broadsides into action. Experiments made during- 
manoeuvres by modern navies, together with the experience 
gained in the war of 1904-05 in the Far East, have combined to 
show that no material change has taken place in this respect. 
It is still as necessary as ever that all the guns should he so placed 
as to be capable of being brought to bear, and it is still a condition 
imposed by the physical necessities of the case that this freedom 
can only be obtained when ships follow one another in a line. 
When in pursuit or flight, or when steaming on the look-out for 
a still unseen enemy, a fleet may be arranged in the " line 
abreast." A pursuing fleet would have to run the risk of being 
struck by torpedoes dropped by a retreating enemy. But it 
would have the advantage of being able to bring all its guns 
which can fire ahead to bear on the rear-ship of the enemy. 
When an opponent is prepared to give battle, and turns his broad- 
side so as to bring the maximum of his gun-fire to bear, he must 
be answered by a similar display of force — in other words, 
the line ahead must be formed to meet the line ahead. 

Both fleets being in this formation, how is the concentration 
of a superior force to be effected? If the opponents are equal 
in number, speed, armament, gunnery and the leadership of the 
chiefs, accident alone can confer an advantage on either of them. 
Where equal weights are tried on accurate scales one cannot 
force up the other, but this evenness of power is rarely met 
in war by land or sea. The knowledge that it existed would 
probably prevent an appeal to arms between nations, since 
no decisive result could be hoped for. It is needless to insist 
that superior numbers make the task of concentrating com- 
paratively easy, unless counterbalanced by a great inferiority 
in speed. Speed is the quality which an admiral will wish his 
fleet to possess, in order that he may have the power to choose 
his point of attack. The swifter of two forces, otherwise equal, 
can always get ahead of its opponent, and then by 
turning inwards bring the leading ship of the force 
it is attacking into a curve of fire. The leader of the slower 
fleet can avoid the danger by also turning inwards. By so doing 
he will keep the assailant on his beam, opposite his side. Then 
the two fleets will tend to swing round in two circles having 
a common centre, the swifter going round the outer circumference 
and the slower round the inner. As the difference in length 
of these two lines would be always great and perhaps immense, 
the less speedy fleet could easily avoid the risk of being headed. 
On the other hand the outer fleet will be in a concave formation, 
and therefore able to bring all its guns to bear on the same point, 
while the inner fleet will be in a convex line, so that it will be 
unable to bring the guns of both van and rear to bear on the 
same mark. The advantage is obvious, but it may perhaps 
be easily exaggerated. The swifter fleet on the larger circle can 
in theory concentrate all its fire on one point, but all" its ships 
will still be under fire, and in practice it is found very difficult 
to make men neglect the enemy who is actually hitting them, 
and apply their attention entirely to another. Moreover the 
ships on the outer circle, having the larger line to cover, cannot 
allow themselves the same margin of steam-power to make 
good loss of speed by injury from shot. A fleet would not go 
at its maximum rate of common speed in action. A blow on 
the water-line might fill part of the ship's watertight compart- 
ments and reduce her speed. She must be able to make good 
the loss by putting on a greater pressure of steam, which she 
would not be able to do if already going at her maximum rate. 
In actual battle very much will depend on the respective skill 
of the gunnery. The swifter fleet might well find its superiority 
neutralised by the crippling of two or three of its leading ships. 
In such an action as this it will be, if not impossible, at least 
exceedingly difficult to give orders by signal. An admiral will 
therefore have to direct by example, which he cannot do except 
by placing his flag-ship at the head of the line. In that place 
he will be marked out as a target for the enemy's concentrated 
fire. He may indeed decide to direct the battle by signal from 
outside the line. Yet the difficulty he will find in seeing what 
is happening, as well as the difficulty the captains will find 
in seeing the signals, will always be so great, that in all probability 
the admirals of the future, will, like Nelson, be content to lay 
down the general principles on which the battle is to be fought, 
and trust the captains to apply them as circumstances arise. 
A large measure of independence must needs be allowed to the 
captains in the actual stress of battle. Ships must be placed 
at such a distance apart as will allow them room to manoeuvre 
so as to avoid collision with their own friends. The interval 
cannot be less than 800 yds. When the length of the vessels 
themselves is added, it will be seen that a line of twelve vessels 
will stretch six miles. c Modern powder is nominally smokeless, 
and it certainly does not create the dense bank of smoke produced 
by the old explosives. Yet it does create a sufficient haze to 
obscure the view from the van to the rear of an extended line. 
The movements must be rapid, and there will be little time 
indeed in which to take decisions. The torpedo may not be 
used during the actual battle. Its part will be to complete the 
destruction or enforce the surrender of a beaten enemy, and to 
cover retreats. 

The submarine and submergible vessel were brought into 
prominence by France in the hope that by diminishing the 
value of battleships they would reduce the superiority of the 
British navy. The example of France was followed by other 
powers, and particularly by Great Britain; but their value 
as weapons of war is necessarily a matter of speculation. 

Bibliography. — Naval strategy can hardly be said to have been 
dealt with at all till Captain Mahan published his Influence of Sea 
Power on History. The tactics of the ancient world are only very 
briefly dealt with in the De re Militari of Vegctius, in book iv. 
Vegetius was much copied and read in the middle ages, and was 
translated in 1284 by Jean de Meung, one of the authors of the Roman 
de la Rose. His translation is printed, together with the verse 
paraphrase of Priorats, in the Anciens Textes francais. Naval 
tactics are dealt with in the treatise of Leo VI. the Tactician, and 
his son Constantine VII., or perhaps Constantine VIII., printed in 
Mcursius' Opera Omnia, vol. vi. They were emperors of the Mace- 
donian dynasty. The tactics of the medieval galleys are described, 
with references to authorities, both by A. Guglielmotti in Marine 
Pontificia, and by Admiral Jurien de la Graviere in Les Derniers 
jours de la marine d rames (1885). The chief writers on the tactics 
of the sailing fleets were French. At the head of them, in time and 
in merit, must be put Paul Hoste, whose folio on Naval Evolutions 
appeared in 1697. Hoste was a Jesuit who was secretary to the Count 
of Tourville. Hoste's treatise was translated into English and 
published in Edinburgh in 1834 with numerous and excellent illustra- 
tions by Captain J. D. Boswall, A Treatise on Naval Tactics. Captain 
Boswall also made use of the passages relating to naval tactics in the 
History of Ike Art of War by J. G. Hoyer, an officer in the Prussian 
army (1797-1800). Another excellent French treatise is Le 
Manceuvrier of Bourde de Villehuet (1765), translated into English 
in 1788 under the title of The Mamsuvrer, or Skilful Seaman. 
Particular attention is due to the Essay on Naval Tactics by Mr Clerk 
of Eldin, first published in a collected form in 1804, but known in 
parts since 1780. Clerk was original in speculation and lucid in 
exposition. A French treatise, L Art de la guerre sur mer, by the 
Vicomte de Grenier (1787), was less famous or influential, but was 
able and original. An exhaustive collection of " Fighting Instruc- 
tions " and other material necessary to an intelligent understanding 
of the naval tactics of sailing fleets is the Fighting Instructions 1530- 
i8i6 t edited by Mr Julian S. Corbett for the Navy Record Society 
(1905)" Admiral Ekin's Naval Battles (1824) has some passages of 
value. It is comparatively easy to give authorities for the warfare 
of galleys and sailing ships. The case is altered when we have to 
deal with the tactics of steam fleets. Vast quantities of speculation 
have 'been written in every country which possesses a fleet, but, no 
test having been applied on a sufficient scale till the Russo-Japanese 
War of 1904, little of it can be said to possess approved authority. 
The facts 01 such wars as there have been are collected in Captain 
Mahan's Life of Farragut (1893) and Lessons of the War with Spain 
(1899), and in Mr H. W. Wilson's Ironclads in Action, i8$$-i89$. A 
standard work on evolutions and formations is Elementary Naval 
Tactics, by Captain Wm. Bainbridge Hoff of the United States navy, 
first published in 1894, but reprinted since with enlargements. 
The Naval Warfare of Admiral P. H. Colomb is a collection of 
historical examples meant to illustrate the principles of naval 
strategy for application in modern conditions. The third edition, 
revised and corrected, with additions, appeared in 1899. (D. H.) 


NAWAB, a Mahommedan title for a native ruler in India, 
answering to the Hindu raja. Nawab originally means a deputy, 
being the honorific plural of the Arabic naib, and it was applied 
to a delegate of a supreme chief, the viceroy or governor under 
the Great Mogul, e.g. the nawab of Oudh. From this use it 
became a title of rank, without office, and is now sometimes 
conferred by the British government on Mahommedan gentlemen 
for distinguished service. 


NAWABGANJ, the name of three towns of British India. 
(1) The most important is the headquarters of Bara Banki 
district in the United Provinces, on the Oudh and Rohilkhand 
railway, 17 m. E. of Lucknow; pop. (1001) 14,478. It has 
a considerable trade in sugar and cotton goods. It was the 
scene of a victory by Sir Hope Grant during the Mutiny. (2) A 
town in Malda district, Eastern Bengal and Assam, on the 
Mahananda near its junction with the Ganges, a centre of river 
trade; pop. (1901) 17,016. (3) A town in Gonda district, 
United Provinces, on the Bengal and Nortb-Western railway; 
pop. (1901) 7047. 


NAWANAGAR, or Jamnagar, a native state of India, in 
Kathiawar, within the Gujarat division of Bombay, situated 
on the south of the Gulf of Cutch. Area, 3791 sq. m. Pop. 
(1001) 336,779, showing a decrease of 11% in the decade due to 
famine. Estimated revenue, £170,000; tribute, £8000. The 
chief, whose title is Jam, is a Jareja Rajput of the same clan 
as the rao of Cutch. Prince Ranjitsinjhi (b. 1872), well known 
in England as a cricketer, was educated at the Rajkumar College, 
Rajkot, and Trinity College, Cambridge. He had been adopted 
by his uncle, the Jam Shri Vibhaji, but the adoption was set 
aside, with British sanction, in favour of a son by a Mahommedan 
mother. This son succeeded, but died in 1906 aged twenty-four, 
and Ranjitsinjhi obtained the throne in March 1907. A branch 
railway, constructed at the expense of the state, was opened 
in 1 898 from Rajkot to Nawanagar town. 

The town of Nawanagar is about 5 m. from the seaport of 
Bedi. Pop. (1901) 53,844. Founded by Jam Rawal in 1540, 
it is built of stone, and has manufactures of silk and gold 
embroidery, and perfumed oils and red powder for ceremonial 
purposes. Its water is supplied from a reservoir covering 600 
acres and an aqueduct 8 m. long. 


NAWIWI [AbC ZakarIyya ibn Sharaf un-Nawawt] (1233- 
1278), Arabian writer, was born at Nawa near Damascus. In 
the latter city he studied from his eighteenth year, and there, 
after making the pilgrimage in 1253, he settled as a private 
scholar until 1267, when he succeeded Abu Shama as professor 
of tradition at the Ashraflyya school. He died at. Nawa from 
overwork. 

His manual of Moslem law according to the Shafi'ite school has been 
edited with French translation by van den Bergh, 2 vols., Batavia 
(1882-1884), and published at Cairo (1888). The Tahdhtb ul-Asma'i 
has been edited as the Biographical Dictionary of Illustrious Men 
chiefly at the Beginning of Islam by F. Wustenfeld (Gottingen, 1842- 
1847). The Taqrtb wa Taistr, an introduction to the study of 
tradition, was published at Cairo, 1890, with Suyutl's commentary. 
It has been in part translated into French by M. Marcais in the 
Journal asiatique, series ix., vols. 16-18 (1900-1901). NawawPs 
collection of the forty (actually forty-two) chief traditions has been 
frequently published with commentaries in Cairo. For other works 
see C. Brockelmann's Gesch. der arabischen Litter atur, vol. i. (Weimar, 
1898), pp. 395-397- (G. W. T.) 


NAXOS, the largest of the Cyclades (about 22 m. by 16 m.), 
a fertile island in the Aegean Sea, east of Faros, with which, and 
adjacent smaller islands, it forms an eparchia. In ancient times 
it was also called Dia or Strongyle. It was rich in vines and 
famous for its wine, and a centre of the worship of Bacchus. 
The god found Ariadne asleep on its shore, when she was deserted 
by Theseus. The sculptors of Naxos formed an important 
school of early Greek art; several unfinished colossal statues 
are still to be seen in the quarries, notably one in Apollona Bay, 
to the N.E. of the island. A tyrant Lygdamis ruled Naxos in 
alliance with Peisistratus of Athens during the 6th century B.C. 
In 501 a Persian fleet unsuccessfully attacked it, but in 490 it 
was captured and treated with great severity. Four Naxian 
ships took part in the expedition of Xerxes, but deserted and 
fought on the Greek side at Salamis in 480. Naxos was a member 
of the Delian League (q.v.)\ it revolted in 471, was captured 
by Athens, and remained in her possession till her empire was 
destroyed. In later times the most remarkable event was its 
capture, in a.d. 1207, by the Venetian Marco Sanudo, who 
founded the duchy of Naxos, which flourished till the Turks took 
the island in 1566. Since the War of Independence it has 
belonged to the Greek kingdom. The only ancient remains of 
any importance are those of a temple (Palati), supposed to be 
that of Dionysus, on an island just oil the town. Naxos is still 
rich in fruit trees, and also exports corn, wine and oil, as well 
as emery, its richest and most important mineral product. Pop. 
(1907) 25,185 (province), 2064 (commune). 


NAXOS, the earliest Greek colony in Sicily, was founded by 
Theocles from Chalcis in 735 B.C., on the E. coast, S. of Tauro- 
menium (mod. Taormina), in a low-lying situation just N. of the 
mouth of the river Alcantara, where the castle of Schiso now 
stands. The adoption of the name of Naxos, the island in the 
Aegean Sea, seems to indicate that there were Naxians among 
its founders. Within a few years it became strong enough to 
found Leontini and Catana. Naxos was the warmest ally of 
Athens in the Sicilian expedition. In 403 B.C. it was destroyed 
by Dionysius and handed over to the Sicels, but was never 
rebuilt. Its place was supplied in 358 by Tauromenium. Scanty 
traces of its walls are to be seen, of irregular blocks of lava, 
especially on the south, parallel to the river (E. A. Freeman, 
HisL of Sic. i. 323). Without the city stood the altar of Apollo 
Archegetes, at which all sacred embassies that left Sicily sacrificed 
before their departure (Thuc. vi. 3). 


NAY, or Ney, the long flute of the ancient Egyptians, held 
obliquely and played by directing the breath, as in the pipes 
of the syrinx, across the open end, which had no embouchure 
of any kind. Performers on the nay are represented on many 
of the frescoes which decorated the tombs at Thebes, their 
flutes reaching nearly to the ground while they are in the familiar 
half-kneeling posture. The acoustic principles involved in the 
production of sound are the same as for the flute. The narrow- 
ness of the bore in proportion to the length would facilitate the 
production of harmonics and so give the nay an extended 
compass. Victor Loret 1 has compiled a list of all the real pipes 
of ancient Egypt which have survived, having for the most 
part been preserved in mummy cases. The nay was not restricted 
to ancient Egypt, but has remained in general use in various 
parts of the East until the present day. (K. S.) 


NAYAGARH, a native state in India, in the Orissa division 
of Bengal. Area, 588 sq. m.; pop. (1901) 140,779; revenue, 
£8000. It contains hills rising to 5000 ft.; and exports much 
agricultural produce. In 1894 a revolt of the hill tribe.of Khonds 
against the raja required the intervention of British military 
police. Nayagarh village (pop. 3340) is connected by road with 
Khurda in Puri district. 


NAYAR, or Nair, a caste or tribe on the W. coast of S. India, 
who form the dominant race in Malabar. Traditionally they are 
soldiers, but many have taken to professions, and one was in 
1910 a judge of the high court at Madras. Their total number in 
all India in 1901 was just over one million. Their most peculiar 
customs are: (1) marumakkaltayam—" descent through sister's 
children," or inheritance in the female line; and (2) sambandham, 
a loose form of union, taking the place of marriage, without any 
responsibility of the husband towards either wife or children. 
In 1896 an act of the Madras legislature enabled a sambandham 
to be registered, and have the force of a legal marriage. Little 
advantage has been taken of this act, while it is alleged that 
the sambandham now usually lasts for a lifetime. 

See Malabar District Gazetteer (Madras, 1908). 


NAYLER (or Naylor), JAMES (1618-1660), English Puritan, 
was born at Andersloe or Ardsley, in Yorkshire, in 1618. In 
1642 he joined the parliamentary army, and served as quarter- 
master in John Lambert's horse. In 165 1 he adopted Quakerism, 
and gradually arrived at the conviction that he was a new 
incarnation of Christ. He gathered round him a small band of 
disciples, who followed him from place to place. At Appleby 
in 1653 and again at Exeter in 1655 he suffered terms of imprison- 
ment. In October 1655, in imitation of Christ's procession into 
Jerusalem, he entered Bristol on horseback riding single — " a 
rawboned nude figure, with lank hair reaching below his cheeks " 
— attended by seven followers, some on horseback, some on foot, 
he in silence and they singing "Hosannal Holy, holy! Lord 
God of Sabaoth!" At the High Cross he and his followers 
were arrested. His trial occupied the second parliament of 
Cromwell for several days, and on the 16th of December 1656 
he was convicted of blasphemy and sentenced to be whipped 
from the Palace Yard to the Old Exchange, to be branded in 
the forehead with " B" (for blasphemer), to have his tongue 
bored with a red-hot iron, to be whipped through the streets 
of Bristol, and to suffer imprisonment with hard labour for two 
years. On his release he was readmitted into the communion 
of the Quakers, and spent some time in Westmorland with 
George Whitehead (1636?-! 7 23). In October 1660 Nayler 
set out to visit his long-forsaken family in Yorkshire, but died 
on the journey in Huntingdonshire. 

A collected edition of the Tracts of Nayler appeared in 1716. 
See A Relation of the Life, Conversion, Examination, Confession, and 
Sentence of James Nayler (1657); a Memoir of the Life, Ministry, 
Trial, and Sufferings of James Nayler (1719) ; and a Refutation of 
some of the more Modem Misrepresentations of the Society of Friends 
commonly called Quakers, with a Life of James Nayler, by Joseph 
Gurney Bevan (1800). 

	1( 'Les Flfltes e*$ryptienncs antiques/' in Journal asiatique, 8eme 
	s6rie, tome xiv. (Pans, 1889). 


NAZARENES (Nafcopacot), an obscure Jewish-Christian sect, 
existing at the time of Epiphanius (fl. a.d. 370) in Coele-Syria, 
Decapolis (Pella) and Basanitis (Cocabe). According to that 
authority {Parianon, xxix. 7) they dated their settlement in 
Pella from the time of the flight of the Jewish Christians 
from Jerusalem, immediately before the siege in a.d. 70; he 
characterizes them as neither more nor less than Jews pure and 
simple, but adds that they recognized the new covenant as well as 
the old, and believed in the resurrection, and in the one God and 
His Son Jesus Christ. He cannot say whether their christologieal 
views were identical with those of Cerinthus and his school, or 
whether they differed at all from his own. But Jerome {Ep. 79, 
to Augustine) says that they believed in Christ the Son of God, 
born of the Virgin Mary, who suffered under Pontius Pilate, and 
rose again, but adds that, " desiring to be both Jews and 
Christians, they are neither the one nor the other." They used 
the Aramaic recension of the Gospel according to Matthew, 
which they called the Gospel to the Hebrews, but, while adhering 
as far as possible to the Mosaic economy as regarded circumcision, 
sabbaths, foods and the like, they did not refuse to recognize the 
apostolieity of Paul or the rights of heathen Christians (Jer., 
Comm. in Isa., ix. 1). These facts, taken along with the name 
(cf. Acts xxiv, 5) and geographical position of the sect, lead 
to the conclusion that the Nazarenes of the 4th century are, in 
spite of Epiphanius's distinction, to be identified with the 
Ebionites (q.v.). 


NAZARETH (mod. en-Ndsira), a town in Galilee, in a hollow 
of the hills on the southern border of the plain of Esdraelon. 
It first appears as a village (John i. 46) in which Joseph and Mary 
lived (Luke i. 26) and to which they returned from Egypt 
(Matt. ii. 23). Here the unrecorded years of Christ's boyhood 
were spent. From the name of the town comes nasdra {i.e. 
" Nazarenes "), the ordinary oriental word for " Christians." 
There was here a synagogue (Matt. xiii. 54) in which Christ 
preached the sermon that led to his rejection by his fellow towns- 
men. The growth of legends and traditional identifications can 
be traced in the writings of the pilgrims who have visited the 
town from Jerome's time till our own. For none of these can 
anything be said, save that it is possible that the village spring 
(called " St Mary's Well ") is the same as that used in the time of 
Christ. A large basilica stood here about a.d. 600: the crusaders 
transferred here the bishopric of Scythopolis. It was taken by 
Saladin in 11 87. In 151 7 it was captured by the Turks. The 
population is now estimated at about 3500 Moslems and 6500 
Christians; there are numerous schools, hospitals, &c, conducted 
by Greeks, Latins and Protestants. Visitors are shown the 
" Church of the Annunciation " with caves (including a fragment 
of a pillar hanging from the ceiling, and said to be miraculously 
supported) which are described as the scene of the annunciation, 
the " workshop of Joseph," the " synagogue," and a stone table, 
said to have been used by Christ. 


NAZARITE, or rather Nazirite, the name given by the 
Hebrews to a peculiar kind of devotee. The characteristic 
marks of a Nazarite were unshorn locks and abstinence from 
wine (Judges xiii. 5; 1 Sam. i. 11; Amos ii, 11 seq.); but full 
regulations for the legal observance of the Nazarite vow are 
given in Num. vi., where every product of the grape-vine is 
forbidden, and the Nazarite is enjoined not to approach a dead 
body, even that of his nearest relative. The law in question is 
in its present form post-exilic, and is plainly directed to the 
regulation of a known usage. It contemplates the assumption 
of the vow for a limited period only, and gives particular details 
as to the atoning ceremonies at the sanctuary by which the vow 
must be recommenced if broken by accidental defilement, and the 
closing sacrifice, at which the Nazarite on the expiry of his vow 
cuts off his hair and burns it on the altar, thus returning to 
ordinary life. Among the later Jews the Nazarite vow, of course, 
corresponded with the legal ordinance, which was further 
developed by the scribes in their usual manner (Mishna, tractate 
Ndzir; cf. 1 Mace. iii. 49; Acts xxi. 23 seq.; Joseph. Anl. xix. 
6. 1, Wars ii. 15. 1). On the other hand, in the earliest historical 
case, that of Samson, and in the similar case of Samuel (who, 
however, is not called a Nazarite), the head remains unshorn 
throughout life, and in these times the ceremonial observances 
as to uncleanness must have been less precise. Samson's mother 
is forbidden to eat unclean things during pregnancy, but Samson 
himself touches the carcass of a lion and is often in contact with 
the slain, nor does he abstain from giving feasts. 1 

In the cases of Samuel and Samson the unshorn locks are a 
mark of consecration to God (Judges xiii. 5) for a particular 
service — in the one case the service of the sanctuary," in the other 
the deliverance of Israel from the Philistines. Since, moreover, 
the Hebrew root n-z~r is only dialectically different from n-d-r y 
" to vow," both corresponding to the same original Semitic root 
(Arab, it-dh-r), it would seem that the peculiar marks of the 
Nazarite are primarily no more than the usual sign that a man is 
under a vow of some kind. To leave the locks unshorn during an 
arduous undertaking in which the divine aid was specially 
implored, and to consecrate the hair after success, was a practice 
among various ancient nations, but the closest parallel to the 
Hebrew custom is found in Arabia. 2 There the vow was generally 
one of war or revenge, and, till it was accomplished, the man who 
vowed left his hair unshorn and unkempt, and abstained from 
wine, women, ointment and perfume. Such is the figure of 
Shanfara as described in his Ldmiya. The observances of the 
ihrdm (period of consecration) belong to the same usage (see 
Mecca), and we find that at Taif it was customary to shear the 
hair at the sanctuary after a journey. The consecration of Samuel 
has also its Arabic parallel in the dedication of an unborn child 
by its mother to the service of the Ka'ba (Ibn Hisham, p. 76; 
Azraki, p. 1 28). The spirit of warlike patriotism that character- 
ized the old religion of Israel could scarcely fail to encourage such 
vows (cf. 2 Sam. xi. 11, and perhaps 1 Sam. xxi. 4 seq.), and from 
the allusion in Amos we are led to suppose that at one time the 
Nazarites had an importance — perhaps even an organization — 
parallel to that of the prophets, but of a very different religious 
type from the Canaanite nature-worship. 

See Rechabites; Encyc. BibL col. 3362 seq.; G. B. Gray, 
Numbers, pp. 56-61; E. Kautzsch {].c. n. 1 below); W. R. Harper, 
Amos and Hosea, p. Ii. sq„ with references. (W. R. S.; S. A. C.) 


NAZARIUS (4th century A.D.), Latin rhetorician and pane- 
gyrist, was, according to Ausonius, a professor of rhetoric at 
Burdigala (Bordeaux). The extant speech of which he is un- 
doubtedly the author (in E. Bahrens, Panegyrici Latini, No. 10) 
was delivered in 321 to celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of the 
accession of Constantiue the Great, and the fifth of his son 
Constantine's admission to the rank of Caesar. The preceding 
speech (No. 9), celebrating the victory of Constantine over 
Maxentius, delivered in 313 at Augusta Trevirorum (Trier), 
has often been attributed to Nazarius, but the difference in style 
and vocabulary, and the more distinctly Christian colouring of 
Nazarius's speech, are against this. 

See M. Schanz, Geschichie der romischen Litteratur, iii. (1896); 
Teuffel-Schwabe, Hist, of Roman Literature (Eng. trans., 1900), 
401. 6. 


NEAGH, LOUGH, the largest lake (Irish, " lough ") in the 
British Isles, situated in the north-east of Ireland, in the province 
of Ulster, its waters being divided between counties Antrim 
(N. and E.), Down (S.E.), Armagh (S.), Tyrone and Londonderry 
(W.). Its shape is an irregular oblong, its extreme measurements 
being iS m. from N.E. to S.W. 16 from N. to S., and 11 from E. 
to W. Its circumference, without including minor indentations, 
is about 64 m., and its area 98,255 acres or about 153 sq. m. The 
shores are generally flat and marshy, or very gently sloping, but 
flat- topped hills rise near the northern shore, where the lake 
reaches its extreme depth of 102 ft. The mean height above sea- 
level is 48 ft. Though the lough receives a large number of 

	1 The prohibition to Samson's mother to abstain from wine does 
	not appear to belong to the original narrative (see E. Kautzsch, 
	Hastings's D.B. v. 657 col. b, following Bohme). John the Baptist is 
	a later example of lifelong consecration (Luke 1. 15); cf. also the 
	tradition as to James the Just (Euseb. H.E. ii. 23). 

	2 On consecration of the hair, see Spencer, De Legibus Hebr. iii, 
	1. 6; I. Goldziher, Rev. Hist. Rel. xiv. 49 sqq. (1886); J. G. Frazer, 
	Golden Bough*, i. 368 sqq.; and W. R. Smith, Rd. Sem?, Index, 
	s*. M hair." 

streams, the river Bann alone carries off its waters, flowing 
northward. The principal feeders are the Main on the north, 
the Crumlin (whose waters have petrifying powers) on the east, 
the Bann and Blackwater on the south, and the Ballinderry and 
Moyola on the west. Antrim and Toome, at the N.E. and N.W. 
respectively, are the only towns immediately on the shores. 
The islands are few and near the shores; namely, Skady Tower 
on the north, Ram's Island (with a ruined round tower) on the 
east, Ready and Coney Islands on the southwest. The lough 
abounds in fish, including gillaroo trout, char and pullen or 
fresh-water herring. A tradition that the lough rose suddenly 
from a fountain, inundating a populous district, and that remains 
of buildings may be seen below the waters, finds place in T ^ >mas 
Moore's ballad Let Erin remember* 


NEAL, DANIEL (167S-1743), English historian, born in 
London on the 14th of December 1678, was educated at the 
Merchant Taylors' School, and at the universities of Utrecht 
and Leiden. In 1704 he became assistant minister, and in 1706 
sole minister, of an independent congregation worshipping in 
Aldersgate Street, and afterwards in Jewin Street, London, 
where he remained almost until his death on the 4th of April 
1743. He married Elizabeth Lardner (d. 1748), by whom he had 
one son, Nathanael, and two daughters. In 1720 Neal published 
his History of New England, which obtained for its author the 
honorary degree of M.A. from Harvard college. He 
also undertook to assist Dr John Evans in writing a history of 
Nonconformity. Evans, however, died in 1730, and, making 
use of his papers for the period before 1640, Neal wrote the 
whole of the work himself. This History of the Puritans deals 
with the time between the Reformation and 1689; the first 
volume appearing in 1732, and the fourth and last in 1738. 
The first volume was attacked in 1733 for unfairness and in- 
accuracy by Isaac Maddox, afterwards bishop of St Asaph and 
of Worcester, to whom Neal replied in a pamphlet, A Review of 
the principal facts objected to in the first volume of the History of 
the Puritans; and the remaining volumes hy Zachary Grey 
(1 688-1 766), to whom the author made no reply. 

The History of the Puritans was edited, in five volumes, by Dr 
Joshua Toulmin (1 740-1815), who added a life of Neal in 1797. 
This was reprinted in 1822, and an edition in two volumes was 
published in New York in 1844. 


NEAL, DAVID DALHOFF (1838- ), American artist, was 
born at Lowell, Massachusetts, on the 20th of Octoher 1838. 
He was a pupil of the Royal Academy, Munich, under Max. 
E. Ainmiller, whose daughter he subsequently married. Later 
he entered the studio of Piloty, with whom he remained from 
1869 to 1876. His picture, " The First Meeting of Mary Stuart 
and Rizzio," won for him the great medal of the Royal Bavarian 
Academy of Art. Besides portraits his canvases include " James 
Watt," a large historical composition shown at the Royal 
Academy, 1874, " Chapel of the Kings at Westminster " (collec- 
tion of F. Cutting, Boston) and " Cromwell visiting Milton " 
(Hurlbut collection, Cleveland, Ohio). 

NEALE, EDWARD VANSITTART (1810-1892), English 
co-operator and Christian Socialist, was born at Bath on the 
'2nd of April 1810, the son of a Buckinghamshire clergyman. 
After receiving his earlier education at home he went to Oriel 
College, Oxford. In 1837 he was called to the bar at Lincoln's 
Inn. He became a member of the Christian Socialists in 1850 
and also joined the council of the Society for Promoting Working 
Men's Associations. His wealth enabled him to carry out 
experiments in co-operation on a larger scale than had been 
previously attempted. He founded the first co-operative store 
in London, and advanced the capital for two builders' associations, 
both of which failed. In 1851, though strongly opposed by other 
members of the promoting " Council," he started on his own 
initiative the Central Co-operative Agency, similar in many 
respects to the Co-operative Wholesale Society of a later day. 
The failure of this scheme, together with that of the operatives' 
cause in the engineering lock-out of 1852 is said to have cost him 
£40,000. It is certain that until in later life he inherited the 
estate of Bisham Abbey in Berkshire he was, comparatively 
speaking, a poor man. He was closely associated with the 
movement which resulted in the Industrial and Provident 
Societies Act of 1876, and the passing of the Consolidation Act of 
1862 was almost entirely due to his efforts. Besides publishing 
pamphlets on co-operation he served on the executive com- 
mittee which afterwards developed into the Central Co-operative 
Board, and took an active part in the formation of the North of 
England Co-operative Wholesale Society in 1863. One of the 
founders of the Cohden mills in 1866, and the Agricultural and 
Horticultural Association in 1867, he also promoted the annual 
co-operative congress, afterwards becoming general secretary 
of the Central Board. He was also a director of the Co-operative 
Insurance Company and a member of the Co-operative News- 
paper Society for many years. He visited America in 1875 with 
a deputation whose object was to open up a direct trade between 
the farmers of the western states and the English co-operative 
stores. After resigning the post of secretary to the congress 
board in 1891, he became a member of the Oxford University 
branch of the Christian Social Union. He died on the 16th of 
September 1892. 


NEALE, JOHN MASON (1818-1866), English divine and 
scholar, was born in London on the 24th of January 1818, and 
was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge. Here he was 
affected by the Oxford movement, and helped to found the 
Camden (afterwards the Ecclesiological) Society. Though he 
took orders in 1841, ill-health prevented his settling in England 
till 1846, when he became warden of Sackville College, an alms- 
house at East Grinstead, an appointment which he held till his 
death on the 6th of August 1866. 

Neale was strongly high-church in his sympathies, and had to 
endure a good deal of opposition, including a fourteen years' 
inhibition by his bishop. In 1855 he founded a nursing sisterhood 
named St Margaret's. He occupies a high place as a hymn- 
ologist, but principally as a translator of ancient and medieval 
hymns, the best known being probably " Brief life is here our 
portion," "To thee, O dear, dear country," and "Jerusalem, 
the golden," which are included in the poem of Bernard of 
Cluny, De Contemptu Mundi, translated by him in full. He also - 
published An Introduction to the History of the Holy Eastern 
Church (1850, 2 vols.); History of the so-called Jansenist Church 
of Holland (1858); Essays on Liturgiology and Church History 
(1863); and many other works. 

See Life by his daughter, Mrs Charles Towle (1907); the Memoir 
by his friend, R. F. Littledale ; and the Letters of John Mason Neale 
(1910), selected and edited by his daughter. For a complete list of 
Neale's works see article in Diet, of Nat. Biog. xl. 145. 


NEAMTZU (Neamtu), a town in Rumania, situated among 
the lower slopes of the Carpathian Mountains, and on the left 
bank of the river Neamtzu, an affluent of the Moldova. Pop. 
(1900) 8578, about half being Jews. Neamtzu gives its name 
to the Department of which Piatra is the capital. Lying 15 m. 
S. by E. of Falticheni, the nearest railway station, it has little 
trade. Near it is the ruined fortress of Neamtzu, constructed 
early in the 13th century by the Teutonic knights of Andrew U., 
king of Hungary, in order to repel the incursions of the 
Cumanians. An hour's drive to the west of the town is the 
monastery of Neamtzu, founded in the 14th century, and con- 
taining two churches and many ancient and interesting relics. 
Before the secularization of the monastic lands in 1864, it was one 
of the richest and most important of the Rumanian monasteries. 
Baltzatesti, 10 m. W. by S. of Neamtzu, is locally famous for its 
mineral springs and baths. 


NEANDER, JOACHIM (1 650-1680), German hymnwriter, was 
born at Bremen. The family name, originally Neumann, had, 
according to the prevailing fashion a century earlier, been 
Graecized as Neander. After studying at Heidelberg and 
Frankfort, where he formed friendships with Friedrich Spanheim 
(1632-1701) and Philipp Jakob Spener (1635-1705), he settled 
at Diisseldorf as rector of the Latin school in connexion with 
the Reformed Church. In 1676 he incurred church censure 
for abstaining and inducing others to abstain from joining 
in the celebration of the communion. It was during the term of 
his suspension from his teaching office that many of his hymns 
were written. He ultimately renounced his connexion with the 
separatists, and in 1679 returned to Bremen as one of the 
preachers of St Martin's church. In the same year he published 
the Bundeslieder and Dankpsalmen, a collection of 71 hymns, 
of which many are still in use. He died on the 31st of May 
1680. The Neanderthal, near Diisseldorf, takes its name from 
him. For his place in hymnology see Hymns. 

See J. F. Iken, Joachim Neander, sein Leben und seine Lieder 
(1880). 


NEANDER, JOHANN AUGUST WILHELM (1789-1850), 
German theologian and church historian, was born at Gottingen 
on the 17th of January 1789. His father, Emmanuel Mendel, 
is said to have been a Jewish pedlar, but August adopted the 
name of Neander on his baptism as a Christian. While still 
very young, he removed with his mother to Hamburg. There, 
as throughout life, the simplicity of his personal appearance 
and the oddity of his manners attracted notice, but still more, 
his great industry and mental power. From the grammar-school 
(Johanneum) he passed to the gymnasium, where the study of 
Plato appears especially to have engrossed him. Considerable 
interest attaches to his early companionship with Wilhelm 
Neumann and certain others, among whom were the writer 
Karl August Varnhagen von Ense and the poet Adelbert von 
Chamisso. 

Baptized on the 25th of February 1806, in the same year 
Neander went to Halle to study divinity. Here Schleiermacher 
was then lecturing. Neander found in him the very impulse which 
he needed, while Schleiermacher found a pupil of thoroughly 
congenial feeling, and one destined to carry out his views in a 
higher and more effective Christian form than he himself was 
capable of imparting to them. But before the year had closed 
the events of the Franco-Prussian War compelled his removal 
to Gottingen. There he continued his studies with ardour, 
made himself yet more master of Plato and Plutarch, and 
became especially advanced in theology under the venerable 
G. J. Planck (l 751-1833). The impulse communicated by 
Schleiermacher was confirmed by Planck, and he seems now 
to have realized that the original investigation of Christian 
history was to form the great work of his life. 

Having finished his university course, he returned to Hamburg, 
and passed his examination for the Christian ministry. After 
an interval of about eighteen months, however, he definitively 
betook himself to an academic career, " habilitating " in 
Heidelberg, where two vacancies had occurred in the theological 
faculty of the university. He entered upon his work here as a 
theological teacher in i3ii; and in 181 2 he became a professor. 
In the same year (1812) he first appeared as an author by the 
publication of his monograph Vber den Kaiser Julianus und sein 
Zeitalter. The fresh insight into the history of the church 
evinced by this work at once drew attention to its author, and 
even before he had terminated the first year of his academical 
labours at Heidelberg, he was called to Berlin, where he was 
appointed professor of theology. 

In the year following his appointment he published a second 
monograph Der Heilige Bemhard und sein Zeitalter (Berlin, 1813) , 
and then in 181S his work on Gnosticism {Genettsche Entwickelung 
der vornehmsten gnostischen Systeme). A still more extended 
an elaborate monograph than either of the preceding followed 
in 1822, Der Heilige Johannes Chrysostomus and die Kirche, 
besonders des Orients in dessen Zeitalter, and again, in 1824, 
another on Tertullian (Antignostikus). He had in the meantime, 
however, begun his great work, to which these several efforts 
were only preparatory studies. The first volume of his 
Allgemcine Geschichte der christlichen Religion und Kirche 
embracing the history of the first three centuries, made its 
appearance in 1825. The others followed at intervals— the 
fifth, which appeared in 1842, bringing down the narrative 
to the pontificate of Boniface VIII. A posthumous volume, 
edited by C. F. T. Schneider in 1852, carried it on to the period 
of the council of Basel. Besides this great work he published 
in 1832 his Geschichte der Pflanzung und Leitung der christlichen 

	xix. n 

Kirche, and in 1837 his Das Leben Jesu Christi, in scinem 
geschichtlichen Zusammenhang und seiner geschichtlichen Ent- 
wickelungy called forth by the famous Life of David Strauss. 
In addition to all these he published Denkwiirdigkeiten aus der 
Geschichte des Chiistentums (1823- 1824, 2 vols., 1825, 3 vols., 
1846); Das Eine und Mannichjaltige des christlichen Lebens 
(1840); papers on Plotinus, Thomas Aquinas, Theobald Thamer, 
Blaise Pascal, J. H. Newman, Blanco White and T. Arnold, 
and other occasional pieces (Kleine Gelegenheitsschriften ) x&2g), 
mainly of a practical, exegetical and historical character. He 
died on the '14th of July 1850, worn out and nearly blind with 
inces/^t study. After his death a succession of volumes, 
representing his various courses of lectures, appeared (1856- 
1864), in addition to the Lectures on the History of Dogma (Theo- 
logische Vorlesungen), admirable in spirit and execution, which 
were edited by J. L. Jacobi in 1857. 

Meander's theological position can only be explained in connexion 
with Schleiermacher, and the manner in which while adopting he 
modified and carried out the principles of his master. Character- 
istically meditative, he rested with a secure footing on the great 
central truths of Christianity, and recognized strongly their essential 
reasonableness and harmony. Alive to the claims of criticism, he no 
less strongly asserted the rights of Christian feeling. " Without it," 
he emphatically says, " there can be no theology; it can only thrive 
in the calmness of a soul consecrated to God." This explains his 
favourite motto: " Pectus est quod theologum facit." 

His Church History (Allgemetne Geschichte der christlichen Religion 
und Kirche) remains the greatest monument of his genius. In this 
" Neander's chief aim was everywhere to understand what was 
individual in history. In the principal figures of ecclesiastical 
history he tried to depict the representative tendencies of each age, 
and also the types^ of the essential tendencies of human nature 
generally. His guiding principle in treating both of the history and 
of the present condition of the church was — that Christianity has 
room for the various tendencies of human nature, and aims at per- 
meating and glorifying them all; that according to the divine plan 
these various tendencies are to occur successively and simultaneously 
and to counterbalance each other, so that the freedom and variety 
of the development of the spiritual life ought not to be forced into 
a single dogmatic form " (Otto Pfleiderer, Development of Theology , 
p. 280). Several of his books have passed into new and revised 
editions and have been translated into English. Among these 
English versions may be mentioned General History of the Christian 
Religion and Church, translated by J. Torrev (1850-1858); History 
of the Planting and Training of the Church by the Apostle , by J. E. 
Ryland (1851); Julian and his Generation, by G. V. Cox (1850); 
Life of Jesus, by J. IvTClintock and C. E. Blumenthal (1848); and 
Memorials of Christian Life in the Early and Middle Ages, by J. E. 
Ryland (1852). 

See O. C. Krabbe, August Neander (1852), and a paper by C. F. 
Kling (1800-1861) in the Stud. w. KriL for # i8si; J. L. Jacobi, 
Erinnerungen an August Neander (1882); Philipp Scnaff, Erinne- 
rungen an Neander (1886) ; Adolph Harnack, Rede auf August Neander 
(1889); A. F. J. Wiegand, Neanders Leben (1889); L. T. Schulze, 
August Neander (1890); and K. T. Schneider, August Neander 
(1894). Cf. Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddic, and P. SchafT, Germany: 
its Universities and Theology (1857). 


NEANDERTHAL, a ravine near the village of Hochdal between 
Diisseldorf and Elberfeld, Rhenish Prussia. Here in 1856 were 
discovered in a Quaternary bed in the Feldhofen Cave human 
remains which have been referred to a type commenly called 
Neanderthal Man. The bones found were a brain-cap, two 
femora, two humeri and other fragments, now in the Fuhlrott 
Collection, Elberfeld. The cranium, pronounced by Huxley to 
be the most ape-like yet discovered, was remarkable for its 
enormous superciliary ridges. Professor Virchow and others 
contended that the remarkable shape was pathological or caused 
by disease during the lifetime of the individual. The subsequent 
discovery of two other skulls, almost identical in form, at Spy 
in Belgium, have helped to prove its typical character. The now 
generally accepted view is that the Neanderthal skull represents 
'the oldest known dolichocephalic race of Europe. 


NEAP, a word only used of tides in which the high-water mark 
is at its lowest, there being the least difference in level between 
high and low water, opposed to " spring tides " (see Tide). 
The word is obscure in origin. It appears in O. Eng. in ntpjldd, 
and only once alone in the expression forthganges nSp, " without 
power of advancing." It may possibly be connected with " nip," 
in the sense of " pinched," " scanty." 


NEARCHUS, one of the officers in the army of Alexander the 
Great. A native of Crete, he settled at Amphipolis in Macedonia. 
In 325, when Alexander descended the Indus to the sea, he 
ordered Nearchus to conduct the fleet to the head of the Persian 
Gulf. The success with which Nearchus accomplished this 
arduous enterprise led to his selection by Alexander for the more 
difficult task of circumnavigating Arabia from the mouth of the 
Euphrates to the Isthmus of Suez. But this project was cut 
short by the illness and death of the king (323). In the troubles 
that followed Nearchus attached himself to Antigonus, under 
whom he held the government of his old provinces of Lycia and 
Pamphylia, and probably therefore shared in the downfall (301) 
of that monarch. 

He wrote a detailed narrative of his expedition, of which a full 
abstract was embodied by Arrian in his Indica — one of the most 
interesting geographical treatises of antiquity. 

The text, with copious geographical notes, is published in C. 
M Ciller's Geographi Graeci Minores, i. (1856); on the topography see 
W. Tomaschek, " Topographische Erlauterung der Kustenfahrt 
Nearchs \om Indus bis zum Euphrat" in Sitzungsberichte der K. K. 
Acad, der Wissenschaften, cxxi. (Vienna, 1890). See also E. H. 
Bunbury, Ancient Geography, i. ch. 13 ; and Alexander the Great. 
Ancient authorities. — Arrian, Anab. vi. 19, 21; vii. 4, 19, 20, 25; 
Plutarch, Alexander, 10, 68, 75; Strabo xv. pp. 721, 725; Diod. Sic. 
xvii. 104; Justin xiii. 4. 


NEATH (Welsh, Castell-NMd), a municipal and contributory 
parliamentary borough, seaport and market-town of Glamorgan- 
shire, south Wales, prettily situated near the mouth of the 
Neath or Nedd, on the Great Western and the Rhondda and 
Swansea Bay railways, 75 m. E.N.E. of Swansea and 183 J m. 
by rail from London, via Badminton. The Neath and Brecon 
railway has a terminus in the town. Pop. (1901) 13,720. The 
principal buildings are the parish church of St Thomas (restored 
1874), the church of St David (1866), a Roman Catholic 
church, and Baptist, Calvinistic, Methodist, Congregational 
and Wesleyan chapels; the intermediate and technical schools 
(1895), Davies's endowed (elementary) school (1789), the Gwyn 
Hall (1888), the town hall, with corn exchange in the basement 
storey, and the market-house. According to tradition Iestyn- 
ap-Gwrgan, the last prince of Glamorgan, had a residence 
somewhere near the present town, but Fitzhamon, on his con- 
quest of Glamorgan, gave the district between the Neath and 
the Tawe to Richard de Granaville (ancestor of the Granvilles, 
marquesses of Bath), who built on the west banks of the Neath 
first a castle and then in 1 1 29 a Cistercian abbey, to whose monks 
he later gave all his possessions in the district. All traces of 
this castle have disappeared. Another castle, built in the same 
century, on the east bank, was held direct by the lords of 
Glamorgan, as the westernmost outpost of their lordship. It was 
frequently attacked by the Welsh, notably in 1231 when it was 
taken, and the town demolished by Llewelyn ab Iorwerth. The 
portcullis gate and a tower are all that remain of it; of the abbey 
which was at one time the finest in Wales, there still exist the 
external walls, with parts of the chapel, vaulted chapter-house, 
refectory and abbot's house. This abbey was the spot where 
Edward II. found shelter after his escape from Caerphilly. At 
the dissolution the abbey and the manor of Cadoxton (part of 
its possessions) were sold to Sir Richard Williams or Cromwell. 
Its cartulary has been lost. Copper smelting has been carried on 
in or near the town since 1584 when the Mines Royal Society set 
up works at Neath Abbey; the industry attained huge propor- 
tions a century later under Sir Humphrey Mackworth, who from 
1695 carried on copper and lead smelting at Melincrythan. 
Besides its copper works the town at present possesses extensive 
tinplate, steel and galvanized sheet works as well as iron and 
brass foundries, steam-engine factories, brick and tile works, 
engineering works, flannel factories and chemical works. In 
the neighbourhood there are numerous large collieries, and coal 
is shipped from wharves on the riverside, vessels of 300 or 400 
tons being able to reach the quays at high tide. The Neath 
Canal, from the upper part of the Vale of Neath to Briton Ferry 
(13 m.) passes through the town, which is also connected with 
Swansea by another canal. There is a large export trade in coal, 
copper, iron and tin, mostly shipped from nieghbouring ports, 
while the principal imports are timber and general merchandise. 
Neath is included in the Swansea parliamentary district of 
boroughs. 

The town perhaps occupies the site of the ancient Nidus or 
Nidum of the Romans on the Julia Maritima from which a vicinal 
road branched off here for Brecon. No traces of Roman anti- 
quities, however, have been found. Neath is a borough by 
prescription and received its first charter about the middle of 
the 1 2th century from William, earl of Gloucester, who granted 
its burgesses the same customs as those of Cardiff. Other charters 
were granted to it by successive lords of Glamorgan in 1200, 1340, 
l 359i 1 397i I 4 21 an d 1423. By the first of these (1290) the town 
was granted a fair on St Margaret's Day (July 20) and as the 
abbey had extensive sheep walks the trade in wool was consider- 
able. In 1685 James II. granted a charter, which, however, 
was not acted upon except for a short time. 


NEBO, or Nabu (" the proclaimer "), the name of one of the 
chief gods of the Babylonian pantheon, the main seat of whose 
worship was at Borsippa — opposite the city of Babylon. It is 
due to the close association of Borsippa with Babylon after 
the period when Babylon became the centre of the Babylonian 
empire that the cult of Nebo retained a prominence only some 
degrees less than that of Marduk. The amicable relationship 
between the two was expressed by making Nebo the son of 
Marduk. In this case the expression of the relationship in this 
form was intended to symbolize the superiority of Marduk, 
different, therefore, from the view involved in making Marduk 
the son of Ea (q.v.), which meant that the prerogatives of Ea 
were transferred to Marduk by the priests of Babylon. 

Borsippa became in the course of time so completely a mere 
adjunct to Babylon that* one might fairly have expected the 
Nebo cult to have been entirely absorbed by that of Marduk. 
Since that did not happen, the legitimate inference is that 
other deterrent factors were at play. One of these factors was 
the position that Nebo had acquired as the " god of wisdom " 
to whom more particularly the introduction of writing was 
ascribed. He takes his place, therefore, by the side of Ea as 
a cultural deity. The wisdom associated with him had largely 
to do with the interpretation of the movements in the heavens, 
and the priests of Nebo at an early age must have acquired 
widespread fame as astrologers. Assuming now, for which 
there is a reasonable amount of confirmatory evidence, that the 
priestly school of Nebo had acquired a commanding position 
before Babylon rose to political importance we can understand 
why the worshippers of Marduk persisted in paying homage to 
Nebo, and found a means of doing so without lowering the 
dignity and standing of their own god. If Assur-bani-pal, the 
king of Assyria (668-626 B.C.), in the subscripts to the copies 
of Babylonian iiterary tablets invokes as he invariably does 
Nebo and his consort Tashmit as the gods of writing to whom 
all wisdom is traced, it is fair to assume that in so doing he was 
following ancient tradition and that the priests of Marduk 
likewise were dependent upon the school at Borsippa for their 
knowledge and wisdom. 

Nebo is therefore an older god than Marduk in the sense 
that his specific prerogative as the god of wisdom was too firmly 
recognized when Marduk became the head of the Babylonian 
pantheon to be set aside. 

The temple school at Borsippa continued to flourish until 
the end of the neo-Babylonian empire, and school texts of 
various contents, dated in the reigns of Artaxerxes, Cambyses 
and Darius, furnish the evidence that the school survived even 
the conquest of Babylonia by Cyprus (538 B.C.). The original 
character of Nebo can no longer be determined with any degree 
of definiteness. He may have been a solar deity, but there are 
also decided indications which point to his being a water-deity — 
like Ea. It may be, therefore, that if he shows the traits of a 
solar deity, this may be due to the influence of the neighbouring 
Marduk cult, just as in return Marduk takes on attributes that 
belong of right to Nebo. Thus, as the god of writing, Nebo 
has charge of the tables of fate on which he inscribes the names 
of men and decides what their lot is to be. If in the systematized 
religious system, Marduk appears as the arbiter of human 
fates, the conclusion is warranted that Marduk is here imbued 
with the authority which originally was in the hands of his son. 
A reconciliation between the rival claims was effected by con- 
tinuing Nebo in the r61e of scribe, but as writing at the dictation 
of the gods, thus recording what the divine assembly, gathered 
in the " chamber of fates " (known as Ubshu Kinakku) within 
the precincts of E-Saggila — Marduk's temple at Babylon — under 
the presidency of Marduk, had decided. 

Nebo also does homage to his father by paying him an annual 
visit during the New Year celebration, when the god was solemnly 
carried across to Babylon, and in return Marduk accompanied 
his son part way back to his shrine at Borsippa. Within E- 
Saggila, Nebo had a sanctuary known, as was his chief temple 
at Borsippa, as E-Zida, " the legitimate (or * firm ') house," and 
the close bond existing between father and son was emphasized 
by providing for Marduk within the precinct of E-Zida, a sanctuary 
which bore the same name, E-Saggila, " the lofty house," as 
Marduk's temple at Babylon. The kings, and more particularly 
those of the neo-Babylonian dynasty, devote themselves assidu- 
ously to the worship and embellishment of both E-Saggila and 
E-Zida. In their inscriptions Marduk and Nebo are invoked 
together and the names of the two temples constantly placed 
side by side. The symbols of the two gods are similarly combined. 
On boundary stones and cylinders, when Marduk's symbol — 
the lance — is depicted, Nebo's symbol — the stylus — is generally 
found adjacent. The dragon, though of right belonging to 
Marduk (q.v.), as the conqueror of Tiamat, also becomes the 
symbol of Nebo, and similarly in other respects the two form 
a close partnership. Such is the relation between the two 
that occasionally, as in the official reports of astrologers and 
in official letters, Nebo is even mentioned before Marduk without 
fear of thereby offending the pride of the priests of Marduk. 

In Assyria the Nebo cult likewise enjoyed great popularity, 
and there is a record of one Assyrian ruler who made Nebo his 
specific deity and called upon his subjects to put their whole trust 
in him. One may discern, indeed, a tendency in Assyria to take 
advantage of the almost equal plane on which Nebo stands 
with Marduk in Babylonia, to play off Nebo as it were against 
Marduk. The Assyrian kings in this way, by glorifying at 
times Nebo at the expense of Marduk, paid their debt of homage 
to the south without any risk of lowering the grade of their 
own chief deity Assur. Marduk was in a measure Assur's rival. 
This was not the case, however, with Nebo, and they accordingly 
showed a desire to regard Nebo rather than Marduk as the 
characteristic representative of the southern pantheon. In the 
astral-theological system Nebo was identified with the planet 
Mercury. His consort, known as Tashmit, plays no independent 
part, and is rarely invoked except in connexion with Nebo. 

See also Babylon, Borsippa, Babylonian and Assyrian 
Religion. (M. Ja.) 


NEBRASKA, a state just N. of the centre of the U.S.A., lying 
approximately between 40 and 43 N. and between 18 18' W., 
and 2 7 W. from Washington. It is bounded on the N. by South 
Dakota, on the E. by Iowa and a corner of Missouri, on the 
S. by Kansas, on the S. and W. by a corner of Colorado, and 
on the W. by Wyoming. The Missouri river extends along the 
eastern and north-eastern border. The extreme length of the 
state is about 430 m., and extreme breadth about 210 m. The 
area is 77,520 sq. m., of which 712 are water surface. 

Physical Features. — The state lies partly in the physiographic 
province of the Great Plains (covering more than four-fifths of its 
area) and partly in that of the Prairie Plains, and slopes gently from 
the N.W. to the S.E. The altitudes of extreme geographical points 
are as follows: Rulo, in the S.E. corner of the state, 842 ft.; Dakota 
city, in the N.E., 1102; Benkelman, in the S.W in Dundy county, 
2968; Kimball, in the S.W. in Kimball county, 4697; Harrison, in 
the N.W. corner, 4849 ft. There are three physiographic sub- 
divisions; the foot-hills (and Bad Lands), the sand-hills and the 
prairie — all three being portions of three great corresponding regions 
of the Great Plains and Prairie Plains provinces. 

The western portion of the state lies in the foot-hills of the Rocky 
Mountain system, and is much rougher than western Kansas. The 
surface of western Nebraska is characterized by high, barren table- 
lands, broken by canyons, dotted with buttes, and dominated by 
some bold and lofty ridges. Pine Ridge, a picturesque escarpment 
of the Great Plains, cuts across the N.W. corner of Nebraska from 
Wyoming into South Dakota. A ridge of low hills and bluffs, often 
precipitous, marked by buttes and deeply cut in places by canons, it is 
the^ most striking surface feature of the state. The altitude in this 
region varies from 3500 to 5000 ft. In the fork of the North and 
South Platte are the Wild Cat Mountains with contours rising to 
5300 ft., in which Wild Cat Mountain, long reported as the highest 
point in the state, attains 5038 ft., Hogback Mountain 5082 ft., and 
various other hills — Gabe Rock (5006), Big Horn Mountain (4718), 
Coliseum Rock (5050), Scotts Bluff (4662) &c. — rise to heights of 
4500 to 5000 ft. In the extreme N.W. the White river and Hat 
Creek have carved canyons in deep lacustrine deposits, creating 
fantastic cliffs and buttes, bare of vegetation, gashed with drainage 
channels, and baked by the sun. The buttes — bare, pyramidal or 
conical, flat-topped, precipitous hills, and often fantastic, towering 
pinnacles — are rather widely distributed through the foot-hill 
region. They are never more than 600 to 1000 ft. above the sur- 
rounding country. Nature is not grand in any part of Nebraska, 
but the Bad Lands are imposing, and in the wooded foot-hills there 
is an abundance of bold and attractive scenery, particularly in Sioux 
county, and in Cherry county around Valentine and on the canyon oi 
the Snake river. East of the Bad Lands is the sand-hill region, which 
includes an area of possibly 20,000 sq. m. The sand-hills proper are 
scattered over an area of perhaps 15,000 sq. m., between the meridians 
of 98 and 103 W. long., lying mainly N. of the Platte; though there 
are some along the Republican river. In places they rise in tiers, 
one above another, like miniature mountains, and are 200 to 300 ft. 
high; but in general they are very low (25-50 ft. high) and are 
scattered over a plain. Their present contours are wholly the result 
of wind action. Save in rare instances, however, they have long 
ceased to be shifting dunes; for, with the cessation of prairie fires 
and the increase of settlement, they have become well grassed over 
and stable; although sand-draws, and even occasional '* blow-outs" 
scooped by the winds in the summits or sides of the hills are still 
characteristic landmarks. All about and inter-penetrating the foot- 
hill and sand-hill regions are the prairies, which include three-fourths 
of the state. They are sometimes characteristically flat over wide 
areas, but are usually gently rolling. Stream valleys and bottom 
lands are the conspicuous modifying feature of the prairie region; 
but in general, owing to the gentle slope of the streams and the great 
breadth of the plains, erosion has been slight; and indeed the 
streams, overloaded in seasonal^ freshets, are building up their 
valley floors. The water-partings are characteristically level 
uplands, often with shallow depressions, once lakes, and some of them 
still so. The valleys of the greatest streams are huge shallow troughs. 
The valley floor of the North Platte in the foot-hills, the flood-plain 
of an older river, is in places 700 ft or more below the bounding 
tableland, and 10 to 15 m. wide; the present flood-plain being from 
1 to 4 m. in width. Hundreds of small tributaries to the greater 
streams (especially along the Republican and the Logan) complicate 
and beautify the landscape. No farming country is richer in quiet 
and diversified scenic charm than the prairies of the eastern half of 
the state. The Missouri is noteworthy for high bluffs cut by ravines, 
which border it almost continuously on at least one side. In the foot- 
hills there are typical canyons, as along the Platte forks, and in the 
northern edge of the sand-hills Those of the upper Republican are 
the largest, those of the Bad Lands are the most peculiar; and the 
Niobrara tributary system is the most developed. 

Rivers. — The Missouri skirts the eastern border for perhaps 500 m. 
It is not navigated, and save at Sioux City and Omaha serves 
practically no economic purposes, irrigation being unnecessary in the 
counties on which it borders. Its bluffs, cut for the most part in the 
loess but at places in the rock, are frequently from 100 to 200 ft. 
high. At Vermilion, South Dakota, Its alluvial plain, 1131 ft. above 
the sea, is 330 ft. above the mouth of the Nemaha. Thecurrent is 
always rapid and heavily loaded with sediment, 1 and its axis is 
forever shifting. Large areas of soil are thus shifted back and forth 
between Nebraska and the bordering states, to the encouragement 
of border lawlessness and uncertainty of titles; some portions E. of 
the thread and apparently well within Iowa remain under the 
jurisdiction of Nebraska, or vice versa; and Yankton has been 
seriously threatened with a sudden transler from the South Dakota 
to the Nebraska side. The Platte system is also heavily loaded with 
sediment in Nebraska. The North and South forks both rise in 
Colorado; each, especially the latter, has a rapid primary descent, 
and a very gradual fall down the foot-hills of the Great Plains.' 
Across Nebraska it maintains a remarkably straight course and an 
extraordinarily even gradient (about 6 ft. per mile). In the spring 
freshets it is a magnificent stream, but in summer its volume greatly 
shrinks, and it is normally a broad, shallow, sluggish, stream, flowing 
through interlacing channels among the sand-bars it heaps athwart 
its course. The underflow is probably much greater than the summer 

	1 About 52 grains per gallon at low water, 404 at high. 

	8 The North Platte falls 3700 ft. in 510 m., the South. 7?oo ft. in 
	427 m., above their junction; the latter falling 2692 ft. iu 30S m. 
	after leaving its canyon in the Rockies. 

surface flow in volume. The Loup system is remarkable for the even 
dip of its parallel feeders, which once joined the Platte separately, 
until the latter banked up its deposits across the mouths of their 
more sluggish currents. The Republican and South Platte — the 
former an intermittent stream — suffer in their flow from the drain 
made upon their waters in Colorado for irrigation. The upper course 
of the Niobrara above the Keya Paha is in a narrow gorge. Its 
immediate bluffs and the shores of some of its tributaries, notably 
the Snake, arc modified by canons. This system is also notable 
among Nebraska streams for a number of pretty water-falls. The 
White river, heading on Pine Ridge, falls nooft. in 20 m. Some 
streams wholly dry up in the dry seasons, and in the foot-hills and 
sand-hills there arc a lew that disappear by sinking or evaporation. 

Surface Water, — Swamps and bogs, apart from purely^ temporary 
weather ponds, are confined to a few restricted regions of the 
Missouri river bottoms and the prairies of the S.E. There are some 
cut-offs or oxbow lakes along the Missouri, and many lakelets origin- 
ally such are scattered along the Platte, Elkhorn, Big Blue and other 
rivers. Scores of lakes are scattered about the heads of streams 
rising in the sand-hills, especially in Cherry county. Sope of them 
are fresh and some alkaline. Springs also are numerous in the sand- 
hills, where they form considerable streams. They often flow with 
force and are known locally from this peculiarity as " artesian " 
springs, or sometimes, from this and their large size, as " mound " 
springs. The state fish-hatchery is on springs at South Bend; at 
Long Pine springs of large flow supply the town and railway shops 
with water, and led to the establishment here of Chautauqua grounds. 

Underground Water. — The so-called blowing- wells are peculiar. 
They occur over much of the state, but most frequently S. of the 
Platte, and are evidently sensitive to barometric conditions; alter- 
nately "blowing" or "' sucking " as these vary; so that, in cold 
weather water-pipes may be frozen 100 or more feet below the surface 
of the ground. Atmospheric pressure is probably the principal cause 
of their action ; they arc therefore termed ' weather wells " in 
some localities. Nearly all counties have a practically inexhaustible 
supply of ground water. Well-depths vary from 15 to 20 ft. in the 
stream valleys and from 30 to 35 ft. on the loess prairies to 100-400 ft. 
in the western foot-hill region and isolated prairie areas. Artesian 
water is also available in many parts of the state. At Niobrara, in 
Knox county, a well 656 ft. deep, drilled in 1896, yielded for a time 
2500 gallons per minute at 95-lt) pressure (in 1903 1900 gallons at 
65-lb pressure), and furnishes power for a flour-mill and municipal 
water and electric lighting works; the pressure forces the water 
about 210 ft. above the mouth of the well, i.e. to a height of 1450 ft. 
Another (1430 ft. deep), in the environs of Omaha, supplies a daily 
flow of 1,160,000 gallons under a pressure of 15 lb. In some small 
and exceptional regions the water is very alkaline, and in the counties 
of the south-east it is^ so generally saline that it is difficult, below 
150 ft., to avoid an inflow of salt water. Saline wells at Lincoln 
(2463, 1050 and 570 ft. deep) and at Beatrice (1260 ft.) are notable 
in this regard. 

Geology. — The eastern part of the state is covered with a thick 
mantle of Quaternary (Pleistocene), and the greatest part of the 
western portion with very thick deposits of Miocene and Pliocene 
(Tertiary). To the Pleistocene belong the alluvium, loess and glacial 
drift, and in part the sand-hills. The drift covers the eastern fifth 
of the state. In striking contrast to Iowa, the Nebraska deposit is 
very thin, seldom thicker than 1 or 2 ft. Above the drift there is 
usually a heavy covering of loess or " bluff deposit " (particularly 
typical in the neighbourhood^ Omaha and Council Bluffs). Though 
thin and worn out in places, it averages probably 100 ft., and is often 
as much as 200 ft. in thickness, and runs diagonally across the state 
from the N.E. to the Colorado inset. The opinion that it is of 
aqueous origin (and probably dates from the close of the glacial time) 
has the weight of authority. It was spread by the rivers: some 
evidences of wind action may be attributed to a later period. The 
sand-hills, which overlap the loess N. of the Platte, are probably 
mainly derived from the Arikaree, but probably also in part from the 
early Pleistocene. West of 102 long, there are beds several hundred 
feet thick of late Tertiary sands and clays. The Arikaree (Miocene) 
and Ogallala (Pliocene) formations of the North Loup beds are super- 
ficial over much of the western half of the state, the former to the N., 
the latter to the S. The buttes are characteristically Arikaree or 
Gering formations topping Brule clay. The same is true of at least 
considerable parts of Pine Ridge. In the Bad Lands there arc 
scanty outcrops of the Chadron formation (known also as " Titano- 
therium beds ), the oldest of the Tertiary beds. The thick super- 
ficial coverings over the state make difficult the determination of the 
underlying strata. There are only very scanty^ outcrops except 
along the rivers. No Archcan roclcs are exposed in Nebraska, and 
the sedimentary formations are undisturbed in situ. The Palaeozoic 
era is represented only by the Pennsylvanian series of the Upper 
Carboniferous and a scanty strip of Kansas- Nebraska Permian, and 
is confined to the S.E. counties. But, though small in area, the 
Carboniferous is by far the most important formation as regards 
mineral resources within the state. It is buried probably 2000 or 
3000 ft. in central Nebraska, outcropping again only in the Rocky 
Mountains. Upon it, in the trough thus formed, rest conformably 
the basal strata of the Cretaceous; the Jurassic and Triassic being 
wholly absent (unless in the extreme north-west). The E. limit of 
the Cretaceous extends across the state from N. to S. between 98 ° 
and 99 W. long. Its groups include the Dakota formation, char- 
acterized by a very peculiar rusty sandstone, and the Benton, both 
of which are rather widely accessible and heavy; the Niobrara; the 
Pierre shales, which apparently underlieabout three-quarters of the 
state in a deep and heavy bed; and, in the extreme west, the 
Laramie. There are almost no Cretaceous outcrops except on the 
streams, especially the Niobrara, Republican and Platte rivers — 
and in the Bad Lands. The superficial Miocene and Pliocene 
deposits in the west, above referred to, are underlaid by the White 
river groups of the Oligoccne, whose outcrops of Brule clay and 
Chadron formation also have been mentioned. b The Bad Lands are 
essentially nothing but fresh-water mud excessively weathered and 
eroded. They are often intersected by dikes of chalcedony, formerly 
mistaken for lava. The Bad Lands and the Arikaree are famous 
fossil fields, the latter being the source of the Daemonelix, or " Devil's 
cork-screw," a large spiral fossil, apparently a lacustrine alga. It 
was once generally supposed that the Pliocene epoch in Nebraska 
was distinguished by the activity of geysers; but the so-called 
11 geyseritc " now known commonly and correctly as "natural 
pumice " and " volcanic ash," which is found inthe Oligocene and 
later formations, has no connexion whatever with geysers, but is 
produced by the shattering of volcanic rock. It occurs widely in 
Nebraska and adjoining states. 

Minerals. — Mineral resources are decidedly limited; the total 
value of the mineral output (excluding coal) in 1907 was $1,383,916, 
of which $953,432 was the value of clay products, $324,239 of stone, 
and $54,227 of sand and gravel. The state, however^ is particularly 
rich in good clays, which are probably its greatestmineral resource. 
Calcite of excellent quality is the commonest mineral. Gravel is 
widely obtainable, and sand of the finest quality is available in 
inexhaustible quantities, and is an important article of export. 
Flint (valuable for railway ballast) occurs in immense quantities 
about Wymore and Blue Springs. The underground salt water flow 
promised once to be a resource of value, especially in the vicinity 
of Lincoln, but has proved of little or no value in comparison with 
the great salt-beds of Kansas. A native plaster is^ yielded by the 
Arikaree and Ogallala rocks, but though otherwise of excellent 
qualities it is ruined by slight exposure to the water. A diatomaceous 
earth in central Nebraska, occurring especially in the region of Loup, 
is a good polishing powder, and is used for_ packing steam pipes. 
Limonite in the form of ochre occurs in considerable quantity. Of 
building stones limestones are the most abundant and important, 
the best comes from the Benton beds and when " green " can be 
sawed into blocks. The Dakota formation, though its sand-stones 
are in general coarse or otherwise inferior, yields some of splendid 
ouality. Its clays, which are of all colours, arc the most valuable of 
the state. The finest building stone is a beautiful green quartzite 
rock of dense, fine texture and lasting quality. It is related to the 
Ogallala beds and occurs only in small areas. The quarries and clay 
pits of the state are mainly in the Carboniferous region of the S.E. 
Cretaceous lignite occurs in small quantities in the N.E., and peat 
more widely. The Carboniferous formations carry only thin seams 
of coal, never thicker than about 2 ft., and rarely readily accessible, 
and they can never be of more than small and merely local import- 
ance. 

Flora. — Nebraska lies partly in the arid, or Upper Sonoran, and 
partly in the humid, or Carolinian, area of the Upper Austral life- 
zone; the divisional line being placed by the United States Biological 
Survey at about ioo° W. long. The most marked characteristic cf 
Nebraskan vegetation is its immigrant character, and the state has 
been called " one of the finest illustrations of the commingling of 
contiguous species to be found anywhere in America " (C. E. Bessey). 
Immigrant species have even come from Texas and New Mexico, 
from the Dakotas and the Rockies. From the last-named various 
species have crept two-thirds of the way across the state, one (the 
buffalo berry) wholly covers it, and some have barely crossed into 
the border foot-hills from Wyoming. A very few trees and shrubs, 
and some grasses, arcstrictly endemic to the plains and to Nebraska. 
Four floral regions^ lying in north to south belts across the state, and 
closely corresponding to — though in boundaries by no means coincid- 
ing with — its great topographic divisions are distinguished in the 
regions of the Missouri border, the prairies, sand-hills and foot-hills. 
In 1896 some 3196, and by 1905 fully 3300 species had been listed, 
11 representing every branch and nearly every class of the vegetahle 
kingdom " (C. E. Bessey). There are at least 64 trees and at least 
77 shrubs growing native in the state ; but of their joint number a 
mere half-dozen or so can be classed as strictly endemic. Small 
woods of broad-leaf trees (and red cedars) grow very generally along 
all the water-courses of the state; and coniferous species grow along 
Pine Ridge and the Wild Cat Mountains. In the East, various trees 
are readily grown on the uplands ; in the West the honey-locust, the 
Osage orange and Russian mulberry for windbreaks; the green ash, 
and red cedar are perhaps the most valuable drought resisting 
species. The conifers are spreading naturally. In the sand-hills the 
sand-bar willow of the rivers and the cottonwoo.d growing naturally, 
evidence the good conditions of moisture; and the forestation of 
much of the region is undoubtedly possible. Forest reserves were 
established on the Dismal river in 1902 and millions of seedlings had 
been grown by 1906 for transplantation in Nebraska and other states 
of the Great Plains. Arbor Day (the 10th of April) was instituted 
by the Nebraska State Board of Agriculture in 1872 at the instance of 
J. Sterling Morton, later secretary of agriculture of the United 
States (see Ajibor Day). It has been yearly observed by the public 
schools of the state, and no state has done more than Nebraska for 
the forestation of its waste and prairie lands. In such a purely 
agricultural state a large wooded area is not desired. Plums, grapes 
and the dwarf " sand-cherry " (Prunus demissa) oi the sand-hills 
are prominent among many wild fruits. The flora is decidedly rich 
in species as compared with other states, but less so in the number 
of individuals. Grasses are perhaps the most noteworthy vegetable 
forms. Nebraska claims a greater variety of native hay and forage 
species than grow in any other state of the Union. No less than 
200 grasses, at least 154 being wild or commonlycultivated, had been 
listed in 1904. Of the total 200 species 150 (130 indigenous) are valu- 
able for forage, 34 (20 indigenous) are classed economically as weeds, 
10 are non-indigenous cereals and 6 are ornamental. The short 
buffalo-grass was originally everywhere abundant, but it had practi- 
cally disappeared by 1890 from the eastern half of the state, and since 
then has steadily become more restricted in habitat. The native 
prairie grasses have been in considerable part displaced by grasses 
introduced from more humid regions. Weeds are very numerous 
(about 125) ; and some, notably the sand-bur (Solonum rostratum) 
cockle-bur, and tumble-weeds among indigenous, and the Russian 
thistle (Salsola tragus) and purslane among non-indigenous species, 
are agricultural pests. Nothing can surpass in beauty the rank 
grasses and bright flowers that grow on the lowlands and rolling 
uplands of a virgin prairie — now hardly to be found in the state. 
The common sunflower (the most conspicuous weed of the state) 
and allied flowers, which spring up in myriads even in the midst of 
unbroken prairie wherever this is disturbed, line the roads with 
yellow bands from horizon to horizon, enclose the broken fields 
and choke waste places. 

Fauna. — The fauna of the state is not known with the same 
thoroughness and detail as the flora, but it too is varied. This is 
notably true of birds and of insects. Of the latter there are 
probably 12,000 to 15,000 species, including 140 butterflies, at least 
180 grasshoppers, several hundred bees/ &c. The so-called " grass 
hoppers," true locusts, have done great damage at times in Nebraska. 
About a third of all the species known in the United ^States are found 
within the state or close to its borders, and of these, 9 or 10 are so 
common that their increase under conditions favourable to^ their 
development may be a danger ^ Such conditions are found in dry 
years, unfavourable to their chief parasitic enemies, favourable to 
their own breeding, and the cause of their migrations. There were 
locust plagues in 1874, 1876 and 1877. Fungus parasites have been 
used with some, but on the whole rather slight, success, and 
mechanical appliances with perhaps greater success, in combating 
these pests. Birds are more effective. As in the case of plants, 
western, eastern, northern and southern avian species meet in 
Nebraska. In 1905 some 415 to 420 species had been found within 
its borders, and more than half of these were known to nest in the 
state; 120 had been counted in the winter. The lakes of the sand- 
hills are the breeding-place — less so as settlement increases — of 
myriads of water-fowl. Before the advent of the white man Neb- 
raska was full of wild mammals, the buffalo ,. elk, black and white 
tailed deer, antelope, bears, timber wolves, panthers (pumas), lynx, 
otter and mink being common. Almost all that remain are black 
bears, foxes, coyotes (prairie wolves), mink, musk-rats, raccoons and 
prairie dogs (or gophers). Antelope were not uncommon in the west 
and northwest until after 1890. The coyote is still so common even 
in the east as to be a nuisance to the farmer; in 1907 a bounty law 
was in force which provided for the payment of a state bounty of $5, 
on every grey wolf, $1*25 on every coyote and $1 on every lynx 
(wild cat). A few rodents have increased in numbers; the prairie 
dog especially is a pest inthe alfalfa fields of the arid lands (as are 
pocket-gophers at places in the east). 

Climate.— -The climate of Nebraska is typically inland or contin- 
ental; i.e. it is characterized by " winters of considerable severity, 
summers of unusual warmth, rainfall in limited quantities, marked 
and sudden changes of temperature, large seasonal and daily tempera- 
ture ranges, and dry, salubrious atmosphere, with a small percentage 
of cloudiness, and a large percentage of sunshine." 1 The average 
wind velocity for the High Plains of Nebraska and adjoining states 
is about 10 to 12 m. ; 25 m. is not uncommon ; and a velocity of 40 m. 
and over is recorded a half-dozen or more times every year. In 
spring velocities of 15 to 20 m. are common. The average velocity 
of winds for the entire state for 11 years preceding 1906 was 9*8 m. 
per hour. The prevailing^ directions are those common to a large part 
of the western Mississippi valley. The prevailing wind of the year is 
N.W.; but in the spring, the summer and much of the autumn its 
predominance is greatly reduced or overcome by S. and S.W. winds 
blowing from the Gulf of Mexico (but deflected by the rotation of the 
earth). Sometimes these winds blow in the winter — causing the 
curious phenomenon of melting snows oh the coldest days of the 
year; in the summer in seasons of drought, especially in the western 
part of the state, this wind from the Gul f sometimes reaches Nebraska 

	1 Senate Executive Document 115 (vol. 10), 51 Congress, 1 
	Session (1890), Climate of Nebraska. 

wrung dry of its moisture and so hot that in a day or two it shrivels 
and ruins the crops in its path. Such calamities are, however, 
uncommon, and the belief that Nebraska is often visited by tornadoes 
is erroneous. 

The normal mean-annual temperature of the state is about 48-7° F, 
and the normals for the six approximately equal weather sections into 
which the state is divided by the National Weather Service are 
respectively about 48 , 50-5°, i8-6°, 50-4°, 47-9° and 46-6° F. This 
illustrates the extraordinary homogeneity of climatic conditions. 
But there is a considerable difference in the averages for different 
months — the normal means of January and July through 30 years 
being 20-9° and 74*6° F., and the means of spring, summer, autumn 
and winter respectively about 48 , 72 , 53 and 23*5° F. Thus there 
is for any particular locality a wide range in absolute temperature 
through the year, which averages for the state probably about 120 
(1897- 1 905). Similarly, the range is large through theday, especially 
in the higher altitudes, where the nights are almost invariably cool 
and refreshing after even the hottest day. The number of continu- 
ous days with a mean temperature above §0° F., averages probably 
about 175 for the state. The actual growing-season between frosts 
is, however, not so great. Temperature is of course lower as one 
moves to the N. and N.W., the initial planting and harvesting of each 
crop progressing wave-like across the state in from one to two weeks. 
Especially in the W. and N.W. there are in some winters occasional 
anti-cyclonic or high-area storms known as blizzards — wind-storms 
preceded or accompanied by snow-fall — which are very severe. 
They continue from one to three days, and are habitually followed 
by very low temperature. They are the cause of great loss to 
the cattle owners. Such storms are, however, rare. In the S.E. 
portion of the state the winters are characteristically mild and open. 
Temperatures below zero are rare for any locality; and the same 
may be said of temperatures above 95 ° in summer. 

The normal mean-annual precipitation for the whole state is about 
23*84 in. in rain and melted snow, the actual yearly fall varying 
through 30 years between 13*30 and 31*65 in. Such rainfall might 
seem inadequate for an agricultural country: moreover, the eastern 
half of the state is pore favoured than the western, which belongs, 
indeed, to the semi-arid Great Plains on which the Reclamation 
Service of the United States Government is active. But aridity is a 
matter of the efficiency rather than of the mere quantity of rainfall, 
and in this regard Nebraska is very fortunately situated. Rain is 
most plenteous in the critical months of the year. Seven-tenths of 
all precipitation falls in the growing season, giving the state, especi- 
ally in the east, a greater amount at this time than many other states 
whose aggregate yearly rainfall is greater; so that Nebraska has an 
abundance for the safest cultivation. Moreover, nine-tenths of the 
rainfall is absorbed by the loess and sandy soils, only one-tenth being 
" run-off." It is a widely spread but unfounded belief in Nebraska 
that the rainfall has been increasing since the settlement of the 
state. That its storage has very greatly increased as cultivation has 
been extended (the prairie sod sheds water like a roof) is true; 
moreover, the spread of scientific principles^ farming has increased 
the advantage derived from the ground-water stored. Efficient 
rainfall has thus been greatly increased. Intermittent streamlets 
may well become perennial, and many are probably, as reported, 
becoming so. It is even conceivable that the settlement of the state 
may affect the seasonal distribution of precipitation; and that an 
advantageous alteration has in fact resulted is believed by many. 

The climate of Nebraska is exceptionally healthy. Its beneficial 
qualities must be attributed to the state's inland situation, its dry 
and pure air, constant winds and splendid drainage, to which its 
even slope and peculiar soil alike contribute. In some people, 
however, nervousness is induced ; and the winds, in particular, often 
have this effect. Autumn is perhaps the finest season ; the fields are 
green into the winter, the air is pure and fresh, though dry and 
warm, and the long season is delightfully mild and beautiful. The 
arid portion, as compared with the eastern portion, of the state has 
alike the advantages and disadvantages of a climate more sharply 
characterized. 

Soil. — Geologically Nebraska is one of the most typical agricultural 
states of the Union; although in the present distribution of industrial 
interests agriculture is by no means so predominant as in some 
southern states. The basis of the soils is sands (coarse, fine or silt) ; 
clay beds, though economically important, are in quantity relatively 
scant. In the eastern half silt, and in the western fine sand, form the 
bulk of the soil. There are five well-defined soil regions correspond- 
ing to the geologic-topographic divisions already indicated of drift 
loess, sand-hills, foot-hills and Bad Lands. The loess is a " salt, fine 
sandy loam with a large percentage of sand or silt, and considerable 
calcareous matter, and usually a small amount of clay." It contains 
considerable humic matter, discolouring rapidly in the air (when 
exposed it is characteristically a bright buff). It is of extraordinary 
fertility, and its great depth (in Lincoln and Dawson counties bluffs 
200 ft. thick are found) is a guarantee of almost inexhaustible re- 
sources.^ The glacial drift is also a useful deposit, coarse ingredients 
in it being of small amount (rare boulders, and some gravel). The 
superficial soil over most of the state, and everywhere in the E. except 
rarely where the loess or drift is bare, is a rich, black vegetable mould, 
1 to 5 ft. thick on the uplands. The sand-hills are not inherently 
infertile; the soil never bakes, is always receptive of moisture, 
absorbing water like a sponge and holding it well. There is a great 
amount of fertile valley land, adequately watered. Alfalfa and other 
cultivated grasses are encroaching on the whole region, and even the 
natural arid-land bunch grasses make excellent grazing. The 
" butte " soil of the W. is a fine sandy ?jil, characteristically cal- 
careous, derived from the Arikaree. With it also moisture is a great 
factor in its productivity. The Bad Lands are by no means infertile 
(their name, it should be noted, was originally Mauvaises terres d 
traverser) ; but they are almost destitute of ground water, though 
containing many green " pockets " where surface water can be 
stored. They contain much clay and mails, non-absorbent and 
subject to such excessive wash that vegetation cannot gain a foot- 
hold. In various parts of the west are small tracts of so-called 
11 gumbo " soil; they are due to the Pierre shale, are poorly drained 
and characteristically alkaline. Small alkaline areas also occur about 
lakes in the sand-hills. Where surface water is adequate the regions 
of the Pierre shale make splendid grazing lands; but in general they 
are not very useful for agriculture. Salt lands occur about Salt Creek 
notably around Lincoln. The stream bottoms of alluvium are modi- 
fied by loess and humic deposits, and are of course very fertile; 
but hardly more so than the loess of the uplands. 

Agriculture. — Agriculture is not only the chief industry but is 
also the foundation of the commerce and manufactures of the state. 
In 1900, of the total area 6o-8% was reported as included in farms, 
and 37*5% as actually improved. The rank of the state in the 
Union was 13th in value of farm property, and 10th in value of farm 
products. The farm value was $747,950,057, an increase since 1890 
of 46-1%; while the total product-value was $162,696,386 — an 
increase (partly factitious) of 143*4% * n tne same period. A greater 
part of the state was reported improved in 1890 than in 1900; the 
change was due to the increase of stock-raising in the West. Simi- 
larly, the size of the average farm increased from 156*9 acres in 1880 
to 190-1 in 1890, and 246-1 in 1900, although in eastern Nebraska 
there was a contrary tendency. Under the^ Kincaid law, which 
permits entire sections instead of quarter sections (160 acres) to be 
homesteaded, this movement has been fostered. In the years 1880- 
1900 the number of farms operated by cash tenants rose from 3-1 to 
9-6%; of share tenants from 14-9 to 27-3% of the total. There is 
no appreciable tendency toward management for absentee owners. 
The census of 1900 showed that not less than two-fifths of the total 
net income came from live stock or from hay, grain and forage on 
farms representing together 96% of the farm-value of the state — 
live stock being a trifle more important; dairying was similarly 
predominant for 1*6%, and beet-sugar for o-i %. Other crops were 
unimportant sources of revenue. Sugar-beet culture has developed 
since about 1889; it is localized largely in Lincoln county, near 
North Platte, though beets are raised over a large part (especially the 
western part) of the state. In 1907 about 11,000 acres were planted 
to sugar beets. The principal factory for the slicing of the beets 
is one built at Grand Island, Hall county, in 1890. The dairy 
interest is rapidly growing, but is still exceeded in other states. 
Omaha is a great dairy market. Nebraska ranks very high in the 
production of cattle and hogs. A fourth of all animal products are 
represented by milk, butter and cheese, eggs and poultry; the rest 
by animals killed on the farm or sold for slaughter, most of them 
going to supply the meat-packing industry of South Omaha. Wild, 
salt and prairie grasses make up the bulk of the forage acreage, but 
the cultivated crops — especially millet and Hungarian grasses and 
alfalfa — are more important. Holt county in the Elkhorn valley, 
and Sheridan county in the foot-hills, produce more than half the 
hay-crop of the state. Alfalfa can be grown with more or less success 
in every county of the state, not excepting areas where clay or sand 
form the sub-soil; but on the uplands of the central part of the state 
it is produced with the greatest success and in the greatest quantities. 
In 1908, according to the reports of the state Board of Agriculture, 
the crop of Custer, Dawson and Buffalo counties was about 15% of 
the total crop (1,846,703 tons) of the state. The product was 
quintupled between 1809 and 1905, and between 1905 and 1908 the 
increase was about 40 %. It has been a great aid to western Nebraska 
as to other portions of the Great Plains. Sorghum and kafir corn are 
also excellent, and broom-corn ^ fairly good, as drought-resistant 
crops; the last, which is of lessening importance, is localized in Cass, 
Saunders and Polk counties. * Cereals are by far the most important 
crops, representing in 1899 four-fifths of farmed land and crop 
values. Allowing for variations in " off years," but speaking with 
as much exactness as is possible, Nebraska has established her 
position since about 1900 in the* third, fourth and fifth rank respec- 
tively among the states of the Union, in the^ production of Indian 
corn, wheat and oats. Of these, Indian corn is by far the most im- 
portant, representing normally about two-thirds of the total crop 
value; while wheat and oats each represented in 1906 about one- 
seventh of the total crop, and rye, barley, kafir-corn and buckwheat 
make up the small remainder. Indian corn is grown to some extent 
all over the state, except in the north-west, but the great bulk of the 
crop is produced east of the 99th meridian. It is rarely cut, but is 
left to mature and dry on the stalk in the field. The yearly yield in 
the decade 1895-1904, according to the most conservative state 
statistics, varied from 298,599,638 to 72,445,227 bushels, and the 
average was 178,941,084 bushels, or 190,773,957, omitting the failure 
of 1901 ; the yield per acre being similarly 26*35 o r 2 7*9 bushels 
(12*4 in 1901); 1 in 1906 the crop was 249,782,500 bushels, and 
the average yield per acre 34-1 bushels; in 1907 the crop was 
179,328,000 bushels, and the average yield only 24 bushels per acre. 
According to the report of the state Board of Agriculture, Custerj 
Lancaster and Saunders counties produced the largest amounts 
(each more than 5,000,000 bushels) of Indian corn in 1908. Since 
1900 Nebraska has become one of the foremost winter wheat states, 
second only to Kansas. Little spring wheat is now sown except in 
the northern counties, the state being on the northern edge of the 
winter wheat belt. From 1880 to 1890 the acreage devoted to wheat 
greatly diminished, because the spring variety was not relatively 
remunerative, but the acreage trebled in the next decade as autumn 
planting increased. The winter varieties have the advantages of 
larger yield, earlier ripening and lesser loss from insects, and afford ' 
protection to the soil. The growth of durum (macaroni) wheat is 
also increasing, but is hampered by the uncertainty of market, which 
is for the most part foreign. The wheat crops of the decade 1895- 
1904 averaged 33,208,805 bushels a year; or ranged from a minimum 
of 9-8 to a maximum of 20-9, averaging 15-8 bushels to the acre; 
in 1906 the crop was 52,288,692 bushels, and the average yield 
22 bushels per acre; and in 1907 the crop was 45,911,000 bushels, 
and the average yield 18-1 bushels per acre. In 1908 Clay, Adams 
and Hamilton were the principal wheat-growing counties in the 
state. The corresponding figures for oats were :' average yield for 
the decade, 48,145,185 (range, 28,287,707 in 1901 to 66,810,065 in 
1904); range of yield per acre, 17-9 to 34-0, and average 27-6 
bushels per acre; in 1906 the crop was 72,275,000 bushels and the 
average yield per acre 29.5 bushels; in 1907 the crop was 51,490,000 
bushels, and the average yield 20*4 bushels per acre. In the decade 
1 890-1900 the state did not rise above the 10th rank in the Union; 
after 1900 her rise was rapid. The same is even more markedly true 
of rye; in 1907 the crop was 1,502,000 bushels (from 88,400 acres), a 
yield exceeded in only five states in the country. Apples are raised in 
th% N.E. and S.E. sections of the state, and are much the most im- 
portant fruit grown. Peaches are next in importance, and horti- 
cultural enthusiasts believe that the possibilities ot this crop are very 
great. Other fruits are raised with much success, and in 1904 at 
St Louis the horticultural exhibit of the state led those of all other 
states in the medals received for excellence; but nevertheless its 
relative rank in the Union as a fruit-producing state is still low. 

In a period of 30 years (1869-1898) there were, according to the 
state Board of Agriculture, four seasons whose crops could reasonably 
be classed as failures, three more as " short," one as fair, eighteen as 
good, and four as great. Compared with adjoining states — Iowa, 
Minnesota, South Dakota, Kansas, Missouri — none shows a greater, 
if indeed any shows sc great an average value per acre in the yield 
of Indian corn, wheat, oats, barley and rye; and this despite the 
assumed handicap of the western half of the state. In fact the yield 
of this section relatively to cultivated acreage is normally fully equal 
to that of the eastern section; a result quite consistent with the 
scientifically proven fertility of semi-arid lands. ^ The real handicap 
of the western counties would be shown in comparing aggregate yields 
per given area; for much land is normally inarable. Alfalfa, stock 
raising and dairying, afforestation, " dry-farming " and irrigation are, 
however, proving that the West can maintain prosperity by not 
relying upon ordinary agriculture. Alfalfa is not easily started, 
however, on the uplands of the extreme western part of the state; 
and dry-farming (the Campbell dust-mulch system) has the expensive- 
ness in labour of intensive cultivation. ^ The above-mentioned 
delusion that climate is changing and adapting itself to agriculture, 
thus relieving the farmer of accommodating his methods to the 
climate, has considerably handicapped him in progress. Systematic 
experiments in dry-farming throughout the Great Plains^ were pro- 
vided for on a great scale by Congress in 1906. By attention to crop 
rotation, soil physics and world-wide search for plants adapted to the 
Great Plains (such as the U.S. Department of Agriculture has long 
been conducting), a very great deal can be accomplished — no one 
can say how much ; but certainly the Western must long remain at 
a great disadvantage in comparison with the Eastern portion of the 
state as regards the growth of cereals. 

Irrigation. — Water for the western part of the state is a resource 
of primary importance, and irrigation therewith a fundamental 
problem. Very generally, especially in the butte regions, the country 
lends itsell to the impounding of surface water. The lakes are of 
great importance for the stock ranges of the sand-hills. It is 
commonly believed that of underground water, and generally of 
artesian water, even the driest counties have an abundance. This is 
great exaggeration. Though both in central and western Nebraska 
there are strata that generally yield a considerable flow, the supply is 
usually limited and the expense is great. Up to 1906 dependence 
was mainly upon the streams, which it is estimated might furnish 
3 or 4 million acre-feet — enough to irrigate between 10 and 15% 
of the arid section— were all the water available, and the land 

	1 Data of the State Bureau of Labor and Industrial Statistics, 
	which are lower than those of the state Board of Agriculture, and 
	(in census years) the Federal Census. The yearly average given by 
	the Board of Agriculture for 1895-1904 is 219,196,000 bushels. 
	The statistics for 1906 and 1907 are taken from the Year-books of the 
	Department of Agriculture. 

irrigable. As compared with the streams of Colorado* where irriga- 
tion is much more advanced, the streams of Nebraska have a very 
constant flow; the relative supply-capacities ol the Arkansas and 
Poudre in Colorado, and the Loup and North Platte in Nebraska 
being about as i-ooo, 1-193, 3*347 and £-632 respectively, according 
to the estimates of the state engineer (Nebraska Public Documents 
1 90 1 -1 902, vol. iii. p. 144). An irrigation law was first passed by 
Nebraska in 1895. One of the greatest improvement projects under- 
taken by the national Reclamation Service is one on the North 
Platte, begun in 1903, which contemplates a reservoir in Wyoming of 
sufficient capacity to store all the surplus waters of that stream, 
about 600 m. of canals, and the reclamation of 107,000 acres in 
Nebraska ; it was 74 % completed in 1909. The work of the national 
service began in Nebraska in 1902. Some farmers on the uplands 
between the valleys in western Nebraska irrigate by means of 
wind-mills, and although the underground water is 175 ft. or more 
below the surface one wind -mill often supplies sufficient water to 
irrigate ten acres. The extent of irrigated acreage increased about 
thirteen-f old from 1 889 to 1 899. In the latter year there were 1 701 m. 
of ditch costing about $751.00 per m., irrigating 148,538 acres, 
which yielded crops averaging $6.61 per acre in value. The greatest 
part of the irrigated acreage is in the valley of the North Platte and 
the Upper Platte — probably nine-tenths in iqo6 — in Scotts Bluff, 
Lincoln, Cheyenne, Dawson, Keith and Deuel counties. There is, 
however, a large ditch in Platte county — the farthest E. of any large 
ditch in the country; and though agriculture is normally quite 
" successful " here without irrigation, nevertheless it is more profit- 
able with it. In fact, in 1899 about a quarter of the irrigated acreage 
lay E. of the section classed as arid. 

Manufactures* — The rank of Nebraska among the states of the 
Union in 1900 in population, in value of agricultural products, and in 
value of manufactured products, was respectively twenty-seventh, 
tenth and nineteenth. In the decade 1890-1900 the state increased 
the value of its manufactures somewhat more than half. The per 
capita product-values for agriculture and manufactures in 1000 were 
$153 and $135 (as compared with $6$and $38 in 1890). Only 
2-3% of the population were engaged in manufacturing in 1900. 
Of the total factory product (in 1900, $I30,3<> 2 >453; in !Q05, 
$154,918,220), 84*7 % were urban (ue. were for the three cities which 
in 1900 had a population of at least 8000) in 1900, and 81*7 in 1905; 
the percentage for these cities being 53-3 in 1900 and 43*5 in 1905 for 
South Omaha, 29*2 in 1900 and 34*9 in 1905 for Omaha, and 2*1 in 
1900 and 3-4 in 1905 for Lincoln; Nebraska City, Fremont, Grand 
Island, Beatrice, Hastings, Plattsmouth and Kearney were the only 
other manufacturing centres of any importance. In 1907 there was 
a beet-sugar factory at Grand Island; at Nebraska City there are 
several distinctive industries; at South Omaha very important 
meat-packing houses; and the other cities have interests rather 
extensive or varied than distinctive. As yet manufactures are 
insignificant except in lines immediately dependent upon agriculture, 
the combined output of the packing, flour and grist mill, dairy and 
malt-liquor establishments constituting in 1900 nine-tenths of the 
total state output. Meat-packing is by far the most important 
single interest, South Omaha being the third greatest packing centre 
of the country, employing in 1900 and in 1905 a quarter of all wage- 
earners and yielding nearly one-half the total product-value of the 
state ($71,018,339 in 1900; $69,243,468 in 1905). The malt- 
liquor industry is favoured by the great production of barley in 
Iowa; the value of malt liquors manufactured in 1900 was 
$1,433,501. and in 1905 $1,663,788. Nebraska wheat, like that of 
Kansas, combines for milling the splendid qualities of winter wheat 
with those characteristic of grain grown on the edge of the semi-arid 
West; flour and grist-mill products were valued at $7,794,130 in 
1900 and at $12,190,303 in 1905. The first creamery in Nebraska 
was established in 1881. A creamery at Lincoln is said to be the 
largest in the United States. Many co-operative dairies have per- 
sisted since the early days of farmers* granges. The value of 
cheese, butter and other dairy products was $2,253,893 in 1900 and 
$3,326,110 in 1905. Of manufactures not dependent upon agri- 
culture perhaps the most promising is that of brick and tile products 
(valued at $839,815 in 1900 and at $1,131,913 in 1905), and the 
largest in 1905 was the manufacture and repair of steam railway cars 
(valued at $2,624,461 in 1900 and at $4,394,685 in 1905). 

Communications. — There is no longer any river navigation. There 
were 6,101-5 m - °* railway in the state at the end of 1907; the great 
period of railway building was 1 870-1 890, the mileage in 1870 being 
705, in 1880, 1953, and in 1890, 5407. The eastern half of the state 
is much better covered by railways than the western. Six great east 
and west trunk-lines connecting the Rocky Mountain region and 
Chicago enter the state at Omaha (q.v .), and two others, giving rather 
an outlet southward, enter the same city and serve the eastern part 
of the state. In 1908 all but 5 counties out of 90 had railway outlets. 
A marked tendency toward north and south railway lines is of great 
promise to the state, as outlets towards the Gulf of Mexico are im- 
portant, especially for local freight. Omaha and Lincoln are Federal 
ports of entry for customs. 

Population.— In 1900 the population of the state was 1,066,300 
and in 1910, 1,192,214. In 1900 16-6% were foreign-born, 
and 43-3% natives of other states than Nebraska. The latter 
came mainly from the north-central states. Of the foreigners, 
Germans, Scandinavians and British (including English Canadians) 
made up four-fifths of the total. The most numerous individual 
races were Germans (65,506), Swedes (24,693), Bohemians 
(16,138), Danes (12,531), Irish (11,127), English (9757), Russians 
(8083) and English Canadians (8010). In 1900 three cities 
had a population above 25,000 — Omaha, 102,555; Lincoln, 
40,169; South Omaha, 26,001 — and seven others had a popula- 
tion between 5000 and 8000 — Beatrice, Grand Island, Nebraska 
City, Fremont, Hastings, Kearney and York. The population 
of Nebraska was 28,841 in i860, 122,993 in 1870, 452,402 in 
1880 and 1,062,656 in 1890. The increases of population 
by decades following i860 were 326-5, 267-8, 134*1, 0-3, and 
11*8%. From 1880-1890 the absolute increase was exceeded 
in only four states, and was greater than in any state W. of 
the Mississippi except the enormous state of Texas; from 
1 890-1 900 it was less than in any state of the Union except 
Nevada (whose population decreased). In this decade 35 
counties out of 90 in the state showed a decrease: the shrinkage 
was mainly in the first half of the decade, and was due to the 
cumulative' effects of national hard times, a reaction from 
an extraordinarily inflated land " boom " of the late 'eighties, 
and a remarkable succession of drought years, and consequent 
crop failure in the West. Between- 1885 and 1895 Kansas and 
Colorado went through much the same experience, due to a too 
rapid settlement of their arid areas before the conditions of 
successful agriculture were properly understood. Many homes, 
and even small settlements in Nebraska — though not to the 
same extent as in Colorado and Kansas — were abandoned. 
Urban population (the population in places having 4000 or 
more inhabitants) als6 fell, constituting 25*8% in 1890, and in 
1900 only 20-8% of the total population of the state. In the 
case of some cities that showed a great decrease (e.g. Lincoln 
27*2%, and Omaha 27%) notoriously "padded" censuses 
in 1890 were in part responsible for the bad showing ten years 
later. 

In 1906 there were in the state 345,803 communicants of 
various religious denominations; of these 100,763 were Roman 
Catholics, 64,352 Methodists, '59,485 Lutherans, 23,862 Presby- 
terians, 19,121 Disciples of Christ, 17,939 Baptists and 15,247 
Congregationalists. 

In 1890 there were in the state 2893 untaxed and 3538 
taxed Indians, the latter being citizens; in 1900 there were 
3,322 altogether, all of them taxed; and in 1908 there were 
3720, of whom 1270 were Omaha, 11 16 Santee Sioux, 1060 
Winnebago and 274 Ponca. 

Among the Indians who occupied Nebraska immediately before the 
advent of the whites and thereafter, the only families of much im- 
portance in the state's history were the Caddoan and the Siouan. 
The Caddoan family was represented by the Middle or Pawnee 
Confederacy; the Siouan family by its Dakota, Thegiha, Chiwere 
and Winnebago branches. Included in the Dakota branch were the 
Santee and Teton tribes, the latter comprising the Brule" , Blackfeet 
and Oglala Indians; in the Thegiha branch were the Omaha and 
Ponca tribes; and in the Chiwere branch, the Iowa, Oto and the 
Missouri tribes. Other tribes were of less importance; and tribes of 
other families — with the exception of the Cheyennes and Arapahoes 
of the Algonquian family, wnose permanent hunting grounds em-, 
braced the foot-hill country of the West — were of negligible im- 
portance, being only roamers withinthe borders of the state. The 
Pawnees contested the plains against the Sioux with undying 
enmity. Before the CivU War there were no very general troubles 
between Indians and whites, despite constant frontier difficulties, 
except the^ bloodless "Pawnee War" of 1859-60; but in 1863- 
64 the Indians rose rather generally along the frontier, and many 
settlers were killed. In 1890-01 there was another war — with the 
Sioux — marked by the battle of Wounded Knee, just across the line 
in South Dakota. In dealings with the Indians there have been in 
Nebraska the usual discreditable features of administration. The 
maltreatment of the Poncas, a fine and peaceable tribe, was peculiarly 
and inexcusably harsh. Segregation on reservations was generally 
accomplished in 1 870-1 880. There were in 1900 small reservations 
for Omahas and Winnebagoes in Thurston county and for the Sioux 
in Sheridan county, and an agency for the Santees and Poncas near 
the mouth of the Niobrara; and at Genoa, where the Pawnee agency 
and reservation had been located, there was in 1908 an Indian school 
maintained by the United States government with 350 boarding 
pupils. In 1908, however, almost all the tribal lands had been distri- 
uted in severalty: the Niobrara Reservation (under the Santee 
government boarding school for the Santee Sioux andthe Ponca) had 
only 1130-7 acres reserved for agency, school and mission purposes; 
the Ponca Reservation (under the same school) had only 160 acres 
reserved for agency and school buildings; the Omaha Reservation 
(under the Omaha School) had 12,421 acres unallotted; the Sioux 
Reservation (under the Pine Ridge Agency) for Oglala Sioux had 
640 acres; and the Winnebago Reservation (under the Winnebago 
School) had 1710-8 acres unallotted and 480 reserved for agency, &c. 
Government. — The present constitution, adopted in 1875, 
replaced one adopted in 1866. In 1871 a convention framed 
a constitution that was rejected by the people. It provided 
for compulsory education, and for the taxation of church 
property; prohibited the grant by counties or cities of financial 
aid to railway or other corporations, and enjoined that railways 
should have an easement only in their right of way. The last 
two provisions were mainly responsible for the defeat of the 
constitution. The instrument of 1875 presents a few variations 
from the normal type, and under it a few interesting problems 
have arisen. The constitution provides two methods for amend- 
ment. A convention for revising or amending the constitution 
is to be held in case a recommendation to that effect made by the 
legislature (a three-fifths vote of all the members of each house 
being required) is accepted by a majority of the electors voting 
at the next election for members of the legislature, but no 
amendment agreed upon by the convention is to take effect until 
approved by a majority of electors voting on it. Without 
calling a convention, however, the legislature may, by a three- 
fifths vote of all the members of each house, adopt an amendment, 
which is to come into effect only if approved by a majority 
of electors voting at the next election of senators and repre- 
sentatives — the publication of the proposed amendment in some 
newspaper in each county once a week for three months before 
the election being required. This has been interpreted by the 
courts as requiring a majority of the votes actually cast for 
senators and representatives. As there is less interest in amend- 
ments than in the election of members of the legislature, only 
two out of a large number of amendments proposed from time 
to time by three-fifths of the members elected to each house 
have been adopted. The first of these, increasing the pay per 
day to the members of the legislature and providing for longer 
sessions, 1 was declared lost by the official canvassers, but when 
(1886) the ballots had been recounted by the legislature it was 
declared adopted. The second (1906), creating a railway com- 
mission, was endorsed by a political party in state convention, 
was printed on the same ballot-paper with the names of the 
party candidates for office in order to secure for it all " straight " 
party votes, and by this procedure, which was upheld by the 
state supreme court in 1907, it was adopted. All male persons 
who are citizens of the United States or have declared their 
intention to become such at least thirty days before an election 
have the right of suffrage provided they have attained the age 
of twenty-one years, have resided in the state six months, are 
not of unsound mind, and have not been convicted of treason 
or felony. Women who have either children or taxable property 
may vote on questions relating to schools. The general election 
of state and local officers is held annually on the first Tuesday 
succeeding the first Monday in November, but municipal and 
school district elections may be held at other times. The secret 
ballot was adopted in 1891; the use of the voting machines 
was authorized in 1899; and the nomination of candidates 
by primaries was made mandatory in 1907. By a provision 
unique in 1875, the constitution authorized tbe legislature 
to provide that the electors might express their preferences 
for United States senators; but this was not treated as mandatory 
on the legislature, and though votes were at times taken (1886, 
1894), they were not officially canvassed, nor were any senatorial 

	1 The amendment increased the pay of members from three dollars 
	to five dollars a day " during their sitting," and provided that sessions 
	should last at least sixty days, and that members should not receive 
	pay " for more than sixty days at any one sitting "; the original 
	constitution had provided that they should " not receive pay for 
	more than forty days at any one session " and had prescribed no 
	minimum length for a session. 

elections materially affected by them. In 1907, under a direct 
primary law, the nomination of candidates for United States 
senator was transferred from the party convention directly 
to the people; and in 1909 the " Oregon plan " was adopted, 
whereby each candidate for the legislature must go on record 
as promising, or not, always to vote for the people's choice 
for United States senator; on the ballot which bears the name 
of each candidate for the legislature there appears a statement 
that he " promises," or that he " will not promise," to vote 
for the " people's choice." In the same year the state 
enacted a law providing for the non-partisan nomination of all 
judges, of all superintendents of public instruction and of 
regents of the state university; nominations are by petition, 
and there is a separate " official non-partisan ballot " bearing 
the names and addresses of the nominees and the titles of the 
office for which they are nominated. The legislature of 1909 
also provided for open election primaries and for the framing 
of state party platforms by convention before the time of the 
primary. 

The governor is the chief executive officer of the state, but quite 
independent of him are a lieutenant-governor, a secretary of state, 
an auditor of public accounts, a treasurer, a superintendent of public 
instruction, an attorney-general and a commissioner of public lands 
and buildings, who, as well as the governor, are elected for a term of 
two years. The governor's appointing power is almost entirely 
limited to officers of state institutions, and for every appointment 
he makes the approval of the Senate is required; but he need not 
ask the consent of that body to remove for incompetency, neglect of 
duty or malfeasance in office " any officer whom he may appoint." 
His constitutional power to pardon is regulated by an act of the 
legislature (i9°7) which requires that he shall in no instance grant a 
pardon until the attorney-general shall have investigated the case and 
conducted a public hearing. _ His veto power extends to items in 
appropriation bills, but any bill or item may be passed over his veto 
by three-fifths of the members elected to each house of the legis- 
lature. The most important board of which he is chairman is the 
state board of equalization. As the present constitution was adopted 
in the year after a grasshopper plague, which had 'caused great 
financial loss, it limited the salary of the governor, auditor of public 
accounts and treasurer, as well as that of the judges of the supreme 
and district courts, to $2500 each and that of other important 
officers (including the secretary of state, the attorney-general and 
the superintendent of public instruction) to $2000. This economy 
has somewhat hampered the growing state. Salaries have been too 
low to attract the ablest men; and as the constitution forbade the 
creation of new offices, and no amendment of this clause could be 
secured, resort was had to the creation of additional " secretaries " 
and of boards constituted of existing state officials or their secretaries. 

The legislature consists of a Senate of 33 members and a House of 
Representatives of 100 members, and meets in regular session on the 
first Tuesday in January of every odd-numbered year at Lincoln, the 
capital. Both^ senators and representatives are apportioned accord- 
ing to population, and are elected by districts in November of each 
even-numbered year for a term of two years. They are paid at the 
rate of five dollars a day during 60 days of a regular session and not 
exceeding ioodays during their entire term. No bill or ioint resolu- 
tion may be introduced at a regular session after its fortieth day 
except at the request of the governor. Special legislation of various 
kinds is expressly prohibited, and in the bill of rights it Is declared 
that " all powers not herein delegated remain with the people." 
This clause would seem to leave the state government with no powers 
not expressly granted, and to make the rule for interpreting the 
Nebraska constitution similar to that for interpreting the Federal 
constitution; but in their practice the Nebraska courts have been 
little influenced by it, and it is chiefly of historical interest.* 

The administration of justice is vested in a supreme court, 15 
district courts, county courts and courts of justices of the peace and 
police magistrates. The supreme court consists of three judges 
elected for a term of six years, one retiring every two years; each 
district court consists of one to seven judges elected for a term of four 
years, and each county court consists of one judge elected for a term 
of two years. The county courts have exclusive original jurisdiction 
in the probate^ of wills and the administration of estates, concurrent 
jurisdiction with the district courts in civil suits for sums not ex- 
ceeding $1000, and important jurisdiction in criminal cases. Perhaps 
the most unique provision of the Nebraska constitution is that 

	5 An almost identical clause was inserted in the Ohio constitution 
	of 1802, and one in exactly the same language appears in the present 
	(1851) constitution of that state; it appears also in the Kansas 
	constitutions of 1855, 1858 and 1859 (present), in the Nebraska 
	constitution of 1866, in the North Carolina and South Carolina 
	constitutions of 1868, and was retained in the present constitution of 
	North Carolina as amended in 1876. 

relating to appeals; it appears in the bill of rights and reads as 
follows: " The right to be heard in all civil cases in the court of last 
resort, by appeal, error or otherwise, shall not be denied." Regard- 
less of this provision, however, the civil code denies the right of an 
appeal from an inferior court in cases that have been tried by a jury, 
and in which the amount claimed does not exceed $20, and the courts 
have decided that this denial is not in conflict with the constitution ; 
but in at least one instance an appeal was allowed because of the 
constitutional guaranty, and that guaranty has doubtless had much 
influence on judicial legislation. 

County government exists under both the district-commissioner 
system and the township supervisor system, the latter being rare. 
Cities are governed in classes according to population. 

Except in Omaha there is no great field for social economic legis- 
lation; bat the record of the state has been normally good in this 
respect. Railways have given rise to the most notable laws. Regu- 
lation has been a burning political question since 1876, the constitu- 
tion making it the duty^ of the legislature to " correct abuses and 
prevent unjust discriminations and extortions in all charges of 
express, telegraph and railroad companies " within the state. The 
influence of the railways has been very great, and a constant drag 
on just taxation and other legislative reforms. In 1885, 1887 and 
1897 the legislature created a Board of Transportation consisting of 
existing state executive officers or their secretaries, but this could do 
little except gather statistics, investigate alleged abuses, and advise 
the legislature, upon which the regulation of rates remained man- 
datory by the constitution. The Board was eventually declared 
unconstitutional by the state supreme court. In 1893 a maximum 
freight-rate Act was passed, but the rates thus fixed were declared 
by the United States Supreme Court to conflict with the Fourteenth 
Amendment, being " unreasonable." The right of the state to fix 
" reasonable " rates remained unquestioned, but American ex- 
perience has not found such laws efficacious. In 1006 all political 
parties conducted campaigns on promises of radical legislation on 
railway rates, passenger and freight; and a constitutional amend- 
ment creating a railway commission was adopted in the manner 
above described. A result of this campaign was a remarkable series 
of enactments in 1907 for the regulation of railways. The legislature 
framed a stringent anti-pass law, reduced passenger fares and express 
and freight charges, provided for equitable local taxation of railway 
terminals, regulated railway labour in the interest of safe travel, fixed 
upon railways the responsibility for the death or injury of their 
employes, and gave to the newly-created railway commission 
complete jurisdiction over all steam-railways in the state, over the 
street railways of the cities, and over express companies, telegraph 
companies, telephone companies and all other common carriers. 
In 1909 provision was made for an annual corporation licence tax 
and for the physical valuation of railways. In the same year, 
following the example of Oklahoma, Nebraska passed a law 
guaranteeing bank deposits from a fund created by an assessment on 
the basis of total deposits. Useful child-labour and pure-food laws 
were enacted in 1907. Prohibition of the liquor traffic had been 
established in the Territory in 1855, but liquor licences were intro- 
duced in 1858; in 1909 the licence fee was fixed at $1000. A law 
enacted in 1907 made it illegal for breweries to own retail liquor 
houses, and one of 1900 required all saloons to close from 8 p.m. to 
7 a.m. A homestead law exempts from judgment liens and forced 
sale a homestead not exceeding $2000 in value and consisting either 
of a farm not exceeding 160 acres or of property not exceeding two 
lots in a city or village; the exemption, however, does not extend to 
mechanics', labourers' or vendors liens upon said homestead or to a 
mortgage upon it that has been signed by both husband and wife or 
by an unmarried claimant. A woman's rights to her property are not 
affected by marriage, except that it becomes liable for payment of 
debts contracted for necessaries to the family when a judgment 
against the husband for the payment of the same cannot be satisfied. 
The rights of dower and courtesy have been abolished, and husband 
and wife have instead equal rights to inherit property from the 
other; but the portion of the property of a deceased spouse that 
descends to the survivor varies from one-fourth to all according to 
whose and how many are the children concerned; The grounds for a 
divorce are adultery, incompetency at the time of marriage, sentence 
to imprisonment for a term of three years or more, abandonment 
without just cause for two years, habitual drunkenness, extreme 
cruelty, and refusal or neglect of the husband to provide a suitable 
maintenance for his wife. The period of residence in the state re- 
quired to secure a divorce was formerly six months, but in 1909 it 
was made two years. 

Finance. — The constitution limited the debt that the state might 
contract to meet casual deficits to $100,000, unless in time of war, 
and required taxes to be laid to maintain interest on such debt 
(bonds). These provisions were construed to mean that not more 
than $100,000 of debt could be contracted in addition to appropria- 
tions made by the legislature. There was from the beginning a 
constant issue of state " warrants " on the general fund, dependent on 
taxation. These warrants when issued and presented for payment 
were paid by the state treasurer, were sold to the permanent school 
J""" .and drew 4% interest until cancelled from the general fund. 
The floating debt of warrants was practically cancelled in 1909, after 
a one-mill levy for four years for this purpose. Since 1900 there has 
been no bonded debt whatever. The constitution also prohibited 
state aid to railways and other corporations, leaving this to cities 
and counties under limitations. In 1903 the assessed valuation of 
property was $188,458,379; in 1905, $504,470,961; in 1906, 
$313,060,301; in 1907, $328,757,578, and in 1908, $39^529,673. 
The increase was due largely to a new revenue law of 1903 ordering 
property to be assessed at one-fifth of its actual value. The average 
tax-rate in the year 1904 was 6§ mills; in 1905, 1906 and 1907, 7 
mills; and in 1908, 6i mills. 

Education. — The public schools have been endowed by the United 
States, beginning in 1854, and by the state ; in 1909 the permanent 
school funds derived from the sale of educational lands amounted to 
$8,450,557, invested in state securities, county, school district and 
municipal bonds. The percentage of illiterate population (i.e. popu- 
lation unable to write) above 10 years of age was in 1880 and 1890 
smaller than that in any other state in the Union, and in 1900, when 
it was 2*3% (for native whites, foreign whites and negroes re- 
spectively o*8, 6-8 and 1 1 *8), was smaller than that in any other state 
except Iowa (whose percentage was also 2*3); the percentage for 
males of voting age (2-5 %) being the least in the Union. There are 
four state normal schools — one at Peru (opened 1867), one at 
Kearney (1905), one at Wayne (originally private; purchased by the 
state in 1900) and one, provided for by the legislature of 1909, 
situated in the north-western part of the state. The university of 
Nebraska at Lincoln was established in 1869 by an act of the state 
legislature, and was opened in 1871. The university is governed by 
a board of six regents, elected by the electors of the state at large, 
each for six years, two going out of office each year. The revenue of 
the university is from the income of Congressional land grants under 
the Morrill Acts and from a one mill per one dollar tax on the current 
assessment roll of the state. 1 Connected with it and governed by 
the same regents are the State College of Agriculture (including the 
School of Agriculture) and the Agricultural Experiment Station, 
on the university farm of 320 acres, 2J m. E. of the university, 
which receive support from the United States government, and an 
experimental sub-station at North Platte. The botanical and 
geological surveys of the state are carried on Jby the university; the 
former has been largely under the supervision of Charles Edwin 
Bessey (b. 1845), professor of botany. The university as reorganized 
in 1909 embraces a college of arts and sciences, a graduate college, 
a college cf agriculture, a college of engineering, a teachers' college 
(1908), a college of law (1891), a college of medicine, a school of 
pharmacy, a school of fine arts, an affiliated school of music and a 
summer session. The medical school is in Omaha. The university 
has no preparatory department. Its^ library in 1909 had about 
85,000 volumes. In 1908-1909 the university had an enrolment of 
361 1 students (2077 men and 1534 women). ^ The granting of uni- 
versity degrees is conditioned by a "credit-hour" system; 125 
credit hours are required for a bachelor's degree. Elisha Benjamin 
Andrews 2 (b. 1844) became chancellor of the university in 1900; 
in 1909 he was succeeded by Samuel Avery fb. 1865). Most of the 
educational institutions of the state are coeducational. Among the 
private educational institutions of the state are: Nebraska Wesleyan 
University (1888, Methodist Episcopal), at University Place, a* 
suburb of Lincoln; Union College (1891, Adventist), at College View, 
suburb of Lincoln; Creighton University (1879, Roman Catholic), 
at Omaha; York College (1890, United Baptist), at York; Cotner 
University (1889; legally "The Nebraska Christian University")," 
at Bethany, a suburb of Lincoln; Grand Island College (1892, 
Baptist), at Grand Island; Doane College (1872, Congregational), at 
Crete; Hastings College (1882, Presbyterian), at Hastings; and 
Bellevue College (1883, Presbyterian), at Bcllevue. State penal and 
charitable institutions include soldiers' and sailors' homes at Grand 
Island and Milford, an Institute for the Blind at Nebraska City 
(1875), an Institute for the Deaf and Dumb at Omaha (1867), an 
Institute for Feeble Minded Youth at Beatrice (1885), an Industrial 
School for Juvenile Delinquents (boys) at Kearney (1879), a Girls* 
Industrial School at Geneva (1881), an Industrial Home at Milford 
(1887) for unfortunate and homeless girls guilty of a first offence, 
asylums or hospitals for the insane at Lincoln (1869), Norfolk (1886) 
and Hastings (1887), an Orthopedic Hospital (1905) for crippled, 
ruptured and deformed children and a state penitentiary (1867), 
both at Lincoln. A Home for the Friendless, at Lincoln, incor- 
porated in 1876, was taken over by the^ state in 1897; admission 
was restricted to children, and in 1909 its name was changed to 
the State Public School. 

	1 In 1909 the state legislature refused to accept for the university 
	the Carnegie education pensions. 

	* He was born in Hinsdale, New Hampshire, on the 10th ol January 
	1844; served in the Union army during the Civil War; graduated 
	at Brown University in 1870 and at Newton Theological Institution 
	in 1874; taught homiletics at Newton in ^i 879-1 882, history and 
	economics at Brown in i882-i888,and political economy and finance 
	at Cornell in 1 888-1 889; and was president of Brown University 
	in 1 889-1 898. He was an ardent bi-metallist, and in 1892 was a 
	member of the International Monetary Conference at Brussels. 
	He wrote on the currency question, and published a History of t the 
	United States in our Own Times (1904) and other works on American 
	history and economics. 

History. — Local pride has prompted some Nebraskans to 
begin the history of the white race in their state with the march 
of Coronado, in 1541, across the buffalo plains to " Quivira," 
N. of the Arkansas river in Kansas; but the claim is not warranted 
by the evidence. Marquette mapped the Platte from hearsay 
in 1673; French explorers followed it to the Forks in 1739; 
and, after Nebraska passed to the United States in 1803 as part 
of the Louisiana Purchase, successive American exploring 
expeditions left traces in its history. Major Stephen H.Long, 
in particular, followed the Platte and South Platte across the 
state in 1 81 9, and his despairing account of the semi-arid buffalo 
plains — whence arose the myth of the Great American Desert — 
finely contrasts with the later history and latter-day optimism 
of dry-farming and irrigation. Meanwhile, fur traders who drew 
their goods from the country of the Platte had long been active 
on the Missouri. Trading posts were probably established in 
Nebraska in 1795, 1802, 1807 and 181 2; the last two near 
the present towns of Ft. Calhoun (about 20 m. N. by W. from 
Omaha) and Bellevue. Manuel de Lisa, a noted Cuban trader 
and plainsman, was probably the first white settler (1807). 
In 1823 Bellevue became an Indian agency, and in 1849 the 
first United States post-office in Nebraska. Ft. Atkinson was 
maintained near the present town of Ft. Calhoun in 1 810-182 7; 
in 1825 the government acquired the first Indian lands, and 
in the 'thirties of the 19th century missionaries began to settle 
among the tribes; the first Ft. Kearney was maintained where 
Nebraska City now stands in 1847-1848, and in the latter year 
was re-established on the Platte, some 175 m. inland from the 
Missouri. Meanwhile there had begun the passage of the Mormons 
across the state (1845-185 7), marked by important temporary 
settlements near Omaha (q.v.) and elsewhere, the travel to Oregon, 
and to California, for which dep6ts of supplies were established 
at Bellevue, Plattsmouth, Nebraska City and old Ft. Kearney, 
or Dobey Town. 1 Thus the country was well and favourably 
known before Congress organized it as a Territory in 1854. 

Movements in Congress for the creation of a new Territory 
on the Platte began in 1844, several attempts at organization 
failing in the succeeding decade. In 1852-1853 Iowans and 
Missourians along the border of what are now Kansas and 
Nebraska held elections W. of the Missouri and sent delegates 
to Congress. A provisional Territorial government formed 
by Wyandot Indians and b'censed white residents on Indian 
lands in Kansas (q.v.) forced Congress to take action. With 
what followed, the rivalry of the Platte and Kansas river valleys 
for the Pacific railway route, and the opposing interests of 
pro-slavery Missouri and anti-slavery Iowa, and possibly the 
personal ambitions of Stephen A. Douglas and Thomas H. 
Benton, had important relations. In the outcome Nebraska 
was one of the two Territories created by the Kansas-Nebraska 
Bill of 1854. This creative act bore evident traces of the pro- 
slavery sentiments of the Congress that passed it in the limitation 
of the suffrage to whites, and the explicit application of the 
national fugitive-slave laws for the last time in a federal statute. 
Under the provision of " popular-sovereignty " it was thought 
that Nebraska, as the more northerly Territory, would become 
a " free " state, if not a free Territory. There were slaves 
within its borders from the beginning, and anti-slavery ideas 
were embodied in several legislative bills, until a teiritorial 
law of 1 86 1 excluded slavery. But the future of slavery was 
settled in Kansas, and events in Nebraska throw only a small 
side-light on that struggle. John Brown and James H. Lane 
spent considerable time in the south-eastern counties, and 
across these an " underground railroad " ran, by which slaves 
were conducted from Kansas to Iowa and freedom. 

As organized in 1854 Nebraska extended from 40 N. lat. 
to British America, and from the Missouri and White Earth 
rivers to the " summit " of the Rockies; but in 1861 and 1863 
it was reduced, by the creation of other Territories, to its present 
"boundaries. By i860 settlement had spread 150 m. W. from 

	1 In 18 months of 1849-1850 it was officially reported that 8000 
	wagons, with 8o ( ooo draught-animals and 30,000 people, passed 
	Ft. Kearney on the way to Oregon, California or Utah. 

the Missouri, following the river valleys and the freighting 
routes. Many who had migrated to Pike's Peak in 1859, stopped 
in Nebraska on their return eastward; and settlement was 
stimulated by the national Homestead Act of 1862 (one of the 
first patents granted thereunder, on the 1st of January 1863, 
was for a claim near Beatrice, Nebraska), and by the building 
and land-sales of the Union Pacific and Burlington railways 
following 1863. Thus in 1861 there were probably 30,000 
inhabitants in the Territory, and 3300 men were sent into the 
field for the Union army in the Civil War. Until well into the 
'sixties freighting across the plains was a great business. The 
"Oregon Trail," the "Old California Trail," and the "Old Salt 
Lake Trail " — all nearly identical in Nebraska — ran along the 
Platte across the entire state with various terminal branches 
near the eastern border, to the Missouri river towns; while' 
branches from St Joseph, Missouri and Leavenworth, Kansas, 
ran up the valleys of the Big Blue and Little Blue rivers and 
joined the Nebraska roads near Ft. Kearney. The Oregon and 
California migration was of large magnitude by 1846. St Joseph, 
Leavenworth and Nebraska City (q.v.) were the great freighting 
terminals of the West. Over these roads was run in 1860-1861 
the famous " pony express " whose service ended with the cont- 
pletion of the overland telegraph in the latter year; it covered 
the distance from St Joseph, Missouri, to Sacramento, California, 
in eight days, and even less. Freighting ended when the Union 
Pacific was extended across Nebraska between 1863 and 1867. 

Political interest in the Territorial period centred mainly 
in a fight for the capital, waged between the towns of the 
Missouri river front, Bellevue, Brownville, Nebraska City, 
Plattsmouth, Omaha and Florence, those of the North Platte 
interior, and of the South Platte. This struggle engendered 
extraordinary bitterness, since success might mean continued 
life, and defeat prompt demise, to competing towns. As popula- 
tion increased the question of the capital was complicated by 
the question of statehood. Both were involved in the agitation 
in 1 858-1 859 for the annexation of the South Platte to Kansas 
(q.v.) t which gained considerable strength; annexation promising 
to the former much earlier statehood than continued union 
with the backward region of the North Platte, and to northern 
Kansas also promising earlier statehood, and an advantage 
in the sectional struggle with southern Kansas. As the expenses 
of Territorial government were partly borne by the United 
States, statehood was voted against in i860, and again (virtually) 
in 1864 after Congress had passed an Enabling Act; but in 

1866 a constitution framed by the legislature was declared 
carried by the people by a majority of 100 votes in 7776, and 
Nebraska was admitted as a state (in spite of President Johnson's 
veto) in 1867, after her legislature had accepted a fundamental 
condition imposed by Congress removing the limitation of the 
suffrage to whites by the new constitution. Fraud was charged 
in the Territorial election. At any rate the Republican party 
had worked for admission because it needed senators in Congress, 
and it got them. During part of 1866-186 7 there were two 
de facto governments, the Territorial and the state. 

The capital of the Territory remained always at Omaha, 
although in 1858 a majority of the legislature removed to Florence 
leaving the governor and a legislative rump at Omaha. In 

1867 the South Platte region, having obtained a predominance 
in population capable of overcoming a gerrymander that had 
favoured the North Platte (and incidentally the Democrats), 
secured the appointment of a legislative committee to locate 
the state capital S. of the Platte. Several of the old Missouri 
river contestants had as representatives of their previous 
claims young towns located at strategic points in the interior. 
The committee avoided these and selected the site of Lincoln. 
Just ten years earlier the legislature had considered removal 
to another site on the Salt, to be called " Douglas " in honour 
of Stephen A. Douglas, then still in the heyday of his popularity. 

The decade 1870-1880 was marked by the work of the two 
constitutional conventions described above. The first legislature 
under the constitution of 1875 met in 1877. The following 
decade was marked by a tremendous growth in population, 
by a feverish activity in railway construction (the mileage 
in the state being increased from 1953 to 5407 m. in the ten 
years), and by an extraordinary rise in land values, urban and 
rural. Farm-land prices were raised to a basis of maximum 
productiveness when the best interests, especially of the western 
section, demanded steady growth based on average crop results 
under average conditions. The early 'nineties were marked 
by an economic collapse of false values, and succeeding years 
by a painful recovery of stable conditions. 

The Democratic and Republican parties were first effectively 
organized in opposition, as parts of national bodies, in the 
territorial campaigns of 1858. Till then there were practically 
only Democratic factions; after 1861 the Republicans held 
the state securely until 1890. After about 1890 the national 
tendencies towards a re-alignment of political parties on social- 
economic issues were sharply displayed in Nebraska. This 
was in the main only an indication of the general Farmers' 
Movement (q.v.), 1 but this found in Nebraska special stimulus 
in large losses (almost $900,000) suffered by the state from 
the negligence and defalcation of certain Republican office- 
holders. Following 1890 the " Fusion " movement — the fusion, 
that is, of Populists, Democrats and (after 1896) of Silver 
Republicans — was of great importance. The only year in which 
these elements carried the state against the Republicans for 
presidential electors was in 1896, when William J. Bryan of 
Lincoln was their presidential candidate; although the state 
delegation of representatives and senators in Congress was 
for a time divided. The Fusionists practically controlled the 
state government from 1 897-1899; they held the legislature from 
1891-1895 and from 1897-1899, the supreme court from 1899- 
1901, and the governorship and executive departments from 
1895-1901; they elected a Democratic governor also for 1891- 
1893; but he was not of the true Fusion type, and vetoed a 
maximum railway freight-rate bill, although his Republican 
successor approved one. The year 1891 was the most feverish 
political year of this period. Apart from these temporary Fusion 
successes the Republicans have always controlled the state. 

The governors of Nebraska have been as follows : — 

	Territorial Period. 
	Francis Burt n days, Oct. 1854 
	Thomas B.Cuming (secretary, acting governor) Oct. 1854-Feb. 1855 
	Mark W.Izard . , Feb. 1855-Oct. 1857 
	Thomas B.Cuming (secretary, acting governor) Oct. 1857-Tan. 1858 
	William A. Richardson Jan. 1858-Dec. 1858 
	L Sterling Morton (secretary, acting governor) Dec. 1858-May 1859 
	muel W. Black May 1859-May 1861 
	Alvin Saunders May 1861-Mar. 1867 
	Algernon S. Paddock (secretary, several times 
	acting governor, 1 861-1867). 
	State. 
	David Butler (impeached and removed from 
	office 1871) 1867-1871 Republican 
	W.H.James (lieu t. -governor, succeeding) 1871-1873 ,, 
	Robert W. Furnas 1873-1875 ,, 
	Silas Garber 1875-1879 ,, 
	Albinus Nance 1879-1883 „ 
	[ames W. Dawes 1883-1887 „ 
	John M. Thayer 1887-1891 
	James E. Boyd * Democrat 
	John M. Thayer (acting governor) . . 1891-1892 „ 
	James E. Boyd 1892-1893 „ 
	Lorenzo Crounse 1893-1895 Republican 
	Silas A. Holcombe . , 1895-1899 Fusion 
	William A. Poynter 1899-1901 ,, 
	Charles H. Dietrich (elected U.S. Senator) 1901 Republican 
	Ezra P. Savage (lieu t.-governor, succeeding) 1901-1903 „ 
	John H. Mickey 1903-1907 „ 
	George L. Sheldon 1907-1909 „ 
	A. C. Shallenberger 1909-1911 Democrat 
	Chester H. Aldrich 191 1- Republican 

	1 Nebraska was one of the states in which the collapse of the co- 
	operative enterprises of the Grange was particularly severe. The 
	Farmers' Alliance was organized for the state in 1887, became a 
	secret organization in 1889, and, as in other states, was a power 
	by 1890. The membership of Grange, Alliance and Knights of 
	Labour went over generally speaking into the People's party. 

	* Removed by decision of state supreme court on grounds of non- 
	citizenship, 5th of May 1891 ; reinstated by decision of U.S. Supreme 
	Court, 1st of February 1892. 

Bibliography. — N. H. Darton, Professional Paper >Jo. 17 (in 
U.S. Geological Survey) (1903), Geology and Water Resources of 
(western) Nebraska, and No. 32 (1905), Geology and Underground 
Water Resources of the Central Great Plains; G. E. Condra, Geology 
and Water Resources of the Republican River Valley and Adjacent 
Areas (Washington, 1907), being Water Supply and Irrigation Paper 
No. 216 of the United States Geological Survey; id. f Water Supply 
Paper No. 215, Geology and Water Resources of a Portion of the Missouri 
River Valley in North-Eastern Nebraska (Washington, 1908); J. C.- 
Stevens, Surface Water Supply of Nebraska (Washington, 1909) 
Water Supply Paper 230; E. H. Barbour, Nebraska Geological 
Survey (Lincoln, 1903) ; G. E. Condra, Geography of Nebraska (Lincoln, 
1906); R. Pound and F. C. Clements, Phytogeography of Nebraska, 
vol. i. (Lincoln, 1898); general scientific sketches by C. E. Besscy, 
L. Bruner and G. A. Lovcland in the Morton history and agricultural 
and # horticultural reports; Annual Reports of the State Board of 
Agriculture and State Horticultural Society; Publications of the 
State Bureau of Statistics and Labor; and Bulletins 52 (1904) and 
66 ( 1 905) of the United States Bureau of Forestry. For government 
consult the biennial legislative Public Documents, embracing reports 
of state officers and boards; also J. A. Barrett, History and Govern-. 
Nebraska State Historical Society, Series 2, vol. v. (Lincoln, 1902). 
For early history see bibliography under article Kansas. See 
especially the publications (since 1885) of the Nebraska State 
Historical Society; and J. Sterling Morton, Albert Watkins and 
others, Illustrated History of Nebraska (3 vols., Lincoln, 1905 sqq.), 
which has superseded H . Johnson, History of Nebraska (Omaha, 1 880) . 


NEBRASKA CITY, a city and the county-seat of Otoe county, 
Nebraska, U.S.A., situated on the high W. bank of the Missouri 
river, about 40 m. below Omaha. Pop. (1880) 4183; (1890) 
11,494; (1900) 7380 (882 foreign-born); (1910) 5488. It is 
served by the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy, and the Missouri 
Pacific railway systems. A railway and wagon bridge spans 
the Missouri. The city is the seat of the state Institute for 
the Blind (1875), and has three public parks and a public library. 
The city is a distributing centre for a beautiful farming region, 
the trade in grain being especially large. In 1900 Nebraska City 
ranked third among the manufacturing cities of the state, the 
manufactures including canned fruits and vegetables, packed 
pork, flour, oatmeal, hominy, grits, meal, starch, cider-vinegar, 
agricultural implements, windmills, paving bricks, concrete, 
sewer pipe, beer, over-alls and shirts. It is one of the oldest 
settlements of the state. The first " old Fort Kearney " was 
established on the site of Nebraska City in 1847, but was 
abandoned in 1848, and the fort was re-established farther W. on 
the Platte river (see Kearney). Otoe county was organized in 
1855, and the original Nebraska City was incorporated and 
made the county-seat in the same year. This city, together 
with Kearney City, incorporated in 1855 — adjacent to the first 
" old " Fort Kearney — and South Nebraska City, were con- 
solidated by the legislature into the present Nebraska City in 
1858. (Twelve other city " additions " and so-called " towns," 
all within or closely adjacent to the present city, were in existence 
in 1857.) Nebraska City was for some years the largest city 
of the state. In 1858 it became the headquarters of a great 
freigh ting-firm that distributed supplies for the United Stages 
government among the army posts between the Missouri river 
and the Rocky Mountains; in seven months in 1859 this one 
firm employed 602 men, used 517 wagons, 5682 oxen, and 75 
mules, and shipped 2,782,258 lb. of freight. Nebraska City was 
the initial point of several roads, parts at one time or another 
of the " Oregon," " Old California," and " Great Salt Lake " trails. 
(See Nebraska (State) : History.) Nebraska City became a city 
of the second class in 1871 and a city of the first class in 1901. 


NEBUCHADREZZAR, or Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, 
th$ NafiovKo8p6o*opos of the Greeks. The first and last are 
nearer to the original name as it is found on the cuneiform 
monuments, viz. Nabu-kudurri-usur, " Nebo, defend the 
landmark." Nebuchadrezzar seems to have been of Chaldean 
origin. He married Amuhia, daughter of the Median king, 
according to Abydenus, and in 605 B.cl defeated Necho at 
Carchemish, driving the Egyptians out of Asia and annexing 
Syria to the Babylonian empire. In the following year h.e 
succeeded his father Nabopolassar on the Babylonian throne, 
and continued the restoration of Babylon, which he made one 
of the wonders of the world. His " new palace " there was 
built in fifteen days; temples were erected to the gods, the 
great walls of the city were constructed with a moat surrounding 
them, the Euphrates was lined with brick and a strong fortress 
erected. Canals were dug throughout the country and a great 
reservoir excavated near the capital. Only a fragment of his 
annals has been preserved, recording his campaign against 
Amasis (Ahmosi) of Egypt in his thirty-seventh year (567 B.C.) 
when he defeated the soldiers of " Phut of the Ionians."* Tyre 
revolted in the seventh year of his reign, and was besieged for 
thirteen years; a contract-tablet dated in his fortieth year 
shows that at that time it was under Babylonian officials. After 
the investment of Tyre Nebuchadrezzar marched against 
Jerusalem, put Jchoiakim to death and placed Jehoiachin 
on the throne. Three months later Jehoiachin was deposed 
and Zedekiah made king in his place. Zedekiah's revolt in 
588 B.C. led to another siege of Jerusalem, which was taken 
and destroyed in 586 B.C. (see Jews and Jerusalem). ' To this 
period probably belong an inscription of Nebuchadrezzar on 
the north bank of the Nahr el-Kelb near Beirut, and another 
in the Wadi Brissa in the Lebanon. From his inscriptions we 
gather that Nebuchadrezzar was a man of peculiarly religious 
character. A younger brother of his is called Nabo-sum-lisir. 

See Josephus, Conl. Apion, i. 19; Eusebius, Praep. Evangel, x. 


NEBULA (Lat. for " cloud," connected with the Gr. ve^eXrj, 
mist or cloud), in astronomy, the name given to certain luminous 
cloudy patches in the heavens. They resemble the stars in that 
they retain the same relative positions, and thus may be dis- 
tinguished from the comets which appear to wander across the 
stars. When examined with sufficient telescopic power, a great 
many of these luminous patches are perceived to be composed 
of clusters of little stars, which in a smaller telescope are invisible 
separately, but whose rays of light blend together so as to 
produce a confused luminous appearance. Others, however, 
cannot be resolved into individual stars even with the best 
telescopes, and in many cases the spectroscope gives direct 
evidence that the nebula has a constitution altogether different 
from that of a. star-cluster. We thus distinguish between the 
nebulae proper and the star-clusters; but owing to the difficulty of 
deciding the nature in any particular case, and especially owing 
to the fact that some of the earlier observers believed it probable 
that all nebulae would with sufficient telescopic power become 
resolvable into stars, the term nebula is often used to cover 
both star-clusters and the true nebulae. 

An enumeration of nebulae was made by Charles Messier in 
Paris in 1771, who recorded 163; Sir William Herschel increased 
the number known to over 2500; whilst Sir John Herschel 
between 1825 and 1847 catalogued and described 3926 nebulae 
(including 1700 observed at the. Cape of Good Hope). About 
1848 the earl of Rosse with his famous six-foot reflector at 
Parsonstown began his examination of the nebulae, which added 
greatly to our knowledge of their forms and structure. In 
more modern times the development of photography has 
enabled the features of the nebulae to be ascertained and 
recorded with a certainty, which, unfortunately, the older visual 
observations and drawings cannot claim to possess. In this con- 
nexion the photographic work of Isaac Roberts, A. A. Common, 
E. E. Barnard and J. E, Keeler in particular must be mentioned. 
The total number of known nebulae has, too, been enormously 
increased; Perrine estimates that the number within the power 
of the Crossley reflector at Lick is not less than half a million. 

Nebulae may be conveniently classified according to their 
telescopic appearance; we enumerate below some of the principal 
forms that have been recognized, but it must be observed that 
this classification is rather superficial, and that the differentia- 
tion is often one of appearance only and not of real structure. 
The types are: (1) Irregular nebulae, examples: the great 
nebula of Orion £M. 42), 1 the "key-hole "nebula near rj Argus, 

	1 i,e. No. 42 in Messier's catalogue. Nebulae not contained in 
	that catalogue are generally known by their number in Dreyer's 
	New General Catalogue (N.G.C.). 

the " Omega " nebula (M. 17); (2) Annular nebulae, example: 
M. 37 in Lyra; (3) Double nebulae, example: the dumb-bell 
nebula (M. 27) in Vulpecula; (4) Planetary nebulae, examples: 
the " owl " nebula (M. 97) in Ursa Major, M. 1 in Taurus; (5) 
Elliptical nebulae, example: the great nebula of Andromeda 
(M. 31); (6) Spiral nebulae, example: M. 51 in Canes Venatici; 
(7) Nebulous stars ; (8) Diffused nebulosities. Most of these names 
require little explanation. The first class have ill-defined irregular 
boundaries; their forms often suggest the appearance of curdled 
liquid or wreaths of smoke. The annular nebulae have a ringed 
appearance, the centre being much darker than the outer parts, 
though it is filled with faintly luminous matter. Double nebulae 
have two principal centres of condensation. The planetary 
nebulae are nearly uniformly illuminated compact patches 
of light generally circular or elliptical in shape; they were so 
called because they appeared to possess disks like planets. 
Elliptical nebulae are usually nebulae of some flat type (such 
as annular or spiral) seen rather edgeways, so that the structure 
is not readily recognizable. The typical spiral nebulae are in 
the form of a double spiral, the two branches of which proceed 
from diametrically opposite points of a bright nucleus and 
wind round it in the same sense; the whole is generally studded 
with points of condensation. The great majority of the nebulae, 
including the abundant small nebulae which shine with a white 
light (in contrast with the blue-green light of the planetary 
and irregular nebulae — see below Spectra of nebulae), are generally 
classed as spiral nebulae. The spiral structure has been shown 
to exist in a few of them, but for the remainder it is only inferred. 
Nebulous stars are true stars surrounded by an atmosphere 
or aureole of nebulous light. Diffused nebulosities are very 
faint nebulae of enormous extent, sometimes forming the back- 
ground of a whole constellation. We proceed to describe some 
of the more famous nebulae. 

One of the most remarkable nebulae is that which is situated 
in the sword-handle of Orion and about the multiple star d 
Orionis; it is faintly visible to the naked eye. It seems to have 
been first noticed by Huygens in 1656, who described and 
figured it in his System Saturnium. It has now been found that 
nebulous streamers connected with the bright nucleus wind 
through the whole constellation of Orion. It is well known 
that all the brighter stars of the constellation except Betelgeuse 
appear to be related to one another by their similarity both 
of spectra and of proper motion; it seems probable that they | 
are actually situated in the nebula and in some way connected 
with it. 

The only other nebula which can be seen with the naked eye 
is the elliptical nebula in Andromeda. Modern photographs 
show very clearly that its structure is spiral. The nucleus is 
large and appears circular, but the spirals proceeding from it 
lie in a plane inclined at a rather sharp angle to the line of sight, 
and this gives to the nebula its elliptical appearance. Two 
small dense nebulae accompany it, and appear to belong to the 
system. 

The finest example of a ring nebula is M. 57 between /3 and y 
Lyrae. The ring is slightly elliptical, its dimensions being 
87* by 64". At the ends of the major axis the ring becomes 
very faint, so that the form of the bright part may justly be 
compared to a pair of marks of parenthesis ( ). The centre is 
marked by a star which appears to be intimately associated 
with the ring, for the whole space within the ring is filled with 
a very faint nebulosity. ■ According to Schaeberle, there is 
evidence of a spiral structure in this nebula also. It must, 
however, clearly be of an essentially different character from 
the structure of an ordinary spiral nebula, and the spectroscope 
reveals a fundamental difference between the annular and 
spiral nebulae. 

The " dumb-bell " nebula in Vulpecula consists of two almost 
separated fan-shaped patches of light. It exhibits a close resem- 
blance to the annular nebula; for we have only to assume a 
continuation of the thinning out along the longest diameter and 
a slight filling in of the centre of the Lyra nebula to obtain the 
dumb-bell form. 

	NEBULA 
	Plate I. 
	ca 
	a 
	3 
	w 
	2 
	§
	Q 
	03 
	Q- 
	»— to 
	o 
	£ 
	o_ 
	XDC332. 
	Plate II. 
	NEBULA 

Of planetary nebulae one of the best known is the "owl 
nebula " in the Great Bear about midway between " the pointers." 
As seen with Lord Rosse's reflector, it presented a startling appear- 
ance, resembling the face of a goblin; two faint stars shone in 
the centres of the two dark circles which represented the saucer- 
eyes of the creature. Some change has certainly taken place 
since then, for the two stars no longer could be supposed to 
represent the pupils of the eyes; the cause may, however, be 
merely the proper motion of the stars or of the nebula. 

The discovery of great regions having a faint nebulous back- 
ground is one of the most remarkable results of modern work. 
Particularly interesting is the fact that, whilst the large telescopes 
are unable to render them perceptible to the eye or to photograph 
them, they are revealed by what at first sight seems an absurdly 
simple apparatus. For the study of the ordinary nebulae 
large reflecting telescopes (preferably of short focal length) are 
used, the great light-gathering power being all important; but 
for photographing these diffused nebulosities portrait lenses 
of very small aperture and focal length are most successful. 
Thus the great extension of the Orion nebula was photographed 
by W. H. Pickering in 1890 with a lens 2-6 in. in aperture 
and of 8-6 in. focal length; the exposure was rather more than 
six hours. Other extensive nebulous regions of a similar character 
have been found by Barnard in the constellations Ophiuchus, 
Scorpio and Taurus. 

Spectra of Nebulae. — Owing to the feebleness of their light the 
study of the spectra of nebulae is one of particular difficulty. 
Two varieties of spectra are recognized; the one consists of a 
few narrow bright lines with sometimes a faint continuous 
spectrum for a background,; the other consists of a continuous 
spectrum crossed by dark lines and is indistinguishable from 
that of ordinary stars. The former variety unmistakably 
shows that the light proceeds from diffuse incandescent vapour; 
nebulae showing this spectrum are accordingly called " gaseous." 
Irregular, annular and planetary nebulae are of this nature. 
The visual spectrum is marked by three bright lines in the 
blue and green of wave-lengths 5007, 4959 and 4861. Of 
these the last is the line H |3 of the hydrogen series; the other 
two are of unknown origin, and as they are always found together 
and have always the same relative intensity, they have both 
been attributed to the same unknown element, which has been 
named " nebulium." Usually there are no other conspicuous 
lines in the visual spectrum, but in the ultra-violet region 
numerous lines can be photographed, including most of the 
hydrogen series. The yellow line (D3) of helium can be detected 
in many nebulae. The great majority of the nebulae, however, 
show the second variety of spectrum, and are thus indistinguish- 
able spectroscopicaily from irresolvahle star-clusters. The 
great nebula of Andromeda and the spiral nebulae are of this 
kind. It is not necessary to conclude that they, therefore, are 
star-clusters whose components are, owing to their remoteness 
from us, too faint and close together to be separately distinguish- 
able. A gaseous mass only gives a bright line spectrum when 
it is so rarefied as to be transparent through and through. If 
the density and thickness are such that a ray of light cannot 
pass through it the spectrum will, in general, be continuous 
like that of a solid body. 

The inquiry into -the physical state and constitution of the 
nebulae raises problems of great difficulty. In the case of 
" gaseous " nebulae it is very hard to understand how such 
extremely tenuous masses are maintained in a state of incan- 
descence. Only one theory has been put forward which at all 
accounts for this fact, and unfortunately, it is not altogether 
satisfactory in other respects. This is Sir Norman Lockyer's 
"Meteoritic Hypothesis," which attributes the light to col- 
lisions between numbers of small discrete solid particles, 
these being vaporized and made luminous owing to the heat 
developed by their impacts. Formidable difficulties, however, 
prevent the entire acceptance of this suggestion. 

The spiral nebulae are not distributed at random over the 
sky, nor are they condensed along the galactic plane like the 
clusters which they " spectroscopicaily resemble. There is a 
well-marked centre of aggregation of the northern nebulae near 
the north galactic pole. In the southern hemisphere they are 
more evenly distributed, but the avoidance of the galactic plane 
is marked. The remarkable Nubeculae or Magellanic Clouds 
in the southern hemisphere, which look like detached portions 
of the Milky Way, are found on telescopic examination to consist, 
not of stars alone, like the Milky Way, but of stars and nebulae 
clustering together. In the greater cloud Sir John Herschel 
counted 286 nebulae; in the lesser cloud they are rather less 
numerous: 

References. — The characters of nebulae receive treatment in all 
text-books on descriptive astronomy; mention may be made of 
Miss A. M. Clerke, The System of the Stars (2nd ed., 1905), which 
contains a full account of these objects, illustrated by many photo- 
graphs; the same work is replete with references to original papers. 
Of recent catalogues of nebula, we notice J. L. E. Dreyer, " A new 
general catalogue of nebulae and clusters of stars/' Memoirs R.A.S. 
(1888), published separately in 1890; and " Index Catalogue of 
Nebulae (1888-1894), "Mem. R.A.S. (1895). Excellent photographs 
of the more famous nebulae are given in Sir R. Ball's Popular Guide 
to the Heavens (1905); a more comprehensive collection is given in 
Isaac Roberts, Photographs of Stars, Star Clusters and Nebulae (2 vols., 
1873-1899). (A. S. E.) 


NEBULAR THEORY, a theory advanced to account for the 
origin of the solar system. It is emphatically a speculation; 
it cannot be demonstrated by observation or established by 
mathematical calculation. Yet the boldness and the splendour 
of the nebular theory have always given it a dignity not usually 
attached to a doctrine which from the very nature of the case 
can have but little direct evidence in its favour. 

There are very remarkable features in the solar system which 
point unmistakably to some common origin of many of the 
different bodies which it contains. We may at once put the 
comets out of view. It does not appear that they bear any 
testimony on either side of the question. We do not know 
whether the comets are really indigenous to the solar system 
or whether they may not be merely imported into the system 
from the depths of space. Even if the comets be indigenous 
to the system, they may, as many suppose, be merely ejections 
from the sun. In any case the orbits of comets are exposed 
to such tremendous perturhations from the planets that it is 
unsafe from the present orbit of a comet to conjecture what 
that orbit may have been in remote antiquity. On these grounds 
we discuss the nebular theory without much reference to comets. 
But even after the omission of all cometary objects we can still 
count in the solar system upwards of five hundred bodies, 
almost every one of which pronounces distinctly, though with 
varying emphasis, in favour of the nebular theory. 

The first great fact to be noticed is that the planets revolve 
around the sun in the same direction. This is true not only 
of the major planets Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, 
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune; it is also true of the host of 
more than five hundred minor planets. It is also remarkable 
that all the great planets and many of the small ones have 
their orbits very nearly in the same plane, and nearly circular 
in form. Viewed as a question in probabilities, we calculate 
the chance that five hundred bodies revolving round the sun 
shall all be moving in the same direction. The improbability 
of such an arrangement is enormously great. It is represented 
by the ratio of a number containing about a hundred and sixty 
figures to unity, and so we are at once forced to the conclusion 
that this remarkable feature of the planetary motions must have 
some physical explanation. In a minor degree this conclusion 
is strengthened by observing the satellites. Discarding those 
of Uranus, in which the orbits of the satellites are highly inclined 
to the ecliptic, and in which manifestly some exceptional in- 
fluences have been at work, we find that the satellites revolve 
around the primaries also in the same direction; 1 while, to make 
the argument complete, the planets, so far as they can be 
observed, rotate on their axes in the same manner. • 

The nebular theory offers an explanation of this most remark- 
able uniformity. Laplace supposed the existence of a primeval 

	1 Exceptions are Saturn ix. (Phoebe), Jupiter vii. (?) and viii., and 
	the satellite of Neptune. 

nebula which extended so far out as to fill all the space at present 
occupied by the planets. This gigantic nebulous mass, of 
which the sun was only the central and somewhat more con- 
densed portion, is supposed to have a movement of rotation on 
its axis. There is no difficulty in conceiving how a nebula, 
quite independently of any internal motion of its parts, shall 
also have had as a whole a movement of rotation. In fact a 
little consideration of the theory of probabilities will show it 
to be infinitely probable that such an object should really have 
some movement of rotation, no matter by what causes the 
nebula may have originated. As this vast mass cooled it 
must by the laws of heat have contracted towards the centre, 
and as it contracted it must, according to a law of dynamics, 
rotate more rapidly. The time would then come when the 
centrifugal force on the outer parts of the mass would more 
than counterbalance the attraction of the centre, and thus 
we would have the outer parts left as a ring. The inner portion 
will still continue to contract, the same process will be repeated, 
and thus a second ring will be formed. We have thus grounds 
for believing that the original nebula will separate into a series 
of rings all revolving in the same direction with a central nebulous 
mass in the interior. The materials of each ring would continue 
to cool and to contract until they passed from the gaseous to 
the liquid condition. If the consolidation took place with 
comparative uniformity we might then anticipate the formation 
of a vast multitude of small planets such as those we actually 
do find in the region between the orbit of Mars and that of 
Jupiter. More usually, however, the ring might be expected 
not to be uniform, and, therefore, to condense in some parts 
more rapidly than in others. The effect of such contraction 
would be to draw the materials of the ring into a single mass, 
and thus we would have a planet formed, while the satellites 
of that planet would be developed from the still nascent planet 
in the same way as the planet itself originated from the sun. 
In this way we account most simply for the uniformity in the 
direction in which the planets revolve, and for the mutual 
proximity of the planes in which their orbits are contained. 

Such was the nebular theory as it was originally sketched. 
At the present day when the nebulae that are spiral in form 
have been shown to be so numerous, next to the fixed stars 
themselves, our view of the nebular theory has been somewhat 
modified. It now seems probable that the spiral nebula is 
the fittest illustration of the transformation of a diffused nebula 
into a system of sun and planets. 

The rotation of the planets on their axes is also explained 
as a consequence of the nebular theory, for at the time of the 
first formation of the planet it must have participated in the 
rotation of the whole nebula, and by the subsequent contraction 
of the planet the speed with which the rotation was performed 
must have been accelerated. 

There is quite a different method of considering the nebular 
origin of our system, which leads in a very striking manner 
to conclusions practically identical with those we have just 
sketched. We may commence by dealing with the sun as we 
find it at the present moment, and thence inferring what must 
have been the progress of events in the earlier epochs of the 
history of our system. 

The daily outpour of heat from the sun at the present time 
suggests a profound argument in support of the nebular theory. 
The amount of the sun's heat has been estimated, but we 
receive on the earth less than one two-thousand-millionth 
part of the whole radiation. It would seem that the greater 
part of the rest flows away to be lost in space. Now what 
supplies this heat? We might at first suppose that the sun 
was really an intensely heated body radiating out its heat as 
does white-hot iron, but this explanation cannot be admitted, 
for there is no historical evidence that the sun is growing 
colder. We have not the slightest reason to think that the 
radiation from the sun is measurably weaker now than it was 
a couple of thousand years ago, yet it can be shown that, if the 
sun were merely radiating heat as simply a hot body, then 
it would cool some degrees every year, and must have cooled 
many thousands of degrees within the time covered by historical 
records. We, therefore, conclude that the sun has some other 
source of heat than that due simply to incandescence. It might, 
for example, be suggested that the heat of the sun was supplied 
by chemical combination analogous to combustion. It would 
take 20 tons of coal a day burned on each square foot of the 
sun's surface to supply the daily radiation. Even if the sun 
were made of one mass of fuel as efficient as coal, that mass 
must be entirely expended in a few thousand years if the present 
rate of radiation was to be sustained. We cannot, therefore, 
admit that the source of the heat in the sun is to be found in any 
chemical combination taking place in its mass. Where then can 
we find an adequate supply of heat ? Only one external source 
can be named: the falling of meteors into the sun must yield 
some heat just as a shooting star yields some heat to our atmo- 
sphere, but the question is whether the quantity of heat obtainable 
from the shooting stars is at all adequate for the purpose. It 
can be shown that unless a quantity of meteors in collective 
mass equal to our moon were to plunge into the sun every year 
the supply of heat could not be sustained from this source. 
Now there is no reason to believe that meteors in anything 
like this quantity can be supplied to the sun, and, therefore, 
we must reject this source as also inadequate. 

The truth about the sun's heat appears to be that the sun is 
really an incandescent body losing heat, but that the operation 
of cooling is immensely retarded owing to a curious circumstance 
due jointly to the enormous mass of the sun and to a remarkable 
law of heat. It is well known that if energy disappears in one 
form it reappears in another, and this principle applied to 
the sun will explain the famous difficulty. 

As the sun loses heat it contracts, and every pair of particles 
in the sun are nearer to each other after the contraction than 
they were before. The energy due to their separation is thus 
less in the contracted state than in the original state, .and as that 
energy cannot be lost it must reappear in heat. The sun is thus 
slowly contracting; but as it contracts it gains heat by the 
operation of the law just referred to, and thus the further cooling 
and further contraction of the sun is protracted until the additional 
heat obtained is radiated away. In this way we can reconcile 
the fact that the sun is certainly losing heat with the fact that 
the change in temperature has not been large enough to be 
perceived within historic times. 

It has been estimated that the sun is at present contracting 
so that its diameter diminishes 10 m. every century; there 
is, however, now reason to think that the rate of contraction 
is by no means' so rapid as this would indicate. This is an 
inappreciable distance when compared with the diameter of the 
sun, which is nearly a million of miles, but the significance for 
our present purpose depends upon the fact that this contraction 
is always taking place. Assuming the accuracy of the estimate 
just made, we see that a thousand years ago the sun must have 
had a diameter 100 m. greater than at present, ten thousand 
years ago that diameter must have been 1000 m. more than it is 
now, and so on. We cannot perhaps assert that the same rate 
is to be continued for very many centuries, but it is plain that 
the further we look back into the past time the greater must 
the sun have been. 

Dealing then simply with the laws of nature as we know them, 
we can see no limit to the increasing size of the sun as we look 
back. We must conceive a time when the sun was swollen tTT 
such an extent that it filled up the entire space girdled by the 
orbit of Mercury. Earlier still the sun must have reached to 
the earth. Earlier still the sun must have reached to where 
Neptune now revolves on the confines of our system, but the 
mass of the sun could not undergo an expansion so prodigious 
without being made vastly more rarefied than at present, 
and hence we are led by this mode of reasoning to the 
conception of the primaeval nebula from which our system has 
originated. 

Considering that our sun is but a star, or but one of the millions 
of stars, it is of interest to see whether any other systems present 
indication of a nebulous origin analogous to that which Laplace 
proposed tor the solar system. In one of his papers, Sir \V. 
Herschei marshals the evidence which can be collected on this 
point- He arranges a selection from his observations on the 
nebulae in such a way as to give great plausibility to his view 
of the gradual transmutation of nebulae into stars Herschei 
begins by showing us that there are regions in the heavens where 
a faint diffused nebulosity is all that can be detected by the 
telescope. There are other nebulae in which a nucleus can be 
just discerned, others again in which the nucleus is easily seen, 
and still others where the nucleus is a brilliant star-like point. 
The transition from an object of this kind to a nebulous star 
is very natural, while the nebulous stars pass into the ordinary 
stars by a few graduated stages. It is thus possible to exhibit 
a series of objects beginning at one end with the most diffused 
nebulosity and ending at the other with an ordinary fixed star 
or group of stars. Each object in the series differs but slightly 
from the object just before it and the object just after it. It 
seemed to Herschei that he was thus able to view the actual 
changes by which masses of phosphorescent or glowing vapour 
became actually condensed down into stars. The condensation 
of a nebula could be followed in the same manner as we can 
study the growth of the trees in the forest, by comparing the 
trees of various ages which the forest contains at the same time. 
In attempting to pronounce on the evidence with regard t to 
Herschers theory, we must at once admit that the transmutation 
of a nebula into a star has never been seen. It is indeed very 
doubtful whether any changes of a nebula have ever been seen 
which are of the same character as the changes Herschel's theory 
would require. It seems, however, most likely that the periods 
of time required for such changes are immense and that the 
changes accomplished in only a century 01 two are absolutely 
inappreciable. 

The nebular theory is a noble speculation supported by plausible 
argument, and the verdict of science on the whole subject cannot 
be better expressed than in the words of S. Newcomb: " At 
the present time we can only say that the nebular hypothesis 
is indicated by the general tendencies of the laws of nature, 
that it has not been proved to be inconsistent with any fact, 
that it is almost a necessary consequence of the only theory 
by which we can account for the origin and conservation of the 
sun's heat, but that it rests on the assumption that this conserva- 
tion is to be explained by the laws of nature as we now see them 
in operation. Should any one be sceptical as to the sufficiency 
of these laws to account for the present state of things, science 
can furnish no evidence strong enough to overthrow his doubts 
until the sun shall be found growing smaller by actual measure- 
ment, or the nebulae be actually seen to condense into stars 
and systems." 

Bibliography. — I^aplace, Sys&me du monde; Sir William 
Herschei, Phil. Trans (1814), pp. 248-284; Kant's Cosmogony, 
translated by Professor Hastie; Sir John Herschei, Outlines of 
Astronomy; Professor S. Newcomb, Popular Astronomy; Lick 
Observatory publications, photographs of Nebulae; Sir Robert 
Ball. The Earth's Beginning. (R. S. B.) 


NECESSITAS (Gr. *Avay icq), in Orphic theology, the personifica- 
tion of absolute necessity. She aopears as the mother of the 
Moerae (Fates), as the wife of Demiurgus (Fashioner of the 
World) and mother of Heimarmene (Destiny). Her power 
is irresistible, even greater than that of the gods; to her was 
due the strife (battles with Titans, Giants) that raged amongst 
them of old, before the rule of love began; the world revolves 
round the spindle, which she holds in her lap. According to the 
Egyptian theory, she is one of the four deities present at the 
birth of every human being, her companions being the Daemon 
(guardian spirit), Tyche (Fortune) and Eros. On the citadel 
of Corinth there was a temple sacred to her and Bia (Violence), 
which none were permitted to enter. The Roman Necessitas is 
represented in the well-known ode of Horace (i. 35) as the fore- 
runner and companion of Fortuna, holding in her brazen hand 
huge nails, a clamp and molten lead, symbolical of fixedness 
and tenacity. 

See Plato, Rep. 616 c, Symp. 195 c, 197 b; Macrobius, Saturnalia, 
i 19: Pausanias ii. 4. 6. 



NECESSITY (Lat. necessitas), a term used technically in 
philosophy for the quality of inevitable happening; for example, 
hot air necessarily tends to rise. Thus it corresponds in the 
sphere of action to certainty in the sphere of knowledge. That 
the sun will rise to-morrow is a necessary event; and men anticipate 
the rising with certainty. In ordinary language the conception 
of necessity is rendered meaningless by being referred to the 
present or even to the past. A current definition of necessity 
is " the state which cannot be otherwise than it is." Such a 
definition tells us nothing. How can any state be otherwise 
than it is? Necessity can have meaning only in reference to 
the future: it means absence of spontaneous power in that 
which acts necessarily. For the origin of the conception we must 
look to our inward personal experience of constraint. When we 
are acting under physical or mathematical oc logical or moral 
necessity we are so far precluded Irom spontaneous action — in 
common phrase, we can do no otherwise — though the causes of 
constraint may be of very different kinds. In ethics the term 
necessitarianism is applied to that view of human action which 
regards all action as dictated by external causes (cf . Determinism). 
The sense in which, .if at all, the human mind can cognize 
necessity, i.e. causal connexion between events or states, has 
been the subject of vigorous discussion among philosophers. 
By sceptics and empiricists it is held that a law is merely a 
crystallized summary of observed phenomena. Thus J. S. 
Mill denies that a general proposition is more than an enumeration 
of particulars, and hence that syllogistic reasoning cannot 
amplify knowledge (see Syllogism). It is clear that the senses 
cannot apprehend causal connexion, and this impossibility gives 
rise to a prior conception according to which the conception 
of necessity is purely intellectual (see Metaphysics). 


NECK (0. Eng. knecca; the word appears in many Teutonic 
languages; cf. Dutch nek, Ger. Nacken; in O. E. the common word 
was keals; cf. Ger. Hals), that part of the body which connects 
the head with the trunk (see Anatomy: Superficial and Artistic). 
The word is transferred to many objects resembling this part 
of the body in shape or function; it is thus applied to an isthmus, 
or to the narrowest portion of a promontory, to the narrow part 
of a musical stringed instrument connecting the head and body, 
as in the violin, or to a narrow pass between mountains, which 
in the Dutch form nek, appears in place-names in South Africa. 
In architecture, the " neck " is that part of the capital just 
above the " astragal," and the term " necking " is applied to 
the annulet or round, or series of horizontal mouldings, which 
separates the capital of a column from the plain part or a shaft. 
In Romanesque work this is sometimes corded. 

In Geology, the term " neck " is given to the denuded stump of an 
extinct volcano. Beneath every volcano there are passages of con- 
duits up which the volcanic materials were forced, and after the mass 
has been levelled by denudation there is always a more or less circular 
pipe which marks the site of the crater. This pipe, which is filled 
with consolidated ashes or with crystalline lava, is the characteristic 
of a volcanic neck. Active volcanoes often stand on the sea-bottom 
and when the eruption comes to an end the volcano is slowly buried 
under layers of sediment. In tropical seas the coral animals cover 
over the submarine volcanoes which rise nearly to the surface and 
form great reefs of limestone around them. Should elevation take 
place after long ages the removal of the overlying strata will bring the 
volcanic mass to light, and in the normal course of things this will 
suffer denudation exactly like a recent volcano. Many instances of 
this are furnished by the geological history of the British Isles. In 
Carboniferous times, for example, before the Coal-measures were 
deposited, a shallow sea occupied the southern part of Scotland and 
the north of England. Volcanic activity broke out on the sea- 
bottom, and many volcanic cones, both small and large, were pro- 
duced. These have long since been uplifted and the superjacent 
strata denuded away over a large part of the area which they occu- 
pied. In_ Derbyshire, Fife, the Lothians and the Glasgow district 
the remains of Carboniferous volcanoes occur in every state of 
preservation. Some have the conical hills of lavas and ashes well 
preserved (e.g. Largo Law in Fifeshire); others retain only a small 
part of the original volcanic pile (e.g. Arthur's Seat, Edinburgh; the 
Sinn of Burntisland) and of the larger number nothing remains but 
the " neck " which shows where once the crater was situated. 

In regions of former volcanic activity necks are the most persistent 
of all volcanic structures, because the active volcanic magma is 
located deep within the earth's crust, and the pipe by which it rises 
to the surface is of great length and traverses a great thickness of 
strata. Many volcanic necks stand on lines of fault. In other cases 
there are groups of necks lying in a straight or sinuous line, which 
may indicate the position of a fracture or at least of a line of least 
resistance. But in Scotland it is often impossible to adduce any 
evidence of the connexion between faults or fissures and the position 
of volcanic necks; and it seems likely that the pressure of the gases 
in the igneous magma increased till an explosion took place which 
perforated the rocks above with a clean tubular passage often nearly 
circular in cross section. This pipe was usually vertical, and nearly 
uniform in diameter for great depths; the material occupying it, 
when exposed by denudation, has a circular ground plan, or if 
shown in vertical section (or elevation) in a cliff is a pillar-shaped 
mass crossing the bedding planes of the strata nearly at right angles. 
It terminates upwards in the remains of the volcanic cone and com- 
municates below with the reservoir from which the lavas were 
emitted, represented in most cases, where it has been exposed, by a 
large irregular mass (a batholith or boss) of coarsely crystalline 
igneous rock. The site of such a neck is generally indicated by a 
low conical hill consisting of volcanic rock, surrounded by^ sedi- 
mentary or igneous strata of a different kind. The low cone is due 
to the greater hardness and strength of the volcanic materials and 
is not connected with the original shape of the volcano. Such hills 
are common in some parts of Scotland and well- known examples are 
Arthur's Seat and the Castle Rock (Edinburgh), North Berwick Law, 
the Bass Rock; they occur also in the Peak district of Derbyshire, 
and the Wolf Rock off the coast of Cornwall is probably a neck. Two 
splendid sugar-loaf cones known as the Pitons of St Lucia in the West 
Indies, rising from the sea with almost vertical sides to a height of 
nearly 3000 ft., are old volcanic necks. In Texas, New Mexico, 
Arizona, California and many of the western states of North 
America geologists have observed conical volcanic hills having all 
the features which belong to necks. 

Where the volcanic rocks are soft and easily disintegrated they may 
be reduced more rapidly than the strata around them and the 
position of a neck may be indicated by a cup-shaped hollow; this 
is the case with some of the diamond-bearing basic pipes of South 
Africa. Sometimes necks are encountered in underground mining 
operations; in the coal-field of Fife, for instance, the coals are 
sometimes replaced by a circular mass of volcanic rock, a quarter of 
a mile or more in diameter, which rise vertically to the surface. 
Better examples are the Kimberley diamond mines. The blue-ground 
(or serpentine breccia) occupies great pipes or funnels, circular in 
outline with nearly vertical sides, extending downwards to un- 
known depths; these are undoubtedly the necks of old volcanoes. 
If any^ lavas were poured out from these pipes at the surface they 
have since been carried away by denudation. 

The size of necks varies considerably; the smallest may be only 
20 or 30 yds. in diameter, the largest are several miles. In 
this respect they resemble active craters, but no necks have been 
met with on the earth's surface with dimensions approaching those of 
the so-called " craters " of the moon. Small necks are usually simple, 
i.e. they contain only one or two kinds of igneous rock (ashes and 
dikes) and have been produced, so far as we can judge, by a single 
eruption. Not infrequently they contain no volcanic rock but are 
filled with pieces of slate, sandstone or whatever strata the pipe 
traverses. Such necks must have been produced by a single eruption 
with an outburst of steam, not followed by lava; the disrupted 
fragments of the surrounding rocks and the materials tumbling down 
from the crater's walls ultimately filled up the cavity. Instances 
occur in Fifeshire and in Shetland, and among the recent volcanoes 
of the Eiffel there are some which have thrown out more slate and 
sandstone than lava. 

Large necks, on the other hand, are often of complex structure, 
contain many kinds of rock and seem to have been produced by 
repeated eruptions, each of which more or less completely cleared 
out the material obstructing the orifice, and introduced a series of 
fresh accumulations. The beds of ashes which line the interior of an 
active crater have in nearly all cases a slope or dip towards a central 
point where the base of the depression is situated, and in volcanic 
necks which have been filled with ash (tuffs and agglomerates) this 
funnel-like inward dip is very constant. If there has been only a 
single eruption the beds of ashes have a very conformable or uniform 
arrangement, but if activity has been resumed after a period of 
quiescence a large part of the old material may have been projected 
and a new series of beds laid down, transgressing unconformably 
the edges of the earlier ones. By these structures we can sometimes 
trace a neck within a neck, or of a lateral crater on the margin of a 
principal one. 

Where the crater has filled up with very coarse ashes, or agglomer- 
ate, the bedding is rarely visible. Sometimes large empty craters 
were occupied temporarily by lakes, and level sheets of mud and silt 
have gathered on their floors: hence bedded sediments are not 
infrequently found in volcanic necks. Mixed with the volcanic ashes 
and bombs there are often large broken pieces of sedimentary rocks 
which may have been crystallized and hardened by the heat and 
vapours emitted by the volcano. Sometimes great fragments of the 
walls have foundered or collapsed into the crater, and masses of ncn- 
volcanic rock, an acre or more in extent, may occur in a volcanic neck. 
In Arran, for example, there is a large neck which contains lumps of 
Cretaceous rocks nowhere else known to occur on the island; they 
have fallen down from strata once occupying part of the walls of the 
crater but now removed by denudation. 

The lava which rises and flows out from the crater leaves its trace 
also in the necks. Sometimes it forms thin beds or flows alternating 
with the tuffs and having the same basin-shaped dip. More commonly 
it appears as the material filling fissures and pipes, traversing the 
ashes irregularly or rising as a central plug in the interior of the 
neck, and sending out branching veins. Occasionally a whole neck is 
composed of solid crystalline rock representing the last part of the 
magma which ascended from the underground focus and con- 
gealed within the crater. In Mont Pelee, Jor instance, the last stage 
of the eruptions of 1902 to 1905 was the protrusion of a great column 
of solidified lava which rose at one time to a height of 900 ft. above 
the lip of the crater, but has since crumbled down. The Castle Rock 
of Edinburgh is a neck occupied by a plug of crystalline basalt. 
Necks of this kind weather down very slowly and tend to form 
prominent hills. 

After the eruptions terminate gases or hot solutions given out by 
deep-lying masses of rnolten rock may find a passage upward through 
the materials occupying the crater, greatly modifying their mineral 
nature and laying down fresh deposits. A good example of secondary 
deposits within a volcanic neck is provided by the Cripple Creek 
mining district of Colorado. The ore-bearing veins are connected 
with volcanic rocks and part of these occupy a vertical circular pipe 
which is a typical volcanic neck. A phbnolitic breccia, greatly 
altered, is the principal rock, and is cut by dikes of phonolite, 
dolerite, &c. The,, country rock is mostly granite and gneiss, and 
blocks of these are common in the breccia. A large volcano was built 
up in Tertiary times on the granite plateau, and has since been almost 
entirely removed by denudation. The gold ores were carried upwards 
by currents of hot water derived from the volcanic magma and were 
deposited along cracks and fissures in the materials which occupied 
the crater, and also in the surrounding rocks (see Volcano). 

a. s. f.) 


NECKAM, ALEXANDER (1157-1217), English schoolman 
and man of science, was born at St Albans in September 11 57, 
on the same night as King Richard I. Neckam 's mother nursed 
the prince with her own son, who thus became Richard's foster- 
brother. He was educated at St Albans Abbey school, and began 
to teach as schoolmaster of Dunstable, dependent on St Albans 
Abbey. Later he resided several years in Paris, where by n 80 
he had become a distinguished lecturer of the university. By 
1 1 86 he was back in England, where he again held the place 
of schoolmaster at Dunstable. He is said to have visited Italy 
with the bishop of Worcester, but this statement has been 
doubted; the assertion that he was ever prior of St Nicolas, 
Exeter, seems a mistake: on the other hand, he was certainly 
much at court during some part of his life. Having become 
an Augustinian canon, he was appointed abbot of Cirencester 
in 1 213. He died at Kempsey in Worcestershire in 121 7, and 
was buried at Worcester. Besides theology he was interested 
in the study of grammar and natural history, but his name is 
chiefly associated with nautical science. For in his De naiuris 
rerum and De utensilibus (the former of which, at any 
rate, had become well known at the end of the 12th century, and 
was probably written about 1180) Neckam has preserved to 
us the earliest European notices of the magnet as a guide to 
seamen — outside China, indeed, these seem to be the earliest 
notices of this mystery of nature that have survived in any 
country or civilization. It was probably in Paris, the chief 
intellectual centre of his time, that Neckam heard iow a ship, 
among its other stores, must have a needle placed above a magnet 
(the De utensilibus assumes a needle mounted on a pivot), 
which needle would revolve until its point looked north, and 
thus guide sailors in murky weather or on starless nights. It 
is noteworthy that Neckam has no air of imparting a startling 
novelty: he merely records what had apparently become the 
regular practice of at least many seamen of the Catholic world. 

See Thomas Wright's edition of Neckam's De ncturis rerum and 
De laudibus divinae sapientiae in the Rolls Series (1863), and of 
the De utensilibus in his Volume of Vocabularies. Neckam also wrote 
Corrogationes Prometliei, a scriptural commentary prefaced by a 
treatise on grammatical criticism; a translation of Aesop into Latin 
elegiacs (six fables from this version, as given in a Paris MS., are 
printed in Robert's Fables inSdites); commentaries, still junprinted, 
on portions of Aristotle, Martianus Capella and Ovid's Meta- 
morphoses, and other works. Of all these the De not. rer. t a sort of 
manual of the scientific knowledge of the 12th century, is much the 
most important: the magnet passage herein is in book ii. chap, 
xcviii. (De vi attractiva), p. 183 of Wright's edition. The correspond- 
ing section in the De utensu, is on p. 114 of the Vol. of Vocabs. 
Roger Bacon's reference to Neckam as a grammatical writer (in 
mtutis vera et utilia scripsit: sed . . . inter auctores non potest . . . 
numerari) may be found in Brewer's (Rolls Series) edition of 
Bacon's Opera inedita, p. 457. See also Thomas Wright, Biographia 
Britannica literaria t Anglo-Norman Period, pp. 449-459 (1846: 
some points in this are modified in the 1863 edition of De naL rer.)\ 
C. Raymond Beazley, Dawn of Modern Geography, iii. 508-509. 

(C. R. B.) 


NECKAR, a river of Germany, and a right-bank tributary 
of the Rhine, rises between the Black Forest and the Swabian 
Alb, near Schwenningen, in Wurttemberg, at an altitude of 
2287 ft. As far as Rottweil only a mountain stream, it here 
attains the volume of a river, flows N. as far as Horb, thence 
in a north-easterly direction, and with rapid current it passes 
Rottenburg and the university town of Tubingen, taking then 
a generally northerly course. From Esslingen the Neckar 
becomes broader and deeper and its valley very picturesque, 
and after passing Cannstatt, from which point it is navigable 
for small craft, it flows through vine-clad hills by the pleasant 
village of Marbach, Schiller's birthplace, receives at Besigheim 
the waters of its most considerable tributary, the Enz, swirls 
down by Lauffen, and enters the beautiful vale of Heilbronn. 
Hence, between hills crowned by frequent feudal castles, it 
runs by Wimpfen and by Hornberg, where Gotz von Berlichingen 4 
lived, to Eberbach, where it enters the sandstone formation 
of the Odenwald. It now takes a tortuous westerly course, 
and the scenery on its banks becomes more romantic. Winding 
down by Neckarsteinach and Neckargemiind between lofty 
wooded heights, it sweeps beneath the Konigsstuhl (1900 ft.), 
washes the walls of Heidelberg, and now quitting the valley 
enters the plain of the Rhine and falls into that river from the 
right at Mannheim. Its length is 247 m., and its drainage area 
4790 sq. m. Its more important tributaries are the Enz, Eschach 
and Glatt (left), and the Fils, Rems, Kocher and Jagst (right). 
It is navigable for small steamboats up to Heilbronn, for boats 
up to Cannstatt, and for rafts from Rottweil. It is the principal 
waterway of Wiirttemberg, and is greatly used for floating 
down timber. From Rottenburg downwards its banks are almost 
everywhere planted with vineyards. Up to Frankfort it has 
been deepened and the channel otherwise improved. A com- 
mittee, chiefly promoted by the Wurttemberg government 
and the Stuttgart chamber of commerce, reported in 1901 that 
it was both desirable and practicable to dredge the river and 
to canalize it, from Esslingen down to Mannheim, and that the 
cost would probably be between 2 and 2! millions sterling. 

See T. Eckart, Bilder aus dem Neckartal (1893). 


NECKARGEMUND, a town and climatic health resort of 
Germany, in .the grand duchy of Baden, situated amid densely 
wooded hills, on the left bank of the Neckar, 6 m. E. from 
Heidelberg by the railway to Wiirzburg and at the junction of 
a line to Jagstfeld. Pop. (1905) 2200. It has an important 
trade in wine. The other industries are quarrying, tanning 
and shipbuilding, and there are electrical works. Neckargemiind, 
one of the favourite tourist resorts in the Neckar valley, was 
founded in the 10th century and became a free town in 1286. 
In 1395 it passed to the elector palatine and, together with the 
surrounding district, was apportioned to Baden in 1814. 


NECKER, JACQUES (1732-1804), French statesman, finance 
minister of Louis XVI., was born at Geneva in Switzerland. 
His' father was a native of Ciistrin in Pomerania, and had, after 
the publication of some works on international law, been elected 
as professor of public law at Geneva, of which he became a citizen. 
Jacques Necker had been sent to Paris in 1747 to become a 
clerk in the bank of a friend of his father, M. Vernet. He soon 
afterwards established, with another Genevese, the famous 
bank of Thellusson & Necker. Thellusson superintended the 
bank in London (his grandson was made a peer as Lord Rendles- 
ham), while Necker was managing partner in Paris. Both 
partners became very rich by loans to the treasury and specula- 
tions in grain. In 1763 Necker fell in love with Madame de 
Vermenou, the widow of a French officer. But while on a visit 
to Geneva, Madame de Vermenou met Suzanne Curchod, the 
daughter of a pastor near Lausanne, to whom Gibbon had been 
engaged, and brought her back as her companion to Paris in 
1764. There Necker, transferring his love from the widow to 
the poor Swiss girl, married Suzanne before the end of the year. 
She encouraged her husband to try and make himself a public 
position. He accordingly became a syndic or director of the 
French East India Company, and, after showing his financial 
ability in its management, defended it in an able memoir against 
the attacks of A. Morellet in 1769. Meanwhile he had made 
interest with the French government by lending it money, and 
was appointed resident at Paris by the republic of Geneva. 
Madame Necker entertained the chief leaders of the political, 
financial and literary worlds of Paris, and her Fridays became 
as greatly frequented as the Mondays of Madame Geoff rin, or 
the Tuesdays of Madame Helvetius. In 1773 Necker won the 
prize of the Academie Francaise for an tloge on Colbert, and in 
1775 published his Essai sur la legislation et le commerce des 
grains j in which he attacked the free-trade policy of Turgot. 
His wife now believed he could get into office as a great financier, 
and made him give up his share in the bank, which he transferred 
to his brother Louis. In October 1776 Necker was made finance 
minister of France, though with the title only of director of 
.the treasury, which, however, he changed in 1777 for that of 
director-general of the finances. He did great good in regulating 
the finances "by attempting to divide the taille or poll tax more 
equally, by abolishing the " vingtieme d'industrie," and establish- 
ing monts de pittt (establishments for loaning money on security). 
But his greatest financial measures were his attempt to fund 
the French debt and his establishment of annuities under the 
guarantee of the state. The operation of funding was too 
difficult to be suddenly accomplished, and Necker rather pointed 
out the right line to be followed than completed the operation. 
In all this he treated French finance rather as a banker than as 
a profound political economist, and thus feU far short of Turgot, 
who was the very greatest economist of his day. Politically 
he did not do much to stave off the coming Revolution, and his, 
establishment of provincial assemblies was only a timid applica- 
tion of Turgot's great scheme for the administrative reorganiza- 
tion of France. In 1781 he published his famous Compte rendu, 
in which he drew the balance sheet of France, and was dismissed 
from his office. Yet his dismissal was not really due to his book, 
but to the influence of Marie Antoinette, whose schemes for 
benefiting the due de Guines he had thwarted. In retirement 
he occupied himself with literature, and with his only child, 
his daughter, who in 1786 married the ambassador of Sweden 
and became Madame de Stael (g.v.). But neither Necker nor 
his wife cared to remain out of office, and in 1787 Necker was 
banished by " lettre de cachet " 40 leagues from Paris for 
attacking Calonne. In 1 788 the country, which had at the bidding 
of the literary guests of Madame Necker come to believe that 
Necker was the only minister who could " stop the deficit," 
as they said, demanded Necker's recall, and in September 1788 
he became once more director-general of the finances. Through- 
out the momentous months which followed the biography of 
Necker is part of the history of the French Revolution (q.v.). 
Necker put a stop to the rebellion in Dauphin6 by legalizing its 
assembly, and then set to work to arrange for the summons 
of the states general. Throughout the early months of 1789 
he was regarded as the saviour of France, but his conduct at 
the meeting of the states general showed that he regarded it 
merely as an assembly which should grant money, not organize 
reforms. But as he had advised the calling of the states general, 
and the double representation of the third estate, and then 
permitted the orders to deliberate and vote in common, he was 
regarded as the cause of the Revolution by the court, and on 
July 11 was ordered to leave France at once. Necker's dismissal 
brought about the taking of the Bastille, which induced the 
king to recall him. He was received with joy in every city he 
traversed, but at Paris he again proved to be no statesman. 
Believing that he could save France alone, he refused to act with 
Mirabeau or La Fayette. He caused the king's acceptance of 
the suspensive veto, by which he sacrificed his chief prerogative 
in September, and destroyed all chance of a strong executive 
by contriving the decree of November 7, by which the ministry 
might not be chosen from the assembly. Financially he proved 
equally incapable for a time of crisis, and could not understand 
the need of such extreme measures as the establishment oi 
assignats in order to keep the country quiet. His popularity 
vanished when his only idea was to ask the assembly for new 
loans, and in September 1790 he resigned his office, unregretted 
by a single Frenchman. Not without difficulty he reached 
Coppet, near Geneva, an estate he had bought in 1784. Here 
he occupied himself with literature, but Madame Necker pined 
for her Paris salon and died in 1794. He continued to live on 
at Coppet, under the care of his daughter, Madame de Stael, 
and his niece, Madame Necker de Saussure, but his time was 
past, and his books had no political influence. A momentary 
excitement was caused by the advance of the French armies 
in 1798, when he burnt most of his political papers. He died 
at Coppet in April 1804. 

Authorities. — Mimoires sur la vie privie de M. Necker (Paris and 
London, 1818), by his daughter, Madame de StaeM-Holstein, and the 
Notice sur la vie de M, Necker (Paris, 1820), by Auguste de Stael- 
Holstein, his grandson, published in the collection of his works edited 
by the latter in 1 820-1821 (Paris, 15 vols.). The bibliography of his 
works is as follows: — Reponse au rnhnoire de M. I' Abbe MoreK&4 
(1769); £loge de J. B. Colbert (1773); Essai sur la Ugislalion et le 
commerce des grains (1775); Compte rendu au rot (1781); De 
I 1 administration des finances de la France (3 vols., 1784); Mimoire 
en riponse au discours prononci par M. de Calonne (1787); De Vim- 
portance des opinions religieuses (1788); Sur V administration de M. 
Necker, par lui-meme (1791); Du pouvoir exScutif dans les grands 
itats (2 vols., 1792); Reflexions sur le proces de Louis XVI. (1792); 
De la revolution francaise, several editions, the last in 4 vols. (1797); 
Cours de la morale religieuse (1800); Dernieres yues de politique et de 
finance (1802); Manuscrits de M. Necker, published by his daughter 
(1804); Suites funestes d'une seule faute f published after his death. 
See also Le Salon de Madame Necker, by the Vicomte d'Haussonville 
(2 vols., 1882), compiled from the papers at Coppet; Ch. Gomel, 
Les Causes financieres dela revolution franQaise (Paris, 1892); and for 
contemporary tracts and pamphlets M. Tourneux, Bill, de Vhistoire 
de Parts pendant la revolution (vol. iv., 1906) ; also (for the earlier 
ones) Collection complete de tous les outrages pour et contre M, Necker ■, 
avec des notes critiques , . . (3 vols.. Utrecht, 1781). 

(H. M. S.; J.T.S.*) 


NECROLOGY (from Med. Lat. necrologium, Gr. veicpfc, 
corpse, the termination being formed from My^os, \krycw to 
read, in the sense of list, register; cf. " martyrology "), a register 
in a monastery or other ecclesiastical establishment of the names 
of the deceased members of the society, or of those for whom 
the prayers of the foundation were offered as benefactors; 
hence any roll or list of deceased persons or collection of 
obituaries. 


NECROMANCY (Gr. veKpofiaweia, or veKvofiavrda, from 
vtKp&s or vkicvs, corpse, and juamia, divination) , properly 
divination by communicating with the dead. The latinized 
form of the Greek word was corrupted into nigromantia, con- 
necting the word with niger, black, and so was applied to the 
" black art," " black magic," in the sense of witchcraft, sorcery. 
This corrupted form is common in English to the 17th century 
(see Magic and Witchcraft). 


NECROPOLIS, a cemetery (q.v.) or burying-place, literally 
a " city of the dead " (Gr. veicpbs, corpse, and 7r6\is, city). 
Apart from the occasional application of the word to modern 
cemeteries outside large towns, the term is chiefly used of burial- 
grounds near the sites of the centres of ancient civilizations. 


NECROSIS (Gr. veicpbs, corpse), a term restricted in surgery 
to death of bone. A severe inflammation, caused by a violent 
blow, by cold, or by the absorption of various poisons, as mercury 
and phosphorus, is the general precursor of necrosis. The dead 
part, analogous to the slough in the soft tissues, is called a 
sequestrum or exfoliation. At first it is firmly attached to the 
living bone around; gradually, however, the dead portion is 
separated from the living tissue. The process of separation is 
a slow one. New bone is formed around the sequestrum, which 
often renders its removal difficult. As a rule the surgeon waits 
until the dead part is loose, and then cuts down through the 
new case and removes the sequestrum. The cavity in which 
it lay gradually closes, and a useful limb is the result. 


NECTAR, in ancient mythology generally coupled with am- 
brosia, the nourishment of the gods in Homer and in Greek 
literature generally. Probably the two tetms were not originally 
distinguished; but usually both in Homer and in later writers 
nectar is the drink and ambrosia the food. On the other hand, ■ 
in Alcinan nectar is the food, and in Sappho and Anaxandrides 
ambrosia the drink. Each is used in Homer as an unguent 
(Iliad, xiv. 170; xix. 38). Both are fragrant, and may be used 
as perfume. According to W. H. Roscher (Nektar und Am- 
brosia, 1883; see also his article in Roscher's Lexikon der Mytho- 
logie) nectar and ambrosia were originally only different forms 
of the same substance — honey, regarded as a dew, like manna, 
fallen from heaven, which was used both as food and drink. 
(See also Ambrosia.) 


NEED-FIRE, or Wiud-Fire (Ger. Notfeuer, O. Ger. nodfyr\ 
a term used in folklore to denote a curious superstition which 
survived in the Highlands of Scotland until a recent date. Like 
the fire-churning still customary in India for kindling the sacri- 
ficial fire, the need- or wild-fire is made by the friction of one 
piece of wood on another, or of a rope upon a stake. Need-fire 
is a practice of shepherd peoples to ward off disease from their 
jherds and flocks. It is kindled on occasions of special distress, 
particularly at the outbreak of a murrain, and the cattle are 
driven through it. Its efficacy is believed to depend on all 
other fires being extinguished. The kindling of the need-fire 
in a village near Quedlinburg was impeded by a night light 
burning in the parsonage (Prohle, Harz-BUder, Leipzig, 1855). 
According to one account, in the Highlands of Scotland the rule 
that all common fires must be previously extinguished applied 
only to the houses situated between the two nearest running 
streams (Kelly, Curiosities of Indo-European Tradition and 
Folklore, p. 53 seq.). In Bulgaria even smoking during 
need-fire is forbidden. Two naked men produce the fire by 
rubbing dry branches together in the forest, and with the flame 
they light two fires, one on each side of a cross-road haunted 
by wolves. The cattle are then driven between the two fires, 
from which glowing embers are taken to rekindle the cold hearths 
in the houses (A. Strausz, Die Bulgaren, p. 198). In Caithness 
the men who kindled the need-fire had previously to divest 
themselves of all metal. In some of the Hebrides the men who 
made the fire had to be eighty-one in number and all married. 
In the Halberstadt district in Germany, the rope which was 
wound round the stake, must be pulled by two chaste boys; 
while at Wolfenbiittel, contrary to usual custom, it is said that 
the need-fire had to be struck out of the cold anvil by the smith. 
In England the need-fire is said to have been lit at Birtley 
within the last half-century. The superstition had its origin in 
the early ideas of the purifying nature of flame. 

See also Grimm, Deutsche Mythologie, i. 501 sqq.; Kelly, Curio- 
sities of Indo-European Tradition and Folklore, p. 48 sqq. ; Elton, 
Origins of English History, p. 293 sqq.; J. G. Frazer, The Golden 
Bough, iii. 301. 


NEEDLE (O. Eng. nmdl-, the word appears in various forms 
in Teutonic languages, Ger. Nadel, Dutch naal, the root being 
ne-, to sew, cf. Ger. nahen, and probably Lat. nere, to spin, Gr. 
vTjacs, spinning), an instrument adapted for passing a thread 
through fabrics in sewing, consisting of a thin rod of steel, having 
a pointed end and pierced with a hole or " eye " to carry the 
thread. The term is also applied to various other objects that 
more or less resemble a sewing needle in form, though differing 
in function, such as the magnetized piece of steel that points 
north and south in the mariner's compass, the pointer or indicator 
of certain forms of electric telegraph instruments, the slender 
tube by which the contents of a hypodermic syringe are injected 
beneath the skin, a sharp-pointed mountain peak or isolated 
mass of rock, &c. 

Sewing needles have been in use from prehistoric times. 
Originally they were made of fishbone, bone or ivory, and their 
first form was probably a rude bodkin having a hook instead 
of an eye, though bone needles with an eye, sometimes at the 
end and sometimes in the middle, have been found in cave de- 
posits in Great Britain and France and in the Swiss lakes. Bone 
needles continue to be used by uncivilized tribes, but since the 
discovery of bronze metal needles have been employed in civilized 
communities. Steel needles were introduced into Europe by 
the Moors, and it is on record that they were being made at 
Nuremberg in 1370. In England their manufacture was estab- 
lished about 1650. The centre of the trade in England is 
Redditch, in Worcestershire, with several other small towns 
in Warwickshire. Originally the industry was domestic in its 
character, but it is now carried on in factories where mechanical 
appliances have to a great extent supplanted handwork. Large 
quantities of needles are also manufactured on the continent of 
Europe, Aix-la-Chapelle being an important centre of their 
production. In the United States ordinary sewing needles 
are not made, though there is a large output of the special forms 
used in sewing machines. 

The raw material of needle-manufacture consists of Sheffield 
crucible steel drawn down into wire of suitable gauge. The wire is 
supplied in coils of definite weight and diameter, and the first 
operation is to cut the coils into lengths, each sufficient for two 
needles. These lengths are next straightened. For this purpose a 
bundle containing several thousand lengths is packed within two 
strong iron rings, is heated to red heat, and is then pressed on an iron 
plate having two parallel grooves in which the iron rings run. Over 
this plate the bundle is worked backward and forward by the pressure 
of an oblong slightly curved iron tool having two longitudinal slits 
through which the edges of the rings project. Thus, by combined 
pressure and rolling the whole of the lengths quickly become perfectly 
straight and even. The next operation consists in pointing both ends 
of the wires. This was formerly done by hand by a grinder who, 
holding several dozen wires against a grindstone with his left hand 
and slightly revolving them with his right, was able to point about 
100,000 needles a day, the number depending, however, to some 
extent on the size treated. This method, however, is now largely 
superseded by machinery, which is still more expeditious. The wires 
are fed out from a hopper to a revolving wheel, on the periphery of 
which they are held by an india-rubber band. This wheel revolves at 
right angles to a revolving hollow grindstone, and so each wire is 
brought up to the stone in rapid succession and pointed at one end, 
the process being repeated for the other end. The next operations 
are to stamp the grooves which are to be found at the head 01 a needle 
and to punch the oval eyes, both being done by automatic machinery. 
Each wire now forms two needles attached head to head by a broad 
thin scarf of steel. The operation of separating them is largely per- 
formed by machines which pass the double blanks over the face of an 
emery wheel, but an oldermethod is to spit them on two flattened 
wires, clamp them tightly in a frame, file away the scarf and break 
the blanks in halves, so that two lots of single needles are obtained, 
each spitted on a wire. The next step, after the heads have been filed 
smooth, is to harden and temper the needles, which are heated to 
redness, plunged into cold oil, and then gently heated by being placed 
on a continuous band passing over a series of gas flames. After the 
tempering comes the process of scouring, and then the eyes are 
smoothed and polished so that they will not cut the thread. For this 
purpose the heads used to be softened by blueing, and the needles 
strung loosely on wires covered with a paste of emery and oil. These 
wires were then suspended between uprights on a frame platform 
to which a jerking motion was communicated; in this way the 
needles were made to swing on the wires and the gentle friction 
effected the desired end. Generally, however, the eyes are cleared by 
the action of a concave wire brush, before the scouring process, and 
then subsequent burnishing becomes unnecessary. The bodies are 
next polished by being passed between revolving leather rollers which 
have also a lateral motion in the direction of their axes. The heads 
of the finished needles have now to be brought all in one direction. 
Formerly this was done by a " header," wearing a cloth cap on one of 
her fingers; this being pressed against a batch of the needles which 
had previously been arranged parallel to each other, those whose 
heads were presented to the cloth stuck in it and thus were with- 
drawn. A more modern device is to roll them down a smooth in- 
clined plane, when the pointed ends, owing to their conical form, 
travel more slowly than the thicker ends, and thus the needles are 
all brought round so that they point the same way. They are then 
sorted according to their lengths, and are done up into packets for 
the market. 

Besides ordinary needles for hand sewing, many varieties are made 
for use in sewing machines, and in their production automatic 
machinery is largely utilized. Those used for sewing leather have 
points of various special forms (twist, chisel, wedge, diamond, &c.) 
instead of the round point of the ordinary needle, and sometimes 
have a hook in place of an eye. Knitting needles are long slender 
rods, usually of steel but sometimes of bone or other material, having 
neither hooks nor eyes. Crochet needles are provided with a hook. 
Hooked needles again are employed in knitting and stockinet 
machines; having to be periodically closed by the operation of the 
mechanism the hooks in one type are made flexible so that they can 
be pushed down on the shank, while in another the same end is 
served by providing them with a minute latch. Another special 
class is constituted by the numerous varieties of needles used by 
surgeons for suturing wounds, &c. (see Surgical Instruments). 


NEEDLE-GUN (Z^ndnadelgewehr), a military breech- 
loading rifle, famous as the arm of the Prussians in 1866 and of 
the Germans in 1870-1871. It was the invention of the gunsmith 
Johann Nicholas von Dreyse (1787-1867), who, beginning in 
1824, had made many experiments, and in 1S36 produced the 
complete needle-gun. From 1841 onwards the new arm was 
gradually introduced into the Prussian service, and later into 
the military forces of many other German states. Dreyse was 
ennobled in 1864. The principal details of the arm (pattern 
1 841) are as follows: — 

	Breech Bolt system 
	Calibre ..... -607 in. 
	Weight without bayonet . 10 lb 4 oz. 
	Charge (black powder) . 74*15 grains 
	Bullet (lead) ... 478 grains 
	Muzzle velocity . * . 1000 f.s. 
	Sighted to ... 800 paces (656 yds.) 

In practice the needle-gun proved to have numerous defects; 
its effective range was very short compared to that of the muzzle- 
loading rifles of the day, and conspicuously so as against the 
chassepot : the^ escape of gas at the breech was, moreover, very 
great. A paper cartridge was used. An improved model, 
giving greater muzzle velocity and increased speed in loading, 
was introduced later, but this was soon replaced by the Mauser 
rifle. 


NEEDLEWORK. This subject may be considered under 
the two headings of (1) Plain Needlework, used for purely 
utilitarian purposes, and (2) Art Needlework for decorative 
purposes. Plain needlework requires no such further explanation 
as may be given in the case of art needlework, under which title 
are included (a) embroidery, and (b) other methods of decorative 
needlework, such as applied or appliqu6 work, ornamental 
quilting, patchwork and couching. In these last-mentioned 
methods the needlework is subservient to the decorative effect, 
which depends almost wholly upon the materials selected for 
the purpose; whereas in embroidery the needlework itself 
constitutes and is the visible decoration. The aim of this article 
is to indicate briefly different stitches of plain needlework and 
then to show that these stitches are also used in the domain of 
art needlework. 

The more necessary stitches in plain needlework for making 
clothes are tacking, running, hemming, feather-stitching or 
herring-boning (all of which are practically of the same type), 
and button-holing in which the thread is looped as each stitch 
is made. Button-holing is allied to another looped stitch, 
namely chain-stitching, which though frequently used in em- 
broidery is rarely if ever used in plain needlework. For repairs of 
clothes and household linen, &c, the principal stitch is darning; 
grafting, however, is a substitute for it, and varies with the 
character of the stuff to be repaired, e.g. knitted stockings, 
damask linen, cloth, &c. Darning is allied to running, and graft- 
ing to patchwork. Patchwork as a form of decorative needle- 
work is exemplified in sumptuous canopies and seat covers 
made several centuries B.C. by Egyptians, and rich hangings 
made by Italian and French workers in the 16th century. 

Long and short stitches, kindred in principle to the running 
stitch in plain needlework, are perhaps the more .frequent of 
any stitches used in embroidery, and are especially appropriate 
when the blending of tints with a flat even surface is the effect 
to be aimed at. Much medieval work of this character, as well 
as that done with chain stitch and its allied split stitch, is re- 
garded as typical of opus anglicanum. Chain stitch produces 
a comparatively broken surface in decided contrast with the 
smooth one of long and short stitch, split stitch and satin stitch 
embroidery. Satin stitch is well adapted to express, with even 
flat surface in designs for colour effects, each mass which is 
to be of one tint. In this respect, therefore, satin stitch serves 
a purpose in contrast to that of long and short stitch. A charac- 
teristic of satin-stitching is the sheeny effect produced, on both 
sides of the material embroidered, by parallel stitches taken 
closely together. Buttonhole stitch in relation to art needle- 
work prevails to a great extent in cut linen and drawn-thread 
work (often called Greek lace), and predominates in the making of 
needlepoint lace (see Lace). In much of the Persian drawn-thread 
work, however, it is superseded by whipping or tightly and closely 
twisting a thread round the undrawn threads of thelinen. Whip- 
ping has been put to another use in certain 16th-century art 
needlework for ecclesiastical purposes, where round the gold 
threads employed as the ground of a design coloured silks are 
dexterously whipped, closely and openly, producing gradations 
of tint suffused with a corresponding variation of golden shimmer. 
Another important branch of art needlework with gold and silver 
threads is couching. When the metallic threads, arranged 
so as to lie closely together, are simply stitched flatly to the found- 
ation material, the work is called flat couching or laying, a kind 
of treatment more frequent in Chinese and Japanese than in 
European art needlework. Flat couching is also carried out 
with floss silks. When a design for couching includes effects 
in relief, stout strings or cords as required by the design are 
first fastened to the foundation materials, and over them the 
metallic threads or in some cases coloured gimps are laid, and 
so stitched as to have an appearance in miniature of varieties 
of willow-twisting or basket work. 

The principle of relief couching is carried much further in 
certain English art needlework, having cumbersome and gro- 
tesque peculiarities, which was done during the reigns of the 
Stuarts. Crude compositions were wrought in partial relief 
with padded work, of costumed figures of kings and queens 
and scriptural persons with a medley of disproportionate animals, 
insects and trees, &c, in which foliage, wings, &c, were of coloured 
silk needlepoint lace — the whole being set as often as not in a 
background of tent or cross-stitch work on canvas. But tent 
and cross-stitch work (in French point comptS) was also used 
by itself for cushion covers and later for upholstery. In its 
earlier phases it seems to come under the medieval classification 
of opus pulvinarum. The reticulations of the canvas or those 
apparent in finer material governed the stitching and imparted 
a stiff formal effect to the designs so carried out, a characteristic 
equally strong in the lacis work, or darning on square mesh net 
(see Lace). 

Applique or applied work belongs as much as patchwork 
to the medieval category of opus consutum y or stitching stuffs 
together according to a decorative design, the greater part of 
which was cut out of material different in colour, and generally 
in texture, from that of the ground to which it was applied and 
stitched. Irish art needlework, called Carrickmacross lace, is for 
the most part of cambric applied or applique to net. 

Quilting is also a branch of art needlework rather than em- 
broidery. Indians and Persians using a short running stitch 
have excelled in it in past times. Some good quilting was done 
in England in the 18th century with chain-stitching which lay 
on the inner side of the stuff, the outer displaying the design 
in 'short stitches. In the account of his voyage to the East 
Indies, published in 1655, Edward Terry (1 590-1 665) writes 
of the Indians " making excellent quilts of satin lined with taffeta 
betwixt which they put cotton wool and worked them together 
with silk." For less bulky quilting, cords have been used; 
and elaborate designs for quilted linen waistcoats were well 
done in the 18th century, with fine short stitches that held the 
cords between the inner and outer materials. 
m A large number of names have been given to the many modifica- 
tions of the limited number of essentially different stitches used in 
plain and art needlework, and on the whole are fanciful rather than 
really valuable from a technical point of view. Much descriptive 
information about them, with an abundance of capital illustrations, 
is given in the Dictionary of Needlework, by J. F. Caul field and 
Blanche Saward (London, 1903). 


NEEMUCH, or Nimach, a town of Central India, with a 
British military cantonment, within the state of Gwalicr, on 
the border of Rajputana, with a station on the Rajputana 
railway, 170 m. N. of Mhow. Pop. (1901) 21,588. In 1857 it was 
the most southerly place to which the Mutiny extended. The 
brigade of native troops of the Bengal army, which was stationed 
there, mutinied and marched to Delhi, the European officers 
taking refuge in the fort, where they were besieged by a rebel 
force from Mandasor, and defended themselves gallantly until 
relieved by the Malwa field force. Since 1895 it has been the 
headquarters of the political agent in Malwa. 


NEENAH, a city of Winnebago county, Wisconsin, U.S.A., 
on the N.W. shore of Lake Winnebago, 82 m. N. by E. of Mil- 
waukee. Pop. (1890) 5083; (1900) 5954, of whom 1559 were 
foreign-born; (1905) 6047; (1910) 5734- It is served by the 
Chicago & North-Western, the Chicago, Milwaukee & St Paul, 
and the Milwaukee, St Paul & Sault Ste Marie railways, by two 
interurban electric railways, and by steamboat lines on the lake 
and on the Fox river, which flows out of Lake Winnebago at 
this point. Several bridges connect it with Menasha, on the 
opposite side of the river, and the two cities- form one industrial 
community. Doty Island, at the mouth of the river, belongs 
partly to Neenah and partly to Menasha. Neenah is a trade 
centre of the surrounding agricultural region, in which dairying, 
especially cheese-making, is carried on extensively. The Fox 
river (with a fall of 12 ft.) furnishes good water-power for the 
manufactories. There was a trading post at or near the site of 
Neenah during the French regime in Wisconsin, but there was 
no actual settlement until well into the 19th century. Neenah 
was chartered as a city in 1873; its name is derived from an 
Indian word meaning " running water " or " rapids." 


NEER, VAN DER. Aernout and Eglon van der Neer, father 
and son, were Dutch painters whose lives filled almost the whole 
of the 17th century. 

1. Aernout van der Neer (i 603-1677), commonly called 
Aert or Artus, was the contemporary of Albert Cuyp and 
Hobbema, and so far like the latter that he lived and died in 
comparative obscurity. Aernout was born at Gorkum and 
died at Amsterdam. Houbraken's statement that Aernout 
had been a steward to a Dutch nobleman, and an amateur 
painter, before he settled in Amsterdam and acquired skill 
with his brush, would account for the absence of any pictures 
dating from his early years. He died in abject poverty, and his 
art was so little esteemed that the pictures left by him were 
valued at about five shillings apiece. Even as early as 1659 
he found it necessary to supplement his income by keeping a 
wine tavern. The earliest pictures in which Aernout coupled 
his monogram of A. V. and D. N. interlaced with a date are a 
winter landscape in the Rijks Museum at Amsterdam (dated 
1639), an d another in the Martins collection at Kiel (1642) — 
immature works both, of poor quality. Far better is the " Winter 
Landscape " (1643) in Lady Wantage's collection, and the 
" Moonlight Scene " (1644) in the d'Arenberg collection in 
Brussels. In 1652 Aernout witnessed the fire which consumed the 
old town-hall of Amsterdam. He made this accident the subject 
for two or three pictures, now in the galleries of Berlin and Copen- 
hagen. Though Amsterdam appears to have been constantly van 
der Neer's domicile, his pictures tell that he was well acquainted 
with the canals and woods about Haarlem and Leiden, and 
with the reaches of the Maes and Rhine. Dort, the home of 
Albert Cuyp, is sometimes found in his pictures, and substantial 
evidence exists that there was friendship between the two 
men. At some period of their lives they laid their hands to the 
same canvases, on each of which they left their joint mark. 
On some it was the signature of the name, on others the more 
convincing signature of style. There are landscapes in the collec- 
tions of the dukes of Bedford and Westminster, in which Cuyp 
has represented either the frozen Maes with fishermen packing 
herrings, or the moon reflecting its light on the river's placid 
waters. These are models after which van der Neer appears 
to have worked. The same feeling and similar subjects are found 
in Cuyp and van der Neer, before and after their partnership. 
But Cuyp was the leading genius. Van der Neer got assistance 
from him; Cuyp expected none from van der Neer. He care- 
fully enlivened his friend's pictures, when asked to do so, with 
figures and cattle. It is in pictures jointly produced by them 
that we discover van der Neer's presence at Dort. We are near 
Dort in the landscape sunset of the Louvre, in which Cuyp 
evidently painted the foreground and cows. In the National 
Gallery picture Cuyp signs his name on the pail of a milkmaid, 
whose figure and red skirt he has painted with light effectiveness 
near the edge of van der Neer's landscape. Again, a couple of 
fishermen with a dog, and a sportsman creeping up to surprise 
some ducks, are Cuyp's in a capital van der Neer at the Staedel 
Institute in Frankfort. 

Van der Neer's favourite subjects were the rivers and water- 
courses of his native country either at sunset or after dark. 
His peculiar skill is shown in realizing transparence which allows 
objects — even distant — to appear in the darkness with varieties 
of warm brown and steel greys. Another of his fancies is to paint 
frozen water, and his dayh'ght icescapes with golfers, sleighers, 
and fishermen are as numerous as his moonlights. But he always 
avoids the impression of frostiness, which is one of his great 
gifts. His pictures are not scarce. They are less valuable in 
the market than those of Cuyp or Hobbema; but, possessing 
a charm peculiarly their own, tliey are much sought after by 
collectors. Out of about one hundred and fifty pictures accessible 
to the pubb'c, the choicest selection is in the Hermitage at St 
Petersburg. In England paintings from his brush are to be 
found at the National Gallery and Wallace Collection, and, 
amongst others, in the collections of the marquess of Bute 
and Colonel Holford. 

2. Eglon van der Neer (1643-1703) was born at Amsterdam, 
and died at Dusseldorf on the 3rd of May 1703. He was first 
taught by his father, and then took lessons from Jacob van Loo, 
whose chief business then consisted in painting figures in the 
landscapes of Wynants and Hobbema. When van Loo went 
to Paris in 1663 to join the school from which Boucher afterwards 
emerged, he was accompanied or followed by Eglon. But, 
leaving Paris about 1666, he settled at Rotterdam, where he 
dwelt for many years. Later on he took up his residence at 
Brussels, and finally went to Dusseldorf, where he entered the 
service of the elector-palatine Johann Wilhclm von der Pfalz. 
In each of the places where he stopped Eglon married, and having 
had three wives became the father of twenty-five children. 
A portrait of the princess of Neuberg led to his appointment 
as painter to the king of Spain. 

Eglon van der Neer has painted landscapes imitating those 
of his father, of Berchem, and of Adam Elsheimer. He frequently 
put the figures into the town views of Jan van der Heyden in 
competition with Berchem and Adrian van der Velde. His 
best works are portraits, in which he occasionally came near 
Ter Borchor Metsu in delicacy of touch, de Hooch in effective- 
ness of lighting, or Mieris in polish of surface. One of his earliest 
pieces in which the influence of Ter Borch is apparent is the 
" Lady with the Book," of 1665, which was sold with theBredel 
collection in 1875. A young woman in white and red satin at 
Rotterdam, of 1669, recalls Mieris, whose style also reappears 
in Eglon's " Cleopatra " at Buckingham Palace. Two land- 
scapes with " Tobit and the Angel," dated 1685 and 1694, 
in the museums of Berlin and Amsterdam, illustrate his fashion 
of setting Scripture scenes in Dutch backgrounds. m The most 
important of his sacred compositions is the " Esther and 
Ahasuerus," of 1696, in the Uffizi at Florence. But Eglon 
varied his practice also with arrangements of hunting and 
hawking parties, pastures and fords, and cavalry skirmishes. 
The latest of his panels is a mountain landscape of 1702 in 
the gallery of Augsburg. (J. A. C. ; P. G. K.) 


NEERWINDEN, a village of Belgium in the province of Liege, 
a few miles E. by S. of Tirlcmont, which gives its name to two 
great battles, the first fought in 1693 between the Anglo-Allied 
army under William III. of England and the French under the 
duke of Luxemburg, and the second in 1793 between the Austrians 
under Prince Josias of Coburg and the French under General 
Dumouriez. 

Battle of Neerwinden or Landen, 1693 (see Grand Alliance, 
War of the). — Luxemburg, having by feints induced William 
to detach portions of his army, rapidly drew together superior 
numbers in face of the Allied camps, which lay in a rough 
semicircle from Elissem on the right to Neerlanden, and thence 
along the Landen brook on the left (July 18-28, 1693). 
William had no mind to retire over the Geete river, and en- 
trenched a strong line from Laer through Neerwinden to Neer- 
landen. On the right section of this line (Laer to Neerwinden) 
the ground was much intersected and gave plenty of cover 
for both sides, and this section, being regarded as the key of 
the position, was strongly garrisoned; in the centre the open 
ground between Neerwinden and Neerlanden was solidly en- 
trenched, and in front of it Rumsdorp was held as an advanced 
post. The left at Neerlanden rested upon the Landen brook 
and was difficult of access. William's right, as his line of retreat 
lay over the Geete, was his dangerous flank, and Luxemburg 
was aware that, the front of the Allies being somewhat long for 
the numbers defending it, the intervention of troops drawn from 
one wing to reinforce the other would almost certainly be too 
late. Under these conditions Luxemburg's general plan was 
to throw the weight of his attack on the Laer-Neerwinden 
section, and specially on Neerwinden itself, and to economize 
his forces — as " economy of force " was understood before 
Napoleon's time — elsewhere, delivering holding attacks or 
demonstrations as might be necessary, and thus preventing 

	NEERWINDEN 
	Scale. 1:158.000 
	Emery V*lUrsc 

the Allied centre and left from assisting the right. Luxemburg 
had about 80,000 men to William's 50,000. Opposite the 
entrenchments of the centre he drew up nearly the whole of his 
cavalry in six lines, with two lines of infantry intercalated. 
A corps of infantry and dragoons was told off for the attack of 
Neerlanden and Rumsdorp, and the troops destined for the 
main attack, 28,000 of all arms, formed up in heavy masses 
opposite Neerwinden. This proportion of about one-third of 
the whole force to be employed in the decisive attack in the 
event proved insufficient. The troops opposite the Allied centre 
and left had to act with the greatest energy to fulfil their con- 
taining mission, and at Laer-Neerwinden the eventual success 
of the attack was bought only at the price of the utter exhaustion 
of the troops. 

After a long cannonade the French columns moved to the 
attack, converging on Neerwinden; a smaller force assaulted 
Laer. The edge of the villages was carried, but in the interior 
a murderous struggle began, every foot of ground being contested, 
and after a time William himself, leading a heavy counter-attack, 
expelled the assailants from both villages. A second attack, 
pushed with the same energy, was met with the same determina- 
tion, and meanwhile the French in other parts of the field had 
pressed their demonstrations home. Even the six lines of cavalry 
in the centre, after enduring the fire of the Allies for many hours, 
trotted over the open and up to the entrenchments to meet with 
certain defeat, and at Neerlanden and Rumsdorp there was 
severe hand to hand fighting. But, meantime, the two intact 
lines of infantry in the French centre had been moved to their 
left and formed the nucleus for the last great assault on Neer- 
winden, which proved too much for the exhausted defenders. 
They fell back slowly and steadily, defying pursuit, and the British 
Coldstream Guards even captured a colour. But at this crisis 
the initiative of a subordinate general, the famous military 
writer Feuquieres (?.v.), converted the hard- won local success 
into a brilliant victory. William had begun to move troops 
from his centre and left to the right in order to meet the great 
assault on Neerwinden, and Feuquieres, observing this, led the 
cavalry of the French centre once again straight at the en- 
trenchments. This time the French squadrons, surprising the 
Allies in the act of manoeuvring, rode over every body of troops 
they met, and nothing remained for the Allies but a hurried 
retreat over the Geete. A stubborn rearguard of British troops 
led by William himself alone saved the Allied army, of which 
all but the left wing was fought out and in disorder. Luxemburg 
had won his greatest victory, thanks in a measure to Feuquieres' 
exploit; but had the assaults on Neerwinden been made — 
as Napoleon would have made them — with one-half or two- 
thirds of his forces instead of one-third, the victory would have 
been decisive, and Feuquieres would have won his laurels, 
not in forcing the decision at the cost of using up his cavalry, 
but in annihilating the remnants of the Allied army in the 
pursuit. The material results of the battle were twelve thousand 
Allies (as against eight thousand French) killed, wounded and 
prisoners, and eighty guns and a great number of standards 
and colours taken by the French. 

The battle of the 18th March 1793 marked the end of Dumouriez's 
attempt to overrun the Low Countries and the beginning of the 
Allies' invasion of France. The Austrians under Coburg, advancing 
from Maestricht in the direction of Brussels, encountered the heads 
of the hurriedly assembling French army at Tirlemont on the 15th 
of March, and took up a position between Neerwinden and Neer- 
landen. On the 18th, however, after a little preliminary fighting 
Coburg drew back a short distance and rearranged his army on a 
more extended front between Racour and Dormael, thus parrying 
the enveloping movement begun by the French from Tirlemont. 
Dumouriez was consequently compelled to fight after all on parallel 
fronts, and though in the villages themselves the individuality and 
enthusiasm of the French soldier compensated for his inadequate 
training and indiscipline, the greater part of the front of contact was 
open ground, where the superiority of the veteran Austrian regulars 
was unchallengeable. In these conditions an attempt to win a second 
Jemappes with numerical odds of 11 to 10 instead of 2 to 1 in favour 
of the attack was foredoomed to disaster, and the repulse of the 
Revolutionary Army was the signal for its almost complete dis- 
solution. Neerwinden was a great disaster, but not a great battle. 
Its details merely show the impossibility of fighting on the 18th- 
century system with ill-trained troops. The methods by which such 
troops could compass victory, the way to .fight a " sans culotte " 
battle, were not evolved until later. 


NEES VON ESENBECK, CHRISTIAN GOTTFRIED (1776- 
1858), German botanist and entomologist, was born at Erbach 
on the 14th of February 1776, and was educated at Darmstadt 
and at Jena, where he took the degree of M.D. After spending 
some time in medical practice he was appointed professor of 
botany in Erlangen in 1816. Three years later he became 
professor of natural history in Bonn, and in 183 1 he was appointed 
to the chair of botany in the university of Breslau. In 1848 
he entered political life and made himself so obnoxious to the 
government that in 1851 he was deprived of his professorship, 
and in consequence the latter years of his life were spent in 
great poverty. He died in Breslau on the 16th of March 
1858. 

For about forty years he edited the Nova acta of the " Acad. 
Leopold-Carolina, ' in which several of his own papers were published. 
His earliest memoirs dealt with the ichneumons, and he published 
a Monographic der Ichneumone in 2 vols, in 1828, and Hymenopterorum 
Ichneumonibus affinium monographiae, in 2 vols, in 1834. "is other 
separate works include: Die Algen des sussen Wassers nach ihren 
Entwickelungsstufen dargestellt (1814); Das System der Ptlze und 
Schwamme (1816); Naturgesckichte der europaischen Lebermoose, in 
4 vols. (1833-1838); " Agrostologia Brasiliensis," in the Flora 
Brasiliensis; and a Systema Launnearum (1836). He also wrote 
numerous monographs in Flora, in Linnaea and in other scientific 
German magazines, either alone or along with other well-known 
botanists. His best-known works are those that deal with the 
Fungi, the Hepaticae and the Glumiferae, in all which groups he made 
valuable additions to knowledge. 

His brother THEOnOR Friedrich Ludwig (1787-1837), inspector 
of the botanic gardens at Leiden, and afterwards professor of 
pharmacy at Bonn, also wrote numerous papers on botanical sub- 
jects, dealing more particularly with medicinal plants and their 
products. 


NEFF, FELIX (179&-1829), Swiss Protestant divine and 
philanthropist, was born at Geneva on the 8th of October 
1798. Originally a sergeant of artillery, he decided in 181 9 to 
devote himself entirely to evangelistic work. He was ordained 
to the ministry in 1822, and soon afterwards settled in the valley 
of Freissinieres, where he laboured in the manner of J. F. 
Oberlin, being at one and the same time pastor, schoolmaster, 
engineer and agriculturist. He was so successful that he changed 
the character of the district and its inhabitants. In 1827, 
worn out by his labours, he was obliged to return to his native 
place, where he died two years later. 


NEGAPATAM, a seaport of British India, in the Tanjore 
district of Madras, forming one municipality with Nagore, 
a port 3 m. N. at the mouth of the Vettar river. Pop. (1901) 
57,190. It carries on a brisk trade with the Straits Settlements 
and Ceylon, steamers running once a week to Colombo. The 
chief export is rice. Negapatam is the terminus of a branch of 
the South Indian railway, and contains large railway workshops. 
It is also a depot for coolie emigration. Negapatam was one 
of the earliest settlements of the Protuguese on the Coromandel 
coast. It was taken by the Dutch in 1660, becoming their 
chief possession in India, and by the English in 1781. From 
1799 to n845 it was the headquarters of Tanjore district. There 
is a large population of Labbais, Mahommedans of mixed Arab 
descent, who are keen traders. Jesuit and Wesleyan missions 
are carried on. 


NEGAUNEE, a city of Marquette county, Michigan, U.S.A., 
about 12 m. W. by S. of Marquette and 3 m. E. of Ishpeming, 
in the N. part of the upper peninsula. Pop. (1904) 6797; (1910) 
8460. It is served by the Chicago & North-Wcstern, the Duluth, 
South Shore & Atlantic, and the Lake Superior & Ishpeming 
railways. It is built on a ridge called Iron Mountain, 1564 ft. 
above sea-level, and under and near it are some of the most 
productive iron-ore deposits in the state, the mining of which is 
the principal industry of the city. The settlement of Negaunee 
began about 1870, and the city was chartered in 1873. The 
name is a Chippewa word meaning " first " or " he goes before," 
and is said to have been chosen at the request of the Pioneer 
Iron Company as an equivalent for " Pioneer." 


NEGLIGENCE (Lat. negligenlia, from negligere, to neglect, 
literally " not to pick up "), a ground of civil law liability, and 
in criminal law an element in several offences, the most conspicu- 
ous of which is manslaughter by negligence. In order to establish 
civil liability on the ground of negligence, three things must be 
proved — a duty to take care, the absence of due care, and actual 
damage caused directly by the absence of due care. Mere care- 
lessness gives no right of action unless the person injured can 
show that there was a legal duty to take care. The duty may 
be to the public in general, on the ground that any person who 
does anything which may involve risk to the public is bound to 
take due care to avoid the risk. For instance, in the words of Lord 
Blackburn, " those who go personally or bring property where 
they know that they or it may come into collision with the 
persons or property of others have by law a duty cast upon 
them to use reasonable care and skill to avoid such a collision." 
Where a special duty to an individual is alleged, the duty must 
rest on a contract or undertaking or some similar specific ground. 
Thus, where a surveyor has carelessly given incorrect progress 
certificates, and a mortgagee who has had no contractual relation 
with the surveyor has advanced money on the faith of the 
certificate, the surveyor is not liable to the mortgagee in an action 
of negligence; because he owed no duty to the mortgagee to be 
careful. When a duty to take care is established, the degree of 
care required is now determined by a well-ascertained standard. 
This standard is the amount of care which would be exercised 
in the circumstances by an " average reasonable man." This 
objective standard excludes consideration of the capacity or 
state of mind of the particular individual. It also gets rid of the 
old distinctions between " gross," " ordinary " and " slight " 
negligence, though no doubt the degree of care required varies 
with the circumstances of the case. The application of such a 
standard is a task for which a jury is a very appropriate tribunal. 
In fact the decision of the question whether there has been a 
want of due care is left almost unreservedly to the jury. There 
is this amount of control, that if the judge is of opinion that the 
evidence, if believed, cannot possibly be regarded as showing 
want of due care, or in technical language that tbere is "no 
evidence of negligence," it is his duty to withdraw the case from 
the jury and give judgment for the defendant. Unless the judge 
decides that there is no duty to take care, or that there is no 
evidence of want of care, the question of negligence or no negli- 
gence is wholly for tbe jury. 

Ordinarily a man is responsible only for his own negligence 
and for that of his servants and agents acting within the scope 
of their authority. For the acts or defaults of the servants of 
an independent contractor he is not liable. But in certain cases 
a stricter obligation is imposed on him by law. The occupier of 
premises is under a duty to all persons who go there on business 
which concerns him to see that the premises are in a reasonably 
safe condition so far as reasonable care and skill can make 
them so. Thus he cannot release himself by employing an in- 
dependent contractor to maintain or repair the premises. The 
effect of this doctrine is that the occupier may be liable if it can 
be shown that the independent contractor or his servant has been 
guilty of a want of due care. A similar obligation has been 
enforced in the case of a wreck stranded in a navigable river, 
and the owner was held liable for damage caused by the careless- 
ness of the servant of an independent contractor who had under- 
taken to light the wreck. So too any person who undertakes a 
work likely to cause danger if due care is not taken is liable for 
damage caused by the carelessness of the servant of an inde- 
pendent contractor, so long as the carelessness is not casual or 
collateral to the servant's employment. 

In an action of negligence a familiar defence is " contributory 
negligence." This is a rather misleading expression. It is not 
a sufficient defence to show that the plaintiff was negligent, 
and that his negligence contributed to the harm complained of. 
The plaintiff's negligence will not disentitle him to recover unless 
it is such that without it the misfortune would not have happened, 
nor if the defendant might by the exercise of reasonable care on 
his part have avoided the consequences of the plaintiff's 
negligence. The shortest and plainest way of expressing this 
rule is, that the plaintiff's negligence is no defence unless it was 
the proximate or decisive cause of the injury. There was an 
attempt in recent times to extend this doctrine so as to make 
the contributory negligence of a third person a defence, in cases 
* where the plaintiff, though not negligent himself, was travelling 
in a vehicle or vessel managed by the negligent third person, or 
was otherwise under his control. In such circumstances it was 
said that the plaintiff was " identified " with the third person. 
QVaUc v. North-Eastern Ry. Co., 1858, E. B. & E., 719). This 
case, in the Exchequer Chamber, was an action on behalf of 
an infant by his next friend. The infant, which was five years 
of age, was with its grandmother, who took a half-ticket for 
the child and a ticket for herself to travel by the defendants' 
line; as they were crossing the railway to be ready for the 
train the child was injured by a passing train. The jury found 
that the defendants were guilty of negligence, and that the 
grandmother was guilty of negligence which contributed to the 
accident, while there was no negligence of the infant plaintiff. 
A verdict was entered for the plaintiff, but in the Queen's 
Bench the verdict was entered for the defendants, without 
calling on them to argue, on the ground that the infant was 
identified with its •grandmother. But the case of the 
"Bernina," decided in 1888, where a passenger and an engineer 
on board the " Bushire " were killed in a collision between the 
" Bernina " and the " Bushire " caused by fault in both ships, 
but without fault on the part of the deceased, exploded this 
supposed doctrine, and made it clear that the defence of 
contributory negligence holds good only when the defendant 
contends and proves that the plaintiff was injured by his own 
carelessness. 

The American law of negligence is founded on the English 
common law; but the decisions in different states have occasion- 
ally contradicted English decisions, and also one another. 

See T. Beven, Negligence in Law, 3rd ed., J908; Shearman and 
Redfield, The Law of Negligence (New York), Thompson, Commen- 
taries on Negligence (Indianapolis). (A. Ll. D.) 


NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT, in law, a document or other 
instrument purporting to represent so much money, and the 
property in which passes, like money, by mere delivery. Negoti- 
able instruments arise in either of two ways: (1) by statute, 
(2) by custom of merchants. The most commonly recognized 
negotiable instruments are bills of exchange, promissory notes, 
bills of lading, foreign bonds and debentures payable to bearer. 
Negotiable instruments constitute an exception to the general 
rule that a man cannot give a better title than he has himself 
(see Bill of Exchange). 


NEGRI, ADA (1870- ), Italian poet, was born at Lodi, of an 
artisan family, and became a village school-teacher. Her first 
book of poems, Tempeste (1891), tells the helpless tragedy of the 
forsaken poor, in words of vehement beauty. Her second volume 
of lyrics, Fatalita (1893), confirmed her reputation as a poet, and 
led to her appointment to the normal school at Milan; but her 
later verse, while striking in its sincerity, suffered by a tendency 
to repetition and consequent mannerism. 

NEGRITOS (Span, for " little negroes "), the name originally 
giveu by the Spaniards to the aborigines of the Philippine Islands. 
They are physical weaklings, of low, almost dwarf, stature, with 
very dark skin, closely curling hair, flat noses, thick lips and 
large clumsy feet. The term has, however, been more generally 
applied to one of the great ethnic groups into which the popula- 
tion of the East Indies is divided, and to an apparently kindred 
race in Africa (see Negro). A. de Quatrefages suggests that 
from the parent negroid stem were thrown off two negrito 
branches to the west and east, the Indo-Oceanic and African, 
and that the Akkas, Wochuas, Bat was and Bushmen of the 
Dark Continent are kinsmen of the Andaman Islanders, the 
Sakais of the Malay Peninsula and the Aetas of the Philippines. 
This view has found much acceptance among ethnologists. The 
result of Quatrefages's theory would be to place the negrito 
races closest to the primitive human type, a conclusion apparently 
justified by their physical characteristics. The true negritos 
are always of little stature (the majority under 5 ft.), have 
rounded forms and their skull is brachycephalic or subbrachy- 
cephalic, that is to say, it is relatively short and broad and of 
little height. Their skin is dark brown or black, sometimes 
somewhat yellowish, their hair woolly (scanty on face and body), 
and they have the flat nose and thick lips and other physical 
features of the negro. Among peoples undoubtedly negrito 
are those of the Andaman Islands (g.fl.), the Malay Peninsula 
(q.v.) and some of the Philippines (g.tf.), the best types being 
the Sakais (q.v.) t Mincopies and Aetas. The question of tbe so- 
called negrito races of India, the Oraons, Gonds, &c, is in much 
dispute, Quatrefages believing the Indian aborigines to have 
been negritos, while other ethnologists find the primitive people 
of Hindustan in the Dravidian races. Some authorities have 
placed the Veddahs of Ceylon among the negritos, but their 
straight hair and dolichocephalic skulls are sufficient arguments 
against their inclusion. The negrito is often confounded with 
the Papuan; but the latter, though possessing the same woolly 
hair and being of the same colour, is a large, often muscular man, 
with a long, high skull. 

See A. de Quatrefages, Les Pygmies (Paris, 1887; Eng. trans. 
1895); E. H. Man, The Aborigines of the Andaman Islands (London, 
1885); Giglioli, Nuove notizie sui populi negroidi dell* Asia e special- 
mente sui Negriti (Florence, 1879); Meyer, Album von Philippines 
Typen (Dresden, 1885); Blumehtritt, Ethnograpkie der Philtppinen 
(Gotha, 1892); A. B. Meyer, Die Negritos (Dresden, 1899); A. H. 
Keane, Ethnology; A. C. Haddon in Nature for September 1899. 


NEGRO (from Lat. niger, black), in anthropology, the designa- 
tion of the distinctly dark-skinned, as opposed to the fair, yellow, 
and brown variations of mankind. In its widest sense it embraces 
all the dark races, whose original home is the intertropical and 
sub-tropical regions of the eastern hemisphere, stretching 
roughly from Senegambia, West Africa, to the Fijian Islands in 
the Pacific, between the extreme parallels of the Philippines 
and Tasmania. It is most convenient, however, to refer to the 
dark-skinned inhabitants of this zone by the collective term of 
Negroids, and to reserve the word Negro for the tribes which 
are considered to exhibit in the highest degree the characteristics 
taken as typical of the variety. 

These tribes are found in Africa; their home being south of 
the Sahara and north of a not very well-defined line running 
roughly from the Gulf of Biafra with a south-easterly trend 
across the equator to the mouth of the Tana. In this tract 
are found the true negroes; and their nearest relatives, the 
Bantu-negroids, are found to the south of the last-mentioned 
line. The relation of the yellowish-brown Bushman and Hotten- 
tot peoples of the southern extremity of Africa to the negro is 
uncertain; they possess certain negroid characters, the tightly 
curled hair, the broad nose, the tendency towards prognathism; 
but their colour and a number of psychological and cultural 
differences would seem to show that the relation is not close. 
Between the two a certain affinity seems to exist, and the 
Hottentot is probably the product of an early intermixture of 
the first Hamito-Bantu immigrants with the Bushman aborigines 
(see Africa: Ethnology). The relation of the negroids of Africa 
to those of Asia (southern India and Malaysia) and Australasia 
cannot be discussed with profit owing to lack of evidence; still 
less the theories which have been put forward to account for 
the wide dispersal from what seems to be a single stock. It will 
be sufficient to say that the two groups have in common a 
number of well-defined characteristics of which the following 
are the chief: A dark skin, varying from dark brown> reddish- 
brown, or chocolate to nearly black; dark tightly curled hair, 
flat in transverse section, 1 of the " woolly " or the " frizzly " 
type; a greater or less tendency to prognathism; eyes dark 
brown with yellowish cornea; nose more or less broad and flat; 
and large teeth. 

Sharing these characteristics, but distinguished by short 
stature and brachycephaly, is a group to which the name Negrito 
(q.v.) has been given; with this exception the tendency among 
the negroids appears to be towards tall stature and doiichoce- 
phaly in proportion as they approach the pure negro type. As 
the most typical representatives of the variety are found in 
Africa, the Asiatic and Australasian negroids may be dismissed 
with this introduction. The negro and negroid population of 
America, the descendants of the slaves imported from West 
Africa, and in a less degree, from the Mozambique coast, before 
the abolition of the slave-trade, are treated separately below. 

In Africa three races have intermingled to a certain extent 
with the negro; the Libyans (Berbers: q.v.) in the Western 
Sudan; and the Hamitic races (q.v.) and Arabs (q.v.) in the east. 
The identity of the people who have amalgamated with the 
negro to form the Bantu-speaking peoples in the southern portion 
of the continent is not certain, but as the latter appear to ap- 
proach the Hamites in those characteristics in. which they differ 
from the true negroes, it seems probable that they are infused 
with a proportion of Hamitic blood. The true negroes show great 
similarity of physical characteristics ; besides those already 
mentioned they are distinguished by length of arm, especially 
of fore arm, length of leg, smallness of calf and projection of heel; 
characteristics which frequently fail to appear to the same degree 

1 This point has been fully determined by P. A. Brown (Classifica- 
tion of Mankind by the Hair, &c), who shows conclusively that, 
unlike true hair and like true wool, the negro hair is flat, issues from 
the epidermis at a right angle, is spirally twisted or crisped, has no 
central duct, the colouring matter being disseminated through the 
cortex and intermediate fibres, while the cortex itself is covered with 
numerous rough, pointed filaments adhering loosely to the shaft; 
lastly, the negro pile will felt, like wool, whereas true hair cannot be 
felted. 

among the Bantu, who are also as a rule less tall, less prognathous, 
less platyrrhine and less dark. A few tribes in the heart of the 
negro domain (the Welle district of Belgian Congo) show a 
tendency to round head, shorter stature and fairer complexion; 
but there seems reason to suppose that they have received an 
infusion of Libyan (or less probably Hamitic) or Negrito blood. 

The colour of the skin, which is also distinguished by a velvety 
surface and a characteristic odour, is due not to the presence of 
any special pigment, but to the greater abundance of the colour- 
ing matter in the Malpighian mucous membrane between the 
inner or true skin and the epidermis or scarf skin. 2 This colouring 
matter is not distributed equally over the body, and does not 
reach its fullest development until some weeks after birth; 
so that new-born babies are a reddish chocolate or copper colour. 
But excess of pigmentation is not confined to the skin; spots 
of pigment are often found in some of the internal organs, such 
as the liver, spleen, &c. Other characteristics appear to be a 
hypertrophy of the organs of excretion, a more developed venous 
system, and a less voluminous brain, as compared with the 
white races. 

In certain of the characteristics mentioned above the negro 
would appear to stand on a lower evolutionary plane than the 
white man, and to be more closely related to the highest anthro- 
poids. The characteristics are length of arm, prognathism, 
a heavy massive cranium with large zygomatic arches, flat nose 
depressed at base, &c. But in one important respect, the 
character of the hair,, the white man stands in closer relation 
to the higher apes than does the Negro. 

Mentally the negro is inferior to the white. The remark of 
F. Manetta, made after a long study of the negro in America, 
may be taken as generally true of the whole race: " the negro 
children were sharp, intelligent and full of vivacity, but on 
approaching the adult period a gradual change set in. The 
intellect seemed to become clouded, animation giving place 
to a sort of lethargy, briskness yielding to indolence. We must 
necessarily suppose that the development of the negro and white 
proceeds on different lines. While with the latter the volume of 
the brain grows with the expansion of the brainpan, in the 
former the growth of the brain is on the contrary arrested by 
the premature closing of the cranial sutures and lateral pressure 
of the frontal bone. 3 This explanation is reasonable and even 
probable as a contributing cause; but evidence is lacking on the 
subject and the arrest or even deterioration in mental develop- 
ment is no doubt very largely due to the fact that after puberty 
sexual matters take the first place in the negro's life and thoughts. 
At the same time his environment has not been such as would tend 
to produce in him the restless energy which has led to the progress 
of the white race; and the easy conditions of tropical life and 
the fertility of the soil have reduced the struggle for existence 
to a minimum. But though the mental inferiority of the negro 
to [the white or yellow races is a fact, it has often been ex- 
aggerated; the negro is largely the creature of his environment, ' 

	2 It is also noteworthy that the dark colour seems to depend neither 
	on geographical position, the isothermals of greatest heat, nor even 
	altogether on racial purity. The extremes of the chromatic scale are 
	found in juxtaposition throughout the whole negro domain, in Sene- 
	gambia, the Gabun, upper Nile basin, lower Congo, Shari valley, 
	Mozambique. ^ In the last region M de Froberville determined the 
	presence of thirty-one different shades from dusky or yellow-brown 
	to sooty black. Some of the sub- negroid and mixed races, such as 
	many Abyssinians, Galla, Jolof and Mandingo, are quite as black as 
	the darkest full-blood negro. A general similarity in the outward 
	conditions of soil, atmosphere, climate, food charged with an excess 
	of carbon, such as the fruit of the butter-tree, and other undetermined 
	causes have tended to develop a tendency towards dark shades every- 
	where in the negro domain apart from the bias mainly due to an 
	original stain of black blood. Perhaps the most satisfactory theory 
	explains the excessive development of pigment in the dark-skinned 
	races as a natural protection against the ultra-violet rays in which 
	tropical light is so rich and which are destructive of protoplasm 
	(see C. E. Woodruff, Tropical Light, London, 1905). The expression 
	" jet black " is applied by Schweinfurth to the upper-Nilotic Shilluk, 
	Nuer and Dinka, while the neighbouring Bongo and Mittu are de- 
	scribed as of a " red-brown " colour "like the soil upon which they 
	reside " (Heart of Africa, vol. i. ch. iv.). 

	5 La Razza Negra nel suo stato selvaggio, &c. (Turin, 1864), p. 20. 

and it is not fair to judge of his mental capacity by tests taken 
directly from the environment of the white man, as for instance 
tests in mental arithmetic; skill in reckoning is necessary to the 
white race, and it has cultivated this faculty; but it is not 
necessary to the negro. 

On the other hand negroes far surpass white men in acuteness 
of vision, hearing, sense of direction and topography. A native 
who has once visited a particular locality will rarely fail to 
recognize it again. For the rest, the mental constitution of the 
negro is very similar to that of a child, normally good-natured 
and cheerful, but subject to sudden fits of emotion and passion 
during which he is capable of performing acts of singular atrocity, 
impressionable, vain, but often exhibiting in the capacity of 
servant a dog-like fidelity which has stood the supreme test. 
Given suitable training, the negro is capable of becoming a 
craftsman of considerable skill, particularly in metal work, 
carpentry and carving. The bronze castings by the cire perdue 
process, and the cups and horns of ivory elaborately carved, 
which were produced by the natives of Guinea after their 
intercourse with the Portuguese of the 16th century, bear ample 
witness to this. But the rapid decline and practical evanescence 
of both industries, when that intercourse was interrupted, shows 
that the native craftsman was raised for the moment ^above his 
normal level by direct foreign inspiration, and was unable to 
sustain the high quality of his work when that inspiration failed. 

In speaking of the form or forms of culture found among negro 
and negroid tribes, the dependence of the native upon his 
environment must be kept in mind, particularly in Africa, where 
interchange of customs is continually taking place among 
neighbours. 

Thus the forest regions are distinguished by a particular form 
of culture which differs from that prevailing in the more open 
country (see Africa: Ethnology). But it may be said generally 
that the negro is first and foremost an agriculturist. The negritcs 
are on a lower cultural plane; they are nomadic hunters who 
do no cultivation whatever. Next in importance to agriculture 
come hunting and fishing and, locally, cattle-keeping. The 
last isno't strictly typical of negro culture at all; nearly all the 
tribes by whom it is practised are of mixed origin, and their 
devotion to cattle seems to vary inversely with the purity of race. 
The most striking exception to this statement is the Dinka of 
the upper Nile, the whole of whose existence centres round the 
cattle pen. Of the other tribes where pastoral habits obtain to 
a greater or less extent, the Masai have a large percentage of 
Hamitic blood, the eastern and southern Bantu-speaking negroids 
are also of mixed descent, &c. 

The social conditions are usually primitive, especially among 
the negroes proper, being based on the. village community ruled 
by a chief. Where the country is open, or where the forest 
is not so thick as to present any great obstacle to communication, 
it has often happened that a chief has extended his rule over 
several villages and has ultimately built up a kingdom adminis- 
tered by sub-chiefs of various grades, and^has even established 
a court with a regular hierarchy of officials. - Benin and Dahomey 
are instances of this. But the region * where this " empire- 
building " has reached its greatest proportions lies to the south 
of the forest belt in the territory of the Bantu negroids, where 
arose the states of Lunda, Cazembe, &c. 

The domestic life of the negro is based upon polygyny, and 
marriage is almost always by purchase. So vital is polygyny to 
the native social system that the attempts made by missionaries 
to abolish plurality of wives would, if successful (a contingency 
unthinkable under present conditions), result in the most serious 
social disorder. Not only would an enormous section of the 
population be deprived of all means of support, but the native 
wife would be infinitely harder worked; agriculture, the task of 
the women, would be at a standstill; and infanticide would 
probably assume dangerous proportions. 

Descent in the negro world is on the whole more often reckoned 
through the female, though many tribes with a patriarchal, 
system are found. Traces of totemism arc found sporadically, 
but are rare. 

Of the highest importance socially are the secret societies, 
which are found in their highest development among the negroes 
of the west coast, and in a far less significant form among some 
of the Bantu negroids of the western forest district. In their 
highest form these societies transcend the tribal divisions, and the 
tie which binds the individual to the society takes precedence of 
all others. But the secret society cannot be called a definitely 
negro institution, since it is found in the west only. 

As an agriculturist the negro is principally a vegetarian, 
but this form of diet is not the result of direct choice; meat is 
everywhere regarded as a great delicacy, and no opportunity 
of obtaining it is ever neglected, with one exception — that the 
cattle-keeping tribes rarely slaughter for food, because cattle 
are a form of currency. Fish is also an important article of diet 
in the neighbourhood of large rivers, especially the Nile and 
Congo. It is worthy of note that the two cultivated plants 
which form the mainstay of native life, manioc in the west and 
centre and mealies in the south and east, are neither of African 
origin. 

Cannibalism is found in its simplest form in Africa. In that 
continent the majority of cannibal tribes eat human flesh because 
they like it, and not from any magical motive or from lack of 
other animal food. In fact it is noticeable that the tribes most 
addicted to this practice inhabit just those districts where game 
is most plentiful. Among the true negroes it is confined mainly 
to the Welle and Ubangi districts, though found sporadically (and 
due to magical motives) on the west coast, and among the Bantu 
negroids in the south-western part of Belgian Congo and the 
Gabun. 

With regard to crafts the most important and typical is that 
of iron smelting and working. No negro tribe has been found 
of which the culture is typical of the Stone age; or, indeed, 
which makes any use of stone implements except to crush ore 
and hammer metal. Even these are rough pieces of stone of 
convenient size, not shaped in any way by chipping or grinding. 
Doubtless the richness of the African soil in metal ores rendered 
the Stone age in Africa a period of very short duration (see 
Africa: Ethnology). A good deal of aptitude is shown in the 
forging of iron, considering the primitive nature of the tools. 
Considerable skill in carving is also found in the west and among 
the Bantu negroids, especially of Belgian Congo south of the 
Congo. Weaving is practised to a large extent in the west; 
the true native material being palm-leaf fibre. The cultivation 
of cotton, which has become important in West Africa, deals 
with an exotic material and has been subjected to foreign 
influences. Among the Bantu of the Kasai district the art of 
weaving palm-cloth reaches its highest level, and in the east 
cot ton- weaving is again found. Pottery-making is almost uni- 
versal, though nowhere has it reached a very advanced stage; the 
wheel is unknown, though an appliance used on the lower Congo 
displays the principle in very rudimentary form. The produc- 
tion of fire by means of friction was universal, the method known 
as " twirling " being in vogue, i.e. the rapid rotation between 
the palms of a piece of hard wood upon a piece of soft wood. 

Trading is practised either by direct barter or through the 
medium of rude forms of currency which vary according to 
locality. Value is reckoned among the tribes with pastoral 
tendencies in cattle and goats; among the eastern negroes 
by hoe-and spear-blades and salt blocks; in the west by cowries, 
brass rods, and bronze armlets (manilas); in Belgian Congo 
variously by olivella shells, brass rods, salt, goats and fowls, 
copper ingots and iron spear-blades, &c. 

As regards religion, the question of environment is again 
important; in the western forests where communities are small 
the negro is a fetishist, though his fetishism is often combined 
more or less with nature worship. Where communication is 
easier the nature worship becomes more systematic, and definite 
supernatural agencies are recognized, presiding over definite 
spheres of human life. 1 Where feudal kingdoms have been formed, 
ancestor- worship begins to appear and often assumes paramount 

	~ l The three volumes by Colonel Ellis mentioned in the biblio- 
	graphy form an excellent study of the development of negro religion. 

importance. In fact this form of religion is typical of all the 
eastern and southern portion of the continent (see Africa: 
Ethnology). With the negro, as with most primitive peoples, 
it is the malignant powers which receive attention from man, 
with a view to propitiation or coercion. Beneficent agencies 
require no attention, since, from their very nature, they must 
continue to do good. The negro attitude towards the super- 
natural is based frankly on fear; gratitude plays no part in it. 
A characteristic feature of the western culture area, among both 
negro and Bantu negroid tribes, is the belief that any form of 
death except by violence must be due to evil magic exercised 
by, or through the agency of, some human individual; to dis- 
cover the guilty party the poison ordeal is freely used. A 
similar form of ordeal is found in British Central Africa, to dis- 
cover magicians, and the wholesale " smelling-out " of " witches," 
often practised for political reasons, is a well-known feature 
of the culture of the Zulu-Xosa tribes. Everywhere magic, 
both sympathetic and imitative, is practised, both by the ordinary 
individual and by professional magicians, and most medical 
treatment is based on this, althou'gh the magician is usually a 
herbalist of some skill. Where the rainfall is uncertain, the 
production of rain by magical means is one of the chief duties 
of the magician, a duty which becomes paramount in the eastern 
plains among negroes and Bantu negroids alike. But the negroes 
and negroids have been considerably influenced by exotic 
religions, chiefly by Mahommedanism along the whole extent 
of country bordering the Sahara and in the east. Christianity 
has made less progress, and the reason is not far to seek. Islam 
is simple, categorical and easily comprehended; it tends far 
less to upset the native social system, especially in the matter 
of polygyny, and at the same time discourages indulgence in 
strong drink. Moreover the number of native missionaries is 
considerable. Christianity has none of these advantages, but 
possesses two great drawbacks as far as the negro is concerned. 
It is not sufficiently categorical, but leaves too much to the 
individual, and it discountenances polygyny. The fact that it 
is divided into sects, more or less competitive among them- 
selves, is another disadvantage which can hardly be overrated. 
This division has not, it is true, as yet had much influence upon 
the evangelization of Africa, since the various missions have 
mostly restricted themselves each to a particular sphere; still, 
it is a defect in Christianity, as compared with Islam, which will 
probably make itself felt in Africa as it has in China. 

As regards language, the Bantu negroids all speak dialects of 
one tongue (see Bantu Languages). Among the negroes the 
most extraordinary linguistic confusion prevails, half a dozen 
neighbouring villages in a -small area often speaking each a 
separate language. All are of the agglutinating order. No 
absolutely indigenous form of script exists; though the Hausa 
tongue has been reduced to writing without European assistance. 1 

Authorities. — J. Deniker, Races of Man (London, 1900); A. H. 
Keane, Ethnology (London, 1896); Man Past and Present (London, 
1900); A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-speaking Peoples (1887); The Ewe- 
speaking Peoples (1890); The Yoruba-speaking Peoples (1894); 
B. Ankermann, " Kulturkreise in Afrika," Zeit.f. Eth. (1905), p. 54. 
See also Africa, § 3, Ethnology. (T. A. J.) 

Negroes in the United Stales. 

After the migration of the European fair-skinned races in 
large numbers to other parts of the earth occupied by people 
of darker colour, the adjustment of relations between the diverse 
races developed a whole series of problems almost unknown 
to the ancient world or to the life of modern Europe. The wider 
the diversity of physique and especially of skin colour, the greater 
the danger of friction. The more serious the effort to secure 
industrial and social co-operation under representative institu- 
tions, the graver have become the difficulties. They have been 
and are perhaps more acute in the United States than elsewhere, 

	1 The Vai alphabet, " invented " by a native, Doalu Bukere, in 
	the first half of the 19th century, owed its inspiration to European 
	influence, and of the characters " many . . . are clumsy adaptations 
	of Roman letters or of conventional signs used by Europeans " 
	(Sir H. H. Johnston, Liberia, p. 1107 foil., London, 1906). 

because there the lightest and the darkest races have com- 
mingled, because of the theory on which the government of the 
country nominally rests,, that each freeman should be given 
an equal chance to improve his industrial position and an equal 
voice in deciding political questions, and because of the almost 
irreconcilable differences in the public opinion of the two great 
sections to only one of which do the problems come home as 
everyday matters. They were not solved by the Civil War 
and emancipation, but their nature was radically altered. Neither 
the earlier system of slavery nor the governmental theory during 
the radical reconstruction period that race differences should 
be ignored has proved workable, and the trend is now towards 
some modus vivendi between these extremes. 

The only definition of negro having any statutory basis in 
the United States is that given in the legislation of many Southern 
states prohibiting intermarriage between a white person and 
" a person who has one-eighth or more of African blood." 
Census enumerators in their counts of the American people 
since 1790 have distinguished the two main races of whites and 
negroes, but in so doing they have never been given a definition 
or criterion of race. Consequently they followed the judgment 
of the community enumerated, which usually classes as negro 
all persons known or believed to have in their veins any ad- 
mixture of negro blood. It is probable that this line, the so- 
called " colour line," which is emphasized in regions where 
negroes are numerous by many legal, economic and social dis- 
criminations between the races, is drawn with substantial 
accuracy. Far different has been the result of governmental 
efforts to draw another line within the group of negroes as thus 
defined, that between the negroes of pure African blood and those 
of mixed negro and white blood. This distinction has no legal 
significance, for negroes of pure blood and negroes of mixed blood 
are subject to the same provisions of law, and at least for the 
whites it has little social or economic significance. An attempt 
to draw it was made at each census betweeen 1850 and 1890 
inclusive, and the results, so far as they were published, indicate 
that between one-sixth and one-ninth of the negroes in the United 
States have some admixture of white blood. The figures were 
reached through thousands of -census enumerators, nearly all 
of whom were white. Of recent years an effort has been made 
on the part of negro investigators to get an answer to the same 
question by the careful study of communities selected as typical. 
The classification of about 39,000 coloured people, most of them 
in different parts of Georgia, with a study of the other available 
data and inferences from a somewhat wide observation, led Dr 
Dubois to the conclusion that " at least one-third of the negroes 
of the United States have recognizable traces of white blood." 

Perhaps we may believe with some confidence that the in- 
formation from white sources understates, and that from negro 
sources overstates, the proportion, and that the true proportion 
cf mulattoes in the United States is between one-sixth and one- 
third of all negroes. To infer that the true proportion in 1850, 
i860, 1870 and 1890, the dates to which the census figures relate, 
was much less than the true proportion in 1895 to 1900, to which 
the unofficial figures relate, is contrary to the general trend of 
the evidence. As the law and the social opinion of the Southern 
whites make little or nothing of this distinction between negroes 
of pure blood and mulattoes, it is often regarded as less important 
than it really is. The recognized leaders of the race are almost 
invariably persons of mixed blood, and the qualities which have 
made them leaders are derived certainly in part and perhaps 
mainly from their white ancestry. Wherever large numbers 
of full-blooded negroes and of persons of mixed central or north 
European and negro blood have lived in the same community 
for some generations, there is a strong and growing tendency 
to establish a social line between them. 

The difficulty of ascertaining the number of mulattoes in 
the United States and the tendency of the testimony to be 
modified by the opinion or desire of the race from which it comes 
are typical. There is hardly any important aspect of the subject 
upon which the testimony of seemingly competent and impartial 
witnesses is not materially affected by the influence of the race 
to which the witnesses belong. Under these circumstances it 
seems necessary to assume that the testimony of the official 
documents of the federal government is correct, unless clear 
evidence, internal or external, refutes it. The following state- 
ments of fact rest mainly on those sources. 

The number of negroes living in the (continental) United 
States in 1908 was about nine and three-quarter millions, and 
if those in Porto Rico and Cuba be included it reached ten and 
two-thirds millions. This number is greater than the total 
population of the United States was in 1820, and nearly as great 
as the population of Norway, Sweden and Denmark. 

During the colonial period, and down to the changes initiated 
by the invention of the cotton gin, negroes were distributed 
with some evenness along the Atlantic coast. Between the date 
of that invention and the Civil War, and largely as a result of 
the changes the cotton gin set in motion, the tendency was to- 
wards a concentration of the negroes in the great cotton-growing 
area of the country. In 1700, for example, one-ninth of the 
population of the colony of New York was negro; in 1900 only 
one-seventieth of the population of the empire state belonged 
to that race. The division line between the Northern and 
Southern states adopted by the Census Office in 1880, and em- 
ployed since that date in its publications, is Mason and Dixon's 
line, or the southern boundary of Pennsylvania, the Ohio river 
from Pennsylvania to its mouth and the southern boundary of 
Missouri and Kansas. In the states north of that line, the 
Northern states, in all of which but Missouri negro slavery either 
never existed or else was abolished before the Civil War, the 
white population increased tenfold and the negro population 
only fourfold between 1790 and i860. In the states south of 
that line, on the contrary, the Southern states, the negro popula- 
tion in the same period increased sixfold and the white population 
not so fast. It was a widespread opinion shortly after the Civil 
War that the emancipated slaves would speedily disperse through 
the country, and that this process would greatly simplify the 
problems arising from the contact of the two races. This expec- 
tation has not been entirely falsified by the result. Between 
i860 and 1900 the negroes in the Northern states increased 
somewhat more rapidly than the northern whites, and those 
in the Southern states much less rapidly than the Southern 
whites. As a result, one-tenth of the American negroes lived 
in 1908 in the Northern states, a larger proportion than at any 
time during the 19th century. But this process of dispersion 
is so slow as not materially to affect the prospects for the im- 
mediate future, and it is still almost as true as at any earlier 
date that the region in which cotton is a staple crop coincides 
in the main with the region in which negroes are more than one- 
half of the total population. 

This appears if a comparison is made between the northern 
boundary of the so-called Austroriparian zone of plant and animal 
life in the United States, that is " the zone of the cotton plant, 
sugar cane, rice, pecan and peanut," and the northern boundary 
of the " black belt " or region in which the negroes are a majority 
of the population. The coincidence of the two is very close, 
and was much closer in 1900 than* in i860. It appears yet more 
clearly by a comparison between a map showing the counties 
in which at least 5% of the area was planted to cotton in 1899 
and another map showing the " black belt " counties in 1900. 
, The black belt stretches north through eastern Virginia beyond 
the cotton belt, and the cotton belt stretches south-west through 
eastern central Texas beyond the black belt, but between these 
two extremes there is a close agreement in the boundaries of the 
two areas. 

The question " Have the American negroes progressed, materi- 
ally and morally, since emancipation?" is generally answered 
in the affirmative. But even on this question entire unanimity 
is lacking. A considerable body of men could still be found 
in 1910, mainly among Southern whites, who held that the con- 
dition of the race was worse than it was in the days of slavery. 
Probably all competent students would admit, however, that 
the race has differentiated since 1865, that the distance separating 
the highest tenth from the lowest tenth has become wider, that 
the highest tenth is far better and far better off than formerly, 
and the lowest tenth is worse and perhaps also worse off than 
in slavery. Under such circumstances there are no adequate 
objective tests of progress. The pessimist points to the alleged 
increase of idleness and crime, the meliorist to a demonstrated 
decrease of illiteracy and to considerable accumulations of 
property. The large majority of competent students believe 
that the American negroes have progressed, materially and 
morally, since emancipation, that the central or average 
point is higher than in 1865, although such persons differ 
widely among themselves regarding the amount of that 
progress. 

It would be generally but not universally held, also, that 
the negroes in the United States progressed under slavery, 
that they were far better qualified for incorporation as a vital 
and contributing element of the country's civilization at the 
time of their emancipation than they were on arrival or than 
an equal number of their African kindred would have been. 
But probably the rate of progress has been more rapid under 
freedom than it was under slavery. 

The evidence regarding the progress of the American 
negro may be grouped under the following heads: numbers, 
birth-rate, health, wealth, education, occupations, morals, 
citizenship. 

Numbers, — The dictum of Adam Smith, " The most decisive mark 
of the prosperity of any country is the increase of the number of its 
inhabitants," may be applied, perhaps after changing the word 
" decisive " to " obvious," to the nepro population of the United 
States. The negro population of Africa is probably not increasing 
at all. But during the 19th century the negroes in the United States 
increased nearly ninefold. They are now much the most thriving 
offshoot of the race and the most civilized and progressive group of 
negroes in the world. Under a slavery system not permitting the 
importation of new supplies a high rate of increase by excess of 
births over deaths is an advantage to the master class. During the 
slavery period and until about 1880 the increase of southern whites 
and of southern negroes proceeded at about the same rate. But 
during the last score of years in the century the increase of negroes 
was much less rapid, the rate being only about three-fifths of that 
prevailing among southern whites. 

Birth-rate. — As the increase of negro population is slackening, as 
the immigration and emigration of negroes are insignificant in 
amount, and as the death-rate is about stationary, it is reasonable to 
infer that the birth-rate is dwindling. This cannot be stated with 
certainty, for there are no registration records giving the number of 
births for any large and representative group of American negroes. 
A good index to the birth-rate, however, may be derived from the 
proportion of children under 5 years of age to women 15 to 49 years 
of age. In the returns negroes are not distinguished from Indians 
and Mongolians. To minimize this slight source of error and at the 
same time to secure a more representative and homogeneous popu- 
lation group, the following figures are confined to the Southern or 
former slave states : — 

	Date. 
	Children under 5 Years of Age to 
	1000 Women 15 to 49 Years of Age 
	in the Southern States. 
	Negroes. 
	Whites. 
	1850 
	i860 
	1870 
	1880 
	1890 
	1900 
	705 
	688 
	661 
	737 
	601 
	577 
	695 
	682 
	601 
	656 
	580 
	58i 

These figures indicate that the proportion of children to child- 
bearing women, and hence probably the birth-rate, changed in the 
same direction during each decade between 1850 and 1890. Between 
1850 and 1870 the proportion of negro children decreased about 6% 
and that of white children about 14%; between 1870 and 1880 the 
proportion of negro children increased about 12% and that of white 
children about 9%; between 1880 and 1890 the proportion of negro 
children decreased about 18 % and that of white children about 12 %; 
between 1890 and 1900 the proportion of negro children decreased 
about 4% and that of white children remained practically the same. 
Before the war the proportion of living children to potential mothers 
was about the same for the two races at the South, for the first three 
censuses after the war the proportion of negro children was much 
greater than of white children, but by 1900 that proportion was less, 
and the movement during the decade suggests that the proportions 
may have begun to change in opposite directions. 

Some light upon the influences at work may be derived from the 
comparison between city and country at the south. 

	Date. 
	Children under 5 Years of Age to 1000 Women 
	15 to 44 Years of Age in the Southern States. 
	Cities having at least 
	25,000 Inhabitants. 
	Smaller Cities and 
	Country Districts. 
	Negroes. 
	Whites. 
	Negroes. 
	Whites. 
	1890 
	1900 
	319 
	271 
	391 
	374 
	688 
	668 
	665 
	671 

The noteworthy inference from these figures is that the proportion 
of negro children in southern cities was very low and decreasing. 
In 1890 it was about five-sixths, and in 1900 less than three-fourths 
of the proportion of children among whites in these cities. The 
differences in northern cities are equally marked. City life appears to 
exercise a powerful and increasing influence in reducing the birth- 
rate among the negroes. 

Health, — The prosperity and progress of a population group are 
indicated, not merely by growth in numbers but also by the longevity 
of its members. This vitality is roughly measured by the death-rate. 
Other things being equal, a low and sinking death-rate is evidence 
of a high and increasing average duration of life. In the United 
States vital statistics are in charge of the several states and cities, 
and are often defective or entirely lacking. In 1890 and 1900 the 
Federal government compiled such as were of importance, and in 
1864 an official compilation was made of death-rates of negroes 
before the war. The results are worth consideration. 

	Date. 
	Negro 
	Deaths. 
	Negro 
	Death-rate. 
	White Death-rate 
	at same Time and 
	Places. 
	Mainly between 
	1818-1863 
	1890 
	1900 
	106,217 
	28,579 
	37.029 
	35*0 
	29.9 
	29-6 
	27-0 
	19-1 
	17-3 

These figures indicate that the death-rate of each race decreased 
during a half century, but that the decrease among negroes was 
much less rapid than among whites. The negro death-rate at the 
earliest period exceeded that of the whites by 8*0 per thousand, or 
three-tenths of the smaller rate. At the latest period the difference 
was 12-3 per thousand, or seven-tenths of the smaller rate. But 
these figures speak for negroes living mainly in cities where the 
proportion of children and elderly persons is small and that of negroes 
at the healthy ages is large. After making a proper allowance for 
these differences in sex and age composition, it is found that the true 
death-rate of negroes in the registration area is about twice as high 
as that of a white population of like sex and age structure. Whether 
the difference between negro and white residents of the country 
districts in the south is equally great, we have no means for 
judging. 

The leading causes of death among negroes in the registration area 
arranged in the order of importance are stated below. The ratio to 
the corresponding death-rate among whites is added, but the differ- 
ences are affected partly by the greater proportion of negroes in the 
southern cities and the different incidence of diseases in the two 
regions^ and partly by probable differences in the accuracy of 
diagnosis of disease in the two sections and by physicians attending 
the two races. 

	Causes of Death. 
	Negro Death-rate 
	per 1000. 
	Ratio to White 
	Death-rate = 100. 
	Consumption .... 
	Pneumonia 
	Diseases of the nervous 
	system 
	Heart disease and dropsy . 
	Diarrheal diseases . 
	Diseases of the urinary 
	organs . ... 
	Typhoid fever .... 
	Old age 
	Malarial fever .... 
	Cancer and tumour 
	Diphtheria and croup . 
	Influenza 
	Whooping cough 
	Diseases of the liver 
	Measles 
	Scarlet fever 
	4*85 
	3*55 
	3-o8 
	2-21 
	2-14 
	i'57 
	•68 
	•67 
	•63 
	•48 
	•32 
	•32 
	.29 
	•21 
	•15 
	•03 
	280 
	192 
	144 
	161 
	165 
	157 
	204 
	125 
	969 
	72 
	69 
	136 
	239 
	92 
	US 
	25 

These figures bring out in a striking way the very high mortality, 
absolute and relative, of the American negro from consumption. 

When one considers both the great number of deaths caused by 
consumption and pneumonia, 28*4% of the deaths from all causes 
in 1900 and the very high death-rate of negroes from these diseases, 
it is no exaggeration to say that the main cause that the death-rate 
of that race is double that of the white race lies in the ravages of 
these two scourges of mankind. The difference between the two 
races in this respect has apparently increased since 1890, for at that 
date the death-rate of negroes in the registration area from con- 
sumption was only 2*37 times that of the whites, and its death-rate 
from pneumonia only 1*53 times that of the whites. Here as else- 
where there has been an improvement as measured by an absolute 
standard, and at the same time an increased divergence from the 
conditions prevailing among the more numerous race. 

Wealth. — An estimate of the property now held by American 
negroes made in 1904 by a committee of the American Economic 
Association indicated about $300,000,000, with a probable error of 
perhaps $50,000,000. This figure indicates a per capita wealth of 
about $34. We have no means for judging what the possessions of 
the race were at the time of its emancipation, but in i860 there were 
nearly half a million free negroes in the country, many of them 
holding property and some of them wealthy. The per capita wealth 
of the white population of the United States in 1900 was about 
$1320 and that of southern whites about $885, indicating that 
the property of the average negro person or family was about 
one twenty-fifth that of the average southern white person or 
family. 

Education, — It is often supposed that the American negroes in 
1865 were without any accumulated property and without any start 
in education. Neither assumption is warranted. On the contrary, 
about two-fifths of the adult free negroes in the country were reported 
in 1850 and i860 as able to read and write, and there is some reason 
to believe that not far from one-twelfth of the adult slaves also had 
learned to write. In ioxx) more than half of the negroes at least ten 
years of age could write, and the proportion was rising at a rate 
which, if continued, would almost eliminate illiteracy by the middle 
of the present century ^ 

The problem of providing adequate educational facilities for negro 
children is made more difficult by the maintenance in all the former 
slave states of two sets of schools, one for each race. At the present 
time those states with one-third of their population negro assign 
about one-fifth of their public school funds to the support of negro 
schools. About $155,000,000 or one-sixth of the entire amount 
spent by southern communities for public schools between 1870 and 
1906, has gone to support schools for the negroes. The same cause 
has^ been aided by many private gifts from individuals and organi- 
zations interested in negro education, among which the Peabpdy 
Education Fund of about $2,000,000, now in course of dissolution, 
and the John F. Slater Fund, now of about $1,500,000, may be 
mentioned. Wide differences of opinion exist regarding the char- 
acter of education needed for the race, and the present trend is 
towards a greater emphasis upon manual and industrial training as 
of prime importance for the great majority. 

Occupations. — The slavery system furnished industrial training to 
many slaves who seemed likely to turn it to their master's advantage. 
When this system was abolished the opportunities for such training 
open to the race were decreased, and it is doubtful whether even yet 
as large a proportion of skilled negro artizans are being trained in the 
south as were produced there before the Civil War. The demand for 
skilled labour in the south is being met more and more by white 
labour. This derives an advantage from a prejudice in its favour on 
the part of white employers even when other things are equal, from 
its greater skill and efficiency in most cases, its better opportunity 
to accumulate or to borrow the requisite capital, its superior in- 
dustry, persistence and thrift. In consequence negroes are being 
more and more excluded from the field of skilled labour in the 
south. 

Morals.— -As the death-rate is believed to vary inversely as health 
and longevity and thus to afford a measure of those characteristics, 
so the crime-rate is often thought to vary inversely as morality, and 
thus to measure the self-control, good order and moral health of the 
community. But the analogy cannot be pushed. The crime- rate 
is everywhere far more difficult, and in the United States impossible 
to ascertain. And even if known the connexion between the in- 
frequency of crime or of specific sorts of crime and the prevalence of * 
good order, obedience to law and morality is far more indirect and 
subject to far more qualifications than the connexion between the 
death-rate and health. Still the data regarding crime with all their 
defects are the best available index of moral progress or retrogression. 
It must be remembered that the comparative infrequency ofcrime 
among slaves, even if it existed, is no proof of the absence of criminal 
tendencies and actions. Offences on the part of slaves, or at least 
minor offences which are always far more numerous than serious 
offences, were dealt with in most cases privately and without in- 
voking the machinery of the law. An apparent increase of crime 
since emancipation might be due merely to the becoming patent of 
what was before latent. The only statistical measure of crime 
now possible in the United States is the number of prisoners in 
confinement at a given date, and these figures are an inadequate 
and misleading substitute for true judicial statistics. The evidence 
they afford, however, is far better than any other in existence and 
deserves careful attention. Enumerations of prisoners affording 
comparable results were made in 1880, 1890 and 1904. 

	Date. 
	Negro 
	Prisoners. 
	Number per 
	100,000 Pop. 
	1880 
	1890 
	1904 
	16,089 
	24.277 
	26,087 
	244 
	324 
	278 

These figures show a^rapid increase between 1880 and 1890 in the 
number and proportion of negro prisoners, and between 1890 and 
1904 a slow increase in the number and a notable decrease in the 
proportion. 

But in order to make the figures for 1890 and 1904 comparable, it is 
necessary to exclude from those for the earlier date 4473 negro 
prisoners mainly belonging to^ two classes, persons in confinement 
prior to sentence and persons in prison because of their inability to 
pay a fine, but all belonging to classes which were excluded from the 
enumeration for 1904. This gives the following result: — 

	Date. 
	Negro 
	Prisoners. 
	Number per 
	100,000 Pop. 
	Whites. 
	1880 
	1890 
	1904 
	16,089 
	19,804 
	26,087 
	244 
	264 
	278 
	96 
	84 
	77 

The proportion of negro prisoners to population increased rapidly 
between 1880 and 1890 and slightly between 1890 and 1904, the 
increase for the first period being most accurately shown by the 
first set of figures and that for the second period by the second set of 
figures. It is noteworthy also that the proportion of white prisoners 
to population decreased during the same period. Perhaps a more 
significant comparison is that between the proportion of prisoners 
ofeach race to the population of that race in the northern states and 
the southern states respectively, the distribution of population and 
the systems cf penal legislation and administration being widely 
different in the two sections. It is impossible to make the correction 
just referred to except for the United States as a whole, but it must 
be remembered that the figures for 1890 are not comparable with 
those for 1904, and that the true figures for that year would be 
decidedly less. 

	Number of Prisoners to each 100,000 People. 
	Date. 
	Southern States. 
	Northern States. 
	Negroes. 
	Whites. 
	Negroes. 
	Whites. 
	1880 
	1890 
	1904 
	157 
	285 
	221 
	58 
	62 
	40 
	495 
	681 
	743 
	99 
	in 
	83 

These figures indicate that in the southern states in 1890 there 
were about four and a half times as many negro prisoners to popu- 
lation as white prisoners, and in 1904 about five and a half times as 
many; that in the northern states in 1890 there were about six 
times as many negro prisoners to population as white prisoners, and 
in 1904 about nine times as many. They throw no light whatever 
upon a point they are often quoted as establishing, the comparative 
criminality of the northern and southern negroes. Those residing in 
the north include an abnormal number of males, of adults, and of city 
population, influences all tending to increase the proportion of 
prisoners. It seems likely that if the figures for the south in 1890 
could be made strictly comparable with those for the same region in 
1904 the apparent decrease of 22% in the proportion of negro 
prisoners to population would almost but not quite disappear. The 
evidence regarding crime indicates a continued but slow and slacken- 
ing increase in the proportion of negro prisoners to negro population 
in the country as a whole and in its two main sections, an increase 
in the proportion of white prisoners to white population during the 
first interval and a decrease during the second, anda growing differ- 
ence between the two races in the proportion of prisoners. 

Citizenship. — When the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments 
to the Federal Constitution were adopted, the former conferring 
United States citizenship on all native negroes and the latter pro- 
viding that the right of such citizens to vote should not be abridged 
by any state on account of race, colour or previous condition of 
servitude, it was not the practice in northern states to allow negroes 
to vote. Proposals to grant them the suffrage were submitted to 
the voters in 1865 in Connecticut, Wisconsin, Minnesota and Colo- 
rado, and in each state they were rejected. In all states containing 
a large proportion of negroes the results of the Federal policy of 
reconstruction were disastrous, and those bitter years probably 
contributed more than the Civil War itself to estrange the two sec- 
tions. Since the withdrawal of Federal troops in 1877 the prevailing 
and persistent judgment of southern whites regarding the laws and 
the policy to be adopted upon this subject has been accorded more 
and more weight in determining the action of the states and thq 
Federal government. The number of negrces voting or entitled to 
vote has been reduced at first by intimidation or fraud, later by 
legislation or provisions of the state constitutions. If such enact- 
ments are nominally directed not against any race but against certain 
characteristics which may appear mainly in the race, such as illiteracy, 
inability or unwillingness to pay an annual poll tax or to register 
each year, they have been and are likely to be held within the 
constitutional authority of the state. On the part of 'the over- 
whelming majority of negroes this practical disfranchisement has 
aroused no protest, while it has tended to improve the government 
and to open the way for the gradual^ development and expression 
in word and vote of differences within the ranks of white voters 
regarding questions of public policy. 

Along with this decrease of pressure from without the southern 
states and the development of economic competition between the 
races within them, there has gone an increased demand on the part 
of the whites for a complete social separation between the races in 
school, in church, in public conveyances and hotels, all founded upon 
a fear that any disregard of such separateness will make intermarriage 
or fruitful illegal unions between the races more frequent. In short, 
these developments are towards a more and more rigid caste system. 

The negroes in the United States have played and are playing an 
important and necessary part in the industrial and economic life of 
the southern states, in which in 1908 they formed about one-third 
of the population. But that life was changing with marvellous 
rapidity, becoming less simple, less agricultural and patriarchal, 
more manufacturing and commercial, more strenuous and complex. 
It was too early to say whether the negroes would be given an equal 
or a fair opportunity to show that they could be as serviceable or 
more serviceable in such a civilization as they had been in that which 
was passing^ away, and whether the race would show itself able to 
accept and improve such chances as were afforded, and to remain in 
the future under these changing circumstances, as they had been in 
the past, a vital and essential part of the life of the nation. 

Bibliography. — Writings about the American negro fall naturally 
into classes. The official governmental publications include those of 
the Census Bureau, notably Bulletin 8, " Negroes in the United 
States," reprinted in 1906 in the volume called Supplementary 
Analysis, those of the Bureau of Labor, especially important articles 
in the Bulletin of the Bureau, and those of the commissioner of 
education. The information in these is largely statistical, but in the 
later publications not a little interpretative matter has been intro- 
duced. The point of view is usually that of a dispassionate northern 
man. 

Among southern white men who have written wisely on the subject 
may be mentioned: Dr J. L. M. Curry, for many years general agent 
of the Peabody and Slater funds; H. A. Herbert, Why the Solid 
South? or Reconstruction and its Results (Baltimore, 1890); T. N. 
Page, The Negro — the Southerner's Problem (New York, 1904); 
E. G. Murphy, Problems of the Present South (New York, 1904); 
E. R. Corson, Vital Equation of the Colored Race; and A. H. Stone, 
Studies in the American Race Problem (New York, 1908). F. L. 
Hoffman's Race, Traits and Tendencies of the American Negro (New 
York, 1896) contains the most important collection of statistical 
data in any private publication and interpretations thoroughly 
congenial to most southern whites. 

Among the southern negroes doubtless the most important 
writers are the two representatives of somewhat antagonistic views, 
Booker T. Washington, Up from Slavery (New York, 1901), Future 
of the American Negro (Boston, 1899), Tuskegee and its People (New 
York, 1905), &c, and W. E. B. Dubois, The Souls of Black Folk 
(Chicago, 1903), The Philadelphia Negro (Boston, 1899), Health and 
Physique of the Negro American (1907), &c. With these should be 
mentioned Atlanta University annual publications, the Proceedings 
of the Hampton Negro Conference and the file of the Southern 
Workman. No northern man since the war has written on the subject 
with the though tfulness and weight of Frederick Law Olmsted, 
Journey in the Seaboard Slave States (New York, 1856). See also 
Sir H. H. Johnston, The Negro in the New World (1910). (W. F. W.) 


NEGUS. (1) The title of a king or ruler (Amharic negus or 
n'gus), in Abyssinia (q.v.); the full title of the emperor is negus 
nagasliy " king of kings." (2) The name of a drink made of 
wine, most commonly port, mixed with hot water, spiced and 
sugared. According to Malone {Life of Dryden, Prose Works, 
i. 484) this drink was invented by a Colonel Francis Negus 
(d. 1732), who was commissioner for executing the office of 
master of the horse from 1717 to 1727, when he became master 
of the buckhounds. 


NEHAVEND, a small but very fertile and productive province 
of Persia, situated south-west of Hamadan, west of Malayir, and 
north-west of Burujird. Pop. about 15,000. The capital is 
the ancient city of Nehavend, where Yazdegird, the last monarch 
of the Sassanian dynasty, was finally defeated by the Arabs. 
(a.d. 641). It has a population of about 5000, including 700 to 
800 Jews; there are fine gardens, and an old citadel on a hill. 
It is situated at an elevation of 5540 ft., 27 m. from Doletabad 
(Malayir), and 25 m. from Burujird. 


NEHEMIAH (Heb. for " Yah[weh] comforts"), governor 
of Judaea under Artaxerxes (apparently A. Longimanus, 465- 
424 B.C.). The book of Nehemiah is really part of the same work 
with the book of Ezra, though it embodies certain memoirs of 
Nehemiah in which he writes in the first person. Apart from 
what is related in this book we possess little information about 
Nehemiah. The hymn of praise by Ben Sira (Ecclesiasticus 
xlix. 13) extols his fame for rebuilding the desolate city of 
Jerusalem and for raising up fresh homes for the, downtrodden 
people. According to other traditions he restored the temple- 
service and founded a collection of historical documents (2 Mace. 
i. 18-36, ii. 13). See further Ezra and Nehemiah (Books), 
Jews: History §§21 seq. 


NEIGHBOUR (0. Eng. niahgebur, from niah, " nigh," " near ") 
and gebftr, "boor," literally "dweller," "husbandman"; 
cf. Dan. and Swed. nabo, Ger. Nachbar), properly one who lives in 
a house close to one, hence any one of a number of persons living 
in the same locality. From Biblical associations (Luke x. 27) 
the word is used widely of one's fellow-men. 


NEILE, RICHARD (1 562-1 640), English divine, was educated 
at Westminster school and at St John's College, Cambridge. 
His first important preferment was as dean of Westminster 
(1605); afterwards he held successively the bishoprics of 
Rochester (1608), Lichfield (1610), Lincoln (1614), Durham 
(1617) and Winchester (1628), and the archbishopric of York 
(163 1). When at Rochester he appointed William Laud as his 
chaplain and gave him several valuable preferments. His 
political activity while bishop of Durham was rewarded with a 
privy councillorship in 1627. Neile sat regularly in the courts 
of star-chamber and high commission. His correspondence 
with Laud and with Sir Dudley Carle ton and Sir Francis Winde- 
bank (Charles I.'s secretaries of state) are valuable sources for 
the history of the time. 


NEILL, JAMES GEORGE SMITH (1810-1857), British 
soldier, was born near Ayr, Scotland, on the 26th of May 1810, 
and educated at Glasgow University. Entering the service of 
the East India Company in 1827,. he received his lieutenant's 
commission a year later. From 1828 to 1852 he* was mainly 
employed in duty with his regiment, the 1st Madras Europeans (of 
which he wrote a Historical Record), but gained some experience 
on the general and the personal staffs as D.A.A.G. and as aide-de- 
camp. In 1850 he received his majority, and two years later 
set out for the Burmese War with the regiment. He served 
throughout the war with distinction, became second-in-command 
to Cheape, and took part in the minor operations which followed, 
receiving the brevet of lieutenant-colonel. In June 1854 he was 
appointed second-in-command to Sir Robert Vivian to organize 
the Turkish contingent for the Crimean War. Early in 1857 he 
returned to India. Six weeks after his arrival came the news that 
all northern India was aflame with revolt. Neill acted promptly; 
he left Madras with his regiment at a moment's notice, and pro- 
ceeded to Benares. The day after his arrival he completely and 
ruthlessly crushed the mutineers (4th June 1857). He next 
turned his attention to Allahabad, where a handful of Europeans 
still held out in the fort against the rebels. From the 6th to 
the 15th of June his men forced their way under conditions of heat 
and of opposition that would have appalled any but a real 
leader of men, and the place, " the most precious in India at 
that moment," as Lord Canning wrote, was saved. Neill re- 
ceived his reward in an army colonelcy and appointment of 
aide-de-camp to the queen. Allahabad was soon made the con- 
centration of Havelock's column. The two officers, through 
a misunderstanding in their respective instructions, dis- 
agreed, and when Havelock went on from Cawnpore (which 
Neill had reoccupied shortly before) he left his subordinate 
there to command the lines of communication. At Cawnpore, 
while the traces of the massacre were yet fresh, Neill inflicted 
the death penalty on all his prisoners with the most merciless 
rigour. Meanwhile, Havelock, in spite of a succession of victories, 
had been compelled to fall back for lack of men; and Neill 
criticized his superior's action with a total want of restraint. 
A second expedition had the same fate, and Neill himself was now 
attacked, though by his own exertions and Havelock's victory 
at Bithor (16th August) the tension on the communications 
was ended. Havelock's men returned to Cawnpore, and cholera 
broke out there, whereupon Neill again committed himself to 
criticisms, this time addressed to the commander-in-chief and 
to Out ram, who was on the way with reinforcements. In spite of 
these very grave acts of insubordination, Havelock gave his 
rival a brigade command in the final advance. The famous 
march from Cawnpore to Lucknow began on September 19th; on 
the 2 1 st there was a sharp fight, on the 22nd incessant rain, on 
the 23rd intense heat. On the 23rd the fighting opened with the 
assault on the Alum Bagh, Neill at the head of the leading 
brigade recklessly exposing himself. Next day he was again 
heavily engaged, and on the 25th he led the great attack on 
Lucknow itself. The fury of his assault carried everything 
before it, and his men were entering the city when a bullet killed 
their commander. Strict as he was, he was loved not less than 
feared, and throughout the British dominions he had established 
a name as a skilful and extraordinarily energetic commander. 
The rank and precedence of the wife of a K.C.B. was given to 
his widow, and memorials have been erected in India and at Ayr. 
See J. W. Kaye, Lives of Indian Officers (1889) ; and J. C. Marsh- 
man, Life of Havelock (1867). 


NEILSON, ADELAIDE (1846-1880), English actress, whose 
real name was Elizabeth Ann Brown, was born in Leeds, the 
daughter of an actress, and her childhood and early youth were 
passed in poverty and menial work. In 1865 she appeared in 
Margate as Julia in The Hunchback, a character with which her 
name was long to be associated. For the next few years she 
played at several London and provincial theatres in various 
parts, including Rosalind, Amy Robsart and Rebecca (in Ivanhoe), 
Beatrice, Viola and Isabella (in Measure for Measure), In 1872 
she visited America, where her beauty and talent made her a 
great favourite, and she returned year after year. She died on 
the 15th of August 1880. Miss Neilson was married to Philip 
Henry Lee, but was divorced in 1877.- 


NEISSE, three rivers of Germany. (1) The Glatzer Neisse 
rises on the Schneegebirge, at an altitude of 1400 ft., flows 
north past Glatz, turns east and pierces the Eulengebirge in 
the Wartha pass, then continues east as far as the town of Neisse, 
and after that flows north-east until at an altitude of 453 ft. 
it joins the Oder between Oppeln and Brieg. Owing to its 
torrential character the greater part of its course is only used 
for floating down timber. It abounds in fish, and its total length 
is 121 m. (2) The Lausitzer or Gorlitz'er Neisse rises near 
Reichenberg in Bohemia, on the south side of the Riesengebirge, 
at an altitude of 1130 ft., flows north past Reichenberg, Gorlitz, 
Forst and Guben, and enters the Oder above Fiirstenberg 
at an altitude of 105 ft. Its length is 140 m., of which less than 
40 m. are navigable. (3) The Wutende Neisse is a tributary of 
the Katzbach. 


NEISSE, a town and fortress of Germany, in the province of 
Prussian Silesia, at the junction of the Neisse and the Biela, 
32 m. by rail S.W. of Oppeln. Pop. (1905) 25,394 (mostly 
Roman Catholics) including a garrison of about 5000. It consists 
of the town proper, on the right bank of the Neisse, and the 
Friedrichstadt on the left. The Roman Catholic parish church 
of St James (Jakobikircbe) dates mainly from the 13th century, 
but was finished in 1430. The chief secular buildings are the 
old episcopal residence, the new town hall, the old Rathaus, 
with a tower 205 ft. in height (1499), the beautiful Renaissance 
Kammerei (exchequer) with a high gabled roof ornamented with 
frescoes, and the theatre. A considerable trade is carried on 
in agricultural products. 

Neisse, one of the oldest towns in Silesia, is said to have been 
founded in the 10th century, and afterwards became the capital 
cf a principality of its own name, which was incorporated with 
the bishopric of Breslau about 1200. Its first walls were erected 
in 1350, and enabled it to repel an attack of the Hussites in 1424. 
It was thrice besieged during the Thirty Years' War. The end 
of the first Silesian War left Neisse in the hands of Frederick 
the Great, who laid the foundations of its modern fortifications. 

The town was taken by the French in 1807. Neisse can, at the 
will of the garrison, be protected by a system of inundation. 

See Kastner, Urkundliche Geschichte der Stadt Neisse (Neisse and 
Breslau, 1854-1867, 3 vols.); Schutte, Beitrage zur Geschichte von 
Neisse (Neisse, 1881) ; and Ruffert, Aus Neisse's Vetgangenheit (1903). 


NEJD, a central province of Arabia, bounded N. by the Nafud 
desert, E. by El Hasa, S. by the Dahna desert and \V. by Asir 
and Hejaz. It lies between 20 and 28 N. and 41 ° and 48 E., 
extends nearly 550 m. from north to south, 450 from east 
to west, and covers approximately 180,000 sq. m. The name 
Nejd implies an upland, and this is the distinctive character 
of the province as compared with the adjoining coastal districts 
of Hejaz and El Hasa. Its general elevation varies from 5000 ft. 
on its western border to 2500 in Kasim in the north-east, 
and somewhat less in Yemama in the south-east. In the north 
the double range of Jebel Shammar, and in the east the ranges 
of J. Tuwek and J. 'Arid rise about 1500 ft. above the general 
level, but on the whole it may be described as an open steppe, 
sloping very gradually from S.W. to N.E. of which the western 
and southern portion is desert, or at best pasture land only 
capable of supporting a nomad population; while in the north 
and east, owing to greater abundance of water, numerous fertile 
oases are found with a large settled population. The principal 
physical features are described in the article Arabia. 

The main divisions of Nejd are the following: Jebel Shammar, 
Kasim, Suder, Wushm, *Arid, Aflaj, Harik, Yemama and Wadi 
Dawasir. J. Shammar is the most northerly: its principal 
settlements are situated in the valley some 70 m. long, between 
the two ranges of J. Aja and J. Selma, though a few lie on their 
outer flanks. Jauf, Tema and Khaibar, though dependencies 
of the Shammar principality, lie beyond the limits of Nejd. 
The capital, Hail, has been visited by several Europeans, by 
W. G. Palgrave in 1862, when Talal was emir, and by Mr Wilfrid 
and Lady Anne Blunt, Charles Doughty, C. Huber, T. Euting 
and Baron E. Nolde during the reign of Mahommed b. Rashid, 
who from 1892 till his death in 1897 was emir of all Nejd. Its 
well ordered and thriving appearance is commented on by all 
these travellers. The town is surrounded by a wall and dominated 
by the emir's palace, a stately, if somewhat gloomy building, 
the walls of which are quite 75 ft. high, with six towers, the whole 
giving the idea of an old French or Spanish donjon. 

Hail lies at the northern end of the valley, 2 m. S.E. of J. 
Aja, at an altitude of about 3000 ft. The highest point of J. 
Aja, the western and higher of the twin ranges, is according to 
Huber 4600 ft. above sea-level. The valley is about 20 m. in 
width and is intersected with dry ravines and dotted with low 
ridges generally of volcanic origin. Wells and springs are the 
only source of water supply, both for drinking and for irrigation. 
The principal crops are dates, wheat and barley and garden 
produce; forage and firewood are very scarce. The population 
was estimated by Nolde in 1893 at 10,000 to 12,000. 

Among the other settlements of J. Shammar are Jafefa 
and Mukak at the northern foot of J. Aja, Kasr and Kafar 
at its southern foot, Rauda, Mustajidda and Fed at the foot 
of J. Selma, all large villages of 3000 to 5000 inhabitants. 
'Akda is a small valley in the heart of J. Aja, an hour's ride 
from Hail; it was the oldest possession of the Ibn Rashid, 
since 1835 the ruling family of J. Shammar, and is a place of 
great natural strength. Kasim lies E. of J. Shammar in the 
valley of the W. Rumma the great wadi of northern Nejd; 
the chief towns Bureda and *Aneza are situated about 10 m. 
apart, on the north and south sides of the wadi respectively. 
Doughty described *Aneza in 1879 as clean and well built with 
walls ^ of sun-dried brick, with well supplied shops. Many 
inhabitants live in distant houses in gardens outside the town 
walls, ' Aneza and Bureda each contain some 1 o,ooo inhabitants. 
The dry bed of the Wadi Rumma in lower Kasim is about 2 m. 
across, fringed in places with palm plantations; water is found 
at 6 or 8 ft. in the dry season and in winter the wells overflow. 
The staple of cultivation is the date-palm, the fruit ripening in 
August or September. Fruit trees and fields of wheat, maize 
or millet surround the villages, but 'the extent of cultivation 
is limited by the necessity of artificial irrigation. Kahafa, 
Kuseba and Kuwara are the principal villages of upper Kasim; 
and *Aneza and Bureda, Madnab, Ayun and Ras of lower 
Kasim. 

Doughty's and Huber's explorations did not extend east of 
Kasim, and for all details regarding eastern and southern Nejd 
Palgrave is the only authority. According to him, a long 
desert march leads from Madnab to Zulfa the first settlement 
in Suder, where the land rises steadily to the high calcareous 
tableland of J. Tuwek. The entire plateau is intersected by a 
maze of valleys, generally with steep banks, as if artificially cut 
out of the limestone. In these countless hollows is concentrated 
the fertility and population of Nejd; gardens and houses, 
cultivation and villages lie hidden from view among the depths 
while one journeys over the dry flats, till one comes suddenly 
on a mass of emerald green beneath. 

Suder forms the northern end of the plateau, \Arid the southern, 
while Wushm appears to lie on its west, and Aflaj and el Harik 
below it and to the south and south-west respectively. The 
principal town is Majma the former capital of Suder, a walled 
town situated on an eminence in a broad shallow valley sur- 
rounded by luxuriant gardens and trees. Tuwem, Jalajil and 
Hula are also described by Palgrave as considerable towns. 

*Arid is entered at Sedus, on the W. Hanifa, a broad valley 
bottom with precipitous sides, here 2 or 3 m. wide, full of trees 
and brushwood. Along its course lie the villages of Ayana, and 
Deraiya the former Wahhabi capital, destroyed by Ibrahim 
Pas^ha in 1817; and a few miles farther E. the new capital 
Riad, built by the emir Fesal after his restoration and visited 
by Palgrave in 1863, and by Pelly two years later. It was then, 
and still is, a large town of perhaps 20,000 inhabitants with 
thirty or more mosques, well-stocked bazars, and like the towns 
of Kasim, surrounded by well-watered gardens and palm groves. 
To the south the valley opens out into the great plains of Yemama, 
dotted with groves and villages, among which Manfuha is 
scarcely inferior in size to Riad itself. Still farther to the south- 
east lies the district of Harik, with its capital Hauta, the last 
in that direction of the settled districts of Nejd, and on the 
borders of the southern desert. 

Palgrave visited El Kharfa the chief place of the Aflaj district 
some 80 m. S.W. of Riad. This district seems to be scantily 
peopled as compared with Suder or Yemama, and a large propor- 
tion of the inhabitants are of mixed negro origin. While there, 
he made inquiries about the adjoining district of W. Dawasir. 
Its length was stated to be ten days' journey or 200 m.; scattered 
villages consisting of palm-leaf huts lie along the way, which 
leads in a south or south-westerly direction to the highlands of 
Asir and Yemen. 

The Bedouin who occupy the remainder of Nejd consist in 
the main of the four great tribes of the Shammar, Harb, 'Ateba 
and Muter. The first-named represent that part of the great 
Shammar tribe which has remained in its ancestral home on 
the southern edge of the Nafud (the northern branch long ago 
emigrated to Mesopotamia); many of its members have settled 
down to town life, but the tribe still retains its Bedouin character, 
and its late chief, the emir Mahommed Ibn Rashid, the most 
powerful prince in Nejd, used to live a great part of the year in the 
desert with his tribesmen. The Harb are probably the largest of 
the Bedouin tribes in the peninsula; they are divided into a 
number of sections, several of which have settled in the oases 
of Hejaz, while others remain nomadic. Their territory is the 
steppe between Kasim and Medina, and across the pilgrim road 
between Medina and Mecca, for the protection of which they 
receive considerable subsidies from the Turks. The 'Ateba 
circuits extend from the Hejaz border near Mecca along the road 
leading thence to Kasim. The Muter occupy the desert from 
Kasim northwards towards Kuwet. 

Nejd became nominally a dependency of the Turkish empire 
in 1 87 1 when Midhat Pasha established a small garrison in El 
Hasa, and created a new civil district under the government 
of Basra, under the title of Nejd, with headquarters at Hofuf. 
Its real independence was not, however, affected, and the emirs, 
Mahommed Ibn Rashid at Hail, and Abdallah Ibn Sa'ud at 
Riad, ruled in western and eastern Nejd respectively, until 1892, 
when the former by his victory at 'Aneza became emir of all 
Nejd. His successor, Abdul Aziz Ibn Rashid, was, however, 
unable to maintain his position, and in spite of Turkish support, 
sustained a severe defeat in 1905 at the hands of Ibn Sa'ud 
which for the time, at any rate, restored the supremacy to Riad. 

No data exist for an accurate estimate of the population; 
it probably exceeds 1,000,000, of which two-thirds may be 
settled, and one-third nomad or Bedouin. Palgrave in 1863, 
perhaps unduly exaggerating the importance of the town 
population, placed it at nearly double this figure. 

The revenue of the emir Mahommed Ibn Rashid of Hail, who 
died in 1897, was estimated by Blunt in 1879 at £80,000, and his 
expenditure at little more than half that amount. Nolde who 
visited Hail in 1893 after the emir's conquest of the Wahhabi 
state, believed that his surplus income then amounted to £60,000 
a year, and his accumulated treasure to £1,500,000. 

Authorities. — W. G. Palgrave, Central and Eastern Arabia 
(London, 1865); Lady Anne Blunt, Pilgrimage to Nejd (London, 
1 881) ; C. M. Doughty, Arabia Deserta (Cambridge, 1885) ; C. Huber, 
Journal oVun voyage en Arabic (Paris, 1891); J. Euting, Reise in 
inner Arabien (Leyden, 1896); E. Nolde, Reise nach inner Arabien 
(Brunswick, 1895). (R. A. W.) 


NEJEF, or Meshed 'Ali, a town of Asiatic Turkey, in the 
pashalik of Bagdad, 50 m. S. of Kerbela and 5 or 6 m. W. of 
the ruins of ancient Ku*fa, out of the bricks of which it is chiefly 
built. It stands on the eastern edge of the Syrian desert, on 
the north-eastern shore of a deep depression, formerly a sea, 
the Assy Hum Stagnum of the old geographers, but in latter years 
drained and turned into gardens for the town. It is a fairly 
prosperous city, supplied with admirable water by an under- 
ground aqueduct from the Hindieh canal, a few miles to the 
north, which also serves to water the gardens in the deep dry 
bed of the former lake. The town is enclosed by nearly square 
brick walls, flanked by massive round towers, dating from the 
time of the caliphs, but now falling into decay. Outside the 
walls, over the sterile sand plateau, stretch great fields of tombs 
and graves, for Nejef is so holy that he who is buried here will 
surely enter paradise. In the centre of the town stands Meshed 
(strictly Meshhed) *Ali, the shrine of 'Ali, containing the reputed 
tomb of that caliph, which is regarded by the Shi'ite Moslems 
as being no less holy than the Ka'ba itself, although it should 
be said that it is at least very doubtful whether 'Ali was actually 
buried there. The dome of the shrine is plated with gold, and 
within the walls and roof are covered with polished silver, 
glass and coloured tiles. The resting-place of *Ali is represented 
by a silver tomb with windows grated with silver bars and a 
door with a great silver lock. Inside this is a smaller tomb of 
damascened ironwork. In the court before the dome rise two 
minarets, plated, like the dome, with finely beaten gold from 
the height of a man and upward. While the population of 
Nejef is estimated at from 20,000 to 30,000, there is in addition 
a very large floating population of pilgrims, who are constantly 
arriving, bringing corpses in all stages of decomposition and 
accompanied at times by sick and aged persons, who have come 
to Nejef to die. At special seasons the number of pilgrims exceeds 
many times the population of the town. Nejef is also the point 
of departure from which Persian pilgrims start on the journey 
to Mecca. No Jews or Christians are allowed to reside 
there. The accumulated treasures of Meshed 'AH were 
carried off by the Wahhabi tes early in the 19th century, and in 
1843 the town was deprived cf many of its former liberties and 
compelled to submit to Turkish law; but it is again enormously 
wealthy, for what is given to the shrine may never be sold or used 
for any outside purpose, but constantly accumulates. Moreover, 
the hierarchy derives a vast revenue from the fees for burials 
in the sacred limits. 

See W. K. Loftus, Chaldaea and Susiana (1857); J. P. Peters, 
Nippur (1897) ; B. Meissner, Hirau Huarnaq (1901). Q* p - Pe 


NELEUS, in Greek legend, son of Poseidon and Tyro, brother of 
Pelias. The two children were exposed by their mother, who 
afterwards married Cretheus, king of Iolcus in Thessaly, After 
the death of Cretheus, the boys, who had been brought up 
by herdsmen, quarrelled for the possession of Iolcus. Pelias 
expelled Neleus, who migrated to Messenia, where he became 
king of Pylos (Apollodorus i. 9; Diod. Sic. iv. 68) and the 
ancestor of a royal family called the Neleidae, who are historically 
traceable as the old ruling family in some of the Ionic states 
in Asia Minor. Their presence is explained by the legend that, 
when the Dorians conquered Pel6ponnesus, the Neleidae were 
driven out and took refuge in Attica, whence they led colonies 
to the eastern shores of the Aegean. By Chloris, daughter of 
Amphion, Neleus was the father of twelve sons (of whom Nestor 
was the most famous) and a daughter Pero. Through the contest 
for his daughter's hand (see Melampus) he is connected with the 
legends of the prophetic race of the Melampodidae, who founded 
the mysteries and expiatory rites and the orgies of Dionysus in 
Argolis. According to Pausanias (ii. 2. 2, v. 8. 2) Neleus restored 
the Olympian games and died at Corinth, where he was buried 
on the isthmus. 


NELLORE, a town and district of India, in the Madras pre- ' 
sidency. The town is on the right bank of the Pennar river, and 
has a station on the East Coast railway, 109 m. N. of Madras 
city. Pop. (1901) 32,040. There are United Free Church, 
American Baptist and Catholic missions. 

The District op Nellore has an area of 8761 sq. m. It 
comprises a tract of low-lying land extending from the base of 
the Eastern Ghats to the sea. Its general aspect is forbidding: 
the coast-line is a fringe of blown sand through which the waves 
occasionally break, spreading a salt sterility over the fields. 
Farther inland the country begins to rise, but the soil is not 
naturally fertile, nor are means of ^irrigation readily at hand. 
About one-half of the total area is cultivated; the rest is either 
rocky waste or is covered with low scrub jungle. The chief 
rivers are the Pennar, Suvarnamukhi and Gundlakamma. 
They are not navigable, but are utilized for irrigation purposes, 
the chief irrigation work being the anicut across the Pennar. 
Nellore, however, is subject both to droughts and to floods. 
Copper was discovered in the western hills in 1801, but several 
attempts by European capitalists to work the ore proved unre- 
munerative, and the enterprise has been abandoned since 1840. 
Iron ore is smelted by indigenous methods in many places, 
but the most important mining industry is that of mica. Salt 
is largely manufactured along the sea-coast. Nellore, with the 
other districts of the Carnatic, passed under direct British 
administration in 1801. The population in 1901 was 1,496,987 
showing an increase of 2-3% in the decade. In 1904 a portion 
of the district was transferred to the newly formed district of 
Guntur, reducing the remaining area to 7965 sq. m., with a 
population of 1,272,81s. The principal crops are millets, rice, 
other food grains, indigo and oil-seeds. The breed of cattle is 
celebrated. The East Coast railway, running through the 
length of the district, was opened throughout for traffic in 1899. 
The section from Nellore town to Gudur, formerly on the metre 
gauge, has been converted to the standard gauge. Previously 
the chief means of communication with Madras was by the 
Buckingham canal. The sea-borne trade is insignificant. 


NELSON, HORATIO NELSON, Viscount (1758-1805), duke 
of Bronte in Sicily, British naval hero, was born at the parsonage 
house of Burnham Thorpe, in Norfolk, on the 29th of September 
1758. His father, Edmund Nelson (1722-1802), who came of a 
clerical family, was rector of the parish. His mother, whose 
maiden name was Catherine Suckling (1725-1767), wasa grand- 
niece of Sir Robert Walpole (1st earl of Orford). This connexion 
proved of little or no value to the future admiral, who, in a 
letter to his brother, the Rev. William Nelson, written in 1784, 
speaks of the Walpoles as " the merest set of cyphers that ever 
existed — in public affairs I mean." His introduction to the 
navy came from his maternal uncle, Captain Maurice Suckling 
(1 725-1778), an officer of some reputation who at his death held 
the important post of comptroller of the navy. Horatio, who 
had received a summary, and broken, education at Norwich, 
Downham and North Walsham, was entered on the " Raisonable " 
when Captain Suckling was appointed to her in 1770 on an alarm 
of war with Spain. The dispute was settled, and Captain Suckling 
was transferred to the " Triumph," the guardship at Chatham, 
whither he took his nephew. In order that the lad might have 
more practice than could be obtained on a harbour ship, his 
uncle sent him to the West Indies in a merchant vessel, and on 
his return gave him constant employment in boat work on the 
river. In a brief sketch of his life, which he drew up in 1799, 
Nelson says that in this way he became a good pilot for small 
vessels " from Chatham to the Tower of London, down the Swin, 
and the North Foreland; and confident of myself among rocks 
and sands, which has many times since been of great comfort 
to me." Between April and October of 1772 he served with 
Captain Lutwidge in the " Carcass," one of the vessels which 
went on a not otherwise notable voyage to the Arctic seas 
with Captain Phipps, better known by his Irish title of Baron 
Mulgrave. On his return from the north he was sent to the 
East Indies in the " Seahorse," in which vessel he made the 
acquaintance of his lifelong friend Thomas. Troubridge. At 
the end of two years he was invalided home. In after times 
he spoke of the depression under which he laboured during the 
return voyage, till " after a long and gloomy reverie, in which 
I almost wished myself overboard, a sudden glow of patrotism 
was kindled within me, and presented my king and my country 
as my patron. My mind exulted in the idea. 'Well then,' 
I exclaimed, 'I will be a hero, and, confiding in Providence, I 
will brave every danger.' " He spoke to friends of the " radiant 
orb " which from that hour hung ever before him, and "urged 
him onward to renown." On his return home he served during 
a short cruise in the " Worcester " frigate, passed his examination 
as lieutenant on the 9th April 1777, and was confirmed in the 
rank next day. He went to the West Indies with Captain Locker 
in the " Lowestoft " frigate, was transferred to the flagship by 
the admiral commanding on the station, Sir Peter Parker (1721- 
1811), and was then by him promoted in rapid succession to the 
command of the " Badger " brig, and the " Hinchinbrook " 
frigate. By this appointment, which he received in 1779, he 
was placed in the rank of post captain (from which promotion 
to flag rank was by seniority), at the very early age of twenty. 
His connexion with Captain Suckling may, no doubt, have been 
of use to him, but in the main he owed his rapid rise to his power 
of winning the affection of all those he met, whether as comrades 
or superiors. Sir Peter Parker and Lady Parker remained 
his friends all through his life. In 1780 he saw his first active 
service in an expedition to San Juan de Nicaragua, which was 
rendered deadly by the climate. He was brought to death's 
door by fever, and invalided home once more. In 1781 he was 
appointed to the "Albemarle" frigate, and after some convoy 
service in the North Sea and the Sound was sent to Newfoundland 
and thence to the North American station. " Fair Canada," 
as he has recorded in one of his letters, gave him the good health 
he had so far never enjoyed. At Quebec he formed one of those 
passionate attachments to women which marked his career. 
He now made the personal acquaintance of Sir Samuel Hood, 
Lord Hood. In the autobiographical sketch already quoted he 
mentions the high opinion formed of him by the admiral who 
presented him to Prince William, duke of Clarence, afterwards 
King William IV., as an officer well qualified to instruct him 
in " naval tactics," by which we must perhaps understand 
seamanship. Prince William has left a brief but singularly vivid 
account of their first meeting. He appeared, says the Prince, 
"to be the merest boy of a captain I ever beheld; and his dress 
was worthy of attention. He had on a full-laced uniform; his 
lank unpowdered hair was tied in a stiff Hessian tail of an extra- 
ordinary length; the old-fashioned flaps of his waistcoat added 
to the general quaintness of his figure, and produced an appear- 
ance which particularly attracted my notice; for I had never 
seen anything like it before, nor could I imagine who he was or 
what he came about. My doubts were, however, removed when 
Lord Hood introduced me to him. There was something 
irresistibly pleasing in his address and conversation; and an 
enthusiasm, when speaking on professional subjects, that showed 
he was no common being." The slight oddity of appearance, 

	XIX- 12 

the power to arouse affection, and the glow indicating the 
fire within, are noted by all who ever looked Nelson in the 
face. 

In- March 1783, at the very end of the American War, he saw 
his second piece of active service. He was repulsed in an attempt 
to retake Turk's Island from the French. The peace gave him 
leisure to pay a visit to France, for which country and all its 
ways he entertained a dislike and contempt characteristic of 
his time. In France he formed another attachment, and went 
so far as to apply to a maternal uncle for an allowance to eke 
out his half-pay. It came to nothing, presumably by refusal 
on the lady's part. And now when the navy was cut down to 
the quick on the peace establishment, and the vast majority of 
naval officers were condemned to idleness on shore, he had the 
extraordinary good fortune to be appointed to the command 
of the "Boreas" frigate, for service in the West Indies. Nelson 
found in this commission an opportunity for the display of his 
readiness to assume responsibility. He signalized his arrival 
in the West Indies by refusing to obey an order of the admiral 
which required him to acknowledge a half-pay officer acting as 
commissioner of the dockyard at Antigua as his superior. He 
insisted on enforcing the Navigation Laws against the Americans, 
who by becoming independent had become foreigners. He called 
the attention of the government to the corruption prevailing in 
the dockyard of Antigua. His line was in all cases correct, but 
it impressed the admiralty as somewhat assuming, and his strong 
measures against the interloping trade brought on him many 
lawsuits, which, though he was defended at the expense of the 
government, caused him much trouble for years. In the West 
Indies on the 12th of March 1787 he married Frances Nisbet 
(i76i-i83i),the widowof a doctor in Nevis, whose favour he first 
gained by being found romping on all fours with her little boy 
under the drawing-room table. The marriage was one of affection 
and prudence, rather than of love. 

Though Nelson had as yet seen little active service, and that 
little had not been specially distinguished, be had already gained 
that reputation within his own service which commonly precedes 
pubb'c recognition. His character had been fully developed, 
and his capacity proved. His horizon was narrow, being strictly 
confined to his profession. He had all the convictions of the 
typical John Bull of his generation. The loyalty of a devoted 
subject was strong in him. He burned to win affection, admira- 
tion, distinction. He was a man to do whatever there was to be 
done to the utmost. A # more magnificent instrument for use in 
the great Revolutionary struggle now close at hand could not 
have been forged. 

War having broken out, he was appointed captain cf the 
"Agamemnon" (64) on the 30th of November 1793, and joined 
his ship on the 7th of February. From this date till June 1800, 
rather more than seven years, he was engaged on continual 
active service, with the exception of a few months when he was 
invalided home. This period is the most varied, the busiest, 
the most glorious and the most debated of a very full career. 
It subdivides naturally into three sections; (1) From the date o\ 
his appointment as captain of the "Agamemnon" till he was 
disabled by the loss of his arm in the unsuccessful attack on 
Santa Cruz de Tenerife on the 24th of July 1797 he served as 
captain, or commodore, under Hood, Hotham and Jervis, 
successive commanders-in-chief in the Mediterranean. (2) After 
an interval of nine months spent at home in recovering from his 
wound, and from the effects of a badly performed operation, 
he returned to the Mediterranean, and was at once sent in pursuit 
of the great French armament which sailed from Toulon under 
the command of Napoleon for the conquest of Egypt. II is victory 
of the Nile on the 1st of August 1798 placed him at once in the 
foremost rank among the warriors of a warlike time, and made 
him a national hero. With his return to Naples on the 22nd of 
September the second period ends. (3) From now till he landed 
at Leghorn on the 26th of July 1800, on his return home across 
Europe, he was entangled at Naples in political transactions 
and intrigues, which he was ill prepared to deal with either by 
nature or training, and was plunged into the absorbing passion, 
which did increase his popularity with the mob, but cost him 
many friends. 

The first of these three passages in his life is full of events 
which must, however, be told briefly. In May he sailed for the 
Mediterranean with Hood, and was engaged under his orders 
in the occupation of Toulon by the allied British and Spanish 
forces. In August 1793 he was despatched to Naples to convoy 
the troops which the Neapolitan government had undertaken 
to contribute towards the garrison of Toulon. It was on this 
occasion that he made the acquaintance of Emma Hamilton 
(q.v.), the wife of Sir William Hamilton, minister at the Court of 
Naples. References to Lady Hamilton begin to appear in his 
letters to his wife, but, as might be expected, they indicate 
little beyond respectful admiration, and he makes a good deal 
of her kindness to his stepson, Josiah Nisbet, whom he had taken 
to sea. Young Nisbet was afterwards promoted to post captain, 
and was put in command of a frigate at an improperly early 
age by Nelson's interest. He proved quite unworthy, and in the 
end died mad. After the allies had been driven from Toulon 
by Napoleon, ^Nelson was employed throughout 1794 in the 
operations connected with the occupation of Corsica. In April 
and May he was engaged in the capture of Bastia, and June and 
July in the taking of Calvi. Both towns really surrendered from 
want of stores, but the naval brigades under Nelson's personal 
direction were conspicuously active, and their energy was 
favourably contrasted with the alleged formality of the troops. 
During the operations at Calvi, Nelson's right eye was 
destroyed by gravel driven into it by a cannon shot which 
struck the ground close to him. From the date of the occupation 
of Corsica till the island was evacuated, that is to say, from the 
end of 1794 till the middle of 1796, he was incessantly active. 
He served under Hotham, who undertook the command when 
Hood returned to England, and was engaged in the indecisive 
actions fought by him in tbe Gulf of Lyons in March and July 
1795. The easy-going ways of the new admiral fretted the eager 
spirit of Nelson, and Hotham's placid satisfaction with the 
trifling result of his encounters with the French provoked his 
subordinate into declaring that, for his part, he would never 
think that the British fleet had done very well if a single ship 
of the enemy got off while there was a possibility of taking her. 
His zeal found more satisfaction when he was detached to the 
Riviera of Genoa, where, first as captain, and then as commodore, 
he had an opportunity to prove his qualities for independent 
command by harassing the communications of the French, 
and co-operating with the Austrians. In Sir John Jervis, who 
superseded Hotham, he found a leader after his own heart. 
When Spain, after first making peace with France at Basel, 
declared war on England, and the fleet under Jervis withdrew 
from the Mediterranean, Nelson was despatched to Elba on a 
hazardous mission to bring off the small garrison and the naval 
stores. He sailed in the "Minerve" frigate, having another 
with him. After a smart action with two Spanish frigates which 
he took off Carthagena on the 20th of December, and a narrow 
escape from a squadron of Spanish line of battle ships, he ful- 
filled his mission, and rejoined the flag of Jervis on the eve of the 
great battle off Cape St Vincent on the 14th of February 1797 
(see St Vincent, Battle of). The judgment, independence 
and promptitude he showed in this famous engagement, were 
rewarded by the conspicuous part he had in the victory, and 
revealed him to the nation as one of the heroes of the navy. 
Nelson receiving the swords of the Spanish officers on the deck 
of the " San Josef " became at once a popular figure. 

A few days after the victory he became rear-admiral by 
seniority, but continued with Jervis, who was made a peer under 
the title of Earl St Vincent. Nelson's own services were recog- 
nized by the grant of the knighthood of the Bath. During the 
trying months in which the fleet was menaced by the sedition 
then rife in the navy, which came to a head in the mutinies at 
Spitbead and the Nore, he remained with the flag, and in the 
blockade of Cadiz. In July 1797 he was sent on a desperate 
mission to Santa Cruz de Tenerifc. It was believed that a 
Spanish Manilla ship carrying treasure had anchored at that 
place, and Lord St Vincent was desirous of depriving the enemy 
of this resource. The enterprise was, in fact, rash in the last 
degree, for the soldiers from the garrisons of Elba and Corsica 
having gone home, no troops were available for the service, and 
a fortified town was to be taken by man-cf-war boats alone. 
Nelson's well-established character for daring marked him out 
for a duty which could only succeed by dash and surprise, if it 
was to succeed at all. But the Spaniards were on the alert, 
and the attack, made with the utmost daring on the night of the 
24th of July, was repulsed with heavy loss. Some of the boats 
missed the mole in the dark and were stove in by the surf, others 
which found the mole were shattered by the fire of the Spaniards. 
Nelson's right elbow was shot through, and he fell back into the 
boat from which he was directing the attack. The amputation 
of his arm was badly performed in the hurry and the dark. 
He was invalided home, and spent months of extreme pain in 
London and at Bath. On the 10th of April 1798 he came back 
to the fleet off Cadiz as rear-admiral, with his flag in the " Van- 
guard " (74). 

He was now one of the most distinguished officers in the navy. 
Within the next six months he was to raise himself far above 
the heads of all his contemporaries. It was notorious that a great 
armament was preparing at Toulon for some unknown destina- 
tion. To discover its purpose, and to defeat it, the British 
government resolved to send their naval forces again into the 
Mediterranean, and Nelson was chosen for the command by 
Jervis, with whom the immediate decision lay, but also by 
ministers. 

Having joined the flag of Lord St Vincent outside of the 
straits of Gibraltar on the 30th of April, Nelson was detached 
on the 2nd of May into the Mediterranean, with three line-of- 
battle ships and five frigates, to discover the aim of the Toulon 
armament. Napoleon had, however, enforced rigid secrecy, and 
the British adrriiralhad to confess that the French were better 
than the British at concealing their plans. Beyond the fact that 
a powerful combined force was collected in the French port he 
could learn nothing. On the 20th of May the " Vanguard " was 
dismasted in a gale. Nelson bore the check in a highly character- 
istic manner. "I ought not," he wrote, "to call what has 
happened by the cold name of accident; but I believe firmly 
that it was the Almighty's goodness to check my consummate 
vanity." The " Vanguard " was saved from going on shore by 
the seaman-like skill of Captain Ball of the "Alexander," against 
whom Nelson had hitherto had a prejudice, but for whom 
he had henceforth a peculiar regard. The " Vanguard " w r as 
refitted by the exertions of her own crew under cover of the little 
island of San Pietri on the southern coast of Sardinia. In the 
meantime the frigates attached to his command had returned 
to Gibraltar, in the erroneous belief that the liners would be 
taken there to make good the damage suffered in the gale. " I 
thought Hope would have known me better," said Nelson. 
On the 30th of April he was off Toulon again, only to find that 
the French were gone, and that he could not learn whither they 
were steering. Racked by anxiety and deprived of his best 
means of obtaining information by the disappearance of his 
frigates, he remained cruising till he was joined, on the 7th of 
June, by Troubridge with ten sail of the line. And now he started 
on his fierce pursuit of the enemy, seeking him in the dark, for 
there were no scouts at hand; exasperated at being left without 
the eyes of his fleet; half maddened at the thought he might, 
by no fault of his own, miss the renown towards which his pro- 
phetic imagination had seemed to guide him; knowing that St 
Vincent would be blamed for choosing so young an admiral; 
but resolved to follow the enemy to the antipodes if necessary. 
From the coast of Sardinia to Naples, from Naples to Messina, 
from Messina to Alexandria, from Alexandria, where he found 
the roadstead empty, back to Sicily, and then when at last a 
ray of light came to him, back to Alexandria — he swept the central 
and eastern Mediterranean. At no time in his life were 
the noble qualities of his nature displayed more entirely free 
from all alloy. He was an embodied flame of resolution, and as 
yet he showed no sign of the vulgar bluster which was to appear 
later. In the midst of his anxieties his kindness of heart shone 
forth without a trace of the tendency of sentimental gush so 
irritatingly obvious in after days. Unlike most admirals of his 
time, he did not live apart from his captains, but saw much of 
them, and freely discussed his plans with them. He had his 
reward in their devotion and perfect comprehension of what 
he wished them to do. At the same time he acquired an absolute 
confidence in the efficiency of his squadron, the magnificent 
force which had been formed by years of successful war, and by 
the careful training of his predecessors. The captains were the 
band of brothers he himself had made them. 

The great victory of the ist of August 1798 (see Nile, Battle 
of) brought Nelson yet another wound. He was struck on the 
forehead by a langridge shot, and had for a time to go below. 
It is perhaps to be lamented in the interest of his fame that the 
wound was not severe enough to compel him to return home. 
After providing for the blockade of what remained of the French 
fleet in Alexandria, he sailed for Naples, and arrived there on the 
22nd of September. There was no rear-admiral of any standing 
in the navy who could not have done what remained to be done 
in the Mediterranean, under the supervision of St Vincent,' as 
well as he. For him Naples was a pitfall. There awaited him 
there precisely the influences to folly which he was least able to 
resist. He loved being loved, and was the man to think the gift 
a debt. He had an insatiable appetite for praise. With those 
weaknesses of character which caused Lord Minto, who yet 
never ceased to regard him with sincere friendship, to say that 
he was in some respects a " baby," he was disarmed in the 
presence of the two women who now made a determined attempt 
to capture him. Emma Hamilton, who could not help endeavour- 
ing to conquer every man she met, was naturally eager to 
dominate one who had filled Europe with his fame. Behind 
Emma was the queen of Naples, Maria Carolina, a woman who 
had a share of the ability of her mother Maria Theresa without 
any of her fine moral qualities. Maria Carolina was all her life 
trying to fight the power of revolutionary France, with no better 
resources than were afforded her by the insignificant kingdom 
of Naples, and a husband who was the embodiment of all the 
faults of the Italian Bourbons. She had made use of the English 
minister's wife as an instrument of political intrigue, and now 
she employed her to manage Nelson. We have the repeated 
assertions of Nelson himself in all his ample correspondence 
from September 1798 to July of 1800, and indeed later; to prove 
that he was, in his own tell-tale phrase, persuaded to "Sicilyfy" 
his conscience — in other words to turn his squadron into an 
instrument for the ambition, the revenge and the fears of Maria 
Carolina, the " Dear Queen " of his letters to Emma Hamilton. 
It is highly probable that he was secretly influenced by annoyance 
at the pedantry of the British government, which only gave him 
a barony for the splendid victory of the Nile, en the ridiculous 
ground that no higher title could be given to an officer who was 
not a commander-in-chief. All doubt as to the character of 
his relations with Lady Hamilton has been laid at rest by the 
Morrison papers. None ought ever to have existed, for, if Nelson 
did not love this woman in the fullest possible sense of the word, 
his conduct would be inexplicable on any other hypothesis than 
that he was an imbecile. He allowed her to waste his money, 
to lead him about " like a bear," and to drag him into gambling, 
which he naturally hated. For her sake he offended old friends, 
and quarrelled with his wife in circumstances of vulgar brutality. 
That he believed she had borne him a child can no longer be 
disputed, and he carried on with her a correspondence under the 
name of Thompson which was apparently meant to deceive 
her husband, but is varied by grotesque explosions which destroy 
the illusion, such as it was. 

In the hands of these two women, and in the intoxicatidn 
produced on him by flattery, which could not be too copious 
or gross for his taste, Nelson speedily became a Neapolitan 
royalist of far greater sincerity than was to be found among the 
king's subjects except in the ranks of the Lazzaroni. He 
gratified the headlong queen by egging her torpid husband into 
an exceedingly foolish attack on the French garrisons then 
occupying the so-called Roman republic. The collapse of the 
Neapolitan forces was instant and ignominious. The court 
fled to Palermo in December, under the protection of the British 
squadron. At Palermo Nelson remained directing the operations 
of the ships engaged in blockading Malta, then held by the 
garrison placed in it by Napoleon when he took it on his way 
to Egypt, and sinking continually deeper into his slavery to 
Lady Hamilton, till the spring of the following year. He was 
then aroused by a double call. A royalist army led by the 
king's vicar-general, Fabrizio Ruffo (g.fl.), had succeeded in 
recovering the greater part of the. kingdom of Naples from the 
government set up by the French, and called, in the pedantic 
style of the revolutionary epoch, the Parthenopean republic. 
A French" fleet commanded by Admiral Bruix entered the 
Mediterranean. News of the appearance of Bruix reached 
Nelson just as he was about to sail for Naples with the heir 
apparent to co-operate with Ruffo and his " Christian Army." 
He immediately took steps to concentrate his ships, which had 
been reinforced by a small Portuguese squadron, at Marittimo 
on the western coast of Sicily, where he would be conveniently 
placed to meet the French, if they came, or to unite with the 
ships of Lord St Vincent. He was, however, half distraught 
between his sense of what was required by his duty to his own 
service and the obligations he had assumed towards the sove- 
reigns of Naples. In the end he resolved to sail for Naples, this 
time without the crown prince, in order to carry out a mission 
entrusted to him by the king. 

The story of Nelson's visit to Naples in the June of 1799 will 
probably remain a subject for perpetual discussion. His reputa- 
tion for humanity and probity is considered to depend on the 
view we take of his actions there and at this period. It is true 
that the relative importance of these episodes has been much 
diminished by the publication of the Morrison Papers, and 
that it has at all times been exaggerated. From the Morrison 
Papers we know that, when his passions were concerned, he 
was not incapable of stratagems to deceive his old friend Sir 
William Hamilton. It is the less incredible that he should have 
been willing to use deceit against persons whom he hated so 
fiercely as he did the Neapolitan Jacobins, in his double quality 
of English Tory and Neapolitan Royalist. But apart from his 
laxity in the course of a double adultery, his letters, written to 
many different people during his stay on the coasts of Naples, 
contain more than sufficient evidence to show that he was utterly 
unhinged by excitement, and was unable to estimate the real 
character of many of his own words and deeds. He considered 
himself as owing an equal allegiance to Ferdinand of Naples 
and to his own sovereign. His feelings towards the Jacobin 
subjects of his Italian king are expressed in terms which bear 
a remarkable likeness to the rhetoric of the Jacobins of France 
when they were most vigorously engaged in ridding their country 
of aristocrats. To Troubridge he writes: "Send me word 
some proper heads are taken off, this alone will comfort me." 
To St Vincent he reports that "Our friend Troubridge had a 
present made him the other day of the head of a Jacobin, and 
makes an apology to me, the weather being very hot, for not 
sending it here." Some allowance may be made for a rude taste 
in jocularity, but it is impossible to mistake the scream of fury 
in Nelson's letters, imitated from the style of Lady Hamilton, 
who in these things was the sycophant of the queen. A man 
who allowed his thoughts to dwell in an atmosphere of hysterical 
ferocity, and was above all a man of action, was well on the way 
to interpret his words into deeds. It was while he was in this 
heated state that he was sent to preside over the fall of the 
Parthenopean republic at the end of June 1799. 

King Ferdinand had not been unwilling to offer terms to 
those of his subjects who had joined with the French to establish 
the republic, so long as he was under the influence of fear. 
But when the French had been defeated in northern Italy 
and had left the Republicans to their own resources, he became 
more anxious to make an example. In the early parts of June 
he heard that Ruffo was inclined tc clemency, and grew very 
eager to prevent any such mistake. No more effectual way of 
enforcing rigour could be imagined than to put the control 
of events entirely in the hands of Nelson, whose sentiments were 
well known, who was notoriously under the influence of Emma 
Hamilton, that is to say, of the queen, and who, as a stranger, 
would have no family or social attachments with the republicans, 
no changes of fortune nor future revenges to fear. That he asked 
Nelson to go to Naples, giving him large powers, may be con- 
sidered certain. A commission in the full sense he could not 
give without the consent of the king of Great Britain, and that 
was not even asked for. But Nelson had general instructions 
from home to support the Neapolitan government, and though 
this only meant, and could only mean, as an ally and against the 
common enemy, he understood it in a much wider sense, while 
he considered himself as being bound to Ferdinand in the relation 
of subject to sovereign by the grant of the duchy of Bronte in 
Sicily, which he had just received. He therefore sailed to 
Naples resolved to act in the double capacity of English and 
Neapolitan admiral, of English opponent of the Jacobins, 
and of Neapolitan royalist. The general cause of Europe and 
the particular revenge of the king and queen were of equal 
importance to him. When he entered the Bay of Naples on the 
24th of June he found that a capitulation had been agreed upon 
some thirty-six hours earlier, between Ruffo, acting as vicar- 
general, with the consent of Captain Foote (1 767-1833) of the 
" Seahorse," the -senior British naval officer present, on the 
one side, and the Neapolitan republicans on the other. The 
republicans had been reduced to the possession of the castles of 
Uovo and Nuovo, and had been glad to secure terms which 
allowed them to go into exile in France. Nelson denounced an 
arrangement which would have precluded all cutting off of 
heads as " infamous." He ordered the white flag to be hauled 
down on the "^Seahorse," and told Ruffo that he would not 
allow the capitulation to be carried out. The same warning 
was given to the republicans in the forts. There is a question 
whether the capitulation had been in part already carried into 
effect. Sir William Hamilton, who, together with his wife, had 
accompanied Nelson from Palermo, asserts that it had, in an 
official despatch to Lord Grenville dated on the 14th July. 
But this letter, written only a fortnight after the transaction, 
contains many inaccuracies, and can be held to prove only that 
Hamilton would have seen nothing discreditable in violating 
a capitulation, or that he was in his dotage, and did not know 
what he was doing. Ruffo refused to be a party to a breach of 
faith. On the afternoon of the 25th he had an interview with 
Nelson on board the flagship the "Foudroyant," which was con- 
ducted through the Hamiltons and was of a very heated character. 
Next morning, as Ruffo showed a determination to stand aside 
and throw on Nelson the responsibility of provoking a renewal 
of hostilities, messages were sent to him both by the admiral 
and by Hamilton that there would be no interference with the 
"armistice." This assurance put a stop to the dispute between 
them. The republicans came out of the forts and were trans- 
ferred to feluccas under the guard of British marines, where they 
were kept till the king's pleasure was known. As a matter of 
course it was that they should be mostly hanged or shot . Whether 
Nelson meant to deceive Ruffo into thinking that he had accepted 
the capitulation when he named the armistice, — whether the 
vicar-general was deceived, and then misled the garrisons in good 
faith — or whether he knew perfectly well that the capitulation 
was not included, and took the opportunity afforded him by 
these two English gentlemen to deceive his own countrymen, 
are points much discussed. The republicans in the forts did claim 
that they were covered by the capitulation, and that it had been 
violated. It is difficult to see in what way the service of King 
George was forwarded by Nelson's zeal for King Ferdinand. 
Such discredit as fell on him would have been avoided if he had 
kept to his duty as British admiral, and had not thought it 
incumbent on him to prove himself a good Neapolitan royalist. 
On the 2Qth of June Francesco Caracciolo (q.v.), a Neapolitan 
naval officer who had joined the republicans, was brought to 
Nelson as a prisoner. Out of his desire to make an example 
of a proper head, and in the full knowledge that Caracciolo's 
death would be pleasing to the queen, Nelson, in virtue, seemingly, 
of his supposed commission as Neapolitan admiral (which he 
did not possess), ordered a court martial of Italian officers to'sit, 
on an English ship, to try the prisoner. The court could only 
find him guilty, and Caracciolo was hanged. The sentence was 
just, but the procedure was indecent, and Nelson's intervention 
cannot be justified. 

At this period of his life it is indeed difficult to represent 
Nelson's actions in a favourable light. In July he disobeyed the 
order of Lord Keith to send some of his ships to Minorca, on 
the ground that they were needed for the defence of Naples. 
The influence of the queen, exercised through Emma Hamilton 
was partly responsible for his wilfulness, but a great deal must 
be put down to his annoyance at finding that Keith, and not he 
himself, was to succeed St Vincent as commander-in-chief in 
the Mediterranean. After the victory of the Nile he became, 
in fact, incapable of acting as a subordinate. Until he left for 
home in June 1800, except during the short interval when he 
acted as commander-in-chief in the absence of Keith, he was 
captious, querulous and avoided leaving Palermo as much as he 
could, and far more than he ought. When forced out he made 
his health an excuse for going back. He began a quarrel with 
Troubridge which ripened into complete estrangement. He 
wearied out his friends at the Admiralty, and finally extorted 
leave to return. As Keith would not allow him to take a line 
of battleship for his journey home with the Hamiltons, and 
indeed said plainly that Lady Hamilton had commanded the 
Mediterranean station long enough, he returned across Europe 
with his friends. Accounts of the figure they cut, and the 
sensation they created at Vienna and at Dresden, can be found 
in the Minto correspondence, and in the reminiscences of Mrs 
St George, afterwards Mrs Trench (1 768-1827). He reached 
home in November. 

In England he was received with the utmost popular en- 
thusiasm, but with coldness by the king, the Admiralty, and by 
the great official and social world. His erratic and self-willed 
conduct towards Lord Keith sufficiently explains the distrust 
shown by My Lords of the Admiralty. Their uneasiness was not 
diminished by their knowledge that his renown made it quite 
impossible to lay him aside at a crisis. The king, a man of strict 
domestic habits and strong religious convictions, was un- 
doubtedly offended by the scandals of Nelson's life at Naples, and 
he cannot but have been displeased by the admiral's openly 
avowed readiness to devote himself to King Ferdinand. English 
society as represented by the First Lord, Lord Spencer, and his 
wife, may not have shared the moral indignation of the pious 
king; but their taste was offended, and so was their self-respect, 
when Nelson insisted on forcing Lady Hamilton on them, and 
would go nowhere where she was not received. When it was 
discovered that he insisted on making his wife live in the same 
house as his mistress, he was considered to have infringed the 
accepted standard of good manners. After enduring insult at 
once cruel and cowardly, to the verge of poorness of spirit, 
Lady Nelson rebelled. A complete separation took place, and 
husband and wife never met again. 

On the 1st of January 1801 Nelson became vice-admiral by 
seniority. The alliance of the Northern powers of which the Tsar 
Paul was the inspiring spirit, made it necessary for the British 
government to take vigorous measures in its own defence. A 
fleet had to be sent on a very difficult and dangerous mission 
to the Baltic. The Admiralty would have been unpardonable, 
and would not have been excused by public opinion if, when it 
had at its disposal such an admirable weapon as the conqueror 
of the Nile, it had failed to employ him. Nelson was chosen to 
go as a matter of course, but unfortunately, it was thought proper 
to put him under the command of Sir Hyde Parker (q.v.) an 
officer of no experience, and, as the Admiralty ought to have 
known, of commonplace, not to say indolent, character. Nelson 
bore the subordination with many bitter complaints, but on the 
whole with patience and tact. Sir Hyde Parker began by 
keeping his formidable second in command at arm's length, 
but Nelson handled him with considerable diplomacy. Knowing 

	zing 

his superior to be fond of good living he caused a turbot to be 
caught for him on the Dogger Bank, and sent it to him with 
a complimentary message. Sir Hyde was not insensible to the 
attention, and thawed notably. We have the good fortune to 
possess the notes taken during the campaign by Colonel Stewart 
(1774-1827), a military officer who did duty with Nelson as a 
marine. Colonel Stewart has put on record many stories of 
Nelson which have a high biographical value. He saw the hero 
when his character was displayed in all its strength and its weak- 
ness. Nelson was at once burning for honour, ardently desirous 
to serve his country at a great crisis, and yet longing for rest and 
for the company of Emma Hamilton. His passion had, if possible, 
been increased by the birth of the child Horatia, whom he 
believed to be his own, and his jealousy was excited by fears that 
Emma would become an object of attention to the prince of 
Wales (afterwards George IV.). His health, as Colonel Stewart 
justly observed, was always affected by anxiety, and during the 
Baltic campaign he complained incessantly of his sufferings. 
Nervous irritation provoked him into odd explosions of excite- 
ment, as when, for instance, he suddenly interfered with the work- 
ing of his flagship while the officer of the watch was tacking 
her on the south coast of England, and so threw her into disorder. 
When he saw the consequences of his untimely intrusion he 
sharply appealed to the officer to tell him what was to be done 
next, and when the embarrassed lieutenant hesitated to reply, 
burst out with, " If you do not know, I am sure I don't," and 
then went into his cabin. His subordinates learnt to take these 
manifestations as matters of course, knowing that they were 
wholly without malignity. To them he was always kind, even 
when they were at fault, taking, as his own phrase has it, a 
penknife where Lord St Vincent would have taken a hatchet. 
Colonel Stewart tells how he was wont to invite the midshipmen 
of the middle watch to breakfast, and romp, with them as if 
he had been the youngest of the party. The playfulness of his 
nature came out, in combination with his heroism, when he 
adorned his refusal to obey Sir Hyde's weak signal of recall in the 
middle of the battle, which would have been disastrous if it had 
been acted on, by putting his telescope to his blind eye and 
declaring that he could not see,, the order to retire. At such 
moments all could see his agitation; but, as the surgeon of the 
" Elephant," which bore his flag at Copenhagen, says, they could 
also see that " it was not the agitation of indecision, but of 
ardent animated patriotism panting for glory." When Sir Hyde 
Parker was recalled in May, Nelson assumed the command in 
the Baltic; but the dissolution of the Northern Confederation 
left him little to do. His health really suffered in the cold air 
of high latitudes, and in June he obtained leave to come home. 
His services were grudgingly recognized by the title of viscount. 
During the brief interval before the peace he was put in command 
of a flotilla to combat Napoleon's futile threat of invasion. 
In the hope of quieting public anxiety rather than in any serious 
expectation of success, an attack was made on a French flotilla 
strongly protected by its position, at Boulogne, which was 
disastrously repulsed. Nelson was not in command on the spot, 
and if he had been would in all probability have renewed his 
experience at Santa Cruz. He could not do the impossible more 
than other men. He was only more ready to try. 

While the brief peace made at Amiens lasted, he remained on 
shore. His home was with the Hamiltons in the strange house- 
hold in which Sir William showed that his 18th-century training 
had taught him to accept a domestic division with a good grace, 
and had not left him too squeamish to profit by the pecuniary 
advantages which may attend the relation of complacent 
husband. His death on the 6th of April 1803 made no change 
in the life of the admiral. He lived almost wholly at Merton, 
where he had purchased a small house, which Emma filled with 
memorials of his glory and of her now passing beauty. She fed 
him profusely with the flattery which he, in Lord Minto's words, 
swallowed as a child does pap; and she was in turn adored by 
him, and treated with profound deference by his family, with 
the exception of his father. 

When the ambition of Napoleon made it impossible to keep 
up the fiction of peace, Nelson was at once called from retirement, 
and this time there could be no question of putting him under 
the authority of any other admiral. He was appointed to the 
Mediterranean command, and hoisted his flag in May 1803. 
Between this date and his death in the hour of full triumph on 
the 21st of October 1805, he was in the centre and was one of 
the controlling spirits of the vast military and naval drama 
which after filling for more than two years the immense stage 
bounded by Europe and the West Indies, found its closing scene 
in Trafalgar Bay (see Trafalgar). In spite of the anxieties 
of an arduous command Nelson was serene and at his best in this 
last period of his life. Once only did the ill-advised boasting 
of Latouche Treville provoke him into a scolding mood. The 
French officer spoke of him as having fled before his French 
ships, and the vaunt, which had no better foundation than that 
Nelson had retired before superior numbers when reconnoitring, 
exasperated him into threatening to make the Frenchman eat 
his letter if ever they met. Nelson could boast, but his loudest 
words are not ridiculously out of proportion to his deeds. 

The last hours at Trafalgar will never be forgotten by English- 
men. There is no figure in English history at once so magnificent 
in battle, and so penetrating in its appeal to the emotions, as 
was Nelson on that last day when under his leadership the fleet 
annihilated the last lingering fear that Napoleon would ever 
carry his desolating arms into the British Islands'. It matters 
little that the woman of whom he thought to the last was utterly 
unworthy of him, had perhaps never rendered the services he 
supposed her to have done for their country, and was about to dis- 
honour his memory by mercenary immorality. He must be worse 
than censorious who can think unmoved of Nelson kneeling in 
prayer by his cabin table as the " Victory " rolled slowly down 
on the enemy on the 21st of October, appealing to God for help, 
and writing the codicil in which he left his mistress and his child 
to the gratitude of his country. 

It is said that his famous signal was to have been worded 
" Nelson confides that every man will do his duty," and that 
his own name was replaced by that of England on the suggestion 
of one of his officers. The use of his name as an inspiration and 
an appeal would have been perfectly consistent with his tone 
at all times, but he agreed to the alteration with the indifference 
of a man to whom self and country were one at that hour. 
" Expects " replaced " confides that " because the signal 
lieutenant Pascoe pointed out to him that the verb originally 
chosen must be spelt out letter by letter in a long string of 
flags. He parted with Captain Blackwood of the " Euryalus " 
with a prophecy of his approaching fate. The sight of Colling- 
wood, the friend of his youth, leading the lee line into action 
in the " Royal Sovereign " drew from him a cry of admiration 
at the noble example his comrade was showing. When the 
" Victory " had passed astern of the French " Bucentaure," 
and was engaged with her and the " Redoubtable," he walked 
up and down the quarter deck of his flagship by the side of his 
flag-captain, T. M. Hardy, with the brisk short step customary 
with him. As they turned, a musket shot from the top of the 
" Redoubtable " struck him on the upper breast, and, plunging 
down, broke the spine. "They have done for me at last!" 
were the words in which he acknowledged the fatal stroke. He 
lingered for a very few hours of anguish in the fetid cockpit of 
the " Victory," amid the horrors of darkness relieved only by the 
dim light of lanterns, and surrounded by men groaning, or 
raving with unbearable pain. The shock of the broadsides made 
the whole frame of the " Victory " tremble, and extorted a 
moan from the dying admiral. When Captain Hardy came down 
to report the progress of the battle, his inherent love for full 
triumph drew from him the declaration that less than twenty 
prizes would not satisfy him. He clung to his authority to the 
end. The suggestion that Collingwood would have to decide 
on the course to be taken was answered with the eager claim, 
" Not while I live. " But the last recorded words were of 
affection and of duty. He begged Hardy for a kiss, and he 
ended with the proud and yet humble claim, " I have done my 
duty, thank God for that." 

His body was brought home in his flagship and laid to rest 
in St Paul's. He is commemorated in London by the monu- 
ment in Trafalgar Square, completed in 1849 with a colossal 
statue by E. K. Baily, and surrounded by Landseer's bronze 
lions, added in 1867. 

In estimating the character of Nelson, and his achievements, 
there are some elements which must be allowed for more fully 
than has always been the case. He was, to begin with, the 
least English of great Englishmen. He had the excitability, the 
vanity, the desire for approbation without much delicacy as 
to the quarter from which it came, which the average Eng- 
lishman of Nelson's time, his judgment obscured by the effects 
of centuries of racial rivalry culminating in the Napoleonic 
wars, was wont to attribute to Frenchmen. Where there 
is vanity there is the capacity for spite and envy. Nor was 
Nelson altogether free from these unpleasant faults. But in 
the main his desire to be liked combined with a natural kindness 
of disposition to make him appeal frankly to the goodwill 
of those about him. He won to a very great extent the affec- 
tion he valued, and that from men so widely different in char- 
acter as Lord Minto and the simple-hearted seamen among 
whom he passed the best part of his life. He could be cruel 
when his emotions were aroused hyevil influences, with the 
downright cruelty he displayed at Naples, or the more subtle 
form of hardness in his conduct to his wife, when his duty 
to her stood in the way of his love for Emma Hamilton. But 
they -were few to whom the evil side of his nature was shown, 
while the captains and seamen for whom he did much to make 
a hard duty more tolerable were to be counted by the thousand. 

As a commander he belonged to the race of Pyrrhus and the 
prince of Conde — the {jghters of battles. His victories were 
won at the head of a force which had been brought to a high 
level of efficiency by three generations of predecessors, against 
enemies who had been, as in the case of the French, disorganized 
by a social revolution which had ruined their discipline, who 
were inexperienced as the Danes were, or who, as in the case of 
the Spaniards, were sunk in a moral and intellectual decadence. 
But he estimated the vices of his opponents with full insight. 
Wielding a fine instrument, and confronted by inferior enemies, 
he was entitled to dare much, and it is a proof of his sagacity 
that he saw how far he could dare, caring but little for the bulk 
of the force in front of him, and looking to the spirit. Above 
all, he had the power to inspire the enthusiasm he felt, and to 
make men act above themselves because he was there, and because 
they found a joy in pleasing him. Among all the warriors of 
his generation Napoleon alone was a greater master of the souls 
of men, and Blucher alone came near him. 

Nelson had no children by his wife. His daughter Horatia, 
by Lady Hamilton, became the wife of the Rev. Philip Ward, 
and died in 1881. In November 1805, in recognition of Nelson's 
great services to his country, his brother William (1757-1835) 
was created Earl Nelson of Trafalgar, an annuity of £5000 being 
attached to the title. When William died without sons in 
February 1835 his only daughter Charlotte Mary (1787-1873), 
wife of Samuel Hood, 2nd Baron Bridport (1 788-1868), became 
duchess of Bronte, while, according to the remainder, his English 
titles passed to his nephew Thomas Bolton (1 786-1835), who 
became 2nd Earl Nelson. Bolton, who took the name of Nelson, 
was succeeded as 3rd Earl Nelson in November 1835 by his 
son Horatio (b. 1823). The duchy of Bronte was in 1910 held 
by Baroness Bridport's grandson, Arthur Wellington Nelson 
Hood, 2nd Viscount Bridport (b. 1839). 

Authorities. — Very much has been written about Nelson/ A 
large part of the total mass consists of hasty work done to meet an 
immediate demand, or of repetition not justified by the critical 
faculty or literary skill of the writers. The valuable portion may be 
divided into original authorities, such as correspondence, and the 
testimony of eyewitnesses; and the narratives or criticisms of 
students who tell with original power, and judge with knowledge and 
insight. Under the heading of original authorities, the first place is 
taken by The Dispatches and Letters of Vice-Admiral Lord Viscount 
Nelson, with notes by Sir N. H. Nicolas (7 vols., 1844-1846). Nicolas 
spared no pains to make his collection complete and to illustrate it 
from all trustworthy sources. Thus he includes Sir Edward Berry's 
Account of the Battle of the Nile, Colonel Stewart's Notes on the Copen- 
hagen Campaign, Dr Beatey's Narrative of Nelson* s Last Hours, and 
passages from the so-called Reminiscences of the Captain of the 
Victory, Dr Scott. This last authority is of little value, for the book 
consists of recollections by Dr Scott's daughter and son-in-law of 
what he said years after the events he was speaking of. The student 
of Nelson's life should make it a rule to exhaust Nicolas before con- 
sulting any other authority. A collection of Letters from Nelson to 
Emma Hamilton was published under her direction in 1814, but it is 
subject to much suspicion. A great mass of correspondence of the 
Hamiltons and much MS. relating to Nelson came into the hands of 
Dr Pettigrew, and passed into the possession of Mr A. Morrison, 
from whose collection they were transferred to the British Museum. 
A catalogue, in which the text is given, was privately printed and 
can be consulted in the museum. Isolated letters have appeared 
from time to time. Between February and April 1898 some valuable 
extracts from his correspondence with his wife, previously un- 
known, and the correct text of parts of his diary, appeared in the 
extinct weekly, Literature. Among the lives of Nelson's contem- 
poraries, J. S. Tucker's Earl of St Vincent (1844), Ross's Saumarez, 
Lady Bourchier's Codrington and the Letters of Sir William Hoste 
throw light on particular points. The Nelsonxan Reminiscences of 
Parsons give an interesting picture of the admiral as he appeared 
to an observant boy. The observations of older and more intelligent 
witnesses will be found in The Diaries and Correspondence of George 
Rose, in The Life and Letters of the First Earl of Minto and in a 
Journal kept during a Visit to Germany, by Mrs St George, afterwards 
Mrs Trench. Incidental mentions of Nelson are to be found in the 
Paget Papers, the correspondence of the minister who succeeded 
Sir W. Hamilton at the court of Naples. Biographies of Nelson are 
numerous. Emma Hamilton inspired one by a Mr Harrison, an 
odious book which was in reality an advertisement of herself and 
which appeared in 1806. The two quartos of Clarke and McArthur 
(1809), reprinted in three volumes octavo in 1840, were based on 
papers supplied by the family, but the texts were edited with un- 
pardonable freedom and the originals have in many cases been lost. 
Southey's classic'Zi/e was based on Clarke and McArthur. All later 
biographies have been superseded by Captain Mahan'sLVfe of Nelson, 
first published in two volumes in 1897 and again in one volume, 
with additions and corrections in 1899. The much-debated Nea- 
politan episode has given rise to a literature of its own. The con- 
troversy began with the appearance of Captain Foote's Vindication 
of his own part in the transaction published in 1810. It drew an 
immediate Counter Vindication of Nelson by Commander Jeaffreson 
Miles. Italian versions will be found in Sacchinelli's Fabrizio Ruffo 
and in the Compendio of Micheroux edited by theMarcheseMaresca. 
The controversy has been revived in England by Mr F. F. Badham 
with his Nelson at Naples (1900). and has provoked the publication 
of a collection of the documents by the Navy Record Society, in 
vol. xxv. of their publications,* under the title Nelson and the 
Neapolitan Jacobins (1903). Mr C. Jeaffreson 's two works, Lady 
Hamilton and Lord Nelson (1888) and the Queen of Naples and 
Lord Nelson (1889), are based on the papers collected by Mr 
Morrison. See also T. Nelson, Genealogical History of the Nelson 
Family (1908). (D. H.) 


NELSON, ROBERT (1656-1715), English philanthropist and 
religious writer, son of John Nelson, a London merchant, was 
born on the 22nd of June 1656, and was educated as the private 
pupil of George Bull, afterwards bishop of St David's. Having 
inherited a considerable fortune from his father, he followed 
no profession. About 1680 he went abroad and spent much 
time on the continent of Europe till 1691, when he settled at 
Blackheath. For many years he was an intimate friend and 
correspondent of Archbishop Tillotson, though not in agreement 
with his views; and he was also on terms of friendship with 
the astronomer Halley and other men of science. Nelson's 
sympathies were with the Jacobites; and after his return to 
England he associated himself with the nonjurors, under whose 
influence he produced several of his writings on religious subjects. 
He was an active supporter of the Society for Promoting Christian 
Knowledge, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, 
and similar associations, and he used his influence largely in 
the establishment of charity schools and the building of churches 
in London. In 1687 he had published a controversial work 
against transubstantiation, and in 1704 appeared his Companion 
for the Festivals and Fasts of the Church of England, which 
obtained a remarkable popularity lasting till the middle of the 
19th century. Within five years of its publication ten thousand 
copies of the Companion were printed, and thirty-six editions 
appeared in a hundred and twenty years. After the death oi 
Bishop Bull in 17 10 Nelson wrote his biography, which was 
published three years later; and he was also the author of many 
other devotional and controversial works. He died in January 
1715, in which year was published his Address to Persons of 
Quality and Estate^ containing suggestions for the establishment 
of special hospitals, schools and theological colleges, many of 
his proposals being afterwards carried into effect. Nelson 
married a Roman Catholic, Lady Theophila Lucy, daughter of 
the earl of Berkeley, and widow of Sir Kingsmill Lucy of 
Broxbourne. 

See Charles F. Secretan, Memoirs of the Life and Times of the Pious 
Robert Nelson (i860); Thomas Birch, Life of Tillotson (2nd ed., 
1753); Thomas Lathbury, History of the Nonjurors (1845). 


NELSON, a river of Keewatin district, Canada, discharging 
the waters of Lake Winnipeg in a north-easterly direction into 
Hudson Bay. It drains an area of 360,000 sq. m. and, including 
its tributary the Saskatchewan, is 1450 m. long. It is navigable 
for small steamers for a distance of about 80 m., after which it 
is unnavigable except for canoes. It has a total fall between the 
lake and sea of 7 10 ft. Here its chief tributary is the Burnt wood. 
Norway House at its source and York Factory at its mouth 
are important stations of the Hudson's Bay Company. 


NELSON, a town of British Columbia, situated on the west arm 
of Kootenay lake. Pop. (1006) about 5000. It is the com- 
mercial, administrative and railroad centre of the east and west 
Kootenay districts. It is the northern terminus of a branch of 
the Great Northern railway and is also connected by rail and 
steamboat with the main line of the Canadian Pacific railway at 
Revels toke and with the Crow's Nest line of the same system at 
Kootenay landing. It has direct railway communication with 
Rossland, Grand Forks and Greenwood. 


NELSON, a municipal borough in the Clitheroe parliamentary 
division of Lancashire, England, 32 \ m. N. from Manchester by 
the Lancashire & Yorkshire railway. Pop. (1891) 22,754, 
(1 901) 32,816. It is of modern growth, possessing a town hall, 
market hall, free library, technical school, pleasant park and 
recreation grounds, and an extensive system of electric tramways 
and light railways, connecting with Burnley and Colne. Its 
chief manufacture is cotton. It was incorporated in 1800, and 
the corporation consists of 'a mayor, 6 aldermen and 18 
councillors. Area, 3466 acres. 


NELSON, a seaport of New Zealand, the seat of a bishop and 
capital of a provincial district of the same name; at the head 
of Blind Bay on the northern coast of the South Island. Pop. 
(1906) 8164. The woods and fields in the neighbourhood abound 
with English song-birds, and the streams are stocked with trout; 
while the orchards in the town and suburbs are famous for English 
kinds of fruit, and hops are extensively cultivated. The town 
possesses a small museum and art gallery, literary institute, 
government buildings, and boys' and girls' schools of high repute. 
The cathedral (Christ Church) is finely placed on a mound which 
was originally intended as a place of refuge from hostile natives. 
It is built of wood, the various native timbers being happily 
combined. Railways connect the harbour with the town, and 
the town with Motupiko, &c. The harbour, with extensive 
wharves, is protected by the long and remarkable Boulder Bank, 
whose southern portion forms the natural breakwater to that 
anchorage. The settlement was planted by the New Zealand 
Company in 1842. The borough returns one member to the 
house of representatives, and its local affairs are administered 
by a mayor and council. 


NELSONVILLE, a city of Athens county, Ohio, U.S.A., on the 
Hocking river, 62 m. S.E. of Columbus. Pop.(r8oo) 4558, (rooo) 
5421, including 328 foreign-born and 204 negroes; (1910) 6082. 
Nelsonville is served by the Hocking Valley railway. The 
city is in one of the most productive coal sections of the state; 
there are large quantities of clay in the vicinity; and the principal 
industries are the mining and shipping of coal and the manu- 
facture of fire-clay products. Nelsonville was settled in 1818 
and was incorporated in 1838; it was named in honour of Elisha 
Nelson, who built the first house here. 


NEMATODA, in zoology, a group of worms. The name Nema- 
toda (Gr. wj/ra, thread, and €t5os, form) was first introduced by 
Rudolphi, but the group had been previously recognized as 
distinct by Zeder under the name Ascarides. They are now by 
many systematists united with the Acanthocephala and the 
Nematomorpha to form the group Nemathelminthes. 

The Nematoda possess an elongated and thread-like form (see 
fig. 1), varying in length from a few lines up to several feet. The 
body is covered externally by a chitinous cuticle which is a 
product of the subjacent epidermic layer in which no cell limits 
can be detected though nuclei are scattered through it. The 
cuticle is frequently prolonged into spines and papillae, which 
are especially developed at the anterior end of the body. The 
mouth opens at one extremity of the body and the anus at or 
near the other. Beneath the epidermis is A 

a longitudinal layer of muscle-fibres which 
are separated into four distinct groups 
by the dorsal, ventral and lateral areas; 
these are occupied by a continuation of the 
epidermic layer; in the lateral areas run 
two thin-walled tubes with clear contents, 
which unite in the anterior part of the 
body and open by a pore situated on the 
ventral surface usually about a quarter 
or a third of the body length from the 
anterior end. These vessels are the nitrogen- 
ous excretory organs. The body-cavity is 
largely occupied by processes from the large 
muscle cells of the skin. These processes 
stretch across the body cavity to be inserted 
in the dorsal and ventral middle lines. 

The body-cavity also contains the so- 
called phagocytic organs. These consist 
of enormous cells with nuclei so large as 
to be in some cases just visible to the naked 
eye. These cells are disposed in pairs, 
though the members of each pair are not 
always at the same level. The number of 
cells is not large (some 2 to 8), and as a 
rule they lie along the lateral lines. In 
some species (Ascaris decipiens) the giant 
cell is ^replaced by an irregular mass of 
protoplasm containing a number of small 
nuclei. Such a Plasmodium bears, on its 
periphery, groups of rounded projections 
of protoplasm termed end-organs. Similarly 
the giant cells are produced at their peri- 
phery into a number of branching pro- 
cesses which bear similar end-organs on 
their surface and in some cases terminate

	MttT Galeb> Arch & 
	Zooi - Ez p-> 1878. 
	FlG - *• Oxyuris. 
	&» Mout h. 
	i e J ^T?™!^ 

in them. These end-organs are the active
agents in taking up foreign granules, or
bacteria, which may have found their way
into the fluid of the body-cavity. From
the shape and position of the phagocytic 
organs it is obvious that they form admir- 
able strainers through which the fluid of 
the body-cavity filters (figs. 2, 3). 

The alimentary tract consists of a 
straight tube running from the mouth to 
the anus without any convolutions; it is 
separable into three divisions: (1) a mus- 
cular oesophagus, which is often provided

	t e% 
	bd, Enlargement of 
	the oesophagus, 
	armed with 
	chitinous teeth. 
	Intestine. 
	Opening of seg- 
	mental tubes 
	(placed by mis- 
	take on the dor- 
	sal instead of the 
	ventral surface). 
	. Testes, 
	cd, Vas deferens, 
	S P* Cloaca, 
	*°» Papillae, 

with cuticular teeth; (2) a cellular intes-
tine; and (3) a short terminal rectum 
surrounded by muscular fibres. Neither
here nor elsewhere are cilia found at any period of develop- 
ment. 

A nervous system has been shown to exist in many species, 
and consists of a perioesophageal ring giving off usually six nerves 
which run forwards and backwards along the lateral and median 
lines; these are connected by numerous fine, circular threads in 
the sub-cuticle. Some of the free-living forms possess eye specks. 
The sexes are distinct (with the exception of a few forms that are 
hermaphrodite), and the male is always smaller than the female. 
The generative organs consist of one or two tubes, in the upper 
portion of which the ova 'or spermatozoa are developed, the lower 
portion serving as an oviduct or vas deferens; the female gener- 
ative organs open at the middle of the body, the male close to 
the posterior extremity into the terminal portion of the ali- 
mentary canal; from this cloaca a diverticulum is given off in 
which are developed one to three chitinous spicules that subserve 
the function of copulation. The spermatozoa differ from those 
of other animals in having the form of cells which sometimes 
perform amoeboid movements. Most remarkable sexual condi- 
tions are found to occur in the free-living genera Rhabditis and 

	Fig. 2. — Sclerostomum arma- 
	tum, 9, X about 3 J, opened to 
	show the phagocytic organs. 
	(From Nassonov.) 
	1, Mouth. 
	2, Anterior end of alimentary 
	canal. 
	3, Posterior end of alimentary 
	canal. 
	4, Ovary. 
	5, 6 and 7, Anterior middle and 
	posterior pairs of phago- 
	cytic organs. 

	Fig. 3. — One of the phagocytic 
	organs of Sc. armatum, highly 
	magnified. (From Nassonov.) 
	1, Nucleus of giant-cell. 
	2, One of the processes and end- 
	organs of the same. 

Diplogaster. While some of the species are bisexual, others are 
protandrous, self-fertilizing hermaphrodites. In cultures of the 
latter there occur very rare supplemental males which appear in 
no sense degenerate but as fit for reproduction as the males of the 
bisexual species. Though possessing a complete copulatory 
apparatus and producing large quantities of spermatozoa, they 
have lost their sexual instinct and play no part in the economy 
of the species. These " psychically decadent " individuals 
appear to represent the entire male sex of a bisexual species, 
and become unnecessary owing to the grafting of hermaphrodit- 
ism on the female sex. 
Mode of Life and Metamorphoses—While the majority of the 
Nematodes arc parasites, there are many that are never at any 
period of their life parasitic. These free-living forms are found 
everywhere — in salt and fresh water, in damp earth and moss, 
and among decaying substances; they are always minute in size, 
and like many other lower forms of life, are capable of retaining 
their vitality for a long period even when dried, which accounts 
for their wide distribution; this faculty is also possessed by 
certain of the parasitic Nematodes, especially by those which 
lead a free existence during a part of their life-cycle. The free- 
living differ from the majority of the parasitic forms in under- 
going no metamorphosis; they also possess certain structural 
peculiarities which led Bastian (Trans. Linn, Soc, 1865) to 
separate them into a distinct family, the Anguillulidae. It is 
impossible, however, to draw a strict line of demarcation between 
the free and parasitic species, since — (1) many of the so-called free 
Nematoda live in the slime of molluscs (Villot), and are therefore 
really parasitic; (2) while certain species belonging to the free- 
living genus Anguillula are normally parasitic (e.g. A. tritici, 
which lives encysted in ears of wheat), other species occasionally 
adopt the parasitic mode of existence, and become encysted in 
slugs, snails, &c; (3) it has been experimentally proved that 
many normally parasitic genera are capable of leading a free 
existence; 1 (4) transitional forms exist which are free at one 
period of their life and parasitic at another. The parasitic 
Nematodes include by far the greatest number of the known 
genera; they are found in nearly all the orders of the animal 
kingdom, but more especially among the Vertebrata, and of 
these the Mammalia are infested by a greater variety than any 
of the other groups. Some two dozen distinct species have been 
described as occurring in man. The Nematode parasites of the 
Invertebrata are usually immature forms which attain their full 
development in the body of some vertebrate; but there are a 
number of species which in the sexually adult condition are 
peculiar to the Invertebrata? 

The Nematoda contain about as many parasitic species as all 
the other groups of internal parasites taken together; they are 
found in almost all the organs of the body, and by their presence, 
especially when encysted in the tissues and during their migration 
from one part of the body to another, give rise to various patho- 
logical conditions. Although some attain their full development 
in the body of a single host — in this respect differing from all 
other Entozoa — the majority do not become sexually mature 
until after their transference from an " intermediate " to a 
" definitive " host. This migration is usually accompanied by 
a more or less complete metamorphosis, which is, however, not 
so conspicuous as in most other parasites, e.g. the Trem&toda. 
In some cases (many species of Ascaris) the metamorphosis is 
reduced to a simple process of growth. 

The parasitic and free-living Nematodes are connected by 
transitional forms which are free at one stage of their existence 
and parasitic at another; they may be divided into two classes — » 
those that are parasitic in the larval state but free when adult, 
and those that are free in the larval state but parasitic when 
adult. 

(1) To the first class belong the so-called " hairworm," Mermis, 
not to be confused < with the Gordian worms.' The adult forms of 
M. nigrescens live in damp earth and may be seen after storms or 
early in the morning crawling up the stalks of plants, a fact which 
causes people to talk about showers of worms. The eggs are laid on 

	1 Ercolani successfully cultivated Oxyuris curvula, Strongylus 
	armatus and other species in damp earth; the free generation was 
	found to differ from the parasitic by its small size, and by the females 
	being ovoviviparous instead of oviparous. To this phenomenon he 
	gave the name of dimorphobiosis. 

	2 The genera A scaris, Filaria, Trichosoma are found throughout the 
	Vertebrate, Cucutlanus (in the adult condition) only in fishes and 
	Amphibia; Ankylostama, Trichocephalus, Trichina and Pseudalius 
	live only in the Mammalia, the last-mentioned genus being confined 
	to the order Cetacea; Strongylus and Physaloptera are peculiar to 
	mammals, birds and reptiles, while Dispharagus, Syngamus and 
	Hystrichis are confined to birds. Mermis (in the larval state) is 
	confined to the Invertebrata and Sphaerularia to bees. Oxyuris, 
	though chiefly parasitic in the Mammalia, occurs also in reptiles, 
	Amphibia and one or two insects. Dacnitis and Ichi'hyontma are 
	only found in fishes. 

	» See Nematomorpha. 

the ground and the young larvae make their way into grasshoppers, 
in whose bodies they pass most of their larval life. (2) To the second 
class belong Ankylostoma, Strongylus and many species of Ascaris] 
the embryo on leaving the egg lives free in water or damp earth, and 
resembles very closely the free-living genus Khabditis. After a longer 
or shorter period it enters the alimentary canal of its proper host with 
drinking-water, or it bores through the skin and reaches the blood- 
vessels, and is so conveyed through the body, in which it becomes 
sexually mature. Rhabditis nigrovenosa has a developmental history 
which is entirely anomalous, passing through two sexual genera- 
tions which regularly alternate. The worm inhabits the lung of 
the frog and toad, and Is hermaphrodite (Schneider) or partheno- 
genetic (Leuckart) ; the embryos hatched from the eggs find their 
way through the lungs into the alimentary canal and thence to the 
exterior; in a few days they develop into a sexual larva, called a 
Rkabditiform larva, in which the sexes are distinct; the eggs remain 
within the uterus, and the young when hatched break through its 
walls and live free in the perivisceral cavity of the mother, devouring 
the organs of the body until only the outer cuticle is left; this eventu- 
ally breaks and sets free the young, which are without teeth, and 
have therefore lost the typical Rhabditis form. They live for some 
time in water or mud, occasionally entering the bodies of water 
snails, but undergo no change until they reach the lung of a frog, 
when the cycle begins anew. Although several species belonging to 
the second class occasionally enter the bodies of water snails and 
other animals before reaching their definitive host, they undergo no 
alteration of form in this intermediate host; the case is different, 
however, in Filaria medinensis and other forms, in which a free 
larval is followed by a parasitic existence in two distinct hosts, all 
the changes being accompanied by a metamorphosis. Filaria medi- 
nensis — the Guinea worm — is parasitic in the subcutaneous connec- 
tive tissue of man (occasionally also in the horse). It is chiefly 
found in the tropical parts of Asia and Africa, but has also been 
met with in South Carolina and several of the West Indian islands. 
The adult worm in the female sometimes reaches a length of 6 ft. 
The males have only recently been discovered. The female is vivi- 
parous, and the young, which, unlike the parent, are provided with 
a long tail, live free in water; it was formerly believed from the 
frequency with which the legs and feet were attacked by this parasite 
that the embryo entered the skin directly from the water, but it 
has been shown by Fedschenko, and confirmed by Manson, Leiper 
and others, that the larva bores its way into the body of a Cyclops 
and there undergoes further development. It is probable that the 
parasite is then transferred to the alimentary canal of man by means 
of drinking-water, and thence makes its way to the subcutaneous 
connective tissue. 

The Nematoda which are parasitic during their whole life may 
similarly be divided into two classes — those which undergo their 
development in a single host, and those which undergo their 
development in the bodies of two distinct hosts. 

Fig. 4. — Trichin-
ella encysted
among muscular
fibres. (After
Leuckart.)

(1) In the former class the eggs are extruded with the faeces, and 
the young become fully formed within the egg, and when accidentally 
swallowed by their host are liberated by the solvent action of the 
gastric juice and complete their development. This simple type of 
life-history has been experimentally proved by Leuckart to be 
characteristic of Trichocephalus affinis^ Oxyuris 
ambigua and other species. (2) The life-history 
of Ollulanus tricuspis is an example of the second 
class. OUulanus tricuspis is found in the adult 
state in the alimentary canal of the cat; the 
young worms are hatched in the alimentary 
canal, and often wander into the body of their 
host and become encysted in the lungs, liver and 
other organs; during the encystment the worm 
degenerates and loses all trace of structure. 
This wandering appears to be accidental, and to 
have nothing to do with the further evolution 
of the animal which takes place in those embryos 
which are voided with the excrement. Leuckart 
proved experimentally that these young forms 
become encysted in the muscles of mice, and 
the cycle is completed after the mouse is de- 
voured by a cat. The well-known Trichinella 
spiralis (fig. 4) has a life-history closely resembl- 
ing that of Ollulanus. The adult worm, which 
is of extremely minute size, the male being only 
^th and the female | of an inch in length 
inhabits the alimentary canal of man and many 
other carnivorous mammalia; the young bore 
their way into the tissues and become encysted 
in the muscles — within the muscle-bundles 
according to Leuckart, but in the connective tissue between them 
according to Chatin and others. The co-cxistcnce of the asexual 
encysted form and the sexually mature adult in the same host, 
exceptionally found in Ollulanus and other Nematodes, is the 
rule in Trichinella; many of the embryos, however, are extruded 
with the faeces, and complete the life cycle by reaching the alimentary 
canal of rats and swine which frequently devour human ordure.
Swine become infested with Trichinella in this way and also by eating 
the dead bodies of rats, and the parasite is conveyed to the body ol 
man along with the flesh of " trichinized " swine. 

Importance in Pathology. — Among recent advances having 
medical import in our knowledge of the Nematodes, the chief 
are those dealing with the parasites of the hlood. F. bancrojti is 
known to live in the lymphatic glands, and its embryos Micro- 
filaria sanguinis hominis nocluma, passing by the thoracic duct, 
reach the blood-vessels and circulate in the hlood. Manson 
showed in 188 1 that the larvae (Microfilariae) were not at all 
times present in the blood, but that their appearance had a 
certain periodicity, and the larvae of F. bancrojti. Microfilaria 
noctuma swarmed in the blood at night-time and disappeared 
from the peripheral circulation during the day, hiding away in 
the large vessels at the base of the lungs and of the heart. Ten 
years later Manson discovered a second species, Filaria perstans t 
whose larvae live in the blood. They, however, show no period- 
icity, and are found continuously both by day and hy night; 
and their larval forms are termed Microfilaria Persians. The 
adult stages are found in the sub-peritoneal connective tissue. 
A third form, Microfilaria diurna, is found in the larval stage in 
blood, but only in the daytime. The adult stage of this form is 
the Filaria loa found in the subcutaneous tissues of the limbs. 

The presence of these parasites seems at times to have little 
effect on the host, and men in whose system it is calculated 
there are some 40-50 million larvae have shown no signs of 
disease. In other cases very serious disorders of the lymphatic 
system are brought about, of which the most marked is perhaps 
Elephantiasis. Manson and Bancroft suggested that the second 
host of the parasite is the mosquito or gnat, and for a long time it 
was thought that they were conveyed to man by the mosquito 
dying after laying her eggs in water, the larval nematodes 
escaping from her hody and being swallowed by man. It is 
now held that the parasite enters the blood of man through the 
piercing mouth-parts at the time of biting. When first sucked 
up by the insect from an infected man it passes into its stomach, 
and thence makes its way into the thoracic muscles, and there 
for some time it grows. Next the larvae make their way into 
the connective tissue in the pro-thorax, and ultimately bore a 
channel into the base of the piercing apparatus and come to 
rest between the hypopharynx and the labium. Usually two are 
found in this position lying side by side; it would be interesting 
to know if these are male and female. From their position in 
the proboscis the larvae can easily enter the hlood of man the 
next time the mosquito hites (Low, Brit. Med. Journ., June 1900; 
James, ibid., Sept. 1900). Shortly after Low had published his 
results, Grassi and Noe issued a paper dealing with the larvae 
of F. immitis, which is spread by means of the mosquito Anopheles 
(Cenlrbl. Bakter. I. Abth. xxviii., 1900). The larvae of this 
parasite develop in the Malpighian tubules of the insect; at a 
certain stage they cast their cuticle and make their way into 
the space — part of the haemocoel — found in the labium. During 
the act of biting the lahium is bent back, and as the piercing 
stylets enter the skin of the sufferer this bending becomes more 
and more acute. Grassi and Noe think that if the cavity of the 
labium be full of the larval nematodes this hending will burst the 
tissue, and through the rent the larvae will escape and make their 
way into the body of the host. Besides Anopheles, two species 
of Ctdex, C. penicillaris and C. pipiens, are also accused of trans- 
mitting the larvae. A paper hy Noe (Atti Ace. Lincei, ix., 1900) 
seems to prove beyond doubt that the larvae of F. immitis 
are transmitted in the manner indicated. The adult worm is 
chiefly found in the heart of the dog, and usually in the right side, 
which may be so packed with the worms as seriously to interfere 
with the circulation (fig. 5). The females produce thousands 
of larvae, which circulate in the blood, and show a certain 
periodicity in their appearance, heing much more numerous 
in the blood at night than during the day. 

Importance as Pests. — Agriculturists now pay increased 
attention to the nematodes that destroy their crops. A good 
example of a fairly typical case is afforded hy Heterodera schachtii, 
which attacks beetroot and causes great loss to the Continental 
sugar manufacturers. The young larvae, nourished by the yolk 
which remains over from the egg and by the remains of the 
mother which they have taken into their alimentary canal, 
make their way through the earth, and ultimately coming across 
the root of a beet, begin to bore into it. This they do by means 
of a spine which can be protruded from the mouth. Once within 
the root, they absorb the cell sap of the parenchyma and begin 
to swell until their body projects from the surface of the root in 

	Fig. 5. 

	A, View of the heart of a dog infested with Filaria immitis Leidy; 
	the right ventricle and base of the pulmonary artery have been 
	opened: a, aorta; 6, pulmonary _ artery; c t vena cava; d, right 
	ventricle; e, appendix of left auricle; /, appendix of right auricle. 

	B, Female F. immitis, X 1 , removed from the heart to show its length. 

the form of a tubercle (fig. 6). The reproductive organs do not 
begin to appear until the larva has twice cast its skin. After 
this a marked sexual dimorphism sets in. The female, hitherto 
indistinguishable from the male, continues to swell until she 
attains the outlines of a lemon. Doing this she bursts the 
epidermis of the rootlet, and her body projects into the surround- 
ing earth. The male has a different life-history (fig. 7). After 
the second larval moult, he passes 
through a passive stage comparable to the 
pupa-stadium of an insect, and during this 
stage, which occurs inside the root, the 
reproductive organs are perfected. The 
male next casts his cuticle, and by means 
of his spine bores through the tissues of 
the root and escapes into the earth. Here 
he seeks a female, pairs, and soon after- 
wards dies. The eggs of the female give 
rise to embryos within the body of the 
mother; her other organs undergo a retrogressive change 
and serve as food for the young, until the body-wall only 
of the mother remains as a brown capsule. From this the 
young escape and make their way through the earth to new 
roots. The whole life-history extends over a period of some 
4-5 weeks (fig. 7), so that some 6-7 generations are born during 
the warmer months. If we assume that each female produces 

	Fig. 6. 

	A,a,Female Heterodera schachtii Schmidt, 
	breaking through the epidermis of a root; 
	the head is still embedded in the paren- 
	chyma of the root. 

	B, a, larvae boring their way into a root; 
	b, larva of the immobile kind surrounded 
	by the old skin, living as an ectoparasite 
	on the outside of the root. (From Strubell.) 

300 embryos, and that half of these are females, the number of 
descendants would be, after six generations, some 22,781 milliards 
(A. Strubell, Bibl. Zool., 1888-1889). Other species which have 
been recorded in the United Kingdom are Tylenchus devastatrix 
(Kuhn), on oats, rye and clover roots; T. lritici y causing the 

	Fig. 7. 

	Male Heterodera schachtii, 
	greatly magnified. 

	a, Head lappets. 
	b f Mouth cavity. 
	c, Spine. 
	d, Muscle of spine, 
	c, Gland. 
	/, Oesophagus. 
	g, Bulb. 
	h t Nerve-ring. 
	£ t Excretory pore 
	j f Oesophagus. 
	k, Testis. 
	/, Intestine. 
	m, Muscles moving spicule. 
	71, Spicule. 
	B, First motile larva. 
	C, Second immovable parasitic 
	larva casting its skin. 
	D, A female with one half of the 
	body- wall taken away to 
	show the coiling generative 
	organs. 

	a, Boring apparatus. 
	b t Oesophageal bulb. 
	c, Excretory pore. 
	d, Alimentary canal. 
	e f Anus, 
	/t Ovary. 
	E, A male shortly before casting 
	its larval skin. 

ear-cockle of wheat; Cephalobus rigidus (Schn.), on oats; 
Heterodera radicicola (Greef ), on the roots of tomatoes, cucumbers, 
potatoes, turnips, peach-trees, vines and lettuce, and many 
other plants. 

See N. Nassonov, Arch. Mikr. Anat. (1900) ; Arch, parasit. (1898) ; 
Rabot, Lab. Warsaw (1898); Z00L Anz. (1898); L. Jagersldold, 
Centrbl. Bakter. (1898); J. Spengel, Zool. Anz. (1897); H. Ehlers, 
Arch. Naturg. (1899); O. Hamann, Die Nemathelminthen (1895). 

(F. E. B. ; A. E. S.) 


NEMATOMORPHA. This zoological group includes Gordian 
worms which are found swimming in an undulatory manner 
or coiling round water-weeds in ponds and puddles, or knotted 
together in an apparently inextricable coil. They may be several 
inches in length and are no thicker than a piece of whip-cord. 

The male is distinguishable from the female by the presence 
of a fork at the posterior end of the body. The body is covered 
by a cuticle which is sculptured and the various markings are 
of systematic importance: it is secreted by a hypodermis which 
also includes nerve-cells and some gland-cells. In the adult 
aquatic stage the alimentary canal shows signs of degeneration, 
and it seems probable that in this stage Gordian worms take no 
food. The mouth is terminal or subterminal; there is a weak 
sucking pharynx situated behind the brain, and a long intestine 
lying along the medio-ventral body-cavity; it ends in a cloaca 
which receives the vasa deferentia in the male. There is a single 
unsegmented nerve-cord which runs along the ventral middle line 
and enlarges posteriorly into a caudal ganglion and anteriorly 
in a ganglion, the brain, which is not supra-oesophageal. The 
peripheral nervous system is minutely described by T. H. 
Montgomery. There is a median eye on the head. 

The Nematomoipha are nearly solid, — quite so at each end, 

	From Cambridge Natural History, vol. ii.,
	"Worms," &c, by permission of Macmillan 
	& Co., Ltd. 

	Fig. 1. — A water plant around which a
	female Gordius is turning and laying eggs.
	a, a, clump and string of eggs. 

	Fig. 2. — Abdomen of 
	Pieroztichus niger with the 
	terga removed to expose 
	the Gordius larva within. 

	Slightly magnified. 

	&c.. by permission of Mac-
	"fig. 3.— Tarsal joint rainute,
	of an Ephemerid larva
	into which two Gordius
	larvae, ( a »a) have
	penetrated. Magnified. r . . , ^ , -j ^ u - 

and only in the middle region of the body are there any body- 
cavities, the space within the body being usually filled up with 
parenchyma. There are four closed spaces of the nature of 
body-cavities, two lateral and a dorso-median and a ventro- 
medial Into the former the ovaries project, though the lumen 
of the lateral body-cavity is quite shut off from the lumina of 
the ovaries or uteri. In the adult male 
the lateral body-cavities are absent. A 
curious duct with lateral branches termed 
the supra-intestinal organ lies above the 
intestine in the female. There are two 
series of ovaries extending through a large 
part of the body and accompanied by two 
uteri; the latter open by two oviducts 
which debouch into an atrium which also 
receives the intestine and a single recep- 
taculum seminis, and is continued back- 
ward as the cloaca; this opens posteriorly. 
The ovaries are epithelial sacs which open 
into the uteri. The paired testes extend 
through the greater part of the body and 
end in two vasa deferentia which unite 
with the intestine to form a cloaca. 
The eggs are laid in the spring as a rule, 
and after about a week they give rise to a 
ringed larva with a protrusible 
boring apparatus consisting of three 
chitinous rods. By the aid of this the 
larva makes its way into the soft body 
^ a of some insect larva, Ephemends, Cniro- 
nomids, or even of Molluscs, and encysts in the muscles or fat 
body. The insect, which may have become an imago with the 
Gordian larva still in it, is then eaten by a carnivorous insect 
or by a fish, and the contained Gordian larva becomes elongate 
and mature in its second host. After a year or more this larva - 
emerges into the water and commences to reproduce. 

The unexpected occurrence of these worms in pools and puddles, 
often in great numbers, has given rise to myths about showers 
of worms. They occasionally make their way into the human 
stomach with the drinking-water and are vomited; but this is a 
case of pseudo-parasitism — they are no true parasite of man. 

There are a considerable number of species divided among the 
four genera: Gordius, Paragordius, Chordodes and Parachordodes ; 
the last, a genus of Camerano's, is looked upon with some doubt by 
Montgomery. A free swimming marine form with longitudinal rows 
of bristles, known as Nectonema A. E. Verrill, may also come here, 
but at present its life-history is unknown. The Nematomorpha 
form an isolated group; at first sight they seem to be connected 
with the Nematoda, but in reality their only common feature is the 
tubular genitalia opening into a cloaca, and it seems at present 

	From Cambridge Natural 
	History, vol. ii., "Worms,' 

impossible to connect them with the Annelida. Until more is known 
it seems wisest to look upon them as an isolated assemblage of 
animals with no near affinities to any of the great phyla. 

Literature. — L. Camerano, " Monografia deiGordii," Mem. Ace. 
Torino, xlvii. (1897), contains literature; O. von Linstow, Arch. 
mikr. Anat., Ii. (1898); T. H. Montgomery, Bull. Mus. Harvard, 
xxxii. (1898); Amer. Natural., xxxiii. (1899); Zool. Jahrb. Anal., 
xviii. (1903) p. 387; F. Vejdovsky, Zeitschr. wiss. Zool., lvii. (1894); 
A. Villot, Arch. Zool. exp. ii. (1887); C. R. Ac. Sci., cviii. (1889); 
H. B. Ward, Bull. Mus. Harvard, xxiii. (1892). (A. E. S.) 

NEMERTINA, or Nemerteans (Nemertca), a subdivision of 
worms, 1 characterized by the ciliation of the skin, the presence 
of a retractile proboscis, the simple arrangement of the generative 
apparatus, and in certain cases by a peculiar pelagic larval 
stage to which the name " pilidium " has been given. Many of 
them are long thread-shaped or ribbon-shaped animals, more or 
less cylindrical in transverse section. Even the comparatively 
shortest species and genera can always be termed elongate, the 
broadest and shortest of all being the parasitic 
Malacobdella and the pelagic Pelagonemerles. 
There arc no exterior appendages of any kind. 
The colours are often very bright and varied. 
Nemertines live in the sea, some being common 
amongst the corals and algae, others hiding in 
the muddy or sandy bottom, and secreting 
gelatinous tubes which ensheath the body along 
its whole length. Formerly, they were gener- 
ally arranged amongst the Platyelminthes as 
a sub-order in the border of the Turbel- 
larians, but with the advance of our know- 
ledge of these lower worms it has been found 
desirable to separate them from the Turbel- 
larians and to look upon the Nemertina as a 
separate phylum. 

0. Burger classifies Nemertines into four orders : — 

1. Protonemertini, in 
which there are two layers 
of dermal muscles, ex- 
ternal circular and in- 
ternal longitudinal ; the nervous system lies external to the circular 
muscles ; the mouth lies behind the level of the brain ; the proboscis 
has no stylet; there is no caecum to the intestine. Families, 

CARINELLIDAE, HUBRECHTIIDAE. 

II. Mesonemertini, in which the nervous system has passed into 
the dermal muscles and lies amongst them ; other characters as in 
Protonemertini. Family, Cepualothricidae. 

III. Metanemertini, in which the nervous system lies inside 
the dermal muscles in the parenchyma; the mouth lies in front of 
the level of the brain; the proboscis as a rule bears stylets; the 
intestine nearly always has a caecum. Families, Eunemertidae, 
Ototyphlonemertidae, Prosorhocmidae, Ampiiiporidae, 
Tetrastemmatidae, Nectonemertidae, Pelagonemertidae, 
Malacobdellidae. 

This order represents the Hoplonemertini of Hubrecht. 

IV. Heteronemertini, in which the dermal musculature is in 
three layers, an external longitudinal, a middle circular, an internal 
longitudinal; the nervous system lies between the first and second 
of these layers; the outer layer of longitudinal muscles is a new 
development; there is no intestinal caecum; no stylets on the 
proboscis and the mouth is behind the level of the brain. Families, 

	EUPOLIIDAE, LlNEIDAE. 

	Fig. 1. — Lineus geniculatus.X\. (From 
	Burger.) 1, Lateral slits on head; 2, 
	anus. 

	1 Nemertes was a sea nymph, daughter of Nereus and Doris. 
	One of the genera was named Nemertes by Cuvier. 

This order represents the Schizonemertini of Hubrecht and the 
family Eupolidae. 

The first three orders, which have a double muscular layer, 
external circular and internal longitudinal, are sometimes grouped 
together as the Dimyaria; the Heteronemertini, in which a third 
coat of longitudinal muscles arises outside the circular layer, are then 
placed in a second branch, the T rimy aria. 

The following families and genera are represented on the British 
coasts: Carinellidae, Cannella; Cephalothricidae, Cephalo- 
thrix, Carinoma; Eunemertidae, Eunemertes; Ototyphlone- 
mertidae, OtotypUonemertes; Amphiporidae, Amphiporus, Dre- 
panophorus; Tetrastemmidae, Tetrastemma, Prosorkocmus; 
Malacobdellidae, Malacobdella; Eupoliidae, Eupolia, Vaten- 
cinia, Oxypolia; Lineidae, Linens, Euborlasia, Micrura, Cerebratu- 
lus, Micrella. 

Anatomy. — Proboscis and Proboscidian Sheath. — The organ most 
characteristic of a Nemertine is without doubt the proboscis. With 
very few exceptions {Malacobdella, Akrostomum, where it has fused 

	p* 
	A. B 
	Fig, 2. — Diagrams of the organs of a Nemertine. A, From 
	below; B, from above. 
	m, Mouth. Br, Brain-lobes. 
	div, Intestinal diverticula. In, Longitudinal nerve stems. 
	a, Anus. pr, Proboscis. 
	ov, Ovaries. ps, Proboscidian sheath, 
	n, Nephridia. p.o., Opening for proboscis. 

with the mouth into a single exterior opening), there is a terminal 
opening, the rhynchostome (subterminal in Valencinia), at the fore- 
most tip of the body, out of which the proboscis is seen shooting 
backwards and forwards, sometimes with so much force that both its 
interior attachments are severed and it is entirely expelled from the 
body. It then often retains its vitality for a long time, apparently 
crawling as if it were itself a worm, a phenomenon which is at least 
partially explained by the extraordinary development of nervous 
tissue, equally distributed all through the walls of the proboscis, 
and either united into numerous longitudinal nerve-stems (Dre- 
panopjiorus, Amphiporus) or spread out into a uniform and com- 
paratively thick layer (Cerebratulus, sp.). This very effective and 
elaborate innervation, which has been directly traced to the brain, 
whence strong nerves (generally two) enter the proboscis, renders 
it exceedingly probable that the most important functions of the 
proboscis are of a sensiferous, tactile nature. In Nemertines the 
' everted proboscis is retracted in the same way as the t tip of a glove 
finger would be if it were pulled backwards by a thread situated in 
the axis and attached to the tip. The comparison may be carried 
still further. The central thread just alluded to is represented in 
the Nemertean proboscis by that portion which is never everted, 
and the tip of the glove by the boundary between the evertiblc and 
non-evertiblc portion of the proboscis — a boundary which in the 
Metanemertini is marked by the presence of a pointed or serrated 
stylet. v This stylet is thus situated terminally when the proboscis 

	P.o. 

has reached its maximum eversion. It adds a decisively aggressive 
character to an organ the original significance of which, as we have 
seen, was tactile. This aggressive character has a different aspect in 
several genera which are destitute of a central stylet, but in which 
the surface that is turned outwards upon
eversion of the proboscis is largely pro- 
vided with nematocysts, sending the 
urticating rods of different sizes in all 
directions. In others this surface is beoet 
with thick', glandular, adhesive papillae. 

The comparison with the glove-finger 
is in so far insufficient as the greater 
portion of the non-evertible half of the 
proboscis is also hollow and clothed by 
glandular walls. Only at the very hinder- 
most end does it pass into the so-called 
retractor-muscle (fig. 2), which is at- 
tached to the wall of the space, or rhyn- 
chocoel, in which the proboscis moves 
about. This retractor-muscle, indeed, 
serves to pull back with great rapidity 
the extruded proboscis, and is aided 
in its action by the musculature of the 
head. The extrusion itself depends en- Fig. 3.— Anterior portion 
tirely upon contraction of the muscular of the body of a Nemer- 
walls of the space just mentioned, the tine, 
rhynchocoel. As it is (1) closed on all Br, Brain-lobes. 
sides, and (2) filled with a corpuscular N, Lateral nerves, 
fluid, the contractions alluded to send PS, Proboscidian sheath, 
this fluid to impinge against the anterior Pr, Proboscis, 
portion, where the proboscis, floating in P.O., Exterior opening 
its sheath, is attached with it to the through which the 
muscular tissue of the head (fig. 3). proboscis is everted 
Partial extrusion lessening the resist- or rhynchostome. 
ance in this region inevitably follows, Oesophagus and 
and when further contractions of the mouth shown by 
walls of the sheath ensue total ex- dotted lines, 
trusion is the consequence. It is 
worthy of notice that in those Nemertines which make a very free 
use of their proboscis, and in which it is seen to be continually 
protruded and retracted, the walls of the proboscidian sheath are 
enormously muscular. On the other hand, they are much less con- 
siderably or even insignificantly so in the genera that are known 
to make a rather sparing use of their proboscis. The rhyn- 
chocoel is formed by a split which appears in the meso- 
blast surrounding the epiblastic pit which is the fore- 
runner of the proboscis. It does not seem to be coclomic. 

The proboscis, which is thus an eminently muscular organ, 
is composed of two or three, sometimes powerful, layers of 
muscles — one of longitudinal and one or two of circular 
fibres. In the posterior retractor the longitudinal fibres 
become united into one bundle, which, as noticed above, is 
inserted in the wall of the sheath. At the circular inser- 
tion of the proboscis in front 
of the brain the muscular fibres of a Hoplonemertine. Fig. 
belonging to the anterior ex- tracted; fig. 5 everted, 
tremity of the body and those 
connected with the proboscis are very intimately interwoven, forming 
a strong attachment. The short tube between this circular insertion 
and the rhynchostome is called the rhynchodaeum. 

The proboscis broken off and expelled is generally reproduced, 
the posterior ribbon-like end of this reproduced 
portion again fusing with the walls of the sheath. 
There is reason to suppose that, when a wound is 
inflicted by the central stylet, it is envenomed by 
the fluid secreted in the posterior proboscidian 
region being at the same time expelled. A re- 
servoir, a duct and a muscular bulb in the region 
(fig. 4) where the stylet is attached serve for this 
purpose. The significance of two or more (in armature from 
Drepanophortis very numerous) small sacs con- the proboscis of 
taining so-called " reserve " stylets resembling in Drepanophorus. 
shape that of the central dart is insufficiently known. 

The muscular walls of the rhynchocoel, which by their transverse 
contractions serve to bring about eversion of the proboscis in the way 
above traced, are attached to the musculature of the head just in 
front of the ganglionic commissures (fig. 3). In nearly all Nemertines 
the rhynchocoelextends backwards as far as the posterior extremity, 
just above the anus; in Carinella it is limited to the anterior body- 
region. The corpuscles floating in the fluid it contains are of definite 

	Fig. 4. Fig. 5. 

	Figs. 4, 5. — Proboscis with stylet, 
	reserve " sacs and muscular bulb 
	4 re- 

	Fig. 6.— The 

shape, and in Cerebratulus urticans they are deep red, possibly from 
the presence of haemoglobin. They are usually larger than the blood 
corpuscles. Internally the muscular layers are lined by an epi- 
thelium. In the posterior portion this epithelium in certain Hetero- 
nemertea has a more glandular appearance, and sometimes the 
interior cavity is obliterated by cell-proliferation in this region. 
Superiorly the. sheath either closely adheres to the muscular body- 
wall, with which it may even be partly interwoven, or it hangs 
freely in the connective tissue which fills the space between the 
intestine and the muscular body-wall. 

Cutaneous System, — Externally in all species a layer of ciliated 
cells forms the outer investment. In it are, moreover, enclosed 
unicellular glands pouring their highly refracting contents, of a more 
or less rod-like shape, directly to the exterior. They appear to 
be the principal source of the mucus these animals secrete. In most 
Hetcronemertines these elements are separated by a thin homo- 
geneous basement membrane (fig. 8) from the following — that is, 
from a layer in which longitudinal muscular fibres are largely inter- 
mixed with tortuous glands, which by reason of their deeper situation 
communicate with the exterior by a much longer and generally very 
narrow duct. The pigment is also principally localized in this layer, 
although sometimes it is present even deeper down within the 
musculature. The passage from this tegumentary layer to the 
subjacent longitudinal muscular one is gradual, no membrane 
separating them. In Carinella, Cephalotkrix, Polia and the Metane- 
mertines the two tegumentary layers with their different glandular 
elements are fused into one; a thick layer of connective tissue 
is situated beneath them (instead of between them) and keeps the 
entire cutaneous system more definitely separate from the muscular 
(figs. 7, 8). 

Musculature and Connective Tissue. — The muscular layers by which 
the body-wall is constituted have been very differently and to some 
extent confusingly described by the successive authors on Nemertean 
anatomy. There is sufficient reason for this confusion. The fact 
is that not only have the larger subdivisions a different arrangement 
and even number of the muscular layers, but even within the same 
genus, nay, in the same species, well-marked differences occur. 

	c 
	Mm 
	long 
	4>1re2. 
	Bni 
	c*rc /. = 
	/an*/*—"**. ;.*;*< 
	Fig. 7. 
	Fig. 8. 
	Fig. 9. 
	Figs. 7-9. — The layers of the body- wall in Carinella (fig. 7), the 
	Metanemertini (fig. 8) and the Heteronemertini (fig. 9). c, Cellular 
	tissue of the integument; Bm, basement membrane; cire. 1, outer 
	circular, and long. y longitudinal layer of muscular tissue; circ. 2, 
	long. i t additional circular and longitudinal layers of the same; 
	nl t nervous layer. 

Increase in size appears sometimes to be accompanied by the develop- 
ment ol a new layer of fibres, whereas a difference in the method of 
preparation may give to a layer which appeared homogeneous in 
one specimen a decidedly fibrous aspect in another. Nevertheless 
there are three principal types under which the different modifications 
can be arranged. One of them is found in the two most primitively 
organized genera, Carinella and Cephalotkrix, i.e. an outer circular, a 
longitudinal ^nd an inner circular layer of muscular fibres (fig. 7). 
The second is common to all the Heteronemertines, as well as to Polia 
and Valencinia, and also comprehends three layers, of which, how- 
ever, two are longitudinal, viz. the external and the internal one, 
there being a strong circular layer between them (fig. 9;. To the 
third type all the Metanemertint correspond; their muscular layers 
are only two. an external circular and an internal longitudinal one 
(fig. 8). 

The Heteronemertini thus appear to have developed an extra layer 
of longitudinal fibres internally to those which they inherited from 
more primitive ancestors, whereas the Metanemertini are no longer 
in possession of the internal circular layer, but have on the contrary 
largely developed the external circular one, which has dwindled 
away in the Heteronemertini. The situation of the lateral nerve- 
stems in the different genera with respect to the muscular layers 
lends definite support to the interpretation of their homologies here 
given and forms the basis of Burger's classification. 

In Carinella, Cephalotkrix and Polia, as well as in all Metane- 
mertines, the basement membrane of the skin already alluded 
to is particularly strong and immediately applied upon the muscular 
layers. In the Heteronemertines there is a layer in which the 
cutaneous elements are largely represented below the thin basement 
membrane (fig. 8), between it and the bulk of the outer longitudinal 
muscles. The difference in the appearance of the basement mem- 
brane — sometimes wholly homogeneous, sometimes eminently 
fibrillar — can more especially be observed in differently preserved 
specimens of the genus Polia. 

	u.l 
	cot 
	Fig. 10 Fig. ii 
	Figs. 10, n. — Brain and 
	lateral organ of a Schizonemer- 

The connective tissue of the integument and basement membrane 
imperceptibly merges into that which surrounds the muscular 
bundles as they are united into denser and definite layers, and this is 
especially marked in those forms (Akrostomum) where the density of 
the muscular body-wall has considerably diminished, and the con- 
nective tissue has thus become much more prominent. It can then at 
the same time be observed, too, that the compact mass of connective 
tissue (" reticulum," Barrois) which lies between the muscular body- 
wall and the intestine is directly continuous with that in which the 
muscular layers are embedded. Nuclei are everywhere present. The 
omnipresence of this connective tissue tends to exclude the formation 
of any perivisceral body cavity in Nemcrtincs. 

In Polia the connective tissue enclosed in the external muscular 
layer is eminently vacuolar — all the intermediate stages between 
such cells in which the vacuole predominates and the nucleus is 
peripheral and those in which the granular protoplasm still entirely 
fills them being moreover present. 

In addition to the musculature of the proboscis and proboscidian 
sheath, longitudinal muscular fibres are found in the walls of the 
oesophagus, whilst transverse ones are numerous and united into 
vertical dissepiments between the successive intestinal caeca, thus 
bringing about a very regular internal metamerization. The genital 
products develop in intermediate spaces similarly limited by these 
dissepiments and alternating with the digestive caeca. 

Nervous System and Sense Organs. — The nervous system of Nemer- 
tines presents several interesting peculiarities. As central organs 
we have to note the brain-lobes and the longitudinal lateral cords 
which form one continuous unsegmented massol fibrous and cellular 
nerve-tissue. The fibrous nerve-tissue is more dense in the higher 
differentiated, more loose and spongy in the lower organized 
forms; the cellular nerve-tissue is similarly less compact in the forms 
that are at the base of the scale. 

	tine (fig. 10) and a Hoplo- 
	nemertine (fig. n). eo, Exterior* 
	opening; u.l, superior brain- 
	lobe; p.l. t posterior brain-lobe, 

No ganglionic swellings whatever occur in the course of the longi-
tudinal cords. The brain must be looked upon as the anterior thick-
ening of these cords, and at the same 
time as the spot where the two halves of the central nerve system 
intercommunicate. This is brought about by a double commissure, 
of which the ventral portion is considerably thicker than the dorsal, 
and which, together with the brain-lobes, constitutes a ring through 
which both proboscis and proboscidian sheath pass. The brain-lobes 
are generally four in number, a ventral and a dorsal pair, respectively 
united together by the above-mentioned commissures, and moreover 
anteriorly interfusing with each other, right and left. In Carinella 
this separation into lobes of the anterior thickenings of the cords has 
not yet commenced, the ventral commissure at the same time being 
extremely bulky. There is great probability that the central stems, 
together with the brain, must be looked upon as local longitudinal 
accumulations of ner-

	sr-z?^ ^ s^"*^ 
	sfr**^£$ •0\___»T^ 

vous tissue in what was
in more primitive ancestors a less highly 
differentiated nervous 
Clexus, situated in the body-wall in a similar 
way to that which still is found in the less 
highly organized Coelcnterates. Such a nervous 
plexus indeed occurs in the body-wall of all 
Heteronemer tines, sometimes even as a 
comparatively thick layer, situated, as arc 
the nerve stems, between the external 
longitudinal and the circular muscles (fig. 
9). In Carinella, where 
the longitudinal nerve-stems are situated exteriorly to the 
cular layers, this plexus, although present, is much less dense, 
and can more fitly be compared to a network with wide meshes. 
In both eases it can be shown to be in immediate continuity with the 
coating of nerve-cells forming part of the longitudinal cords. It 
stretches forward as far as the brain, and in Carinella is again con- 
tinued in front of it, whereas in the Heteronemertines the innervation 
of the anterior extremity of the head, in front of the brain, takes the 
form of more definite and less numerous branching stems. The 
presence of this plexus in connexion with the central stems, sending 
out nervous filaments amongst the muscles, explains the absence, in 
Pro-, Meso- and Hetcronemertines, of separate and distinct peri- 
pheral nerve stems springing from the central stems innervating 
the different organs and body-regions, the only exceptions being the 

	Fig 
	L.NT L.N. 
	12. — The brain of a Nemertine, with 
	its lobes and commissures. 
	S.N., Nerves to sensory apparatus. 
	P.N., Nerves for proboscis. 
	vag, Nerves for oesophagus. 
	L.N., Lateral nerve-stems. 
	mus- 

nerves for the proboscis, those for the sense organs in the head and 
the strong nerve pair (tt. vagus) for the oesophagus. At the same 
time it renders more intelligible the extreme sensitiveness of the body- 
wall of the Nemertines, a local and instantaneous irritation often 
resulting in spasmodic rupture of the animal at the point touched. 

In the Metanemertini, where the longitudinal stems lie inside the 
muscular body-wall, definite and metamerically placed nerve 
branches spring from them and divide dichotomously in the different 
tissues they innervate. A definite plexus can here no longer be 
traced. In certain Metanemertines the lateral stems have been 
noticed to unite posteriorly by a terminal commissure, situated 
above the anus, the whole of the central nervous system being in 
this way virtually situated above the intestine. In others there is an 
approximation of the lateral stems towards the median ventral line 
(Drepanophorus) ; in a genus of Heteronemertines (Langia), on the 
other hand, an arrangement occurs by which the longitudinal stems 
are no longer lateral, but have more or less approached each other 
dorsally. 

In addition to the nerves starting from the brain-lobes just now 
especially mentioned, there is a double apparatus which can hardly 
be treated of in conjunction with the sense organs, because its 
sensory functions have not been sufficiently made out, and which 
will therefore rather be considered along with the brain and central 
nervous system. This apparatus is usually known under the name 
of the lateral organs. To it belong (a) superficial grooves or deeper 
slits situated on the integument near the tip of the head, (6) nerve 
lobes in immediate connexion with the nervous tissue of the brain, 
and (c) ciliated ducts penetrating into the latter and communicating 
with the former. Embryology shows that originally these different 
parts arc separately started, and only ultimately become united 
into one. Two lateral outgrowths of the foremost portion of the 
oesophagus, afterwards becoming constricted off, as well as two 
ingrowths from the epiblast, contribute towards its formation, at 
least as far as both Mcta- and Heteronemertines are concerned. As 
to the Mesonemertini, in the most primitive genus, Carinella, we do 
not find any lateral organs answering to the description above given. 
What we do find is a slight transverse furrow on each side of the hc-ad, 
close to the tip, but the most careful examination of sections made 
• through the tissues of the head and brain shows the absence of any 
further apparatus comparable to that described above. Only in one 
species, tarinella inexpectata, a step in advance has been made, in 
so far as in connexion with the furrow just mentioned, which is 
here also somewhat more complicated in its arrangement, a ciliated 
tube leads into the brain, there to end blindly amidst the nerve- 
cells. No other intermediate stages have as yet been noticed 
between this arrangement and that of the Heteronemertini, in which 
a separate posterior brain-lobe receives a similar ciliated canal, and 
in Which the oesophageal outgrowths have made their appearance 
and are coalesced with the nerve-tissue in the organ of the adult 
animal. The histological elements of this portion remain distinct 
. both by transmitted light and in actual sections. 

These posterior brain-lobes, which in all Heteronemertines are in 
direct continuity of tissue with the upper pair of principal lobes, 
cease to have this intimate connexion in the Metanemertini; and, 
although still constituted of (i) a ciliated duct, opening out exter- 
nally, (2) nervous tissue surrounding it, and (3) histological elements 
distinctly different from the nervous, and most probably directly 
derived from the oesophageal outgrowths, they are nevertheless 
here no longer constantly situated behind the upper brain-lobes and 
directly connected with them, but are found sometimes behind, 
sometimes beside and sometimes before the brain-lobes. Further- 
more, they are here severed from the principal lobes and connected 
with them by one or more rather thick strings of nerve-fibres. 
In some cases, especially when the lobes lie before the brain, their 
distance from it, as well as the length of these nervous connexions, 
has considerably increased. 

These curious neuro-glandular pits (fig. 1), absent in* the Mesone- 
mertine and one or two aberrant species, have been shown to possess 
large glandular cells at their base which secrete a mucus. The 
development of these organs, which in the Protonemertine are but 
grooves in the epidermis, not far removed from the similar cephalic 
slits of many Turbellaria, reaches its height in Drepanophorus. Here 
the pits split into two, one part ending in a sac lined with sensory 
epithelium, and embedded in nervous tissue, the other projecting 
backwards as a long, glandular, blind canal. The exit of these organs 
takes many shapes, of value in systematic work. Their function is 
still little understood. Two lateral, shallow pits occur on the side 
of the body about the level of the hinder end of the proboscis in 
some species of the genus Carinella, which are termed side-organs. 
Thesie are capable of being everted, and are probably sensory in 
function (fig. 20, if). 

For the Heteronemertines arguments have been adduced to prove 
that here they have the physiological significance of a special respir- 
atory apparatus for the central nervous tissue, which in all these 
forms is strongly charged with haemoglobin. The haemoglobin 
would, by its pre-eminent properties of fixing oxygen, serve to 
furnish the nerve system, which more than any other requires a 
constant supply, with the necessary oxygen. Such could hardly 
be obtained in any other way by those worms that have no special 
respiratory apparatus, and that live in mud and under stones where 
the natural supply of freshly oxygenated sea-water is practically 
limited. Whether in the Metanemertines, where the blood fluid is 

	13, 

	Fig. 14. 
	14.- 

often provided with haemoglobiniferous disks, the chief functions 
of the^ side organs may not rather be a sensory one needs further 
investigation. 

The exterior opening of the duct has been several times alluded to. 
In the Metanemertines it is generally situated towa/ds the middle- 
of a lateral transverse groove on either side s~** 
of the head, as was noticed for Carinella, and fk ^ 
as is also present in Polia. Generally a 
row of shorter grooves perpendicular to the 
first, and similarly provided with strong 
cilia, enlarges the surface of these furrows 
(fig. 14). In Valencinia there is nothing but 
a circular opening without furrow. In 'all 
Heteronemertines there is on each side of Fig. 13. 
the head a longitudinal slit of varying length p IGS 
but generally considerable depth, in the ^^ v — s of head 
bottom of which the dark red brain is very < Heteronemertine 
plainly visible by transparency These slits (fi j with x u 

are continued, into the ciliated duct, being t v u a ina i* >/ slitf and </ a 
at the same time themselves very strongly Metanemertine (fig 14) 
ciliated. In life they are commonly rhythmi- with transverse groove 
cally opened and shut by a way move- and furrows> 
ment. They are the head slits (cephalic 
fissures, " Kopfspalten ") so characteristic of this subdivision 
(figs. 10 and 13). 

With respect to the sense organs of the Nemertines, we find that 
eyes are of rather constant occurrence, although many Hetero- 
nemertines living in the mud appear to be blind. The more highly 
organized species have often very numerous eyes (Amphiporus, 
Drepanophorus), which are provided with a spherical refracting 
anterior portion, with a cellular " vitreous body," with a layer of 
delicate radially arranged rods, with an outer sheath of dark pigment, 
and with a separate nerve-twig each, springing from a common or 
double pair of branches v/hich leave the brain as n. optici, for the 
innervation of the eyes. Besides these more highly differentiated 
organs of vision, more primitive eyes are present in others down to 
simple stellate pigment specks without any refracting apparatus. 

Organs of hearing in the form of capsules containing otoliths 
have only been very rarely observed, apparently only in Metane- 
mertini. 

As to the organ of touch, the great sensitiveness of the body has 
already been noticed, as well as the probable primary significance 
of the proboscis. Small tufts of tactile hairs or papillae are sometimes 
observed in small number at the tip of the head; sometimes longer 
hairs, apparently rather stiff, are seen on the surface, very sparingly 
distributed between the cilia, and hitherto only in a very limited 
number of small specimens. They may perhaps be considered as 
sensory. 

Digestive System. — The anterior opening, the mouth, is situated 
ventrally, close to the tip of the head and in front of the brain in the 
Metanemertini , somewhat more backward and behind the brain in 
the other Nemertines. In most Heteronemertines it is found to be 
an elongated slit with corrugated borders; in the Metanemertines 
it is smaller and rounded; in Malacobdella and Akrostomum it, 
moreover, serves for the extrusion of the proboscis, which emerges 
by a separate dorsal opening just inside the mouth. The oesophagus 
is the anterior portion of the digestive' canal; its walls are folded 
longitudinally, comparatively thick and provided with longitudinal 
muscular fibres. Two layers are specially obvious in its walls— the 
inner layer bordering the lumen being composed of smaller ciliated 
cells, the outer thicker one containing numerous granular cells and 
having a more glandular character. Outside the walJL of the oeso- 
phagus a vascular space has been detected which is in direct con- 
tinuity with the longitudinal blood-vessels. In certain cases, how- 
ever, the walls of the oesophagus appear to be very closely applied 
to the muscular body- wall and this vascular space thereby con- 
siderably reduced. 

The posterior portion of the intestine is specially characterized 
by the appearance of the intestinal diverticula horizontally and 
symmetrically placed right and left and opposite to each other. 

In the Metanemertini there is a curious diverticulum of the intes- 
tine which stretches forward in the median line, ventral to the so- 
called stomach. It is at times sacculated, but its chief interest is that, 
as Lebedinsky 1 has shown, the tip of the caecum in embryonic life 
opens to the exterior as the blastopore. This subsequently closes up, 
and the newly-formed oesophagus and stomach open in the intestine 
above and behind it. It is a curious feature in Nemertines that the 
alimentary canal seldom contains traces of food and yet most of these 
worms are voracious. The food must be digested, absorbed and ex- 
creted with great rapidity. There is some evidence that in this 
group the ectoderm of the oesophagus is chiefly concerned with 
digestion, whereas the endoderm of the intestine is limited to the 
absorption of the soluble products. 

Cases of asymmetry or irregularity in the arrangement of the 
intestinal caeca, though sometimes occurring, are not normal. At 
the tip of the tail, where the growth o f the animal takes place, the 

	1 Arch. mikr. Anat. xlix. (1897) p. 503. 

	-JUV 
	jt" \ /
	Cj, X^^^^^^B^L GX
	o „ s
	
caeca are always eminently regular. So they are throughout the 
whole body in most of the Metanemertines. In Carinella they are 
generally deficient and the intestine straight; in young specimens 
of this species, however, they occur, though less regular and more in 
the form of incipient foldings by which the digestive surface is, 
increased. The inner surface of the intestinal caeca is ciliated, the 
caeca themselves are some- 
times — especially in the hindermost portion of the 
body — of a considerably smaller lumen than the in- 
termediate genital spaces; sometimes, however, the 
reverse is the case, and in both cases it is the smaller 
lumen that appears enclosed between and suspended by 
the transverse fibres constituting the muscular dis- 
sepiments above mentioned. The anus is situated ter- 
minally, the muscular body-wall through which the 
intestine must find its way outwards probably acting 
in this region the part of a sphincter. The lateral nerve 
stems mostly terminate on both sides in closest prox- 
imity to the anus; in certain species, however, they 
interfuse by a transverse connexion above the anus. 
The longitudinal blood-vessels do the same. 

Circulatory Apparatus. — 
The chief vessels are three longitudinal trunks, a 
median and two lateral ones. They are in direct con- 
nexion with each other both at the posterior and at the 
anterior end of the body. At the posterior end they 
communicate together by a T-shaped connexion in a 
simple and uniform way. Anteriorly there is a cer- 
tain amount of difference in the arrangement. Where- 
as in the Metanemertines an arrangement prevails as re- 

	tions to show' disposition oTTnternal presented hi fig. 18, in the 
	organs in Carinella (Protonemertini), Heteronemertines the 
	fig. 15, Heteronemertini, fig. 16, and 

	Lfr. 

	Fig. 17. 

	Fics. 15-17. — Diagrammatic sec- 
	15. 
	Mctanemertini, fig. 17. 
	C, Cellular portion of integument. 
	B, Basement membrane. 
	A, Circular muscular layer. 
	A\ Longitudinal muscular layer. 
	A* y Second circular (in Carinella). 
	A ,w , Second longitudinal (in Hetero- 
	nemertini). 
	N, Nervous layer. 
	LN, Lateral nerves. 
	PS, Cavity of proboscidian sheath (the 
	sheath itself of varying thickness). 
	P, Proboscis. 
	/, Intestine. 
	LBv, lateral blood-vessel. 
	DBv, Dorsal blood-vessel. 
	CT, Connective tissue. 

lateral stems, while entirely uniform all through the 
posterior portion of the body, no longer individually 
exist in the oesophageal region, but here dissolve 
themselves into a network of vascular spaces surround- 
ing this portion of the digestive tract. The median 
dorsal vessel, however, remains distinct, but instead 
of continuing its course beneath the proboscidian 
sheath it is first enclosed by the ventral musculature of 
this organ, and still farther forwards it even bulges out 
longitudinally into the 
cavity of the sheath. Anteriorly it finally communicates with the 
lacunae just mentioned, which surround the oesophagus, bathe the 
posterior lobes of the brain, pass through the nerve ring together 
with the proboscidian sheath, and are generally continued in front 
of the brain as a lacunar space in the muscular tissue, one on each 
side. 

Special mention must be made of the delicate transverse vessels 
regularly connecting the longitudinal and the lateral ones. They 
are metamerically placed, and belong to the same metamere as the 
digestive caeca, thus alternating with the generative sacs. The 
blood fluid does not flow in any definite direction ; its movements 
are largely influenced by those of the muscular body-wall. It is 
colourless and^ contains definite corpuscles, which are round or 
elliptical, and in many Metanemertines are coloured red by haemo- 
globin, being colourless in other species. The circulatory system 
of Carinella is considerably different, being more lacunar and less 
restricted to definite vascular channels. Two lateral longitudinal 
lacunae form, so to say, the forerunners of the lateral vessels. A 
median longitudinal vessel and transverse connecting trunks have 
not as yet been detected. There are large lacunae in the head in 
front of the ganglia. 

The vascular system is entirely closed. It contains a colourless 
fluid, with flat, oval nucleated corpuscles, as a rule colourless, but in 
some cases tinged with yellow or red haemo- 
globin. Its presence is one of the most dis- 
tinctive features which separate the Nemer- 
tines from the Platyhelminthes. In origin 
the vascular system is due to a fusion of 
spaces which arise in the mesoblast of the 
larva. The blood is probably circulated by 
the general contraction of the whole animal, 
since it is very doubtful if there are any 
intrinsic muscles in the vessel- walls. Its 
function is less that of respiration than of

	p IG x g Diagram 
	S^^^^^^'P^^H 10 ^ of tne 'circulatory 

the body, and the excretory products to the apparatus m the an * 
#V nd doubtless it cverves at times to te % r body . region of 
assist in the extension and retraction of parts a Metanemertine 
of the body. The vessels in the more highly- 
.developed genera seem to be partly lacunae and partly true vessels 
with definite walls. 

Nephridia. — Associated with the lateral blood-vessels are the single 
pair of nephridia. Each consists of a more or less coiled, ciliated, 
longitudinal canal, which on its external surface gives origin to one 
or more transverse canals, which pass to the exterior and open a 
little way behind the mouth on the sides of the body. On its inner 
surface the longitudinal canal is adpressed to the lateral blood- 
vessel, and gives off a number of small, blind caeca or tags, each of 
which ends in a small clump of cells. These tags indent the blood- 
vessel. From their inner ends, projecting into the lumen of the tag, 
hangs a bunch of cilia, which forms the flickering " flame " so well 
known in the excretory apparatus of the Platyhelminthes and larval 
Annelids (fig. 19). There is no communication between the nephridia 
on one side and the other, but in Eupolia there are ducts opening 
into the alimentary canal as well as to 
the exterior, a condition of things which 
recalls what obtains in certain Oligochaetes. 
As a rule these organs only extend a short 
way along the anterior end of the body, 
a concentration which we may associate 
with the development of a vascular system 
to bring the products of excretion to a 
fixed spot. In Stichostemma, however, 
Montgomery l has described a series of 
nephridia lying all along the body, 
a nd each wi t h a varying nu mber of 
external pores. The excretory system is 
epiblastic in its origin. 

The two external openings of the 
nephridia are situated sometimes more 
towards the ventral, at other times more 
towards the dorsal side. Even in the 
larger Heteronemertines these pores are 
only a few millimetres behind the mouth 
region. In transverse sections the nephridia 
can be shown to be generally situated in 
the region limited by (1) the proboscidian 
sheath, (2) the upper wall of the intestine, 
(3) the muscular body-wall. No trace of 
nephridia is found posterior to the oeso- 
phagus. 

Generative System. — In the Nemertines 
the sexes are separate, with only very 
few exceptions (Tetrastemma hcrma- excretory system lying 
phroditica t Marion). The reproductive on the lateral vessel of 
system is of the simplest, strongly con- Drepanophorus specta- 
trasting with the complicated arrange- bilis. (Magnified about 
ments in the Platyhelminthes. A series 750.) I, The longitudinal 
of sacs lined with an epithelium, the pro- excretory canal ; 2, one 
liferation of which gives rise to the ova of the tags containing the 
or spermatozoa, alternate between the flame-cells, 
caeca of the intestine. When mature, 
each sac pushes out a process to the exterior, and this forms 
the genital duct. The line of the genital openings is usually 
dorsal to the lateral nerve. The whole sac, with its epithelial 
wall and its contained genital cells, arises ultimately from some 
of the parenchymatous cells of the body. The walls and con- 
tents in some forms arise simultaneously; in others the walls are 
first formed and their lining then proliferates. It has been pointed 
out that the cavity of the sacs corresponds^ many particulars with 
the coelom of higher animals, and in Lebidinsky's observations on 
the development there is some support to the view that a coelom 
exists. Montgomery has also described certain spaces which may 
be coelomic lying between the alimentary canal and the inner 
longitudinal layer of muscles in the Heteronemertini. The ova and 

	Fig. 19.— Part of the 
	
	1 Zool. Jahrb. Anat. t x. (1897) p. 265. 

spermatozoa, when mature, present no peculiarities. As the ova are 
in many species deposited in a gelatinous tube secreted by the body- 
walls, in which they are arranged (three or more together) in flask- 
shaped cavities, impregnation must probably take place either before 
or at the very moment of their being deposited. The exact mode has 
not yet been noticed. 

	pharynx, and he sums up their relationship to the Annelids by the 
	statement that to a certain extent the Nemertines represent Turbel- 
	laria which in the course of time have copied certain features of an 
	Annelid character. 

Literature. — T. Barrois, " Recherches sur Tembryologie des 
Nemertcs," Annates des Sc. Naturelles, vi. (1877); O. Biitschli, 

	Fig. 20. — Anterior end of a Carinella, partly diagrammatic. Magnified.
	(From Burger.)
	1, Opening of proboscis;
	2, cephalic glands running to frontal organ;
	3, dorsal commissure of brain;
	4, cerebral organ;
	5, upper dorsal nerve;
	6, under dorsal nerve; 
	7, rhynchocoelic blood-vessel;
	8, fore-gut;
	9, rhynchocoel;
	10, nerve to proboscis;
	11, proboscis;
	12, genital sac;
	13, genital pore; 
	14, mid-gut;
	15, circular nerves;
	16, pore of excretory system;
	17, lateral organ;
	18, excretory canal;
	19, lateral vessel;
	20, lateral nerve;
	21 , oesophageal nerve;
	22, mouth;
	23, ventral ganglion of brain;
	24, dorsal ganglion of brain;
	25, rhynchodaeum. 

Prosorhocmus claparedt'i is a viviparous form. 

Development. — The embryology of the Nemertines offers some 
very remarkable peculiarities. Our knowledge of the development 
of the most primitive forms is scanty. Both Iletero- and Metane- 
mertini have been more exhaustively studied than the other two 
groups, the first, as was noticed above, being characterized by peculiar 
larval forms, the second developing without metamorphosis. 

The larva of Ccrebratidus is called the pilidium. In exterior shape 
it resembles a helmet with spike and ear-lobes, the spike being a 
strong and long flagellum or a tuft of long cilia, the ear-lobes lateral 
ciliated appendages (fig. 21). It encloses the primitive alimentary 
tract. Two pairs of invaginations of the skin, which originally are called 
the prostomial and metastomial disks, grow round the intestine, finally fuse 
together, and form the skin and muscular body-wall of the future Nemer- 
tine, which afterwards becomes ciliated, frees itself from the pilidium in- 
vestment and develops into the adult worm without further metamorphosis. 
The eggs of these species are not enveloped by such massive gelatinous 
strings as are those of the genus Linens, In the latter we find the 
young Nemertines crawling about after a period of from six to eight 
weeks, and probably feeding upon a portion of this gelatinous substance, 
which is found to diminish in bulk. In accordance with these more seden- 
tary habits during the first phases of life, the characteristic pilidium larva, 
which is so eminently adapted for a 

	oe, 
	cs, 

	Fig. 21. — Pilidium-larva. 
	B, Bunch of cilia or flagel- 
	lum. 
	Oesophagus. 
	Stomach. 
	am, Amnion.
	pr.d. t Prostomial disk.
	po.d. s Metastomial disk.
	Oesophageal outgrowth pelagic
	for lateral organ.

existence, appears to have been reduced to a close-fitting exterior 
layer of cells, which is stripped off after the definite body-wall of the 
Nemertine has similarly originated out of four ingrowths from the 
primary epiblast. To this reduced and sedentary pilidium the 
name of " larva of Desor " has been given. 

In the Metanemertini, as far as they have been investigated, a 
direct development without metamorphosis has been observed. 
It appears probable that this is only a further simplification of the 
more complicated metamorphosis described above. 

As to the development of the different organs, there is still much 
that remains doubtful. The hypoblast in some forms originates by 
invagination, in others by delamination. The proboscis is an in- 
vagination from the epiblast; the proboscidian sheath appears in 
the mesoblast, but is perhaps originally derived from the hypoblast. 
The origin of the lateral organs has already been noticed ; that of the 
nerve system is essentially epiblastic. 

Affinities.— The position of the Nemertines in the animal king- 
dom is now looked upon as more isolated than was formerly thought, 
and recent writers have been inclined to treat them as a separate 
phylum. Whether this view be adopted or not, and whether the 
Turbellaria be regarded as nearly related or only remotely connected, 
there can be little doubt that the Nemertines resemble the Turbel- 
laria more nearly than they do any other group of animals. Burger 
even goes so far as to homologize the proboscis with the Turbellarian 

" Einige Bemerkungen zur Metamorphose des Pilidium,** Archiv 
fur Naturgeschichte (1873); L. von Graff, Monographic der Tur- 
bellarien (1882) ; A. A. W. Hubrecht, " Untersuchungen iiber 
Nemertinen a. d. Golf von Neapel," NiederL Archiv fur Zoologie, 
ii.; Id., " The Genera of European Nemerteans critically revised," 
Notes from the Leyden Museum (1879); Id. 9 "Zur Anatomic u. 
Physiologie d. Ncrvensystems d. Nemertinen," Verk. kon. Akad. 
v. Wetensch. (Amsterdam, 1880), vol. xx.; Id., "The Peripheral 
Nervous System of the Palaeo- and Schizonemertini, one of the layers 
of the Body-wall,** Quart. Journal of Micr. Science, vol. xx.; Id. t 
" On the Ancestral Forms ol the Chordata," lb. (July 1883); W. 
Keferstein, " Untersuchungen tiber nicdere Seethiere," Zeitschr. 
f. wissensch. Zool. vol. xii. (1863); J. von Kennel, " Bcitriige 
zur Kenntniss der Nemertinen,*' Arbeiten a. d. zool.-zoot. Instit. 
ii. (Wiirzburg, 1878); W. C. Macintosh, A Monograph of British 
Annelida: I. Nemerteans (Ray Society, 1873-1874); A. F. Marion, 
11 Recherches sur les animaux inf6rieurs du Golfe de Marseille," 
Ann* des Sc. Nat. (1873); E. Metschnikoff, " Studien iiber die 
Entwickelung der Echinodermen und Nemertinen/* Mem. de VAcad. 
Imp. de St Petersb. xiv. (1869); Max Schultze, Bextrage zur Natur- 
geschichte der Turbellarien (Greifswald, 1851) and Zeitschr. fur 
wissensch. Zool.^ iv. (1852), p. 178; W. B. Benham, Quart. Journ. 
Micr. Sci. xxxix. (1896), p. 19; A. Brown, Proc. Roy. Soc. lxi. 
(1897), p. 28; O. Burger, Zeit. f. wiss. ZooL 1. (1890), p. 1; Id.> 
MitL Zool. Si Neapel, x. (1891), p. 206; Id. t Zeit. f. wiss.. ZooL 
liii. (1892), p. 322; Id., Verh. Deutsch. zool. Gesellsch. (1893); 
Id., Fauna u. Flora d. Golfe d. Neapel, Monograph 22 (1895); 
A. Vendy, Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria (n.s.),iv. (1892), p. 85, v. p. 127 
(1891-1892); B. Haller, Arb. Zool. Inst. Wien, viii. (1889), p. 276; 
A. A. W. Hubrecht, " Challenger " Reports, xix. (1887); L. Joubin, 
Arch. Zool. Exper. (2), viii. (1890), p. 461; Id., " Nemertines," in 
Blanchard's Traiti de zoologie (1894); J. N. Lebedinsky, Arch. 
Mikr. Anat. xlix. (1897), p. 503; T. H. Montgomery, ZooL Anzeig. 
xvii. (1894), pp. 298, 301; Id., Zeit.f iviss. Zool. lix. (1895), p. 83; 
Id., Zool. Jahrb. (Anat.) x. (1807), p. 1; A. E. Vernll, Trans. 
Connecticut Acad. New Haven, viii. (1892), p. 382; D. Bergendal, 
Zool. Anzeiger, xxiii. (1900), p. 313; \V. R. Coe, Zool. Jahrb. (Anat ) 
xii. (1899), p. 425; Id., Trans. Connect. Acad. ix. (1895), p. 479; 
Id., Proc. Wash. Acad. iii. (1901), p. 1 ; T. H. Montgomery, Journ. 
Morph., xiii. (1897) p. 381; Id., ZooL Jahrb. (Anat.) x. (1897), 
p. 265; R. C. Punnett, Quarl. Journ. Mic. Sc. xliv. (1900), p. ill; 
Id., Willey's ZooL Results, pt. v. (1900), p. 569; Id., Quart* Journ. 
Mic. Sc. xliv. (1901), p. 547; Staub, Semon's Forschungsreisen 
(5 Bd., 1900) ; C. B. Thompson, Zool. Anzeiger, xxiii. (1900), pp. 151, 
627; C. B. Wilson, Quart. Journ. Mic. Sc. xliii. (1900), p. 97. 

(A. A. W. H.;A. E. S.) 


NEMESIANUS, MARCUS AURELIUS OLYMPIUS, Roman 
poet, a native of Carthage, flourished about a.d. 283. He was 
a popular poet at the court of the Roman emperor Cams 
(Vopiscus, Carus, 11). He wrote poems on the arts of fishing 
(Halieiitica), aquatics (Nautica) and hunting (Cynegetica) , but 
only a fragment of the last, 325 hexameter lines, has been 
preserved. It is neatly expressed in good Latin, and was used 
as a school text-book in the 9th century. Four eclogues, formerly 
attributed to Titus Calpurnius (q.v.) Siculus, are now generally 
considered to be by Nemesianus, and the Praise of Hercules t 
generally printed in Claudian's works, may be by him. 

Complete edition of the works attributed to him in E. Bahrens, 
Poelae Latini Minores, iii. (1881); Cynegetica: ed. M. Haupt (with 
Ovid's Halieutica and Grattius Faliscus) 1838, and R. Stern, with 
Grattius (1832); Italian translation with notes by L. F. Valdrighi 
(1876). The four eclogues are printed with those of Calpurnius in 
the editions of H. Schenkl (1885) and E. H. Keene (1887); see 
L. Cisorio, Studio suite Egloghe di N. (1895) and Dell 9 imitazione 
nelle Egloghe di N. (1896) ; and M. Haupt, De Carminibus Bucolicis 
Calpurnii et N. (1853), the chief treatise on the subject. 


NEMESIS, the personification of divine justice. This is the 
only sense in which the word is used in Homer, while Hesiod 
(Theog. 223) makes Nemesis a goddess, the daughter of Night 
(some, however, regard the passage as an interpolation); she 
appears in a still more concrete form in a fragment of the Cypria. 
The word Nemesis originally meant the distributor (Gr. vkixav) 
of fortune, whether good or bad, in due proportion to each man 
according to his deserts; then, the resentment caused by any 
disturbance of this proportion, the sense of justice that could 
not allow it to pass unpunished. Gruppe and others prefer to 
connect the name with vefieeav, vcfie<ri£e<rQai ("to feel just 
resentment")- In J:he tragedians Nemesis appears chiefly as 
the avenger of crime and the punisher of arrogance, and as such 
is akin to Ate and the Erinyes. She was sometimes called 
Adrastcia, probably meaning " one from whom there is no 
escape "; the epithet is specially applied to the Phrygian 
Cybele, with wham, as with Aphrodite and Artemis, her cult 
shows certain affinities. She was specially honoured in the 
district of Rhamnus in Attica, where she was perhaps originally 
an ancient Artemis, partly confused with Aphrodite. A festival 
called Nemeseia (by some identified with the Genesia) was held 
at Athens. Its object was to avert the nemesis of the dead, 
who were supposed to have the power of punishing the living, 
if their cult had been in any way neglected (Sophocles, Electra, 
792; E. Rohde, Psyche, 1907, i. 236, note 1). At Smyrna 
there were two divinities of the name, more akin to Aphrodite 
than to Artemis. The reason for this duality is hard to explain; 
it is suggested that they represent two aspects of the goddess, the 
kindly and the malignant, or the goddesses of the old and the 
new city. Nemesis was also worshipped at Rome by victorious 
generals, and in imperial times was the patroness of gladiators 
and venalores (fighters with wild beasts) in the arena and one of 
the tutelary deities of the drilling-ground {Nemesis campestris). 
In the 3rd century a.d. there is evidence of the belief in an all- 
powerful Nemesis-Fortuna. She was worshipped by a society 
called Nemcsiaci. In early times the representations of Nemesis 
resembled Aphrodite, who herself sometimes bears the epithet 
Nemesis. Later, as the goddess of proportion and the avenger 
of crime, she has as attributes a measuring rod, a bridle, a sword 
and a scourge, and rides in a chariot drawn by griffins. 

See C. Walz, De Netnesi Graecorum (Tubingen, 1852) ; E. Tournier, 
Nimisis (1863), and H. Posnansky, " Nemesis und Adrasteia," in 
Breslauer philologische Abhandlungen, v. heft 2 (1890), both ex- 
haustive monographs; an essay, " Nemesis, or the Divine Envy/' 
by P. E. More, in The New World (N. Y., Dec. 1899) ; L. R. Farnell, 
Cults of the Greek States, ii. ; and A. Legrand in Darember^ and 
Saglio's Dictionnaire des antiquiUs. For the Roman Nemesis, see 
G. Wissowa, Religion und Kultus der Romer (Munich, 1902). 


NEMESIUS (fl. c. a.d. 390), a Christian philosopher, author 
of a treatise 7repi <f>v<xecos avOpdnrov (On Human Nature), was, 
according to the title of his book, bishop of Emesa (in Syria); 
of his life nothing further is known, and even his date is uncertain, 
but internal evidence points to a date after the Apollinarian 
controversy and before the strife connected with the names of 
Eutyches and Nestorius, i.e. about the end of the 4th century. 
His book is an interesting attempt to compile a system of anthro- 
pology from the standpoint of the Christian philosophy. Moses 
and Paul are put side hy side with Aristotle and Menander, 
and there is a clear inclination to Platonic doctrines of pre- 
existence and metempsychosis. In physiological matters he 
is in advance of Aristotle and Galen, though we can hardly 
assert — as has sometimes been thought — that he anticipated 
Harvey's discovery of the circulation of the blood. The treatise 
is conclusive evidence as to the mutual influence of Christianity 
and Hellenism in the 4th century. John of Damascus and the 
schoolmen, including Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, 
held Nemesius in high esteem, believing his book to be the work 
of Gregory of Nyssa, with whom he has much in common. 

Editions: Antwerp, 1575; Oxford, 167 1 ; Halle, 1802; Migne'a 
Patrol. Gr. vol. 40. Versions: Latin by Alsanus, ed. Holzinger 
(1887); by Burgundio, ed. Burkhardt (1891-1896). Literature: 
Bender, Untersuch. uber Nemesius (1898). See further Herzog- 
Hauck's Realencyklop, s.v. 


NEMORENSIS LACUS (mod. Nemz), a lake in the Alban 
Hills, in an extinct subsidiary crater in the outer ring of the 
ancient Alban crater, E. of the Lake of Albano. It is about 
3 J m. in diameter and some no ft. deep; the precipitous slopes 
of its basin are over 300 ft. high, and on the side towards the 
modern village a good deal more, and are mainly cultivated. 
It is now remarkable for its picturesque beauty. In ancient times 
it was included in the territory of Aricia, and bore the name 
" Mirror of Diana." The worship of Diana here was a very 
ancient one, and, as among the Scythians, was originally, so it 
was said, celebrated with human sacrifices; even in imperial 
times the priest of Diana was a man of low condition, a gladiator 
or a fugitive slave, who won his position by slaying bis pre- 
decessor in fight, having first plucked a mistletoe bough from 
the sacred grove, and who, notwithstanding, bore the title of 
rex (king). It is curious that in none of the inscriptions that have 
been found is the priest of Diana mentioned; and it has indeed 
been believed by Morpurgo and Frazer that the rex was not the 
priest of Diana at all, but, according to the former, the priest 
of Virbius, or, according to the latter, the incarnation of the 
spirit of the forest. The temple itself was one of the most splendid 
in Latium; Octavian borrowed money from it in 31 B.C., and 
it is frequently mentioned by ancient writers. Its remains are 
situated a little above the level of the lake, and to the N.E. of 
it. They consist cf a large platform, the back of which is formed 
by a wall of concrete faced with opus reticulatum, with niches, 
resting against the cliffs which form the sides of the crater. 
Excavations in the 17th and the last quarter of the 19th centuries 
(now covered in again), and also in 1905, led to the discovery 
of the temple itself, a rectangular edifice, 98 by 52 ft., and of 
various inscriptions, a rich frieze in gilt bronze, many statuettes 
(ex-votos) from the favissae of the temple in terra-cot ta and 
bronze, a large number of coins, &c. None of the objects seem 
to go back beyond the 4th century B.C. A road descended to 
it from the Via Appia from the S.W., passing through the modern 
village of Genzano. The lake is drained by a tunnel of about 
2 m. long of Roman date. On the W* side of the lake remains 
of two ships (really floating palaces moored to the shore) have been 
found, one belonging to the time of Caligula (as is indicated by 
an inscription on a lead pipe), and measuring 210 ft. long by 
66 wide, the other even larger, 233 by 80 ft. The first was 
decorated with marbles and mosaics, and with some very fine 
bronze beamheads, with heads of wolves and lions having rings 
for hawsers in their mouths (and one of a Medusa), now in the 
Museo delle Terme at Rome, with remains of the woodwork, 
&c, &c. Various attempts have been made to raise the first 
ship, from the middle of the 15th century onwards, by which 
much harm has been done. The neighbourhood of the lake was 
naturally in favour with the Romans as a residence. Caesar 
had a villa constructed there, but destroyed again almost at 
once, because it did not satisfy him. 

See F. Barnabei, Notizie degli scavi (1895), 361, 461; (1896), 188; 
V. Malfatti, Notizie degli scavi (1895), 471; (1896), 393; Rivista 
marittima (1896), 379; (1897), 293; J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough 
(London, 1900); L. Morpurgo in Monumenti dei Lincei t xiii. (1903), 
297 sqq. (T. As.) 


NEMOURS, LORDS AND DUKES OF. In the 12th and 13th 
centuries the lordship of Nemours, in Gatinais, France, was in 
possession of the house of Villebeon, a member of which, Gautier, 
was marshal of France in the middle of the 13th century. The 
lordship was sold to King Philip III. in 1274 and 1276 by Jean 
and Philippe de Nemours, and was then made .a county and 
given to Jean de Grailly, captal de Buch in 1364. In 1404 
Charles VI. of France gave it to Charles III. of Evreux, king of 
Navarre, and erected it into a duchy in the peerage of France 
(ducU-pairie). Charles III.'s daughter, Beatrix, brought the 
duchy to her husband Jacques de Bourbon, count of La Marche, 
and by the marriage of their daughter, Eleanor, to Bernard of 
Armagnac, count of Pardiac, it passed to the house of Armagnac. 
After being confiscated and restored several times, the duchy 
reverted to the French crown in 1505, after the extinction of the 
house of Armagnac-Pardiac. In 1 507 it was given by Louis XII. 
to his nephew, Gaston de Foix, who was killed at Ravenna in 
1512. The duchy then returned to the royal domain, and was 
detached from it successively for Giuliano de Medici and his 
wife Philiberta of Savoy in 15^, for Louise of Savoy in 1524, and 
for Philip of Savoy, count of Genevois, in 1528. The descend- 
ants of the last-mentioned duke possessed the duchy until its 
sale to Louis XIV. In 1572 Louis gave it to his brother Philip, 
duke of Orleans, whose descendants possessed it until the 
Revolution. The title of due de Nemours was afterwards given 
to Louis Charles, son of King Louis Philippe, who is dealt with 
separately below. 

The following are the most noteworthy of the earlier dukes 
of Nemours. 

James of Armagnac, duke of Nemours (c. 1433-147 7), was 
the son of Bernard d'Armagnac, count of Pardiac, and Eleanor of 
Bourbon-La Marche. As comte de Castres, he served under 
Charles VII. in Normandy in 1449 and 1450 ; and afterwards in 
Guienne. On the accession of Louis XI. the king loaded him 
with honours, married him to his god-daughter, Louise of Anjou, 
and recognized his title to the duchy of Nemours in 1462. Sent 
by Louis to pacify Roussillon, Nemours f :lt that he had been 
insufficiently rewarded for the rapid success of this expedition, 
and joined the League of the Public Weal in 1465. He subse- 
quently became reconciled with Louis, but soon resumed his 
intrigues. After twice pardoning him, the king's patience 
became exhausted, and he besieged the duke's chateau at Carlat 
and took him prisoner. Nemours was treated with the utmost 
rigour, being shut up in a cage ; and was finally condemned to 
death by the parlemcnt and beheaded on the 4th of August 1477. 

See B. de Mandrot, Jacques d' Armagnac^ due de Nemours (Paris, 
1890). 

Philip of Savoy, duke of Nemours (1490-1533), was a son 
of Philip, duke of Savoy, and brother of Louise of Savoy, mother 
of Francis I. of France. Originally destined for the priesthood, 
he was given the bishopric of Geneva at the age of five, but 
resigned it in 15 10, when he was made count of Genevois. He 
served under Louis XII., with whom he was present at the battle 
of Agnadello (1509), under the emperor Charles V. in 1520, and 
finally under his nephew, Francis I, In 1528 Francis gave him 
the duchy of Nemours and married him to Charlotte of Orl6ans- 
Longueville. He died on the 25th of November 1533. 

His son, James (1531-1585), became duke of Nemours in 
1533. He distinguished himself at the sieges of Lens and Metz 
(r 552-1 553), at the battle of Renty (1554) and in the campaign 
of Piedmont (1555). He was a supporter of the Guises, and had 
to retire for some time into Savoy in consequence of a plot. 
On his return to France he fought the Huguenots, and signalized 
himself by his successes in Dauphine and Lyonnais. In 1567 he 
induced the court to return from Meaux to Paris, took part in 
the battle of St. Denis, protested against the peace of Long- 
jumcau, and repulsed the invasion of Wolfgang, count palatine 
of Zweibriicken. He devoted his last years to letters and art, 
and died at Annecy on the 15th of June 1585. 

By his wife Anne of Este, the widow of Francis, duke of 
Guise, the duke left a son, Charles Emmanuel (1567-1595), 
who in his youth was called prince of Genevois. Involved 
in political intrigues by his relationship with the Guises, he was 
imprisoned after the assassination of Henry, duke of Guise, 
and his brother the cardinal of Lorraine, in 1588, but contrived to 
escape. He fought at Ivry and Arques, and was governor of 
Paris when it was besieged by Henry IV. After quarreling 
with his half-brother Charles of Lorraine, duke of Mayenne, he 
withdrew to his government of Lyonnais, where he endeavoured 
to make himself independent. He was imprisoned, however, 
in the chateau of Pierrc-Encise by the archbishop of Lyons. 
After his escape he attacked Lyons, but was defeated owing 
to the intervention of the constable de Montmorency. He died 
at Annecy in July 1595. 

His brother Henry (1572-1632), called originally marquis de 
Saint-Sorlin, succeeded him as duke. In 1588 he took the 
marquisate of Saluzzo from the French for his cousin, the duke 
of Savoy. The princes of Guise, his half-brothers, induced 
him to join the League, and in 1591 he was made governor of 
Dauphin6 in the name of that faction. He made his submission 
to Henry IV. in 1596. After quarrelling with the duke of Savoy 
he withdrew to Burgundy and joined the Spaniards in their 
war against Savoy. After peace had been proclaimed on the 
14th of November 161 6, he retired to the French court. He died 
in 1632, and was succeeded by his eldest son, Louis, and on the 
death of the latter in 1641 by his second son, Charles Amadeus 
(1624-1652), who served in the army of Flanders in 1645, an d 
in the following year commanded the light cavalry at the siege 
of Courtrai. In 1652 he took part in the war of the Fronde, and 
fought at Bleneau and at the Faubourg St Antoine, where he 
was wounded. On the 30th of July of the same year he was 
killed in a duel by his brother-in-law, Francois de Vend6me, 
duke of Beaufort. He had two daughters, Marie Jeanne Baptiste 
(d. 1724), who married Charles Emmanuel of Savoy in 1665; 
and Marie Francoise Elisabeth, who married Alphonso VI., 
king of Portugal, in 1666. His brother Henry (1625-1659), 
who had been archbishop of Reims, but now withdrew from 
orders, succeeded to the title. In 1657 he married Marie 
d'Orleans-Longueville (1625-1707), daughter of Henry II. 
of Orleans, duke of Longueville. This duchess of Nemours is 
a famous personage. At an early age she was involved in 
the first Fronde, which was directed by her father and her 
stepmother. Anne Genevieve de Bourbon-Conde, the cele- 
brated duchesse de Longueville; and when her husband died 
in 1659, leaving her childless, the rest of her life was mainly 
spent in contesting her inheritance with her stepmother. She 
left some interesting MSmoires, which are published by C. B. 
Petitot in the Collection compute des mimoires (1819-1829). 


NEMOURS, LOUIS CHARLES PHILIPPE RAPHAEL, Due de 
(1814-1S96), second son of the duke of Orleans, afterwards 
King Louis Philippe, was born on the 25th of October 1814. 
At twelve years of age he was nominated colonel of the first 
regiment of chasseurs, and in r83© he became a chevalier of the 
order of the Saint Esprit and entered the chamber of peers. 
As early as 1825 his name was mentioned as a possible candidate 
for the throne of Greece, and in 183 1 he was elected king of 
the Belgians, but international considerations deterred Louis 
Philippe from accepting the honour for his son. In February 1 83 1 
he accompanied the French army which entered Belgium to 
support the new kingdom against Holland, and took part in 
the siege of Antwerp. He accompanied the Algerian expedition 
against the town of Constantine in the autumn of 1836, and in a 
second expedition (1837) he was entrusted with the command 
of a brigade and with the direction of the siege operations before 
Constantine. General Damr6mont was killed by his side on the 
1 2th of October, and the place was taken by assault on the 13th. 
He sailed a third time for Algeria in 1841, and served under 
General Bugeaud, taking part in the expedition to revictual 
Medea on the 29th of April, and in sharp fighting near Miliana 
on the 3rd to 5th of May. In the expedition against the fortified 
town of Takdempt he commanded the 1st infantry division. 
On his return to France he became commandant of the camp 
of Compiegne. He had been employed on missions of courtesy 
to England in r835, in 1838 and in 1845, and to Berlin and 
Vienna in 1836. The occasion of his marriage in 1840 with 
Victoria, daughter of Duke Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg, was 
marked by a check to Louis Philippe *s government in the form 
of a refusal to bestow the marriage dowry proposed by Thiers in 
the chamber of deputies. The death of his elder brother, 
Ferdinand, duke of Orleans, in 1842 gave him a position of greater 
importance as the natural regent in the case of the accession of 
his nephew, the young count of Paris. His reserve and dislike 
of public functions, with a certain haughtiness of manner, how- 
ever, made him unpopular. On the outbreak of the revolution of 
1848 he held the Tuileries long enough to cover the king's retreat, 
but refrained from initiating active measures against the mob. 
He followed his sister-in-law, the duchess of Orleans, and her two 
sons to the chamber of deputies, but was separated from them 
by the rioters, and only escaped finally by disguising himself 
in the uniform of a national guard. He embarked for England, 
where he settled with his parents at Claremont. His chief aim 
during his exile, especially after his father's death, was a re- 
conciliation between the two branches of the house of Bourbon, 
as indispensable to the re-establishment of the French monarchy 
in any form. These wishes were frustrated on the one hand 
by the attitude of the comte de Chambord, and on the other 
by the determination of the duchess of Orleans to maintain the 
pretensions of the count of Paris. Nemours was prepared to 
go further than the other princes of his family in accepting the 
principles of the legitimists, but lengthy negotiations ended 
in 1857 with a letter, written by Nemours, as he subsequently 
explained, at the dictation of his brother, Francois, prince de 
Joinville, in which he insisted that Chambord should express 
his adherence to the tricolour flag and to the principles of con- 
stitutional government. In 1871 the Orleans princes renewed 
their professions of allegiance to the senior branch of their house, 
but they were not consulted when the count of Chambord came 
to Paris in 1873, and their political differences remained until 
his death in 1883. 

Nemours had lived at Bushey House after the death of Queen 
Marie Amelie in 1866. In 1871 the exile imposed on the French 
princes was withdrawn, but he only transferred his establishment 
to Paris after their disabilities were also removed. In March 
1872 he was restored to his rank in the army as general of division, 
and placed in the first section of the general staff. After his 
retirement from the active list he continued to act as president 
of the Red Cross Society until 1881, when new decrees against 
the princes of the blood led to his withdrawal from Parisian 
society. During the presidency of Marshal MacMahon, he had 
appeared from time to time at the filysee. He died at Versailles 
on the 26th of June 1896, the duchess having died at Claremont 
on the 10th of November 1857. Their children were Louis 
Philippe Marie Ferdinand Gaston, comte d'Eu (b. 1842), who 
married Isabella, eldest daughter of Don Pedro II. of Brazil; 
Ferdinand Philippe Marie, due d'Alencon (b. 1844), who married 
Sophie of Bavaria (1 847-1 897), sister of the empress Elizabeth 
of Austria; Margaret (1846-1893), who married Prince Ladislas 
Czartoryski; and Blanche (b. 1857). 

See R. Bazin, Le Due de Nemours (1907); Paul Thureau-Dangin, 
Histoire de la monarchie de juillet (4 vols., 1884, &c). 


NEMOURS, a town of northern France, in the department of 
Seine-et-Marne, on the Loing and its canal, 26 m. S. of Melun, 
on the Paris-Lyon railway. -Pop. (1906) 4814. The church, 
which dates mainly from the 16th century, has a handsome 
wooden spire, and there is a feudal castle. A statue of the 
mathematician Bezout (d. 1783), a native of the town, was erected 
in 1885. In the vicinity is a group of fine sandstone rocks, and 
sand is extensively quarried. Nemours is supposed to derive its 
name from the woods (nemora) in the midst of which it formerly 
stood, and discoveries of Gallo-Roman remains indicate its early 
origin. It was captured by the English in 1420, but derives its 
historical importance rather from the lordship (afterwards 
duchy) to which it gave its name. In 1585 a treaty revoking 
previous concessions to the Protestants was concluded at Nemours 
between Catherine de Medici and the Guises. 


NENADOVICH, MATEYA (1777-1854), Servian patriot, was 
born in 1777. He is generally called Prota Mateya, since as a 
boy of sixteen he was made a priest, and a few years later hecame 
archpriest (Prota) of Valyevo. His father, Alexa Nenadovich, 
Knez (chief magistrate) of the district of Valyevo, was one of the 
most popular and respected public men among the Servians at 
the beginning of the 19th century. When the four leaders of 
the Janissaries of the Belgrade Pashalic (the so-called Dahis) 
thought that the only way to prevent a general rising of the 
Servians was to intimidate them by murdering all their principal 
men, Alexa Nenadovich was one of the first victims. The 
policy of the Dahis, instead of preventing, did actually and 
immediately provoke a general insurrection of the Servians 
against the Turks. Prota Mateya became the deputy-commander 
of the insurgents of the Valyevo district (1804), but did not 
hold the post for long, as Karageorge sent him in 1805 on a secret 
mission to St Petersburg, and afterwards employed him almost 
constantly as Servians diplomatic envoy to Russia, Austria, 
Bucharest and Constantinople. After the fall of Karageorge 
(1813), the new leader of the Servians, Milosh Obrenovich, sent 
Prota Mateya as representative of Servia to the Congress of 
Vienna (1814-1815), where he pleaded the Servian cause inde- 
fatigably. During that mission he often saw Lord Castlereagh, 
and for the first time the Servian national interests were hrought 
to the knowledge of British statesmen. 

Prota Mateya's memoirs are the most valuable authority for the 
history of the first and second Servian insurrections against the 
Turks. The best edition of the Memoari Prole Mateye Nenadovicha 
was published by the Servian Literary Association in Belgrade in 
1893. 


NENAGH, a market town of Co. Tipperary, Ireland, finely 
situated in a rich though hilly country near the river Nenagh, 
96^ m. S.W. from Dublin by the Ballyhrophy and Limerick 
branch of the Great Southern & Western railway. Pop. (1901) 
4704. Of the old castle, called Nenagh Round, dating from the 
time of King John, there still exists the circular donjon or keep. 
There are no remains of the hospital founded in 1200 for Austin 
canons, nor of the Franciscan friary, founded in the reign of 
Henry III. and one of the richest religious houses in Ireland. The 
town is governed by an urban district council. It was one of the 
ancient manors of the Butlers, who received for it the grant of a 
fair from Henry VIII. In 1550 the town and friary were burned 
by O'Carroll. In i64r the town was taken by Owen Roe O'Neill, 
but shortly afterwards it was recaptured by Lord Inchiquin. 
It surrendered to Ireton in 165 1, and was hurned by Sarsfield in 
1688. 


NENNIUS (fl. 796), a Welsh writer to whom we owe the 
Historia Britonum, lived and wrote in Brecknock or Radnor. 
His work is known to us through thirty manuscripts; hut the 
earliest of these cannot be dated much earlier than the year 1000; 
and all are defaced by interpolations which give to the work so 
confused a character that critics were long disposed to treat it 
as an unskilful forgery. A new turn was given to the controversy 
by Heinrich Zimmer, who, in his Nennius vindicatus (1893), 
traced the history of the work and, by a comparison of the 
manuscripts with the 11th-century translation of the Irish 
scholar, Gilla Coemgim (d. 1072), succeeded in stripping off the 
later accretions from the original nucleus of the Historia. Zimmer 
follows previous critics in rejecting the Prologus maior (§§ 1, 2), 
the Capitulaj or table of contents, and part of the Mirabilia 
which form the concluding section. But he proves that Nennius 
should be regarded as the compiler of the Historia proper (§§ 7-65). 
Zimmer's conclusions are of more interest to literary critics than 
to historians. The only part of the Historia which deserves to 
be treated as a historical document is the section known as the 
Genealogiae Saxonum (§§ 57-65). This is merely a recension of 
a work which was composed ahout 679 by a Briton of Strathclyde. 
The author's name is unknown; hut he is, after Gildas, our 
earliest authority for the facts of the English conquest of England. 
Nennius himself gives us the oldest legends relating to . the 
victories of King Arthur; the value of the Historic from this 
point of view is admitted hy the severest critics. The chief 
authorities whom Nennius followed were Gildas' De excidio 
Britonurn, Eusebius, the Vita Patricii of Murichu Maccu Mach- 
theni, the Collectanea of Tirechan, the Liber ocenpationis (an 
Irish work on the settlement of Ireland), the Liber de sex 
aetatibus mitndi, the chronicle of Prosper of Aquitaine, the 
Liber beati Germanu The sources from which he derived his 
notices of King Arthur (§ 56) have not been determined. 

See J. Stevenson's edition of the Historia Britonum (English Hist. 
Soc, 1838), based on a careful study of the MSS. ; A. de la Borderie, 
V Historia Britonum (Paris and London, 1883), which summarizes 
the older negative criticism; H. Zimmer, Nennius vindicatus 
(Berlin, 1893); T. Mommsen in Neues Archiv der Geseltschaft fur 
alter e deutsche Geschichtskunde, xix. 283. (H. W. C. D.) 


NEO-CAESAREA, SYNOD OF, a synod held shortly after that 
of Ancyra, probably about 314 or 315 (although Hefele inclines 
to put it somewhat later). Its principal work was the adoption 
of fifteen disciplinary canons, which were subsequently accepted 
as ecumenical by the Council of Chalcedon, 451, and of which the 
most important are the following: i. degrading priests who 
marry after ordination; vii. forbidding a priest to be present 
at the second marriage of any one; viii. refusing ordination 
to the husband of an adulteress; xi. fixing thirty years as the 
age below which one might not be ordained (because Christ 
began His public ministry at the age of thirty); xiii. according 
to city priests the precedence over country priests; xiv. per- 
mitting Chorepiscopi to celebrate the sacraments; xv. requiring 
that there be seven deacons in every city. 

See Mansi ii. pp. 539-551; Hardouin i. pp. 282-286; Hefele 
(2nded.) i. pp. 242-251 (Eng. trans, i. pp. 222-230). (T. F. C.) 


NEOCOMIAN, in geology, the name given to the lowest stage 
of the Cretaceous system. It was introduced by J. Thurmann 
in 1835 on account of the development of these rocks at Neuchatel 
(Neocomum), Switzerland. It has been employed in more than 
one sense. In the type area the rocks have been divided into 
two sub-stages, a lower, Valanginian (from Valengin, E. Desor, 
1854) and an upper, Hauterivian (from Hauterive, E. Renevier, 
1874) ; there is also another local sub-stage, the infra- Valanginian 
or Berriasian (from Berrias, H. Coquand, 1876), These three 
sub-stages constitute the Neocomian in its restricted sense. 
A. von Koenen and other German geologists extend the use 
of the term to include the whole of the Lower Cretaceous up to 
the top of the Gault or Albian. Renevier divided the Lower 
Cretaceous into the Neocomian division, embracing the three 
sub-stages mentioned above, and an Urgonian division, including 
the Barremian, Rhodanian and Aptian sub-stages. Sir A. 
Geikie (Text Book 0} Geology , 4th ed., 1903) regards " Neocomian" 
as synonymous with Lower Cretaceous, and he, like Renevier, 
closes this portion of the system at the top of the Lower Green- 
sand (Aptian). Other British geologists (A. J. Jukes-Browne, 
&c.) restrict the Neocomian to the marine beds of Speeton and 
Tealby, and their estuarine equivalents, the Weald Clay and 
Hastings Sands (Wealden). Much confusion would be avoided 
by dropping the term Neocomian entirely and employing 
instead, for the type area, the sub-divisions given above. This 
becomes the more obvious when it is pointed out that the 
Berriasian type is limited to Dauphine; the Valanginian has 
not a much wider range; and the Hauterivian does not extend 
north of the Paris basin. 

Characteristic fossils of the Berriasian are Hoplites euthytni, H. 
occitanicus; of the Valanginian, Natica leviathan, Belemnites j>istil- 
liformis and B. dilatatus t Oxynoticeras Gevrili\ of the Hauterivian, 
Hoplites radiatus, Crioceras capricornu, Exogyra Couloni and Toxaster 
complanatus. The marine equivalents of these rocks in England arc 
the lower Speeton Clays of Yorkshire and the Tealby beds of Lincoln- 
shire. The Wealden beds of southern England represent approxi- 
mately an estuarine phase of deposit of the same age. The Hils 
clay of Germany and Wealden of Hanover; the limestones and 
shales of Teschen; the Aptychus and Pygope diphyoides marls of 
Spain, and the Petchorian formation of Russia are equivalents of 
the Neocomian in its narrower sense. 

See Cretaceous, Wealden, Speeton Beds. (J. A. H.) 


NEOCORATE, a rank or dignity granted by the Senate under 
the Roman' Empire to certain cities of Asia, which had built 
temples for the worship' of the emperors or had established 
cults of members of the imperial family. The Greek word 
v&tiKbpos meant literally a temple-sweeper (pecos, temple, Kopeiv, 
to sweep), and was thence used both of a temple attendant 
and of a priestly holder of high rank who was in charge of a 
temple. 


NEOLITHIC, or Later Stone Age (Gr. vkos t new, and Xi0os, 
'stone), a term employed first byLordAvebury and since generally 
accepted, for the period of highly finished and polished stone 
implements, in contrast with the rude workmanship of those 
of the earlier Stone Age (Palaeolithic). Knowledge of Neolithic 
times is derived principally from four sources, Tumuli or ancient 
burial-mounds, the Lake-dwellings of Switzerland, the Kitchen- 
middens of Denmark and the Bone-Caves. No trace of metal 
is found, except gold, which seems to have been sometimes used 
for ornaments. Agriculture, pottery, weaving, the domestica- 
tion of animals, the burying of the dead in dolmens, and the 
rearing of megalithic monuments are the typical developments 
of man during this stage. [ 

See Archaeology ; also Lord Avebury, Prehistoric Times (igoo) ; 
Sir John Evans, Ancient Stone Implements of Great Britain (1897); 
Sir J. Prestwich, Geology (1886-188S). 


NEOPHYTE (Gr. veb<j>VTos , from veos, new, <j>vrov, a plant, 
" newly planted "), a word used in the Eleusinian and other 
mysteries to designate the newly initiated, and in the early 
church applied to newly baptized persons. These usually 
wore the white garments which they received at their admission 
to the church (see Baptism) for eight days, from Easter eve till 
the Sunday after Easter (hence called Dominica in albi$) } but 
they were subject to strict supervision for some time longer 
and, on the authority of 1 Tim. iii, 6, were generally held 
ineligible for election as bishops, a rule to which, however, history 
shows some notable exceptions, as in the cases of St Ambrose 
at Milan in 374 and Synesius of Cyrene at Ptolemais in 409, 
who were chosen bishops before they were even baptized. By 
the council of Nicaea (325) this rule was extended to the priest- 
hood. The ancient discipline is still maintained in the Roman 
Church, and applies to converts from Christian sects as well 
as to those from heathenism. The period, however, is deter- 
mined by circumstances. The term " neophyte " is also some- 
times applied in the Roman Church to newly ordained priests, 
and even — though rarely — to novices of a religious order. In 
a transferred sense the word is also given to one beginning to 
learn any new subject. 

See Bergier, Diet, de thiologie, s.v. ; Martigny, Diet, des antiquitis, 
pp. 433-435; Sicgel, Christliche Alterthumer, iii. 17 seq.; Riddle, 
Christ. Antiquities , pp. 313, 522 ;Walcott, Sacred A rchaeology t s.v. 


NEOPLATONISM, the name given specially to the last school 
of pagan philosophy, which grew up mainly among the Greeks 
of Alexandria from the 3rd century onwards. The term has 
also been applied to the Italian humanists of the Renaissance, 
and in modern times, somewhat vaguely, to thinkers who have 
based their speculations on the Platonic metaphysics or on 
Plotinus, and incorporated with it a tendency towards a mystical 
explanation of ultimate phenomena. 

Historical Position and Significance. — The political history 
of the ancient world ends with the formation, under Diocletian 
and Constantine, of a universal state bearing the cast of Oriental 
as well as Graeco-Roman civilization. The history of ancient 
philosophy ends in like manner with a universal philosophy 
which assimilated elements of almost all the earlier systems, 
and worked up the results of Eastern and Western culture. 
Just as the Later Roman empire was at once the supreme effort 
of the old world and the outcome of its exhaustion, so Neo- 
platonism is in one aspect the consummation, in another the 
collapse, of ancient philosophy. Never before in Greek or 
in Roman speculation had the consciousness of man's dignity 
and superiority to nature found such adequate expression; 
never before had real science and pure knowledge been so under- 
valued and despised by the leaders of culture as they were by 
the Neoplatonists. Judged from the standpoint of empirical 
science, philosophy passed its meridian in Plato and Aristotle, 
declined in the post -Aristotelian systems, and set in the darkness 
of Neoplatonism. But, from the religious and moral point of 
view, it must be admitted that the ethical " mood " which 
Neoplatonism endeavoured to create and maintain is the highest 
and purest ever reached by antiquity. 

It is a proof of the strength of the moral instincts of mankind 
that the only phase of culture which we -can survey in all its 
stages from beginning to end culminated not in materialism, 
but in the boldest idealism. This idealism, however, is also 
in its way a mark of intellectual bankruptcy. Contempt for 
reason and science leads in the end to barbarism — its necessary 
consequence being the rudest superstition. As a matter of fact, 
barbarism did break out after the flower had fallen from Neo- 
platonism, The philosophers themselves, no doubt, still lived 
on the knowledge they repudiated; but the masses were trained 
to a superstition with which the Christian church, as the executor 
of Neoplatonism, had to reckon and contend. By a fortunate 
coincidence, at the very moment when this bankruptcy of the 
old culture must have become apparent, the stage of history 
was occupied by barbaric peoples. This has obscured the fact 
that the inner history of antiquity, ending as it did in despair 
of this world, must in any event have seen a recurrence of 
barbarism. The present world was a thing that men would 
neither enjoy nor master nor study. A new world was discovered, 
for the sake of which everything else was abandoned; to 
make sure of that world insight and intelligence were freely 
sacrificed; and, in the light that streamed from beyond, the 
absurdities of the present became wisdom, and its wisdom 
became foolishness. 

Such is Neoplatonism. The pre-Socratic philosophy took 
its stand on natural science, to the exclusion of ethics and 
religion. The systems of Plato and Aristotle sought to adjust 
the rival claims of physics and ethics (although the supremacy 
of the latter was already acknowledged); but the popular 
religions were thrown overboard. The post - Aristotelian 
philosophy in all its branches makes withdrawal from the 
objective world its starting-point. It might seem, indeed, that 
Stoicism indicates a falling off from Plato and Aristotle towards 
materialism, but the ethical dualism, which was the ruling 
tendency of the Stoa, could not long endure its materialistic 
physics, and took refuge in the metaphysical dualism of the 
Platonists. But this originated no permanent philosophical 
creation. From one-sided Platonism issued the various forms 
of scepticism, the attempt to undermine the trustworthiness 
of empirical knowledge. Neoplatonism, coming last, borrowed 
something from all the schools. First, it stands in the line 
of post-Aristotelian systems; it is, in fact, as a subjective philo- 
sophy, their logical completion. Secondly, it is founded on 
scepticism; for it has neither interest in, nor reliance upon, 
empirical knowledge. Thirdly, it can justly claim the honour 
of Plato's name, since it expressly goes back to him for its 
metaphysics, directly combating those of the Stoa. Yet even 
on this point it learned something from the Stoics; the Neo- 
platonic conception of the action of the Deity on the world and 
of the essence and origin of matter can only be explained by 
reference to the dynamic pantheism of the Stoa. Fourthly, 
the study of Aristotle also exercised an influence on Neoplatonism. 
. This appears not only in its philosophical method, but also — 
though less prominently — in its metaphysic. And, fifthly, Neo- 
platonism adopted the ethics of Stoicism; although it was 
found necessary to supplement them by a still higher conception 
of the functions of the spirit. 

Thus, with the exception of Epicureanism — which was always 
treated by Neoplatonism as its mortal enemy — there is no out- 
standing earlier system which did not Contribute something to 
the new philosophy. And yet Neoplatonism cannot be described 
as an eclectic system, in the ordinary sense of the word. For, in 
the first place, it is dominated by one all-pervading interest — the 
religious; and in the second place, it introduced a new first 
principle into philosophy, viz. the supra-rational, that which 
lies beyond reason and beyond reality. This principle is not to 
be identified with the "idea" of Plato or with the "form" of 
Aristotle. Neoplatonism perceived that neither sense perception 
nor rational cognition is a sufficient basis or justification for 
religious ethics; consequently it broke away from rationalistic 
ethics as decidedly as from utilitarian morality. It had therefore 
to find out a new world and a new spiritual function, in order 
first to establish the existence of what it desiderated, and then 
to realize and describe what it had proved to exist. Man, how- 
ever, cannot transcend his psychological endowment. If he will 
not allow his thought to be determined by experience, he falls 
a victim to his imagination. In other words, thought, which will 
not stop, takes to mythology; and in the place of reason we 
have superstition. Still, as we cannot allow every fancy of the 
subjective reason to assert itself, we require some new and potent 
principle to keep the imagination within bounds. This is found 
in the authority of a sound tradition. Such authority must be 
superhuman, otherwise it can have no claim on our respect; it 
must, therefore, be divine. The highest sphere of knowledge — 
the supra-rational — as well as the very possibility of knowledge, 
must depend on divine communications — that is, on revelations. 
In short, philosophy as represented by Neoplatonism, its sole 
interest being a religious interest, and its highest object the supra- 
rational, must be a philosophy of revelation. 

This is not a prominent feature in Plotinus or his immediate 
disciples, who still exhibit full confidence in the subjective pre- 
suppositions of their philosophy. But the later adherents of the 
school did not possess this confidence 1 ; they based their philo- 
sophy on revelations of the Deity, and they found these in the 
religious traditions and rites of all nations. The Stoics had 
taught them to overstep the political boundaries of states and 
nationalities, and rise from the Hellenic to a universal human 
consciousness. Through all history the spirit of God has breathed ; 
everywhere we discover the traces of His revelation. The older 
any religious tradition or mode of worship is, the more venerable is 
it, the richer in divine ideas. Hence the ancient religions of the 
East had a peculiar interest for the Neoplatonist. In the inter- 
pretation of myths Neoplatonism followed the allegorical method, 
as practised especially by the Stoa; but the importance it 
attached to the spiritualized myths was unknown to the Stoic 
philosophers. The latter interpreted the myths and were done 
with them; the later Neoplatonists treated them as the proper 
material and the secure foundation of philosophy. Neoplatonism 
claimed to be not merely the absolute philosophy, the keystone 
of all previous systems, but also the absolute religion, reinvigorat- 
ing and transforming all previous religions. It contemplated a 
restoration of all the religions of antiquity, by allowing each to 
retain its traditional forms, and at the same time making each a 
vehicle for the religious attitude and the religious truth embraced 
in Neoplatonism; while every form of ritual was to become a 
stepping-stone to a high morality worthy of mankind. In short, 
Neoplatonism seizes on the aspiration of the human soul after a 
higher life, and treats this psychological fact as the key to the 
interpretation of the universe. Hence the existing religions, 
after being refined and spiritualized, were made the basis of 
philosophy. * 

Neoplatonism thus represents a stage in the history of religion; 
indeed this is precisely where its historical importance lies. 
In the progress of science and enlightenment it has no positive 
significance, except as a necessary transition which the race had 
to make in order to get rid of nature-religion, and that under- 
valuing of the spiritual life which formed an insuperable obstacle 
to the advance of human knowledge. Neoplatonism, however, 
failed as signally in its religious enterprise as it did in its phil- 
osophical. While seeking to perfect ancient philosophy, it really 
extinguished it; and in like manner its attempted reconstruction 
$>f ancient religions only resulted in their destruction. For in 
requiring these religions to impart certain prescribed religious 
truths, and to inculcate the highest moral tone, it burdened them 
with problems to which they were unequal. And further, by 
inviting them to loosen, though not exactly to dissolve, their 
political allegiance — the very thing that gave them stability — 
it removed the foundation on which they rested. But might it 
not then have placed them on a broader and firmer foundation? 
Was not the universal empire of Rome ready at hand, and might 
not the new religion have stood to it in the same relation of 
dependence which the earlier religions had held to the smaller 
nations and states? This was no longer possible. It is true that 
the political and spiritual histories of the peoples on the Mediter- 
ranean run in parallel lines, the one leading up to the universal 
monarchy of Rome, the other leading up to monotheism and 
universal human morality. But the spiritual development had 
shot far ahead of the political; even the Stoa occupied a height 
far beyond the reach of anything in the political sphere. It is 
also true that Neoplatonism sought to come to an understanding 

1 Porphyry wrote a book, irepl rrjs Ik Xoytwv ^iXoco^tas, but this 
was before he became a pupil of Plotinus; as a philosopher he was 
independent of the \6yta. 

with the Byzantine Roman empire; Julian perished in the 
pursuit of this project. But even before his day the shrewder 
Neoplatonists had seen that their lofty religious philosophy could 
not stoop to an alliance with the despotic world-empire, because 
it could not come in contact with the world at all. To Neo- 
platonism political affairs are at bottom as indifferent as all other 
earthly things. The idealism of the new philosophy was too 
heavenly to be naturalized in the Byzantine empire, which stood 
more in need of police officials than of philosophers. Important 
and instructive, therefore, as arc the attempts made from time 
to time by the state and by individual philosophers to unite 
Neoplatonism and the universal monarchy, their failure was a 
foregone conclusion. 

There is one other question which we are called upon to raise 
here. Why did not Neoplatonism set up an independent religious 
community? Why did it not provide for its mixed multitude of 
divinities by founding a universal church, in which all the gods of 
all nations might be worshipped along with the one ineffable 
Deity? The answer to this question involves the answer to 
another — Why was Neoplatonism defeated by Christianity? 
Three essentials of a permanent religious foundation were want- 
ing in Neoplatonism; they are admirably indicated in Augustine's 
Confessions (vii. 18-21). First, and chiefly, it lacked a religious 
founder; second, it could not tell how the state of inward peace 
and blessedness could become permanent; third, it had no 
means to win those who were not endowed with the speculative 
faculty. The philosophical discipline which it recommended 
for the attainment of the highest good was beyond the reach of 
the masses; and the way by which the masses could attain .the 
highest good was a secret unknown to Neoplatonism. Thus it 
remained a school for the " wise and prudent "; and when Julian 
tried to enlist the sympathies of the common rude man for the 
doctrines and worship of this school, he was met with scorn and 
ridicule. 

It is not as a philosophy, then, nor as a new religion, that 
Neoplatonism became a decisive factor in history, but, if one 
may use the expression, as a " mood." The instinctive certainty 
that there is a supreme good, lying beyond empirical experience, 
and yet not an intellectual good — this feeling, and the accom- 
panying conviction of the utter vanity of all earthly things, 
were produced and sustained by Neoplatonism. Only it could 
not describe the nature of this highest good; and there- 
fore it had to abandon itself to imagination and aesthetic im- 
pressions. It changed thought into an emotional dream; 
it plunged into the ocean of sentiment; it treated the old world 
of fable as the reflection of a higher reality, and transformed 
reality into poetry; and after all these expedients, to borrow 
a phrase of Augustine's, it only saw afar off the land of its 
desire. 

Yet the influence of Neoplatonism on the history of our 
ethical culture is immeasurable, above all because it begot 
the consciousness that the only blessedness which can satisfy 
the heart must be sought higher even than the sphere of reason. 
That man shall not live by bread alone, the world had learned 
before Neoplatonism; but Neoplatonism enforced the deeper 
truth — a truth which the older philosophy had missed — that 
man shall not live by knowledge alone. And, besides the pro- 
paedeutic importance which thus belongs to it, another fact 
has to be taken into account in estimating the influence of 
Neoplatonism. It is to this day the nursery of that whole type 
of devotion which affects renunciation of the world, which 
strives after an ideal, without the strength to rise above aesthetic 
impressions, and is never able to form a clear conception of the 
object of its own aspiration. 

Origin, — As forerunners of Neoplatonism we may regard, 
on the one hand, those Stoics who accepted the Platonic dis- 
tinction between the sensible world and the intelligible, and, 
on the other hand, the so-called Neopythagoreans and religious 
philosophers like Plutarch of Chaeronea and especially Numenius 
of Apamea. But these cannot be considered the actual pro- 
genitors of Neoplatonism; their philosophic method is quite 
elementary as compared with the Neoplatonic, their fundamental 
principles are uncertain, and unbounded deference is still paid 
to the authority of Plato. The Jewish and Christian thinkers 
of the first two centuries approach considerably nearer than 
Numenius to the later Neoplatonism. 1 Here we have Philo, 
to begin with. Philo, who translated the Old Testament religion 
into the terms of Hellenic thought, holds as an inference from 
his theory of revelation that the divine Supreme Being is " supra- 
rational," that He can be reached only through " ecstasy ", 
and that the oracles of God supply the material of moral and 
religious knowledge. The religious ethics of Philo — a compound 
of Stoic, Platonic and Neopythagorean elements — already 
bear the peculiar stamp which we recognize in Neoplatonism. 
While his system assigns the supremacy to Greek philosophy 
over the national religion of Israel, it exacts from the former, 
as a sort of tribute to the latter, the recognition of the elevation 
of God above the province of reason. The claim of positive 
religion to be something more than the intellectual apprehension 
of the reason in the universe is thus acknowledged. Religious 
syncretism is also a feature of Philo's system, but it differs 
essentially from what we find in later Neoplatonism. For 
Philo pays no respect to any cultus except the Jewish; and he 
believed that all the fragments of truth to be found amongst 
Greeks and Romans had been borrowed from the books of Moses. 
The earliest Christian philosophers, particularly Justin and 
Athenagoras, likewise prepared the way for the speculations 
of the Neoplatonists — partly by their attempts to connect 
Christianity with Stoicism and Platonism, partly by their 
ambition to exhibit Christianity as " hyperplatonic." In the 
introduction to his Dialogue with Trypho, Justin follows a 
method which bears a striking resemblance to the later method 
of Neoplatonism: he seeks to base the Christian^, knowledge 
of God — that is, the knowledge of the truth — on Platonism, 
Scepticism and " Revelation." A still more remarkable parallel 
to the later Neoplatonism is afforded by the Christian Gnostics 
of Alexandria,_espccially Valentinus and the followers of Basilides. 2 
Like the Neoplatonists, the Basilidians believed, not in an 
emanation from the Godhead, but in a dynamic manifestation 
of its activity. The same is true of Valentinus, who also placed 
an unnameable being at the apex of his system, and regarded 
matter, not as a second principle, but as a product of the one 
divine principle. It must be added that the dependence of 
Basilides and Valentinus on Zeno and Plato is beyond dispute. 
But the method observed by these Gnostics in thinking out the 
plan and the history of the universe is by no means thoroughgoing. 
Ancient myths are admitted without undergoing analysis; the 
most naive realism alternates with daring efforts at spiritualiz- 
ing. Philosophically considered, therefore, the Gnostic systems 
are very unlike the rigorous self-consistency of Neoplatonism; 
although they certainly contain almost all the elements which 
enter into the Neoplatonic theory of the universe. 

But were the oldest Neoplatonists really acquainted with 
the speculations of Philo, or Justin, or Valentinus, or Basilides? 
Did they know the Oriental religions, Judaism and Christianity 
in particular? And, if so, did they really derive anything from 
these sources? 

To these questions we cannot give decided, still less definite 
and precise, answers. Since Neoplatonism originated in 
Alexandria, where Oriental modes of worship were accessible 
to every one, and since the Jewish philosophy had also taken 
its place in the literary circles of Alexandria, we may safely 
assume that even the earliest of the Neoplatonists possessed 

	1 The resemblance would probably be still more apparent if we 
	thoroughly understood the development of Christianity at Alexandria 
	in the 2nd century; but unfortunately we have only very meagre 
	fragments to guide us here. 

	2 The dogmas of the Basilidians, jsls given by Hippolytus, read 
	almost like passages from Neoplatonic works: kird oi&lv fy, oix fay* 
	oi)K obaia, ofo &vob<ru>v f o$x AirXoDy, ob aivdeTov, owe 6lv6tjtov, owe 
	kvaicrOfirov, owe &v9poiroj. . . . ofo &v 6ed$ Aw^toj, &vatc$TfTu>s t A/So&Xws, 
	AxpoatpcTtuj, iiTraBQs, &vejrt9vfx-f}Ta)$ KixTpov rjO&rjcre iroojercu . . . oCtojs 
	owe &v Qtds cjrofyae Kdupov owe oVra l£ owe 6tnu}v, (carajSaXi^cwj nal 
	i)TroaT'i)aas arirkpfxa ti tv ?x<w tacrav iv kavry rty tov k6c$xov irawirtp/ifa* 

	(Philos. vii. 20 seq.). See Gnosticism, Basilides, &c. 

an acquaintance with Judaism and Christianity. But if we 
search Plotinus for evidence of any actual influence of Jewish 
and Christian philosophy, we search in vain; and the existence 
of any such influence is all the more unlikely because it is only 
the later Neoplatonism that offers striking and deep-rooted 
parallels to Philo and the Gnostics. The Philonic and Gnostic 
philosophies thus appear to be merely an historical anticipation 
of the Neoplatonic, without any real connexion. Nor is there 
anything mysterious in such an anticipation. It simply means 
that a certain religious and philosophical tendency, which 
grew up slowly on Greek soil, was already implanted in those 
who occupied the vantage-ground of a revealed religion of redemp- 
tion. We have to come down to Iamblichus and his school 
before we find complete correspondence with the Christian 
Gnosticism of the 2nd century; that is to say, it is only in the 
4th century that Greek philosophy in its proper development 
reaches the stage at which certain Greek philosophers who 
had embraced Christianity had arrived in the 2nd century. 
The influence of Christianity — whether Gnostic or Catholic 
— on Neoplatonism was at no time very considerable, although 
individual Neoplatonists, after Amelius, used Christian texts 
as oracles, and put on record their admiration for Christ. 

History and Doctrines. — The founder of the Neoplatonic school 
in Alexandria is supposed to have been Ammonius Saccas (q.v.). 

Plotinus ** ut t ^ ie E,nnea ^ s °f n * s pupil Plotinus are the primary 
and classical document of Neoplatonism. The doctrine 
of Plotinus is mysticism, and like all mysticism it consists of 
two main divisions. The first or theoretical part deals with the 
high origin of the human soul, and shows how it has departed 
from its first estate. In the second or practical part the way 
is pointed out by which the soul may again return to the Eternal 
and Supreme. Since the soul in its longings reaches forth beyond 
all sensible things, beyond the world of ideas even, it follows 
that the highest being must be something supra-rational. The 
system thus embraces three heads — (1) the primeval Being, 
(2) the ideal world and the soul, (3) the phenomenal world. 
We may also, however, in accordance with the views of 
Plotinus, divide thus: (A) the invisible world — (1) the primeval 
Being, (2) the ideal world, (3) the soul; (B) the phenomenal 
world. 

The primeval Being is, as opposed to the many, the One; 
as opposed to the finite, the Infinite, the unlimited. It is the 
source of all life, and therefore absolute causality and the only 
real existence. It is, moreover, the Good, in so far as all finite 
things have their purpose in it, and ought to flow back to it. 
But one cannot attach moral attributes to the original Being 
itself, because these would imply limitation. It has no attributes 
of any kind; it is being without magnitude, without life, without 
thought; in strict propriety, indeed, we ought not to speak 
of it as existing; it is " above existence/' " above goodness." 
It is also active force without a substratum; as active force 
the primeval Being is perpetually producing something else, 
without alteration, or motion, or diminution of itself. This 
production is not a physical process, but an emission of force; 
and, since the product has real existence only in virtue of the 
original existence working in it, Neoplatonism may be described 
as a species of dynamic pantheism. Directly or indirectly, 
everything is brought forth by the " One." In it all things, 
so far as they have being, are divine, and God is all in all. Derived 
existence, however, is not like the original Being itself, but is 
subject to* a lawof diminishing completeness. It is indeed an 
image and reflection of the first Being; but the further the line 
of successive projections is prolonged the smaller is its share 
in the true existence. The totality of being may thus be con- 
ceived as a series of concentric circles, fading away towards 
the verge of non-existence, the force of the original Being in 
. the outermost circle being a vanishing quantity. Each lower 
stage of being is united with the " One " by all the higher stages, 
and receives its share of reality only by transmission through 
them. All derived existence, however, has a drift towards, 
a longing for, the higher, and bends towards it so far as its 
nature will permit. 

The original Being first of all throws out the nous, which is a perfect 
image of the One and the archetype of all existing things. It is at 
once being and thought, ideal world and idea. As image, the nous 
corresponds perfectly to the One, but as derived it is entirely different. 
What Plotinus understands by the nous is the highest sphere acces- 
sible to the human mind (Koarpios jwjt6s), and, along with that, 
pure thought itself. 

The image and product of the motionless nous is the soul, which, 
according to Plotinus is, like the nous, immaterial. Its relation to 
the nous is the same as that of the nous to the One. It stands 
between the nous and the phenomenal world, is permeated and 
illuminated by the former, but is also in contact with the latter. 
The nous is indivisible; the soul may preserve its unity and remain 
in the nous, but at the same time it has the power of uniting with 
the corporeal world and thus being disintegrated. It therefore 
occupiesan intermediate position. As a single soul (world-soul) it 
belongs in essence and destination to the intelligible world; but it 
also embraces innumerable individual souls; and these can either 
submit to be ruled by the nous, or turn aside to the sensual and lose 
themselves in the finite. 

Then the soul, a^ moving essence, generates the corporeal or pheno- 
menal world. This world ought to be so pervaded by the soul that 
its various parts should remain in perfect harmony. Plotinus is no 
dualist, like the Christian Gnostics; he admires the beauty and 
splendour of the world. So long as idea governs matter, or the soul 
governs the body> the world is fair and good. It is an image — 
though a shadowy image — of the upper world, and the degrees of 
better and worse in it are essential to the harmony of the whole. 
But in the actual phenomenal world unity and harmony are replaced 
by strife and discord; the result is a conflict, a becoming and 
vanishing, an illusive existence. And the reason for this state of 
things is that bodies rest on a substratum of matter. Matter is the 
basework of each (rd $6Bos hecurrov ij t\rj); it is the dark principle, the 
indeterminate, that which has no qualities, the ^ bv. Destitute of 
form and idea, it is evil ; as capable of form it is neutral. 

The human souls which have descended into corporeality are those 
which have allowed themselves to be ensnared by sensuality and 
overpowered by lust. They now seek to cut themselves loose from 
their true being; and, striving after independence, they assume a 
false existence. They must turn back from this; and, since they 
have not lost their freedom, a conversion is still possible. 

Here, then, we enter upon the practical philosophy. Along the 
same road by which it descended the soul must retrace its steps back 
to the supreme Good. It must first of all return to itself. This is 
accomplished by the practice of virtue, which aims at likeness to 
God, and leads up to God. In the ethics of Plotinus all the older 
schemes of virtue are taken over and arranged in a graduated series. 
The lowest stage is that of the civil virtues, then follow the purifying, 
and last of all the divine virtues. The civil virtues merely adorn 
the life, without elevating the soul. ' That is the office of the purifying 
virtues, by which the soul is freed from sensuality and led back to 
itself, and thence to the nous. By means of ascetic observances the 
man becomes once more a spiritual and enduring being, free from all 
sin. But there is still a higher attainment; it is not enough to be 
sinless, one must become " God." This is reached through contem- 
plation of the primeval Being, the One — in other words, through an 
ecstatic approach to it. Thought cannot attain to this, for thought 
reaches only to the nous, and is itself a kind of motion. It is only in 
a state of perfect passivity and repose that the soul can recognize 
and touch the primeval Being. Hence the soul must first pass 
through a spiritual curriculum. Beginning with the contemplation 
of corporeal things in their multiplicity and harmony, it then retires 
upon itself and withdraws into the depths of its own being, rising 
thence to the nous, the world of ideas. But even there it does not 
find the Highest, the One; it still hears a voice saying, " not we 
have made ourselves." The last stage is reached when, in the highest 
tension and concentration, beholding in silence and utterforgetful- 
ness of all things, it is able as it were to lose itself. Then it may see 
God, the fountain of life, the source of being, the origin of all good, 
the root of the soul. In that moment it enjoys the highest indescrib- 
able bliss; it is as it were swallowed up of divinity, bathed in the 
light of eternity. 1 

Such is the religious philosophy of Plotinus, and for himself 
personally it sufficed, without the aid of the popular religion 
or worship. Nevertheless he sought for points of support in 
these. God is certainly in the truest sense nothing but the 
primeval Being; but He reveals Himself in a variety of emana- 
tions and manifestations. The nous is a sort of second god, 
the A6yot which are wrapped up in it are gods, the stars are gods, 
and so on. A rigid monotheism appeared to Plotinus a miserable 
conception. He gave a meaning to the myths of the popular 
religions, and he had something to say even for magic, sooth- 
saying and prayer. In support of *image- worship he advanced 

	1 Porphyry tells us that on four occasions during the six years of 
	their intercourse Plotinus attained to this ecstatic union with God. 

arguments which were afterwards adopted by the Christian 
image- worshippers. Still, as compared with the later Neo- 
platonists, he is comparatively free from crass superstition and 
wild fanaticism. He is not to be classed amongst the " deceived 
deceivers," and the restoration of the worship of the old gods 
was by no means his chief object. 

Amongst his pupils, Amelius and Porphyry are the most 
eminent. Amelius modified the teaching of Plotinus on certain 
points; and he also put some value on the prologue 

Porphyry. tQ the Gos?d

of John To Porphyry ( q v ) belongs the 
credit of having recast and popularized the system of his master 
Plotinus. He was not an original thinker, but a diligent student, 
distinguished hy great learning, by a turn for historical and 
philological criticism, and by an earnest purpose to uproot false 
teaching — especially Christianity, to ennoble men and train 
them to goodness. The system of Porphyry is more emphatically 
practical and religious than that of Plotinus. The object of 
philosophy, according to Porphyry, is the salvation of the soul. 
The origin and the blame of evil are not in the body, but in the 
desires of the soul. Hence the strictest asceticism (abstinence 
from flesh, and wine, and sexual intercourse) is demanded, as 
well as the knowledge of God. As he advanced in life, Porphyry 
protested more and more earnestly against the rude faith of the 
common people and their immoral worships. But, outspoken 
as he was in his criticism of the popular religions, he had no 
wish to give them up. He stood up for a pure worship of the 
many gods, and maintained the cause of every old national 
religion and the ceremonial duties of its adherents. His work 
Against the Christians was directed, not against Christ, nor even 
against what he believed to be Christ's teaching, but against 
the Christians of his own day and their sacred books, which, 
according to Porphyry, were the work of deceivers and ignorant 
people. In his trenchant criticism of the origin of what passed 
for Christianity in his time, he spoke bitter and severe truths, 
which have gained for him the reputation of the most rabid and 
wicked of all the enemies of Christianity. His work was 
destroyed, 1 but the copious extracts which we find in Lactantius, 
Augustine, Jerome, Macarius Magnus and others show how 
profoundly he had studied the Christian writings, and how great 
was his talent for real historical research. 

Porphyry marks the transition to a new phase of Neoplafonism, 
in which it becomes completely subservient to polytheism, and 
seeks before everything else to protect the Greek and 
etas. " Oriental religions from the formidable assault of 
Christianity. In the hands of Iamblichus (q.v.), the 
pupil of Porphyry, Neoplatonism is changed " from a philo- 
sophical theory to a theological doctrine." The distinctive tenets 
of Iamblichus cannot be accounted for from scientific but only 
from practical considerations. In order to justify superstition 
and the ancient forms of worship, philosophy becomes in his hands 
a theurgy, a knowledge of mysteries, a sort of spiritualism. 

To this period also belongs a set of " philosophers," with 
regard to whom it is impossible to say whether they are dupes 
or impostors — the "decepti deceptores" of whom Augustine 
speaks. In this philosophy the mystical properties of numbers 
are a leading feature; absurd and mechanical notions are 
glossed over with the sheen of sacramental mystery; myths are 
explained by pious fancies and fine-sounding pietistic reflections; 
miracles, even the most ridiculous, are believed in, and miracles 
are wrought. The " philosopher " has become a priest of magic 
and philosophy a method of incantation. Moreover, in the 
unbridled exercise of speculation, the number of divine beings 
was increased indefinitely; and these fantastic accessions to 
Olympus in the system of Iamblichus show that Greek philosophy 
is returning to mythology, and that nature-religion is still a 
power in the world. And yet it is undeniable that the very 
noblest and choicest minds of the 4th century are to be found 
in the ranks of the Neoplatonists. So great was the general 
decline that this Neoplatonic philosophy offered a welcome 
shelter to many earnest and influential men, in spite of the 

	1 It was condemned by an edict of the emperors Theodosius II. and 
	Valentinian in the year 448. 

charlatans and hypocrites who were gathered under the same 
roof. On certain points of doctrine, too, the dogmatic of 
Iamblichus indicates a real advance. Thus his emphatic asser- 
tion of the truth that the seat of evil is in the will is noteworthy; 
and so also is his repudiation of Plotinus's theory of the divinity 
of the soul. 

The numerous followers of Iamblichus — Aedesius, Chrysan- 
thius, Eusebius, Priscus, Sopater, Sallust, and, most famous of 
all, Maximus (q.v.), rendered little service to speculation. Some 
of them (Themistius in particular) are known as commentators 
on the older philosophers, and others as the missionaries of 
mysticism. The work De mysteriis Aegyptiorum is the best 
sample of the views and aims of these philosophers. Their hopes 
rose high when Julian ascended the imperial throne (361-363). 
But the emperor himself lived long enough to see that his 
romantic policy of restoration was to leave no results; and 
after his early death all hope of extinguishing Christianity was 
abandoned. 

But undoubtedly the victory of Christianity in the age of 
Valentinian and Theodosius had a purifying influence on Neo- 
platonism. During the struggle for supremacy, the 
philosophers had been driven to make common cause iBfl " eBce 
with everything that was hostile to Christianity, t^ty*' 
But now Neoplatonism was thrust from the great stage 
of history. The church and church theology, to whose guidance 
the masses now surrendered themselves, took in along with them 
their superstition, their polytheism, their magic, their myths, 
and all the machinery of religious witchcraft. The more all 
this settled and established itself — certainly not without opposi- 
tion — in the church the purer did Neoplatonism become. While 
maintaining intact its religious attitude and its theory of know- 
ledge, it returned with new zest to scientific studies, especially 
the study of the old philosophers. If Plato still remains the 
divine philosopher, yet we can perceive that after the year 400 
the writings of Aristotle are increasingly read and valued. 
In the chief cities of the empire Neoplatonic schools flourished 
till the beginning of the 5th century; during this period, indeed, 
they were the training-schools of Christian theologians. At 
Alexandria the noble Hypatia (q.v.) taught, to whose memory 
her impassioned disciple Synesius, afterwards a bishop, reared a 
splendid monument. But after the beginning of the 5th century 
the fanaticism of the church could no longer endure the presence 
of " heathenism." The murder of Hypatia was the death of 
philosophy in Alexandria, although the school there maintained 
a lingering existence till the middle of the 6th century. But there 
was one city of the East which, lying apart from the crowded 
highways of the world, had sunk to a mere provincial town, and 
yet possessed associations which the church of the 5th century felt 
herself powerless to eradicate. In Athens a Neoplatonic school 
still flourished. There, under the monuments of its glorious 
past, Hellenism found its last retreat. The school of Athens 
returned to a stricter philosophical method and the cultivation 
of scholarship. Still holding by a religious philosophy, it under- 
took to reduce the whole Greek tradition, as seen in the light of 
Plotinus, to a comprehensive and closely knit system. Hence 
the philosophy which arose at Athens was what may fairly be 
termed scholasticism. For every philosophy is scholastic 
whose subject-matter is imaginative and mystical, and which 
handles this subject-matter according to established rules in 
logical categories and distinctions. Now to these Neoplatonists, 
the books of Plato, along with certain divine oracles, fhe Orphic 
poems, and much more which they assigned to a remote antiquity, 
were documents of canonical authority; they were inspired 
divine writings. Out of these they drew the material of their 
philosophy, which they then proceeded to elaborate with the 
appliances of dialectic. 

The most distinguished teachers at Athens were Plutarch 
(q.v.), his disciple Syrianus (who did important work as a com- 
mentator on Plato and Aristotle, and further deserves Proctos. 
mention for his vigorous defence of the freedom of the 
will), but above all Proclus (411-485). Proclus is the great 
schoolman of Neoplatonism. It was he who, combining religious 
ardour with formal acuteness, connected the whole mass of 
traditional lore into a huge system, making good defects, and 
smoothing away contradictions by means of distinctions and 
speculations. " It was reserved for Proclus," says Zeller, " to 
bring the Neoplatonic philosophy to its formal conclusion by the 
rigorous consistency of his dialectic, and, keeping in view all 
the modifications which it had undergone in the course of two 
centuries, to give it that form in which it was transferred to 
Christianity and Mahommedamsm in the middle ages." Forty- 
four years after the death of Proclus the school of Athens was 
closed by Justinian (a.d. 529); but it had already fulfilled its 
mission in the work of Proclus. The works of Proclus, as the 
last testament of Hellenism to the church and the middle ages, 
exerted an incalculable influence on the next thousand years. 
They not only formed one of the bridges by which the medieval 
thinkers got back to Plato and Aristotle; they determined the 
scientific method of thirty generations, and they partly created 
and partly nourished the Christian mysticism of the middle ages. 

The disciples of Proclus are not eminent (M annus, Asclepio- 
dotus, Ammonius, Zenodotus, Isidorus, Hegias, Damascius). 
The last president of the Athenian school was Damascius (q.v.). 
When Justinian issued the edict for the suppression of the school, 
Damascius along with Simplicius (the painstaking commentator 
on Aristotle) and five other ^eoplatonists set out to make a home 
in Persia. They found the conditions were unfavourable and 
were allowed to return (see Chosroes I.). 

At the beginning of the 6th century Neoplatonism had ceased 
to exist in the East as an independent philosophy. Almost at 
the same time, however — and the coincidence is not accidental — 
it made new conquests in the church theology through the writings 
of the pseudo-Dionysius. It began to bear fruit in Christian 
mysticism,- and to diffuse a new magical leaven through the 
worship of the church. 

In the West, v where philosophical efforts of any kind had been 
very rare since the 2nd century, and where mystical contempla- 
tion did not meet with the necessary conditions, Neoplatonism 
found a congenial soil only in isolated individuals. C. Marius 
Victorinus (q.v.) translated certain works of Plotinus, and thus 
had a decisive influence on the spiritual history of Augustine 
(Confess, vii. 9, viii. 2). It may be said that Neoplatonism 
influenced the West only through the medium of the church 
theology, or, in some instances, under that disguise. Even 
Boetius (it may now be considered certain) was a catholic 
Christian, although his whole mode of thought was certainly 
Neoplatonic (see Boetius). His violent death in the year 525 
marks the end of independent philosophy in the West. But 
indeed this last of the Roman philosophers stood quite alone 
in his century, and the philosophy for which he lived was neither 
original, nor well-grounded, nor methodically developed. 

Neoplatonism and Ike Theology of the Church. — The question asto 
the influence of Neoplatonism on the development of Christianity 
is not easily answered, because it is scarcely possible to get a com- 
plete view of their mutual relations. The answer will depend, in 
the first instance, upon how much is included under the term " Neo- 
platonism." If Neoplatonism is understood in^ the widest, sense, 
as the highest and fittest expression of the religious movements at 
work in the Graeco-Roman empire from the 2nd to the 5th century, 
then it may be regarded as the twin-sister of the church dogmatic 
which grew up during the same period; the younger sister was 
brought up by the elder, then rebelled against her and at last tyran- 
nized oyer her. The Neoplatonists themselves characterized the 
theologians of the church as intruders, who had appropriated the 
Greek philosophy and spoiled it by the admixture of strange fables. 
Thus Porphyry says of Origen (Euseb. H.E. vi. 19), "The outer 
life of Origen was that of a Christian and contrary to law; but, as 
far as his views of things and of God are concerned, he thought like 
the^ Greeks, whose conceptions he overlaid with foreign myths." 
This verdict of Porphyry's is at all events more just and apt than 
that of the theologians on the Greek philosophers, when they accused 
them of having b6rrowed all their really valuable doctrines from the 
ancient Christian books. But the important pointis that the rela- 
tionship was acknowledged on both sides. Now, in so far as both 
Neoplatonism and the church dogmatic set out from the felt need of 
redemption, in so far as both sought to deliver the soul from sensu- 
ality and recognized man's inability without divine aid — without a 
levclation — to attain salvation and a sure knowledge of the truth, 
they are at once most intimately related and at the same time 
mutually independent. It must be confessed that when Chris- 
tianity began to project a theology it was already deeply impregnated 
by Hellenic influences. But the influence is to be traced not so 
much to philosophy as to the general culture of the time, and the 
whole set of conditions under which spiritual life was manifested. 
When Neoplatonism appeared, the Christian church had already laid 
down the main positions of her theology; or if not, she worked 
them out alongside of Neoplatonism — that is not a mere accident — 
but still independently. It was only by identifying itself with the 
whole history of Greek philosophy, or by figuring as pure Platonism 
restored, that Neoplatonism could stigmatize the church theology 
of Alexandria as a plagiarism from itself. These assumptions, how- 
ever, were fanciful. Although our sources are unfortunately very 
imperfect, the theology of the church does not appear to have learned 
much from Neoplatonism in the 3rd century — partly because the 
latter had not yet reached the form in which its doctrines could 
be accepted by the church dogmatic, and partly because theology 
was otherwise occupied. Her first business was to plant herself 
firmly on her own territory, tonpakc good her position and dear 
away old and objectionable opinions. Origen was quite as inde- 
pendent a thinker as Plotinus; only, they both drew on the same 
tradition. From the 4th century downwards, however, the influence 
of Neoplatonism on the Oriental theologians was of the utmost im- 
portance. The church gradually expressed her most peculiar con- 
victions in dogmas, which were formulated by philosophical methods, 
but were irreconcilable with Neoplatonism (the Christological 
dogmas); and the further this process went the more unrestrainedly 
did theologians resign themselves to the influence of Neoplatonism 
on all other questions. The doctrines of the incarnation, the resur- 
rection of the flesh and the creation of the world in time marked the 
boundary line between the church's dogmatic and Neoplatonism; 
in every other respect, theologians and Ncoplatonists drew so closely 
together that many of them arc completely^ at one. In fact, there 
were special cases, like that of Synesius, in which a speculative 
reconstruction of distinctively Christian doctrines by Christian men 
was winked at. If a book does not happen to touch on any of the 
above-mentioned doctrines, it may often be doubtful whether the 
writer is a Christian or a Neoplatonist. ^ In ethical precepts, in 
directions for right living (that is, asceticism), the two systems 
approximate more and more closely. But it was here that^ Neo- 
platonism finally celebrated its greatest triumph. It indoctrinated 
the church with all its mysticism, its mystic exercises and even its 
magical cultus as taught by Iamblichus. The works of the pseudo- 
Dionysius contain a gnosis in which, by means of the teaching of 
Iamblichus and Proclus, the church's theology is turned _ into a 
scholastic mysticism with directions on matters of practice and 
ritual. And as these writings were attributed to Dionysius, the 
disciple of the apostles, the scholastic mysticism which they unfold 
was regarded as an apostolic, not to say a divine, science. The 
influence; exercised by these writings, first on the East, and then — 
after the 9th (or 12th) century — on the West, cannot be overestima- 
ted. It is impossible to enlarge upon it here; suffice it to say that the . 
mystical and pietistic devotion of our own day, even in the Protestant 
churches, is nourished on works whose ancestry can be traced, 
through a series of intermediate links, to the writings of the pseudo- 
Areopagite. 

In the ancient world there was only one Western theologian who 
came directly under the influence of Neoplatonism ; but that one is 
Augustine, the most important of them all. It was through Neo- 
platonism that Augustine got rid of scepticism and the last dregs of 
Manichaeism. In the seventh book of his Confessions he has recorded 
how much he owed to the perusal of Neoplatonic works. On all the 
cardinal doctrines — God, matter, the relation of God to the world, 
freedom and evil — Augustine retained the impress of Neoplatonism; 
at the same time he is the theologian of antiquity who most clearly 
perceived and most fully stated wherein Neoplatonism and Chris- 
tianity differ. The best ever written by any church father on this 
subject is to be found in chaps, ix.-xxi. of the seventh book of the 
Confessions. 

Why Neoplatonism succumbed in the conflict with Christianity is 
a question which the historians have never satisfactorily answered. 
As a rule, the problem is not even stated correctly. m We have nothing 
to do here with our own private ideal of Christianity, but solely 
with catholic Christianity and catholic theology. These are the forces 
that conquered Neoplatonism, after assimilating nearly everything 
that it contained. Further, we must consider the arena in which 
the victory was won.^ The battlefield was the empire ofConstantine 
and Theodosius. It is only when these and all other circumstances 
of the case are duly realized that wehaye a right to inquire how 
much the essential doctrines of Christianity contributed to the vic- 
tory, and what share must be assigned to the organization of the 
church. 

In medieval theology and philosophy mysticism appears as the 
powerful opponent of rationalistic dogmatism. The empirical 
science of the Renaissance and the two following centuries was itself 
a new development of Platonism and Neoplatonism, as opposed jto 
rationalistic dogmatism, with its contempt for experience. Magic, 
astrology and alchemy — all the outgrowth of Neoplatonism — gave 
the first effectual stimulus to the observation of nature, and conse- 
quently to natural science, and in this way finally extinguished barren 
rationalism. Thus in the history of science Neoplatonism has played 
a part and rendered services of which Plotinus or Iamblichus or 
Proclus never dreamt. So true is it that sober history is often 
stranger and mofe capricious than all the marvels of legend and 
romance. . . 

Authorities. — On the relation of Neoplatonism to Christianity, 
and the historical importance of Neoplatonism generally, see the lead- 
ing church histories, and the Histories of Dogma by Baur, Nitzsch, 
Harnack, &c. Compare also Loffler, Der Platonismus der Kitchen- 
vdter (1782 ); Huber, Die Philosophie der Kirchenvdter (1859); 
Tzchirner, Fall des Heidenthums (1829), pp. 574-618; Burckhardt, 
Die Zeit Constantly s des Grossen (1853) ; Chastel, Hist, de la destruc- 
tion du Paganisme dans V empire d Orient (1850); Beugnot, Hist, 
de la destruction du Paganisme en Occident (1835); E. von Lasaulx, 
Der Untergang des Hellenismus (1854); Vogt, Neuplatonismus und 
Christenthum (1836); Ullmann, " Einfluss des Christenthums auf 
Porphyrins," in the Stud. u. Kritiken (18^2); Jean Reville, La 
Religion & Rome sous les Severes (1886); C. Bigg, The Christian 
Platonists of Alexandria (1886) and Neoplatonism (1895); Rufus M. 
Jones, Studies in Mystical Religion (1909), pp.70 foil. See further, 
C. Schmidt, Gnostische Schriften in Koptischer Sprache (1892); K. P. 
vol. xiii. (1903). On the after-effects of Neoplatonism on the 
church's dogmatic, see Ritschl, Theologie und Metaphysik (1881). 
On the relation of Neoplatonism to Monachism, compare Keim, Aus 
dem Urchristenthum (1878). On the history of Neoplatonism with 
special reference to the decline of Roman polytheism, see, e.g., 
Samuel Dill, Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western 
Empire (1898), pp. 82 foil. On Plotinus, Porphyry, &c, see separate 
articles. (A. Ha.; J. M. M.) 

NEOPTOLEMUS (also called Pyrrhtjs), in Greek legend, the 
son of Achilles and Deidameia. He was brought up by his 
grandfather Lycomedes in the island of Seyros, and taken to 
Troy in the last year of the war by Odysseus, since Helenus had 
declared that the city could not be captured without the aid of a 
descendant of Aeacus. Neoptolemus was famed for his beauty, 
eloquence and bravery. He was one of the warriors in the 
wooden horse and slew Priam at the sack of Troy (Odyssey, 
xi. 508-526; Aeneid, ii. 527). Apart from these Trojan tales, 
Neoptolemus is a prominent figure in the legends of Epirus and 
of Delphi. He was the ancestor of the Molossian kings, who 
therefore claimed to be of pure Hellenic stock. He was murdered 
at Delphi, where he was buried, and a festival was held in his 
honour every eighth year. 


NEOPYTHAGOREANISM, a Graeco- Alexandrian school of 
philosophy, which became prominent in the 1st century a.d. 
Very little is known about the members of this school, and there 
has been much discussion as to whether the Pythagorean litera- 
ture which was widely published at the time in Alexandria was 
the original work of ist-century writers or merely reproductions 
of and commentaries on the older Pythagorean writings. The 
only well-known members of the school were Apollonius of Tyana 
and MQderatus of Gades. In the previous century Cicero's 
learned friend P. Nigidius Figulus (d. 45 B.C.) had made an 
attempt to revive Pythagorean doctrines, but he cannot be 
described as a member of the school. Further, it is necessary 
to distinguish from the Neopythagoreans a number of Eclectic 
Platonists, who, during the 1st century of our era, maintained 
views which had a similar tendency (e.g. Apuleius of Madaura, 
Plutarch of Chaeronea and, later, Numenius of Apamea). 

Neopythagoreanism was the first product of an age in which 
abstract philosophy had begun to pall. The Stoics discovered 
that their " perfect man " was not to be found in the luxurious, 
often morbid society of the Graeco-Roman world; that some- 
thing more than dialectic ethics was needed to reawaken a 
sense of responsibility. A degenerate society cared nothing for 
syllogisms grown threadbare by repetition. Neopythagoreanism 
was an attempt to introduce a religious element into pagan 
philosophy in place of what had come to be regarded as an arid 
formalism. The founders of the school sought to invest their 
doctrines with the halo of tradition by ascribing them to Pytha- 
goras and Plato, and there is no reason to accuse them of insin- 
cerity. They went back to the later period of Plato's thought, 
the period when Plato endeavoured to combine his doctrine 
of Ideas with the Pythagorean number-theory, and identified 
the Good with the One, the source of the duality of the Infinite 
and the Measured (t6 airapov and irkpas) with the resultant 
scale of realities from the One down to the objects of the material 
world. They emphasized the fundamental distinction between 
the Soul and the Body. God must be worshipped spiritually 
by prayer and the will to be good, not in outward action. The 
soul must be freed from its material surrounding, the " muddy 
vesture of decay," by an ascetic habit of life. Bodily pleasures 
and all sensuous impulses must be abandoned as detrimental 
to the spiritual purity of the soul. God is the principle of good; 
Matter (uXt/) the groundwork of Evil. In this system we dis- 
tinguish not only the asceticism of Pythagoras and the later 
mysticism of Plato, but also the influence of the Orphic mysteries 
and of Oriental philosophy. The Ideas of Plato are no longer 
self-subsistent entities; they are the elements which constitute 
the content of spiritual activity. The Soul is no longer an 
appanage of obala, it is ovala itself: the non-material universe 
is regarded as the sphere of mind or spirit. 

Thus Neopythagoreanism is a link in the chain between the 
old and the new in pagan philosophy. It connects the teaching 
of Plato with the doctrines of Neoplatonism and brings it into 
line with the later Stoicism and with the ascetic system of the 
Essenes. A comparison between the Essenes and the Neo- 
pythagoreans shows a parallel so striking as to warrant the theory 
that the Essenes were profoundly ^influenced by Neopythago- 
reanism. Lastly Neopythagoreanism furnished Neoplatonism 
with the weapons with which pagan philosophy made its last 
stand against Christianity. 

See Pythagoras, Neoplatonism, Essenes; and Zeller's Philo- 
sophie d. Griechen. For members of the school see Apollonius of 
Tyana and Moderatus of Gades. 


NEPAL, Nepaul or Nipal, an independent state, situated on 
the north-eastern frontier of India, lying between 8o° 15' and 
88° 10' E., and 26 20' and 30 10' N.; area, 54,000 sq. m. Its 
extreme length is about 525 m., and its breadth varies from 90 
to 140 m. It is bounded on the N. by Tibet; on the E. by 
Sikkim; on the S. by Bengal and the United Provinces; and 
on the W. by Kumaon, from which it is separated by the Kali 
river. Its population is estimated by the natives at about 
5,200,000, the common phrase used by the rulers in speaking 
of popular opinion being, " but what will the Bawan (i.e. fifty- 
two) Lakh say to this." 

Nepal consists physically of two distinct territories: (1) the 
tarai, or strip of level, cultivated and forest land lying along the 
southern border; and (2) the great mountainous tract stretching 
northwards to Tibet. Along the northern frontier stand many of 
the highest peaks of the Himalayan range, such as Dhaulagiri 
(26,837 ft.), Mutsiputra, Gaurishankar and Yasa (24,000), Gosain 
Than (26,313), Mount Everest (29,002 accordingto the survey value), 
Kinchinjunga (28,146), and numerous peaks varying from 20,000 
to 24,000 ft. In clear weather this magnificent snowy range may be 
seen in an almost continuous line from the top of some of the lower 
ranges near Katmandu. South of these are numerous parallel lower 
ranges, varying from 16,000 to 6000 ft. in height, which are broken 
up at intervals by cross ranges, thus forming a series of glens with a 
few hill-girt valleys interspersed. 

These mountain ranges determine the course of the rivers, which 
are divided by the cross ranges into four groups. The first of these 
extends from Kumaon eastward as far as Dhaulagiri, and consists 
of the affluents of the Kali (Sarda), Sarju, Kurnah, Eastern Sarju, 
and Rapti, all of which ultimately form the Gogra or Gogari, and 
flow into the Ganges. The second group, known to the Nepalese 
as the Sapt Gandaki, rises from the peaks between Dhaulagiri and 
Gosain Than, and unite at Trebeni Ghat to form the Gandak. 
The third is a group of smaller rivers draining the great valley of 
Nepal, the valleys of Chitlong, Benepa, and Panouti, and portions 
of the tarai around the Chunaghati range of hills. These are the 
various branches of the Bara Gandak, the lesser Rapti, the Bagmati 
and Kumla. East of this again is the fourth group, known to the 
Nepalese as the Sapt Kosi, rising from the peaks between^ Gosain 
Than and Kinchinjunga, and uniting to form the Soon Kosi, which 
falls into the Ganges. 

There is thus a natural division of the country into four portions. 
The most western is the country of the Baisi (or twenty-two) rajas, 
and contains the towns of Jumla, Doti and Sulliana. The second 
is the country of the Chaubisi (or twenty-four) rajas, and contains 
the towns of Malebum, Palpa, Gurkha and Noakote. The third is 
the district containing Nepal proper, with the capital and many 
large towns to be mentioned aftenvards. The fourth is the eastern 
portion of Nepal, comprising the country of the Kiratis, and many 
small towns, such as Dhankota, Ilam and Bijapur. 

Route into Nepal — The portion of Nepal, exclusive of the tarai, 
which is open to Europeans is the " valley of Nepal," containing 
the capital of the country, and a few adjacent smaller valleys. 
There is only one means of access open to Europeans, and this 
indeed is in general resorted to by the natives, as the other 
routes to the capital are longer and far more difficult. The 
road runs nearly north from Segauli, passing through the tarai 
and sal forests, to Bhichhkhori; then through the beds of mountain 
streams, through a pass in the Churiyaghati range, and through 
another sal forest, to Hetoura; thence by a wide and good road to 
Bhimphedi at the foot of the Sisaghari range of hills. So far the 
route is practicable for carts and baggage animals, but from this 
point the road is a mere rugged footpath over the Sisaghari Pass, 
through the Chitlong valley and over the Chandragiri range. The 
distance from Segauli to Katmandu is 90 m. 

The valley in extreme length from east to west is about 26 m., 
and in breadth from north to south about 15. The surrounding 
hills vary in height from 6000 to 9720 ft., the level of the valley 
itself being about 4500 ft. above the sea. Tradition has it that 
Nepal was once a lake, and appearances are in favour of this view. 
It is crossed from east to west by a low limestone range, through 
which the waters have gradually forced a passage, and in like manner 
the collected rivers have escaped at the south-east corner of the 
valley. 

There are three principal streams, the Bagmati, Vishnumati, and 
Manohora, besides many small tributaries of these. All the rivers 
rise within the valley, except the Bagmati, which springs from the 
northern side of the Shiupuri peak, and enters the valley through a 
ravine at the north-east corner. They all unite and pass^ through 
a long narrow gorge In the limestone range, already mentioned, at 
Chobhar, and ultimately escape from the valley at Kotwaldar. 

Climate. — In and around the Nepal valley, as in India, the year 
may be divided into the rainy, cold and hot seasons. The rains 
begin in June and last till October, but the fall is not so heavy or 
continuous as in the plains of Hindustan. The cold season extends 
from the middle of October to the middle of April.^ During these 
months the climate is delicious. Hoar-frost and thin ice are common 
in the mornings, and the thermometer sometimes falls as low as 25 
Fahr., but the days arc bright and warm. From Christmas to the 
end of February there are occasional showers of rain ; and snow 
falls on the surrounding low ranges, but is very rarely seen in the 
valley itself. From April to the beginning of the rains is the hot 
season, but the thermometer seldom reaches 85 in the shade. The 
result of observations extending over many years gives an average 
mean temperature of 6o° Fahr., and an annual rainfall of about 
60 in. Violent thunderstorms are not uncommon, and occasionally 
severe earthquakes occur, as in 1833 and 1866. 

Flora and Fauna. — In a country possessing such a range of 
altitudes the flora and fauna are of course very varied. For descrip- 
tive purposes, Nepal may again be divided into three zones. These 
are — (1) the tarai and lower ranges of hills up to 4000 ft. in height; 

(2) the central ranges and high-lying valleys, up to 10,000 ft.; and 

(3) the alpine region, from 10,000 to 29,000 ft. in height. These 
zones are not, however, sharply defined, as the climate varies 
according to the latitude, the height of intermediate ranges, and the 
depth of the valleys; so that tropical plants and animals arc some- 
times found far in the interior, and the more northern species descend 
along the loftier spurs into the southern zones. 

The low alluvial land of the tarai is well adapted for cultivation, 
and is, so to speak, the granary of Nepal; but owing to scantiness 
of population and other causes the greater portion of it consists of 
swamps, jungles and forests. Considerable stretches of land arc, 
however, being reclaimed from year to year. The productions here 
are those of British India — cotton, rice, wheat, pulse, sugar-cane, 
tobacco, opium, indigo, and the fruits and vegetables familiar in 
the plains of India. The forests yield a magnificent supply of sal, 
sisu.and other valuable forest trees; and the jungles abound with 
acacias, mimosas, cotton tree (Bombax), dak (Butea frondosa), large 
bamboos, rattans, palms, and numerous ferns and orchids. On the 
Churiaghati range the common Finns longifolia grows freely. Tea 
can be grown at a height of from 2000 to 4000 ft. The middle zone 
supplies rice, wheat, maize, barley, oats, ginger, turmeric, chillies, 
potatoes, Cueurbitaceac, pineapples, and many varieties of European 
fruits, vegetables and flowers. The forests contain tree rhododen- 
drons, Pinus longifolia, oaks, horse-chestnuts, walnuts, maples, hill 
bamboos, wild cherry, pear, allies of the tea plant, paper plants 
(Daphne), roses, and many other inhabitants of temperate climes, 
wkh various orchids, ferns and wild flowers. In the alpine zone 
exist Coniferac of many kinds, junipers, yew, box, hollies, birch, 
dwarf rhododendrons and the usual alpine flora. 

The wild animals follow a similar distribution, and the following 
typical species may be mentioned. In the lowest zone are found the 
tiger, leopard, wolf, hyena and jackal, the elephant and rhinoceros, 
the gaur (Gavaeus gaurus), gayal (Gavaeus frontalis), wild buffalo or 
arna, many species of deer, and the black bear {Ursus labiatus). 
Among the birds arc found the pea-fowl, francolins, wild jungle 
fowl, and the smaller vultures, &c. In the middle zone there are the 
leopard, the Himalayan black bear (Ursus tibetanus), the wild dog, 
cats of many sorts, squirrels, hares, porcupines, the pangolin, and 
some species of deer and antelope. Among the birds are the larger 
vultures and eagles, pheasants (Gallophasis) , chukor, hill partridges, 
&c. In the alpine zone are found the true bear (Ursus isabellinus, 
or brown bear), the yak, musk deer, wild goats and sheep, marmots, 
&c. Among the birds are the eagle- vulture (Gypaetus), the blood 
pheasant (Jtfiaginis cruentus), snow pheasant (Tetraogallus hima- 
layensis), snow partridge (Lerwa nivicola), the horned pheasant 
(Ceriornis saiyra), crested pheasant (Catrens wallichi). &c. Geese, 
ducks, waders of all sorts, and other migratory birds are found in 
abundance in the two lower zones. 

Minerals. — The lowest zone in some directions abounds in fossils; 
and deposits of lignite, and even of true coal, arc met with, the 
latter notably at a spot south of Palpa. The middle zone is rich in 
limestone and marbles, and abounds with minerals, such as iron, 
copper, zinc, lead and sulphur. Copper is found near the surface 
in many places, and there are remains of mines both at Markhu and 
in the great valley of Nepal. Mineral springs, both hot and cold, are 
numerous. Traces of silver, and also of gold, have been found in 
the alpine zone. 

People. — The races occupying Nepal are of mixed Mongol 
origin. To the north, inhabiting the higher mountains and 
valleys, dwell the Bhutias or Tibetans. To the west lie the 
Gurungs and Magars. The Murmis, Gurkhalis and Newars 
occupy the central parts; and the Kiratis, Limbus and Lepchas 
occupy the eastern districts. There are also Brahmans and 
Chhatris in the hills. Besides these there are many small tribes 
residing in the tarai and some other malarious districts, known 
as Kumhas, Tharus, Manjis, &c, but generally classed together 
by the Nepalese as Aoulias, or dwellers in the malarious or aoul 
districts. These are probable descendants of immigrants from 
the lower castes of Hindus, occupying the borderlands of the 
tarai. Among the forests of the lower eastern region are also 
to be found some small savage tribes, known as Cbepangs and 
Kusundas. 

All the races except the Aoulias are of a decidedly Mongolian 
appearance, being generally short and robust, and having fiat 
faces, oblique eyes, yellow complexions, straight black hair, 
and comparatively hairless faces. The Newars, according to 
the Vamqavali or native history, trace their descent from the 
races of southern India, but this is rendered more than doubtful 
by both their appearance and language. The Gurkhalis (Gurkhas 
or Ghurkhas) are descendants of the Brahmans and Rajputs who 
were driven out of Hindostan by the Moslems, and took refuge in 
the western hilly lands, where they ultimately became dominant, 
and where they have become much mixed with the other races 
by intermarriage. 

Religions. — The Bhutias, Newars, Limbus, Keratis, and Lepchas 
are all Buddhists, but their religion has become so mixed up with 
Hinduism that it is now hardly recognizable. The Newars have 
entirely abandoned the monastic institutions of Buddhism, and 
have in great measure adopted the rules of caste, though even these 
sit but lightly upon them. They burn their dead, cat the flesh of 
buffaloes, goats, sheep, ducks, and fowls, and drink beer and spirits. 
The Gurkhalis, Magars, and Gurungs arc Hindus, but the last two 
arc by no means strict in the observance of their religion, though 
there are some peculiarities which they carefully preserve. Thus, 
for instance, the Magars will eat pork but not buffalo's flesh, whereas 
the Gurungs cat the buffalo but not the hog. 

Priests. — Where temples are so numerous (there are 2733 shrines 
in the valley) priests naturally abound, both of the Hindu and 
Buddhist religions. The festivals too are many in number, and in 
consequence holidays arc incessant. The raj guru, or high priest, is 
an influential person in the state, a member of council, and has a 
large income from government lands as well as from the fines for 
offences against caste, &e. Many other priests, gurus and purohits, 
have lands assigned to them, and most of the temples have been 
richly endowed by their founders. Every family of rank has a 
special priest, whose office is hereditary. 

Astrologers are also numerous, and their services are in constant 
request. One cannot build a house, set out on a journey, com- 
mence a war, or even take a dose of physic, without having an 
auspicious moment selected for him. 

Languages. — The various races have all separate languages, or 
at least dialects. The Gurkhalis and western tribes use Khas (see 
Pahari), which, unlike the other dialects, is of Sanskrit origin. The 
Newars have a distinct language and alphabets, for there are three 
known to their pandits, though only one is in use now. Their 
language, called Gubhajius, greatly resembles Tibetan, but is now 
interspersed with many Sanskrit words. The Bhutias use the 
Tibetan language and alphabet. 

Education. — There is a central educational institution at Kat- 
mandu with sixteen branches, or schools, over the valley of Nepal. 
This central institution has three departments, English, Sanskrit 
and Persian — or more correctly perhaps Urdu. Education is provided 
free by the state, and is encouraged by grants of scholarships 
and prizes. Boys passing out well are sent at government expense 
to the various universities of northern India to complete their 
education, and some have lately been sent to Japan. The evil 
effects of higher education, as taught in the Indian colleges, on the 
youth of Bengal, &c, has, however, given the Gurkha durbar a 
distinct shock, and it seems not unlikely that education in Nepal 
may receive a set-back in consequence. Some of the upper classes 
speak English fluently, but the bulk of the labouring classes is quite 
illiterate. 

Katmandu is a perfect storehouse of ancient Sanskrit literature, 
and some of the oldest MSS. in that language as yet known to 
scholars have been found there. There is also a fair English library. 
Both are lodged in a good building. 

Calendar. — There are three principal eras in use in Nepal. The 
;Samvat of Vikramaditya begins fifty-seven years before the Christian 
"era, the Saka era of Salivanhn begins seventy-eight years after 
the Christian era, and the Nepalese Sam vat dates from October a.d. 
880. The Sri-Harsha and Kaligat eras are also sometimes used. 
Day is considered to begin when the tiles on a house can be counted, 
or when the hairs on the back of a man's hand can be discerned 
against the sky. Sixty bipalas = i pala; 60 palas = i ghari or 
24 minutes ; 60 gharis = 1 day of 24 hours. 

Health. — All families of good position have at least one bai<L % or 
medical man, in constant attendance, and there are also many 
general practitioners. There is a large central hospital at Katmandu, 
and some thirteen other smaller hospitals are distributed over the 
country, with free beds, and provision for outdoor treatment. 
There is also a small hospital attached to the British Residency. 
The diseases most prevalent in the country are rheumatism, chronic 
dyspepsia, skin diseases, syphilis, goitre, smallpox, cholera and 
leprosy. In the rains a number of cases of mild intermittent fever, 
diarrhoea, and dysentery are met with. Fever of a severe typhoid 
type is common in the crowded lanes and dirty villages. Vaccination 
is being gradually introduced into the country, and the general 
health of the inhabitants of the principal cities in the valley has 
greatly improved since the introduction of fresh water, which has 
been brought in by pipes from mountain springs. 

Towns. — There are three large towns in the Nepal valley, Kat- 
mandu, the capital, said to contain approximately 50,000 inhabitants, 
Patan and Bhatgaon about 30,000 each. The houses are from two to 
four storeys ?.n height, built of brick and tiled. The windows and 
balconies are of wood, arid some are elaborately carved. There 
are numerous handsome temples in all the towns, the majority of 
which are pagoda-shaped and built of brick, with roofs of copper, 
which is sometimes gilt. The streets are narrow, and they, as well 
as the squares, are all paved with brick or stone. In front of the 
temples generally stand monoliths surmounted by figures of Garuda, 
or of the founder, made of brass gilt, or sometimes of black stone. 
Besides these three large towns, there are at least twenty smaller 
towns and numerous villages in the valley, ail of which possess 
many temples. Some of these, as for instance those of Pasnupati, 
Bodhnatha and Symbhunatha, are considered of great sanctity. 
Many thousands of pilgrims come at one festival to worship at 
Pashupati, and it is there that the dying are brought to be immersed 
in the Bagmati, and the dead are burned on its banks. 

Agriculture. — While the Gurkhalis are occupied in military affairs, 
the agriculture of the valley is carried on by the Newars. The 
soil is varied in character, from light micaceous sand to dense 
ferruginous clay. The whole valley is cultivated and irrigated 
where practicable, and the slopes of the hills are carefully terraced, 
so that there is little grazing ground, and few sheep or cattle are 
kept. There are some milch cows and buffaloes, which are either 
stall-fed or grazed in the jungles at the foot of the hills. Animals 
for consumption and sacrifice are all imported, and are consumed 
as fast as they are brought in. In the cold season the Bhutias bring 
large flocks of sheep and goats laden with bags of borax, salt and 
saltpetre. These are sold for consumption, except a few tnat are 
retained to carry back the bags. These droves are generally accom- 
panied by ponies and some of the large Tibetan dogs; the latter are 
powerful, fierce, shaggy animals, about the size of a small Newfound- 
land dog. Poultry are kept and used by the Newars, especially 
ducks, the eggs of which are in great demand even among the 
orthodox Hindus. The crops grown in the valley consist of rice, 
both the transplanted and the dry-sown or ghaiya varieties, wheat, 
pulse, murwah, maize, buckwheat, chillies, radishes, mustard, 
garlic, onions, ginger, turmeric, sugar-cane, potatoes, ground nuts, 
many species of cucumbers and pumpkins, &c. Nothing but 
articles of food are allowed to be grown in the valley; hence its 
capabilities for producing tea, cotton and tobacco are unknown. 
All of these, however, are grown in other parts of the country, both 
t in the hills and the tarai. Large cardamoms are extensively grown 
in the eastern hills, and form an important article of export. The 
hemp plant {Cannabis indica) grows wild, and is used both for manu- 
facturing purposes and for producing the resinous extract and other 
intoxicating products which are exported. Plants producing dyes, 
such as madder or maniit, arc grown in some places; and drugs, 
such as chirata, are collected and exported. The better class of 
soils yields a return of about Rs. 180 per khait, and the poorest 
about Rs. 90 per khait. Erom some of the finer soils as many as 
three crops of various sorts are obtained annually. The land- 
measures in use are different in different parts of the country. 
Thus, in the eastern tarai a bigha measures 90X90 yds. English, 
while in the western tarai it is only 15X15 yds. In the hills the 
unit cf land measurement is called ropni, which is about twice the 
size of a western tarai bigha— and twenty-five ropnis make one 
khait. This measurement applies only to rice lands. Other land 
measurements for the valley are as follows : One Nepali bigha is 
90 yds.X 90 yds. British. (A British Indian bigha is 40 yds.X 40 
yds. and 3 Nepali bighas equal about 5 acres.) Sixteen ropnis 
equal 1 Nepali bigha. 

Land Taxes. — The tarai lands pay from two to nine rupees 
(British) per Nepali bigha according to quality of land. In the hills 
taxes are charged on the plough, thus: one plough pays 13 annas; 
one bullock without plough about 10 annas; one spade 6 J annas. 
These taxes are termed Hal, Patay and Kodaley. 

Horticulture. — The Newars are also fond of horticulture. Many 
European fruits, flowers and vegetables have been introduced 
and grow freely. The country is famous for its oranges and pine- 
apples. Elowers are grown and sold for religious purposes, and even 
wild flowers are brought into the market and much used by the 
Newar women in adorning their hair, as well as for offerings at 
the shrines. Many wild fruits are collected and sold in the 
markets. Apples and pears, of English stock, thrive well; apricots 
and plums are good; peaches and grapes grow freely and are 
of large size, but they seldom ripen before the rains begin, when 
they rot. 

Trade. — All the trade and manufactures of the country are in 
the hands of the Newars, and a few Kashmiris and natives of Hindu- 
stan. The trade in European goods is chiefly carried on by the 
latter, whilst the Newars deal in corn, oil, salt, tobacco and articles 
of domestic manufacture. The trade with India is carried on at 
numerous marts along the frontier, at each of which a customs 
station is established, and the taxes are collected by a thikadar 
or farmer. The Newars also carry on the trade with Tibet, through 
a colony which has been for many years established at Lhasa, but 
this trade has been a shrinking item since the opening of the Lhasa- 
Darjeeling route. There are two principal routes to Tibet. One of 
these runs north-east from Katmandu to the frontier-station of 
Kuti or Nilam, crossing the Himalayan range at a height of 14,000 ft. ; 
the other passes out of the valley at the north-west corner, and 
runs at first upwards along the main branch of the Gandak, crossing 
the Himalayas, near Kerung, at a height of 9000 ft. All goods on 
these routes are carried on men's backs, except the salt, &c, carried 
in bags by the Bhutia sheep and goats. The principal imports from 
Hindustan are raw cotton, cotton goods, woollen goods, silks and 
velvets, hardware, cutlery, beads, jewels, coral, saddlery, shoes, 
guns, gunpowder, glassware, vermilion, indigo, lac, tea, betel-nut, 
spices, paper, sugar, tobacco, oils, sheet copper, goats, cattle, 
buffaloes; and from Tibet, musk, medicines, yaks tails, tea, woollen 
cloth, blankets, borax, salt, saltpetre, paper-plant, honey, wax, 
sheep, goats, yaks, ponies, silver, gold. The exports to Hindustan 
include wax, paper-plant, music, yaks' tails, medicines, cardamoms, 
borax, sulphate of copper, brass pots, iron pots, ponies, elephants, 
hawks, hides and horns (buffalo), rice, ghee, oil seeds, red chillies, 
madder, cobalt, potatoes, oranges; and to Tibet, broad cloth, raw 
cotton, cotton goods, tobacco, sugar, opium, coral, jewels, pearls, 
spices, betel-nut, copper pots, iron pots and hardware. The 
Nepalese are utterly regardless of statistics, but recent estimates 
value the exports and imports to and from the British provinces 
at 3 million sterling annually. Duties are levied on exports and 
imports, which will be noticed under the head of revenue. 

Manufactures. — The Newars are skilful workmen. Their bricks 
are excellent, and so also is their pottery, for which certain towns 
are famous, such as Themi and Noakote. As carpenters they excel, 
though the use of the large saw is still unknown, and planks are cut 
with chisel and mallet. Some of the wood carvings on the temples 
and large houses are most artistic in design and bold in execution, 
though unfortunately they are sometimes of a most obscene char- 
acter. The manufactures are few, consisting chiefly of coarse 
cotton cloths, paper made of the inner bark of the paper-plants 
(Daphne), bells, brass and iron utensils, weapons, and ornaments 
of gold and silver. 

Coinage. — At one time Nepal supplied Tibet with its silver coinage, 
but this was abandoned on account of the adulterations introduced 
by the Nepalese. The ancient coins, specimens of which are still to 
be met with, were made by hand. The modern coinage is struck by 
machinery, a regular mint having been established by Sir Jung 
Bahadur at Katmandu, and since improved by his successors. 

Government. — The Nepalese have relations with China, and 
occasionally send an embassy with presents to Peking. The 
British too have considerable influence with the government 
in regard to their foreign relations, and a British resident is 
stationed at Katmandu. But in all matters of domestic policy 
the Nepalese brook no interference, and they are most jealous 
of anything that has a tendency to encroach on their inde- 
pendence. Theoretically the government of Nepal is a pure 
despotism, and the maharajah is paramount. Practically, all 
real power has long been in the hands of the prime minister, 
and mueh of the modern history of the country consists of 
accounts of the struggles of the various factions for power. 
Under the prime minister there is a council, consisting of the 
relations of the king, the raj guru, the generals, and a few other 
officials known as kajis and sirdars and bhardars, which is con- 
sulted on all important business, and which forms a court of 
appeal for disputed cases from the courts of law. There arc 
separate civil and criminal courts, but the distinction is not 
always observed, as difficult cases are often transferred from 
one to the other. 

Law and Justice. — The old savage legal code with its ordeals by 
fire and water, and its punishments by mutilation and torture was 
abolished by Sir Jung Bahadur after his return from England in 
1 85 1. Treason, rebellion and desertion in war-time are punished 
by death. Bribery and peculation by public^ servants are punished 
by dismissal from office, and a fine and imprisonment, the latter of 
which can be commuted by payments at various rates, according 
to the nature of the offence. Murder and the killing of cows arc 
capital offences. Manslaughter and maiming cows are punished by 
imprisonment for life and other offences against the person or 
property by imprisonment or fine. Brahmans and women are 
exempted from capital punishment. Offences against caste are 
heavily punished by fine and imprisonment. In some cases indeed 
all the offender's property is confiscated, and he and his family may 
be sold as slaves. Bankruptcy laws have been recently introduced. 
The marriage laws are somewhat peculiar. Among the Gurkhas 
the laws resemble those of other Hindus as regards the marriage of 
widows, polygamy &c , but among the Newars every girl while still 
an infant is married with much ceremony to a bel fruit, which is 
then thrown into some sacred stream. . As the fate of the fruit is 
unknown, a Newari is supposed never to become a widow. At the 
age of puberty a husband is selected, but the woman can at any 
moment divorce herself by placing a betel-nut under her husband's 
pillow and taking her departure Adultery is punished by the im- 
prisonment and fine of both the adulteress and her paramour. Sati 
has been abolished in Nepal by law- 

Gaols. — There are three large prisons in the Nepal valley, one 
for males and two for females; there are also a considerablenumber 
of gaols throughout the country. The prisoners are kept in irons, 
and employed in public works of various sorts. They are allowed 
six pice a day for subsistence at the capital, and five pice in other 
places. Their relatives are allowed, to minister to their creature 
comforts. 

Slavery is an institution of the country, and all families of rank 
possess many slaves, who are employed in domestic and field work. 
They are generally treated well, and are carefully protected by law. 
The price of slaves ranges from Rs. 100 to Rs. 200. 

Revenue. — The revenue of Nepal is about one hundredand fifty 
lakhs of rupees, i.e. £10,000,000. The chief sources of it are the 
land-tax, customs, mines, forests and monopolies. About 10% 
of the tarai lands, and 20% of the hil! lands, are private property. 
Some lands were assigned by the Gurkhali rajas to Brahmans, 
soldiers and others, and these are untaxed. Others, which were 
the gifts of the old Newar kings, pay from 4 to 8 annas per bigha. 
All such grants of land, however, are subject to a heavy fine on the 
coronation of a new raja. Land which does not produce rice is 
lightly taxed, but in the valley of Nepal, and wherever rice is grown, 
the government tax or rent is one half of the produce of the land. 
Waste lands, when brought into cultivation, are rent free for ten 
years, after which for five years the tax is only 4 annas per bigha, 
and the cultivator receives one- tenth of the cleared land rent free 
for his life. A considerable revenue in the shape of royalty is 
obtained from mines of copper, iron ? &c- The taxes on merchandise 
amount to from 12 to 14% on the value of the goods carried to and 
from British India, and from 5 to 6% is charged on goods exported 
to Tibet. 

Army. — Much attention is devoted by the purkhalis to military 
matters and the bulic of that race may be said to be soldiers. The 
standing army consists of about 50,000 men. in affair state of effici- 
ency. Besides this force there is a reserve, consisting of men who 
have served for a few years and taken their discharge, but in case 
of necessity can be called on again to enter the ranks. These would 
probably raise the strength to between 70.000 and 80,000 men. 
The regiments are formed on the European system, and similarly 
drilled and officered. Each man carries in addition to a bayonet a 
kukri or native knife There is practically no cavalry, as the country 
is not suited for horses. The artillery, however, is on a larger scale, 
and consists nearly entirely of batteries of mountain artillery. 
There is a large arsenal well provided with supplies of gunpowder 
and military stores There are workshops where cannon are cast, 
and rifles and ammunition of all sorts turned out in large quantities, 
but of an indifferent quality* 

In addition to its own army, Nepal supplies to the British army in 
India a large force of- splendid soldiers, who were raised under the 
following circumstances. In 1815 the British enlisted three battalions 
of Gurkhas from amongst the soldiers of that race who were thrown 
out of employment, owing 10 the termination of the first phase of 
the war with Nepal. These regiments were styled the 1st. 2nd 
and 3rd Gurkhas, and were soon employed on active service. The 
1st and 2nd behaved with much gallantry at the siege and storming 
of Bharatpur, and in the First Sikh War, while the 2nd and 3rd 
won a great name for loyalty and courage during the Mutiny of 1857- 
58, especially at the siege of Delhi. This induced the British to 
raise, in 1858, two more battalions, which they numbered the 4th 
and 5th, and the whole Gurkha force has since proved its usefulness 
and loyalty on many occasions, particularly during the Afghan War 
of 1878-80, and on many frontier expeditions. Battalions have also 
been sent^ on service to Burma, Egypt, China and Tibet. The 
Gurkhas in the British service now consist of ten regiments of 
riflemen of two battalions each, and number about 20,000 men. 

History. — Nepal and the somewhat similar country of Kashmir 
are peculiar among the Hindu states of India in possessing an 
historical literature. The Nepalese VantQdvalt professes to start 
from a very early period in the Satya Yuga, when the present 
valley was still a lake. The earlier portion of it is devoted to 
the Satya and Treta Yugas, and contains mythological tales 
and traditions having reference to various sacred localities 
in the country. During these two Yugas, and also the Dwapur 
Yuga, the VantQdvalt deals in round numbers of thousands of 
years. 

In the beginning of the Kali Yuga, the Gupta dynasty is said 
to have been founded by Ne-Muni, from whom the country takes 
its name of Nepal. Lists are then given of the various dynasties, 
with the lengths of the reigns of the rajas. The dynasties 
mentioned are the Gupta, Ahir, Kirati, Somavanshi, Suryavanshi, 
Thakuri or first Rajput, Vaishya Thakuri, second Rajput and 
Karnataki dynasties. The country was then invaded by Mukun- 
dasena, and after his expulsion various Vaishya Thakuri dynasties 
are said to have held the throne for a period of 225 years. The 
chronology of the VamQdvalt up to this period is very confused 
and inaccurate; and, though the accounts of the various 
invasions and internal struggles, mixed up as they are with 
grotesque legends and tales, may be interesting and amusing, 
they can hardly be considered authentic. Some of the names of 
the rajas, and the dates of their reigns, have been determined 
by coins, the colophons of old MSS., and certain inscriptions 
on the temples and ancient buildings. For instance, Ancuvarma, 
of the Thakuri dynasty, reigned about a.d. 633, as he is men- 
tioned by the Chinese traveller Hsuan Tsang, who visited Nepal. 
His name too is found in an inscription still extant. In like 
manner it is ascertained from MSS. that Rudra-deva-Varma 
was reigning in 1008; Lakshmikama-deva from 1015 to 1040; 
Padma-deva, of the Vaishya Thakuri dynasty, in 1065; Mana- 
deva, of the second Rajput dynasty, in 1139; Ananta-Malla, 
1286-1302; Harisinha-deva, 1324; Jayastithi-Malla, 1385-1391. 
Much information as to the chronology of the various dynasties 
can be obtained from the catalogue of the Cambridge MSS. com- 
piled by Cecil Bendall, and also from his papers on the ancient 
coins of the country. Inscriptions too have been edited by 
Professor Biihler in the Indian Antiquary, vol. ix. Detailed 
lists of the rajas are to be found in Kirkpatrick's Account of 
Nepal f in Hodgson's Essays t Prinsep's papers in the Asiatic 
Society s Journal and Wright's History of Nepal. 

The records begin to be more accurate from the time of the 
invasion and conquest of the country by Harisinha-deva, the 
raja of Simraun, 1324. This raja was driven from Simraun 
by Tughlak Shah of Delhi, but seems to have found little difficulty 
in the conquest of Nepal. There were only four rajas of this 
Ayodhya dynasty, and then the throne was occupied by Jaya- 
bhadra-Malla, a descendant of Abhaya-Malla, one of the Rajput 
dynasty, who reigned in the 13th century* There were eight 
rajas of this dynasty. The seventh, Jayastithi-Malla, who 
reigned for forty-three years (1386-14 29), appears to have done 
much in forming codes of laws, and.introducing caste and its rules 
among the Newars. In the reign of the eighth raja, Yaksha- 
Malla, the kingdom was divided into four separate states — 
namely, Banepa, Bhatgaon or Bhaktapur, Kantipur or Kat- 
mandu, and Lalitapur or Patan. There was only one raja of 
Banepa, who died without issue. The Malla dynasty in the other 
three branches continued in power up to the conquest of the 
country by the Gurkhas in 1768. 

The Gurkhas claim descent from the Rajputs of Chitor, in 
Rajputana. They were driven out of their own country by 
the victorious Moslems, and took refuge in the hilly districts 
about Kumaon, whence they gradually pushed their way east- 
wards to Lamjung, Gurkha, Noakote and ultimately to the 
valley of Nepal, which under RajaPrithwiNarayana they finally 
captured. In the struggle which took place at Bhatgaon, Jaya- 
prakasa (the raja of Katmandu) was wounded, and shortly 
afterwards he died at Pashupati. Ranjit-Malla, the aged raja 
of Bhatgaon, was allowed to retire to Benares, where he ended 
his days. Tej Narsinha, the raja of Patan, was kept in confine- 
ment till his death. During the latter years of the war Jaya- 
prakasa applied to the British for assistance, and a small force, 
under Captain Kinloch, was sent into the tarai in 1765, but it was 
repulsed by the Gurkhas. 

Prithwi Narayana died in 1774. He left two sons, Pratapa- 
sinha Sah and Bahadur Sah. The former succeeded his father, 
but died in 1777, leaving an infant son, Rana Bahadur Sah. On 
the death of Pratapa-sinha, his brother, who had been in exile, 
returned to Nepal and became regent. The mother of the infant 
king, however, was opposed to him, and he had again to flee to 
Bettia, in British territory, where he remained till the death of 
the rani, when he again became regent, and continued so till 1795. 
During this time the Gurkhas were busily annexing all the 
neighbouring petty states, so that in 1790 their territories 
extended from Bhutan to the Sutlej river, and from Tibet to the 
British provinces. At length, in 1790, they invaded Tibet, and 
were at first successful; but they were thus brought into contact 
with the Chinese, who in 1791 sent a large force to invade Nepal. 
In 1792 the Chinese advanced as far as Noakote, and there 
dictated terms to the Nepalese. 

In 1791 the Gurkhas had entered into a commercial treaty with 
the British and hence, when hard pressed, they applied for 
assistance against the Chinese to Lord Cornwallis. In con- 
sequence of this Kirkpatrick was despatched to Nepal, and 
reached Noakote in the spring of 1792, but not till after peace had 
been concluded. One result of this embassy was the ratification 
of another commercial treaty on the 1st of March 1792. 

In 1795 Rana Bahadur removed his uncle, Bahadur Sah, from 
the regency, and two years subsequently put him to death. 
From this time up to 1799 the king, who seems to have been 
insane, perpetrated the most barbarous outrages, till at length 
his conduct became so intolerable that he was forced to abdicate 
in favour of his son, Girvan-yuddha VikramaSah, who was still 
an infant. Rana Bahadur once again recovered the throne in 
1804, but was assassinated in 1805. 

In October 1801 another treaty was signed by the British and 
Nepalese authorities, and a British resident was sent to the 
Nepalese court, but was withdrawn in 1803, owing to the conduct 
of the Nepalese. From this time the Nepalese carried on a 
system of encroachment and outrage on the frontier, which led 
to a declaration of war by the British in November 1814. At first 
the British attacks were directed against the western portion of 
the Nepalese territory, and under Generals Marly, Wood and 
Gillespie several disasters were met with. General Gillespie 
himself was killed while leading an assault on a small fort called 
Kalunga. General Ochterlony was more successful, and the 
Gurkhas were driven eastward beyond the Kali river, and began 
to negotiate for peace. Arms, however, were soon taken up again, 
and Ochterlony, who was put in command, in January 1816, 
advanced directly on the capital in the line of the route that is 
now in use. He soon fought his way as far as Mukwanpur, and 
the Nepalese sued for peace. A treaty was concluded in March, 
by which the Nepalese relinquished much of their newly acquired 
territory, and agreed to allow a British residency to be estab- 
lished at Katmandu. In November the raja died, and was 
succeeded by his infant son, Surendra Bikran Sah, the reins of 
government being held by General BhimsenaThapa. 

From this time the records for many years furnish little of 
interest except a history of struggles for office between the Thapa 
and Pandry factions, and futile attempts at forming combinations 
with other states in Hindustan against the British. 

In 1839 Bhimsena's enemies succeeded in driving him from 
power, and he committed suicide, or was murdered, in prison. 
The Kala Pandry faction then came into power, and there were 
frequent grave disputes with the British. War, however, was 
averted by the exertions of the resident, Mr Brian Hodgson. 

In 1843 Matabar Singh, the nephew of Bhimsena, returned 
from exile, soon got into favour at court, and speedily effected 
the destruction of his old enemies the Kala Pandrys, who were 
seized and executed in May 1843. At this time mention begins 
to be made of a nephew of Matabar Singh, Jung Bahadur, the 
eldest of a band of seven brothers, sons of a kaji or state official. 
He rose rapidly in the army and in favour at the court, especially 
with one of the ranis, who was of a most intriguing disposition. 
In 1844 he was a colonel, and on the 18th of May 1845 killed his 
uncle, and immediately, with the aid of the rani, took a prominent 
part in the government. After a short but turbulent interval of 
intrigue, he got rid of his enemies at one fell swoop, by what is 
known as the Kot massacre, on the 15th of September 1846. 
From that time till the day of his death Jung Bahadur was in 
reality the ruler of Nepal. His old friend, the rani, was banished, 
and all posts of any consequence in the state were filled by Jung, 
his brothers and other relatives. In 1850, finding himself 
securely seated in power, Jung Bahadur paid a visit to England, 
which made a great impression on his acute intellect, and ever 
after he professed and proved himself to be a stanch friend of the 
British. On his return in 1851 he at once devoted himself to 
reforming the administration of the country, and, whatever may 
have been the means by which he gained power, it must be 
allowed that he exercised it so as to prove himself the greatest 
benefactor his country has ever possessed. In 1853 a treaty for 
the extradition of criminals was proposed, but it was not ratified 
till February 1855. In 1854 the Nepalese entered into a war 
with Tibet, which lasted with varying success till March 1856, 
when peace was concluded on terms very favourable to Nepal. 

In June 1857 intelligence of the mutiny cf the native troops in 
Hindustan reached Nepal, and produced much excitement. Jung 
Bahadur, in spite of great opposition, stood firm as a friend of the 
British. On the 26th June 4000 troops were sent off to assist, 
and these rendered good service in the campaign against the 
mutineers. Jung himself followed on the 10th of December, with 
a force of 8000 men, 500 artillerymen and 24 guns, but too late 
to be of much use. Many of the mutineers and rebels, including 
the infamous Nana Sahib, took refuge in the Nepalese tarai, 
and it was not till the end of 1859 that they were finally swept 
out of the country. The Nana was said to have died of fever in 
the tarai, and it is probable that this was the case. His wives 
and a few attendants resided for many years near Katmandu. 

In return for the aid afforded to the British, Jung Bahadur was 
well rewarded. He was created a G.C.B., and in 1873 a G.C.S.I., 
honours of which he was not a little proud. The troops employed 
received food and pay from the day of leaving Katmandu; 
handsome donations were given to those severely wounded, and 
to the relatives of the killed; great quantities of muskets and 
rifles were presented to the Nepalese government; and, to crown 
all, a large portion of the tarai was restored to Nepal. This 
ground contains most valuable sal and sisu forests, and yields a 
revenue of several lakhs of rupees yearly. 

From the termination of the mutiny Nepalese history has been 
uneventful. The country has been prosperous, and the relations 
with the British have continued to be most friendly. Neverthe- 
less the restrictions on commerce, and the prohibitions against 
Europeans entering the country, or travelling beyond certain 
narrow limits, are as rigidly enforced as they were a hundred 
years ago. Sir Jung Bahadur died suddenly in the tarai in 1877. 
In spite of all the exertions he had made to bring about a better 
state of things, three of his wives were allowed to immolate 
themselves on his funeral pyre. His brother, Sir Ranadip Singh 
Bahadur, G.C.S.I., succeeded him as prime minister. Shortly 
after his accession to power a plot was formed against him, but 
nearly forty of the conspirators were seized and executed, while 
others escaped into exile. He was, however, murdered in 1885 
and was succeeded by his nephew Sir Shamsher Jung, G.C.S.I., 
who died in 1901 and was succeeded by his brother Deb Shamsher 
Jung. But in June of that year a palace revolution placed another 
brother, Chandra Shamsher Jung, in power, whilst Deb Shamsher 
fled to India. Maharajah Chandra Shamsher has ruled Nepal 
with much ability. He gave effective aid to the British during the 
Tibet war of 1904, and the relations with the government of 
India became more cordial after his accession to power. In 
1906 Chandra Shamsher was created a G. C.S.I. , and in 1908 he 
visited England as a guest of the government, when he was in- 
vested with the G.C.B. by King Edward VII. He was also made 
a major-general in the British army, and honorary colonel of the 
4th Gurkha Rifles. 

For authorities see Dr Daniel Wright, History of Nepal (1877); 
Colonel Kirkpatrick, Account of Nepal; Brian Houghton Hodgson's 
essays; Dr H. A. Oldfield's sketches; Sir C. M. Aitchison, Treaties 
and Engagements; Sir Joseph Hooker's writings; and Sir Richard 
Temple, Hyderabad and Nepal (1887). . (D. Wr.; H. Wy.) 

NEPENTHES (Gr. vr\TT€vQk, sc. <f>apfxaKov, a drug that takes 
away grief, from vr\- privative, and 7re^os, " grief "), an 
Egyptian drug spoken of by Homer in the Odyssey (iv. 221). 
Generally in the form " nepenthe " the name is given to any 
drug having a like property, and also occasionally to the herb 
or plant from which such a drug is produced. It is also applied 
to a special genus of plants, chiefly East Indian, known as the 
»" pitcher-plants/' on account of the formation of the leaves. 
NEPHELINE, a rock-forming mineral consisting of sodium, 
potassium and aluminium silicate, NaeKzAlgSigOM* Its crystals 
belong to the hexagonal system, and usually have the form of 
a short six-sided prism terminated by the basal plane. The 
unsymmetrical etched figures produced artificially on the 
prism faces indicate, however, that the crystals are hemimorphic 
and tetartohedral, the only element of symmetry being a polar 
hexad axis. The hardness is 5^. The specific gravity (2-6), 
the low index of refraction and the feeble double refraction are 
nearly the same as in quartz; but since in.nepheline the sign of 
the double refraction is negative, whilst in quartz it is positive, 
the two minerals are readily distinguished under the microscope. 
An important determinative character of nepheline is the ease 
with which it is decomposed by hydrochloric acid, with separa- 
tion of gelatinous silica (which may be readily stained by 
colouring matters) and cubes of salt. A clear crystal of nepheline 
when immersed in acid becomes for this reason cloudy; hence 
the name nepheline, proposed by R. J. Haiiy in 1801, from Gr. 
ve<j>ekrj, a cloud. 

Although in naturally occurring nepheline sodium and potas- 
sium are always present in approximately the atomic ratio 3:1, 
artificially prepared crystals have the composition NaAlSiO^ 
the corresponding potassium compound, KAlSi04, which is 
the mineral kaliophilite, has also been prepared artificially. 
It has therefore been suggested that the orthosilicate formula, 
(NaK)AlSi0 4 , represents the true composition of nepheline. 

The mineral is one specially liable to alteration, and in the 
laboratory various substitution products of nepheline have been 
prepared. In nature it is frequently altered to zeolites (especially 
natrolite), sodalite, kaolin, or compact muscovite. Gieseckite 
and liebenerite are pseudomorphs. 

Two varieties of nepheline are distinguished, differing in their 
external appearance and in their mode of occurrence, being 
analogous in these respects to sanidine or glassy orthoclase and 
common orthoclase respectively. " Glassy nepheline " has the 
form of small, colourless, transparent crystals and grains with 
a vitreous lustre. It is characteristic of the later volcanic rocks 
rich in alkalis, such as phonolite, nepheline-basalt, leucite- 
basalt, &c, and also of certain dike-rocks, such as tinguaite. 
The best crystals are those which occur with mica, sanidine, 
garnet, &c, in the crystal-lined cavities of the ejected blocks 
of Monte Somma, Vesuvius. The other variety, known as 
elaeolite, occurs as large, rough crystals, or more often as 
irregular masses, which have a greasy lustre and are opaque, or 
at most translucent, with a reddish, greenish, brownish or grey 
colour. It forms an essential constituent of certain alkaline 
plutonic rocks of the nepheline-syenite series, which are typically 
developed in southern Norway. 

The colour and greasy lustre of elaeolite (a name given by 
M. H. Klaproth in 1809, from Gr. e\aiov, oil, and \tBos, stone; 
Ger. Fettstein) are due to the presence of numerous microscopic 
enclosures of other minerals, possibly augite or hornblende. 
These enclosures sometimes give rise to a chatoyant effect like 
that of cat's-eye and cymophane; and elaeolite when of a good 
green or red colour and showing a distinct band of light is some- 
times cut as a gem-stone with a convex surface. 

Closely allied to nepheline, and occurring with it in some 
nepheline-syenites, is the species cancrinite, which has the 
composition H6Na6Ca(NaC0 3 )2Als(Si04)9. It is frequently of 
a bright yellow colour, and has sometimes been cut as a gem- 
stone. (L. J. S.) 


NEPHELINE-SYENITE, or Elaeolite-syenite, a noncrystal- 
line plutonic rock which consists largely of nepheline and 
alkali felspar. The rocks are mostly pale coloured, grey or pink, 
and in general appearance they are not unlike granites, but dark 
green varieties are also known. They do not contain quartz, 
as that mineral and nepheline are mutually exclusive. From 
ordinary syenites they are distinguished not only by the presence 
of nepheline but also by the occurrence of many other minerals 
rich in alkalis or in rare earths. Orthoclase and albite are the 
principal felspars; usually they are intergrown to form perthite. 
In some rocks the potash felspar, in others the soda felspar 
predominates. Soda-lime felspars such as oligoclase and andesine 
are rare or entirely absent. Fresh clear microcline is very char- 
acteristic of some types of nepheline-syenite. Sodalite, colourless 
and transparent in the slides, but frequently pale blue in the 
hand specimens, is the principal felspathoid mineral in addition 
to nepheline. As a rule these two crystallize before felspar, 
but they may occur in perthitic intergrowth with it. The 
commonest ferro-magnesian mineral is pale green augite, which 
may be surrounded by rims of dark-green, pleochroic soda-augite 
(aegirine). The latter forms long flat prisms or bundles of 
radiating needles. A dark reddish-brown biotite is very common 
in some of these rocks and a white mica, probably not muscovite 
but lepidolite, is occasionally present. The hornblende may be 
brown, brownish-green, blue or blue-black, belonging as a rule 
to the varieties which contain soda; it is often intergrown with 
the pyroxene or enclosed in it*. The dark-brown trichnic. horn- 
blende aenigmatite occurs also in these rocks. Olivine is rare, 
but may be found in some basic forms of nepheline-syenite. 

The commonest accessories are sphene, zircon, iron ores and 
apatite. Cancrinite occurs in several nepheline-syenites; in 
others there is fluor-spar or melanite garnet. A great number 
of interesting and rare minerals have been recorded from 
nepheline-syenites and the pegmatite veins which intersect 
them. Among these we may mention eudialyte, eukolite, mos- 
andrite, rinkite, johnstrupite, lavenite, hiortdahlite, perofskite 
and lamprophyllite. Many of these contain fluorine and the 
rare earths. 

Nepheline-syenites are rare rocks; there is only one occurrence 
in Great Britain and one in France and Portugal. They are 
known also in Bohemia and in several places in Norway, Sweden 
and Finland. In America these rocks have been found in Texas, 
Arkansas and Massachussetts, also in Ontario, British Columbia 
and Brazil. South Africa, Madagascar, India, Tasmania, Timor 
and Turkestan are other localities for the rocks of this series. 
They exhibit also a remarkable individuality as each occurrence 
has its own special features; moreover a variety of types 
characterizes each occurrence, as these rocks are very variable. 
For these reasons, together with the numerous rare minerals 
they contain, they have attracted a great deal of attention from 
petrographers. 

Many types of nepheline-syenite have received designations 
derived from the localities in which they were discovered. The 
laurdalites (from Laurdal in Norway) are grey or pinkish, and in 
many ways closely resemble the la urvi kites of southern Norway, 
with which they occur. They contain anorthoclasc felspars of 
lozenge-shaped forms, biotite or greenish augite, much apatite and 
sometimes olivine. Some of these rocks arc porphyritic. The 
foyaites include the greater number of known nepheline-syenites 
and are called after Foya in the Serra de Monchique (southern 
Portugal), from which they were first 'described. They are grey, 
green or reddish, and mostly of massive structure with preponderat- 
ing potash felspar, some nepheline, and a variable (often small) 
amount of femic minerals. Pyroxene-, hornblende- and biotite- 
foyaites have been recognized according to their mineral com- 
position. Examples of the first-named occur in southern Norway 
with the laurdalites; they contain aegirine and black mica. At 
Alno Island in the Gulf of Bothnia (Sweden) similar rocks are found 
bearing enclosures or altered limestone with wollastonite and 
scapolite. In Siebenburgen (Hungary) there is a well-known rock 
of this group, very rich in microcline, blue^ sodaliteand cancrinite. 
It contains also orthoclase, nepheline, biotite, aegirine, acmite, &c. 
To this type the name ditroite has been given from the place where 
it occurs (Ditro). Pyroxene-foyaite has been described also from 
Pouzac in the Pyrenees (S. France). Mica-foyaite is not very 
common, but is known at Miask in the Ural Mountains (miaskite), 
where it is coarse-grained, and contains black mica, sodalite and 
cancrinite. The hornblende-foyaites are usually brown or blue, 
and intensely dichroic, but may contain also biotite or augite. 
Rocks of this class occur in Brazil (Serra de Tingua) containing 
sodalite and often much augite, in the western Sahara and Cape 
Verde Islands; also at Zwarte Koppies in the Transvaal, Madagascar, 
Sao Paulo (in Brazil), Paisano Pass (West Texas) and Montreal, 
Canada. The rock of Salem, Mass., U.S.A., is a mica-foyaite rich in 
albite and aegirine ; it accompanies granite and essexite. 

Litchfieldite is another well-marked type of nepheline-syenite, 
in which albite is the dominant felspar. It is named after Litch- 
field, Maine, U.S.A., where it occurs in scattered blocks. Biotite, 
cancrinite and sodalite are characteristic of this rock. A similar 
nepheline-syenite is known from Hastings Co., Ontario, and con- 
tains hardly any orthoclase, but onlyalbite felspar. . Nepheline is 
very abundant and there is also cancrinite, sodalite, scapolite, calcite, 
biotite and hornblende. The lujaurites are distinguished from the 
rocks above described by their dark colour, which is due to the 
abundance of minerals such as augite, aegirine, arfvedsonite and 
other kinds of amphibole. Typical examples are known near Lujaur 
on the White Sea, where tney^ occur with umptekites and other 
very peculiar rocks. Other localities for this group are at Tulianehaab 
t in Greenland (with sodalite-syenite) ; at their margins they contain 
pseudomorphs after leucite. The lujaurites frequently have a 
parallel-banding or gneissose structure. 

Sodalite-syenites in which sodalite very largely or completely 
takes the place of nepheline occur in Greenland, where they contain 
also microcline-perthite, aegirine, arfvedsonite and eudialyte- 
Cancrinite-syenite, with a large percentage of cancrinite, has been 
described from Dalekarlia (Sweden) and from Finland. We may 
also mention urtite from Lujaur Urt on the White Sea, which con- 
sists very largely of nepheline, with aegirine and apatite, but no 
felspar. Jacupirangite (from Jacupiranga in Brazil) is a blackish 
rock composed of titaniferous augite, magnetite, ilmenite, perofskite 
and nepheline, with secondary biotite. 

The chemical peculiarities of the nepheline-syemtes are well 
marked, as will be seen from the following analyses. They are 
exceedingly rich in alkalis and in alumina (hence the abundance of 
felspathoids and alkali felspars) with silica varying from 50 to 56%, 
while lime, magnesia and iron are never present in great quantity, 
though somewhat more variable than the other components. As a 
group, also, these rocks have a low specific gravity. 

	SiOj. 
	AI2O1. 
	FeO. 
	FcaOj. 
	CaO. 
	MgO. 
	K2O. 
	NasO. 
	Laurdalite . 
	Ditroite 
	Litchfieldite 
	Lujaurite . 
	54*55 
	56-30 
	60-39 
	54-14 
	19-07 
	24-14 
	22-57 
	20*6l 
	3-12 
	2-26 
	2-08 
	2-41 
	1-99 
	0-42 
	3*28 
	3-15 
	0-69 
	0-32 
	1-85 
	1-98 
	0-13 
	0-13 
	0-83 
	4.84 
	6-79 
	4*77 
	5*25 
	7-67 
	9-28 
	8-44 
	9-87 
	a- s. f.) 


NEPHELINITES. The group of effusive rocks which contains 
nepheline with plagioclase felspar is subdivided into nepheline- 
tephrites and nephetine-basanites, while those which contain 
nepheline but not felspar are nephelinites and nepheline-basalts. 
The tephrites differ from the basanites in the absence of olivine, 
and the same distinction subsists between the nephelinites and 
nepheline-basalts. 

Lavas with nepheline, plagioclase and augite = nepheline- 
tephrites. 

Lavas with nepheline, plagioclase, augite and olivine = nepheline- 
• basanites. 

Lavas with nepheline and augite = nephelinites. 

Lavas with nepheline, augite and olivine = nepheline-basalts. 

In their essential and accessory minerals, appearance and 
structure, these rocks have much in common, and they tend to 
occur in a natural association as basic rocks comparatively rich 
in alkalis and alumina. The nephelinites and tephrites are rather 
closely linked to the phonolites and pass into them by various 
gradations. They are usually richer in alkalis and silica and 
contain less iron, lime and magnesia than the basanites and 
nepheline-basalts, a difference which finds expression in the 
presence of olivine and the smaller amount of felspars and 
felspathoids in the latter. 

The nepheline is colourless and transparent when fresh, often 
in six-sided prisms, but also as irregular interstitial masses 
filling the spaces between the other minerals, and hard to identify 
owing to its low double refraction and frequent decomposition. 
Leucite appears in some tephrites; haiiyne is more frequent as 
small dodecahedra often filled with black inclusions. The 
augite varies a gcod deal, being bright green or dark green 
(aegirine) and rich in sdda in some tephrites and nephelinites, 
while in basanites and basalts it is often brown " basaltic " 
augite or purple " titaniferous " augite. It has often good 
crystalline form, and occurs as eight-sided monoclinic prisms, 
but the soda augites may be of late crystallization and form 
mossy or irregular growths in the matrix. Brown hornblende is 
much less common, and a red biotite is very characteristic of 
certain nephelinites. Of the felspars, labradorite is probably the 
most common, with more acid varieties of plagioclase. Sanidine 
is by no means absent, but may be considered as an accessory. 
The olivine presents no peculiarities. Mclilite, perofskite, 
pseudobrookite, melanite garnet, iron oxides, apatite and 
chromite are occasionally met with. 

All these rocks are practically confined to lavas of Tertiary and 
recent age, though some occur as dikes or small intrusive masses. 
The plutonic facies of these rocks are found among thetheralites, 
shonkinites, essexites and ijolites. In the British Isles they are 
exceedingly scarce, though nepheline-basanite occurs in a dike 
which is presumably Tertiary, cutting the Triassic rocks at Butterton 
in Staffordshire, and nepheline-basalt has been found in a single 
neck at John o* Groat's in Caithness and at one or two places near 
North^ Berwick in Haddingtonshire. They attain a great develop- 
ment in the Canary Islands (Teneriffe, Grand Canary, &c.) and in 
the Azores, Cape Verde Islands and Fernando Noronha. In Germany 
they are represented among the Tertiary eruptive rocks of the 
Rhine district and Thuringia, at the extinct craters of the Eiffel 
and at the Kaiserstuhl. In central Bohemia there are many occur- 
rences of nepheline-tephrites, basanites and basalts which though 
fine grained contain all their minerals in excellent preservation. 
The nephelinite of Katzenbuckel in the Odenwald is well known. 
Contrasted with the phonolites and leucitophyres these rocks are 
scarce in Italy and the Mediterranean province, but leucite-bearing 
nepheline-tephrites occur at Monte Vulture and nepheline-basalts in 
Tripoli. In America these rocks occur in Texas, in the Bearpaw 
Mountains of Montana and at Cripple Creek, Colorado. From 
Argentina some members have been described: thay have a great 
extension in East Africa (Somaliland and Masai-land) and occur also 
in North Nigeria. A few also have been described from New South 
Wales, New Zealand (Dunedin) and Tasmania. (J. S. F.) 


NEPHEW, the son of a brother or sister. The word is adapted 
from Fr. neveu, Lat. nepos (originally " grandson " or " de- 
scendant "). The O. Eng. nefa survived in the form neve till the 
15th century; this represents the Teutonic branch, cf. Ger. 
Neffe, Dutch neef; the ultimate root is seen in the cognate 
Gr. veiroSeSj " descendants," aveptSs, " kinsman," and Sans. 
napdt t napt, " descendants " or " descendant." The correlative 
" niece," the daughter of a brother or sister, is from Fr. niece, 
Lat. neptis, the feminine form of nepos; the O. Eng. word was nift r 
cf. Ger. Nichtc. A euphemistic use of " nephew " is that of the 
natural son of a pope, cardinal or other ecclesiastic; and from 
the practice of granting preferments to such children the word 
" nepotism " is used of any favouritism shown in finding positions 
for a man's family. 


NEPI (anc. Nepet or Nepete), a town and episcopal see of Italy, 
in the province of Rome, 7$ m. S.W. of the town of Civita 
Castellana, 738 ft. above sea-level. Pop. (1901) 2973. The site, 
surrounded by ravines and accessible only on the \V., is naturally 
strong and characteristic of an Etruscan town; on this side 
there is a considerable fragment of the ancient Etruscan wall, 
built of rectangular blocks of tufa (whether the rest of the site 
was protected by walls is uncertain), and a ruined castle, erected 
by Antonio da Sangallo the elder in 1499, for Pope Alexander VL, 
and restored by Pope Paul III. The municipio (town hall) is 
from the designs of Vignola, and contains some ancient 
inscriptions. The cathedral was burnt down by the French in 1789 
and restored in 1831. A mile and a half E.N.E. is the Roman- 
esque church of S Elia, founded about a.d. 1000, with frescoes 
of the period. It contains a pulpit of the time of Pope Gregory 
IV. (827-844), the sculptures of which are scattered about the 
church (F. Mazzanti in Nuovo Bollettino 6/ Archaeologia Cristiana, 
1896, 34). 

Nepet had become Roman before 386 B.C., when Livy speaks 
of it and Sutrium as the keys of Etruria. In that year it was 
surrendered to the Etruscans and recovered by the Romans, 
who beheaded the authors of its surrender. It became a colony 
in 383 B.C. It was among the twelve Latin colonies that refused 
further help to Rome in 209 b.c. After the Social War it became 
a municiptum. It is hardly mentioned in imperial times, except 
as a station on the road (Via Amerina) which diverged from the 
Via Cassia near the modern Settevene and ran to Ameria and 
Tuder. In the 8th century a.d. it was for a short while the seat 
of a dukedom. 

See G. Dennis, Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria (London, 1883, 
i. 82). (T. As.) 


NEPOMUK (or Pomuk), JOHN OF, the national saint of 
Bohemia. It is necessary to distinguish between the John of 
Nepomuk of history and the legendary one. In 1393 a dispute 
arose between King Wenceslaus IV. of Bohemia and the arch- 
bishop of Prague, John of Jenzenstein. Wenceslaus, wishing to 
found a new bishopric in south-western Bohemia, determined to 
seize the revenues of the abbey of Kladrub as soon as the aged 
abbot Racek should die. The archbishop opposed this plan, 
and by his orders his vicar-general, John of Pomuk — son of a 
German named Wolfel, a citizen of Pomuk — advised the monks 
to elect a new abbot immediately after Racek's death. This 
greatly incensed the king, who summoned ,the archbishop and 
some of his clergy — among whom was Pomuk — to appear before 
him. He ordered them to be immediately arrested, and though 
the archbishop escaped his four companions — among them 
Pomuk — were seized and subjected to cruel torture. They were 
ordered to abandon the archbishop. Three of them consented, 
but Pomuk, who refused to submit and was already on the point 
of death, was carried to the bridge of Prague and thrown into 
the Vltava. It is difficult to connect this historical event with 
the legend of St John of Nepomuk, who was canonized by the 
church of Rome in 1729, mainly by the influence of the Jesuits, 
who hoped that this new cult would obliterate the memory of 
Hus. The Austrian chronicler Thomas Ebendorffer of Hasel- 
bach, who lived two generations later, first states that it was 
reported that King Wenceslaus had ordered that the confessor 
of his queen — an office that John of Pomuk never held — should 
be thrown into the Vltava because he would not reveal the secret 
of confession. The story is afterwards told in greater detail by 
the untrustworthy Bohemian historian Wenceslaus Hajek. It 
appears certain that the person canonized in 1729 was not the 
historical John of Pomuk or Nepomuk. 

See A. H. Wratislaw, Life, Legend and Canonization of St John 
Nepomuk (1873), a valuable work founded on the best Bohemian 
authorities; also A. Frind, Der geschichUiche Heilige Johann von 
Nepomuk (1861); O. Abel, Die Legende vom keiligen Johann von 
Nepomuk (1855); and particularly vol. iii. of W. W. Tomek's 
History of the Townof Prague (Czech) (12 vols., Prague, 1855-1901). 


NEPOS, CORNELIUS (c. 90-24 B.C.), Roman historian, friend 
of Catullus, Cicero and At ticus, was born in Upper Italy (perhaps 
at Verona or Ticinum). He wrote: Chronica, an epitome of 
universal history; Exempla, a collection of anecdotes after the 
style of Valerius Maximus; letters to Cicero; lives of Cato the 
elder and Cicero; and De viris illustribus, parallel lives of dis- 
tinguished Romans and foreigners, in sixteen books. One section 
of this voluminous work (De excellentibus ducibus exterarum 
gentium, more commonly known as Vitae excellentium impera- 
torum) and the biographies of Cato and Atticus from another 
(De Latinis historicis) have been preserved. Erotic poems and 
a geographical treatise are also attributed to him. Nepos is not 
altogether happy in the subjects of his biographies, and he writes 
rather as a panegyrist than as a biographer, although he can 
rebuke his own countrymen on occasion. The Lives contain 

	xix. 13 

many errors (especially in chronology), but supply information 
not found elsewhere. The language is as a rule simple and 
correct. The Lives were formerly attributed to Aemilius Probus 
of the 4th century a.d.; but the view maintained by Lambinus 
(in his famous edition, 1 569)— that they are all the work of Nepos 
— is now generally accepted. A dedicatory epigram written by 
Probus to the emperor Theodosius and inserted after the life of 
Hannibal, was the origin of the mistake. This dedication, if 
genuine, would only prove that Probus copied (and perhaps modi- 
fied and abridged) the work. In modern times G. F. Unger (Der 
sogenannleC.N., 1881) has attempted to prove that the author 
was Hyginus, but his theory has not been favourably received. 

Editions of the Lives (especially selections) are extremely numer- 
ous; text by E. O. Winstedt (Oxford, 1904), C. L. Roth (1881), 
C. G. Cobet (1881), C. Halm and A. Fleckeisen (1889), with lexicon 
for school use; with notes, O. Browning and W. R. Inge (1888), 
J. C. Rolfe (U.S. 1894), A. Weidner and J. Schmidt (1902), C. Erbe 
(1892), C. Nipperdey and B. Lupus (ed. maj., 1879, school ed., 
1895), J- Siebehs and O. Stange (1897). 


NEPOS, JULIUS, the last but one of the Roman emperors 
of the West (474-475). He was a nephew of Marcellinus, prince 
of Dalmatia, whom he succeeded in his principality. After 
the death of Olybrius the throne of the West remained vacant 
for some months, during which Italy was abandoned to bar- 
barians. Being connected by marriage with Leo I., emperor of 
the East, he was selected by him to succeed Olybrius on the 
Western throne, and proclaimed at Ravenna. After capturing 
his rival Glycerius, who had been nominated by the army in 
473, at the mouth of the Tiber, he was recognized as emperor 
in Rome, Italy and Gaul. The only event of the reign of Nepos 
was the inglorious cession to the Visigoths of the province of 
Auvergne. In 475 Orestes, father of Augustulus, afterwards 
the last emperor of the West, raised the standard of revolt and 
marched against Nepos at Ravenna. The emperor fled into 
Dalmatia, and continued to reside at Salona until his assassina- 
tion by two of his own officers in 48b, possibly at the instigation 
of Glycerius, who had been compelled to enter the church and 
had been appointed bishop of Salona. 

See Tillemont, Hist, des empereurs t vi. ; Gibbon, Decline and 
Fall, ch. 36. 


NEPTUNE (Lat. Neptunus), an Italian god, of unknown 
origin and meaning, paired with Salacia, possibly the goddess 
of the salt water. At an early date (399 B.C.) he was identified 
with the Greek Poseidon (q.v.), when the Sibylline books ordered 
a lectisternium in his honour (Livy v. 13). His festival, Nep- 
tunalia, at which tents were made from the branches of trees, 
was celebrated on the 23rd of July, and his temple, containing a 
famous marine group by Scopas, stood near the Circus Flaminius. 
In earlier times it was the god Fortunus who was thanked for naval 
victories; but Sextus Pompeius called himself son of Neptune, 
and Agrippa dedicated to Neptune a temple (Basilica Neptuni) in 
the Campus Martius in honour of the naval victory of Actium. 


NEPTUNE, in astronomy, the outermost known planet of 
our solar system ; its symbol is W . Its distance from the sun is 
a little more than 30 astronomical units, i.e. 30 times the mean 
distance of the earth from the sun, or about 2,796,000,000 m. 
It deviates greatly from Bode's law, which would give a 
distance of nearly 39. Its orbit is more nearly circular than 
that of any other major planet, Venus excepted. Its time of 
revolution is 165 years. Being of the 8th stellar magnitude it 
is invisible to the naked eye. In a small telescope it cannot 
be distinguished from a fixed star, but in a large one it is seen 
to have a disk about 2-3* in diameter, of a pale bluish hue. No 
features and no change of appearance can be detected upon it, so 
that observation can give no indication of its rotation. Both its 
optical aspect and the study of its spectrum seem to show that it 
resembles Uranus. Its spectrum shows marked absorption-bands 
in the red and yellow, indicating an atmosphere of great depth 
of which hydrogen would seem to be a constituent. (See Planet.) 

Only a single satellite of Neptune is yet known. This was dis- 
covered by William Lassell soon after the discovery of the planet. 
Its period of revolution is $d. 21 h. Its motion is retrograde, in a 
plane making an angle of about 35 with the orbit of the planet. 
This was the first case of retrograde motion found in any of the 
planets or satellites of the solar system. The most noteworthy feature 
connected with the satellite is a secular change which is going on in 
the position of its orbital plane. Were the planet spherical in form, 
no such change could occur, except an extremely slow one produced 
by the action of the sun. The change is therefore attributed to a 
considerable ellipticity of the planet, which is thus inferred to be in 
rapid rotation. It will ultimately be possible to determine from this 
motion the position of the a^is of rotation of Neptune with much 
greater precision than it could possibly be directly observed. 

The following elements of the satellite were determined by H. 
Struve from all the observations available up to 1892: 

	Varying Elements of Neptune's Satellite. 
	Inclination to earth's equator . 119 -35°— o -165° (t-1890) 
	R.A. of node on earth's equator . 185 -i5°-fo .148 (t-1890) 
	Distance from node at epoch . 234 -42 
	Mean daily motion .... 61*25748° 
	Mean distance at logA = 1-47814 16 -271* 
	Epoch, 1890, Jan. o, Greenwich 
	mean noon 
	The eccentricity, if any, is too small to be certainly determined. 
	From the above mean distance is derived as the mass of Neptune 
	j? Jrnj. The motion of Uranus gives a mass t^Itt* 

Discovery of Neptune. — The detection of Neptune through 
its action upon Uranus before its existence had been made known 
by observation is a striking example of the precision reached 
by the theory of the celestial motions. So many agencies were 
concerned in the final discovery that the whole forms one of 
the most interesting chapters in the history of astronomy. The 
planet Uranus, before its actual discovery by Sir William 
Herschel in 1781, had been observed as a fixed star on at least 
17 other occasions, beginning with Flamsteed in 1690. In 1820 
Alexis Bouvard of Paris constructed tables of the motion of 
Jupiter, Saturn and Uranus, based upon a discussion of observa- 
tions up to that year. Using the mutual perturbations of these 
planets as developed by Laplace in the Micanique CHeste, he 
was enabled satisfactorily to represent the observed positions 
of Jupiter and Saturn; but the case was entirely different 
with Uranus. It was found impossible to represent all the 
observations within admissible limits of error, the outstanding 
differences between theory and observation exceeding 1'. In 
these circumstances one of two courses had to be adopted, 
either to obtain the best general representation of all the observa- 
tions, which would result in the tables being certainly erroneous, 
or to reject the older observations which might be affected with 
errors, and base the tables only on those made since the discovery 
by Herschel. A few years of observation showed that Uranus 
was deviating from the new tables to an extent greater than 
could be attributed to legitimate errors of theory of observation, 
and the question of the cause thus became of growing interest. 
Among the investigators of the question was F. W. Bessel, 1 
who tried to reconcile the difficulty by an increase of the mass 
of Saturn, but found that he could do so only by assigning a 
mass not otherwise admissible. Although the idea that the 
deviations were probably due to the action of an ultra-Uranian 
planet was entertained by Bouvard, Bessel and doubtless 
others, it would seem that the first clear statement of a con- 
viction that such was the case, and that it was advisable to 
reach some conclusion as to the position of the disturbing body, 
was expressed by the Rev. T. J. Hussey, an English amateur 
astronomer. In a letter to Sir George B. Airy in 1834 he inquired 
Airy's views of the subject, and offered to search for the planet 
with his own equatorial if the required estimate of its position 
could be supplied. Airy expressed himself as not fully satisfied 
that the deviation might not arise from errors in the perturba- 
tions. He therefore was not certain of any extraneous action; 
but even if there was, he doubted the possibility of determining 
the place of a planet which might produce it. In 1837 Bouvard, 
in conjunction with his nephew Eugene, was again working 
on the problem; but it does not seem that they went farther 
than to collect observations and to compare the results with 
Bouvard's tables. 

In 1835 F. B. G. Nicolai, director of the observatory at 
Mannheim, in discussing the motion of Halley's comet,* con- 
sidered the possibility that it was acted upon by an ultra- 

	1 Brief wechsel zivischen Oilers u. Bessel, ii. 250 (Oct. 9, 1823). 

Uranian planet, the existence of which was made probable by 
the disagreement between the older and more recent observations. 2 

In 1838 Airy showed in a letter to the Astronomische Nach- 
rickten that not only the heliocentric longitude, but the tabulated 
radius vector of Uranus was largely in error, but made no 
suggestions as to the cause. 3 

In 1843 the Royal Society of Sciences of Gottingen offered 
a prize of 50 ducats for a satisfactory working up of the whole 
theory of the motions of Uranus, assigning September 1846 
as the time within which competing papers should be presented. 

It is also recorded that Bessel, during a visit to England 
in 1842, in a conversation with Sir John Herschel, expressed 
the conviction that Uranus was disturbed by an unknown 
planet, and announced his intention of taking up the subject. 4 
He went so far as to set his assistant Fleming at the work of 
reducing the observations, but died before more was done. 

The question had now reached a stage when it needed only 
a vigorous effort by an able mathematician to solve the problem. 
Such a man was found in John Couch Adams, then a student 
of St John's College, Cambridge, who seriously attacked the 
problem in 1843, the year in 'which he took his bachelor's degree. 
He soon found that the observations of Uranus could be fairly 
well represented by the action of a planet moving in a radius 
of twice the mean distance of Uranus, which would closely 
correspond to Bode's law. During the two following years he 
investigated the possible eccentricity of the orbit, and in 
September 1845 communicated his results to Professor James 
Challis. In 1845, about the 1st of November, Adams also sent 
his completed elements to Airy, stating that according to his 
calculations the observed irregularities in the motion of Uranus 
could be accounted for by the action of an exterior planet, of 
which the motions and orbital elements, were given. It is 
worthy of note that the heliocentric longitude of the unknown 
body as derived from these- elements is only between one and 
two degrees in error, while the planet was within half a degree 
of the ecliptic. Two or three evenings assiduously devoted to 
the search could not therefore have failed to make the planet 
known. Adams's paper was accompanied by a comparison of 
his theory with the observations of Uranus from 1780, showing 
an excellent agreement. Airy in replying to this letter inquired 
whether the assumed perturbation would also explain the error 
of the radius-vector of Uranus, which he seemed to consider 
the crucial test of correctness. It does not seem that any 
categorical reply to this question was made by Adams. 

Meanwhile, at the suggestion of Arago, the investigation had 
been taken up by U. J. J. Leverrier, who had published some 
excellent work in theoretical astronomy. Leverrier's first 
published communication on the subject was made to the French 
Academy on the 10th of November 1845, a few days after 
Adams's results were in the hands of Airy and Challis. A second 
memoir was presented by Leverrier in 1846 (June 1). His 
investigation was more thorough than that of Adams. He first 
showed that the observations of Uranus could not be accounted 
for by the attraction of known bodies. Considering in succession 
various explanations, he found none admissible except that of 
a planet exterior to Uranus. Considering the distances to be 
double that of Uranus he then investigated the other elements 
of the orbit. He also attempted, but by a faulty method, to 
determine the limits within which the elements must be contained. 

The following are the elements found by Adams and Leverrier: 

	Leverrier. 
	Adams. 
	Hypothesis I. 
	Hypothesis II. 
	Semi -major axis . 
	Eccentricity . 
	Long, of perihelion 
	Mean longitude . 
	Epoch 
	True longitude 
	36-154 
	0-1076 
	284° 45; 
	318° 47' 
	1847, Jan. 1 
	326 b 32' 
	38-38 
	0-16103 
	325° 8 ; 
	1846, Oct. 1 
	328 
	37*27 
	0-12062 
	299 11' 
	323° 2' 
	1846, Oct.i 
	329° 

	2 Astron. Nach. xiii. § 94. s Ibid. xv. § 217. 

	4 See Astron. Nach., Erganzungsheft, p. 6, 

The longitude of the actual planet was 327 57' on the 1st of 
October 1846. 

The close agreement of these elements led Airy to suggest 
to Challis, on the 9th of July 1846, a search for the planet with 
the Northumberland telescope. He proposed an examination 
of a part of the heavens 30 long in the direction of the ecliptic 
and io° broad, and estimated the number of hours' work likely 
to be employed in this sweep. The proposed sweeps were 
commenced by Challis on the 29th of July, The plan required 
each region to be swept through twice, and the positions of all 
the known stars found to be compared, in order that the position 
of the planet might be detected by its motion. On the 31st of 
August Leverrier's concluding paper was presented to the French 
Academy, and on the 18th of September he wrote to John G. 
Galle (1812-1910), then chief assistant at the Berlin observatory, 
suggesting that he should search for the computed planet, with 
the hope of detecting it by its disk, which was probably more 
than 3* in diameter. This letter, probably received on the 23rd 
of September, was communicated to J. F. Encke, the. director 
of the observatory, who approved of the search. EL L. d'Arrest, 
a student living at the observatory, expressed a wish to assist. 
In the evening the search was commenced, but it was not found 
possible to detect any planet by its disk. Star charts were at 
the time being prepared at the observatory under the auspices 
of the Berlin Academy of Sciences. It was suggested by d'Arrest 
that this region might be covered by one of the charts. Referring 
to the chart, which was lying in a drawer, it was found that such 
was the case. Comparing the stars on the chart one by one 
with the heavens it was found that an eighth magnitude star 
now visible was not on the chart. This object was observed 
until after midnight, but no certain motion was detected. On 
the following evening the object was again looked for, and found 
to have actually moved. The existence of the planet was thus 
established. It was afterwards found that Challis in his sweeps 
had observed the planet on the 4th of August, but, not having 
compared his observations with those made subsequently, had 
r failed to detect it. 

The question whether Leverrier should receive the sole credit 
of the discovery was warmly discussed. Arago took the extreme 
ground that actual publication alone should be considered, 
rejecting Adams's communications to Airy and Challis as quite 
unworthy of consideration. He also suggested that the name 
of Leverrier should be given to the planet, but this proposal 
was received with so little favour outside of France that he 
speedily withdrew it, proposing that of Neptune instead. 

The observations at the first opposition showed that the planet 
was moving in a nearly circular orbit, and was at a mean distance 
from the sun much less than that set by Leverrier as the smallest 
possible. The latter had in fact committed the error of deter- 
mining the limits by considering the variations of the elements 
one at a time, assuming in the case of each that while it varied 
the others remained constant. But a simultaneous variation 
of all the elements would have shown that the representation 
of the observations of Uranus would be improved by a simul- 
taneous diminution of both the eccentricity and the mean 
distance, the orbit becoming more nearly circular and the 
planet being brought nearer to the sun. But this was not at 
first clearly seen, and Benjamin Peirce of Harvard University 
went so far as to maintain that there was a discontinuity between 
the solution of Adams and Leverrier and the solution offered 
by the planet itself, and that the coincidence in direction of the 
actual and computed planet was an accident. But this view 
was not well founded, and the only explanation needed was to 
be found in Leverrier's faulty method of determining the limits 
within which the planet must be situated. As a matter of 
fact the actual motion of the planet during the century preceding, 
as derived from Leverrier's elements, was much nearer the truth 
than the elements themselves were. This arose from the fact 
that his very elliptic orbit, by its large eccentricity, brought the 
planet near to the sun, and therefore near to its true position, 
during the period from 1780 to 1845, when the action on Uranus 
was at its greatest. 

The observations of the first opposition enabled Sears Cook 
Walker of the National Observatory, Washington, in February 
1847 to compute the past positions of the planet, and identify 
it with a star observed by Lalande at Paris in May 1795. This 
being communicated to the Paris observatory, an examination 
of Lalande's manuscript showed that he had made two observa- 
tions of the planet, on the 8th and 10th of May, and finding 
them discordant had rejected one as probably in error, and 
marked the other as questionable. A mere re-examination of 
the region to see which observation was in error would have led 
him to the discovery of the planet more than half a century 
before it was actually recognized. The identity of Lalande's 
star with Neptune was also independently shown by Petersen 
of Altona, before any word of Walker's work had reached him. 

Bibliography. — The principal sources for the history of the 
discovery of Neptune are the Astronomische Nachrichten, vols, xxv., 
xxvi., xxviii., and Lindenau's paper in the Erganzungsheft to this 
publication, pp. 1-31 (Altona, 1849). I" the Memoirs of the Royal 
Astronomical Society, vol. xvi., Airy gave a detailed history of the 
circumstances connected with the discovery, so far as he was cog- 
nizant of them. Documents pertaining to the subject are found in 
the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astron. Society. B. A. Gould, 
Report to the Smithsonian Institution on the History of the Discovery 
of Neptune, published by the Smithsonian Institution (Washington, 
1850), is the most complete and detailed history of all the circum- 
stances connected with the discovery, and with the early investiga- 
tions on the orbit of the planet, that has been published. Leverrier's 
investigation was published in extenso as an addition to the Con- 
naissance des temps, and Adams's as an appendix to the Nautical 
Almanac for 1851. Peirce's discussions, so far as published at all, 
are found in the Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and 
Sciences. The first computations of the orbit after the discovery 
were made by Sears Cook Walker, and published by the Smithsonian 
Institution (1848-1850). General tables of the motion of Neptune are 
in Kowalski's Tables du mouvement de la planete Neptune; Newcomb's 
Investigation of the Orbit of Neptune, Washington, Smithsonian In- 
stitution (1866); Leverrier's Annates de VObservatoire de Paris; 
Memoirs, vol. xiv. (1877), and lastly Newcomb's " Tables " in 
Astron. Papers of the American Ephemeris, vol. vii., part iv. Tables 
of the satellite are found in Newcomb, The Uranian and Nep- 
tunian Systems; appendix to the Washington observations for 
1873. (S. N.) 


NERAC, a town of south-western France, capital of an arron- 
dissement in the department of Lot-et-Garonne, 16 m. W.S.W. 
of Agen by road. Pop. (1906) town, 4018; commune, 6318. 
The town, once the capital of the dukes of Albret, is divided by 
the 'Baise into two parts, Grand -N6rac on the left bank and 
Petit-Nerac on the right bank. The river is spanned by a bridge 
of the 16th century, called the Pont Vieux, and by the Pont 
Neuf, of modern construction. Narrow winding streets often 
bordered by old houses ascend from the narrow quays on both 
banks. From the left bank a staircase leads to the Rue Henri 
Quatre, where stands a wing of the castle in which Henry IV. 
lived. A statue of the king stands in one of the squares. The 
former palace of the Chambre des Comptes is now occupied 
by the tribunal of commerce, the library and the museum. The 
church of Grand-N6rac of the 18th century and the church 
of Petit-Nerac of the 19th century offer no remarkable features. 
On the left bank of the Baise, above* Grand-N6rac, market 
gardens have taken the place of the old gardens of the Sires 
d'Albret, but remains of the Palais des Mariannes and of the 
Pavilion des Bains du Roi de Navarre, both of Renaissance 
architecture, are left. The famous promenade of La Garenne 
laid out by Antoine de Bourbon, king of Navarre, stretches 
for more than a mile along the opposite bank of the river. The 
remains of a Roman villa, including a fragment of mosaic, have 
been found there. A road leads from the south end of La 
Garenne to the ruins of the feudal castle of Nazareth. The 
Chateau du Tasta of the 15th century is within a short distance 
of N6rac. The town has a sub-prefecture, and the industries 
include brewing and cork-working. 

Nerac appears at the beginning of the nth century as a 
possession of the monks of St Pierre de Condom. The lords of 
Albret gradually deprived them of their authority over the town, 
and at the beginning of the 14th century founded a castle on the 
left bank of the Baise. In the 16th century the castle was the 
residence of Henry IV. during much of his youth and of 
Marguerite de Valois, sister of Francis L, of Jeanne d'Albret, 
and of the second Marguerite de Valois, wife of Henry IV., 
who held a brilliant court there. N6rac, the inhabitants of which 
had adopted the Reformed religion, was seized by the Catholics 
in 1562. The conferences, held there at the end of 1578 between 
the Catholics and Protestants, ended in February 1579 in the 
peace of N6rac. In 1580 the town was used by Henry IV. as 
a base for attacks on] the Agenais, Armagnac and Guienne. 
A Chambre de TEdit for Guienne and a Chambre des Comptes 
were established there by Henry IV. In 1621, however, the 
town took part in the Protestant rising, was taken by the troops 
of Louis XIII. and its fortifications dismantled. Soon after it 
was deprived both of the Chambre de TEdit and of the Chambre 
des Comptes, and its ruin was completed by the revocation of 
the Edict of Nantes in 1685. 


NERBUDDA, or Narbada, a river of India. It is traditionally 
regarded as the boundary between Hindustan proper and the 
Deccan. It rises on the summit of Amarkantak hill in Rewa 
state, and for the first 200 m. of its course winds among the 
Mandla hills, which form the head of the Satpura range; then 
at Jubbulpore, passing through the " Marble Rocks," it enters its 
proper valley between the Vindhyan and Satpura ranges, and 
pursues a direct westerly course to the Gulf of Cambay. Its 
total course through the Central Provinces and Gujarat amounts 
to about 800 m., and it falls into the sea in the Bombay district 
of Broach. It receives the drainage of the northern slopes 
of the Satpuras, but not that of the Vindhyan tableland, the 
streams from which flow into the Ganges and Jumna. After 
leaving the Central Provinces, the river widens out in the fertile 
district of Broach, with an average breadth of J m. to 1 m. 
Below Broach city it forms an estuary which is 13 m. broad 
where it enters the Gulf of Cambay. The Nerbudda is nowhere 
utilized for irrigation, and navigation is confined to the lower 
section. In the rainy season boats of considerable size sail about 
60 m. above Broach city. Sea-going vessels of abqut 70 tons 
frequent the port of Broach, but they are entirely dependent 
on the tide. In sanctity the Nerbudda ranks only second 
to the Ganges among the rivers of India, and along its whole 
course are special places of pilgrimage. The most meritorious 
act that a pilgrim can perform is to walk from the sea to the source 
of the river and back along the opposite bank. This pilgrimage 
takes from one to two years to accomplish. 

The Nerbudda has given its name to a division of the Central 
Provinces, comprising the five districts of Narsinghpur, Hoshanga* 
bad, Nimar, Betul and Chhindwara. Area, 18,382 sq. m. ; 
pop. (1001) 1,785,008. 


NERCHINSK, a town of Eastern Siberia, in the government 
of Transbaikalia, 183 m. by rail E. of Chita, on the left bank of 
the Nercha, 2% m. above its confluence with the Shilka. Pop. 
(1897) 6713. It is badly built of wood, and its lower parts 
frequently suffer from inundations. It has a small museum. 
The inhabitants support themselves mainly by agriculture, 
tobacco-growing and cattle-breeding; a few merchants trade in 
furs and cattle, in brick -tea from China, and manufactured 
wares from Russia. 

The fort of Nerchinsk dates from 1654, and the town was 
founded in 1658 by Pashkov, who in that year opened direct 
communication between the Russian settlements in Transbaikalia 
and those on the Amur which had been founded by Cossacks and 
fur-traders coming from the Yakutsk region. In 1689 was signed 
between Russia and China the treaty of Nerchinsk, which 
stopped for two centuries the farther advance of the Russians into 
the basin of the Amur. After that Nerchinsk became the chief 
centre for the trade with China. The opening of the western 
route through Mongolia, by Urga, and the establishment of a 
custom-house at Kiakhta in 1728 diverted this trade into a new 
channel. But Nerchinsk acquired fresh importance from the 
influx of immigrants, mostly exiles, into eastern Transbaikalia, 
the discovery of rich mines and the arrival of great numbers of 
convicts, and ultimately it became the chief town of Trans- 
baikalia. In 181 2 it was transferred from the banks of the Shilka 
to its present site, on account of the floods. Since the foundation, 
in 1851, of Chita, the present capital of Transbaikalia, Nerchinsk 
has been falling into decay. 


NERCHINSK (in full Nerchinskiy Zavod), a town and silver- 
mine of East Siberia, in the government of Transbaikalia, 150 m. 
E.S.E. of another Nerchinsk (q.v.) (with which it is often con- 
fused), on a small affluent of the Argun. Pop. (1897) 3000. 
It lies in a narrow valley between barren mountains, and is much 
better built than any of the district towns of East Siberia. It 
has a chemical laboratory for mining purposes, and a meteoro- 
logical observatory (51 18' N., 119 37' E., 2200 ft. above 
sea-level), where meteorological and magnetical observations 
have been made every hour since 1842. The average yearly 
temperature is 25-3° F., with extremes of 97*7° and -52-6°. 

Nerchinsk Mining District extends over an area of 29,450 
sq. m., and includes all the silver-mines and gold-fields between 
the Shilka and the Argun, together with a few on the left bank 
of the Shilka. It is traversed by several parallel chains of moun- 
tains which rise to 4500 ft., and are intersected by a complicated 
system of deep, narrow valleys, densely wooded, with a few 
expansions along the larger rivers, where the inhabitants with 
difficulty raise some rye and wheat. The population (75,625 
in 1897) consists of Russians, Buryats and Tunguses. Included 
in this number were some 2300 convicts. The mountains, so 
far as they have been geologically explored, consist of crystalline 
slates and limestones — probably Upper Silurian and Devonian — 
interspersed with granite, syenite and diorite; they contain 
rich ores of silver, lead, tin and iron, while the diluvial and 
alluvial valley formations contain productive auriferous sands. 

The Nerchinsk silver mines began to be worked in 1704, but 
during the first half of the 18th century their yearly production did 
not exceed 8400 oz., and the total amount for the first 150 years 
( 1 704-1 854) amounted to 11,540,000 oz. The lead was mostly 
neglected on account of the^ difficulties of transport, but its pro- 
duction is at present on the increase. Gold was first discovered in 
1830, and between 1833 and 1855 260,000 oz. of gold dust were 
obtained. In 1864 a large number of auriferous deposits were dis- 
covered. Until 1863 all the labour was performed by serfs, the 
property of the emperor, and by convicts, numbering usually 
nearly four thousand. 


NEREUS, in Greek mythology, the eldest son of Pontus and 
Gaea, and father of the fifty Nereids. He is a beneficent and 
venerable old man of the sea, full of wisdom and skilled in 
prophecy, but, like Proteus, he will only reveal what he knows 
under compulsion. Thus Heracles seized him when asleep, and, 
although he attempted to escape by assuming various forms, 
compelled him to reveal the whereabouts of the apples of the 
Hesperides (Apollodorus ii. 5). His favourite dwelling-place is a 
cavern in the depths of the Aegean. The fifty daughters of 
Nereus, the Nereids, are personifications of the smiling, quiet sea. 
Of these, Thetis and Amphitrite rule the sea according to the 
legend of different localities; Galatea is a Sicilian figure, who 
plays with and deludes her rustic lover of the shore, Polyphemus. 
Nereus is represented with the sceptre and trident; the Nereids 
are depicted as graceful maidens, lightly clad or naked, riding on 
tritons and dolphins. The name has nothing to do with the 
modern Greek vepb (really veapbv, " fresh " [water]) : it is prob- 
ably a short form of N^piros. 


NERGAL, the name of a solar deity in Babylonia, the main 
seat of whose cult was at Kutha or Cuthah, represented by the 
mound of Tell-Ibrahim. The importance of Kutha as a religious 
and at one time also as a political centre led to his surviving the 
tendency to concentrate the various sun-cults of Babylonia in 
Shamash (q.v.). He becomes, however, the representative of 
a certain phase only of the sun and not of the sun as a whole. 
Portrayed in hymns and myths as a god of war and pestilence, 
there can be little doubt that Nergal represents the sun of noon- 
time and of the summer solstice which brings destruction to man- 
kind. It is a logical consequence that Nergal is pictured also as the 
deity who presides over the nether-world, and stands at the head 
of the special pantheon assigned to the government of the dead, 
who are supposed to be gathered in a large subterranean cave 
known as Aralu or Irkalla. In this capacity there is associated 
with him a goddess Allatu, though there are indications that at 
one time Allatu was regarded as the sole mistress of Aralu, ruling 
in her own person. Ordinarily the consort of Nergal is Laz. 
Nergal was pictured as a lion and on boundary-stone monuments 
his symbol is a mace surmounted by the head of a lion. 

As in the case of Ninib, Nergal appears to have absorbed 
a number of minor solar deities, which accounts for the various 
names or designations under which he appears, such as Lugalgira, 
Sharrapu (" the burner," perhaps a mere epithet), Ira, Gibil 
(though this name more properly belongs to Nusku, q.v.) and 
Sibitti. A certain confusion exists in cuneiform literature 
between Ninib and Nergal, perhaps due to the traces of two 
different conceptions regarding these two solar deities. Nergal 
is called the " raging king," the " furious one," and the like, and 
by a play upon his name — separated into three elements Ne-uru- 
gal " lord of the great dwelling " — his position at the head of the 
nether-world pantheon is indicated. In the astral-theological 
system he is the planet Mars, while in ecclesiastical art the great 
lion-headed colossi serving as guardians to the temples and 
palaces seem to be a symbol of Nergal, just as the bull-headed 
colossi are probably intended to typify Ninib. 

The name of his chief temple at Kutha was E-shid-lam, from 
which the god receives the designation of Shidlamtaea, " the 
one that rises up from Shidlam." The cult of Nergal does not 
appear to have been as widespread as that of Ninib. He is 
frequently invoked in hymns and in votive and other inscriptions 
of Babylonian and Assyrian rulers, but we do not learn of many 
temples to him outside of Kutha. Sennacherib speaks of one 
at Tarbisu to the north of Nineveh, but it is significant that 
although Nebuchadrezzar II. (606-586 B.C.), the great temple- 
builder of the neo-Babylonian monarchy, alludes to his opera- 
tions at E-shid-lam in Kutha, he makes no mention of a sanctuary 
to Nergal in Babylon. Local associations with his original 
seat — Kutha — and the conception formed of him as a god of 
the dead acted in making him feared rather than actively 
worshipped. (M. Ja.) 


NERI, PHILIP (Filippo de) (1515-1595), Italian churchman, 
was born at Florence on the 21st of July 151 5. He was the 
youngest child of Francesco Neri, a lawyer of that city, and 
his wife Lucrezia Soldi, a woman of noble birth, whose family 
had long served the state. He was carefully brought up, and 
received his early teaching from the friars at San Marco, the 
famous Dominican monastery in Florence. He was accustomed 
in after life to ascribe most of his progress to the teaching of 
two amongst them, Zenobio de* Medici and Servanzio Mini. 
When he was about sixteen years old, a fire destroyed nearly 
all his father's property. Philip was sent to his father's childless 
brother Romolo, a merchant at San Germano, a Neapolitan 
town near the base of Monte Cassino, to assist him in his business, 
and with the hope that he might inherit his possessions. So 
far as gaining Romolo's confidence and affection, the plan was 
entirely successful, but it was thwarted by Philip's own resolve 
to take holy orders. In 1533 he left San Germano, and went 
to Rome, where he became tutor in the house of a Florentine 
gentleman named Galeotto Caccia. Here he was able to pursue 
his own studies under the guidance of the Augustinians, and to 
begin those labours amongst the sick and poor which gained 
him in later life the title of "Apostle of Rome," besides paying 
nightly visits for prayer and meditations to the churches of the 
city and to the catacombs. In 1538 he entered on that course 
of home mission work which was the distinguishing charac- 
teristic of his life; somewhat in the manner of Socrates he 
traversed the city, seizing opportunities of entering into con- 
versation with persons of all ranks, and of leading them on, 
with playful irony, with searching questions, with words of wise 
and kindly counsel, to consider the topics he desired to set 
before them. 

In 1548 he founded the celebrated confraternity of the San- 
tissima Trinita de' Pellegrini e de' Convalescente, whose primary 
object is to minister to the needs of the thousands of poor 
pilgrims who flock to Rome, especially in years of jubilee, and 
also to relieve the patients discharged from hospitals, but still 
too weak for labour. In 1551 he passed through all the minor 
orders, and was ordained deacon, and finally priest on the 23rd 
of May. He had some thought of going to India as a missionary, 
but was dissuaded by his friends who saw that there was abundant 
work to be done in Rome, and that he was the man to do it. 
Accordingly he settled down, with some companions, at the 
hospital of San Girolamo della Carita, and while there tentatively 
began, in 1556, the institute with which his name is more especi- 
ally connected, that of the Oratory. The scheme at first was 
no more than a series of evening meetings in a hall (the Oratory), 
at which there were prayers, hymns, readings from Scripture, 
from the fathers, and from the Martyrology, followed by a 
lecture, or by discussion of some religious question proposed 
for consideration. The musical selections (settings of scenes 
from sacred history) were called oratorios. The scheme was 
developed, and the members of the society undertook various 
kinds of mission work throughout Rome, notably the preaching 
of sermons in different churches every evening, a wholly novel 
agency at that time. In 1564 the Florentines requested him to 
leave San Girolamo, and to take the oversight of their church 
in Rome, San Giovanni dei tfiorentini, then newly built. He 
was at first reluctant, but by consent of Pius IV. he accepted, 
while retaining the charge of San Girolamo, where the exercises 
of the Oratory were kept up. At this time the new society 
included amongst its members Caesar Baronius, the ecclesi- 
astical historian, Francesco Maria Tarugi, afterwards archbishop 
of Avignon, and Paravicini, all three subsequently cardinals, 
and also Gallonius, author of a well-known work on the Sufferings 
of the Martyrs, Ancina, Bordoni, and other men of ability and 
distinction. 

The Florentines, however, built in 1574 a large oratory or 
mission-room for the society contiguous to San Giovanni, in 
order to save them the fatigue of the daily journey to and from 
San Girolamo, and to provide a more convenient place of 
assembly, and the headquarters were transferred thither. As 
the community grew, and its mission work extended, the need 
of having a church entirely its own, and not subject to other 
claims, as were San Girolamo and San Giovanni, made itself 
felt, and the offer of the small parish church of Santa Maria in 
Vallicella, conveniently situated in the middle of Rome, was 
made and accepted. The building, however, as not large 
enough for their purpose, was pulled down, and a splendid 
church erected on the site. It was immediately after taking 
possession of their new quarters that Neri formally organized, 
under permission of a bull dated July 15, 1575, a community 
of secular priests, entitled the Congregation of the Oratory. The 
new church was consecrated early in 1577, and the clergy of 
the new society at once resigned the charge of San Giovanni 
dei Fiorentini, but Neri himself did not migrate from San Giro- 
lamo till 1583, and then only in virtue of an injunction of the 
pope that he, as the superior, should reside at the chief house 
of his congregation. He was at first elected for a term of three 
years (as is usual in modern societies), but in 1587 was nominated 
superior for life. He was, however, entirely free from personal 
ambition, and had no desire to be general over a number of 
dependent houses, so that he desired that all congregations 
formed on his model outside Rome should be autonomous, 
governing themselves, and without endeavouring to retain 
control over any new colonies they might themselves send out — 
a regulation afterwards formally confirmed by a brief of Gregory 
XV. in 1622. Much as he mingled with society, and with persons 
of importance in church and state, his single interference in 
political matters was in 1593, when his persuasions induced the 
pope, Clement VIII., to withdraw the excommunication and 
anathema of Henry IV. of France, and the refusal to receive 
his ambassador, even though the king had formally abjured 
Calvinism. Neri saw that the pope's attitude was more than 
likely to drive Henry to a relapse, and probably to rekindle 
the civil war in France, and directed Baronius, then the pope's 
confessor, to refuse him absolution, and to resign his office of 
confessor, unless he would withdraw the anathema. Clement 
yielded at once, though the whole college of cardinals had 
supported his policy; and Henry, who did not learn the facts 
till several years afterwards, testified lively gratitude for the 
timely and politic intervention. Neri continued in the govern- 
ment of the Oratory until his death, which took place on the 
26th of May 1595 at Rome. He was succeeded byBaronius. 
There are many anecdotes told of him which attest his possession 
of a playful humour, united with shrewd mother-wit. He 
considered a cheerful temper to be more Christian than a melan- 
choly one, and carried this spirit into his whole life. This is 
the true secret of his popularity and of his place in the folk-lore 
of the Roman poor. Many miracles were attributed to him 
alive and dead, and it is said that when his body was dissected 
it was found that two of his ribs had been broken, an event 
attributed to the expansion of his heart while fervently praying 
in the catacombs about the year 1545. This phenomenon is 
in the same category as the stigmata of St Francis of Assisi. 
Neri was beatified by Paul V, in 1600, and canonized by Gregory 
XV. in 1622. 

" Practical commonplaceness," says Frederick William Faber in 
his panegyric of Neri, was the special mark which distinguishes his 
form of ascetic piety from the types accredited before his day. 
" He looked like other men . . . he was emphatically a modern 
gentleman, of scrupulous courtesy, sportive gaiety, acquainted with 
what was going on in the world, taking a real interest in it, giving and 
getting information, very neatly dressed, with a shrewd common 
sense always alive about him, in a modern room with modern furni- 
ture, plain, it is true, but with no marks of poverty about it — in a 
word, with all the ease, the gracefulness, the polish of a modern 
gentleman of good birth, considerable accomplishments, and a very 
various information." Accordingly, he was ready to meet the needs 
of his^day to an extent and in a manner which even the versatile 
Jesuits, who much desired to enlist him in their company, did not 
rival; and, though an Italian priest and head of a new religious 
order, his genius was entirely unmonastic and unmedieval; he was 
the active promoter of vernacular services, frequent and popular 
preaching, unconventional prayer, and unsystematized, albeit 
fervent, private devotion. 

Neri was not a reformer, save in the sense that in the active dis- 
charge of pastoral work he laboured to reform individuals. He had 
no difficulties in respect of the teaching and practice of his church, 
being in truth an ardent Ultramontane in doctrine, as was all but 
inevitable in his time and circumstances, and his great merit wis the 
instinctive tact which showed him that the system of monasticism 
could never be the leaven of secular life, but that something more 
homely, simple, and everyday in character was needed for the new 
time. 

Accordingly, the congregation he founded is of the least con- 
ventional nature, rather resembling a residential clerical club than 
a monastery of the older type, and its rules (never written by Neri, 
but approved by Paul V. in 161 2) would have appeared incredibly 
lax, nay, its religious character almost doubtful, to Bruno, Stephen 
Harding, Francis or Dominic. It admits only priests aged at least 
thirty-six, or ecclesiastics who have completed their studies and are 
ready for ordination. The members live in community, and each 
pays his own expenses, having the usufruct of his private means — 
a startling innovation on the monastic vow of poverty. They have 
indeed a common table, but it is kept up precisely as a regimental 
mess, by monthly payments from each member. Nothing is pro- 
vided by the society except the bare lodging, and the fees of a 
visiting physician. Everything else — clothing, books, furniture, 
medicines — must be defrayed at the private charges ofeach member. 
There are no vows, and every member of the society is at liberty to 
withdraw when he pleases, and to take his property with him. 
The government, strikingly unlike the Jesuit autocracy, is ot a 
republican form; and the superior, though first in honour, has^ to 
take his turn in discharging allthe duties which come to each priest 
of the society in the order of his seniority, including that of waiting 
at table, which is not entrusted in the Oratory to lay brothers, 
according to the practice in most other communities. Four deputies 
assist the superior in the government, and all public acts are decided 
by a majority of votes of the whole congregation, in which the 
superior has no casting voice. To be chosen superior, fifteen years 
of membership are requisite as a qualification, and the office is 
tenable, as all the others, for but three years at a time. No one can 
vote till he has been three years in the society; the deliberative 
voice is not obtained before the eleventh year. There are thus three 
classes of members — novices, triennials and decennials. Each house 
can call its superior to account, can depose, and can restore him, 
without appeal to any external authority, although the bishop of 
thediocese in which any house of the Oratory is established is its 
ordinary and immediate superior, though without power to interfere 
with the rule. Their churches are non- parochial, and they can 
perform such rites as baptisms, marriages, &c, only by permission 
of the parish^ priest, who is entitled to receive all fees due in respect 
of these ministrations. The Oratory chiefly spread in Italy and in 
France, where in 1760 there were 58 houses all under the government 
of a superior-general. Malebranche, Thomassin, Mascaron and 
Massillon were members of the famous branch established in Paris 
in 161 1 by Berulle (after cardinal), which had a great success and 
a distinguished history. It fell in the crash of the Revolution, but 
was revived by Pere Petetot, cure of St Roch, in 1852, as the 
" Oratory of Jesus and the Immaculate Mary "; the Church of the 
Oratory near the Louvre belongs to the Reformed Church. An 
English house, founded in 1847 at Birmingham, is celebrated as the 
place at which Cardinal Newman fixed his abode after his sub- 
mission to the Roman Catholic Church. In 1849 a second congrega- 
tion was founded in King William Street, Strand, London, with F. W. 
Faber as superior; in 1854 it was transferred to Brompton. The 
society has never thriven in Germany, though a few houses have been 
founded there, in Munich and Vienna. 

Authorities. — J. Marciano, Memorie istoriche delta Congregazionc 
delV Oratorio (5 vols., Naples, 1693-1702); Perraud, LOratoire de 
France (2nd cd., Paris, i860) ; Jourdain de la Passardiere, VOratoire 
de St Ph. de Neri (1880); Ant. Gallonius, Vita Ph. Neri (Rome, 
1600); Giacomo Bacci, Life of Saint Philip Neri, trans. Faber 
(2 vols., London, 1847); Crispino, La Scuola di San Filippo Neri 
(Naples, 1875); F. W. Faber, Spirit and Genius of St Philip Neri 
(London, 1850) ; F. A. Agnelli, Excellencies of the Oratory of St Philip 
Neri, trans. F. I. Antrobus (London, 1881); articles by F. Theiner 
and Hilgers in Wetzer und Weltc's Kirchenlexicon, and by Reuchlin 
and Zockler in Herzog's Realencyklopddie. Neri's own writings 
include Ricordi, or Advice to Youth, Letters (Padua, 1751), and a few 
sonnets printed in the collection of the Rime Oneste. Other lives by 
Posl (Regensburg, 1847); P. Guerin (Lyons, 1852); Mrs Hope 
(London, 1859); Abp. Capecelatro (2 vols., 1879; 2 nd ed., 1884; 
Eng. trans., 1882; 2nd ed. by T. A. Pope, 1894). 


NERO (37-68), Roman emperor 54-68, was born at Antium 
on the 1 5th of December 37. He was the son of Gnaeus Domitius 
Ahenobarbus and Agrippina the younger, and his name was 
originally L. Domitius Ahenobarbus. His father died when Nero 
was scarcely three years old. In the previous year (39) his mother 
had been banished by order of her brother Caligula (Gaius) 
on a charge of treasonable conspiracy, and Nero, thus early 
deprived of both parents, found shelter in the house of his aunt 
Domitia, where two slaves, a barber and a dancer, began his 
training. The emperor Claudius recalled Agrippina, who spent 
the next thirteen years in the determined struggle to win for Nero 
the throne which had been predicted for him. Her first decisive 
success was gained in 48 by the disgrace and execution of 
Messallina (q.v.) t wife of Claudius. In 49 followed her own 
marriage with Claudius, and her recognition as his consort in the 
government. 1 The Roman populace already looked with favour 
on Nero, as the grandson of Germanicus, but in 50 his claims 
obtained formal recognition from Claudius himself, who adopted 
him under the title of Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus Germanicus. 2 
Agrippina's next step was to provide a suitable training for her 
son. The scholar L. Annaeus Seneca was recalled from exile 
and appointed his tutor. On the 15th of December 51 Nero 
completed his fourteenth year, and Agrippina, in view of 
Claudius's failing health, determined to delay no -longer his 
adoption of the toga virilis. The occasion was celebrated in a 
manner which seemed to place Nero's prospects of succession 
beyond doubt. He was introduced to the senate by Claudius him- 
self. The proconsular imperium and the title of princeps juven- 
tutis were conferred upon htm. 3 He was specially admitted as an 
extraordinary member of the great priestly colleges; his name 
was included by the Arval Brethren in their prayers for the 
safety of the emperor and his bouse; at the games in the circus 
his appearance in triumphal dress contrasted significantly with 
the simple toga praelexta worn by Britannicus. ' During the next 
two years Agrippina followed this up with energy. Britannicus's 
leading partisans were banished or put to death, and the all- 
important command of the praetorian guard was transferred 
to Afranius Burrus, a Gaul by birth, who had been the trusted 
agent first of Livia and then of Tiberius and Claudius. Nero 
himself was put prominently forward. The petitions addressed 
to the senate by the town of Bononia and by the communities 
of Rhodes and Ilium were gracefully supported by him in Latin 
and Greek speeches, and during Claudius's absence in 52 at 
the Latin festival it was Nero who, as praefect of the city, 
administered justice in the forum. Early in 53 his marriage with 

	1 Tac. Ann. xii. 26, 36; sec also Schiller, Nero, 67. 
	* Tac, Ann. xii. 26; Zonaras xi. 10. 
	' Tac. Ann. xii. 41. 

Claudius's daughter Octavia drew still closer the ties which 
connected him with the imperial house. Agrippina determined 
to hasten the death of Claudius, and the absence, through illness, 
of the emperor's trusted freedman Narcissus, favoured her 
schemes. On the 13th of October 54 Claudius died, poisoned, as 
all our authorities declare, by her orders, and Nero was presented 
to the soldiers on guard as their new sovereign. From the steps 
of the palace he proceeded to the praetorian camp to receive 
the salutations of the troops, and thence to the senate-house, 
where he was promptly invested with all the honours, titles and 
powers of emperor. 1 

Agrippina's bold stroke had been completely successful. 
Only a few voices were raised for Britannicus; nor is there any 
doubt that Rome was prepared to welcome the new emperor 
with genuine enthusiasm. His prestige and his good qualities, 
carefully fostered by Seneca, made him popular, while his 
childish vanity, ungovernable selfishness and savage temper 
were as yet unsuspected. His first acts confirmed this favourable 
impression. He modestly declined the title of pater patriae) 
the memory of Claudius, and that of his own father Domitius 
were duly honoured. The senate listened with delight to his 
promises to rule according to the maxims of Augustus, and to 
avoid the errors which had rendered unpopular the rule of his 
predecessor, while his unfailing clemency, liberality and affa- 
bility were the talk of Rome. Much no doubt of the credit of all 
this is due to Seneca and Burrus. Seneca had seen from the 
first that the real danger with Nero lay in the savage vehemence 
of his passions, and he made it his chief aim to stave off by every 
means in his power the dreaded outbreak. The policy of indulging 
his tastes and helping him to enjoy the sweets of popularity 
without the actual burdens of government succeeded 'for the 
time. During the first five years of his reign, the golden quin- 
quennium Neronis, little occurred to damp the popular enthusiasm. 
Nero's promises of constitutional moderation we're amply 
fulfilled, and the senate found itself free to discuss and even 
to decide important administrative questions. Abuses were 
remedied, the provincials protected from oppression, and the 
burdens of taxation lightened. On the frontiers, thanks chiefly 
to Corbulo's energy and skill, no disaster occurred serious enough 
to shake the general confidence, and even the murder of Britanni- 
cus seems to have been accepted as a necessary measure of self- 
defence. But Seneca's fear lest Nero's sleeping passions should 
once be roused were fully verified, and he seems to have seen 
all along where the danger lay, namely in Agrippina's imperious 
temper and insatiable love of power. The success of Seneca's 
own management of Nero largely depended on his being able 
gradually to emancipate the emperor from his mother's control. 
During the first few months of Nero's reign the chances of such 
an emancipation seemed remote, for he treated his mother with 
elaborate respect and consulted her on all affairs of state. 
In 55, however, Seneca found a powerful ally in Nero's 
passion for the beautiful freedwoman Acte, a passion which 
he deliberately encouraged. Agrippina's angry remonstrances 
served only to irritate Nero, and caresses equally failed. She 
then rashly tried intimidation and threatened to espouse the 
cause of Britannicus. Nero retaliated by poisoning Britannicus. 
Agrippina then tried to win over Nero's neglected wife Octavia, 
and to form a party of her own. Nero dismissed her guards, and 
placed her in a sort of honourable confinement (Tac. Ann. 
xiii. 12-20). During nearly three years she disappears from the 
history, and with her retirement things again for the time went 
smoothly. In 58, however, fresh cause for anxiety appeared, 
when Nero was enslaved by Poppaea Sabina, a woman of a very 
different stamp from her predecessor. High-born, wealthy and 
accomplished, she was resolved to be Nero's wife, and set herself 
to remove the obstacles which «tood in her way. Her first object 
was the finaTruin of Agrippina, and by rousing Nero's jealousy 
and fear she induced him to seek her death, with the aid of a 
freedman Anicetus, praefect of the fleet of Misenum. Agrippina 
was invited to Baiae, and after an affectionate reception, was 
conducted on board a vessel so constructed as, at a given signal, 

	1 Tac. Ann. xii. 96; Suet. Nero, 8. 

to fall to pieces. But Agrippina saved herself by swimming, 
and wrote to her son, announcing her escape, and affecting entire 
ignorance of the plot. A body of soldiers under Anicetus then 
surrounded her villa, and murdered her in her own chamber. 
Nero was horrorstruck at the enormity of the crime and terrified 
at its possible consequences. But a six months' residence in 
Campania, and the congratulations which poured in upon him 
from the neighbouring towns, where the report had been officially 
spread that Agrippina had fallen a victim to her treacherous 
designs upon the emperor, gradually restored his courage. In 
September 59 he re-entered Rome amid universal rejoicing. 
A prolonged carnival followed. Chariot races, musical and 
dramatic exhibitions, games in the Greek fashion rapidly 
succeeded each other. In all the emperor was a prominent 
figure, but these revels at least involved no bloodshed, and 
were civilized compared with the gladiatorial shows. 

A far more serious result of the death of Agrippina was the . 
growing influence over Nero of Poppaea and her friends. In 62 
Burrus died, it was said by poison, and Seneca retired from 
the unequal contest. Their place was filled by Poppaea, and the 
infamous Tigellinus, whose sympathy with Nero's sensual tastes 
had gained him the command of the praetorian guards in 
succession to Burrus. The haunting fear of conspiracy was skil- 
fully used by them to direct Nero's suspicions against possible 
opponents. Cornelius Sulla, who had been banished to Massilia 
in 58, was put to death on the ground that his residence in Gaul 
was likely to arouse disaffection in that province, and a similar 
charge proved fatal to Rubellius Plautus, who had for two years 
been living in retirement in Asia. 2 Nero's taste for blood thus 
whetted, Octavia was divorced, banished to the island of Panda- 
teria and barbarously murdered. Poppaea 's triumph was now 
complete. She was formally married to Nero; her head appeared 
on the coins side by side with his; and her statues were erected 
in the public places of Rome. 

In the course of the year 61 Rome was startled by the news of a 
disaster in Britain. At the time of the Claudian invasion of Britain 
in a.d. 43 Prasutagus, the king of the Iceni, had concluded a treaty 
with Claudius, by^ which no doubt he recognized the suzerainty of 
Rome and was himself enrolled among " the allies and friends of 
the Roman people." The alliance was of value to Claudius, for the 
territory of the Iceni (Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire) lay 
immediately north of the new province and its capital town Col- 
chester, and Prasutagus had loyally kept faith with Rome. But in 
a.d. 61 he died, leaving no maie heir. His kingdom therefore lapsed 
to Rome, and Prasutagus, anxious that the transfer should be 
effected in an orderly way, divided his accumulated wealth between 
his two daughters and the emperor. His plan failed, for the local 
Roman officiate acted as though the kingdom had been conquered 
in war; they seized on the property of the late king and his chiefs 
and insulted his family. Fearing that worse might Follow when the 
kingdom should be annexed, and encouraged by the absence of the 
legate and his legions, the Iceni, led by Prasutagus's daughter 
Boudicca (Boadicea) rose in revolt and were joined by the Trino- 
bantesin Essex, who had been long subject to Rome and had their 
own grievances to redress. Colchester, since a.d. 50 a Roman colony, 
was sacked. The ninth legion which had hurried from Lincoln was 
cut to pieces, and the insurgents prepared to march on London. 
The news of the^ outbreak found the legate Suetonius Paulinus en- 
gaged in attacking Anglesey. His resolution was at once taken. 
At the head of such light troops as he could collect, he marched in 
haste along the Wathng Street, leaving orders for the legions to 
follow. Though the tnbes along the road were rising, Suetonius 
succeeded in reaching London, only however to find himself too 
weak to hold it. He was obliged to fall back along the road by 
which he had come. London first , and then Verulam , were abandoned 
to the firitons. At last at some undefined point on the Watling 
Street his legions joined him. Thus reinforced he turned to face 
the enemy. The engagement was severe but the Roman victory 
was decisive, and Roman authority was restored throughout central 
and southern Britain. 

The profound impression produced in Rome by the " British 
disaster " was confirmed two years later in a.d. 63 by the partial 
destruction of Pompeii by an earthquake, and the news of the 
evacuation of Armenia by the Roman legions. A far deeper and 
more lasting impression was produced by the great fire in Rome. 
The fire broke out on the night of the 18th of July, 64, among the 
wooden booths at the south-east end of the Circus Maximus. 
Thence in one direction it rapidly spread over the Palatine and 

	* Tac. Ann. xiv. 59. 

Velia up to the low cliffs of the Esquiline, and in another it laid 
waste the Aventine, the Forum Boarium and Velabrum till it 
reached the Tiber and the solid barrier of the Servian wall. 
After burning fiercely for six days it suddenly started afresh in 
the northern quarter of the city and desolated the regions of the 
Circus Flaminius and the Via Lata, and by the time that it was 
finally quenched only four of the fourteen regiones remained un- 
touched; three had been utterly destroyed and seven reduced 
to ruins. The conflagration is said by all authorities later than 
Tacitus to have been deliberately caused by Nero himself. 1 
But Tacitus, though he mentions the rumours, declares that its 
origin was uncertain, and in spite of such works as Profumo's 
Le fonti ed i tempi dello incendio Neroniano (1905), there is no 
proof of his guilt. 2 By Nero's orders, the open spaces in the 
Campus Martius were utilized to give shelter to the homeless 
crowds, provisions were brought from Ostia and the price of 
-corn lowered. In rebuilding the city every precaution was taken 
against the recurrence of such a calamity. Broad regular streets 
replaced the narrow winding alleys. The new houses were 
limited in height, built partly of hard stone and protected by 
open spaces and colonnades. The water-supply, lastly, was 
carefully regulated. 

There is, however, no doubt that this great disaster told against 
Nero in the popular mind. It was regarded as a direct mani- 
festation of the wrath of the gods, even by those who did not 
suspect the emperor. This impression no religious ceremonies, 
nor even the execution of a number of Christians, as convenient 
scapegoats, could altogether dispel. But Nero proceeded with 
the congenial work of repairing the damage. In addition to the 
rebuilding of the streets, he erected a splendid palace, the 
•" golden house," for himself. The wonders of his Domus aurea 
were remembered and talked of long after its partial demolition 
by Vespasian. It stretched from the Palatine across the low 
ground, afterwards occupied by the Colosseum, to the Esquiline. 
Gold, precious stones and Greek masterpieces adorned its walls. 
Most marvellous of all were the grounds in which it stood, with 
their meadows and lakes, their shady woods and their distant 
views. To defray the enormous cost, Italy and the provinces, 
says Tacitus, were ransacked, and in Asia and Achaia especially 
the rapacity of the imperial commissioners recalled the days of 
Mummius and of Sulla. 3 It was the first occasion on which the 
provincials had suffered from Nero's rule, and the discontent it 
caused helped to weaken his hold over them at the very moment 
when the growing dissatisfaction in Rome was gathering to a 
head. Early in 65 Nero was panic-stricken by the discovery of a 
formidable conspiracy involving such men as Faenius Rufus, 
Tigellinus's colleague in the prefecture of the praetorian guards, 
Plautius Lateranus, one of the consuls elect, the poet Lucan, 
and, lastly, not a few of the tribunes and centurions of the 
praetorian guard itself. Their chosen leader, whom they destined 
to succeed Nero, was C. Calpurnius Piso (q.v.) } a handsome, 
wealthy and popular noble, and a boon companion of Nero 
himself. The plan to murder Nero was frustrated by a f reedman 
Milichus, who, in the hope of a large reward, disclosed the 
whole plot. Piso, Faenius Rufus, Lucan and many of their 
less prominent accomplices, and even Seneca himself (though 
there seems to have been no evidence of his complicity) were 
executed. 

But, though largesses and thanksgivings celebrated the 
suppression of the conspiracy, and the round of games and 
shows was renewed with even increased splendour, the effects 
of the shock were visible in the long list of victims who during 
the next few months were sacrificed to his restless fears and 
resentment. Conspicuous among them was Paetus Thrasea, 
whose unbending virtue had long made him distasteful to Nero, 
and who was now suspected, possibly with reason, of sympathy 
with the conspirators. The death of Poppaea in the autumn of 

	J Tac. Ann. xv. 38; Suet. Nero, 38; Dio Cass. lxii. 16; Pliny, 
	N.H. xvii. 5. 

	* This work is a reply to C. Pascal's U Incendio di Roma e i primi 
	Cristiani (Milan, 1900), which throws the guilt on the Christians. 

	'Tac. Ann. xv. 42; Suet. Nero, 31; cf. Friedlander, Sitten- 
	geschichte, iii. 67-69. 

65 was probably not lamented by any one but her husband, but 
the general gloom was deepened by a pestilence, caused, it 
seems, by the overcrowding at the time of the fire. 

Early, however, in the summer of 66, the Parthian prince 
Tiridates visited Italy. This event was a conspicuous tribute 
to the ability both as soldier and statesman of Cn. Domitius 
Corbulo. As long ago as 54 the news reached Rome that the 
Parthian king Vologaeses had expelled the king recognized by 
Rome from Armenia and installed in his place his own brother 
Tiridates. Orders were at once issued to concentrate all available 
forces on the Cappadocian frontier under Corbulo, the first soldier 
of his day. After some time spent in making his army efficient, 
Corbulo invaded Armenia and swept victoriously through the 
country. Armenia was rescued and Corbulo proposed that 
Tiridates should become king of Armenia on condition of his 
receiving his crown as a gift from Nero. But the government in 
Rome had a plan of its own, and a certain Tigranes, long resident 
in Rome, but a stranger to the Armenians, was sent out, and 
Corbulo was obb'ged reluctantly to seat him on the Armenian 
throne. Tigranes's position, always insecure, soon became un- 
tenable, and it became necessary for Rome to intervene once 
more. A Roman force under Caesennius Paetus was sent to 
restore Tigranes and re-establish Roman predominance. Paetus, 
however, was no Corbulo. He was defeated, and Corbulo, now 
legate of Syria, was obb'ged to come to his rescue. The result 
was the final triumph of Corbulo's policy. Tiridates agreed to 
accept the crown of Armenia from the hands of Nero. In royal 
state he travelled to Italy, and the ceremony of investiture was 
performed at Rome with the utmost splendour. Delighted with 
this tribute to his greatness, Nero for a moment dreamt of 
rivalling Alexander. Expeditions were talked of to the Caspian 
Sea and Ethiopia, but Nero was no soldier and quickly turned 
to a more congenial field. He had already, in 64, appeared on 
the stage before the half- Greek public of Naples. But his mind 
was now set on challenging the applause of the Greeks themselves 
in the ancient home of art. Towards the end of 66 he arrived 
in Greece with a retinue * of soldiers, courtiers, musicians 
and dancers. The spectacle presented by Nero's visit was 
unique. 4 He went professedly as an enthusiastic worshipper of 
Greek art and a humble candidate for the suffrages of Greek 
judges. At each of the great festivals, which to please him were 
for once crowded into a single year, he entered in regular form 
for the various competitions, scrupulously conformed to the 
tradition and rules of the arena, and awaited in nervous suspense 
the verdict of the umpires. The dexterous Greeks humoured 
him to the top of his bent. Everywhere the imperial competitor 
was victorious, and crowded audiences importuned him to 
display his talents. The emperor protested that only the Greeks 
were fit to hear him, and rewarded them when he left by the 
bestowal of immunity from the land tax 'on the whole province, 
and by the gift of the Roman franchise; he also planned and 
actually commenced the cutting of a canal through the Isthmus 
of Corinth, If we may believe report, Nero found time in the 
intervals of his artistic triumphs for more vicious excesses. The 
stories of his mock marriage with Sporus, his execution of wealthy 
Greeks for the sake of their money, and his wholesale plundering 
of the temples were evidently part of the accepted tradition 
about him in the time of Suetonius, and are at least credible. 
Far more certainly true is his ungrateful treatment of Domitius 
Corbulo, who, when he landed at Cenchreae, fresh from his 
successes in Armenia, was met by an order for his instant 
execution and at once put an end to his life. 

Meanwhile the general dissatisfaction was coming to a head, 
as we may infer from the urgency with which the imperial 
freedman Helius insisted upon Nero's return to Italy. Far more 
serious was the disaffection which now showed itself in the rich 
and warlike provinces of the west. In northern Gaul, early in 
68, the standard of revolt was raised by Julius Vindex, governor 
of Gallia Lugdunensis, and himself the head of an ancient and 
noble Celtic family. South of the Pyrenees, P. Sulpicius Galba, , 
governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, and Poppaea's former 

	* Suet. Nero, 19-24; Dio Cass. Epit. lxiii. 8-16. 

husband, Marcus Salvius Otho, governor of Lusitania, followed 
Vindex's example. At first, however, fortune seemed to favour 
Nero. It is very probable that Vindex had other aims in view 
than the deposition of Nero and the substitution of a fresh 
emperor in his place, and that the liberation of northern Gaul 
from Roman rule was part of his plan. 1 If this was so, it is 
easy to understand both the enthusiasm with which the chiefs 
of northern Gaul rallied to the standard of a leader belonging 
to their own race, and the opposition which Vindex encountered 
from the Roman colony of Lugdunum and the legions on the 
Rhine. For it is certain that the latter at any rate were not 
animated by loyalty to Nero. Though they defeated Vindex 
and his Celtic levies at Vesontio (Besancon), their next step 
was to break the statues of Nero and offer the imperial purple 
to their own commander Virginius Rufus. He, declined their 
offer, but appealed to them to declare for the senate and people 
of Rome. Meanwhile in Spain Galba had been saluted imperator 
by his legions, had accepted the title, and was already on his 
march towards Italy. On the road the news met him that 
Vindex had been crushed by the army of the Rhine, and for 
the moment he resolved to abandon his attempt. Meanwhile, 
Nero had reluctantly left Greece, but returned to Italy only 
to renew his revels. When on the 19th of March the news 
reached him at Naples of the rising in Gaul, he allowed a week 
to elapse before he could tear himself away from his pleasures, 
and then contented himself with proscribing Vindex, and setting 
a price on his head. The revolts in Spain and Germany terrified 
him too late into something like energy. The senate almost 
openly intrigued against him, and the populace were silent or 
hostile. The fidelity of the praetorian sentinels even was more 
than doubtful. When finally the palace guards forsook their posts, 
Nero despairingly stole out of Rome to seek shelter in a freed- 
man's villa some four miles off. There he heard of the senate's 
proclamation of Galba as emperor, and of the sentence of death 
passed on himself. On the approach of the horsemen sent to 
drag him to execution, he collected sufficient courage to save 
himself by suicide. Nero died on the 9th of June 68, in the 
thirty-first year of his age and the fourteenth of his reign, and 
his remains were deposited by the faithful hands of Acte in the 
family tomb of the Domitii on the Pincian Hill. With his death 
ended the line of the Caesars, and Roman imperialism entered 
upon a new phase. His statues were broken, his name every- 
where erased, and his golden house demolished; yet, in spite 
of all, no Roman emperor has left a deeper mark upon subsequent 
tradition. The Roman populace for a long time reverenced his 
memory as that of an open-handed patron, and in Greece the 
recollections of his magnificence, and his enthusiasm for art, 
were still fresh when the traveller Pausanias visited the country 
a century later. The belief that he had not really died, but 
would return again to confound his foes, was long prevalent, 
not only in the remoter provinces, but even in Rome itself; 
and more than one pretender was able to collect a following 
by assuming the name of the last of the race of Augustus. More 
lasting still was the implacable hatred of those who had suffered 
from his cruelties. Roman literature, faithfully reflecting the 
sentiments of the aristocratic salons of the capital, while it 
almost canonized those who had been his victims, fully avenged 
their wrongs by painting Nero as a monster of wickedness. In 
Christian tradition he even appears as the mystic Antichrist, 
who was destined to come once again to trouble the saints. Even 
in the middle ages, Nero was still the very incarnation of splendid 
iniquity, while the belief lingered obstinately that he had only 
disappeared for a time, and as late as the nth century his 
restless spirit was supposed to haunt the slopes of the Pincian 
Hill. 

The chief ancient authorities for Nero's life and reign are Tacitus 
(Annals, xiii.-xvi., ed. Furneaux), Suetonius, Dio Cassius (Epit. 
Ixi., lxii. f bciii.), and Zonaras (Ann. xi.). The most important 
modern work is that of B. W. Henderson, The Life and Prtncipate 
of the Emperor Nero (London, 1903; see an important notice in 

	^uet. Nero, 40; Dio Cass. Epit. Ixiii. 22; Plut. Galba, 4; 
	cf. also Schiller's Nero, pp. 261 seq.; Mommsen in Hermes, xiii. 90. 

Class. Rev. vol. xviii. p. 57), which contains complete bibliography 
of ancient and modern writers; see also H. Schiller's Nero, and 
Geschichte d. Kaiserzeit; Lehmann, Claudius und Nero; histories of 
Rome in general. (H. F. P.) 


NERVA, MARCUS COCCEIUS, Roman emperor from the 
18th of September 96 to the 25th of January 98, was born at 
Narnia in Umbria on the 8th of November, probably in the year 
35. He belonged to a senatorial family, which had attained 
considerable distinction under the emperors, his father and 
grandfather having been well-known jurists. A single inscription 
(C.I.L. vi. 31,297) gives the name of his mother as Sergia 
Plautilla, daughter of Laenas. In his early manhood he had been 
on friendly terms with Nero, by whom he was decorated in 65 
(Tacitus, A nnals, xv. 72) with the triumphal insignia after the 
suppression of the Pisonian conspiracy (further valuable informa- 
tion as to his career is given in an inscription from Sassoferrato, 
(C.I.L. xi. 5743). 

He was praetor (66) and twice consul, in 71 with the emperor 
Vespasian for colleague, and again in 90 with Domitian. Towards 
the close of the latter's reign (93) he is said to have excited sus- 
picion and to have been banished to Tarentum on a charge of 
conspiracy (Dio Cass, lxvii. 15; Philostr. ApolL Tyan. vii. 
8). On the murder of Domitian in September 96 Nerva was 
declared emperor by the people and the soldiers. He is described 
as a quiet, kindly, dignified man, honest of purpose, but unfitted 
by his advanced age and temperament, as well as by feeble 
health, to bear the weight of empire. Nevertheless, his selection, 
in spite of occasional exhibitions of weakness, justified the choice. 
His accession brought a welcome relief from the terrible strain 
of the last few years. The new emperor recalled those who had 
been exiled by Domitian; what remained of their confiscated 
property was restored to them, and a stop was put to the vex- 
atious prosecutions which Domitian had encouraged. But the 
popular feeling demanded more than this. The countless 
informers of all classes who had thriven under the previous 
regime now found themselves swept away, to borrow Pliny's 
metaphor (Pliny, Panqg. 35), by a hurricane of revengeful fury, 
which threatened to become as dangerous in its indiscriminate 
ravages as the system it attacked. It was finally checked by 
Nerva, who was stung into action by the sarcastic remark of 
the consul Titus Catius Caesius Fronto that, " bad as it was 
to have an emperor who allowed no one to do anything, it was 
worse to have one who allowed every one to do everything " 
(Dio Cass, lxviii. 1). 

Nerva seems to have followed the custom of announcing the 
general lines of his future policy. Domitian had been arbitrary 
and high-handed, and had heaped favours on the soldiery while 
humiliating the .senate; Nerva showed himself anxious to 
respect the traditional privileges of the senate, and such maxims 
of constitutional government as still survived. He pledged 
himself to put no senator to death. His chosen councillors in 
all affairs of state were senators, and the hearing of claims 
against the fiscus was taken from the imperial procurator es and 
entrusted to the more impartial jurisdiction of a praetor and a 
court of judices (Dio Cass, lxviii. 2; Digest, i. 2, 2; Pliny, 
Paneg.36). 

No one probably expected from Nerva a vigorous admini- 
stration either at home or abroad, although during his reign a 
successful campaign was carried on in Pannonia against the 
Germans (Suebi), for which he assumed the name Germanicus. 
He appears, however, to have set himself honestly to carry out 
reforms. The economical condition of Italy evidently excited 
his alarm and sympathy. The last mention of a lex agraria in 
Roman history is connected with his name, though how far the 
measure was strictly speaking a law is uncertain. Under the 
provisions of this lex, large tracts of land were bought up and 
allotted to poor citizens. The cost was defrayed partly from the 
imperial treasury, but partly also from Nerva's private resources, 
and the execution of the scheme was entrusted to commissioners 
(Dig. xlvii. 21, 3; Dio Cass, lxviii. 2; Pliny, Ep. vii. 31; 
Corp. Inscr. Lat. vi. 1548). He also founded or restored colonies 
at Verulae, Scyllacium and Sitifis in Mauretania. The agrarian 
law was probably as short-lived in its effects as preceding ones 
had been, but a more lasting reform was the maintenance at the 
public cost of the children of poor parents in the towns of Italy 
(Aur. Vict. Ep. 24), the provision being presumably secured by a 
yearly charge on state and municipal lands. Private individuals 
were also encouraged to follow the imperial example. In the 
hands of Trajan, Hadrian and the Antonines, Nerva's example 
bore fruit in the institution of the alimentationes, the most 
genuinely charitable institution of the pagan world. These 
measures Nerva supplemented by others which aimed at lighten- 
ing the financial burdens on the declining industry of Italy. 
The cost of maintaining the imperial postal system (yehiculatio) 
was transferred to the fiscus; from the same source apparently 
money was found for repairing the public roads and aqueducts; 
and lastly, the lucrative but unpopular tax of 5 % on all legacies 
or inheritances (vicesima hereditatum) , was so readjusted as to 
remove the grosser abuses connected with it (Pliny, Paneg. 37) . At 
the same time Nerva did his best to reduce the overgrown expendi- 
ture of the state (Pliny, Ep. ii. 1). A commission was appointed to 
consider the best modes of retrenchment, and the outlay on shows 
and games was cut down to the lowest possible point. Nerva 
seems nevertheless to have soon wearied of the uncongenial task 
of governing, and his anxiety to be rid of it was quickened by the 
discovery that not even his blameless life and mild rule protected 
him against intrigue and disaffection. Early, apparently, in 
97 he detected a conspiracy against his life headed by L. (or C.) 
Calpurnius Crassus, but he contented himself with a hint to the 
conspirators that their designs were known, and with banishing 
Crassus to Tarentum. This ill-judged lenity provoked a few 
months later an intolerable insult to his dignity. The praetorian 
guards had keenly resented the murder of their patron Domitian, 
and now, at the instigation of one of their two prefects, Casperius 
Aelianus, whom Nerva had retained in office, they imperiously 
demanded the execution of Domitian's murderers, the chamber- 
lain Parthenius and Petronius Secundus, Aelianus's colleague. 
Nerva vainly strove to save, even at the risk of his own life, the 
men who had raised him to power, but the soldiers brutally 
murdered the unfortunate men, and forced him to propose a 
vote of thanks for the deed (Dio Cass. Epit. lxviii. 4; Aur. 
Vict. Ep. 24) . This humiliation convinced Nerva of the necessity 
of placing the government in stronger hands than his own. 
Following the precedent set by Augustus, Galba and Vespasian, 
he resolved to adopt as his colleague and destined successor, 
M. Ulpius Trajanus, a distinguished soldier, at the time in com- 
mand of the legions on the Rhine. In October 97, in the temple 
of Jupiter on the Capitol, Trajan was formally adopted as his son 
and declared his colleague in the government of the empire 
(Pliny, Paneg. 8). For three months Nerva ruled jointly with 
Trajan (Aur. Vict. Ep. 24); but on the 25th (according to 
others, the 27th) of January 98 he died somewhat suddenly. 
He was buried in the sepulchre of Augustus, and divine honours 
were paid him by his successor. The verdict of history upon his 
reign is best expressed in his own words — " I have done nothing 
which should prevent me from laying down my power, and living 
in safety as a private man." . The memory of Nerva is still pre- 
served by the ruined temple in the Via Alessandrina (il Colonacce) 
which marks the site of the Forum begun by Domitian, but which 
Nerva completed and dedicated (Suet. Dom. 5; Aur. Vict. 12). 

Authorities. — Dio Cass, lxviii. 1-4; Aurelius Victor 12, and 
Epit. 24 ; Zonaras xi. 20 ; compare also Pliny, Epistolae and 
Panegyrtcus; Tillemont, Histoire des empereurs romains, ii.; 
C. Merivale, History of the Romans under the Empire, ch. 63; H. 
Schiller, Geschichte der romiscken Kaiserzeit, i. pt. 2 (1883), p. 538; 
J. Asbach, Romisches Kaiserthum und Verfassung bis auf Trajan 
(Cologne, 1896); A. Stein in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopddie 
(s.v. Cocceius, 16); J. B. Bury, The Students Roman Empire, en. 23 
(1893). (H. F. P.) 

NERVAL, GfiRARD DE (1808-1855), the adopted name of 
Gerard Labrunie, French man of letters, born in Paris on the 
22nd of May 1808. His father was an army doctor, and the 
child was left with an uncle in the country, while Mme Labrunie 
accompanied her husband in his campaigns. She died in Silesia. 
In 181 1 his father returned, and beside Greek and Latin taught 
the boy modern languages and the elements of Arabic and 
Persian. Gerard found his favourite reading in old books on 
mysticism and' the occult sciences. He distinguished himself 
by his successes at the College Charlemagne, however, and his 
first work, La France guerriere, iligies nationales, was published 
while he was still a student. In 1828 he published a translation 
of Goethe's Faust, the choruses of which were afterwards used 
by Berlioz for his legend-symphony, The Damnation of Faust. 
A number of poetical pieces and three comedies combined to 
acquire for him, at the age of twenty-one, a considerable literary 
reputation, and led to his being associated with Theophile 
Gautier in the preparation of the dramatic feuilleton for the 
Presse. He conceived a violent passion for the actress Jennie 
Colon, in whom he thought he recognized a certain Adrienne, 
who had fired his childish imagination. Her marriage and her 
death in 1842 were blows from which his nervous temperament 
never really recovered. He travelled in Germany with Alexandre 
Duma^, and alone in various parts of Europe, leading a very 
irregular and eccentric life. In 1843 he visited Constantinople 
and Syria, where, among other adventures, he nearly married 
the daughter of a Druse sheikh. He contributed accounts of his 
travels to the Revue des Deux Mondes and other periodicals. 
After his return to Paris in 1844 he resumed for a short time his 
feuilleton for the Presse, but his eccentricities increased and he 
committed suicide by hanging, on the 25th of January 1855. 
The literary style of Gerard is simple and unaffected, and he has 
a peculiar faculty of giving to his imaginative creations an air of 
naturalness and reality. In a series of novelettes, afterwards 
published under the name of Les Illumines, ou les precurseurs 
du socialisme (1852), containing studies on Retif de la Bre tonne, 
Cagliostro and others, he gave a sort of analysis of the feelings 
which followed his third attack of insanity. Among his other 
works the principal are Les FUles du feu (1854), which contains 
his masterpiece, the semi-autobiographical romance of Sylvie; 
Scbnes de la vie orientale (1848-1850); Contes el factties (1852); 
La Boheme galante (1856); and U Alchimiste, a drama in five 
acts, the joint composition of Gerard and Alexandre Dumas. 
His Poesies computes were published in 1877. 

There are many accounts of Gerard de Nerval's unhappy life. 
Among them may be mentioned notices by his friend Theophile 
Gautier and by Arsene Houssaye, prefixed to the posthumous 
Le Rive et la vie (1855); Maurice Tourneux's sketch in his Age du 
romantisme (1887); and a sympathetic study of temperament in 
the Nevrose's (1898) of Mme Arvede Barine. See also G. Ferrieres, 
Girard de Nerval (1906). 


NERVE (Lat. nervus, Gr. vevpov, a bowstring), originally a sinew 
or tendon (and still so used in the phrase " to strain every nerve "), 
but now a term practically confined to the fibres of the nervous 
system in anatomy, though consequentially employed as a general 
psychical term in the sense of courage or firmness, and sometimes 
(but more usually " nervousness ") in the opposite sense. In 
the present article the anatomy of the nerves is dealt with; see 
also Nervous System, Muscle and Nerve, Neuropathology, 
&c. 

I. Cranial 

The cranial nerves are those which rise directly from the 
brain, and for the most part are concerned with the supply of the 
head. With one exception they all contain medullated fibres 
(see Nervous System). Twelve pairs of these nerves are 
recognized, and they are spoken of as often by their numbers as 
by their names. The following is a list: — 

(1) Olfactory; (2) Optic; (3) Oculo-motor or Motor oculi; 
(4) Trochlearis or Patheticus; (5) Trigeminal or Trifacial; (6) 
Abducens; (7) Facial; (8) Auditory; (9) Glosso-pharyngeal; 
(10) Vagus or Pneumogastric; (11) Spinal accessory; (12) 
Hypoglossal. 

The first, or olfactory nerve, consists of the olfactory bulb and tract, 
which are a modified lobe of the brain and he beneath the sulcus 
rectus on the frontal lobe of the brain (see fi£. 1). At its posterior 
end thetract divides to become continuous with the two extremities 
of the limbic lobe (see Brain), while at its anterior end is the bulb 
from which some twenty small non-medullated nerves pass through 
the cribriform plate of the ethmoid to supply the sensory organs in 
the olfactory mucous membrane (see Olfactory Organ). 

The second or optic nerve consists of the optic tract, the optic 
commissure or chiasma, and the optic nerve proper. The optic tract 
begins at the lower visual centres or internal and external geniculate 
bodies, the superior quadrigeminal body and the pulvinar (see fig. i), 
but these again are connected with the higher visual centre in the 
occipital lobe by the optic radiations (see fig. 2). In the chiasma 
some of the fibres cross and some do not, so that the right optic 
tract forms the right half of both the right and left optic nerves. 
In addition to this the fibres coming from the internal geniculate 
body of one side cross in the chiasma to the same body of the op- 
posite side, forming Gudden\s commissure. The optic nerve passes 
through the optic foramen in the skull into the orbit, where^ it is 
penetrated by the central artery of the retina, and eventually pierces 
the scelerotic just internal to the posterior pole of the eyeball. Its 
final distribution is treated in the article Eye. 

The third or oculomotor nerve rises from a nucleus in the floor of 
the aqueduct of Sylvius (see Brain, fig. 8), and comes to the surface 

	Olfactory buiu 
	Olfactory tract 
	Olfactory tubercle ■ — 3 
	Optic nerve 
	Optic chiasma 
	Oculo-raotor nerve— 
	Trochlear nerve -a 
	Trigeminal nerve-H 
	Abducent nerve-^L 
	Facial nerve-|E 
	Pars intermedia- 
	Auditory 
	Glosso-pharyngeal 
	Vagus 
	Spinal accessory nerve (accessory) 
	Spinal accessory nerve (spinal) 
	Hypoglossal nerve 
	Hypoglossal nerve ■ 
	Spinal cord 
	Vermis of Cerebellum (cul) 

	From D. J. Cunningham, in Cunningham's Text-book of Anatomy. 

	Fig. 1. — View of the Under Surface of the Brain,
	with the lower portion of the temporal and occipital 
	lobes, and the cerebellum on the left side removed,
	to show the origins of the cranial nerves. 

in a groove on the inner side of the cms cerebri (fig. 1); it soon 
pierces the dura mater, and lies in the outer wall of the cavernous 
sinus, where it divides into an upper and lower branch. Both 
these enter the orbit through the sphenoidal fissure, the upper 
branch supplying the superior rectus and levator palpebrae 
superioris muscles, the lower the inferior and internal rectus and the 
inferior oblique, so that it supplies five of the seven orbital muscles. 

The fourth or trochlear nerve is very small, and comes from a 
nucleus a little lower than that of the third nerve. It is specially 
remarkable in that it crosses to the opposite side in the substance 
of the valve of Vieussens of the fourth ventricle, after which it 
winds round the outer side of the cms cerebri (fig. 1) and enters the 
outer wall of the cavernous sinus to reach the orbit through the 
sphenoidal fissure. Here it enters the superior oblique muscle 
on its orbital surface. 

The fifth or trigeminal nerve consists of motor and sensory roots. 
The motor root rises irom a nucleus in the upper lateral part of the 
floor of the fourth ventricle, as well as by a descending (mesence- 
phalic) tract from the neighbourhood of the Sylvian aqueduct 
(see fig. 3). The large sensory root goes to a sensory nucleus a 
little external to the motor one, and also, by a spinal or descending 
root, to the substantia gelatinosa Rolandi as low as the second 
spinal nerve (see fig. 3). The superficial origin of the fifth nerve is 
from the side of the pons (see fig. 1), and the two roots at once 
pass into a small compartment of the dura mater, in front of the 
apex of the petrous bone, known as Meckel's cave; here the large 
crescentic Gasserian ganglion is formed upon the sensory root, and 
from this the three branches come off, earning the nerve its name 
of trigeminal. The first of these divisions is the ophthalmic, the 
second the maxillary, and the third the mandibular, while the motor 
root only joins the last of these. The first or ophthalmic division of 
the fifth runs in the outer wall of the cavernous sinus, where it 
divides into frontal, lachrymal and nasal branches. They all enter 
the orbit through the sphenoidal fissure.^ The frontal nerve divides 
into supraorbital and supratrochlear, which pass out of the upper 
part of the anterior opening of the orbit and supply the skin of the 
forehead and upper part of the scalp as well as the inner part of the 
eyelids. The lachrymal nerve supplies that gland and the outer 
part of the upper eyelid. The nasal nerve gives off a branch to the 
ciliary or lenticular ganglion, which lies in the outer part of the 
orbit, and through which, as well as through its own long ciliary 

branches, it supplies the eyeball with sensation. 1 1 leaves the 
orbit through the anterior ethmoidal canal, and lies for a short 
distance on the cribrilorm plate of the ethmoid; it then enters 
the nasal cavity through the nasal slit and supplies this cavity, as 
well as the surface of the nose as 
far as the tip, with ordinary sensation. The second or maxil- 
lary division of the fifth nerve leaves the skull through the foramen 
rotundum, and then runs across the roof of the spheno-maxillary 
fossa; here the spheno-maxillary or Meckel's ganglion hangs from 
it by two roots. The nerve then runs in the floor of the orbit, 
giving off superior dental branches, until it emerges on to the face at 
the infraorbital foramen, where it divides into palpebral, nasal and 
labial branches, the names ^ of which indicate their distribution. 
The third or mandibular division of the fifth leaves the skull 
through the foramen ovale, and at once gives off a set of motor 
branches for the muscles cf mastication; these are derived from 
the motor root of the fifth, except that for the buccinator, which 
really supplies only the skin and mucous membrane in contact 
with the muscle. After the motor branch is given off, the third 
division of the fifth divides into lingual, inferior dental and 
auriculo-temporal. The lingual is joined by the chorda tympani 
branch of the facial nerve, and then passes to the anterior two- 
thirds of the tongue. In its course it passes deep to the submaxillary 
gland, and here the small submaxillary ganglion is connected 
with it by two roots. The inferior dental nerve gives off a small 

	•Olfactory bulb 
	iry tract 
	Broca's area 
	Olfactory tubercle 
	Mesial root of olfactory 
	lerve 
	'Lateral root 
	'Optic rhiflwia 
	i Ant. perforated spot 
	•Temporal lobe (cut) 
	detract 
	!o-motor nerve 
	Trochlear nerve 
	Taenia semidrcularis 
	Trigeminal nerve 
	geniculate body 
	.bducent nerve 
	Int. geniculate body 
	Pulvinar 
	Facial nerve 
	Pars intermedia 
	Auditory nerve 
	Lateral ventricle 
	Mid. cerebellar peduncle 
	Glosso-pharyngeal nerve 
	Vagus nerve 
	Spinal accessory nerve 
	(accessory) 
	Spinal accessory nerve 
	(spinal) 
	Occipital lobe (cut) 

motor branch to the mylohyoid and posterior belly of the digastric 
muscles, and then enters a canal in the lower jaw, where it gives 
off twigs to all the lower teeth. A mental branch comes out through 
the mental foramen to supply the skjn of the chin. The aurictdo 
temporal nerve rises by two roots, which embrace the middle men- 
ingeal artery, and runs backward and then upwafd close to the 
lower jaw joint to supply the parotid gland, the skin on the outer 
side of the car, and the side of the scalp. At its beginning it com- 
municates with the otic ganglion, which lies just internal to it below 
the foramen ovale, and also receives a communication from the 
nerve to the internal pterygoid^ muscle. 

The sixth or abducent nerve rises from a nucleus in the floor of the 
fourth ventricle deep to the epinentia teres (see fig. 3). It appears 
on the surface of the brain just below the pons and close to the 
middle line (see fig. 1), soon after which it pierces the dura mater 
and runs in the floor of the cavernous sinus to the sphenoidal fissure. 
Entering the orbit through this, it quickly supplies the external 
rectus muscle. 

The seventh or facial nerve begins in a nucleus which is about the 
same level as that for the sixth, but much deeper from the floor of 
the fourth ventricle as well as farther from the middle line (see fig. 3). 
The fibres of the facial loop round the nucleus of the sixth, and 
then emerge in the triangular interval between the medulla, pons 
and cerebellum, close to the eighth nerve, and having the pars 
intermedia between (see fig. i). Entering the internal auditory 
meatus with these structures the facial nerve soon passes into a 
canal in the petrous bone known as the aqueductus Fattopii, and in 

this it makes a sudden bend and forms the 
geniculate ganglion, From which the great 
superficial petrosal branch to Meckel's 
ganglion is given off. The canal ends at the 
stylo-mastoid foramen on the base of 
the skull, and here the nerve enters the par- 
otid gland, in which it forms a plexus called 
the pes anserinus. From this, branches 
pass to all the muscles of the face except 
those of mastication. In the aqueduct the 
pars intermedia joins the seventh, and, be- 
yond the geniculate ganglion, leaves it as 
the chorda tympani, which runs through 
the tympanum (see Ear) to join the lin- 
gual branch of the fifth. It is prob- 
able that the pars intermedia, geni- 
culate ganglion and^ chorda tym- 
pani, represent the sensory root 
of the facial nerve. Just out- 
side the stylo-mastoid foramen 

	From D. J. Cunningham, in Cunningham's Text-Book of ^he facial gives 
	AMatom y- off the posterior 

	Fig. 2. — Diagram of the Central Connexions auricular branch 
	of the Optic Nerve and Optic Tract. to the occipitalis 

	and posterior 
	auricular muscles, as well as a branch of supply to the stylo- 
	hyoid and posterior belly of thedigastric muscles. 

The eighth or auditory nerve is in two bundles, cochlear and 
vestibular. The former comes from the cochlear nuclei which lie 
deep to the acoustic tubercle in the floor of the fourth ventricle 
(see fig. 3), while the latter rises from the dorsal nucleus, nucleus 
of Deiters and the nucleus of the descending root, which are 
more deeply placed. The nucleus of Deiters is connected with 
the cerebellum, and is concerned in maintaining the eauilibrium 
(q.v.) of the body, while, as is pointed out in the article B rain, 
the cochlear nuclei are connected with the inferior quadri- 
.geminal body by the lateral fillet as well as with the internal 
geniculate body, while this body again is connected with the 
higher auditory centre in the grey cortex of the temporo- 
spnenoidal lobe by the auditory radiations. The vestibular 
root passes in front of the restiform body (see fig. 3), and the 
cochlear behind that body. Together they enter the internal 
auditory meatus, and, at the end of it, pierce the lamina 
cribrosa, the vestibular nerve supplying the utricle and superior v *cus 
and external semicircular canals, the cochlear nerve the posterior 
canal, the saccule and the cochlea (see Ear). 

The ninth or glossopharyngeal^ nerve is chiefly, if not entirely, 
sensory, and its deep termination in the brain is the solitary 
bundle (see fig. 3; and Brain, fig. 4). It appears on the surface vagus" 
between the olive and restiform body (see fig. 1), and leaves the 
skull through the posterior lacerated foramen ; as it does so two 
ganglia, the jugular and petrous, are formed on it, after which 
it runs downward and forward, between the internal and ex- 
ternal carotid arteries, and eventually reaches the back of the 
tongue (see Tongue). On its way it supplies the tympanum, 
the stylopharyngeus muscle, though there is grave doubt as to 
whether these fibres are not really derived from the facial nerve, 
contributions to the pharyngeal plexus, the tonsil and part of 
, the epiglottis. 

The tenth nerve or vagus has sensory and motor fibres; the 
former go to the solitary bundle mentioned in the description of the 
last nerve (see fig. 3), while the latter come from the dorsal nucleus and 
nucleus ambiguus, both of which are found deep to the lower half 
of the fourth ventricle. The nerve appears on the surface between 
the olive and restiform body and just below the ninth (see fig. 1). 
It leaves the skull through the posterior lacerated foramen, and, 
like the glossopharyngeal, has two ganglia developed on it; the 
upper of these is the ganglion of the root, and the lower the ganglion 
of the trunk (see fig. 4). From the former the auricular branch or 
Arnold's nerve (see Ear) comes off, while from the latter are given 
off the pharyngeal branches to the pharyngeal plexus (fig. 4, Ph.) 
and the superior laryngeal branch which is the sensory nerve of the 
larynx (fig. 4, S.L.) ; ^ Between the two ganglia the accessory part of 
the eleventh nerve joins the tenth, and it is from this communication 
that the motor twigs to the pharynx, larynx, alimentary and re- 
spiratory tracts are derived, as well as the inhibitory^ fibres of the 
heart. In the neckthe vagus accomoanies the carotid artery apd 
internal jugular vein, and here jt gives off superior and inferior 
cardiac branches. The left inferior cardiac branch passes to the 
superficial, while the three others go to the deep cardiac plexus. 
The nerve now enters the thorax, passing between the subclavian 
artery and vein. On the right side its recurrent laryngeal branch 
loops under the subclavian artery (fig. 4, R.), and runs up to supply 
all the muscles of the larynx except one (see Respiratory System). 
In the thorax the left vagus passes in front of the arch of the aorta, 
under which the left recurrent laryngeal loops, and on both sides a 
thoracic cardiac branch is given to the deep cardiac plexus. Both 
vagi pass behind the root of their own lung, and break up to form the 
posterior pulmonary plexus after giving off some -branches for the 
much smaller anterior pulmonary plexus ; they then reach the 
oesophagus, where they again break up into an oesophageal plexus 
or plexus gulae. As the diaphragm is approached the two nerves 
become distinct again, but the left one now lies in front and the 
right behind the food tube, so that, when the stomach is reached, 
the left vagus supplies the front of the organ and communicates with 
the hepatic plexus, while the right goes to the back and communicates 
with the coeliac, splenic and renal plexuses. 

The eleventh or spinal accessory nerve is entirely motor, and con- , 
sists of a spinal and an accessory part. The former rises from the 

	rACiAU 

	From D. J. Cunningham, in Cunningham's Text-Book 0/ Anatomy. 
	Fig. 3. — Deep Origins of Cranial Nerves from the Fourth Ventricle, 

anterior horn of the grey matter of the spinal cord as low as the 
fifth cervical nerve. Its fibres come to the surface mid-way between 
the anterior and posterior nerve-roots, and run up through the 
foramen magnum to join the accessory part, the deep origin of 
which is the lower part of the nucleus ambiguus. The accessory 
part, as has been noticed, joins the vagus, while the spinal part 
pierces the sterno-mastoid muscle and runs obliquely downward 

	From A. M. Paterson,in Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 
	Fig. 4. — The Distribution of the Pneumogastric Nerve, 
	Va.R, 
	Va.L, 
	Sy t 
	G.Ph, 
	Ace, 
	m, 
	Aur, 
	t t 
	Hy, 
	Cl,C2 
	Ace, 
	Ph, 
	Pk.Pl, 
	S.L, 
	I.L, 
	E.L, 
	Right vagi. 
	Left vagi. 
	Ganglion of the root and 
	connexions with 
	Sympathetic, superior cer- 
	vical ganglion. 
	Glossopharyngeal. 
	Spinal accessory nerve. 
	Meningeal branch. 
	Auricular branch. 
	Ganglion of the trunk 
	and connexions with 
	Hypoglossal nerve. 
	Loop between the first 
	two cervical nerves. 
	Sympathetic. 
	Spinal accessory nerve. 
	Pharyngeal branch. 
	Pharyngeal plexus. 
	Superior laryngeal nerve. 
	Internal laryngeal branch. 
	External laryngeal branch. 
	J.C, 
	E.C, 
	Cai, 
	Ca2, 
	R.L, 
	Ca$, 
	Ca\, 
	Internal, and 
	External carotid arteries. 
	Superior cervical cardiac 
	branch. [branch. 
	Inferior cervical 'cardiac 
	Recurrent laryngeal nerve. 
	Cardiac bra nches from 
	recurrent laryngeal 
	nerves. 
	Thoracic cardiac branch 
	(right vagus). 
	A. P. PI, Anterior, and 
	P. P. Pi, Posterior pulmonary 
	plexuses. 
	Oes.Pl, Oesophageal plexus. 
	Gast.R, and Gast.L, Gastric 
	branches of vagus (right 
	and left). 
	Coe.Pl, Coeliac plexus. 
	Hep.Pl, Hepatic plexus. 
	Spl.Pl, Splenic plexus. 
	Ren.Pl, Renal plexus. 

and backward across the posterior triangle of the neck to enter 
the trapezius; both these muscles are in part supplied by the 
nerve. 

The twelfth or hypoglossal nerve is motor, and rises from a nucleus 
in the floor of the fourth ventricle deep to the trigonum hypoglossi 
(see Brain, fig. 3). It emerges from the brain between the anterior 
pyramid and the olive (see fig. 1), and leaves the skull in two bundles 
through the anterior condylar foramen. Soon after this it is closely 
bound to the vagus, and, in front of the atlas, receives an important 
contribution from the loop between the first and second cervical 
nerves. The nerve then passes downward until it reaches the 
origin of the occipital artery, round which it loops, and then runs 
forward on the surface of the hyo-glossus to the muscles of the 
tongue. As it bends round the occipital artery it gives off its de- 
scendens hypoglossi branch, which derives its fibres from the com- 
munication with the first cervical already mentioned. This branch 
runs down and forms a^ loop with the communicans cervicis branch 
from the second and third cervical nerves, and from this loop (ansa 
hypoglossi) many^ of the depressor muscles of the hyoid bone and 
larynx are supplied. Farther forward special branches are given 
off to the thyro-hyoid and cenio-hyoid muscles, and these, like the 
descendens hypoglossi, are derived from the first and second cervical 
loop, thus leaving all the true muscles of the tongue to be supplied 
by the medullary part of the nerve. 

For the embryology and comparative anatomy of the cranial 
nerves, see Nervous System. 

II. Spinal 

The spinal nerves are those which arise from each side of the 
spinal cord and are distributed to the trunk and limbs, though 
some of the upper ones supply the lower parts of the head and 
face. As is shown in the article Nervous System, the division 
between cranial and spinal nerves is rather one of convenience 
than of any real scientific difference. There are generally 
thirty-one pairs of these nerves, which are subdivided according 
to the part of the vertebral column through which they pass out; 
thus there are eight cervical (abbreviated C), twelve thoracic 
(Th.) — formerly called dorsal, — five lumbar (L.), five sacral (S.) 
and one coccygeal (Coo). As the thoracic nerves are the simplest 
and most generalized in their arrangement, a typical one of these, 
say the fourth or fifth, will be first described. 

The nerve is attached to the spinal cord by two roots, of which 
the ventral is purely efferent or motor and the dorsal purely afferent 
or sensory. On the dorsal root is a fusiform ganglion which lies in 
the foramen between the vertebrae through which the nerve passes.
The two roots then join together to form a mixed nerve (see fig. 5),
but very soon divide once more into anterior (ventral) and posterior
(dorsal) primary divisions. These, however, each contain sensory and
motor fibres. J Just before it divides in this way the mixed 
nerve gives and receives its rami communicantes with the sympa- 
thetic (see Nervous System). 

The anterior primary division 
runs" round the trunk, between the 
ribs, forming an intercostal nerve 
and giving off a lateral cutaneous branch, when the side of the
body is 


	From A. M. Paterson, in Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 
	Fig. 5. — Scheme of the Distribution of a 
	Typical Spinal Nerve. 

reached, which divides into anterior and posterior secondary branches. 
The rest of the division runs forward, supplying the intercostal 
muscles, as far as the edge of the sternum, when it ends in an 
anterior cutaneous branch to the front of the chest. The dorsal 
primary division divides into an external (lateral) and internal 
(mesial) branch through which the skin and muscles of the back are 
supplied. 

It will be seen from the foregoing that the thoracic nerves are 
almost completely segmental in their distribution, in other words, 

	From A. M. Paterson, in Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy* 

	Fig. 6. — The Distribution of Cutaneous Nerves on the front of 
	the Trunk. On one side the distribution of the several nerves is 
	represented, the letters indicating their nomenclature. 

	G.A., Great auricular nerve. 
	S.C, Superficial cervical nerve. 
	S.Cl, Supraclavicular nerves. 
	Acr, Acromial. 
	Cl f Clavicular. 
	St f Sternal. 

	7\ 2-12, Lateral and anterior 
	branches of thoracic nerves. 
	I.H, llio-hypogastric nerve. 
	J.J, llio-inguinal nerve. 
	Circ, Cutaneous branch of cir- 
	cumflex nerve, [nerve. 
	LJ.C, Lesser internal cutaneous 
	LH, 
	LC, 
	M.S, 
	5.5c, 
	Intercostohumeral. 
	Internal cutaneous. 
	Cutaneous branch of mus- 
	culo-spiral nerve. 
	E.C, External cutaneous nerve. 
	G.C, Genito-crural nerve. 
	M.C 1 ***, Middle cutaneous nerve. 
	J. C l , Branch of internal cutane- 
	ous nerve. 
	Branches of pudic nerve. 
	Branches of small sciatic 
	nerve. 

each supplies a slice of the body, but in the other regions this seg- 
mental character is masked by the development of the branchial 
skeleton and the limbs. In the cervical region the first cervical or 
suboccipital nerve comes out between the occiput and atlas and does 
not always have a posterior root. When it has not, it obviously can 
supply no skin. Its anterior primary division joins those of the 
second, third and fourth cervical nerves to form the cervical plexus, 
from which the skin of the side of the neck and lower part of the 
head and face are supplied by means of the small occipital, great 
auricular, superficial cervical, suprasternal, supraclavicular and supra- 
acromial nerves (see fig. 7), as well as those muscles of the neck 
which are not supplied by the cranial nerves. The phrenic nerve, 
which comes chiefly from the fourth cervical, deserves special notice 
because it runs down, through the thorax, to supply the greater part 
of the diaphragm. The explanation of this long course (see Dia- 
phragm) is that the diaphragm is formed in the neck region of the 
embryo. The posterior primary division of the second cervical nerve 
is very large, and its inner (mesial) branch is called the great occipital 
and supplies most of the back of the scalp (fig. 7). The filth, sixth, 
seventh and eighth anterior primary divisions of the cervical nerves 
as well as a large part of that of the first thoracic are prolonged into 
the arm, and in the lower part of the neck and armpit communicate 
with one another to form the brachial plexus. As a general law 
underlies the composition of the limb plexuses it will be worth while 
to study the structure and distribution of this one with some little 
care. It will be seen from the accompanying diagram (fig. 8) that 
each component nerve with the exception of the first thoracic 
divides into an anterior (ventral) and a posterior (dorsal) division 
which are best spoken of as secondary divisions in order to prevent 
any confusion with the anterior and posterior* primary divisions 
which all the spinal nerves undergo. In the diagram the anterior 
secondary divisions are white, while the posterior are shaded. It 
has been suggested by A. M. Paterson that the posterior secondary 
branches correspond with the lateral branches of the thoracic nerves 
already mentioned, but there are still certain difficulties to be 
explained before altogether accepting this. Later on in the plexus 
three cords are formed of which the posterior is altogether made up 
of the posterior secondary divisions, while the anterior secondary 
divisions of the fifth, sixth and seventh cervical nerves form the 

	C.v»«THia?*o. • 

	From Gray's Anatomy, Descriptive end Surgical. 

	Fig. 9. — Plan of the Lumbar and Sacral Plexuses. 

external cord, and those of the eighth cervical and first thoracic 
the inner. As a general rule the nerves which rise from the ventral 
secondary divisions of the limb plexuses run only to that surface of 
the limb which was ventral in the embryo, while the dorsal secondary 
divisions are confined to the original dorsal area, but, in order to 
apply this to the human adult, it must be realized that the limbs 
are at one time flattened buds coming off at right angles from the 
side of the body and having dorsal and ventral surfaces, one (pre- 
axial) border toward the head of the embryo, and one (postaxial) 
toward the tail. If a person lies prone upon the floor with the arms 
outstretched and the palms downward the embryological position 
of the forelimb is to some extent restored, and it will now be easily 
understood that the more preaxial part of the limb will be supplied 
by those nerves which enter it from nearer the head, while the 
postaxial part draws its nerve supply from lower down the spinal 
cord. To use Herringham's words: * (A) Of two spots on the skin, 
that nearer the preaxial border tends to be supplied by the higher 
nerve. (B) Of two spots in the preaxial area the lower tends to be 
supplied by the lower nerve, and of two spots in the postaxial area 
the lower tends to be supplied by the higher nerve." Other points 
of general importance in regard to cutaneous nerve supply are, 
firstly, that the area of skin supplied by one spinal nerve is not 
sharply marked off from that of the next, but the two are separated 

	Great occpil 
	nerve 
	Small occipital 
	Great auricular 
	Mylo-byoid 
	nerve 
	Nerves to levator 
	anguli scapulae 
	Superficial cervical 
	nerve 
	Spinal accessory 
	Nerve to trapezius 
	Acromial'] branches f 
	CUvicular L££j 
	SlernalJ plexus I 
	Posterior scapular 
	nerve 
	Posterior thoracic 

outer head of the median nerve (C. 5?, 6, 7), which joins the inner 
head (C. 8, Th. 1) and supplies most of the flexor muscles of the 
front of the forearm as well as those of the ball of the thumb, the 
outer two lumbricals and also the skin of the outer part of the palm 
including the outer three digits and half the fourth. 

From the inner cord come the inner head of the median just 
mentioned, the ulnar nerve (C. 8, Th. 1), which passes down behind 
the internal condyle of the humerus, where it is popularly known as 
the ** funny bone " and supplies the flexor carpi ulnans, half the 
flexor profundus digitorum, and most of the muscles of the hand 
as well as the inner digit and^ a half on the palmar and dorsal 
aspects. Other branches of the inner cord are the internal cutaneous 
(C. 8, Th. 1) supplying the inner side of the forearm, the lesser 
internal cutaneous (Th. 1) which often joins the intercosto-humeral or 
lateral cutaneous branch of the second intercostal nerve to supply 
the skin on the inner side of the upper arm, and the internal anterior 
thoracic nerve (C. 8, Th. 1) to the pectoralis minor and major. 

From the posterior cord are derived the 
three subscapular nerves (C. 5, 6, 7, 8) 
which supply # the subscapukris, teres 
major and latissimus dorsi muscles, the 
circumflex nerve (C. 5, 6) supplying the 
deltoid and teres minor muscles, and the 
skin over the lower part of the deltoid, 
and the museulo-spiral nerve (C. 5, 6, 7, 8) 
which is the largest branch of the 
brachial plexus and gives off cutaneous 
twigs to the outer side and back of the 
arm and to the back of the forearm, as well 
as muscular twigs to the triceps and 
adjacent muscles. At the elbow this 
nerve divides into the radial and posterior 
interosseous. The radial is entirely sen- 
sory and supplies the skin of the outer side 
of the back of the hand, including three 
digits and a half, while the posterior inter- 
osseous is wholly muscular, supplying the 
muscles on the back of the forearm. It 
will be seen that the posterior cord is 
derived altogether from posterior second- 
ary divisions of the plexus, but there 
are three other nerves derived from these 
which should be mentioned. 

The posterior thoracic or respiratory 
nerve of Bell comes off the back of the 
fifth, sixth and seventh cervical nerves 
before the anterior and posterior secondary 

	Internal laryn-
	Hypoglossal 
	nerve 
	g«d nerve 
	Nerve to 
	thyro-byoid 
	Descendens 
	hypoglossi 

	From A. M. Paterson, in Cunningham's Text-book ofAnatomy. 

	Fig. 7. — The Triangles of the Neck (Nerves) 

"by an overlapping region^ and, secondly, that the area supplied by 
any one spinal nerve is liable to variation in different individuals 
within moderate limits. This variation may affect the whole plexus, 
and the term " prefixed plexus " has been devised by C.S. Sherring- 
ton to indicate one in which the spinal nerves entering into its 
formation are rather higher than usual, while, when the opposite 
is the case, the plexus is spoken of as " postfixed." 

With regard to the muscular supply of a limb the general rule is 
that each muscle is supplied by fibres derived from more than one 
spinal nerve; this, of course, is made possible by the redistribution 
of fibres in the plexuses. Moreover, the muscular supply does not 
necessarily correspond to that of the overlying skin, because (see 
Muscular System) some of the primitive muscles have been sup- 
pressed, others have fused together, while others have shifted thejr 
position to a considerable distance. Bearing the foregoing facts in 
mind, the main distribution of the nerves of the brachial plexus may 
be surveyed, though the exact details must be sought in the human 
anatomy text-books. The outer cord of the plexus gives off the 
external anterior thoracic nerve (C. 5, 6, 7) to the pectoralis major, 
the musculo-cutaneous nerve (C. 5, 6) to the muscles on the front of 
the arm, and to the skin of the outer side of the forearm and the 
divisions separate, and runs down to supply 
the serratus magnus muscle. 

The posterior scapular or nerve to the 
rhomboid muscles runs to those muscles 
from the fifth cervical. 

The suprascapular nerve (C, 5, 6) passes 
through the suprascapular notch to supply 
the supraspinatus and infraspinatus 
muscles. t 

The spinal nerves which are distributed 
to the lower limbs first intercommunicate 
in the lumbar and sacral plexuses, which, 
with the perineal nerves, are sometimes 
spoken of together as the lumbo sacral 
plexus. The lumbar plexus (see fig. 9) is 
formed as a rule of the first four lumbar 
nerves, though the greater part of the first 
number is segmental in its distribution 
and resembles one of the thoracic nerves. 
It early divides into an ilio-hypogastric 
and ilio-inguinal branch, which run 
round the abdominal wall in the sub- 
stance of the muscles^ and of which the former gives off an iliac 
branch, which is in series with the lateral cutaneous branches of the 
intercostal nerves and passes over the crest of the ilium to the 
gluteal region, while the hypogastric branch runs round to the skin 
of the pubic region. The ilio-inguinal, on the other hand, gives off 
no lateral cutaneous or iliac branch, but is prolonged down the 
inguinal canal to supply the skin of the scrotum as well as that of 
the thigh which^ touches it.^ In all probability the hypogastric 
branch of the ilio-hypogastric and the whole of the ilio-inguinal 
represent the anterior secondary division of the first lumbar nerve, 
while the posterior secondary division is the iliac branch of the ilio- 
hypogastric. 

The other anterior secondary divisions of the lumbar plexus is 
the obturator (see fig. 8). The obturator nerve (L. 2, 3, 4) supplies 
the adductor group of muscles on the inner side of the thigh as 
well as the hip and knee joints; it occasionally has a cutaneous 
branch on the inner side of the thigh. The posterior secondary 
branches of the plexus are the genito-crural, the external cutaneous 
and the anterior crural. The genito-crural nerve (L. 1, 2) is partly 
anterior (ventral) and partly posterior (dorsal). It sends one 
anterior branch through the inguinal canal to supply the cremaster 
muscle, and another (posterior) to the skin of the thigh just below 
the groin. 

The external cutaneous nerve (L.2, 3) supplies the skin of the 
outer side of the thigh, while the anterior crural (L.2, 3, 4) innervates 
the muscles on the front of the thigh, the skin on the front and inner 
division. The into 

	From A. M. Paterson, in Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 

	Fig. 8. — The Nerves of the Brachial Plexus. 
	Sy, Sympathetic gangliated cord. Cb, Nerve to coraco-brachialis. 
	Phr f Phrenic nerve. if, Median nerve. 
	C.4, 5.6, 7j 8, r.i»2»3» Anterior primary divi- j nner Cord. 
	sions of the lower cervical and "PPer ^^^ Internal anterior thomc ; c nerve ^ 
	U, Ulnar nerve. 
	of 
	thoracic nerves. 
	m 1 , m 1 , Muscular branches to axial muscles. 
	P.T, Long thoracic nerve. 
	Pk, Nerve to rhomboids (posterior scapular) 
	Subcl, Nerve to subclavius muscle. 
	Int, Intercostal nerves. 
	S.Sc, Supra-scapular nerve. 
	part 01 the first thoracic nerve is omitted 
	Outer Cord. 
	E.A.T f External anterior thoracic nerve, 
	M.C f Muscular-cutaneous nerve. 
	I.C, Internal cutaneous nerve. 
	L.I.Q Lesser internal cutaneous nerve. 
	Posterior Cord. 
	Circ f Circumflex nerve. 
	The intercostal M.S, Musculo-spiral nerve. 
	S.Sub, Short subscapular nerve. 
	M.Sub, Lower subscapular nerve. 
	L.Sub, Long subscapular nerve. 
	I.H, Jntercosto-humeral nerve. 
	Lot, Lateral branch of third intercostal nerve. 

to supply "the skin 
side of the thigh, through its middle and internal cutaneous branches, 
and the skin of the inner side of the leg and foot through the internal 
saphenous branch. At first sight it is difficult to understand how the 
anterior crural nerve, which supplies the skin of the front of the 
thigh, is a posterior secondary division of the lumbar plexus, but 
the explanation is that the front of the human thigh was originally 
the dorsal surface of the limb bud, and the distribution of the nerve 
is quite easily understood if the position of the hind limb of a lizard 
or crocodile is glanced at. The fourth lumbar nerve is sometimes 
called the nervus furcalis, because, dividing, it partly goes to the 
lumbar, and partly to the sacral plexus (fig. 8), though, when the 
plexus is prefixed, the third lumbar may be the nervus furcalis, or, 
when it is postfixed, the fifth lumbar. Under ordinary conditions 
the descending branch of the fourth lumbar nerve joins the fifth, and 
together they make the lumbosacral cord, which, with the first three 
sacral^ nerves, forms the sacral plexus. This plexus, like the others, 
contains anterior and posterior secondary divisions of its spinal 
nerves, and it resembles the brachial plexus in that the lowest nerve 
to enter it contributes no dorsal secondary division. 

All the constituent nerves of the plexus run into one huge nerve, 
the great sciatic, which runs down the back of the thigh and, before 
reaching the knee, divides into external and internal popliteal nerves. 
These two nerves are sometimes separate from their first formation 
in the plexus, and may always be separated easily by the handle^ of 
a^ scalpel, since they are only bound together by loose connective 
tissue to form the great sciatic nerve. When they are separated in 
this wayit is seen that the external popliteal is made up entirely 
of posterior (dorsal) secondary divisions (see fig. 9), and is derived 
from the fourth and fifth lumbar and first and second sacral nerves, 
while the internal popliteal is formed by the anterior (ventral) 
secondary divisions of the fourth and fifth lumbar and first, second 
and third sacral nerves. The external popliteal nerve supplies the 
short head of the biceps femoris (see Muscular System), and, just 
below the knee, divides into anterior tibial and musculo-cutaneous 
branches, which both supply the dorsal surface of the leg and foot. 
The anterior tibial nerve is chiefly muscular, innervating the muscles 
in front of the tibia and fibula as well as the extensor brevis digitorum 
pedis on the dorsum of the foot, though it gives one small cutaneous 
branch to the cleft between the first and second toes. Themusculo- 
cutaneous nerve supplies the peroneus longus and brevis muscles, 
and the rest of the skin of the dorsum, of the foot, and lower part of 
the leg, while the skin of the upper part of the dorsum of the leg, 
below the knee, is supplied by the external popliteal before its 
al popliteal nerve, after supplying the ham- 
strings, is continued into the calf of the leg 
as the posterior tibial and innervates all the 
muscles on this, the ventral, surface. Behind 
the inner ankle it divides into the external and 
internal plantar nerves, from which the 
muscles and skin of the sole are supplied. A 
little above the knee^ each popliteal nerve 
gives off a contribution to help form the 
external or short saphenous nerve. That from 
the internal popliteal is called the com- 
municans tibialis, while that from the ex- 
ternal popliteal is the communicans fibularis. 
These loin about the middle of the back of 
the calf, and the, now formed, short saphenous 
nerve runs down behind the outer ankle to 
supply the outer side of the foot. Some- 
times it encroaches on the dorsum of the 
foot, replacing part of the musculo-cutaneous, 
though, when this is the case, its dorsal con- 
tribution from the external popliteal (com- 
municans fibularis) is always larger than 
usual. To return to the sacral plexus: 
branches are given off from the anterior 
secondary divisions to the short external 
rotator muscles of the hip (pyriformis, quad- 
ratus femoris, See), while from the posterior 
secondary divisions come the superior glu- 
teal (L. I.S. 4, 5) and the inferior gluteal 
(L.5, S. 1, 2) to the muscles of the buttocks. 
In modern descriptions the lower branches 
of the lumbo-sacral plexus are grouped into 
a pudendal plexus, and the plan, though open 
to criticism on morphological grounds, has 
such descriptive advantages that it is followed 
here. Contributions from the first, second, 
third and fourth sacral, and the coccygeal 
nerve, form it, and these contributions are 
almost all anterior (ventral) secondary divi- 
sions. The branches of this plexus are the 
small sciatic, pudic, visceral, perforating 
cutaneous, muscular and sacro- coccygeal 
nerves. The small sciatic (S.1,2, 3) js^ partly 
dorsal and partly ventral in its origin and 
distribution ; it supplies the skin of the 
perineum, buttock and the back of the 
thigh. The pudic nerve (S.2, 3, 4) helps 
and muscles of the perineum and genital 
organs. The visceral branches form the pelvic stream of white 
rami communicantes (see Nervous System); they run from 
the second and third or third and fourth sacral nerves to the pelvic 
plexuses of the sympathetic system. The perforating cutaneous 
nerve (S.2, 3) pierces the great sacro-sciatic ligament and supplies 
the skin over the lower internal part of the buttock. The muscular 
branches (S.3, 4) supply the external sphincter, levator ani and 
coccygeus. 

The sacro-coccygeal nerve (S.4, 5, Coc.i) runs down on each side 
of the coccyx to supply the adjacent skin, and represents the ventro- 
lateral nerve of the tail of lower mammals. (F. G. P.) 


NERVI, a coast town of Liguria, Italy, in the province of Genoa, 
from which it is 7^ m. S.E. by rail (also electric tramway), 82 ft. 
above sea-level. Pop. (1901) 3480 (town); 6317 (commune). 
It is much frequented as a winter resort. It is surrounded with 
groves of olives, oranges and lemons, and its villas have beautiful 
gardens. It is moister and less dusty than the western Riviera, 
and is especially in favour with those who suffer from lung 
complaints. At Quarto, 2? m. N.W., 1000 Garibaldians (1 mille) 
embarked for Marsala in i860. 


NERVOUS SYSTEM. The nervous system forms an extremely 
complicated set of links between different parts of the body, 
and is divided into (A) the central nervous system, composed of 
(1) the brain, and (2) spinal cord; (B) the peripheral nervous 
system, consisting of (1) the cranial nerves, (2) the spinal nerves, 
(3) the various sense organs, such as the eye, ear, olfactory organ, 
taste organ and tactile organs, and (4) the motor end plates; 
(C) the sympathetic system. The anatomy and physiology of 
many of these parts are treated in separate articles (see Brain, 
Spinal Cord, Nerve, Eye, Ear, Olfactory Organ, Taste, 
Touch, Muscle and Nerve, Sympathetic Nervous System). 
The object here is to deal with anatomical points which are 

	Axis 
	cylinder 
	Myelin 

common to the whole system, or for which a place does not 
conveniently occur elsewhere. 

Histology of the Nervous System. 

Three kinds of tissue are found in the nervous system, nerve 
fibres, nerve cells, and a supporting tissue called neuroglia. Nerve 
fibres may be medullated or non-medullated, but, whichever they 
are, they consist of the long process or axon of a nerve cell; in a 
non-medullated nerve this process is either naked or enclosed in a 
delicate membrane called the primitive sheath or neurilemma, but in 
a medullated nerve the process or axis cylinder is encased Jby a white 
fatty substance called myelin, and so the term " myelinated " is 
often used instead of " medullated " for these nerves (see fig. ij. 
Outside this white sheath the neurilemma is 
present in most nerves, but is lost when they 
are massed to form the white matter of the 
central nervous system and in the optic nerve. 
At regular intervals the myelin is interrupted 
by some substance which stains deeply with 
silver nitrate, and these breaks are known as 
nodes of Ranvier. They do not, however, affect 
the axis cylinder. In a large nerve, such as the 
median, the nerve fibres are collected into small 
Primitive bundles called funiculi^ enclosed in a connective 
sheath tissue > sheath, the perineurium, and separated 
from it by a lymph space. From this sheath 
delicate processes penetrate among the fibres, 
and these are known as the endoneurium. The 
funiculi are collected into bundles called fasciculi, 
and the whole nerve consists of a variable num- 
ber of fasciculi surrounded by a dense fibrous 
sheath, the epineurium. The various bundles 
do not remain distinct, but break up and re- 
arrange themselves, so that following them up 
with the scalpel is a difficult and tedious work. 
The nerve fibres, however, never join one another 
and are often several feet in length. 

Nerve cells are unipolar, bipolar or multi- 
polar. Unipolar cells are found in the ganglia on 
the posterior roots of the spinal nerves, and only 
give off an axon or axis cylinder process; this, 
however, soon dividesin a T-shaped manner, and 
all these cells were originally bipolar, though the 
cell has grown away from its two axons (or, as 
they are often regarded, axon and dendrite), 
leaving a stalk joining it to them at right angles. 
Bipolar cells are found as an embryonic stage of 
unipolar, though in fish they persist in the spinal 
ganglia throughout life. They are also some- 
times found in the sympathetic ganglia. Multi- 
polar cells are found in the brain and cord, and 
are best studied in the anterior horns of the grey 
matter of the latter, where they are nearly visible 
to the naked eye (see fig. 2). Of their many
processes only one is an axon, and it becomes 

	Cunningham's Text-
	Book of Anatomy.
	p IG> !. Nerve- tne ax ^ a * cylinder of a motor spinal nerve. The 
	fibre from a Frog, other fibres are called dendrites, and break up 
	(After v.Kolliker.) mt0

delicate branches some of which surround, 
but, it is generally believed, are not actually 
continuous with, neighbouring cells or their processes. It is known 
that the axons are made up of delicate fibrils, and it is thought 
by some observers that there is actual continuity between some 
of these and those of an adjacent neuron, as the combination 
of a nerve cell, its axon and dendrites, is called. The cells of 
Purkinje in the cerebellum show a particularly rich arborization of 
dendrites (see Brain, fig. 7). Nerve cells have generally a large clear 
nucleus. 

The Neuroglia is the delicate connective tissue which supports 
and binds together the nervous elements of the central nervous 
system. One part of it, which lines the central canal of the cord 
and ventricles of the brain, is formed of columnar cells, and is 
called ependyma, while the rest consists of small cells with numerous 

Erocesses which sometimes branch and sometimes do not. These 
m bres interlace with one another to form a delicate felt-work which 
is unmixed with nervous elements on the surface of the grey matter 
of the brain (see Brain, figs. 7 and 15). though elsewhere it is inter- 
woven with them. 

Nerve Endings. — Sensory nerves end by breaking up _ into 
fibrillae or by various tactile organs. In the former case the minute 
fibrils, of which it has been shown that the axons or nerve fibres 
consist, separate and end among epithelial cells of the mucous 
membrane or skin. In the latter case the nerve > fibres lose their 
coating of myel\n and end in one of the seven following organs : — 

1. End bulbs of Krause (fig. 3, A), oval bulbs composed of elongated 
cells among which the nerve fibrils end in knobs or coils; each is 
surrounded by a sheath of neurilemma, and the organs are found in 
the lips, tongue, conjunctiva, epineurium of nerves, synovial mem- 
branes of joints, and in the glans penis et clitoridis, where they have 
a mulberry-like appearance. 

2. Pacinian corpuscles (fig. 3,_ B) are large enough to be seen by 
the naked eye, and are oval bodies made up of a series of concentric 
capsules of connective tissue rather resembling the structure of an 
onion; in the centre of this is a structureless core, at the distal 
extremity of which the nerve fibre ends in one or more knobs. These 

	Cunningham's Text-Book 0/ Anatomy. 

	Fig. 2. — Three Nerve-Cells from the Anterior Horn of Gray Matter 
	of the Human Spinal Cord. 
	bodies are found in the palm and sole, in the mesentery, the genital 
	organs and in joints. 

3. Tactile corpuscles of Meissner and Wagner (fig. 3, C) are oval 
bodies found in certain of the skin papillae and mucous membrane, 
especially of very sensitive parts like the hand and foot, lips, tongue 
and nipple. They are oval and made of a connective tissue capsule 
from which septa enter the interior. The nerve fibre generally 
takes a spiral course through them, loses its myelin sheath, and 
ends by breaking up into its fibrils, which eventually become bulbous. 

4. Tactile corpuscles of Grandry are found in the skin of those 
parts devoid of hair, and consist of a capsule containing two or more 

	A 4p B 

	From Robert Howden, in Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 
	Fig. 3. — Tactile Corpuscles. A, End bulb (Krause); B, Corpuscle 
	_ of Pacini; C, Corpuscle of Meissner. (B, C, after Ranvier.) 

largish cells, between which the nerve fibre ends in the so-called 
tactile discs. 

S.Ruffini's endings are flattened oval bodies with a thick con- 
nective tissue capsule, in which the nerve fibre divides into many 
branches which have a varicose appearance, form a rich plexus, and 
end in knobs. These organs are found between the true skin and 
subcutaneous tissue of the fingers. 

6. Organs of Golgi are found in tendons. Nerve fibres penetrate 
the tendon bundles and divide in a tree-like manner to end in little 
disks and varicosities. 

7. Neuro-muscular spindles are small fusiform bundles of em- 
bryonic muscle fibres among which the nerve fibres end by en- 
circling them and forming flattened disks. These are sensory endings, 
and must not be confused with the motor end plates. They are 
found in most of the striped muscles of the body. 

Motor nerves end in striped muscle by motor end plates. These 
are formed by a nerve fibre approaching a muscle fibre and suddenly 
losing its myelin sheath while its neurilemma becomes continuous 
with the sarcolemma of the muscle fibre. The axis cylinder divides, 
and its ramifications are surrounded by a disk of granular matter 
containing many clear nuclei. In very long muscle fibres more 
than one of these end plates are sometimes found. Involuntary 
motor endings are usually found in sympathetic nerves going to 
unstriped muscle. The fibres form minute plexuses, at the points 
of union of which small triangular ganglion cells are found. After 
this the separate fibrils of the nerve divide, and each ends opposite 
the nucleus of an unstriped muscle cell. 

The Sympathetic System 

This system is made up of two ganglia ted cords running down one 
on each side of the vertebral column and ending below in the median 
vertebrae. In addition to these cords there are numerous ganglia 
and plexuses through which the sympathetic nerves pass on their 
way to or from the viscera and blood-vessels. 

A typical ganglion of the sympathetic chain is connected with its 
corresponding spinal nerve by two branches called rami communi- 
cantes, one of which is grey and the other white
(see fig. 4). The white consists of medullated 
fibres belonging to the central nervous system, 
and these are splanchnic afferent or centripetal, 
and efferent or centrifugal- The efferent fibres 
lie in the anterior roots of the spinal nerves, and, 
like all the fibres there, are either motor or secre- 
tory. They are the motor paths for the 
unstriped muscle of the vessels and viscera, and 
the secretory paths for the cells of the viscera. 
In the course of each fibre from the nerve cell 
in the^ spinal cord, of which it is an 
axon, to the vessel or viscus it supplies, 
there is always a break where it 
arborizes round a ganglion cell, and 
this may be in its own ganglion of the 
sympathetic chain, in a neighbouring 
ganglion above or below, or in one of 
the so-called collateral ganglia in- 
terposed between the^ sympathetic 
chain and the viscera. In addition 
to these there are a certain number 
[of?] vaso-dilator and viscero-inhibitory 
fibres, which run without any cell 
connexions from the spinal or cranial 
nerve to the viscera. The splanchnic ij~* 
afferent or centri- „?.* 
Car, 

	From A. M. Paterson, in Cunningham's Text-Book of 
	Oi Anatomy. 

	Fig. 5. — The Distribution of the Sym- 
	pathetic Gangliated Cord in the Neck. 
	Sy. 1 , Superior cervical ganglion , and con- 
	nexions and branches. 
	Internal carotid artery. 
	Glosso-pharyngeal. 
	Vagus. 
	Hypoglossal. 
	G.Ph, 
	Va, 
	petal fibres are the" Si 2 ' ^ti^^f "^ Mr ^ 
	sensory nerves from 
	the viscera, and 
	have no cell con- 
	nexions until they 
	reach the spinal 
	ganglia on the pos- 
	terior roots of the 
	spinal nerves, which 
	they do by travers- 
	ing the gangliated 
	cord of the sym- 
	pathetic. The fibres 
	of the 
	Plex, 
	G.Ph, 
	E.C, 
	Sy.2, 
	Pharyngeal plexus. 
	Glosso-pharyngeal nerve. 
	To external carotid artery. 
	Middlecerviealganglion.connexions 
	and branches. 
	Fifth and sixth cervical nerves. 
	Inferior thyroid artery. 
	Ansa Vieussenii. 
	Inferior cervical ganglion, con- 
	nexions and branches. 
	C.y, 8, Seventh and eighth cervical nerves. 
	Vert, Vertebral plexus. 
	Car, Cardiac branches. 
	C.5, 6, 
	LThy, 
	A.V, 
	From A.'M. Paterson, in Cunningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 
	white rami 

communicantes are remarkable for their small diameter, and 
the efferent fibres, at all events, are only found in two regions, 
one of which is called the thoracico-lumbar stream and extends 
from the first or second thoracic to the second or third lumbar 
nerve, while the pelvic stream is found from the second to the 
fourth sacral nerves. 

The grey rami communicantes are found in connexion with all 

	Fig. 4 .-Scheme of the Constitution and Connexions of the Gangliated
	
	^^•."S^ 8 ' though ^ey are irregular in the paths by which 

	Cord of the Sympathetic. The gangliated cord is indicated on the right,
	
	=nZ^%Lv e fi t ym ^ thetlC •^ ng,,a ba Z?n ZS* of which they 
	
	with the arrangement of the fibres arising from the ganglion cells.
	
	On E5? *jj helr f fi i res ?re mainly non-medullated and pass into 
	
	the left the rootsand trunks of spinal nerve! are shown with "the arrange-
	
	££jwiJ? f the T™> nen ?!i. and als ° m «» the anterior and 
	
	ment of the white ramus communicans above and of the gray
	
	-mushed. £XM^ 

secretory and pilo-motor fibres, supplying the vessels, glands 

coccygeal ganglion (g. impar). In the neck the cords lie in front of 
the anterior tubercles of the transverse processes of the cervical 
vertebrae, in the thorax, in front of the heads of the ribs, while 
in the 'abdomen they lie in front of the sides of the bodies of the 
and hair muscles of the skin and its glands. The sympathetic 
ganglia, from which these nerves come, contain multipolar nerve 
cells with one axon and several dendrites as well as a number of 
medullated fibres passing through, and much connective tissue. 
Some of the axons of these cells pass in the connectives to ganglia 
above and below, while others pass with the splanchnic efferent 
nerves to the viscera. 

The above sketch will give the general scheme of the sympathetic 
system, but its exact topographical details in man must be sought 
in the modern text-books such as those of Gray, Quain or Cunning- 
ham. Here only the larger and more important details can fe 
given. In the gangliated chain there is a ganglion corresponding 
to nearly each spinal nerve, except in the neck, where only three are 
found; of these the superior cervical ganglion is more than an inch 
long, and is connected with the first four spinal nerves as well as 

	From A. M. Paterson, in Cun- 
	ningham's Text-Book of Anatomy. 
	Fig. 6. — The Arrange- 
	ment of the Sympathetic 
	System in the Thorax, 
	Abdomen and Pelvis. 
	r.1-12, L.1-5, 5.1-5, Co, 
	Anterior primary 
	divisions of spinal 
	nerves, connected 
	to the gangliated 
	cord of the sym- 
	pathetic by rami 
	communicantes, 
	white (double lines) 
	and gray (single 
	lines). 
	Oesophagus and 
	oesophageal plexus. 
	Aorta and aorta 
	plexus. 
	Vagus nerve joining 
	oesophageal plexus. 
	Great splanchnic 
	nerve. 
	,G r e a t splanchnic 
	ganglion. 
	Small splanchnic 
	nerve. 
	Least splanchnic 
	nerve. 
	Coronary artery and plexus. 
	Splenic artery and plexus. 
	Hepatic artery and plexus. 
	Semilunar ganglion. 
	Diaphragm. 
	S.R, Suprarenal capsule. 
	Re, Renal artery and 
	plexus. 
	S.M, Superior mesenteric 
	artery and plexus. 
	Spermatic artery and plexus. 
	LM, Inferior mesenteric artery and plexus. 
	Hypogastric nerves and plexus. 
	Rectal plexus. 
	Uterine plexus. 
	Ves, Vesical plexus. 
	V.V.V, Visceral branches 
	from sacral nerves. 
	EEC. UX VES. 

with the ninth, tenth and twelfth cranial nerves (see fig. 5, Sy.i). 
Branches of distribution pass from it to the pharyngeal plexus, 
the heart and the two carotid arteries. Of these the branch accom- 
panying the internal carotid artery passes to the carotid and cavern- 
ous plexuses, and through these communicates with the spheno- 
maxillary, otic and ciliary ganglia, while the branch to the external 
carotid communicates with the submaxillary ganglion. The middle 
cervical ganglion (fig. 5, Sy.2), when it is present, gives rami com- 
municantes to the fifth and sixth cervical nerves, as well as branches 
of distribution to the thyroid body and heart. 

The inferior cervical ganglion (fig. 5, Sy.3) lies behind the sub- 
clavian artery, and, besides the main connective cord, has a loop 

	Rec, 
	Ut, 

(ansa Vieussenii) joining it to the middle cervical ganglion in front 
of that vessel. It communicates with the seventh and eighth spinal 
nerves, and gives branches of distribution to the heart and to the 
subclavian artery and its branches, especially the vertebral. The 
thoracic part of the sympathetic cord has usually eleven ganglia, 
which receive both white and grey rami communicantes from the 
spinal nerves (fig. 6); of the former the upper ones run up in the 
chain and come off from the cervical ganglia as already described, 
while the lower ones form the three abdominal splancnnics which 
pass through the diaphragm (q.v.) and join the abdominal plexuses. 

The great splanchnic (fig. 6, 5.i) comes from the sixth to the ninth 
ganglia, and ends in the semi-lunar ganglion of the solar plexus 
(fig. 6, SL). The small splanchnic (fig. 6, 0.2) comes from the ninth 
and tenth, or tenth and eleventh ganglia, and ends in the aortico- 
renal ganglion of the solar plexus, while the smallest splanchnic 
(fig. 6, 5.3) comes from the last thoracic ganglion, whether it be the 
tenth or eleventh, and ends in the renal plexus. 

In the lumbar region the gangliated cord is verv irregular; there 
may be four or more ganglia, and these are often fused. Grey rami 
communicantes are given to all the lumbar spinal nerves, and white 
ones are received from the first two. Most of the branches of dis- 
tribution pass to the aortic plexus. The sacral gangliated cord runs 
down just internal to the anterior sacral foramina; it usually has 
four small ganglia, and the two cords end by joining the coccygeal 
ganglion or ganglion impar, though the two-fourth sacral ganglia are 
united by transverse interfunicular commissures. The white rami 
communicantes, already mentioned as the pelvic, stream, from the 
second to the fourth sacral spinal nerves, do not enter the ganglia 
but pass directly to the pelvic plexuses (fig. 6, V). 

Sympathetic Plexuses. — In the thorax are the superficial and deep 
cardiac plexuses and the coronary plexuses; the former receives the 
left superior cervical cardiac of the vagus, and lies in the concavity 
of the arch of the aorta. The deep cardiac plexus is larger, and 
lies in front of the bifurcation of the trachea; it receives all the 
other cardiac nerves, and communicates with the anterior pulmonary 
plexuses of the vagus (see Nerves: Cranial). The right and left 
coronary plexuses accompany the coronary arteries; the former 
communicates with both the cardiac plexuses, the latter only with 
the deep cardiac plexus. 

In the abdomen the solar plexus is by far the^ most important. 
It lies behind the stomach and surrounds the coeliac axis; in it are 
situated the semilunar, aortico-renal and superior mesenteric 
ganglia, and from it are prolonged subsidiary plexuses along; the main 
arteries, so that diaphragmatic, suprarenal, renal, spermatic, coeliac, 
superior mesenteric, aortic and inferior mesenteric _ plexuses, are 
recognized. The hypogastric plexus is the continuation downward 
of the aortic, and lies just below the bifurcation of the aorta (see 
fig. 6, Hy); it divides into two branches, which accompany the 
internal iliac arteries and are joined bythe pelvic stream of white 
rami communicantes from the sacral spinal nerves and some twigs 
from the ganglia of the sacral sympathetic to form the pelvic 
plexuses. These are prolonged to the viscera along the branches of 
the internal iliac artery, so that haemorrhoidal, vesical, prostatic, 
vaginal and uterine plexuses are found. By the side of the neck of 
the uterus in the last-named plexus several small ganglia are seen. 
(For the literature of the sympathetic system, see Quain's Anatomy, 
London, 1895.) 

Embryology of Nervous System 

The development of the brain, spinal cord and organs of special 
sense (eye, ear, tongue), will be found in separate articles. Here 
that of the cranial and spinal nerves and the sympathetic system is 
dealt with. The thoracic spinal nerves are the most typical, and 
one of them is the best to begin with. In fig. 7, A the ganglion on 
the dorsal root (DR) is seen growing out from the neural crest, and 
the cells or neuroblasts of which it is composed become fusiform and 
grow in two directions as the ganglion recedes from the cord. Those 
which run toward the spinal cord are the axons, while those growing 
into the mesoderm are probably enlarged dendrites. The ventral 
roots (VR) rise as the axons of the large cells in the ventral horn of 
the grey matter, and meet the fibres of the dorsal root on the distal 
side of the ganglion (fig. 7, B). As the two roots join each divides 
into an anterior (ventral) and a posterior (dorsal) primary division 
(fig. 7, D), the latter growing into the dorsal segment of its muscle 
plate and the skin of the back. ^ The anterior primary division 
grows till it reaches the cardinal vein and dorsal limit of the coelom, 
and there forks into a somatic branch to the body wall (fig. \, C, So), 
and a splanchnic or visceral branch (fig. 7, C, Vt) which joins the 
sympathetic and forms the white ramus communicans. The somatic 
branch grows round the body wall and gives off lateral and anterior 
branches (fig. 7, E). In the limb regions the anterior primary 
divisions of the nerves divide into anterior and posterior secondary 
divisions, which probably correspond to the anterior and lateral 
branches of the thoracic nerves (fig. 7, E and F). These unite with 
neighbouring nerves to form plexuses, and divide again, but the 
anterior nerves keep to the ventral side of the limb and the posterior 
to the dorsal. 

The cranial nerves are developed in the same way as the spinal, 
so far as concerns the facts that the motor fibres are the axons 
of cells situated in the basal lamina of the mesencephalon and 
rhombencephalon (see Brain), and the sensory are the axons and den- 
drites of cells situated in ganglia which have budded off from the 
brain. The evidence of comparative anatomy, however, shows that 

	From A. M. Paterson, in Cunningham's Text-book of Anatomy, 

	Fig. 7.— Development of the Spinal Nerves. 
	A, Formation of nerve roots. 
	D.R, Dorsal root. 
	V.R, Ventral root. 
	N.T, Neural tube. 
	No, Notochord. 
	Al.C, Alimentary canal. 
	Ao, Aorta. 
	V, Cardinal vein. 
	Jkf.P, Muscle plate. 
	B, Formation of nerve trunk (N) 
	D.G, Dorsal ganglion. 
	Sy, Sympathetic cord. 
	W.D, Wolffian duct. 
	Co, Coelom. 

the cranial nerves cannot be directly homologized with the spinal, nor 
can the fact of there being twelve of them justify us in assuming 
that the head contains the rudiments of twelve fused or unsegmented 
somites. To this we will return kter. The case of the optic nerve 
is different to that of any of the others. A. Robinson (Journ. AnaU 
and Phys. t vol. 30, p. 319) has shown that most of its fibres are the 
axons of ganglion cells in the retina, and, as the retina is part of 
the optic vesicle and an outgrowth from the brain, the so-called 
optic nerve is only comparable to a tract of fibres within the brain. 

The twelfth or hypoglossal nerve is regarded as a fusion of the 
motor roots of three spinal nerves, and embryology bears this out, 
for Froriep has described a small and transitory ganglion corre- 
sponding to the posterior root ganglion of this nerve. Another link 
in the chain of reasoning is that the first spinal or sub-occipital nerve 
often has its posterior root suppressed. 

The sympathetic system is developed from the posterior root 
ganglia of the spinal nerves, by cells which in man migrate a few 
at a time. A. M. Paterson, however, believes that the sympathetic 
is developed, independently of the cerebro-spinal system, in the 
mesoderm (Phil. Trans, clxxxi. pt. B. p. 159). In embryos of 
I4'5 > m.m. there are found masses of cells on each side of the ab- 
dominal aorta, permeated with blood vessels, and having the same 
structure as the carotid and coccygeal bodies. They are known as 
the organs of Zuckerkandl, and disappear soon after birth. 

Comparative Anatomy 

The comparative anatomy of the brain and spinal cord is dealt 
with in the separate articles devoted to them. 

>Spinal Nerves. — In Amphioxus the dorsal and ventral roots do 
not unite with one another but alternate, a dorsal root on one side 
being opposite a ventral on the other. The dorsal roots are both 
sensory and motor, the ventral only motor. In the Cyclostomata 
(Petromyzon) the arrangement is nearly the same, but in some regions 
there are two ventral roots to one dorsal. In the fishes and higher 
vertebrates the dorsal and ventral roots unite, though in selachian 
(shark) embryos F. M. Balfour says that the dorsal and ventral 
roots alternate (The Development of Elasmobranch 
Fishes, London, 1878). When limbs are developed, 
beginning with fishes, limb plexuses are formed. 
Where the limbs are suppressed rudimentary 
plexuses may persist, as in the snake, though 
usually they disappear. 

The cranial nerves are only represented by two 
pairs in Amphioxus. In the Cyclostomata, fishes 
and Amphibia, ten pairs of nerves are found, 
which in their distribution do not always agree 
with those of man. In the Amniota or reptiles, 
birds and mammals, the eleventh and twelfth 
nerves have been added. The researches of W. 
H. Gaskell (" On the structure, distribution and 
functions of the nerves which innervate the 
visceral and vascular systems," J. of Phys. vii. 
1, 1886), O. S. Strong ("The cranial nerves 
of Amphibia," /. Morph. x. 101), T. B. 
Johnston (/. Comp. Neurol, xii. 2 and 87), 
and others, show that the cranial nerves are 
formed of at least five components: (1) Ven- 
tral motor, (2) Lateral motor, (3) Somatic 
sensory, (4) Visceral sensory, (5) Lateral line 
nerves. 

9 The ventral motor components are those which 
rise from cells situated close to the mid line, and 
probably correspond to the ventral roots of the 
spinal nerves. The nerves to the eye muscles 
(motor oculi, trochlearis and abducens) have this 
origin (see Nerve : Cranial), as also has the hy po- 
ll glossal, which doubtless is a cephalized spinal 
nerve. 

The lateral motor components rise from cells situ- 
ated more laterally, and comprise the motor roots 
of the fifth (trigeminal), seventh (facial), and 
ninth, tenth and eleventh (glossopharyngeal, 
vagus and spinal accessory) . These nerves 
supply muscles belonging to the branchial 
skeleton, instead of ^ the muscles of the primi- 
tive cranium, of which the eye muscles are the 
remnants. 

	D, E, Formation of subordinate branches,
	Lat, Lateral,
	Ant % Anterior, branches.
	F, Formation of nerve trunks in relation
	to the limb ; dorsal and ventral
	trunks corresponding to lateral and
	anterior trunks in D and E.

The somatic ^ sensory components supply the 
skin, and end in cells which, among the cyclo- 
stomes and fishes, form a considerable elevation 
in the rhombencephalon, known as the lobus 
and trigemini (fig. 8, Nuc. V.). These components, 
in the lower forms, are found in the fifth, seventh 
and tenth nerves, but in mammals practically 
only the fifth contains them. They correspond 
to the dorsal roots of the spinal nerves. 
The splanchnic sensory or viscera sensory com- 
ponents end in the brain in the medullary cells 
known as the fasciculus communis in fishes, and 
fasciculus solitarius in mammals (see Brain, fig. 4), 
as well as in- the lobus trigemini and lobus vagi (fig. 8, Nuc. X.). They 
are found in the fifth, seventh, ninth, tenth and eleventh nerves, 
and supply visceral surfaces. In mammals the lingual and palatine 

	So, 
	C, Formation of nerves. 
	Somatic division. 
	Visceral branch. 
	Posterior primary division. 
	-EP1PH/, 
	*0PT.N. 
	6ANS.HA0. 
	.'OPT. LOBE 
	nuc:*v: 
	-NUC.X. 

	From Catalogue of the Museum of ike Royal College of Surgeons of England, vol. 2 
	2nd ed 

	Fig. 8. — Brain (A) and Choroid Plexuses (B) of Lamprey. 

branches of the fifth, the chorda tympani and great superficial 
petrosal (?) of the seventh, and all the sensory fibres of the ninth 
and tenth except Arnold's nerve, represent these. In fishes and 
Amphibians the palate is supplied by the seventh nerve instead of 
the fifth, but the explanation given for this difference is that in 
these lower forms the Gasserian and geniculate ganglia are not 
distinct, and so fibres from the compound ganglion may pass into 
either nerve. These splanchnic sensory components of the cranial 
nerves evidently correspond to the branches which have already 
been mentioned as the splanchnic afferent fibres of the sympathetic. 

The system of the lateral line or acustico-lateralis component is 
sometimes regarded merely as a subdivision of the somatic sensory. 
It is best developed in the fish, and may be divided into pre- and 
post-auditory, and auditory. The pre-auditory part comprises the 
pit and canal end organs supplied by the seventh, and also probable 
the olfactory organ supplied by. the first^ nerve. The auditory 
apparatus, supplied by the eighth nerve, is, according to modern 
opinion, undoubtedly a part of this system, while the tenth nerve 
sends a large branch along the lateral line supplying the special end 
organs of the post -auditory part. All these components of the 
lateral line pass to the tuberculum acusticum in the fourth ventricle, 
as well as to the cerebellum, which J. B. Johnston {Zool. Bull. 
1, 5, p. 221, Boston) regards as a derivative of the rostral (anterior) 
end of the acusticum. In mammals no doubt the olfactory and 
auditory apparatus and nerves have the same morphological signi- 
ficance as in fishes, but the seventh does not supply any cutaneous 
sense organs en the head or face, and the only vestige of the post- 
auditory supply of the tenth nerve to the lateral line is the small 
auricular branch of the vagus, often called Arnold's nerve. 

The following table, slightly modified from the one drawn up by 
J. McMurrich, gives a fair idea of the present state of our knowledge 
of the nerve components in the Mammalia. 

	Nerve. 
	Ventral 
	Lateral 
	Somatic 
	Splanchnic 
	Sensory. 
	Lateral 
	Motor. 
	Motor. 
	Sensory. 
	Line. 
	I. 
	+(?) 
	II. 1 
	III. 
	+ 
	IV. 
	+ 
	V. 
	+ 
	-f 
	+ 
	VI. 
	+
	VII. 
	+
	+ 
	VIII. 
	+ 
	IX. ) 
	X. 1 
	+ 
	+ 
	+ 
	+ 
	XI. ) 
	XII. 
	+ 
	Spinal 
	+ 
	(?) 
	+ 
	+ 
	
	1 A tract of the brain. 

For further details and literature of the nervous system see 
Quain's Anatomy (latest edition); R. Wiedersheim's Comp. Anat.of 
Vertebrates (Lond. 1907); Bronn's Classen und Ordnungen des Thier- 
reichs ; C. S. Minot's Human Embryology (1 892) ; McMurrich's Develop- 
ment of the Human Body (London, 1906). For the theory of nerve 
components see Onera Merritt, Journ. Anat. and Phys., vol. 39, 
p. 199. A general discussion^ on the comparative anatomy and 
morphology of limb plexuses will be found in Miss C. W. Saberton's 
paper on the " Nerve Plexuses of Troglodytes Niger " Studies in 
Anatomy, University of Manchester, vol. iii. (1906), p. 165. She 
refers to most of the literature on the subject, but the papers of 
H. Braus, Jena Zeitschr. v. 31 (1898), p. 239 on fish, of M. 
Davidoff, Morph. Jahrb. v. 5 (1879), p. 450 on the pelvic plexuses 
of fish, and of M. Furbringer, Gegenb. Festschr. v. 3 (1897), on 
the spi no-occipital nerves and brachial plexus of fish, are also very 
important. (F. G. P.) 


NESFIELD, WILLIAM EDEN (1835-1888), British architect, 
one of the leaders of the Gothic revival in England, was born 
in Bath on the 2nd of April 1835. His father, Major William 
Andrew Nesfield, a well-known landscape gardener, laid out 
Regent's Park and St James's Park, and remodelled Kew. 
Educated at Eton, Nesfield was articled first to Mr Burn, a 
classicist, and then to his uncle, Anthony Salvin, who took the 
Gothic side in the " battle of the styles." Nesfield travelled 
for study in France, Italy and Greece, afterwards publishing a 
volume, Sketches from France and Italy (London, 1862), which 
became one of the text-books of the Gothic revival. In 1859 
Nesfield settled down in London. His first important commission 
was to build a new wing to Combe Abbey for Lord Craven. In 
1862 began a nominal partnership with Norman Shaw, the fruits 
of which have been exaggerated; they shared rooms in Argyle 
Street for some years, but never col'aborated. It was in Argyle 
Street that the principal work of Nesfield's life was conceived — 
Combe Abbey, Cloverly Hall and Kinmel Park. Here he showed 
a mastery of planning and construction, a conscientious regard 
for detail, an eye for the picturesque, an unfailing regard for 
dignity, which make his achievements landmarks in the history 
of his art. He built the lodge in Regent's Park (1864) and that 
in Kew Gardens (1866). Combe Abbey and Cloverly are some- 
what " early French " in style, but as Nesfield developed he 
adopted a purely English manner, and presented his newer ideas 
in Loughton Hall and Kinmel Park. The gate lodge at Kinmel 
Park, Abergele, is entirely " English Renaissance "; Cloverly 
Hall (1864), planned when he was twenty-nine, with its great 
hall, fine approaches to the staircase, and the staircase itself, 
is already half English, and Eastlake, in his History of Gothic 
Revival, praises it on that very ground. The full development 
of the revived classic taste in Nesfield came with his addition to 
Kinmel Park — red brick, stone dressings, grey-green slated roofs 
— which elevated that originally unpretentious 18th-century 
building into a small Renaissance palace. For contrast in style, 
harmonious as they are in artistic expression, Cloverly and 
Kinmel are the typical examples of the artist's style. Other 
works are Farnham Royal House near Slough, Lea Wood, 
Loughton Hall and Westcombe Park. His more notable urban 
works are the bank at Saffron Walden (1873), and the Rose 
and Crown Hotel; they stand next door to each other and exhibit 
another contrast, the former being medieval and the latter what 
is called " Queen Anne." Though he built no new important 
church, Nesfield rebuilt the Early Decorated St Mary's, Farnham 
Royal, near Slough, mainly on the old lines. He restored King's 
Walden church, Herts (1868), and Radwinter church, Essex 
(187 1), and Cora church near Whitchurch, Salop; but no great 
public building came from him. Nesfield's career was a com- 
paratively short one. On the 3rd of September 1885 he married 
Mary Annetta, eldest daughter of John Sebastian Guilt and 
granddaughter of Joseph Guilt, and he retired from practice some 
years before his death at Brighton on the 25th of March 1888. 
He left behind him a valuable series of sketches and measured 
drawings, most of which are now in the library of the Royal 
Institute of British Architects. (J. M. By.) 


NESLE, the name of a place in France (dep. of Somme), which 
gave its name to an old feudal family. This family became 
extinct at the beginning of the 13th century, and the heiress 
brought the lordship to the family of Clermont in Beauvaisis. 
Simon de Clermont, seigneur de Nesle, was regent of the kingdom 
of France during the second crusade of St Louis. Raoul de 
Clermont, constable of France, and Guy I. (d. 1302) and Guy II. 
(d. 1352) de Clermont, both marshals of France, were members of 
the family. The lordship of Nesle was erected into a countship 
for Charles de Sainte-Maure in 1467 and into a marquisate 
for Louis de Sainte-Maure in 1546. It was acquired in 1666 by 
Louis Charles de Mailly. His grandson, Louis de Mailly, had five 
daughters, of whom four (the countess of Mailly, the duchess 
of Lauragais, the countess of Vintimille, and the marquise de 
la Tournelle, afterwards duchess of Ch&teauroux) were succes- 
sively, or simultaneously, mistresses of Louis XV. 


NESSELRODE, KARL ROBERT, Count (1780-1862), Russian 
diplomatist and statesman, was born on the 14th of December 
1780 at Lisbon, where his father (d. 18 10) was Russian 
ambassador. In deference to his mother's Protestantism he was 
baptized in the chapel of the British embassy, thus becoming 
a member of the Church of England. The Nesselrodes were of 
Westphalian origin, but had long been settled in Livonia. Nessel- 
rode's German origin was emphasized by his education in a Berlin 
gymnasium, his father having been appointed ambassador to the 
Prussian court about 1787. When he was sixteen he entered the 
Russian navy, and his father's influence procured for him the 
position of naval aide-de-camp to the emperor Paul. He 
presently exchanged into the. army, obtained a further court 
appointment, and entered the diplomatic service. Nesselrode 
was attached to the Russian embassy at Berlin, and transferred 
thence to the Hague. In August 1806 he received a commission 
to travel in South Germany to report on the French troops; 
he was then attached as diplomatic secretary to Generals 
Kamenski, Buxhoewden 'and Bennigsen in succession. He 
was present at the battle of Eylau in January 1807, and assisted 
at the negotiation of the peace of Tilsit . Immediately afterwards 
he was sent to Paris to join the embassy of Count Peter 
Tolstoy, whom he accompanied in the spring of the next year 
to the meeting of the two emperors at Erfurt. After his return 
to Paris he strengthened the understanding between Alexander I. 
and Talleyrand consequent on the Erfurt meeting, and acted as 
intermediary between the two. On the appointment of a 
successor to Count Tolstoy he retired to St Petersburg, but 
returned to Paris early in 1810 charged with a commission from 
Speranski to Talleyrand and the marquis de Caulaincourt, 
formerly ambassador in St Petersburg, both of whom were 
hostile to Napoleon's policy of aggression. After the breach of 
diplomatic relations with Russia in 181 1, Nesselrode returned 
to St Petersburg by way of Vienna in order to exchange views 
with Metternich. He sought to persuade Alexander to open 
negotiations with Napoleon, if only to throw the onus of breaking 
the peace entirely on the French side. He joined the tsar's 
headquarters at Vilna in March 181 2 and, though Rumiantzov 
was still foreign minister, it was Nesselrode who directed the 
foreign policy of Russia from this time forward. He was present 
at the battle of Leipzig, and accompanied the invading army 
to Paris; he negotiated the capitulation of Marmont and 
Mortier at Clichy, and signed the treaty of Chaumont on the 1st 
of March 1814. His former relations with Talleyrand facilitated 
negotiations in Paris, and his great influence with the emperor 
was used in favour of the restoration of the Bourbons, and, after 
Waterloo, against the imposition of a ruinous war indemnity on 
France. At the congress of Vienna he was associated with 
Count Capo dTstria, and when, in August 1816, Alexander 
made him secretary of state for foreign affairs in succession 
to Rumiantzov, it was again in conjunction with the Greek 
statesman, from whom he differed widely in temperament 
and ideas. The emperor Alexander I., however, was apt to keep 
the direction of affairs in his own hands and so long as Alexander 
inclined to Liberalism Capo dTstria was the interpreter of his 
will, but as the emperor veered towards Metternich's system 
Nesselrode became his mouthpiece. After Alexander's final 
" conversion " to reactionary principles, Capo dTstria was dis- 
missed (1822) and Nesselrode definitely took his place. He had 
consistently advocated Alexander's project of a " universal 
union," symbolized by the Holy Alliance, in contradistinction to 
tne narrower system of the alliance of the great powers; and, 
when the Greek insurrection broke out, he did much to determine 
the tsar to sacrifice his sympathy with the Orthodox Greeks 
to his dream of the European confederation (see Alexander I., • 
emperor of Russia) . 

After Alexander's death in 1825 Nesselrode retained office 
under Nicholas I. He was responsible for the change of policy 
of Russia towards the Ottoman empire after 1829, viz. thaV 
of abandoning the traditional idea of conquering Constantinople 
in favour of keeping the Ottoman power weak and dependent 
on the tsar. This was his policy during the revolt of Mehemet 
Ali (q.v.)> and it was Nesselrode who inspired the terms of the 
famous treaty of Unkiar Skelessi (1833). Nicholas I. was, 
however, even less inclined than his brother to place himself 
in the hands of a minister; and Nesselrode showed himself 
amenable, though when his views differed from those of the 
emperor he stated them with great frankness. He conducted 
the negotiations which led to the shelving of the treaty of 
Unkiar Skelessi and to the alliance between Russia and Great 
Britain which, issuing ultimately in the Straits Convention of 
1 84 1 — to which France also was a party — healed the breach 
which had so long divided the powers of eastern and western 
Europe. 

In 1849 it was Nesselrode who suggested the intervention of 
Russia in Hungary in favour of the Austrian government, 
•although he restrained the tsar from active intervention in 
France then as in 1830. During the crisis of 1853 he prolonged 
negotiation in the hope of averting war. The last of his im- 
portant political acts, the signing of the treaty of Paris in 1856, 
undid the results of his patient efforts to establish Russian 
preponderance in the Balkan peninsula. He then retired from 
the foreign office, retaining the chancellorship, which he had 
held since 1844. He died at St Petersburg on the 23rd of March 
1862. - 

See Lettres et papiers du chancelier comic de Nesselrode 1760-1850, 
the first volume of which was issued by his grandson Count Anatole 
Nesselrode at Paris in 1904. This work includes letters of the 
chancellor's father, Count William, Nesselrode's correspondence, and 
important state papers. In vol. ii. is a fragment^ of an autobio- 
graphy (to 1814), which Count Nesselrode did not live to complete. 
See also Correspondence diplomatique du comte Pozzo di Borgo et du 
comte de Nesselrode, edited by Charles Pozzo di Borgo (Paris, 2 vols., 
1890-1897). 


NEST, the place where a bird lays its eggs, hatches them out, 
and shelters them until they are fledged. The word is used by 
analogy of other animals than birds, insects, &c. It appears 
in much the same form in Teutonic languages; related to it 
are Irish nead, and Lat. nidus, whence Fr. nid. It has been 
referred to the Gr. vbaros, return home, but it is now estabb'shed 
that it represents a form nizdo- for nisido-, from ni- t down; 
cf. " nether," and sed-, to sit. Sanskrit has ntda. The Lat. 
nidus has given the scientific term for nest-building, nidification 
(q.v.). 


NESTOR, in Greek legend, son of Neleus and Chloris, king 
of Pylos in Messenia. When all his brothers were slain by 
Heracles, in consequence of the refusal of Neleus to purify him 
for the murder of Iphitus, Nestor alone escaped, being absent 
at Gerenia — hence his epithet Gerenios in Homer (Apollodorus 
i. 9). He is the old warrior of the Iliad- and the wise counsellor 
of the Greeks before Troy. After the fall of the city he returned 
to Pylos, where Telemachus visited him to obtain news of his 
father. In his earlier years he took part in the battle of the 
Centaurs and Lapithae, the Calydonian boar hunt, and the 
Argonautic expedition. The name is used in modern times 
for any old man of ripe experience, or the oldest member of a 
class or corporation. 


NESTOR (c. 1056-c. 1 1 14), the reputed author of the earliest 
Russian chronicle, was a monk of the Pecherskiy cloister of 
Kiev from 1073. The only other fact of his life is that he was 
commissioned with two other monks to find the relics of St 
Theodosius, a mission which he succeeded in fulfilling. The 
chronicle begins with the deluge, as those of most chroniclers 
of the time did. The compiler appears to have been acquainted 
with the Byzantine historians; he makes use especially of 
John Malalas and George Hamartolus. He also had in all 
probability other Slavonic chronicles to compile from, which 
are now lost. Many legends are mixed up with Nestor's 
Chronicle-, the style is occasionally so poetical that perhaps he 
incorporated bilini which are now lost. The early part is rich in 
these stories, among which are the arrival of the three Varangian 
brothers, the founding of Kiev, the murder of Askold and Dir, 
the death of Oleg, who was killed by a serpent concealed in the 
skeleton of his horse, and the vengeance taken by Olga, the 
wife of Igor, on the Drevlians, who had murdered her husband. 
The account of the labours of Cyril and Methodius among the 
Slavs is also very interesting, and to Nestor we owe the tale 
of the summary way in which Vladimir suppressed the worship 
of Perun and other idols at Kiev. As an eyewitness he could 
only describe the reigns of Vsevolod and Sviatopolk (1078-1112), 
but he gathered many interesting details from the lips of old 
men, two of whom were Giurata Rogovich of Novgorod, who 
gave him information concerning the north of Russia, Petchora, 
and other places, and Jan, a man ninety years of age, who died 
in iro6, and was son of Vishata the voivode of Yaroslavl and 
grandson of Ostromir the Posadnik, for whom the Codex was 
written. Many of the ethnological details given by Nestor of 
the various races of the Slavs are of the highest value. 

The latest theory about Nestor is that the Chronicle is a patchwork 
of many fragments of chronicles, and that the name of Nestor was 
attached to it because he wrote the greater part or perhaps because 
he put the fragments together. The name of a certain Sylvester, 
an Igumen, is affixed to several of the manuscripts as the author. 

The Chronicle has come down to us in several manuscripts, but 
unfortunately no contemporary ones, the oldest being the so-called 
Lavrientski of the 14th century (1377). It was named after the 
monk Lavrentii, who copied it out for Dimitri Constantinovich, 
the prince of Souzdal. The work, as contained in this manuscript, 
has had many additions made to it from previous and contemporary 
chronicles, such as those of Volinia and Novgorod. Soloviev, the 
Russian historian, remarks that Nestor cannot be called the earliest 
Russian chronicler, but he is the first writer who took a national 
point of view in his history, the others being merely local writers. 
The language of his work, as shown jn the earliest manuscripts just 
mentioned, is Palaeo-Slavonic with many Russisms. It has formed 
the subject of a valuable monograph by Professor Miklosich. 

The Chronicle has been translated into Polish, Bohemian,- German 
and French. The compiler cannot very well be the author of the 
lives of Boris and Gleb, the martyrs, and of the life of St Theodosius, 
because they contradict many passages in the^ Chronicle. The 
work is of primary importance ^ for early Russian history, and,, 
although devoid of literary merit, is not without its amusing episodes 
of an Herodotean character. The reputed body of the ancient 
chronicler may be seen among the relics preserved in the Pecherskiy 
monastery at Kiev. 

See Louis Leber's Chronique dite de Nestor (Paris, ' 1884); 
Bestuzhev Riumin, On the Composition of the Russian Chronicles 
till the end of the 14th century (in Russian), (St Petersburg, 1869). 

(W. R. M.) 


NESTOR, the name of a small but remarkable group of parrots 
peculiar to the New Zealand sub-region, of which the type 
is the Psittacus meridionalis of Gmelin, founded on a species 
described by J. Latham {Gen, Synopsis i. 264), and subse- 
quently termed by him P. nesior, in allusion to its hoary head, 
but now usually known as Nestor meridionalis, the " Kaka " 
of the Maories and English settlers in New Zealand, in some 
parts of which it was very abundant, though its numbers are 
fast decreasing. Forster, who accompanied Cook in his second 
voyage) described it in his MSS. in 1773, naming it P. hypopolius, 
and found it in both the principal islands. The general colour 
of the kaka is olive-brown, nearly all the feathers being tipped 
with a darker shade, so as to give a scaly appearance to the 
body. The crown is light grey, the ear-coverts and nape purplish- 
bronze, and the rump and abdomen of a more or less deep 
crimson-red; but much variation is presented in the extent and 
tinge of the last colour,* which often becomes orange and some- 
times bright yellow. The kaka is about the size of a crow; 
but a larger species, generally resembling it, though with plumage 
mostly dull olive-green, the Nestor notabilis of J. Gould, was 
discovered in 1856 by Walter Mantell, in the higher mountain 
ranges of the Middle Island. This is the " Kea " of the Maories, 
and incurred the enmity of colonists by developing an extra- 
ordinary habit of assaulting sheep, picking holes with its powerful 
beak in their side, wounding the intestines, and so causing 
death. The bird is admittedly an eater of carrion in addition 
to its ordinary food, which, like that of the kaka, consists of 
fruits, seeds and the grubs of wood-destroying insects, the last 
• being obtained by stripping the bark from trees infested by them. 
The amount of injury the kea inflicts on flock-masters has 
doubtless been much exaggerated, for Dr Menzies states that 
on one " run," where the loss was unusually large, the proportion 
of sheep attacked was about one in three hundred, and that 
those pasturing below the elevation of 2000 ft. are seldom 
disturbed. 

On the discovery of Norfolk Island (October 10 1774) a 
parrot, thought by Forster to be specifically identical with the 
kaghai (as he wrote the name) of New Zealand — though his 
son (Voyage, ii. 446) remarked that it was "infinitely brighter 
coloured " — was found in its hitherto untrodden woods. Among 
the drawings of Bauer, the artist who accompanied Robert 
Brown and Flinders, is one of a Nestor marked " Norfolk Isl. 
19 Jan. 1805," on which Herr von Pelzeln in i860 founded his 
N. norfolcensis. Meanwhile Latham, in 1822, had described, 
as distinct species, two specimens evidently of the genus Nestor, 
one said, but doubtless erroneously, to inhabit New South 
Wales, arid the other from Norfolk Island. In 1836 Gould de- 
scribed an example, without any locality, in the museum of the 
Zoological Society, as Plyclolopkus produclus, and when some 
time after he was in Australia, he found that the home of this 
species, which he then recognized as a Nestor, was Phillip Island, 
a very small adjunct of Norfolk Island, and not more than 5 m. 
distant from it. Whether the birds of the two islands were 
specifically distinct or not we shall perhaps never know, since 
they are all extinct, and no specimen undoubtedly from Norfolk 
Island seems to have been preserved. The Phillip-Island Nestor 
may ,be distinguished from both of the New-Zealand species 
by its somewhat smaller size, orange throat, straw-coloured 
breast, and the generally lighter shade of its tints. 

The position of the genus Nestor in the order Psiltaci must 
be regarded as uncertain, but it is now usually placed in the 
sub-family Nestorinae of the Trichoglossidae (see Parrot). 

Further knowledge of this very -interesting form may be facilitated 
by the following references to the Transactions and Proceedings 
o£ the New Zealand Institute, ii. 64, 65, 387, iii. 45-52, 81-90, v. 207, 
vi. 114, 128, ix. 340, x. 192, xi. 377; and to Sir W. Buller's 
Birds of New Zealand. (A. N.) 


NESTORIANS. §1. The Early Nestorians.— Among those who 
had been present at Ephesus in support of Nestorius (q.v.) was 
Ibas, presbyter and head of the theological school of Edessa. 
In 435 he became bishop of Edessa and under his influence the 
Nestorian teaching made considerable progress. On the accusa- 
tion of the orthodox he was deposed by the " Robber Synod " 
of Ephesus, but at Chalcedon in 451 was pardoned on condition 
of anathematizing both Nestorius and Eutyches and accepting 
the Tome of Leo. He had not, however, changed his views, and 
this was generally recognized. Meanwhile one of his pupils, 
Barsumas, had settled at Nisibis in Persian territory where he 
became bishop in 435 and established a Nestorian school. And 
when the emperor suppressed the school of Edessa (" the Athens 
of Syria ") in 489, and expelled its members, they travelled far 
afield as eager and successful missionaries of the Gospel. In 
Persia their numbers and their zeal stimulated the old churches 
into vigour and led to the founding of new ones. And as they 
were under ban from Rome and out of communion with the 
Byzantine Church the Persian government welcomed them as a 
political ally, though the religious opposition of the Magi was 
still largely retained. In their new environment the Nestorians 
abandoned some of the rigour of Catholic asceticism, and at a 
synod held in 499 abolished clerical celibacy even for bishops 
and went so far as to permit repeated marriages, in striking 
contrast not only to orthodox custom but to the practice of 
Aphraates at Edessa who had advocated celibacy as a condition 
of baptism. The liberty here granted to bishops was enjoyed 
as late as the 12th century, but since then the Nestorian Church 
has assimilated its custom to that of the Greek Church. That 
the ascetic ideal was by no means wholly extinct is evident 
from the Book of Governors written by Thomas, bishop of Marga, 
in 840 which bears witness to a Syrian monasticism founded by 
one Awgin of Egyptian descent, who settled in Nisibis about 
350, and lasting uninterruptedly until the time of Thomas, 
though it had long been absorbed in the great Nestorian move- 
ment that had annexed the church in Mesopotamia. 

The Nestorian Church in Eastern Syria and Persia was under 
the jurisdiction of an archbishop (catkolikos) , who in 498 assumed 
the title " Patriarch of the East " and had his seat at Seleucia- 
Ctesiphon on the Tigris, a busy trading city and a fitting centre 
for the great area over which the evangelizing activity of the 
Nestorians now extended. The church traced its doctrines 
to Theodore of Mopsuestia rather than to Nestorius, whose name 
at first they repudiated, not regarding themselves as having 
been proselytized to any new teaching. 

§ 2. The Later Nestorians. — In 608 Magian influence was so 
strong in Persia that the Christians were persecuted and the 
office of catholicus was vacant for 20 years, being filled again by 
Jesu-Jabus, during whose patriarchate the Mahommedan 
invasion overran Persia. The patriarch was able to secure 
from the caliph permission for the Christians to practice their 
religion in return for tribute money and this was afterwards 
remitted. Ibn Ali Talib, anxious to perpetuate their severance 
from the orthodox church and the Byzantine empire, confirmed 
these privileges by charter and in 762 the patriarchate was 
removed to Bagdad. For five centuries the Nestorians were 
a recognized institution within the territory of Islam, though 
their treatment varied from kindly to harsh. Birurri, a Mahom- 
medan writer, who lived at Khiva c. a.d. iooo, speaks of them 
as comprising the bulk of the population of Syria, Irak and 
Khorasan, and as superior to the orthodox in intellectual ability. 

They agreed with Byzantines in observing Lent, Christmas 
and Epiphany, but differed from them in the observance* of all 
other feasts and fasts. The Latin church tried in vain during 
the Crusades to secure their adhesion to Rome. The barbaric 
invasions of the 13th and 14th centuries fell with crushing 
force on the Nestorians. In 1258 Hulagu Khan took Bagdad, 
and about 1400 Timur again seized and sacked the city. Though 
the Nestorians were numerous, their moral influence and their 
church life had greatly deteriorated. Those who escaped capture 
by Timur fled to the mountains of Kurdistan, and the community 
that had played so large a part in Mesopotamian history for a 
thousand years was thus shattered. In 1552 they were further 
weakened by a large secession known as "the Chaldeans " 
arising out of a dispute about the succession to the patriarchate. 
The discontented appealed to Rome, and the pope (Julius III.) 
consecrated the Chaldean catholikos. The Chaldeans are now 
chiefly found in rural districts east of the Tigris. They have a 
see at Bagdad, a monastery (Rabban Hormuz) at Elkoosh, and 
are called by those Syrian Christians who have resisted the papal 
overtures, Maghlabin (" the conquered ")• Other attempts 
during the 16th century to promote union between the Nestorians 
and Rome proved fruitless, but the Roman Church has never 
ceased in its efforts to absorb this ancient community. The 
history of the Jacobites or Syrian Monophysites who, like the 
Nestorians, diverged from the Byzantine Church, but in an 
exactly opposite direction, is told elsewhere (see Jacobite 
Church, &c). Like the Nestorians they were great missionaries, 
and up to the 7th century, and again in the 12th and 13th, pro- 
duced the bulk of Syriac literature (q.v.). The chief Nestorian 
authors were (a) in the 7th, 8th and 9th centuries, Babbai the 
elder and Isho-yabh of Gedhala, commentators; Sahdona, who 
wrote on the monastic life; Abraham the Lame, a devotional 
and penitential writer; Dionysius of Tell Mahre (see Dionysius 
Telmaharensis), whose Annals are important; and Thomas 
(q.v.) of Marga; (b) in the 14th century, Abdh-isho bar Berikha 
(d. 1318) the author of a theological treatise Marganitha (" the 
Pearl "), 1298, and the Paradise of Eden, a collection of 50 
theological poems. 

§ 3. The Nestorian Missionary Enterprise. — The combined 
hostility of the orthodox church and the Byzantine empire 
drove the Nestorians into exile, but they went much further 
than was needed simply to secure immunity from persecution. 
They showed a zeal for evangelization which resulted in the 
establishment of their influence throughout Asia, as is seen 
from the bishoprics founded not only in Syria, Armenia, Arabia 
and Persia, but at Halavan in Media, Merv in Khorasan, Herat, 
Tashkent, Samarkand, Baluk, Kashgar, and even at Kambaluk 
(Pekin) and Singan fu Hsi'en fu in China, and Kaljana and 
Kranganore in India. In 1265 they numbered 25 Asiatic 
provinces and over 70 dioceses. Mongolian invasions and 
Mahommedan tyranny have, of course, long since swept away 
all traces of many of these. The 400,000 Syrian Christians 
(" Christians of St Thomas," see Thomas, St) who live in 
Malabar no doubt owe their origin to Nestorian missionaries, 
the stories of the evangelization of India by the Apostles Thomas 
and Bartholomew having no real historical foundation, and the 
Indian activity of Pantaenus of Alexandria having proved 
fruitless, in whatever part of India it may have been exercised. 
The theology of the Indian Syrian Christians is of a Nestorian 
type, and Cosmas Indicopleustes (6th century) puts us on the 
right track when he says that the Christians whom he found in 
Ceylon and Malabar had come from Persia (probably as refugees 
from persecution, like the Huguenots in England and the 
Pilgrim Fathers in America). Pahlavi inscriptions 1 found on 
crosses at St Thomas's Mount near Madras and at Kottayam 
in Travancore, are evidence both of the antiquity of Christianity 
in these places (7th or 8th century), and for the semi-patri- 
passianism (the apparent identification of all three persons 
of the Trinity in the sufferer on the cross) which marked the 
Nestorian teaching. In 745 Thomas of Kana brought a new 

	1 " In punishment by the cross (was) the suffering of this One; 
	He who is the true Christ, and God alone, and Guide ever pure." 

band of emigrants from Bagdad and Nineveh, and possibly the 
name " Christians of St Thomas " arose from confusion between 
this man and the apostle. Other reinforcements came from 
Persia in 822, but the Malabar church never developed any 
intellectual vigour or missionary zeal. They had their own 
kings, lived as a close caste, and even imitated the Hindus in 
caste regulations of food and avoidance of pollution. In 1330 
Pope John XXII. issued a bull appointing Jordanus, a French 
Dominican, bishop of Quilon, and inviting the Nestorians to 
enter " the Christian Church." The invitation was declined, 
but in the 16th century the Syrian Christians sought the help 
of the Portuguese settlers against Mussulman oppression, only 
to find that before long they were subjected to the fiercer perils 
of Jesuit antagonism and the Inquisition. The Syrians submitted 
to Rome at the synod of Dampier in 1599, but it was a forced 
submission, and in 1653 when the Portuguese arrested the Syrian 
bishop just sent out by the catholicus of Babylon, the rebellion 
broke out. The renunciation was not quite thorough, one party 
adhering to the Roman Church as Romo-Syrians, the others 
reverting wholly to Syrian usages and forming to-day about 
three-fourths of the whole community. In 1665 a curious thing 
happened. Gregory, the Jacobite metropolitan of Jerusalem, 
visited Malabar, and, as the people had no consecrated bishop 
at the time, he consecrated Mar Thomas, who had been filling 
the office at the people's request, and remained in the country 
jointly administering the affairs of the Church with Thomas. 
Thus the Nestorian Church in India, voluntarily and with perfect 
indifference to theological dogmas, passed under Jacobite rule, 
and when early in the 18th century, Mar Gabriel, a Nestorian 
bishop, came to Malabar, he had a cool reception, and could only 
detach a small following of Syrians whom he brought back 
to the old Nestorianism. The approaches of the Anglican Church 
through the Church Missionary Society in the first part of the 
19th century were politely repelled. On the death of the bishop 
Mar Athanasius Matthew in 1877, litigation began as to his 
successor; it lasted ten years, and the decision (since reversed) 
was given against the party that held by the Nestorian connexion 
and the habitual autonomy of the Malabar church in favour of 
the supremacy of the Jacobite patriarch of Antioch. The great 
need of the Indian Syrian church to-day is an educated ministry. 

Early evidence of Nestorian missions in China is extant in the 
tablet found in 1625 at Chang* an in the district of Hsi'en-fu, 
province of Shensi. It commemorates " the introduction and 
propagation of the noble law of Ta t'sin in the Middle Kingdom," 
and beneath an incised cross sets out in Chinese and Syriac an 
abstract of Christian doctrine and the course of a Syrian mission 
in China beginning with the favourable reception of Olopan, 
who came from Judaea in 636. For two generations the little 
cause prospered, and again after persecutions in 699 and 813. 
Later on a second mission arrived, many churches were built 
and several emperors patronized the faith. This evidence is 
confirmed by (a) the canon of Theodore of Edessa (800) allowing 
metropolitans of China, India and other distant lands to send 
their reports to the catholikos every six years; (6) the edict of 
Wu Tsung destroying Buddhist monasteries and ordering 300 
foreign priests to return to the secular life that the customs of 
the empire might be uniform; (c) two 9th-century Arab travellers, 
one of whom, Ibn Wahhab, discussed the contents of the Bible 
with the emperor; (d) the discovery in 1725 of a Syrian MS. 
containing hymns and a portion of the Old Testament. 

In the 10th century the Nestorians introduced Christianity 
into Tartary proper; in '1274 Marco Polo saw two of their 
churches. The legend of Prester John is based on the idea of 
the conversion of a Mongol tribe, the Karith, whose chieftain 
Ung Khan at baptism received the title Malek Juchana (King 
John). And there has lately come to light a MS. of the 9th or 
10th century in Sogdianese, an Indo-Iranian language spoken 
in the north-east of Asia, which shows that theNestorianshad trans- 
lated the New Testament into that tongue and had taught the 
natives the alphabet and the doctrine. Their activity may well 
be said to have covered the continent. Their campaign was one 
of deliberate conquest, one of the greatest ever planned by 
Christian missionaries. Marco Polo is witness that there were 
Nestorian churches all along the trade routes from Bagdad to 
Pekin. (A. J. G.) 

§4. The Modem Nestorians. — The Nestorians or East Syrians 
(Surayi) of Turkey and Persia now inhabit a district bounded 
by Lake Urmia, or Urumia, on the east, stretching westwards 
into Kurdistan, to Mosul on the south, and nearly as far as Van 
on the north. They are divided into the Persian Nestorians of 
the plain of Azerbaijan, and the Turkish Nestorians, inhabiting 
chiefly the sanjak of Hakkiari in the vilayet of Van, who are 
subdivided into the Ray at or subject, and the Askiret or tribal, 
the latter being semi-independent in their mountain fastnesses. 
Forming at once a church and a nation, they own allegiance 
to their hereditary patriarch, Mar Shimun, Catholicus of the 
East, who resides at Qudshanis, a village about 7000 ft. above 
the sea-level, near the Kurdish town of Julamerk. It is only of 
late years, under the influence of the different missions, that 
education, ruined by centuries of persecution, has revived 
amongst the Nestorians; and even now the mountaineers, cut 
off from the outer world, are as a rule destitute of learning, 
and greatly resemble their neighbours, the wild and uncivilized 
Kurds. They are, however, extraordinarily tenacious of their 
ancient customs, and, almost totally isolated from the rest of 
Christendom since the 5th century, they afford an interesting 
study to the eccesiastical student. Their churches are rude 
buildings, dimly lighted and destitute of pictures or images, 
save that of the Cross, which is treated with the deepest venera- 
tion. The qanki, or sanctuary, is divided from the nave, by a 
solid wall, pierced by a single doorway; it contains the altar, or 
madWkha (literary, tlte sacrificing place), and may be entered 
only by persons in holy orders who are fasting. Here is cele- 
brated the Eucharist (Qurbana, or the offering', cf. "Corban"), 
by the priest (qasha), attended by his deacon (shamasha). Vest- 
ments are worn only at the ministration of the sacraments; 
incense is used invariably at the Eucharist and frequently at 
other services. There are three liturgies — of the Holy Apostles, 
of Theodore and of Nestorius. The first is quite free from 
Nestorian influence, dates from some remote period, perhaps 
prior to 431, and is certainly the most ancient of those now in 
use in Christendom; the other two, though early, are un- 
doubtedly of later date. The Nestorian canon of Scripture 
seems never to have been fully determined, nor is the sacra- 
mental system rigidly defined. Nestorian writers, however, 
generally reckon the mysteries as seven, i.e. Priesthood, Oil of 
Unction, the Offering of the Body and Blood of Christ, Absolu- 
tion, The Holy Leaven, the Signation of the life-giving Cross. 
The " Holy Leaven " is reputed to be a part of the original 
bread of the first Eucharist, brought by Addai and Man 1 and 
maintained ever since in the Church; it is used in the confection 
of the Eucharistic wafers, which are rather thicker than those 
used in the Western Church. Communion is given in both kinds, 
as throughout the East; likewise, confirmation is administered 
directly after baptism. Sacramental confession is enjoined, 
but has recently become obsolete; prayers for the departed 
and invocation of saints form part of the services. The bishops 
are always celibates and are chosen from episcopal families. 
The service-books were wholly in MS. until the press of the 
archbishop of Canterbury's mission at Urmia issued the Takhsa 
(containing the liturgies, baptismal office, &c.) and several other 
liturgical texts. 

The Nestorians commemorate Nestorius as a saint, and invoke 
his aid and that of his companions. They reject the Third 
Oecumenical Council, and though showing the greatest devotion 
to the Blessed Virgin, deny her the title of Tkeotokos, i.e. the 
mother or bearer of God. Their theological teaching is 
misty and perplexing; their earliest writings contain no 
error, and the hymns of their great St Ephrem, still sung 
in their services, are positively antagonistic to " Nestorianism "; 
their theology dating from the schism is not so satisfactory. 
They attribute two Kiani, two Qnumi and one Parsopa in 

	1 The legendary founders of the Syrian Church. Addai was sup- 
	posed to be one of the Seventy of Luke x. 1 , and Mari his disciple. 

Christ (see J. F. Bethune-Baker's Nestorius and his Teaching). 
To say that the modern Nestorians are not definitely and 
firmly orthodox is perhaps fairer than to charge them with 
being distinctly heretical. 

§ 5. Missions amongst the Nestorians. — The peculiar circum- 
stances, both ecclesiastical and temporal, of the Nestorians have 
attracted much attention in western Christendom, and various 
missionary enterprises amongst them have resulted. 

1. The Roman Catholic Missions. — In Turkey these consist of the 
Dominican mission, established at Mosul during the 18th century, 
and in Persia of the French Lazarist mission, which sprang out of 
some schools established by a French layman and scientific traveller, 
Eugene Bore\ in 1838. At M. Boreas entreaty the Propaganda sent 
the first Lazarist father to Persia in 1840. The chief stations of the 
Lazarists are at Khosrova and Urmia. At the latter place there is 
an orphanage under the superintendence of the Sisters of St Vincent 
de Paul. The work of these missions is to extend and consolidate 
that Catholicized and partly Latinized offshoot of the Nestorians 
known as the Uniat- Chaldean Church (see ante). 

2. The American Presbyterian Mission, established in Persia in 
1 834-1835 by the Rev. Justin Perkins and Dr A.Grant, comprises large 
buildings near Urmia, a college and a hospital. The influence of 
this mission does not extend much beyond the Turkish frontier, but 
it is strong in the Persian plains. The original aim was to influence 
the old Nestorian Church rather than to set up a new religious body, 
but the wide difference between Presbyterians and an Oriental Church 
rendered the attempt abortive, and the result of the labours of the 
Americans has been the establishment since 1862 of a Syrian Pro- 
testant community in Persia, with some adherents in Turkey. 

3. The A rchbishop of Canterbury's Mission to the A ssyrian 
Christians. — This Anglican mission was promoted by Archbishop 
Tait, and finally established by Archbishop Benson in 1886. Its 
aim is thus officially defined : " To aid an existing Church, . . . not 
to Anglicanize, . . . not to change any doctrines held by them which 
are not contrary to that faith which the Holy Spirit, speaking 
through the Oecumenical Councils of the Undivided Church of 
Christ, has taught us as necessary to be believed by all Christians, 
but ... to strengthen an ancient Church, at the earnest request 
of the Catholicos, and with the knowledge and blessing of the 
Catholic patriarch of Antioch, one of the four patriarchs of the 
Holy Orthodox Eastern Church, and occupant of the Apostolic See 
from which the Church of the East revolted at the time of Nestorius." 
This mission has its headquarters at Urmia, with a college for 
candidates^ for holy orders and a printing-press. Two mission- 
priests reside in Turkey, one at Qudshanis with Mar Shimun, the 
Nestorian Catholicus and Patriarch. The Anglican Church in 
America co-operates with the mission. 

4. The Russian Mission.— One of the Nestorian bishops joined 
the Russian Orthodox Church in 1898, and returned the same year 
with a small band of missionaries sent by the Holy Synod of Russia. 
This mission enrolled a very large number of adherents drawn 
from the old Church, the Protestant Nestorians, and the Uniat- 
Chaldeans, but it can hardly be said to have commenced anyactive 
work, although the Anglican mission withdrew from competition by 
closing its schools in the dioceses occupied by the Russians. 

Authorities. — J. S. Assemani, Bibliotheca Orientalis, ii. and iv.; 
A. J. Maclean and G. F. Browne, The Catholicos of the East and his 
People (London, 1892); G. P. Badger, Nestorians and their Rituals 
(London, 1852); M. Labourt, Le Christianisme dans V empire perse 
(Paris, 1904); W. F. Adeney, The Greek and Eastern Churches, 
Pp- 477-53 8 (Edinburgh, 1908; ; J. Rendel Harris, Sidelights on New 
Testament Research, Lect. iv. (London, 1908); G. Milne Rae, The 
Syrian Church in India (1892); K. Heussi und H. Mulert, Atlas 
zur Kirchengeschichte, Map III. (Tubingen, 1905); P. Cams, The 
Nestorian Monument (Chicago and London, 1909) ;_ E. Gibbon, 
Decline and Fall, ch. xlvii.; J. W. Etheridge, Syrian Churches 
(1846) ; The Liturgy of the Holy Apostles Adai and Mari, &c. (London, 
1893) ; Piolet, Les Missions cathofiques au XIX™* siecle (Paris, vol. i.) ; 
Quarterly Papers and Annual Reports of the Archbishop of Canter- 
bury's Assyrian Mission. (J. A. L. R.) 


NESTORIUS (d. c. 451), Syrian ecclesiastic, patriarch of 
Constantinople from 428 to 431, was a native of Geraianicia 
at the foot of Mount Taurus, in Syria. The year of his birth is 
unknown. He received his education at Antioch, probably under 
Theodore of Mopsuestia. As monk in the neighbouring monastery 
of Euprepius, and afterwards as presbyter, he became celebrated 
in the diocese for his asceticism, his orthodoxy and his eloquence; 
hostile critics, such as the church historian Socrates, allege that 
his arrogance and vanity were hardly less conspicuous. On the 
death of Sisinnius, patriarch of Constantinople (December 427), 
Theodosius II., perplexed by the various claims of the local 
clergy, appointed the disinguished preacher of Antioch to the 
vacant see. The consecration took place on the 10th of April 
428, and then, almost immediately afterwards, in what is 
said to have been his first patriarchal sermon, Nestorius exhorted 
the emperor in the famous words — " Purge me, O Caesar, the 
earth of heretics, and I in return will give thee heaven. Stand 
by me in putting down the heretics and I will stand by thee in 
putting down the Persians." In the spirit of this" utterance, 
steps were taken within a few days by the new prelate to suppress 
the assemblies of the Arians; these, by a bold stroke of policy, 
anticipated his action by themselves setting fire to their meeting- 
house, Nestorius being forthwith nicknamed " the incendiary." 
The Novatiansand the Quartodecimans were the next objects 
of his orthodox zeal — a zeal which in the case of the former at 
least was reinforced, according to Socrates, by his envy of their 
bishop; and it led to serious and fatal disturbances at Sardis 
and Miletus. The toleration the followers of Macedonius had 
long enjoyed was also rudely broken, the recently settled Pela- 
gians alone finding any respite. While these repressive measures 
were being carried on outside the pale of the catholic church, 
equal care was taken to instruct the faithful in such points of 
orthodoxy as their spiritual head conceived to be the most im- 
portant or the most in danger. One of these was that involved 
in the practice, now grown almost universal, of bestowing the 
epithet Georo/cos, " Mother of God," upon Mary the mother of 
Jesus. In the school of Antioch the impropriety of the expres- 
sion had long before been pointed out, by Theodore of Mopsuestia, 
among others, in terms precisely similar to those afterwards 
attributed to Nestorius. From Antioch Nestorius had brought 
along with him to Constantinople a co-presbyter named Anas- 
tasius, who enjoyed his confidence and is called by Theophanes 
his " syncellus." This Anastasius, in a pulpit oration which the 
patriarch himself is said to have prepared for him, caused great 
scandal to the partisans of the Marian cultus then beginning by 
saying, " Let no one call Mary the mother of God, for Mary was 
a human being; and that God should be born of a human being 
is. impossible." The opposition, which was led by one Eusebius, 
a " scholasticus " or pleader who afterwards became bishop of 
Dorylaeum, chose to construe this utterance as a denial of the 
divinity of Christ, and so violent did the dispute upon it become 
that Nestorius judged it necessary to silence the remonstrants 
by force. The situation went from bad to worse, and the dispute 
not only grew in intensity but reached the outer world. 

Matters were soon ripe for foreign intervention, and the 
notorious Cyril (q.v.) of Alexandria, in whom the antagonism 
between the Alexandrian and Antiochene schools of theology, 1 
as well as the jealousy between the patriarchate of St Mark 
and that of Constantinople, found a determined and unscrupulous 
exponent, did not fail to make use of the opportunity. He 
stirred up his own clergy, he wrote to encourage the dissidents 
at Constantinople, he addressed himself to the sister and wife of 
the emperor (Theodosius himself being known to be still favour- 
able to Nestorius), and he beggared the clergy of his own diocese 
to find bribes for the officials of the court. 2 He also sent to Rome 
a careful selection of Nestorius's sayings and sermons. Nestorius 
himself, on the other hand, having occasion to write to Pope 
Celestine I. about the Pelagians (whom he was not inclined to 
regard as heretical), gave from his own point of view an account 
of the disputes which had recently arisen within his patriarchate. 3 
While ordinarily Rome might have been expected to hold the 
balance between the contrasted schools of thought, as Leo was 
able later to do, it is not surprising that this implied appeal proved 
unsuccessful, for Celestine naturally resented any questioning 
of the Roman decision concerning the Pelagians and was jealous 
of the growing power of the upstart see of the Nova Roma of the 
East. He was not slow to use the opportunity of gaining what 
was at once an official triumph and a personal satisfaction. In 
a synod which met in 430, he decided in favour of the epithet 

	1 At Alexandria the mystic and allegorical tendency prevailed, 
	at Antioch the practical and historical, and these tendencies showed 
	themselves in different methods of study, exegesis and presentation 
	* of doctrine. 

	* Letters of the archdeacon Epiphanius to the patriarch Maxi- 
	mianus (Migne, Pair. Gr. lxxxiv. 826). 

	8 The letter is given in F. Loofs, Nestoriana 166-168, partly trans- 
	lated in J.F. Bethune-Baker, Nestoriui and his Teaching, p. l6scq. 

Qeordtcos, and bade Nestorius retract his erroneous teaching, on 
pain of instant excommunication, at the same time entrusting 
the execution of this decision to the patriarch of Alexandria. 
On hearing from Rome, Cyril at once held a synod and drew up 
a doctrinal formula for Nestorius to sign, and also twelve ana- 
themas covering the various points of the Nestorian dogmatic. 
Nestorius, instead of yielding to the combined pressure of his 
two great rivals, merely replied by a counter excommunication. 

In this situation of affairs the demand for a general council 
became irresistible, and accordingly Theodosius and Valentinian 
III. issued letters summoning the metropolitans of the catholic 
church to meet at Ephesus at Whitsuntide 431, each bringing 
with him some able suffragans. • Nestorius, with sixteen bishops 
and a large following of armed men, was among the first to arrive; 
soon afterwards came Cyril with fifty bishops. Juvenal of Jeru- 
salem and Flavian of Thessalonica were some days late. It 
was then announced that John of Antioch had been delayed on 
his journey and could not appear for some days; he, however, 
is stated to have written politely requesting that the opening 
of the synod should not be delayed on his account. Cyril and 
his friends accordingly assembled in the church of the Theotokos 
on the 22nd of June, and summoned Nestorius before them to 
give an account of his doctrines. The reply they received was 
that he would appear as soon as all the bishops were assembled ; 
and at the same time the imperial commissioner, Candidian, 
presented himself in person and formally protested against the 
opening of the synod. Notwithstanding these circumstances, 
Cyril and the one hundred and fifty-nine bishops who were with 
him proceeded to read the imperial letter of convocation, and 
afterwards the letters which had passed between Nestorius and 
his adversary. Almost immediately the entire assembly with 
one voice cried out anathema on the impious Nestorius and his 
impious doctrines, and after various extracts from the writings 
cf church fathers had been read the decree of his exclusion from 
the episcopate and from all priestly communion was solemnly 
read and signed by all present, whose numbers had by this time 
swelled to one hundred and ninety-eight. The accused and his 
friends never had a hearing. As Nestorius himself said, " the 
Council was Cyril "; it simply registered the Alexandrian 
patriarch's views. 

When the decision was known the populace, who had been 
eagerly waiting from early morning till night to hear the result, 
accompanied the members with torches and censers to their 
lodgings, and there was a general illumination of the city. A 
few days afterwards (June 26th or 27th) John of Antioch arrived, 
and efforts were made by both parties to gain his ear; whether 
inclined or not to the cause of his former co-presbyter, he was 
naturally excited by the precipitancy with which Cyril had acted, 
and at a conciliabulum of forty-three bishops held in his lodgings 
shortly after his arrival he was induced by Candidian, the friend 
of Nestorius, to depose the bishops of Alexandria and Ephesus 
on the spot. The efforts, however, to give effect to this act on the 
following Sunday were frustrated by the zeal of fc the Ephesian 
mob. Meanwhile a letter was received from the emperor declar- 
ing invalid the session at which Nestorius had been deposed 
unheard; numerous sessions and counter-sessions were after- 
wards held, the conflicting parties at the same time exerting them- 
selves to the utmost to secure an effective superiority at court. 
In the end Theodosius decided to confirm the depositions which 
had been pronounced on both sides, and Cyril and Memnon 
as well as Nestorius were by his orders laid under arrest. Re- 
presentatives from each side were now summoned before him 
to Chalcedon, and at last, yielding to the sense of the evident 
majority, he gave a decision in favour of the " orthodox," and 
the council of Ephesus was dissolved. Maximian, one of the 
Constantinopolitan clergy, a native of Rome, was promoted to 
the vacant see, and Nestorius was henceforward represented 
in the city of his former patriarchate only by one small con- 
gregation, which also a short time afterwards became extinct. 
The commotion which had been thus raised did not so easily 
subside in the more eastern section of the church; the Antio- 
chenes continued to maintain for a considerable time an attitude 
of antagonism towards Cyril and his creed, and were not pacified 
until an understanding was reached in 433 on the basis of anew 
formula involving some material concessions by him. Tbe union 
even then met with resistance from a number of bishops, who, 
rather than accede to it, submitted to deposition and expulsion 
from their sees; and it was not until these had all died out that, 
as the result of stringent imperial edicts, Nestorianism may be 
said to have become extinct throughout the Roman empire. 
Their school at Edessa was closed by Zeno in 489. As for 
Nestorius himself, immediately after his deposition he withdrew 
into private life in his old monastery of Euprepius, Antioch, 
until 435, when the emperor ordered his banishment to Petra in 
Arabia. A second decree, it would seem, sent him to Oasis, 
probably the city of the Great Oasis, in Upper Egypt, where he 
was still living in 439, at the time when Socrates wrote his 
Church History. He was taken prisoner by the Blemmyes, a 
nomad tribe that gave much trouble to the empire in Africa, and 
when they set him free in the Thebaid near Panopolis (Akhmim) 
c. 450, they exposed him to further persecution from Schenute 
the great hero of the Egyptian monks. There is some evidence 
that he was summoned to the Council of Chalcedon, 1 though 
he could not attend it, and the concluding portion of his book 
known as The Bazaar of Heraclides not only gives a full account 
of the " Robber Synod " of Ephesus 449, but knows that Theo- 
dosius is dead (July 450) and seems aware of the proceedings of 
Chalcedon and the flight of Dioscurus the unscrupulous successor 
of Cyril at Alexandria. Nestorius was already old and ailing 
and must have died very soon after. 

The Nestorian Heresy. — What is technically and conventionally 
meant in dogmatic theologyby " the Nestorian heresy " must now 
be noticed. As Eutychianism is the doctrine that the God-man 
has only one nature, so Nestorianism is the doctrine that He has 
two complete persons. So far as Nestorius himself is concerned, 
however, it is certain that he nevtr formulated any such doctrine; 2 
nor does any recorded utterance of his, however casual, come so 
near the heresy called by his^ name as Cyril's deliberately framed 
third anathema (that regarding the " physical union " of the two 
hypostases or natures) approaches Eutychianism. It must be 
remembered that Nestorius was zs orthodox at all events as 
Athanasius on the subject of the incarnation, and sincerely, even 
fanatically, held every article of the Nicene creed. Hefele himself, 
one of the most learned and acute of Cyril's partisans, is compelled 
to admit that Nestorius accurately held the duality of the two 
natures and the integrity of each, was equally explicitly opposed 
to Arianism and Apollinarianism, and was perfectly correct in his 
assertion that the Godhead can neither be bom nor suffer; all that 
he can allege against him is that " the fear of the communicatio 
idiomalum pursued him like a spectre." But in reality the question 
raised by Nestorius was not one as to the communicatio idiomatum, 
but simply as to the proprieties of language. " I cannot speak of 
God," he said, " as being two or three months old," a remark which 
was twisted to his disadvantage. He did not refuse to speak of 
Mary as being the mother of Christ or as being the mother of 
Emmanuel, but he thought it improper to speak of her as the mother 
of God, and Leo in the Letter to Flavian which was endorsed at 
Chalcedon uses the term " Mother of the Lord " which was exactly 
what Nestorius wished. And there is at least this to be said for 
him that even the most zealous desire to frustrate the Arian had 
never made it a part of orthodoxy to speak of David as 0«ox£r«/> 
or of James as 6Lih4>69(oz. The secret of the enthusiasm of the 
masses for the analogous expression Theotokos js to be sought not 
so much in the Nicene doctrine of the incarnation as in the recent 
growth in the popular mind of notions as to the dignity of the Virgin 
Mary, which were entirely unheard of (except in heretical circles) 
for nearly three centuries of the Christian era. That the Virgin 
should be given a title that was quasi-divine mattered little. The 
danger was that under cover of such a title an unhistorical con- 
ception of the facts of the Gospel should grow up, and a false doctrine 
of the relations between the human and the Divine be encouraged, 
and this was to Nestorius a double dangerthat needed to be^ ex- 
posed. He was thus forced into the position of one who brings 
technical objections against a popular term. 

The fact that Nestorius was trained at Antioch and inherited the 
Antiochene zeal for exact biblical exegesis and insistence upon the 
recognition of the full manhood of Christ, is of the first importance 
in understanding his position. From the days of Ignatius, down 
through Paul of Samosata and Lucian to the 'great controversies 
of the 5th century which began with the theories of Apollinarius, 
the theologians of Antioch started from the one sure fact, that 

	1 Coptic Life of Dioscurus (Rev. £gyptologique, 1880-188^). 
	1 J. F. Bethune-Baker, Nestorius and his Teaching, ch. vi. 

Christ lived on earth the life of man, and without questioning the 
equally genuine Divine element laid stress on this genuine human 
consciousness. There is no reason to suppose that Nestorius in- 
tended to introduce any innovations in doctrine, and in any estimate 
of him his strong religious interest and his fervent pastoral spirit 
must have due weight. He was a great extempore preacher and 
exposed to the peril of the unconsidered " telling " phrase. That 
a man of such conspicuous ability, who impressed himself at the 
outset on the people of Constantinople as an uncompromising 
opponent of heresy should within a few short years be an excom- 
municated fugitive, sacrificed to save the face of Cyril and the 
Alexandrians, is indeed, as Duchesne says, a tragedy. No suc- 
cessor of Chrysostom was likely to receive much good-will from the 
nephew and successor of Theophilus of Alexandria. 

It is only within recent years that an attempt has been made to 
judge Nestorius from some other evidence than that afforded by 
the accusations of Cyril and the inferences drawn therefrom. This 
other evidence consists partly of letters from Nestorius, preserved 
among the works of those to whom they were written, some sermons 
collected in a Latin translation by Marius Mercator, an African 
merchant who was doing business in Constantinople at the time of 
the dispute, and other material gathered from Syriac manuscripts. 
Since the helpful collection of Nestoriana published by Dr F. Loofs 
in 1905 there has also come to our knowledge the most valuable 
evidence of all, Nestorius's own account of the whole difficulty, 
viz. The Bazaar * of Heraclides of Damascus. This pseudonym served 
to protect the book against the fate that overtook the writings of 
heretics, and in a Syriac version it was preserved in the Euphrates 
valley where the 'followers of Nestorius settled. Ebed Jesu in the 
14th century mentions it together with Letters and Homilies, as well 
as the Tragedy, or a Letters to Cosmos, the Theopaschites (of which 
some fragments are still extant) and the Liturgy, which is still used 
by the Nestorian Church. The discovery of The Bazaar, which is 
the Apologia of Nestorius, was made public by Dr H. Goussen 
(though members of the Archbishop of Canterbury's Mission to the 
Assyrian Christians had previously been acquainted with the book). 
The text has been edited by P. Paul Bedjan (Leipzig, 1910) and a 
French translation has been made by M. Tabbe" F. Nau. A repre- 
sentative selection of extracts has been given to English readers in 
J. F. Bethune-Baker's Nestorius and his Teaching (Cambridge, 
1908), chapter ii. of which describes the MS. and its accounts. 
Much of the argument is thrown into the form of a dialogue between 
(1) Nestorius and an imaginary opponent Superianus, (2) Nestorius 
and Cyril. The book reveals a strong personality and helps us to 
know the man and his teaching, even though we nave to gather his 
own views largely from his criticism of his antagonists. He is 
throughout more concerned for the wrong done to the faith at 
Ephesus than to himself, saying that if he held the views attributed 
to him by Cyril he would be the first to condemn himself without 
mercy. All through the years of conflict he had " but one end in 
view, that no one should call the Word of God a creature, or the 
Manhood which was assumed incomplete." In his letters to Celestine 
he had laid stress on the point that the teaching he attacked was 
derogatory to the Godhead and so he called its champions Arians. 
" If the Godhead of the Son had its origin in the womb of the Virgin 
it was not Godhead as the Father's, and He who was born could 
not be homoousiqs withGod, and that was what the Arians denied 
Him to be." It is thus increasingly difficult to believe that Nestorius 
was a " Nestorian." Pere J. Mane" has shown (Revue d Inst, ecclis. 
July, 1906) that in spite of notable differences of terminology and 
form the chronologies of Antioch and Alexandria were in essence 
the same. Personal rather than doctrinal reasons had by far the 
larger part in determining the fate of Nestorius, who was sacrificed 
to the agreement between the two great schools. This view is 
confirmed by the evidence of the Synodicon Orientate (the collection 
of the canons of Nestorian Councils and Synods), which shows that 
the Great Syriac Church built up by the adherents of Nestorius 
and ever ^memorable for its zeal in carrying the Gospel into 
Central Asia, China and India cannot, from its inception, be rightly 
described as other than ^ orthodox. The^ " attenuated " (i.e. un- 
" Nestorian ") form which some historians have noted in the 
early centuries of Persian Nestorianism was really there from the 
beginning. The Nestorian Church, following its leader, formally 
recognizes the Letter of Leo to Flavian and the decrees of the 
Council of Chalcedon. " When I came," said Nestorius (Baz. Herac.), 
" upon that exposition and read it, I gave thanks to God that the 
Church of Rome was rightly and blamelessly making confession, 
even though they happened to be against me personally." His aim, 
he tells us, had been to maintain the distinct continuance of the two 
natures of Christ when united through the Incarnation into one 
Person. " In the Person the natures use their properties mutually. 
. . . The manhood is the person of the Godhead and the Godhead 
is the person of the manhood." The ultimate union of these two 
natures appears to lie in the will — " For there was one and the same 
will and mind in the union of the natures, so that both should will 
or not will exactly the same things. The natures have, moreover, a 

	* Syriac, tegurtd, lit. " merchandise. " The Greek word may have 
	been lurtpiov. Nothing is certainly known of any such Heraclides. 

mutual will, since the person of this is the person of that, and the 
person of that the person of this." The manner in which this 
union is realized is thus stated by Nestorius: " The Word also 
passed through Blessed Mary inasmuch as He did not receive a 
beginning bylsirth from her, as is the case with the body which was 
born of her. For this reason I said that God the Word passed and 
not was born, because He did not receive a beginning from her. 
But the two natures being united are one Christ. And He who 
was born of the Father as to the Divinity, and from the Holy Virgin 
as to the humanity is and is styled one; for of the two natures 
there was a union." It may truly be said that the ideas for which 
Nestorius and the Antiochene school strove " won the day as regards 
the doctrinal definitions of the church. The manhood of Christ was 
safeguarded, as distinct from the Godhead: the union was left an 
ineffable mystery." • 

Authorities. — On Nestorius, in addition to the modern literature 
cited in the article, and the standard histories of dogma (A. Harnack, 
F. Loofs, R. L. Ottley's Doctrine of the Incarnation, &c.) see R, 
Seeberg, Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte, Bd. ii.§ 27 (Leipzig, 1910), 
L. Duchesne, Histoire ancienne de VSglise, vol. iii. chs. x. xi. (Paris, 
1910). (J.S. Bl.;A. J. G.) 


NESZLER, VICTOR (1841-1890), German musical composer, 
was born on the 28th of January 1841 at Baldenheim, near 
Schlettstadt. At Strassburg he began his university career 
with the study of theology, but he concluded it with the pro- 
duction of a light opera entitled Fleurelte (1864). To complete 
his knowledge of music Neszler went to Leipzig to study under 
Hauptmann. His opera Der Trompeler von Sackingen, based 
on ScheffeFs poem, was composed and performed in 1884. 
Besides a number of other operas, Neszler wrote many songs 
and choral works; but it is with the Trompeler von Sackingen 
that his name is associated. He died at Strassburg on the 28th of 
May 1890. In 1895 a monument to him by Marzolff was erected 
there. 

NET, 1 a fabric of thread, cord or wire, the intersections of 
which are knotted so as to form a mesh. The art of netting is 
intimately related to weaving, knitting, plaiting and lace-making, 
from all of which, however, it is distinguished by the knotting 
of the intersections of the cord. It is one of the most ancient 
and universal of arts, having been practised among the most 
primitive tribes, to whom the net is of great importance in hunting 
and fishing. 

Net-making, as a modern industry, is principally concerned 
with the manufacture of the numerous forms of net used in 
fisheries, but netting is also largely employed for many other 
purposes, as for catching birds, for the temporary division of 
fields, for protecting fruit in gardens, for screens and other 
furniture purposes, for ladies' hair, bags, appliances used in 
various games, &c. Since the early part of the 19th century 
numerous machines have been invented for netting, and several 
of these have attained commercial success. Fishing nets were 
formerly made principally from hemp fibre — technically called 
" twine "; but since the adaptation of machinery to net-making 
cotton has been increasingly used, such nets being more flexible 
and lighter, and more easily handled and stowed. 

The forms of fishing nets vary according to the manner in 
which they are intended to act. This is either by entangling the 
fish in their complicated folds, as in the trammel; receiving 
them into pockets, as in the trawl; suspending them by the body 
in the meshes, as in the mackerel-net; imprisoning them within 
their labyrinth-like chambers, as in the stake-net; or drawing 
them to shore, as in the seine. The parts of a net are the head or 
upper margin, along which the corks are strung upon a rope 
called the head-rope; the foot is the opposite or lower margin, 
which carries the foot-rope, on which in many cases leaden 
plummets are made fast. The meshes are the squares composing 
the net. The width of a net is expressed by the term " over "; 
e.g. a day-net is three fathoms long and one over or wide. The 
lever is the first row of a net. There are also accrues, false 
meshes or quarterings, which are loops inserted in any given 
row, by which the number of meshes is increased. To bread or 

	1 This is a common Teut. word, of which the origin is unknown; 
	it is not to be connected with " knit " or " knot." The term " net," 
	i.e. remaining after all deductions, charges, &c, have been made, as 
	in" net profit," is a variant of " neat," tidy, clean, Lat. nitidus, 
	shining. 

	Fig. 1. 

breathe a net is to make a net. Dead netting is a piece without 
either accrues or stole (stolen) meshes, which last means that a 
mesh is taken away by netting into two ineshe? of the preceding 
row at once. 

Hand-Netting. — The tools used in hand-netting are the needle, 
an instrument for holding and netting the material; it is made with 
ancye E, a tongue T, and a fork F (fig. 1). The 
twine is wound on it by being passed alternately 
between the fork and round the tongue, so that 
the turns of the string lie parallel to the length of the 
needle, and are kept on by the tongue and fork. A 
spool or mesh-pin is a piece of round or flat wood 
on which the_ loops are formed, the perimeter of the 
spool determining the size of the loops. Each loop 
contains two sides of the square mesh; therefore, 
supposing that it be required to make a mesh 1 in. 
square — that is, measuring 1 in. from knot to knot, 
— a spool 2 in. in circumference must be used. 
Large meshes may be formed by giving the twine 
two or more turns round the spool, as occasion 
may require; or the spool may be made flat, and of 
a sufficient width. The method of making the 
hand-knot in nets known as the fisherman's knot 
is more easily acquired by example than described in 
writing. Fig. 2 shows the course of the twine in form- 
ing a single knot. From the last-formed knot the twine 
passes over the front of the mesh-pin h, and is caught 
behind by the little finger of- the left hand, forming the loop s, 
thence it passes to the front and is caught at d by the left thumb, 
then through the loops 5 and m as indicated, after which the twine 
is_ released by the thumb and the knot is drawn " taut " or tight. 
Fig. 3 is a bend knot used for uniting two ends of twine. 

Machine-Netting. — In 1778 a netting-machine was 
patented by William Horton, William Ross, Thomas 
Davies and John Golby. In 1802 the French govern- 
ment offered a reward of 10,000 francs to the person 
who^ should invent an automatic machine for net- 
making. Jacquard submitted (J h 
a model of a VZ — ___  machine which 
was brought under the notice of Napoleon 
and Carnot, and he was summoned to Paris by 
the emperor who asked — " Are you the man 
who pretends to do what God Almighty cannot 
— tie a knot in a stretched string?" Jac- 
quard's model, which is incomplete, was de- 
posited in the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers; 
it was awarded a prize, and he himself received 
an appointment in the Conservatoire, where he 
perfected his famous attachment to the com- 
mon loom. In the United Kingdom, the first 
to succeed in inventing an efficient machine 
and in establishing the industry of machine^ net-making was 
James Paterson of Musselburgh. Paterson, originally a cooper, 
served in the army through the Peninsular War, and was discharged 
after the battle of Waterloo. He established a net factory in Mussel- 
burgh about 1820; but the early form of machine 
was imperfect, the knots it formed slipped readily, 
and, there being much prejudice against machine 
nets, the demand was small. Walter Ritchie, 
native of Musselburgh, devised a method for 
forming the ordinary hand-knot on the machine 
nets, and the machine, patented in. July 1835, 
became^ the foundation of an extensive and 
flourishing industry. 

The Paterson machine is very complex. It 
consists of an arrangement of hooks, needles and 
sinkers, one of each being required for every mesh 
in the breadth being made. The needles hold the 
meshes, while the hooks seize the lower part of each and twist it 
into a loop. Through the series of loops so formed a steely wire is 
shot, carrying with it twine for the next range of loops. This twine 
the sinkers successively catch and depress sufficiently to form the 
two sides and loop of the next mesh to be formed. The knot formed 
by threading the loops is now tightened up, the last formed mesh is 
freed from the sinkers and .transferred to the^ hooks, and the process 
of looping, threading and knotting thus continues. 

Another form of net-loom, working on a principle distinct from 
that of Paterson, was invented and patented in France by Onesiphore 
Pccqueur in 1840, and again in France and in the United King- 
dom in 1849. This machine was improved by many subsequent 

	Fig. 2. 

	Fig. 4. 

inventors; especially by Baudouin and Jouannin, patented in the 
United Kingdom in 1861. In this machine separate threads or 
cords running longitudinally for each division of the mesh are em- 
ployed (fig. 4). It will be observed that the alternate threads a and 
b are differently disposed — the a series being drawn into simple 
loops over and through which the threads of the b series nave to pass. 
On the machine the a series of threads are arranged vertically, 
while the b series are placed horizontally in thin lenticular spools. 
Over the horizontal b series is a range of hooks equal in number 
with the threads, and set so that they seize the b threads, raise 
them, and give them a double twist, thus forming a row of open 
loops. The loops are then depressed, and, seizing the vertical a 
threads, draw them crotchet-like through the b loops into loops
sufficiently long and open to pass right over the spools containing
the b threads (fig. 5), after which -r it only, remains to tighten
the threads and the mesh is complete. 

Wire-netting, which is in extensive de- 
mand for garden use, poultry coops,and 
numerous like purposes, is also a twisted 
structure made principally by machine 
power. The industry was mainly founded 
by Charles Barnard in 1844, tne nrst net * 
ting being made by hand on wooden rollers. 
The first machine appeared in 1855, and, 
since that time many devices, generally of extremely complex con- 
struction, have come into use. The wire chiefly used is common 
annealed Bessemer or mild steel (see B. Smith, Wire, Its Manufacture 
and Uses, New York, 1891). 

NETHERLANDS. The geographical features of the countries 
formerly known collectively as the Netherlands or Low Countries 
are dealt with under the modern English names of Holland 
and Belgium. Here we are concerned only with their earlier 
history, which is put for convenience under this heading in order 
to separate the account of the period when they formed practically 
a single area for historical purposes from that of the time when 
Holland and Belgium became distinct administrative units. 

The sources of our knowledge of the country down to the 8th 
century are Caesar's De Bello Gallico, iv., the history of Velleius 
Paterculus, ii. 105, the works of Tacitus, the Historia 
fabttlnts. F rancorum (i.-iii.) of Gregory of Tours, the Fredegar's 
Chronica (for the last two of which see D. Bouquet's 
Recueil de historiens des Gaules et de la France, 1738- 
1876). The Netherlands first became known to the Romans 
through the campaigns of Julius Caesar. He found the country 
peopled partly by tribes of Gallo- Celtic, partly by tribes of 
Germanic stock, the river Rhine forming roughly the line of 
demarcation between the races. Several of the tribes along the 
borderland, however, were undoubtedly of mixed blood. The 
Gallo-Celtic tribes bore the general appellation of Belgae, and 
among these the Nervii, inhabiting the district between the 
Scheldt and the Sambre were at the date of Caesar's invasion, 
57 B.C., the most warlike and important. To the north of the 
Meuse, and more especially in the low-lying ground enclosed 
between the Waal and the Rhine (insula Batavorum) lived the 
Batavi, a clan of the great Germanic tribe, the Chatti. Beyond 
these were found the Frisians (q.v.), a people of German origin, 
who gave their name to the territory between the Rhine and the 
Ems. Of the other tribes the best known are the Caninefates, 
Chaud, Usipetes, Sicambri, Eburones, Menapii, Morini and 
Aduatid. 

Julius Caesar, after a severe struggle with the Nervii and their 
confederates, was successful in bringing the Belgic tribes into 
The!r subjection to Rome. Under Augustus, 15 B.C., the 
relations conquered territory was formed into an imperial 
with the province, Gallia Belgica, and the frontier line, the 
Romans, Rh me> was strongly held by a series of fortified camps. 
With regard to the region north of the Rhine we first obtain 
information from the accounts of the campaigns of Nero, Claudius, 
Drusus and Tiberius. The Batavians were first brought under 
Roman rule in the governorship of Drusus, a.d. 13. They were 
not incorporated in the empire, but were ranked as allies, socii 
or auxilia. Their land became a recruiting ground for the Roman 
armies, and a base for expeditions across the Rhine. The 
Batavians served with fidelity and distinction in all parts of the 
empire, and from the days of Augustus onwards formed a con- 
siderable part of the Praetorian guard. The Frisians struggled 
against Roman over-lordship somewhat longer, and it was not 
until a.d. 47 that they finally submitted to the victorious arms 
of Domitius Corbulo. The Frisian auxiliaries were likewise 
regarded as excellent troops. 

In the confusion of the disputed succession to the imperial 
throne after the death of Nero, the Batavians (a.d. 60-70) under 
the influence of a great leader, known only by his 
Roman name, Claudius Civilis, rose in revolt. Civilis 

	The revolt of OvBls. The Franks* 

had seen much service in the Roman armies, and was 
a man of statesmanlike ability. In revenge for his own 
imprisonment, and the death of his brother by order of Nero, 
he took advantage of the disorder in the empire not only 
to stir up his fellow-countrymen to take up arms for independ- 
ence, but to persuade a large number of German and Belgic tribes 
to join forces with them. A narrative of the revolt is given 
in detail by Tadtus. At first success attended Civilis and the 
Romans were driven out of the greater part of the Belgic province. 
Even the great fortress of Castra Vetera (Xanten) was starved 
into submission and the garrison massacred. But dissensions 
arose between the German and Celtic elements of Civilis's follow- 
ing. The Romans, under an able general, Cerealis, took 
advantage of this, and Civilis, beaten in fight, retired to the 
island of the Batavians. But both sides were exhausted, and 
it was arranged that Cerealis and Civilis should meet on a broken 
bridge over the Nabalia (Yssel) to discuss terms of peace. At 
this point the narrative of Tacitus breaks off, but it would appear 
that easy conditions were offered, for the Batavians returned to 
their position of socii, and were henceforth faithful in their steady 
allegiance to Rome. The insula Batavorum, lined with forts, 
became for a long period the bulwark of the empire against the 
inroads of the Germans from the north. 

Of this period scarcely any record remains, but when at the 
end of the 3rd century the Franks (q.v.) began to swarm over the 
Rhine into the Roman lands/ the names of the old 
tribes had disappeared. The peoples within the 
frontier had been transformed into Romanized pro- 
vincials; outside, the various tribes had become merged in the 
common appellation of Frisians. The branch of the Franks — 
who were a confederacy, not a people — which gradually over- 
spread Gallia Belgica, bore the name of the Salian Franks. 
Nominally they were taken under the protection of the empire, 
m reality they were its masters and defenders. In the days of 
their great king Hlodwig or Clovis (481-511) they were in 
possession of the whole of the southern and centraI;,Netherlands. 
The strip of coast from the mouth of the Scheldt to that of the 
Ems remained, however, in the hands of the free Frisians (q.v.), 
in alliance with whom against the Franks were the Saxons (q.v.), 
who, pressing forward from the east, had occupied a portion of 
the districts known later as Gelderland, Overyssd and D rente. 
Saxon was at this period the common title of all the north German 
tribes; there was but little difference between Frisians and 
Saxons either in race or language, and they were closely united 
for some four centuries in common resistance to the encroach- 
ments of the Frankish power. 

The conversion of Clovis and his rude followers to Christianity 
tended gradually to civilize the Franks, and to facilitate the 
fusion which soon took place between them and the 
Gallo-Roman population. It tended also to accentuate qJJJJJ,*' 
the enmity to the Franks of the heathen Frisians and aaity% ' 
Saxons. In the south (of the Netherlands) Christianity 
was spread by the labours of devoted missionaries, foremost 
amongst whom were St Amandus, St Bavon and St Eligius, 
and bishoprics were set up at Cambrai, Tournai, Arras, Th6rou- 
anne and Li6ge. In the north progress was much slower, and 
though a church was erected at Utrecht by Dagobert I. about 
a.d. 630, it was destroyed by the Frisians, who remained obstin- 
ately heathen. The first successful attempt to convert them 
was made, under the powerful protection of Pippin of Heristal, 
by Willebrord, a Northumbrian monk, who became, a.d. 695, 
the first bishop of Utrecht (see Utrecht). His labours were 
continued with even more striking results by another English- 
man, Winfred, better known as St Boniface, the Apostle of the 
Germans, who suffered martyrdom at Dokkum in a.d. 754 at 
the hands of some heathen Frisians. The complete conversion 
was, however, in the end due rather to the arms of the Carolingian 
kings than to the unaided efforts of the missionaries. Towards 
the end of the century, Charlemagne, himself a Netherlander 
by descent and ancestral possessions, after a severe struggle, 
thoroughly subdued the Frisians and Saxons, and compelled them 
to embrace Christianity. 

In the triple partition of the Carolingian empire at Verdun in 
843, the central portion was assigned to the emperor Lothaire, 
separating the kingdoms of East Francia (the later 
Itltwer Germany) from West Francia (the later France). 
Lorraine. This middle kingdom formed a long strip stretching 
across Europe from the North Sea to Naples, and 
embraced the whole of the later Netherlands with the exception 
of the portion on the left bank of the Scheldt, which river was 
made the boundary of West Francia. On the death of the 
emperor, his son Lothaire II.' received the northern part of his 
father's domain, known as Lotharii or Hlutharii Regnum, 
corrupted later into Lotharingia or Lorraine. Lothaire had no 
heir, and in 870 by the treaty of Meerssen his territory was 
divided between the kings of East and West Francia. In 879 
East Francia acquired the whole; from 912 to 924 it formed 
part of West Francia. Finally in 924 Lorraine passed in the 
reign of Henry the Fowler under German (East Frankish) 
overlordship. Henry's son, Otto the Great, owing to the 
disordered state of the country, placed it in 953 in the hands 
of his able brother, Bruno, archbishop of Cologne, for pacification. 
Bruno, who kept for himself the title of archduke, divided 
the territory into the two duchies of Upper and Lower Lorraine. 
Godfrey of Verdun was invested by him with the government 
of Lower Lorraine (Nieder-Lothringen). The history of the 
Netherlands from this time forward — with the exception of 
Flanders, which continued to be a fief of the French kings — 
is the history of the various feudal states into which the duchy 
of Lower Lorraine was gradually broken up. 

It is a melancholy history, telling of the invasion of the North- 
men, and of the dynastic struggles between the petty feudal 
Growth sovereigns who . carved out counties and lordships 
of the for themselves during the dark centuries which 
feudal followed the fall of the Carolingian empire. It was a 
states. t j me f pp ress i on an d cruelty, and of war and devasta- 
tion, during which the country remained chiefly swamp and 
tangled woodland, with little communication save up and down 
the rivers and along the old Roman roads. Its remoteness from 
the control of the authority of the German and French kings, 
together with its inaccessibility, gave special facilities in Lower 
Lorraine to the growth of a number of practically independent 
feudal states forming a group or system apart. Chief among 
these states were the duchy of Brabant, the counties of Flanders, 
Hainault, Holland, Gelderland, Limburg and Luxemburg, 
and the bishoprics of Utrecht and Liege. For their separate 
local histories and their dynasties, their wars and political 
relations with one another and with neighbouring countries, 
reference must be made to the separate articles Flanders, 
Holland, Brabant, Gelderland, Limburg, Luxemburg, 
Utrecht, Liege. 

During the 9th and 10th centuries the Netherlands suffered 
cruelly from the attacks of the Northmen, who ravaged the 
The in- shores ar\d at times penetrated far inland. In 834 
vasions Utrecht and Dorestad were sacked, and a few years 
of the later all Holland and Friesland was in their hands. 
m#n. year after year the raids went on under a succession of 
leaders— Heriold, Roruk, Rolf, Godfrey— and far and wide 
there was pillaging, burning, murder and slavery. In 873 Rolf 
seized Walcheren, and became the scourge of the surrounding 
districts. In 880 the invaders took Nijmwegen, erected a 
permanent camp at Elsloo and pushed on to the Rhine. Liege, 
Aix-la-Chapelle, Cologne and Bonn fell into their hands. The 
emperor, Charles the Fat, was roused to collect a large army, 
with which he surrounded the main body of the Northmen under 
their leader Godfrey in the camp at Elsloo. But Charles pre- 
ferred negotiation and bribery to fighting. Godfrey received 
a large sum of money, was confirmed in the possession of Fries- 
land, and on being converted to Christianity in 882, received 
in marriage Gisela, daughter of Lothaire II. Three years later, 
however, Godfrey was murdered, and although the raids of the 
Northmen did not entirely cease for upwards of another century, 
no further attempt was made to establish a permanent dynasty 
in the land. 

At the close of the nth century the system of feudal states 
had been firmly established in the Netherlands under stable 
dynasties hereditary or episcopal, and, despite the 
continual wars between them, civilization had begun to crusades. 
develop, orderly government to be carried on, and the 
general condition of the people to be less hopeless and miserable. 
It was at this time that the voice of Peter the Hermit roused the 
whole of western Europe to enthusiasm by his preaching of the 
first crusade. Nowhere was the call responded to with greater 
zeal than in the Netherlands, and nowhere had the spirit of 
adventure and the stimulus to enterprise, which was one of the 
chief fruits of the crusades, more permanent effects for good. The 
foremost heroes of the first crusade were Netherlanders. Godfrey 
of Bouillon, the leader of the expedition and the first king of 
Jerusalem, was duke of Lower Lorraine, and the names of his 
brothers Baldwin of Edessa and Eustace of Boulogne, and of 
Count Robert II. of Flanders are only less famous. The third 
crusade numbered among its chiefs Floris III. of Helland, Philip of 
Flanders, Otto I. of Gelderland and Henry I. of Brabant. The 
so-called Latin crusade of 1203 placed the imperial crown of 
Constantinople on the head of Baldwin of Flanders. At the siege 
and capture of Damietta (1218) it was the contingent of North- 
Netherlanders (Hollanders and Frisians under Count William I, 
of Holland) who bore the brunt of the fighting and specially 
distinguished themselves. To the Netherlands, as to the rest of 
western Europe, the result of the crusades was in the main 
advantageous. They broke down the intense narrowness of the 
life of those feudal times, enlarged men's conceptions and intro- 
duced new ideas into their minds. They first brought the 
products and arts of the Orient into western Europe; and in the 
Netherlands, by the impulse that they gave to commerce, they 
were one of the primary causes of the rise of the chartered towns. 

Little is known about the Netherland towns before the 12th 
century. The earliest charters date from that period. No place 
was reckoned to be a town unless it had received a Risc of 
charter from its sovereign or its locaL lord. The the cities 
charters were of the nature of a treaty between the {" th * 
city and its feudal lord, and they differed much in tands. 
character according to the importance of the place 
and the pressure it was able to put upon its sovereign. The 
extent of the rights which the charter conceded determined 
whether the town was a free town (vr'ije stadt — villa franca) 
or a commune (ge?neente — communia). In the case of a commune 
the concessions included generally the right of inheritance, 
justice, taxation, use of wood, water, &c. The lord's repre- 
sentative, entitled " justiciary " {schout) of " bailiff " (baljuw), 
presided over the administration of justice and took the command 
of the town levies in war. The gemeente— consisting only of those 
bound by the communal oath for mutual help and defence — 
elected their own magistrates. These electors were often a small 
proportion of the whole body of inhabitants: sometimes a few 
influential families alone had the right, and it became hereditary. 
This governing oligarchy was known as " the patricians." The 
magistrates bore the name of scabini (schepenen or Schevins), 
and at their head was the seigneurial official — the schout or 
baljuw. These schepenen appointed in their turn from the 

	The Flemish com' manes* 

citizens to assist them a body of sworn councillors (gezworenen 
or jurts), whose presidents, styled " burgomasters," had the 
supervision of the communal finances. Thus grew up a number 
of municipalities — practically self-governing republics — semi- 
independent feudatories in the feudal state. 

The most powerful and flourishing of all were those of Flanders 
— Ghent, Bruges and Ypres. In the 13th century these towns 
had become the seat of large industrial populations 
(varying according to different estimates from 100,000 
to 200,000 inhabitants), employed upon the weaving 
of cloth with its dependent industries, and closely 
bound up by trade interests with England, from whence they 
obtained the wool for their looms. Bruges, at that time connected 
with the sea by the river Zwijn and with Sluis as its port, was 
the central mart and exchange of the world's commerce. In 
these Flemish cities the early oligarchic form of municipal 
government speedily gave way to a democratic. The great mass 
of the townsmen organized in trade gilds — weavers, fullers, dyers, 
smiths, leather-workers, brewers, butchers, bakers and others, 
of which by far the most powerful was that of the weavers— 
as soon as they became conscious of their strength rebelled against 
the exclusive privileges of the patricians and succeeded in ousting 
them from power. The patricians (hence called leliaerts) relied 
upon the support of the French crown, but the fatal battle of 
Courtrai (1302), in which the handicraftsmen (clauwaerts) laid 
low the chivalry of France, secured the triumph of the democracy. 
The power of the Flemish cities rose to its height during the 
ascendancy of Jacques van Artevelde (1 285-1345), the famous 
citizen-statesman of Ghent, but after his downfall the mutual 
jealousies of the cities undermined their strength, and with the 
crushing defeat of Roosebeke (1382) in which Philip van Artevelde 
perished, the political greatness of the municipalities had entered 
upon its decline. 

In Brabant — Antwerp, Louvain, Brussels, Malines(Mechlin) — 
and in the episcopal territory of Liege — Liege, Huy, Dinant — 
other there was a feebler repetition of the Flemish conditions. 
Nether' Flourishing communities were likewise to be found in 
toad' Hainault, Namur, Cambrai and the other southern 
2Jj?" districts of the Netherlands, but nowhere else the 
vigorous independence of Ghent, Bruges and Ypres, 
nor the splendour of their civic life. In the north also the 13th 
century was rich in municipal charters. Dordrecht, Leiden, 
Haarlem, Delft, Vlaardigen, Rotterdam in Holland, and Middle- 
burg and Zierikzee in Zeeland, repeated with modifications the 
characteristics of the communes of Flanders and Brabant. 
But the growth and development of the northern communal 
movement, though strong and instinct with life, was slower and 
less tempestuous than the Flemish. In the bishopric of Utrecht, 
in Gelderland and Friesland, the privileges accorded to Utrecht, 
Groningen, Zutphen, Stavoren, Leeuwarden followed rather on 
the model of those of the Rhenish " free cities " than of the 
Franco-Flemish commune. In the northern Netherlands gener- 
ally up to the end of the 14th century the towns had no great 
political weight; their importance depended upon their river 
commerce and their markets. Thus at the close of the 14th 
century, despite the constant'wars between the feudal sovereigns 
who held sway in the Netherlands, the vigorous municipal life 
had fostered industry and commerce, and had caused Flanders 
in particular to become the richest possession in the world. 

It was precisely at this time that Flanders, and gradually the 
other feudal states of the Netherlands, by marriage, purchase, 
treachery or force, fell under the dominion of the 
guadlan nouse °* Burgundy. The foundation of the Burgundian 
dominion. ru l e in the Netherlands was laid by the succession of 
Philip the Bold to the counties of Flanders andArtois 
in 1384 in right of his wife Margaret de Male. In 1404 Antony, 
Philip's second son (killed at Agincourt 141 5), became duke 
of Brabant by bequest of his great-aunt Joan. The consolidation 
of the Burgundian power was effected by Philip the Good, 
grandson of Philip the Bold, in his long and successful reign of 48 
years, 1419-1467. He inherited Flanders and Artois, purchased 
the county of Namur (1427) and compelled his cousin Jacqueline, 
the heiress of Holland, Zeeland, Hainault and Friesland, to 
surrender her possessions to him, 1428. On the death in 1430 of 
his cousin Philip, duke of Brabant, he took possession of Brabant 
and Limburgjthe duchy of Luxemburg he acquired by purchase, 
1443. He made his bastard son David bishop of Utrecht, and 
from 1456 onwards that see continued under Burgundian 
influence. Two other bastards were placed on the episcopal 
throne of Liege, an illegitimate brother on that of Cambrai. 
Philip did not live to see Gelderland and Liege pass definitively 
under his rule; it was reserved for his son, Charles the Bold, 
to crush the independence of Liege (1468) and to incorporate 
Gelderland in his dominions (1473). 

This extension of dominion on the part of the dukes of Bur- 
gundy implied the establishment of a strong monarchical 
authority. They had united under their sway a number 
of provinces with different histories and institutions a OQ £ 
and speaking different languages, and their aim was 
to centralize the government. The nobility and clergy were on 
the side of the ducal authority; its opponents were the munici- 
palities, especially those of Flanders. Their strength had been 
seriously weakened by the overthrow of Roosebeke, but Philip 
on his accession found them once more advancing rapidly in 
power and prosperity. He was quite aware that the industrial 
wealth of the great Flemish communes was financially the main- 
stay of his power, but their very prosperity made them the chief 
obstacle to his schemes of unifying into a solid dominion the 
loose aggregate of states over which he was the ruler. On this 
matter Philip would brook no opposition. Bruges was forced 
after strenuous resistance to submit to the loss of its most 
cherished privileges in 1438, and the revolt of Ghent was quenched 
in the " red sea " (as it was styled) of Gavre in 1453. The 
splendour and luxury of the court of Philip surpassed that of 
any contemporary sovereign. A permanent memorial of it 
remains in the famous Order of the Golden Fleece, which was 
instituted by the duke at Bruges in 1430 on the occasion of his 
marriage with Isabel of Portugal, a descendant of John of Gaunt, 
and was so named from the English wool, the raw material used 
in the Flemish looms, for which Bruges was the chief mart. 
The reign of Philip, though marred by many acts of tyranny 
and harshness, was politically great. Had his successor been as 
prudent and able, he might have made a unified Netherlands 
the nucleus of a mighty middle kingdom, interposing between 
France and Germany, and a revival of that of the Carolingian 
Lothaire. 

Before the accession of Charles, the only son of Philip, two 
steps had been taken of great importance in the direction of 
unification. The first was the appointment of a grand 
council with supreme judicial and financial functions, ^/go/d. 
whose seat was finally fixed at Malines (Mechlin) in 
1473; the other the summoning of deputies of all the provincial 
" states " of the Netherlands to a states-general at Brussels 
in 1465. But Charles, rightly surnamed the Bold or Head- 
strong, did not possess the qualities of a builder of states. Im- 
patient of control and hasty in action, he was no match for his 
crafty and plotting adversary, Louis XI. of France. His 
ambition, however, was boundless, and he set himself to realize 
the dream of his father — a Burgundian kingdom stretching from 
the North Sea to the Mediterranean. At first all went well with 
him. By his ruthless suppression of revolts at Dinant and Liege 
he made his authority undisputed throughout the Netherlands. 
His campaigns against the French king were conducted with 
success. His creation of a formidable standing army, the first 
of its kind in that age of transition from feudal conditions, gave 
to the Burgundian power all the outward semblance of stability 
and permanence. But Charles, though a brave soldier and good 
military organizer, was neither a capable statesman nor a skilful 
general. He squandered the resources left to him by his father, 
and made himself hateful to all classes of his subjects by his 
exactions and tyranny. When at the very height of power, all 
his schemes of aggrandisement came to sudden ruin through a 
succession of disastrous defeats at the hands of the Swiss at 
Grandson (March 2, 1476), at Morat (June 22, 1476) 
and at Nancy (January 5, 1477). At Nancy Charles was 
himself among the slain, leaving his only daughter Mary of 
Burgundy, then in her twentieth year, sole ^heiress to his 
possessions. 

The catastrophe of Nancy threatened the loosely-knit Bur- 
gundian dominion with dissolution. Louis XI. claimed the 
Mary of reversion of the French fiefs, and seized Burgundy, 
Burgundy Franche Comte and Artois. But the Netherland 
andMaxl* provinces, though not loving the Burgundian dynasty, 
mffl&n of kad n0 desire to have a French master. Deputies 
Austria. representing Flanders, Brabant, Hainault and Holland 
met at Ghent, where Mary was detained almost as a 
prisoner, and compelled her (February 10, 1477) to sign the 
" Great Privilege." This charter provided that no war could 
be declared nor marriage concluded by the sovereign, nor taxes 
raised without the assent of the states, that natives, were alone 
-eligible for high office, and that the national language should be 
used in public documents. The central court of justice at 
Malines was abolished, but the Grand Council was reorganized 
and made thoroughly representative. The Great Privilege was 
supplemented by provincial charters, the Flemish Privilege 
granted (February 10), the Great Privilege of Holland and 
Zeeland (February 17), the Great Privilege of Namur and the 
Joyeuse Entrie of Brabant, both in May, thus largely curtailing 
the sovereign's power of interference with local liberties. On 
these conditions Mary obtained the hearty support of the states 
against France, but her humiliations were not yet at an end; 
two of her privy councillors, accused of traitorous intercourse 
with the enemy, were, despite her entreaties, seized, tried and 
beheaded (April 3). Her marriage four months later to 
Maximilian of Austria was the beginning of the long domination 
of the house of Habsburg. The next fifteen years were for 
Maximilian a stormy and difficult period. The duchess Mary 
died from the effects of a fall from her horse (March 1482), and 
Maximilian became regent (mambourg) for his son. The peace of 
Arras with France (March 1483) freed him to deal with the dis- 
cords in the Netherland provinces, and more especially with the 
turbulent opposition in the Flemish cities. With the submission 
of Ghent (June 1485) the contest was decided in favour of the 
archduke, who in 1494, on his election as emperor, 
Jo&antu was a ^^ e t0 nan d over the country to his son Philip 

in a comparatively tranquil and secure state. Philip, 
surnamed the Fair, was fifteen years of age, and his accession 
was welcomed by the Netherlanders with whom Maximilian had 
never been popular. Gelderland, however, which had revolted 
after Nancy, had Charles of Egmont for its duke, and the two 
bishoprics of Liege and Utrecht were no longer subject to 
Burgundian authority. In 1496 Philip married Joanna of 
Aragon, who in 1500 became heiress apparent to Castile and 
Aragon. That same year she gave birth at Ghent to a son, 
afterwards the emperor Charles V. Philip's reign in the Nether- 
lands was chiefly noteworthy for his efforts for the revival of 
trade with England. On the death of Queen Isabel, Philip and 
Joanna succeeded to the crown of Castile and took up their 
residence in their new kingdom (January 1506). A few months 
later Philip unexpectedly died at Burgos (September 25th). 
His Burgundian lands passed without opposition to his son 
Charles, then six years of age. 

The claim of the emperor Maximilian to be regent during 
the minority of his grandson was recognized by the states-general. 

Maximilian nominated his daughter Margaret, widow 
of Austria. °f Philibert, duke of Savoy, to act as governor-general, 
and she filled the difficult post for eight years with 
great ability, courage and tact; and when Charles, at the age 
of fifteen assumed the government he found the Netherlands 
thriving and prosperous. In the following year, by the death 
of Ferdinand of Aragon, his maternal grandfather, and the 
incapacity of his mother Joanna, who had become hopelessly 
insane, he succeeded to the crowns of Castile and Aragon, which 
carried with them large possessions in Italy and the dominion 
of the New World of America. In 1519 Maximilian died, and 
the following year his grandson, now the head of the house 
of Austria, was elected emperor. Charles V. had been born and 
brought up in the Netherlands, and retained a strong predilection 
for his native country, but necessarily he had to pass Cbaries Vt 
the larger part of his life, at that great crisis of the 
world's history, in other lands. During his frequent absences 
he entrusted the government of the Netherlands to the tried 
hands of his aunt, Margaret, who retained his confidence until 
her death (November 1530), and secured the affection of all 
Netherlanders. Margaret was assisted by a permanent council 
of regency, and there was a special minister charged with the 
administration of the finances, sometimes under the name of 
superintendent of the finances, sometimes under the title of 
treasurer-general and controller-general. The duties of this 
minister were of special importance, for it was to the Netherlands 
that Charles looked for much of the resources wherewith to 
carry on his many wars. During this time Charles consolidated 
his dominion over the Netherlands. In 1524 he became lord 
of Friesland by purchase, and in 1528 he acquired the tempor- 
alities of Utrecht. He now ruled over seventeen provinces — 
i.e. four duchies, Brabant, Gelderland, Limburg and Luxemburg; 
seven counties, Flanders, Artois, Hainault, Holland, Zeeland, 
Namur and Zutphen; the margraviate of Antwerp; and 
five lordships — Friesland, Mechlin, Utrecht, Overyssel, and 
Groningen with its dependent districts. 

After the death of Margaret, Charles appointed his sister 
Mary, the widowed queen of Hungary, to the regency, and for 
twenty years she retained her post, until the abdication 
in fact of Charles V. in 1555. She too governed ably, Hungary* 
though in entire subservience to her nephew, but was 
not in such intimate touch with the national peculiarities of 
the Netherlanders as her predecessor. At the time of her 
accession to office Charles changed the form of administration 
by the creation* of three separate councils, those of State, of 
Finance, and the Privy Council. The regent was president of 
the council of state, of which the knights of the Golden Fleece 
were members. The policy of Charles towards the Netherlands 
was for many years one of studied moderation. He redressed 
many grievances, regulated the administration of justice, 
encouraged commerce, reformed the coinage, but as time went on 
he was compelled to demand larger subsidies and to take severer 
measures against heretical opinions. Mary was forced to impose 
taxation which met with violent resistance, especially in 1539 
from the stiff-necked town of Ghent. The emperor himself 
was obliged to intervene. On the 14th of February 1540 he 
entered Ghent at the head of a large army and visited the 
city with severe punishment. All its charters were annulled, 
its privileges and those of its gilds swept away, and a heavy 
fine imposed. It was a lesson intended to teach the Netherlanders 
the utter futility of opposition to the will of their lord. The 
struggle, however, with the Protestant princes of Germany not 
only led to continual demands of Charles for men and money 
from his Netherland dominions, but to his determination to 
prevent the spread of Protestant opinions; and a series of 
edicts was passed, the most severe of which (that of 1550) was 
carried out with extreme rigour. Its preamble stated that its 
object was " to exterminate the root and ground of this pest." 
By its enactments, men holding heretical opinions were condemned 
to the stake, women to be buried alive. Yet despite the efforts 
of the government the Reformation made progress in the land. 
In 1548 Charles laid before the states a scheme for making the 
Netherlands an integral part of the empire under the name of 
the Circle of Burgundy; but the refusal of the German Electors 
to make his only son Philip king of the Romans led him to 
abandon the project, which was never renewed. Already the 
emperor was beginning to feel weary of the heavy burdens 
which the government of so mauy realms had imposed upon him, 
and in 1549 he presented Philip to the states of the Netherlands, 
that they might take the oath of allegiance to him, and Philip 
swore to maintain all ancient rights, privileges and customs. 

The abdication of Charles V. took place on the 25th of October 
1555 in the great hall of the palace at Brussels, and Philip II. 
entered upon his long and eventful reign. His external policy 

	PhWpII. 

was at first successful. Chiefly through the valour of Lamoral, 
count of Egmont, two great victories were won over the French 
at St Quentin (August 10, 1557) and at Gravelines 
(July 13, 1558), The terms of the treaty of Cateau- 
CambrSsis (February 1559) were entirely favourable to Philip. 
Internal difficulties, however, confronted him. His proposal 
to impose a tax of 1% on real property and of 2% on movable 
property was rejected by all the larger provinces. As a thorough 
Spaniard who did not even understand the language of his 
Netherland subjects Philip was from the first distrusted and his 
acts regarded with suspicion. He himself never felt at home 
at Brussels, and in August 1559 he set sail for Spain, never again 
to revisit the Netherlands. 

He appointed as regent, Margaret, duchess of Parma, a natural 
daughter of Charles V. by a* Flemish mother, and like the other 
women of the House a strong and capable ruler. 
^Pfcnmi. She was nominally assisted by the members of the 

three councils — the Council of State, the Privy Council 
and the Council of Finance, but in reality all power had been 
placed by Philip in the hands of three confidential councillors 
styled the Consulia — Barlaymont, president of the Council 
of Finance, Viglius, president of the Privy Council, and Antony 
Perrenot, bishop of Arras, better known by his later title as 
Cardinal Granvelle. This extremely able man, a Burgundian 
by birth, was the son of one of Charles Ws most trusted 
councillors, and it was largely to him that the government 
of the Netherlands was confided. Two burning questions at 
the outset confronted Margaret and Granvelle — the question 
of the new bishoprics and the question of the presence in the 
Netherlands of a number of Spanish troops. The proposal to 
reorganize the bishoprics of the Netherlands was not a new one, 
but was the carrying out of a long-planned project of Charles V. 
In 1555 there were but three dioceses in tbe Netherlands — those 
of Tournay, Arras and Utrecht, — all of unwieldy size and under 
the jurisdiction of foreign metropolitans. It was proposed now 
to establish a more numerous hierarchy, self-contained within 
the limits of Burgundian rule, with three archbishops and fifteen 
diocesans. The primatial see was placed at Malines (Mechlin), 
having under it Antwerp, Hertogenbosch, Roermond, Ghent, 
Bruges, and Ypres constituting the Flemish province; the 
second archbishopric was at Cambray, with Tournay, Arras, St 
Omer, and Namur, — the Walloon province; the third at 
Utrecht, with Haarlem, Middleburg, Leeuwarden, Groningen and 
Deventer, — the northern (Dutch) province. All these with the 
exception of Cambray and St Omer were within the boundaries 
of the Netherlands. The scheme aroused almost universal 
distrust and opposition. It was believed that its object was 
the introduction of the dreaded form of the Inquisition established 
in Spain, and in any case more systematic and stringent measures 
for the stamping out of heresy. It excited also the animosity 
of the nobles jealous of their privileges, and of the monasteries, 
which were called upon to furnish the revenues for the new sees. 
Granvelle was made first archbishop of Malines, and all the 
odium attaching to the increase of the episcopate was laid at 
his door, though he was in reality opposed to it. The continued 
presence of the Spanish troops caused also great dissatisfaction. 
The Netherlanders detested the Spaniards and everything 
Spanish, and this foreign mercenary force, together with the 
new bishops, was looked upon as part of a general plan for the 
gradual overthrow of their rights and liberties. So loud was the 
outcry that Margaret and Granvelle on their own responsibility 
sent away the Spanish regiments from the country (January 
1 561). The most serious difficulty with which Margaret had to 
deal arose from the attitude of the great nobles, and among these 
especially of William (the " Silent ") of Nassau, prince of Orange, 
Lamoral, count of Egmont, and Philip de Montmorency, count 
of Hoorn. These great magnates, all of them Knights of the 
Fleece and men of peculiar weight and authority in the country, 
were disgusted to find that, though nominally councillors of 
state, their advice was never asked, and that all power was 
placed in the hands of the Consulia. They began to be alarmed 
by the severity with which the edicts against heresy were being 
xix. 14 

carried out, and by the rising indignation among the populace. 
William, Egmont, and Hoorn therefore placed themselves at 
the head of a league of nobles against Granvelle (who had 
become cardinal in 1561) with the object of undermining his 
influence and driving him from power. They resigned their 
positions as councillors of state, and expressed their grievances 
personally to Margaret and by letter to the king in Madrid, 
asking for the dismissal of Granvelle. The duchess, herself 
aggrieved by the dictatorial manners of the cardinal, likewise 
urged upon her brother the necessity of the retirement of the 
unpopular minister. At last Philip unwillingly gave way, and 
he secretly suggested to the cardinal that he should ask per- 
mission from the regent to visit his mother at Besancon. 
Granvelle left Brussels on the 13th of March 1564, never to return. 
But the king was only temporizing; he had no intention of 
changing his policy. He did but bide his time. 

The Council of Trent had recently brought its long labours 
to a close (December 4, 1563), and Philip resolved to enforce 
its decrees throughout his dominions. He issued an 
order to that effect (August 18, 1564), and it was sent ^ aeatlae 
to the duchess of Parma for publication. The nobles decrees. 
protested, and Egmont was deputed to go to Madrid 
and try to obtain from the king a mitigation of the edicts and 
redress of grievances. Philip was inexorable. The activity of 
the Inquisition was redoubled, and persecution raged throughout 
the Netherlands. Everywhere intense indignation was aroused 
by the cruel tortures and executions. In the presence of the 
rising storm the duchess was bewildered, seeing clearly the folly 
of the policy she was obliged to carry out no less than its difficulty. 
Following the example of William of Orange, Hoorn, Berghen 
and other governors, the magistrates generally declined to enforce ' 
the edicts, and offered to resign rather than be the instruments 
for burning and maltreating their fellow-countrymen. It was 
at this time that the lesser nobility, foremost among whom were 
Louis of Nassau (brother of William), Philip de Marnix, lord of 
Sainte Aldegonde, and Henry, count of Brederode, 
began to organize resistance, and in 1 566 a confederacy pr ^ m jJ^' 
was formed, all the members of which signed a docu- 
ment called "The Compromise, " by which they bound themselves 
to help and protect one another against persecution, and to 
extirpate the Inquisition from the land. The signatories drew 
up a petition, known as the " Request," which was presented by 
the confederates to the regent (April 5, 1566) in the council 
chamber at Brussels. As they approached, Barlaymont had 
been heard to say to Margaret, "What, Madam, is 
your Highness afraid of these beggars (gueux)?" 
The phrase was seized upon and made a party name, 
and it became the fashion for patriots to wear beggar's garb and 
a medal round the neck, bearing Philip's image on one side and 
a wallet on the other, with two hands crossed, and the legend 
Fiddles an roijusqu'd la besace. 

William of Orange, Egmont, and Hoorn were alarmed at the 
violent passions that had been aroused, and held aloof at first 
from Brederode and his companions. At their instance, and 
carrying with them instructions from the regent and the council, 
the marquis of Berghen and Hoorn's brother (the lord of Mon- 
tigny) were persuaded to go to Spain and lay before Philip the 
serious character of the crisis. Philip received them courteously, 
but took care that neither of them should return home. Mean- 
while in the Netherlands the sectaries had been making rapid 
headway in spite of the persecution. Open-air conventicles were 
held in all parts of the provinces, and the fierce Calvinist 
preachers raised the religious excitement of their hearers 
to such a pitch that it found vent in a furious outburst c j ast ^ >a °' 
of iconoclasm. During the month of August bands of 
fanatical rioters in various parts of the country made havoc in 
the churches and religious houses, wrecking the altars, smashing 
the images and pictures, and carrying off the sacred vessels and 
other treasures on which they could lay their hands. These acts 
of wild and sacrilegious destruction reached their climax at 
Antwerp (August 16 and 17), where a small body of rioters 
forced their way into the cathedral and were permitted without 
any interference on the part of the magistracy to wreak their 
will upon its spendid and priceless contents. 

The effect of the outbreak was in every way disastrous. The 
regent was alienated from the popular leaders, and was no longer 
disposed to help William of Orange, Egmont, and Hoorn to secure 
a mitigation of religious persecution; and the heart of Philip 
was hardened in its resolve to exterminate heresy in the Nether- 
lands. He dissembled until such time as he could despatch -his 
greatest general, the duke of Alva, to Brussels at the head of a 
picked force to crush all opposition. 

William of Orange was not deceived by the specious temporiz- 
ing of the king. He foresaw the coming storm, and he did his 
utmost to induce Egmont, Hoorn and other prominent 
Oraniv. members of the patriotic party to unite with him in 

taking measures for meeting the approaching danger. 
Egmont and Hoorn refused to do anything that might be con- 
strued into disloyalty; in these circumstances William felt that 
the time had come to provide for his personal safety. He with- 
drew (April 1567) first to his residence at Breda, and then to the 
ancestral seat of his family at Dillenburg in Nassau. 

Margaret of Parma meanwhile, with the aid of a considerable 
body of German mercenaries, had inflicted exemplary punish- 
Ptmlsh* ment upon the iconoclasts and Calvinist sectaries. 
meat of A body of some 2000 men drawn principally from 
the sect' Antwerp were cut to pieces at Austruweel (March 13, 
Mies. 1567), and their leader John de Marnix, lord of Thou- 
seule, slain. Valenciennes, the chief centre of disturbance in 
the south, was besieged and taken by Philip de Noircarmes, 
governor of Hainault, who inflicted a savage vengeance (April 
1567). The regent therefore represented to her brother that the 
disorders were entirely put down and that the time had come to 
show mercy. But Philip's preparations were now complete, and 
Alva set out from Italy at the head of a force of some 10,000 
veteran troops, Spaniards and Italians, afterwards increased by 
a body of Germans, with which, after marching through Bur- 
gundy, Lorraine and Luxemburg, he reached the Netherlands 
(August 8), and made his entry into Brussels a fortnight 
later. 

The powers conferred on Alva were those of military dictator. 
The title of regent was left to the duchess Margaret, but she 
speedily sent in her resignation, which was accepted 
c he (October 6). Before this took place events had been 
of Bfood. moving fast. On the 9th of September Egmont and 
Hoorn were arrested as they left a council at the duke's 
residence and were confined in the castle of Ghent. At the same 
time Orange's friend, the powerful burgomaster of Antwerp, 
Anthony van Stralen, was seized. The next step of Alva was 
to create a special tribunal which was officially known as the 
" Council of Troubles," but was popularly branded with the name 
of the " Council of Blood," and as such it has passed down to 
history. As a tribunal it had no legal status. The duke himself 
was president and all sentences were submitted to him. Two 
members only, Vargas and del Rio, both Spaniards, had votes. 
A swarm of commissioners ransacked the provinces in search of 
delinquents, and the council sat daily for hours, condemning the 
accused, almost without a hearing, in batches together. The 
executioners were ceaselessly at work with stake, sword and 

gibbet. Crowds of fugitives crossed the frontier to 
outlawed. see ^ re ^ u ge in Germany and England. The prince of 

Orange was publicly declared an outlaw and his 
property confiscated (January 24, 1568). A few weeks later his 
eldest son, Philip William, count of Buren, a student at the 
university of Louvain, was kidnapped and carried off to Madrid. 
William had meanwhile succeeded in raising a force in Germany 
with which his brother Louis invaded Friesland. He gained a 
victory at Heiligerlee (May 23) over a Spanish force under Count 
Aremberg. Aremberg himself was killed, as was Adolphus of 
Nassau, a younger brother of William and Louis. But Alva 
himself took the field, and at Jemmingen (July 21) completely 
annihilated the force of Louis, who himself narrowly escaped 
with his life. One result of the victory of Heiligerlee 
was the determination of Alva that Egmont and Hoorn 
should die before he left Brussels for the campaign in 
Friesland. They were pronounced by the Council of 
Blood to be guilty of high treason (June 2, 1568). Bxecvtion 
On the 6th of June they were beheaded before the andSora. 
Broodhuis at Brussels. 

A few months after the disaster of Jemmingen, Orange, who 
had now become a Lutheran, himself led a large army into 
Brabant. He was met by Alva with cautious tactics. 
The Spaniards skilfully avoided a battle, and in Alya 
November the invaders were compelled to withdraw ^" mpA * 
across the French frontier through lack of resources, 
and were disbanded. Alva was triumphant; but though 
Alva's master had supplied him with an invincible army, he was 
unable to furnish him with the funds to pay for it. Money had 
to be raised by taxation, and at a meeting of the states-general 
(March 20, 1569) the governor-general proposed (ij an immediate 
tax of 1% on all property, (2) a tax of 5% on all transfers of 
real estate, (3) a tax of 10 % on the sale of all articles of commerce, 
the last two taxes to be granted in perpetuity. Everywhere the 
proposal met with uncompromising resistance. After a pro- 
longed struggle, Alva succeeded in obtaining a subsidy of 
2,000,000 fl. for two years only. All this time the brutal work of 
the Blood Council went on, as did the exodus of thousands upon 
thousands of industrious and well-to-do citizens, and with 
each year the detestation felt for Alva and his rule steadily 
increased. 

All this time William and Louis were indefatigably making 
preparations for a new campaign, and striving by their agents 
to rouse the people to active resistance. The first 
successes were however to be not on land, but on the Betas' 
sea. In 1569 William in his capacity as sovereign 
prince of Orange issued letters-of-marque to a number 
of vessels to prey upon the Spanish commerce in the narrow 
seas. These corsairs, for such they were, were known by the 
name of Sea-Beggars (Gueux-de-Mer). Under the command of the 
lord of Lumbres, the lord of Treslong, and William de la Marck 
(lord of Lumey) they spread terror and alarm along the coast, 
seized much plunder, and in revenge for Alva's cruelty com- 
mitted acts of terrible barbarity upon the priests and monks and 
catholic officials, as well as upon the crews of the vessels that fell 
into their hands. Their difficulty lay in the lack of ports in 
which to take refuge. At last by a sudden assault the 
Sea-Beggars seized the town of Brill at the mouth of Capture ot 
the Maas (April 1, 1572). Encouraged by this success p^A/al 
they next attacked and took Flushing, the port of 
Zeeland, which commanded the approach to Antwerp; and the 
inhabitants were compelled to take the oath to the prince of 
Orange, as stadtholder of the king. They next mastered Delfs- 
haven and Schiedam. These striking successes caused a wave of 
revolt to spread through Holland, Zeeland, Gelderland, % evoH 
Utrecht and Friesland. The principal towns gave in j fl the 
their submission to the prince of Orange, and acknow- northern 
ledged him as their lawful stadtholder. Within three P"»' toc «- 
months of the capture of Brill, Amsterdam was the only town in 
Holland in the hands of the Spaniards. 

This revolt of the northern provinces was facilitated by the 
fact that Alva had withdrawn many of the garrisons, and was 
moving to oppose an invasion from the south. Louis 
of Nassau, with a small force raised in France with the Tbe 
connivance of Charles IX., made a sudden dash into ^J^Jif" 
Hainault (May 1572) and captured Valenciennes and 
Mons. Here he was shut in by a superior force of Spaniards, and 
made preparations to defend himself until relieved by the army 
which Orange was collecting on the eastern frontier. On the 
9th of July William crossed the Rhine, and captured Malines, 
Termonde and Oudenarde, and was advancing southwards 
when the news reached him of the massacre of St Bartholomew, 
which deprived him of the promised aid of Coligny and his army 
of 12,000 men. He made an attempt, however, to relieve Mons, 
but his camp at Harmignies was surprised by a night attack, and 
William himself narrowly escaped capture. The next morning 
he retreated, and six days later Mons surrendered. 

Orange however did not despair, and resolved to throw 
in his lot for good and all with the rebel province of the north. 

Already at his summons the states of Holland had 
take-up met at Dort (J^y J 5) under the presidency of Philip 
hisresh de Marnix, lord of Sainte Aldegonde, and they had 
dence at unanimously recognized William as their lawful stadt- 
holder and had voted a large grant of supplies. The 
prince now took up his permanent residence at Delft, and a 
regular government was established, in which he exercised 
almost dictatorial authority. 

Alva was now free to deal with rebellion in the north. Malines, 
which had surrendered to William, was given over for three 
days to the mercy of a brutal soldiery. Then the army under 
Alva's son, Don Frederick of Toledo, marched northwards, 
and the sack of Zutphen and the inhuman butchery of Naarden 
are among the blackest records of history. But the very horrors 
of Don Frederick's advance roused a spirit of indomitable 
resistance in Holland. 

The famous defence of Haarlem, lasting through the winter 
of 1572 to July 1573, cost the besiegers 12,000 lives, and gave 
/ the insurgent provinces time to breathe. The example 
Haarlem °f Haarlem was followed by Alkmaar, and with better 
and success. The assault of the Spaniards was repulsed, 
Alkmaar. ^ dykes were cut, and Don Frederick, fearing for 
his communications, beat a hasty retreat (August). A few 
weeks later (Oct. 11) the fleet of Alva on the Zuyder Zee was 
completely defeated by the Sea-Beggars and its 
draws ' admiral taken prisoner. Disgusted by these reverses, 
from the in bad odour with the king, and with his soldiers 
Nether- mutinying for lack of pay, the governor-general 
resigned. On the 18th of December 1573 Alva, who 
to the end had persisted in his policy of pitiless severity, 
left Brussels, carrying with him the curses of the people over 
whom he had tyrannized for six terrible years of misery and 
oppression. 

Philip sent the grand commander, Don Luis Requesens, 
as governor-general in his place, and after some futile attempts 
Don L is at negotiation the war went on. The prince of Orange, 
Requesens, who had now formally entered the Calvinist communion, 
governor- was inexorable in laying down three conditions as 
general. indispensable: (1) Freedom of worship and liberty 
to preach the gospel according to the Word of God; (2) the 
restoration and maintenance of all the ancient charters, privileges, 
and liberties of the land; (3) the removal of all Spaniards and 
other foreigners from all posts and employments civil and military. 
In February 1574 the Spaniards by the fall of Middleburg lost 
their last hold upon Walcheren and Zeeland. This triumph was 
however far more than counterbalanced by the complete defeat 
of the army, led by Count Louis of Nassau, at Mookerheide near 
Nijmwegen (14th March). The gallant Louis and his younger 
brother Henry both lost their lives. This was a grievous blow 
to William, but his courage did not fail. The Spaniards laid 
siege to Leiden, and though stricken down by a fever at Delft 
the prince spared no exertion to save the town. The 
n t 8ie J** dykes were cut, the land flooded, but again and again 
of Leiden. a relieving force was baulked in its attempts to reach 
the place, which for more than four months bravely 
defended itself. But when at the very last extremity through 
famine, a tempestuous flood enabled the vessels .of Orange 
to reach Leiden, and the investing force was driven to retreat 
(October 3, 1574). This was the turning-point of the first stage 
in the struggle for Dutch independence. In honour of this 
great deliverance, the state of Holland founded the university, 
which was speedily to make the name of Leiden illustrious 
throughout Europe. 

In the spring of 1575 conferences with a view to peace were 
held at Breda, and on their failure Orange, in the face of Spanish 
successes in Zeeland, was forced to seek foreign 
*Re ni uc° f succour - He sought at first in vain. The sovereignty 
sens. ' °f Holland and Zeeland was offered to the queen of 
England, but she, though promising secret support, 
declined. The situation was, however, relieved through the 
sudden death of Requesens (March 1576). ' The stadtholdcr 
summoned a meeting of the states of Holland and Zeeland to 
Delft, and on the 25th of April an act of federation 
between the two provinces was executed. By this ^°4*/on 
compact the prince was invested with all the pre- between 
rogatives belonging to the sovereign. He was made Holland 
commander-in-chief of both the military and naval * Drf . . 
forces with supreme authority, and in his hands was 
placed the final appointment to all political and judicial posts 
and to vacant city magistracies. He was required to maintain 
the Protestant reformed religion and to suppress " all religion 
at variance with the gospel." He also had authority to confer 
the protectorate of the federated provinces upon a foreign 
prince. 

In June 1576 the long siege of Zierikzee, the capital of 
Schouwen, ended in its surrender to the Spanish general Mon- 
dragon, after the failure of a gallant attempt by 
Admiral Boisot to break the leaguer, in which he lost ™ e gT f at 
his life. Things looked ill for the patriots, and Zeeland Mutiny. 
would have been at the mercy, of the conqueror had 
not the success been followed by a great mutiny of the Spanish 
and Walloon troops, to whom long arrears of pay were due. 
They chose their leader (eletto), marched into Brabant, and 
established themselves at Alost, where they were joined by 
other bands of mutineers. The principal fortresses of the country 
were in the hands of Spanish garrisons, who refused obedience 
to the council. William seized his opportunity, and with a body 
of picked troops advanced into Flanders, occupied Ghent, and 
entered into negotiations with the leader of the states- 
general at Brussels, for a union of all the provinces on " The 
the basis of exclusion of foreigners and non-interference pury." 
with religious belief. The overtures were favourably 
received, the council at Brussels was forcibly dissolved, and a 
congress met at Ghent on the 19th of October to consider what 
measures must be taken for the pacification of the country. 
In the midst of their deliberations the news arrived that the 
mutineers had marched from Alost on Antwerp, overpowered 
the troops of Champagney, and sacked the town with terrible 
barbarities (Nov. 3). This tragedy, known as " the Spanish 
Fury," silenced all disputes and differences among the repre- 
sentatives of the provinces. A treaty establishing a firm alliance 
between the provinces, represented by the states-general, 
assembled at Brussels on the one part, and on the other by the 
prince of Orange, and the states of Holland and 
Zeeland, was agreed upon and ratified under the title I* tf ff* c '" / 
of the " Pacification of Ghent." It was received with QbcnU 
great enthusiasm. The provinces agreed first to eject 
the foreigner, then to meet in states-general and regulate all 
matters of religion and defence. It was stipulated that there 
was to be toleration for both Catholics and Protestants; that the 
Spanish king should be recognized as de jure sovereign, and the 
prince of Orange as governor with full powers in Holland and 
Zeeland. 

Meanwhile Philip had appointed his natural brother, Don 
John of Austria, to be governor-general in the place of Requesens. 
After many delays he reached Luxemburg on the 4th DoaJoBn 
of November (the date of the Spanish Fury at Ant- of Austria 
werp) and notified his arrival to the council of state, becomes 
His letter met with a cold reception. On the advice ^owrnorw 
of the prince of Orange the states-general refused to 
receive him as governor-general unless he accepted the " Paci- 
fication of Ghent." Negotiations were entered into, but a dead- 
lock ensued. At this crisis the hands of Orange and the patriotic 
party were greatly strengthened by a new compact entitled 
" The Union of Brussels," which was extensively 
signed, especially in the southern Netherlands. This Brussels?" 
document (Jan. 1577) engaged all its signatories to 
help in ejecting the foreign soldiery, in carrying out the 
" Pacification," in recognizing Philip's sovereignty, and at the 
same time in maintaining the charters and constitutions which 
that king on his accession had sworn to observe. The popular 
support given to the Union of Brussels forced Don John to yield. 
He promised to accept the " Pacification of Ghent," and finally 
an agreement was drawn up, styled the " Perpetual Edict/' 
which was signed by Don John (February 12th) and 
"*to7l ratified by Philip a few weeks later. The states- 
firffct" general undertook to accept Don John as governor- 
general and to uphold the Catholic religion, while 
Don John, in the name of the king, agreed to carry out the 
provisions of the " Pacification." The authority conferred upon 
Orange as stadtholder by the provinces of Holland and Zeeland 
was thus ratified, but that astute statesman had no confidence 
that Philip intended to observe the treaty any longer than it 
suited his convenience. He therefore refused, with the approval 
of the representatives of these provinces, to allow the publica- 
tion of the " Perpetual Edict " in Holland and Zeeland. As 
events were to prove, he was in the right. 

Don John made his state entry into Brussels on the 1st of May, 
but only to find that he had no real authority. " The prince of 
Orange," he informed the king, " has bewitched the 
Brussels, minds of all men. They keep him informed of every- 
thing, and take no resolution without consulting 
him." In vain the fiery young soldier strove to break loose 
from the shackles which hampered him. He was, to quote the 
words of a contemporary, "like an apprentice defying his 
master." Irritated and alarmed, the governor suddenly left 
Brussels in the month of July with some Walloon troops and 
went to Namur. It was a virtual act of abdication. The eyes 
of all men turned to the prince of Orange. Through his exertions 
the Spanish troops had not only been expelled from Holland 
and Zeeland, but also from the citadels of Antwerp and Ghent, 
which were now in the hands of the patriots. He was invited 
to come to Brussels, and after some hesitation, and not without 
having first obtained the approval of the states of Holland and 
Zeeland, he assented. William made his triumphal entry into 
the capital (September 23), which he had quitted as an outlawed 
fugitive ten years before. In a brief period he was the acclaimed 
leader of the entire Netherland people. 

But it was not to last. The jealousy of Catholic against 
Protestant, of south against north, was too deeply rooted. 
Two distinctive nationalities, Belgian and Dutch, were 
Matthias, already in course of formation, and not even the 
tactful and conciliatory policy of the most consummate 
statesman of his time could unite those whom the whole trend 
of events was year by year putting farther asunder. On the 6th 
of October, at the secret invitation of the Catholic nobles headed 
by the duke of Aerschot, the archduke Matthias, brother of the 
emperor, arrived in Brussels to assume the sovereignty of the 
Netherlands. He was but twenty years of age, and his sudden 
intrusion was as embarrassing to the prince of Orange as to Don 
John. William, however, whose position had been strengthened 
by his nomination to the post of ruwaard of Brabant, determined 
to welcome Matthias and use him for his own purposes. Matthias 
was to be the nominal ruler, he himself with the title of lieutenant- 
general to hold the reins of power. 

But Philip had now become thoroughly alarmed, and he 
despatched Alexander Farnese, son of the duchess of Parma, to 
The Duke J°* n n * s unc ^ e ^ on John w ith a veteran force of 20,000 
ofAnjou troops. Strengthened by this powerful reinforcement, 
and John Don John fell upon the patriot army at Gemblours 
Casimir. near ^amur on t he 3 is t f January 1578, and with 
scarcely any loss completely routed the Netherlanders. All was 
now terror and confusion. The " malcontent " Catholics now 
turned for help from Matthias to the duke of Anjou, who had 
invaded the Netherlands with a French army and seized Mons. 
At the same time John Casimir, brother of the elector palatine, 
at the invitation of the Calvinist party and with the secret 
financial aid of Queen Elizabeth, entered the country at the head 
of a body of German mercenaries from the east. Never did the 
diplomatic talents of the prince of Orange shine brighter than at 
this difficult crisis. The duke of Anjou at his earnest instigation 
accepted the title of " Defender of the liberties of the Nether- 
lands," and promised, if the provinces would raise an army of 
10,000 foot and 2000 horse, to come to their assistance with a 
like force. At the same time negotiations were successfully 
carried on with John Casimir, with Elizabeth and with Henry of 
Navarre, and their help secured for the national cause. Mean- 
while Don John had aroused the mistrust of his brother, who met 
his urgent appeal for funds with cold silence. Deeply 
hurt at this treatment and disappointed at his failure, oo^JoAri. 
the governor-general fell ill , and died on the 1st of 
October. Philip immediately appointed Alexander Farnese to 
the vacant post. In him Orange was to find an adversary 
who was not only a great general but a statesman of insight 
and ability equal to his own. 

Farnese at once set to work with subtle skill to win over to 
the royalist cause the Catholic nobles of the south. The moment 
was propitious, and his efforts met with success. Alexander 
Ghent had fallen into the hands of John Casimir, Farnese 
and under his armed protection a fierce and intolerant goveraor^ 
Calvinism reigned supreme in that important city. geaeraL 
To the " Malcontents " (as the Catholic party was styled) the 
domination of heretical sectaries appeared less tolerable than the 
evils attendant upon alien rule. This feeling was widespread 
throughout the Walloon provinces, and found expres- 
sion in the League of Arras (5th of January 1579). /mts! 
By this instrument the deputies of Hainault, Artois 
and Douay formed themselves into a league for the defence of the 
Catholic religion, and, subject to his observance of the political 
stipulations of the Union of Brussels, professed loyal allegiance 
to the king. The Protestant response was not long in coming. 
The Union of Utrecht was signed on the 29th of January by the 
representatives of Holland, Zeeland, Utrecht, Gelder- 
land and Zutphen. By it the northern provinces utrechu 
bound themselves together "as if they were one 
province " to maintain their rights and liberties " with life-blood 
and goods " against foreign tyranny, and to grant complete 
freedom of worship and of religious opinion throughout the 
confederacy. This famous compact was the work of John of 
Nassau, at that time governor of Gelderland, and did not at first 
commend itself to his brother. William was still struggling to 
carry out that larger scheme of a union of all the seventeen 
provinces, which at the time of the " Pacification of Ghent " 
had seemed a possibility. But his efforts were already doomed 
to certain failure. The die* was cast, which decreed that from 
1579 onwards the northern and southern Netherlands were to 
pursue separate destinies. For their later history see Holland 
and Belgium. 

Bibliography. — General history: For the early authorities 
consult Collections de chrontques Beiges in&dites, publ. par ordre du 
gouvernement (89 vols., 1836-1893) ; and Collections des chroniqueurs. 
Trouveres Beiges, publ. par l'Academie de Bruxelles (58 vols., 1868- 
1870); among later writers, J. P. Arend, Algemeane geschiedenis 
des vaderlands van de vroegste tijden (4 vols., 1 840-1 883); J. Wage- 
naar, Vaderlandsche historie (21 vols., 1749/-1759); J. P. Blok, 
A History of the People of the Netherlands (trans, from the Dutch by 
O. Bierstadt and R. Putnam), vols. i. and ii. (1 898-1900). For the 
Burgundian period — A. B. de Burante, Histoire des dues de Burgogne 
(136A-1477), (13 vols., 1824-1826); L. Vanderkindere, Le Siecle 
des Artevelde (1879); J. F. Kirk, History ef Charles the Bold, Duke 
of Burgundy (3 vols., 1 863-1 868). For the Habsburg period to 
1555— Th. Juste, Charles Quint et Marguerite d'Autriche (1858); 
A. Le Glay, Maximilien I. et Marguerite dAutriche (1839) ; A. Henne, 
Histoire du regne de Charles V. en Belgique (10 vols., 1858-1860). 

The Revolt of the Netherlands: Contemporary authorities: 
P. C. Gachard, Correspondence de Philippe II. sur les affaires des 
Pays-Bas (5 vols., 1 848-1 879); Correspondence de Guillaume le 
taciturne (6 vols., 1 847-1 857); G. Groen van Prinsterer, Archives 
ou correspondence intdtte de la maison d* Orange, i° s6rie (9 vols., i8ai- 
1861) ; Poullet et Piot, Correspondence du cardinal Granvelle (12 vols., 
1 879-1 899); J. M. B. C. Kervyn de Lettenhove, Relations politiques 
des Pays-Bas et de VAngleterre sous le regne de Philippe II. (5 vols., 
1 882-1 886); Collection de m&moires sur Vhistoire de Belgique au 
XVI; XVII; et XVIII* siecles (47 vols., 1 858-1 875) (chiefly dealing 
with the period of the Revolt) P. bor, Oorspronck, begin ende aenwang 
der Nederlandscher oorlogen t beroerten ende borgelijcke oneenicheyden 
(1595); J* Ghysius, Oorsprong en voortgang der nederlandscher 
beroerten (1626); Hugo Grotius, Annates et histoire de rebus belgicis 
(1657); P. C.'Hooft, Nederlandscher historien, 155^1587 (1656); 
E. V. Reyd, Voornaenste ghesckiedennissen in de Nederlanden, 1566- 
1601 (1626); A. Carnero, Historia de las guerras civiles que ha avido 
en los estados de Flandres des del anno i$$9 hasta el de i6oq % y las 
causes de la rebelion de los dichos estados (1625); B. Mendoca, 
Commentaires memorables des guerres de Flandres et Pays-Bas, avec 
une sommaire description des Pays-Bos 1567-1577 (1591); F. 
Strada, De hello Belgico decades duae (1640-1647); L. Guicciardini, 
Descrittione di tutti i Paesi Bassi (1588). Later works: R. Fruin, 
Het voorspel van den tachtigjariger ocrlog (1866); J. M. B. C. Kervyn 
de Lettenhove, Les Huguenots et les Gueux 1560-158$ (6 vols., 1883- 
1885); Th. Juste, Histoire de la revolution des Pays-Bas sous 
Philippe II.> 1555-1577 (4 vols., 1855-1867); W. J. Nuyens, Ge- 
schiedenis der Nederlandsche berverten (2 vols., 1889); E. Marx, 
Studien zur Geschichte des niederldndischen A ufstandes ( 1 902 ) ; 
W. H. P-rescott, History of the Reign of Philip II. 155K-1568 (1855) ; 
J. L. Motley, Rise of the Dutch Republic 1555-1584 (3 vols., 1856) ; 
Cambridge Modern History, vol. i., c. xiii. (1902), and vol. iii., cc. vi. 
and vii. (1904). (Bibliographies, vol. i. pp. 761-769, vol. iii. pp. 
798-809). (G. E.) 


NETHERSOLE, OLGA (1863- ), English actress, of Spanish 
descent, was born in London, and made her stage d6but at 
Brighton in 1887. From 1888 she played important parts in 
London, at first under John Hare at the Garrick, and in 1894 
took the Court Theatre on her own account. She also toured in 
Australia and America, playing leading parts in modern plays, 
notably Clyde Fitch's Sapho (produced in London in 1902), 
which was strongly objected to in New York. Her powerful 
emotional acting, however, made a great effect in some other 
plays, such as Carmen, in which she again appeared in America 
in 1906. 


NETHINIM, the name given to the Temple assistants in 
ancient Jerusalem. They are mentioned at the return from 
the Exile and particularly enumerated in Ezra ii. and Neh. vii. 
. The original form of the name was Nethunim, as in the Khetib 
(consonantal reading) of Ezra viii. 17 (cf. Numbers iii. 9), and 
means " given " or " dedicated/' i.e. to the temple. The Talmud 
has also the singular form — Nathin. In all, 612 Nethinim came 
back from the Exile and were lodged near the " House of the 
Nethinim " at Ophel, towards the east wall of Jerusalem so as to 
be near the Temple, where they served under the Levites and were 
free of all tolls, from which they must have been supported. 
It is mentioned that they had been ordered by David and the 
princes to serve the Levites (Ezra viii. 20). 

Notwithstanding their sacred service, the Nethinim were 
regarded by later Jewish tradition as especially degraded, being 
placed in tables of precedence below bastards (Talm. Jet. Hot. 
iii. 5, Jeb. vii. 5) and in the Mishna (Jeb. viii. 3) it is stated 
that the prohibition against intermarriage with the Moabites, 
Ammonites, Egyptians and Edomites, though given in the Bible, 
only applied for a certain number of generations and did not 
apply at all to their daughters, but, it is added, " Bastards and 
Nethinim are prohibited (to marry Israelites) , and this prohibition 
is perpetual and applies both to males and females." 

To explain this combination of sacred service and exceptional 
degradation, it has been suggested by Joseph Jacobs that the 
Nethinim were the descendants of the Kedishoth, i.e. women 
dedicated to the worship of Astarte and attached to the Temple 
before the Exile. There is evidence of these practices from the 
time of Solomon (1 Kings xi. 5) down to Josiah (2 Kings xiii. 4-6), 
and even as late as Ezekiel (Ezek. xxiii. 36-48), giving rise to 
the command of Deuteronomy xxiii. 17. 

An examination of the name lists given in duplicate in Ezra 
ii. 43-58, Neh. vii. 46-59, together with the additional names in 
the Greek Esdras (v. 29-35), shows that the Nethinim were in 
charge of the rings and hooks connected with the temple service; 
they sheared the sheep offered for sacrifice in the temple and 
poured the libations. Some of them were derived from the wars 
with the Meunim; others from the campaign with Rezin of 
Damascus. One of the names given in r Esdras v. 34, viol 
Soi/jSd, ed. Fritzsche, Soi/jSis, ed. Swete, would seem to throw 
light on the puzzling reading dhoid (A.V. " Sabeans," R.V. 
" Drunkards ") of Ezek. xxiii. 42, and if so would directly 
connect the list of the Nethinim with the degraded worship of 
Astarte in the Temple. 

A large majority of the names of the parents mentioned seem 
to be feminine in form or meaning, and suggest that the Nethinim 
could not trace back to any definite paternity; and this is con- 
firmed by the fact that the lists are followed by the enumeration 
of those who could not " show their father's house " (Ezra 
ii. 60; Neh. vii. 62). The Greek versions, as well as Josephus, 
refer to them as tepoSouXot, which can mean one thing only. 

The Talmudic authorities have an abstract term, Nethinuth, 
indicating the status of a Nathin {Tos. Kidd. v. 1) ed. Zucker- 
mandel, p. 341), and corresponding to the abstract Mamziruth t 
" bastardy." The existence of this degraded class up to the 
Exile throws considerable light upon the phraseology of the 
prophets in referring to idolatry as adultery and the scenes 
connected with it as prostitution. Their continued existence 
as a pariah class after the Exile would be a perpetual reminder 
of the dangers and degradation of the most popular Syrian 
creed. 

These unfortunate creatures had no alternative but to accept 
the provisions made for them out of the Temple treasury, but 
after the fall of the Temple they would naturally disappear 
by intermarriage with similar degraded classes (Mishna Kidd. 
viii, 3). In the Code of Khammurabi §§ 191, 192, they could 
be adopted by outsiders. 

The above explanation of the special degradation of the 
Nethinim, though they were connected with the Temple service, 
seems to be the only way of explaining the Talmudic reference 
to their tabooed position, and is an interesting example of the 
light that can be reflected on Biblical research by the Talmud. 

See Joseph Jacobs, Studies in Biblical Archaeology (1894), 104-122 ; 
W. Baudissin, Geschichte des Alttestamentlichen Priesterthums, 142 seg. 
This view, however, is not accepted by Cheyne, Encyclopaedia 
Biblica, s.v. (J. Ja.) 


NETLEY, a village in the Fareham parliamentary division of 
Hampshire, England, 3 m. S.E. of Southampton on the east 
shore of Southampton Water, and on a branch of the London 
& South Western railway. Here a Cistercian abbey was founded 
in 1237 by Henry III., and its ruins are extensive, including a 
great part of the cruciform church, abbot's house, chapter house 
and domestic buildings. The style is Early English and 
Decorated, and many beautiful details are preserved. The 
gatehouse was transformed into a fort in the time of Henry VIII. 
Netley Hospital for wounded soldiers (1 m. S.E. of the abbey), 
was built in 1856 after the Crimean War. It is a vast pile giving 
accommodation for upwards of a thousand patients, and is the 
principal military hospital in Great Britain. 


NETSCHER, GASPAR (1630-1684), German portrait and 
genre painter, was born at Heidelberg in 1639. His father died 
when he was two years of age, and his mother, fleeing from 
the dangers of a civil war, carried him to Arnheim, where he was 
adopted by a physician named Tullekens. At first he was 
destined for the profession of his patron, but owing to his great 
aptitude for painting he was placed under an artist named de 
Koster, and, having also studied under Ter Borch, he set out for 
Italy to complete his education there. Marrying, however, at 
Liege, he settled at Bordeaux, and toiled hard to earn a livelihood 
by painting those small cabinet pictures which are now so highly 
valued on account of their exquisite finish. After removing to 
The Hague, he turned his attention to portrait-painting, and in 
this branch of his art was more successful. He was patronized by 
William III., and his earnings soon enabled him to gratify his 
own taste by depicting musical and conversational pieces. It 
was in these that Netscher's genius was fully displayed. The 
choice of these subjects, and the habit of introducing female 
figures, dressed m glossy satins, were imitated from Ter Borch; 
they possess easy yet delicate pencilling, brilliant and correct 
colouring, and pleasing light and shade; but frequently their 
refinement passes into weakness. The painter was gaining both 
fame and wealth when he died prematurely in 1684. His sons 
Constantyn (1668-17 2 2), and Theodoras (1661-1732), were also 
painters after their father's style, but inferior in merit. 


NETTLE (0. Eng. netele, cf. Ger. Nessel), the English equivalent 
of Lat. Uriica y a genus of plants which gives its name to the 
natural order Urticaceae. It contains about thirty species in 
the temperate parts of both east and west hemispheres. They 
are herbs covered with stinging hairs, and with unisexual flowers 
on the same or on different plants. The male flowers consist of a 
perianth of four greenish segments enclosing as many stamens, 
which latter, when freed from the restraint exercised upon them 
by the perianth-segments while still in the bud, suddenly uncoil 
themselves, and in so doing liberate the pollen. The female 
perianth is similar, but encloses only a single seed-vessel with a 
solitary seed. The stinging hairs consist of a bulbous reservoir 
filled with acrid fluid, prolonged into a long slender tube, the 
extremity of which is finely pointed. By this point the hair 
penetrates the skin and discharges its irritant contents beneath 
the surface. Nettle tops, or the very young shoots of the nettle, 
may be used as a vegetable like spinach; but from the abundance 
of crystals (cystoliths) they contain they are apt to be gritty, 
though esteemed for their antiscorbutic properties, which they 
do not possess in any exceptional degree. The fibre furnished 
by the stems of several species is used for cordage or paper- 
making. Three species of nettle are wild in the British Isles: 
Urtica diotca, the common stinging nettle, which is a hairy 
perennial with staminate and pistillate flowers in distinct plants; 
U. urens, which is annual and, except for the stinging hairs, 
glabrous, and has staminate and pistillate flowers in the same 
panicle; and U. pilulifera (Roman nettle), an annual with the 
pistillate flowers in rounded heads, which occurs in waste places 
in the east of England, chiefly near the sea — the more virulent 
of the British species. From their general presence in the neigh- 
bourhood of houses, or in spots where house refuse is deposited, 
it has been suggested that the nettles are not really natives, a 
supposition that to some extent receives countenance from the 
circumstance that the young shoots are very sensitive to frost. 
In any case they follow man in his migrations, and by their 
presence usually indicate a soil rich in nitrogen. The trailing 
subterranean root-stock renders the common nettle somewhat 
difficult of extirpation. 


NETTLERASH, or Urticaria, a disorder of the skin char- 
acterized by an eruption resembling the effect produced by the 
sting of a nettle, namely, raised red or red and white patches 
occurring in parts or over the whole of the surface of the body 
and attended with great irritation. It may be acute or chronic. 
In the former variety the attack often comes on after indulgence in 
certain articles of diet, particularly various kinds of fruit, shell- 
fish, cheese, pastry, &c, also occasionally from the use of certain 
drugs, such as henbane, copaiba, cubebs, turpentine, &c. There 
is at first considerable feverishness and constitutional disturbance, 
together with sickness and faintness, which either precede or 
accompany the appearance of the rash. The eruption may appear 
on any part of the body, but is most common on the face and 
trunk. The attack may pass off in a few hours, or may last for 
several days, the eruption continuing to come out in successive 
patches. The chrome variety lasts with interruptions for a 
length of time often extending to months or years. This form 
of the disease occurs independently of errors in diet, and is not 
attended with the feverish symptoms characterizing the acute 
attack. As regards treatment, the acute variety generally yields 
quickly to a purgative and the use of some antacid, such as mag- 
nesia or liquor potassae. The local irritation is allayed by 
sponging with a warm alkaline solution (soda, potash or ammonia), 
or a solution of acetate of lead, and a lotion of ichthyol has 
been found useful. Chronic cases have been known to benefit 
from the administration of creosote or salol. 


NETTLESHIP, HENRY (1839-1893), English classical scholar, 
was born at Kettering on the 5th of May 1839. He was educated 
at Lancing, Durham and Charterhouse schools, and Corpus 
Christi College, Oxford. In 1861 he was elected to a fellowship 
at Lincoln, which he vacated on his marriage in 1870. In 
1868 he became an assistant master at Harrow, but in 1873 
he returned to Oxford, and was elected to a fellowship at Corpus. 
In 1878 he was appointed to succeed Edwin Palmer in the 
professorship of Latin, which post he held till his death at Oxford 
on the 10th of July 1893. Nettleship had been from the first 
attracted to the study of Virgil, and a good deal of his time 
was devoted to his favourite poet. After Conington's death 
in 1869, he saw his edition of Virgil through the press, and revised 
and corrected subsequent editions of the work. In 1875 he had 
undertaken to compile a new Latin lexicon for the Clarendon 
Press, but the work proved more than he could accomplish, 
and in 1887 he published some of the results of twelve years' 
labour in a volume entitled Contributions to Latin Lexicography, 
a genuine piece of original work. In conjunction with J. E. 
Sandys, Nettleship revised and edited Seyffert's Dictionary of 
Classical Antiquities, and he contributed to a volume entitled 
Essays on the Endowment of Research an article on " The Present 
Relations between Classical Research and Classical Education 
in England," in which he pointed out the great value of the 
professorial lecture in Germany. In his views on the research 
question he was a follower of Mark Pattison, whose essays he 
edited in 1889 for the Clarendon Press. In Lectures and Essays 
on Subjects connected with Latin Literature and Scholarship, 
Nettleship revised and republished some of his previous publica- 
tions. A second series of these, published in 1895, and edited 
by F. Haverfield, contains a memoir by Mrs M. Nettleship, 
with full bibliography. 

See obituary notices in The Times (nth of July, 1893); Classical 
Review (October, 1893); Oxford Magazine (18th of October, 1893). 


NETTLESHIP, RICHARD LEWIS (1846-1892), English 
philosopher, youngest brother of Henry Nettleship, was born on 
the 17th of December 1846, and educated at Uppingham and 
Balliol College, Oxford, where he held a scholarship. He won 
the Hertford scholarship, the Ireland, the Gaisford Greek verse 
prize, a Craven scholarship and the Arnold prize, but took only 
a second class in Litterae Humaniores. He became fellow and 
tutor of his college and succeeded to the work of T. H. Green, . 
whose writings he edited with a memoir (London, 1880). He 
left an unfinished work on Plato, part of which was published 
after his death, together with his lectures on logic and some 
essays. His thought was idealistic and Hegelian. His literary 
style was excellent; but, though he had considerable personal 
influence on his generation at Oxford, a certain nebulousness 
of view prevented his making any permanent contribution to 
philosophy. He was fond of music and outdoor sports, and 
rowed in his college boat. He died on the 25th of August 1892, 
from the effects of exposure on Mont Blanc, and was buried at 
Chamounix. 


NETTLE TREE, the name applied to certain trees of the genus 
Celtis, belonging to the family or natural order Ulmaceae, 
The best-known species have usually obliquely ovate, or lanceo- 
late leaves, serrate at the edge, and marked by three prominent 
nerves. The flowers are inconspicuous, usually hermaphrodite, 
with a 4- or 5-parted perianth, as many stamens, a hairy disk 
and a i-celled ovary with a 2-parted style. The fruit is succulent 
like a little drupe, a character which serves to separate the genus 
alike from the nettles and the elms, to both of which it is allied. 
Celtis australis is a common tree, both wild and planted, through- 
out the Mediterranean region extending to Afghanistan and the 
Himalayas; it is also cultivated in Great Britain. It is a rapidly 
growing tree, from 30 to 40 ft. high, with a remarkably sweet 
fruit, recalling a small black cherry, and was one of the plants 
to which the term " lotus " was applied by Dioscorides and the 
older authors. The wood, which is compact and hard and takes 
a high polish, is used for a variety of purposes. C. occidentalism 
a North American species, is the hackberry (tf.v.). 


NETTUNO, a fishing village of the province of Rome, Italy, 
2 m. E.N.E. of Anzio by rail, and 39 m. S.S.E. of Rome, 36 ft. 
above sea-level. Pop. (1901) 3406 (town), 5072 (commune). 
It has a picturesque castle built by Alexander VI. from the 
designs of Antonio da Sangallo the elder in 1496. It is said to 
have been a Saracen settlement. The picturesque costume 
of the women is now worn only at festivals. To the E. on the 
sandy coast on the way to Astura is a military camp and a range 
for the trial of field artillery. 


NETZE, a river of Germany, having a small portion of its 
upper course in Poland. It is a right-bank tributary of the 
Warthe, and rises in the low-lying lake district, through which 
the Russo-German frontier runs, to the south of Inowrazlaw. 
The frontier crosses Lake Goplo, which is not far from the source 
of the Netze, which on leaving it (in Prussian territory), flows 
north-west to the Trlonger lake, and continues thereafter in 
the same general direction, but with wide fluctuations, to Nakel. 
Here it joins the Bromberg canal, which gives access to the river 
Brahe and so to the Vistula. The Netze then turns west- 
south-west and waters the moorland (much of which, however, 
has been brought under cultivation) known as the Netzebruch. 
It joins the Warthe at Zantoch, after a course of 273 m. It is 
navigable for 130 m. up to the Bromberg canal and thereafter 
for smaller boats for 40 m. up to Pakosch on the Trlonger lake. 
Its drainage area is 5400 sq. m. From 1772 to 1807 that part 
of Poland which was given to Prussia at the first partition 
was known as the Netze District, as it extended along the 
Netze. It was almost all given back to Russia at the peace 
of Tilsit, but was restored to Prussia in 181 5 under the treaty 
of Vienna. 


NEU-BRANDENBURG, a town of" Germany, in the grand 
duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, is situated on a small lake called 
the Tollense See, 58 m. N.W. of Stettin by rail. Pop. (1905) 
11,443. It is still partly surrounded with walls, and possesses 
four interesting old Gothic gates, dating from about 1300. The 
principal buildings are the Marienkirche, a Gothic building of 
the 13th century, the Johanniskirche, the town-hall and the 
grand ducal palace. It possesses a bronze statue of Fritz Reuter 
(1893); a monument to Bismarck (1895); another commemorat- 
ing the war of 1870-71 (1895); a small museum of antiquities; 
and an art collection. On the other side of the lake is the grand- 
ducal palace, Belvedere. Iron-founding, machine-making, wool- 
spinning and the making of paper, tobacco and musical instru- 
ments are carried on here, and the trade in wool and agricultural 
products is considerable. The horse fair is also important. 
Neu-Brandenhurg was founded in 1248, and has belonged to 
Mecklenburg since 1292. 

See Boll, Ckronik der Vorderstadt Neubrandenburg (1875). 


NEUBREISACH, a town and fortress of Germany in the 
imperial province of Alsace-Lorraine, situated on the Rhine- 
Rhone canal, 12 m. E. from Colmar by the railway to Freiburg- 
im-Breisgau. Pop. (1905 — including a garrison of 2300 men) 
3520. It is built in the form of a hectagon, and together with 
Fort Mortier, which lies on an arm of the Rhine opposite, forms 
a place of great strategic strength. It contains an Evangelical 
(garrison) church, a Roman Catholic church and a non-com- 
missioned officers' school. There are electrical works in the 
town. 

Neubreisach was founded by Louis XIV. in 1699 and fortified 
by Vauban, the Neubreisacher canal being constructed to 
transport the necessary materials. In the Franco-German War, 
it was bombarded by the Germans from the 2nd to the 10th of 
November 1870, when it capitulated. 

See Wolff, Geschickte des Bombardements von ScUeiistadt und 
Neubreisach (Berlin, 1874); and von Neumann, Die Eroberung von 
Schlettstadi und Neubreisach im Jahre 1870 (Berlin, 1876). 


NEUBURG, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Bavaria, 
is pleasantly situated on the Danube, 12 m. W. of Ingolstadt, 
on the railway to Neuoffingen. Pop. (1005) 8532. It is a place 
of ancient origin, but is chiefly noteworthy because formerly 
for two centuries it was the capital of the principality of Pfalz- 
Neuburg. Its most important building is the old residence of its 
princes, the handsomest part of which is in the Renaissance style 
of the 16th century. The town also contains an Evangelical 
and seven Roman Catholic churches, a town hall, several 
schools and convents, a theatre, and' an historical museum with 
a valuable library. It has electrical works and breweries, while 
fruit and vegetables are cultivated in the neighbourhood, a 
considerable trade in these products being carried on by the 
Danube. 

Neuburg was originally an episcopal see. In the 10th century 
it passed to the counts of Scheyern, and through them to Bavaria, 
being ceded to the Rhenish Palatinate at the close of a war in 1 507. 
From 1557 to 1742 it was the capital of a small principality 
ruled by a cadet branch of the family of the elector palatine of the 
Rhine. This principality of Pfalz-Neuburg had an area of about 
1000 sq. m. and about 100,000 inhabitants. In 1742 it was 
united again with the Rhenish Palatinate, with which it passed 
in 1777 to Bavaria. 

See Gremmel, Geschickte des Herzogtums Neuburg (Neuburg, 
1872); and Fuhrer durch die Stadt Neuburg und deren Umgebung 
(Neuburg, 1004). 


NEUCHATEL (Ger. Neuenburg), one of the cantons of western 
Switzerland, on the frontier towards France. It is the only 
Swiss canton that is situated entirely in the Jura, of which it 
occupies the central portion (its loftiest summit is the Mont 
Racine, 4731 ft. in the Tete de Rang range). The canton has 
a total area of 311-8 sq. m.,of which 267*1 sq. m. are reckoned 
" productive " (forests occupying 88-6 sq. m. and vineyards 
4 -4 sq. m.). It consists, for the most part, of the longitudinal 
ridges and valleys characteristic of the Jura range, while its 
drainage is very unequally divided between the Thiele or Zihl, 
and the Doubs, which forms part of the north-west boundary 
of the canton, and receives only the streams flowing from the Le 
Locle and La Chaux de Fonds valley. Three regions make up 
the territory. That stretching along the shore of the lake is 
called Le Vignoble (from its vineyards) and extends from about 
1500 ft. to 2300 ft. above the sea-level. An intermediate region 
is named Les V allies, for it consists of the two principal valleys 
of the canton( the Val de Ruz, watered by the Seyon, and the Val 
de Travers, watered by the Areuse) which lie to a height of about 
2300 ft. to 3000 ft. above the sea-level. The highest region is 
known as Les Montagues, and is mainly composed of the long 
valley in which stand the industrial centres of La Chaux de 
Fonds (?.t>.), and Le Locle (q.v.) to which must be added those 
of La Sagne, Les Ponts and Les Verrieres, the elevation of these 
upland valleys varying from 3000 ft. to 3445 ft. The canton is 
well supplied with railways, the direct line from Bern past 
Kerzers (Chietres), Neuchatel, the Val de Travers and Les 
Verrieres to Pontarlier for Paris passing right through it, while 
La Chaux de Fonds is connected by a tine past Le Locle with 
Morteau in France. Other lines join the capital, Neuchatel, 
to La Chaux de Fonds, as well as to Yverdon at the south-west 
extremity of the lake, and to St Blaise at its north-east end, not 
very far from Bienne. 

In 1000 the population numbered 126,279 souls according to 
the federal census (a cantonal census of 1006 makes the figure at 
that date 134,014), of whom 104,551 were French-speaking, 
17,629 German-speaking and 3664 Italian-speaking, while 107,291 
were Protestants, 17,731 Romanists or Old Catholics, and 1020 
Jews. There are three " established and state-endowed " 
churches, the National Evangelical (in 1007 a proposal to 
disestablish it was rejected by a huge majority), the Roman 
Catholic, and the Old Catholic (this sect in La Chaux de Fonds 
only), while the pastors of the Free Evangelical church and of 
the Jews (mostly in La Chaux de Fonds) are so far recognized 
as such by the state as to be exempt from military service. 

Besides the capital, Neuchatel (?.v.), the chief towns are La 
Chaux de Fonds (the most populous of all), Le Locle and 
Fleurier (3746), the principal village in the Val de Travers. 

The most valuable mineral product is asphalt, of which there is 
a large and rich deposit in the Val de Travers, belonging to the 
state but worked by an English company. The wine of the 
Vignoble region (both sparkling and still) is plentiful and has a 
good reputation, the red wines of Neuchatel, Boudry and Cor- 
taillod being largely exported, though the petit vin blanc of 
Neuchatel is all but wholly consumed within the canton. 
Absinthe is largely manufactured in the Val de Travers, but 
lace is no longer made there as of old. The well-known manu- 
factory of Suchard's chocolate is at Serrieres, practically a 
suburb of the town of Neuchatel, while in the canton there are 
also cement factories and stone quarries. But the most char- 
acteristic industry is that of watch-making and the making of gold 
watch cases, which is chiefly carried on (since the early 18th 
century) in the highland valleys of La Chaux de Fonds and of 
Le Locle, as well as at Fleurier in the Val de Travers. At 
Couvet, also in the Val de Travers, there is a large factory of 
screws and knitting machines. 

The canton is divided into 6 administrative districts, which 
comprise 6s communes. The cantonal constitution dates in 
its main features from 1858, but has been modified in several 
important respects. The legislature or Grand Conseil consists 
of members elected (since 1903) in the proportion of one to every 
1 200 (or fraction over 600) of the population, and holds office for 
three years, while since 1906 the principles of proportional repre- 
sentation and minority representation obtain in these elections. 
Since 1906 the executive of 5 members (since 1882) or Conseil 
d'Htat is elected by a popular vote. The 2 members of the federal 
Conseil des Atals are named by the Grand Conseil, but the 6 
members of the federal Conseil National are chosen by a popular 
vote. Since 1879, 3000 citizens have the right of " facultative 
referendum " as to all laws and important decrees, while since 
1882 the same number have the right of initiative as to all 
legislative projects, this right as to the partial revision of the 
cantonal constitution dating as far back as 1848, the number in 
the case of a total revision having been raised in 1906 to 5000. 

We first hear of the novum castellum, regalissimam sedem in 
the will (ion) of Rudolf III., the last king of Burgundy, on 
whose death (1032) that kingdom reverted to the empire. About 
1034 the emperor Conrad II. gave this castle to the lord of 
several neighbouring fiefs, his successors establishing themselves 
permanently there in the 1 2th century and then taking the title 
of " count." In 1288 the reigning count resigned his domains 
to the emperor Rudolf, who gave them to the lord of Chalon-sur- 
Sa6ne, by whom they were restored to the count of Neuchatel on 
his doing homage for them. This act decided the future history 
of Neuchatel, for in 1393 the house of Chalon succeeded to the 
principality of Orange by virtue of a marriage contracted in 1388. 
The counts gradually increased their dominions, so that by 1373 
they held practically all of the present canton, with the exception 
of the lordship of Valangin (the Val de Ruz and Les Montagnes, 
this last region only colonized in the early 14th century), which 
was held by a cadet line of the house till bought in 1592. In 
1395 the first house ended in an heiress, who brought Neuchatel 
to the count of Freiburg im Breisgau. As early as 1290 the 
reigning count had made an alliance with the Swiss Fribourg, in 
1308 with Bern, and about 1324 with Soleure, but it was not till 
1406 that an " everlasting alliance " was made with Bern (later 
in 1495 with Fribourg, and in 1501 with Lucerne). This alliance 
resulted in bringing the county into the Swiss confederation 
four centuries later, while it also led to contingents from Neuchatel 
helping the Confederates from the battle of St Jakob (1444) 
onwards right down into the early iSth century. In 1457, through 
another heiress, the county passed to the house of the marquises 
of Baden-Hochberg, and in 1504 similarly to that of Orleans- 
Longueville (a bastard line of the royal house of France). From 
1 51 2 to 1529 the Swiss occupied it as the count was fighting for 
France and so against them. In 1532 the title of " prince " 
was taken, while by the treaty of Westphalia (1648) the princi- 
pality became sovereign and independent of the empire. In 1530 
(the very year Farel introduced the Reformation at Neuchatel) 
the overlordship enjoyed by the house of Chalon-Orange passed, 
by virtue of a marriage contracted in 1515, to that of Nassau- 
Orange, the direct line of which ended in 1702 in the person of 
William III., king of England. In 1707 the Longueville house 
of Neuchatel also became extinct, and a great struggle arose as 
to the succession. Finally the parliament (states) of Neuchatel 
decided in favour of Frederic I., the first king of Prussia, whose 
mother was the elder paternal aunt of William III., and so heiress 
of the rights (given in 1288) of the house of Chalon, to which the 
fief had reverted on the extinction of the line of the counts of 
Neuchatel. Thus the act of 1288 determined the fate of the 
principality, partly because Frederic I. was a Protestant, while 
the other claimants were Romanists. The nominal rule of the 
Prussian king (for the country enjoyed practical independence) 
lasted till 1857, with a brief interval from 1806 to 1814, when the 
principality was held by Marshal Berthier, by virtue of a grant 
from Napoleon. In 1814 its admission into the Swiss confedera- 
tion was proposed and was effected in 181 5, the new canton 
being the only non-republican member, just as the hereditary 
rulers of Neuchatel were the last to maintain their position in 
Switzerland. This anomaly led in 1848 to the establishment 
(attempted in 183 1) of a republican form of government, brought 
about by a peaceful revolution led by A. M. Piaget. A royalist 
attempt to regain power in 1856 was defeated, and finally, 
after long negotiations, the king of Prussia renounced his claims 
to sovereignty, though retaining the right (no longer exercised) 
to bear the title of "prince of Neuchatel." Thus in 1857 
Neuchatel became a full republican member of the Swiss con- 
federation. 

Bibliography — A. Bachelin, VHorlogerie Neuchdteloise (Neu- 
chatel, 1888); E. Bourgeois, Neuchdtel etla politique prussienne en 
Franclie Comti, 1702-1713 (Paris, 1887); J. Boy ve, Annales historiques 
du comti de Neuchdtel et de Valangin (6 vols., Berne and Neuchatel, 
1855); F. de Chambrier, Histoire de Neuchdtel et Valangin jusqu a 
Vavenement de la maison de Prusse, 1707 (Neuchatel, 1840); L. . 
Grandpierre, Histoire du canton de Neuchdtel sous les rots dePrusse % 
1707-1848 (Neuchatel, 1889), L. Junod, Histoire du canton de 
Neuchdtel sous les rois de Prusse, 1707-1848 (Neuchatel, 1889); A. 
Humbert and J. Clerc, A. M. Piaget et la rSpublique neuchdteloise de 
1848 a 1858 (2 vols., Neuchatel, 1888-1895); G. A. Matile, Monu- 
ments de I histoire de Neuchdtel (3 vols., Neuchatel, 1844-1848), and 
Histoire de la seigneurie de Valangin jusqu & sa reunion a la directe, 
1JQ2 (Neuchatel, 1852); Musie Neuchdtelois (published by the 
Cantonal Historical Society), from 1864; Le Patois neuchdtelois 
(an anthology) (Neuchatel, 1895); A; Pfleghart, Die schweizerische 
Uhrenindustrie (Leipzig, 1908); E. Quartier-la-Tente, Revue 
historique et monographtque des communes du canton de Neuchdtel 
(Neuchatel, 1897-1904). (W. A. B. C.) 


NEUCHATEL, capital of the above Swiss canton, situated 
near the north-east corner of the lake of Neuchatel. It is the 
meeting-point of several important railway lines, from Bern 
past Kerzers (27 m.), from Bienne (19 m.), from La Chaux de 
Fonds (19 m.), from Pontariier (in France), by the Val de Travers, 
(33im.),and from Yverdon (23 m.). The railway station (1575 
ft.) at the top of the town is connected by an electric tramway 
with the shore of the lake some 1 50 ft. lower. The older portion 
of the town is built on the steep slope of the Chaumont, and 
originally the waters of the lake bathed the foot of the hill on 
which it stood. But the gradual growth of alluvial deposits, 
and more recently the artificial embankment of the shore of 
the lake, have added much dry ground, and on this site the 
finest modern buildings have been erected. The 16th-century 
castle and the 13th-century collegiate church of Notre Dame 
(now Protestant) stand close together and were founded in the 
1 2 th century when the counts took up their permanent residence 
in the town, to which they granted a charter of liberties in 1214. 
Among the buildings on the quays are the Musee des Beaux 
Arts (modern Swiss paintings and also various historical collec- 
tions, including that of Desor relating to the Lake Dwellings), 
the Gymnase or College Latin (in which is also the museum of 
natural history and the town library) , the university (refounded 
in 1866 and raised from the rank of an academy to that of a 
university in 1909), the ficole de Commerce and the post office. 
The town owes much to the gifts of citizens. Thus David de 
Purry (1709-1786) founded the town hospital and built the town 
hall, while James de Purry bequeathed to the town the villa 
in which the ethnographical museum has been installed (1904). 
In 1811 J. L. de Pourtales (1722-1814) founded the hospital 
which bears his name, while in 1844 A. de Meuron (1780-1852) 
constructed the lunatic asylum at Pre*fargier, a few miles from 
the town. Among natives of the town are the theologians J. F. 
Ostervald (1663-1747) and Frederic Godet (1812-1900), the 
geologist E. Desor (1811-1882), the local historian G. A. Matile 
(1807-1881) and the politicians A. M. Piaget (1802-1870) and 
Numa Droz (1844-1899). Neuchatel (partly because very good 
French is spoken there) attracts many foreign students, while the 
town is' a literary centre. In 1900 Neuchatel numbered 20,843 
inhabitants (in 1850 only 7727 and in 1870, 12,683), 15,277 being 
French-speaking and 4553 German-speaking; there were 17,237 
Protestants, 3459 Romanists and 80 Jews. (W. A. B. C.) 


NEUCHATEL, LAKE OF. This lake, in W. Switzerland, is 
with the neighbouring lakes of Bienne and Morat (both connected 
with it by canals), the modern representative of the large body of 
water which at one time seems to have filled the whole of the 
lower valley of the Aar. -It is now the most considerable sheet 
of water which is.wkolly within Switzerland (since parts of those 
of Geneva and Constance belong to foreign countries), though it 
does not belong entirely to any one Canton — of its total area 
of 92^ sq. m., 365 sq. m. are in the Canton of Neuchatel and 
rather over 33 sq. m. in that of Vaud, while Fribourg claims 
20$ sq. m. and Berne 2 sq. m. It is about 23J m. in length, 
varies from 3§ to 5 m. in width, and has a maximum depth of 
502 ft., while its surface is 1427 ft. above sea-level. It is mainly 
formed by the Thiele or Zihl river, which enters it at its south- 
western end and issues from it at its north-eastern extremity, 
but it also receives, near its north-west end, the Areuse (flowing 
through the Val de Travers) and the Seyon (which traverses 
the Val de Ruz), as well as, near its north-east end, the Broye 
(that flows through a canal from the Lake of Morat). Successive 
drainages have brought to light the remains of many lake dwell- 
ings, of which there is a good collection in the natural history 
museum at Neuchatel. The scenery of the lake, though pleasing, 
cannot compare with that of the other Swiss lakes, despite the 
fact that from it the giants of both the Mont Blanc and Bernese 
Oberland ranges are clearly seen. The first steamer was placed 
on the lake in 1827. On the south-eastern shore the picturesque 
and historical little town of Estavayer is the chief place. At 
the south-western extremity of the lake is Yverdon (the Eburo- 
dunum of the Romans and the residence of the educationalist 
Pestalozzi, 1806-1825). Far more populated is the north- 
western shore, where, from S.W. to N.E., we find Grandson 
(famous for the battle of 1476 wherein Charles the Bold, duke of 
Burgundy, was defeated by the Swiss), Cortaillod (producing 
excellent sparkling wine), Serrieres (with the famous manu- 
factories of Suchard chocolate) and Neuchatel itself. On the 
north shore is La Tene, famous for the remarkable relics cf the 
Iron Age that have been discovered there. (\V. A. B. C.) 


NEUENAHR, a spa of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine 
province, situated at the foot of a basalt peak, in the pleasant 
valley of the Ahr, 10 m. N.W. of Remagen on the Rhine by the 
railway to Adenau. Pop. (1905) 3388. It is well laid out, 
has an Evangelical and two Roman Catholic churches, and 
carries on a considerable trade in the red wines of the district. 
There are five alkaline springs with temperatures from 69 to 
102 F., the waters of which are specific in chronic catarrh of 
the respiratory organs, gout, rheumatism and diabetes. In the 
immediate vicinity lies the Apollinaris spring. 

See Schmitz, Erfahrungen fiber Bad Neuenahr (5th ed., Ahrweiler, 
1887); and Schwenke, Die Kurtnittel des Bodes Neuenahr (Halle, 
1900). 


NEUENDORF, a village of Germany, in the province of 
Brandenburg, 2 m. E. from Potsdam, on the Nuthe, with a 
station on the railway from Berlin to Potsdam. Pop. (1905) 
6877. Tbe place has considerable industries, chief among 
which are carpet-weaving, jute-spinning and the manufacture of 
railway plant. Within its area lies the colony of Nowawes laid 
out by Frederick the Great in 1754. 


NEUFCHATEAU, a town of eastern France, in the department 
of Vosges at the confluence of the Meuse and the Mouzon, 49 m. 
W.N.W. of fipinal by rail. Pop. (1906) 3924. The churches of 
St Christopher (13th and 15th centuries) and St Nicholas, the 
latter combining the Romanesque and Gothic styles and built 
above a Romanesque crypt, are of interest. A sub-prefecture, 
a tribunal of first instance and communal colleges are among 
the public institutions. Neufchateau carries on wool-spinning 
and the manufacture of embroidery, nails and chains. The 
town, which is said to occupy the site of the Roman Neomagus, 
belonged in the middle ages to the dukes of Lorraine, ruins 
of whose chateau are still to be seen. In 1641 it passed to 
France. 


NEUHALDENSLEBEN, a town of Germany, in the province 
of Prussian Saxony on the Ohre, situated 18 m. N.W. from 
Magdeburg by the railway to Obisfelde and at the junction of a 
line to Eisleben. Pop. (1905) 10,421. It has an Evangelical 
church, an old equestrian statue of Henry the Lion and a gym- 
nasium. There are several active industries, notably the 
manufacture of majolica and terra-cotta wares, machinery, 
gloves, beer, malt, cheese and sugar, while large pig markets are 
held here. 

See Behrends, Chronik der Stadt Neuhaldensleben (new ed., 1903). 


NEUHOF, THEODORE STEPHEN, Baron von (c. 1690-1756), 
German adventurer and for a short time nominal king of Corsica, 
was a son of a Westphalian nobleman and was born at Metz. 
Educated at the court of France, he served first in the French 
army and then in that of Sweden. Baron de Goertz, minister to 
Charles XII., realizing Neuhofs. capacity for intrigue, sent 
him to England and Spain to negotiate with Cardinal Alberoni. 
Having failed in this mission he returned to Sweden and then 
went to Spain, where he was made colonel and married one of 
the queen's ladies-in-waiting. Deserting his wife soon afterwards 
he repaired to France and became mixed up in Law's financial 
affairs; then he wandered about Portugal, Holland and Italy, 
and at Genoa he made the acquaintance of some Corsican 
prisoners and exiles, whom he persuaded that he could free their 
country from Genoese tyranny if they made him king of the 
island. With their help and that of the bey of Tunis he landed 
in Corsica in March 1736, where the islanders, believing his 
statement that he had the support of several of the great powers, 
proclaimed him king. He assumed the style of Theodore I., 
issued edicts, instituted an order of knighthood, and waged 
war on the Genoese, at first with some success. But he was 
eventually defeated, and civil broils soon broke out in the 
island; the Genoese having put a price on his head and published 
an account of his antecedents, he left Corsica in November 
1736, ostensibly to seek foreign assistance. After trying in 
vain to induce the grand duke of Tuscany to recognize him, 
he started off on his wanderings once more until he was arrested 
for debt in Amsterdam. On regaining his freedom he sent his 
nephew to Corsica with a supply of arms; he himself returned 
to the island in 1738, 1739 and 1743, but the combined Genoese 
and French forces and the growing strength of the party opposed 
to him again drove him to wandering about Europe. Arrested 
for debt in London he regained his freedom by mortgaging 
his " kingdom " of Corsica, and subsisted on the charity of 
Horace Walpole and some other friends until his death in 
London on the nth of December 1756. His only son, Frederick 
(c. 1 725-1 797), served in the army of Frederick the Great 
and afterwards acted as agent in London for the grand-duke of 
Wurttemberg. 

Frederick wrote an account of his father's life, Mimoirts pour 
servir a Vhistoire de la Corse, and also an English translation, both 
published in London in 1768. In 1795 he published a new edition 
on Description of Corsica with an account of its union to the crown of 
Great Britain. See also Fitzgerald, King Theodore of Corsica (London, 
1890). 


NEUILLY-SUR-SEINE, a town of northern France, in the 
department of Seine, si m. N.W. of the centre of Paris, of which 
it is a suburb, between the fortifications and the Seine. Pop. 
( 1 906) 39,222. A castle at Neuilly , built by the count of Argenson 
in the 18th century, ultimately became the property and favourite 
residence of the duke of Orleans (Louis Philippe), the birthplace 
of nearly all his children, and the scene of the offer of the crown 
in 1830. The buildings were pillaged and burned by the mob 
in 1848. The park, which extended from the fortifications to the 
river, as well as the neighbouring park of Villiers (also belonging 
to the princes of Orleans), was broken up into building lots, and 
is occupied by many small middle-class houses and a few fine 
villas. Within the line of the fortifications, but on Neuilly 
soil, stands the chapel of St Ferdinand, on the spot where the 
duke of Orleans died in 1842 from the results of a carriage 
accident. The stained-glass windows were made at Sevres after 
designs by Ingres; the ducal cenotaph, designed by Ary Scheffer, 
was sculptured by de Triqueti; and the chapel also contains 
a " Descent from the Cross," by the last-named artist, and 
an angel executed in Carrara marble by the princess' Marie 
d'Orleans, sister of the duke. The fine bridge, designed in the 
1 8th century by Perronet, is noteworthy as the first level bridge 
constructed in France. The Galignani Institution, founded by 
the brothers Galignani for aged booksellers, printers and others, 
has accommodation for 100 residents. The manufactures 
include perfumery, chocolate, colours, varnish, automobiles, 
carpets, &c. 


NEUMANN, FRANZ ERNST (1 798-1895), German mineralogist, 
physicist and mathematician, was born at Joachimstal on the 
nth of September 1798. In 1815 he interrupted his studies at 
Berlin to serve as a volunteer in the campaign against Napoleon, 
and was wounded in the battle of Ligny. Subsequently he 
entered Berlin University as a student of theology, but soon 
turned to scientific subjects. His earlier papers were mostly 
concerned with crystallography, and the reputation they gained 
him led to his appointment as Privatclozent at Konigsberg, 
where in 1828 he became extraordinary, and in 1829 ordinary, 
professor of mineralogy and physics. In 1831, from a study 
of the specific heats of compounds, he formulated " Neumann's 
law," which expressed in modern language runs: " The mole- 
cular heat of a compound is equal to the sum of the atomic 
heats of its constituents." Devoting himself next to optics, 
he produced memoirs which entitle him to a high place among 
the early searchers after a true dynamical theory of light. In 
1832, by the aid of a particular hypothesis as to the constitution 
of the ether, he reached by a rigorous dynamical calculation 
results agreeing with those obtained by A. L. Cauchy, and 
succeeded in deducing laws of double refraction closely resembling 
those of A. J. Fresnel; and in subsequent years he attacked 
the problem of giving mathematical expression to the conditions 
holding for a surface separating two crystalline media, and 
worked out from theory the laws of double refraction in strained 
crystalline bodies. He also made important contributions to the 
mathematical theory of electrodynamics, and in papers published 
in 1845 an d *$47 established mathematically the laws of the 
induction of electric currents. His last publication, which 
appeared in 1878, was on spherical harmonics (Beitr&ge zur 
Theorie der Kugelfunciionen) . He took part in founding the Mathe- 
matisch-Physikalisches Seminar, to give students a practical 
acquaintance with the methods of original research. He retired 
from his professorship in 1876, and died at Konigsberg on the 
23rdof May 1895. His son, Carl Gottfried Neumann (b. 1832), 
became in 1858 Privatdozent, and in 1863 extraordinary 
professor of mathematics at Halle. He was then appointed 
to the ordinary chair of mathematics successively at Basel (1863), 
Tubingen (1865) and Leipzig (1868). 


NEUMANN, KARL FRIEDRICH (1793-1870), German 
orientalist, was born, under the name of Bamberger, at 
Reichsmannsdorf, near Bamberg, on the 28th of December 
1793. He studied philosophy and philology at Heidelberg, 
Munich and Gottingen, became a convert to Protestantism and 
took the name of Neumann. From 1822 to 1825 he was a teacher 
at Spires; then he learned Armenian in Venice and visited 
Paris and London. In 1829 he went to China, where he studied 
the language and amassed a large library of valuable books 
and manuscripts. These, about 12,000 in number, he presented 
to the royal library at Munich. Returning to Germany in 1831 
Neumann was made professor of Armenian and Chinese in the 
university of Munich. He held this position until 1852, when, 
owing to his pronounced revolutionary opinions, he was removed 
from his chair. Ten years later he settled in Berlin, where he 
died on the 17th of March 1870. 

Neumann's leisure time after his enforced retirement was occupied 
in historical studies, and besides his Geschichte des englischen Reichs 
in Asien (Leipzig, 1851), he wrote a history of the United States of 
America, Geschichte der Vereinigten Staaten von Amerika (Berlin, 
1 863-1 866). His other works include Versuch einer Geschichte der 
armenischen Literatur (Leipzig, 1836); Die Volker des sudlichen 
Russland (1846, and again 1855); and Geschichte des englisch- 
chinesischen Kriegs (1846, and again 1855). He also issued some 
translations from Chinese and Armenian: Catechism of the Shamans 
£1831); Vahram's Chronicle of the Armenian Kingdom in Cilicia 
(1831) and History of the Pirates in the China Sea (1831). The 
journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (London, 1871) contains a full 
list of his works. 


NEUMAYR, MELCHIOR (1845-1890), German palaeontologist, 
was born at Munich on the 24th of October 1845, the son of 
Max von Neumayr, a Bavarian Minister of State. He was 
educated in the university of Munich, and completed his studies 
at Heidelberg, where he graduated Ph.D. After some experience 
in field-geology under C. W. von G umbel he joined the Austrian 
geological survey in 1868. Four years later he returned to 
Heidelberg, but in 1873 he was appointed professor of palaeon- 
tology in Vienna, and occupied this post until his death on the 
29th of January 1890. His more detailed researches related 
to the Jurassic and Cretaceous Ammonites and to the Tertiary 
freshwater mollusca; and in these studies he sought to trace 
the descent of the species. He dealt also with the zones of 
climate during the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods, and en- 
deavoured to show that the equatorial marine fauna differed 
from that of the two temperate zones, and the latter from 
that of the arctic zone, much as the faunas of similar zones differ 
from each other in the present day; see his "Ober klimatische 
Zonen wahrend der Jura und Kreidezeit" (Denkschr. K. Akad. 
Wiss. Wien t 1883); he was author also of Erdgeschichte (2 vols., 
1887); and Die Sldmme des Thierr etches (vol. 1 only, 1889). 

Obituary by Dr W. T. Blanford in Quart. Journ. GeoL Soc. 
(1890). 


NEUMTINSTER, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province 
of Schleswig-Holstein, lies on both banks of the small river 
Schwale, in the basin of the Stor, 40 m. N. of Altona-Hamburg 
by rail, and at the junction of lines to Kiel, Vamdrup (Denmark) 
and Tonning. Pop. (1905) 3M47- It has an Evangelical and 
a Roman Catholic church and several schools. It is, after 
Altona, the most important industrial town in the province, and 
contains extensive cloth-factories, besides manufactories of 
leather, cotton, wadding, carpets, paper, machinery, beer and 
sweetmeats. Its trade is also brisk. The name, which was 
originally Wipendorp, is derived from an Augustine monastery, 
founded in 1130 by Vicelin, the apostle of Holstein, and is 
mentioned as "novum monasterium " in a document of 1136. 
Its industrial importance began in the 17th century, when the 
cloth-workers of Segeberg, a town to the south-east, migrated 
to it. It became a town in 1870. 

See Kirmis, Geschichte der Stadt Neumunster (1900) ; and Dittmann, 
Aus dem alien Neumunster (1879). 


NEUNKIRCHEN, or Ober-Neunktrchen, a town of Germany, 
in the Prussian Rhine province, on the Blies, 12 m. N.W: of 
Saarbrueken by rail. Pop. (1905) 32,358, consisting almost 
equally of Protestants and Roman Cathob'cs. It contains two 
Gothic Evangelical and a Romanesque Roman Catholic church, 
several schools, and a monument to Freiherr von Stumm (d.1901), 
a former owner of the iron-works here. The principal industrial 
establishment is a huge iron-foundry, employing upwards of 
4800 hands, and producing about 320,000 tons of pig-iron per 
annum; and there are also boiler- works, saw-mills, soap manu- 
factories and a brewery. Around the town are important 
coal mines from which about 2\ million tons of coal are raised 
annually. The castle built in 1570 was destroyed in 1797, and is 
now a ruin. The town is first mentioned in 1280, and became 
important industrially during the 18th century. 


NEUQUEN, an inland territory of Argentina on the Chilean 
frontier, between the Colorado and Limay rivers, with the 
province of Mendoza on the N. and the territory of Rio Negro 
on the E. and S. Area, 42,345 sq. m. Pop. (1895) 14,517; 
(1904, estimate) 18,022. The greater part of the territory is 
mountainous, with fertile, well-watered valleys and valuable 
forests. The eastern part, however, contains large barren 
plains, showing some stunted vegetation, and having numerous 
saline deposits. Long drouths prevail in this region and there 
is no inducement for settlement, the nomadic Indians visiting 
it only on their hunting expeditions. Guanacos and Argentine 
hares are found in abundance in Neuquen, and to a lesser degree 
the South American ostrich. The Neuquen, which unites with 
the Limay near the 68th meridian to form the Rio Negro, is the 
principal river of the territory. The largest of a group of beauti- 
ful lakes in the higher Andean valleys is the celebrated Nahuel- 
Huapi (Lion Grass), which is nearly 50 m. long from E. to W. 
and about 20 m. from N. to S. at its 'widest part, and which lies 
partly in the S.W. angle of the territory, partly in Rio Negro, 
and partly in the republic of Chile. It is the source of the Rio 
Limay and receives the overflow from two smaller neighbouring 
lakes. The temperature of the Andean region js cold even in 
summer, but on the lower plains it is hot in summer, and only 
moderately cold in winter. The principal industry is the raising 
of stock for the Chilean markets, as there is little cultivation. 
Cereals, forage crops, vegetables and fruits of the cold temperate 
zone can be produced easily, but distance from markets and lack 
of transport have restricted their production to local needs. 
The territory is reached by a light-draft river steamer which 
ascends the Rio Negro to Fort Roca at the confluence of the 
Limay and Neuquen, and by a branch of the Great Southern 
railway from Bahia Blanca to the same point. The population 
is concentrated in a few small towns on the rivers and in some 
colonies, established by the national government to check 
Chilean invasions, in the fertile districts of the Andes. A 
majority of the population, however, is of Chilean origin. The 
capital is Chos Malal, a small town on the upper Neuquen, in 
the mountainous district in the northern part of the territory. 

NEURALGIA (Gr. veupov, nerve, and 6X70$, pain), a term 
denoting strictly the existence of pain in some portion or through- 
out the whole of the distribution of a nerve without any distinctly 
recognizable structural change in the nerve or nerve centres. 
This strict definition, if adhered to, however, would not be 
applicable to a large number of cases of neuralgia; for in not a 
few instances the pain is connected with some source of irritation, 
by pressure or otherwise, in the course of the affected nerve; 
and hence the word is generally used to indicate pain affecting 
a particular nerve or its branches from any cause. There are 
few ailments which give rise to greater human suffering. The 
existence of neuralgia usually betokens a depressed or enfeebled 
state of health. It is often found to affect the hereditarily rheu- 
matic or gouty. In weakened conditions of the system from 
improper or insufficient food, or as a result of any drain upon the 
body, or in anaemia from any cause, and in such diseases as 
syphilis or malaria, neuralgia' is a frequent concomitant. Any 
strain upon the nervous system, such as mental overwork or 
anxiety, is a potent cause; or exposure to cold and damp, 
which seems to excite irritation in a nerye already predisposed 
to suffer. But irritation may be produced by numerous other 
causes besides this — such as a decayed tooth, diseased bone, 
local inflammations in which nerves are implicated, by some 
source of pressure upon a nerve trunk, or by swelling of its sheath 
in its passage through a bony canal or at its'exit upon the surface. 

The pain is generally localized, but may come to extend beyond 
the immediate area of its first occurrence. It is usually of 
paroxysmal character, and not unfrequently periodic, occurring 
at a certain time of the day or night. It varies in intensity, 
being often of the most agonizing character, or less severe and 
more of a" tingling kind. Various forms of perverted nerve 
function may be found co-existing with or following neuralgia. 
Thus there may be hyperesthesia, anaesthesia, paralysis, 
or alterations of nutrition, such as wasting of muscles, whitening 
of the hair, &c. 

The forms in which neuralgia most commonly shows itself 
are facial neuralgia or tic douloureux, migraine (hemicrania or 
brow ague), intercostal neuralgia and sciatica. 

Facial neuralgia, or tic doldotCreuXj affects the great nerve of 
sensation of the face (fifth nerve), and may occur in one or more 
of the three divisions in which the nerve is distributed. It is 
usually confined to one side. When the first or upper division 
of the nerve is involved the pain is mostly felt in the forehead 
and side of the head. It is usually of an intensely sharp, cutting 
or burning character, either constant or with exacerbations, 
and often periodic, returning at a certain hour each day while 
the attack continues. The skin over the affected part is often 
red and swollen, and, even after the attack has abated, feels 
stiff and tender to the touch. In this, as in all forms of neuralgia, 
there are certain localities where the pain is more intense, these 
" painful points," as they are called, being for the most part in 
those places where the branches of the nerves emerge from bony 
canals or pierce the fascia to ramify in the skin. Hence, in this 
form, the greater severity of the pain above the eyebrow and 
along the side of the nose. There is also pain in the eyelid, 
redness of the eye, and flow of tears. When the second division 
of the nerve is affected the pain is chiefly in the cheek and upper 
jaw, the painful points being immediately below the lower eyelid, 
over the cheek bone, and about the upper lip. When the third 
division of the nerve suffers the pain affects the lower jaw, 
and the chief painful points are in front of the ear and about the 
chin. 

Hemicrania, migraine, brow-ague and sick headache are various 
terms employed to describe what by some is considered to be 
another form of neuralgia. An attack may come on suddenly, 
but, in general, begins by a dull aching pain in the brow or 
temple, which steadily increases in severity and extent, but 
remains usually limited to one side of the head. It attains at 
times an extreme degree of violence, and is apt to be aggravated 
by movement, loud noises or bright light. Accompanying the 
pain there is more or less of nausea, and when the attack reaches 
its height vomiting may occur, after which relief comes, especially 
if sleep supervene. An attack of this kind may last for a few 
hours or for a whole day, and after it is over the patient feels 
comparatively well. It may recur periodically, or, as is more 
common, at irregular intervals. During the paroxysms, or even 
preceding them, certain sensory disturbances may be experienced, 
more especially affections of vision, such as ocular spectra, 
hemiopia, diplopia, &c. Gout, eyestrain and intestinal toxaemia 
have been put forward as causes of migraine, and Sir W. Gowers 
regards it as the equivalent of a true epileptic attack. 

Intercostal neuralgia is pain affecting the nerves which emerge 
from the spinal cord and run along the spaces between the ribs to 
the front of the body. This. form of neuralgia affects the left side 
more than the right, is much more common in women than in 
men, and occurs generally in enfeebled states of health. It might 
be mistaken for pleurisy or some inflammatory affection of the 
lungs; but the absence of any chest symptoms, its occurrence 
independently of the acts of respiration, and other considerations 
well establish the distinction. The specially painful points are 
chiefly at the commencement of the nerve as it issues from the 
spinal canal, and at the extremities towards the front of the body, 
where it breaks up into filaments which ramify in the skin. This 
form of neuralgia is occasionally the precursor of an attack of 
shingles {Herpes zoster) as well as a result of it. 

Sciatica is another of the more common forms of neuralgia. 
It affects the great sciatic nerve which emerges from the pelvis 
and runs down the leg to the foot. It is in most instances 
traceable to exposure to cold or damp, to overuse of the limbs 
in walking, &c. Any source of pressure upon the nerve within 
the pelvis, such as may be produced by a tumour or even by 
constipation of the bowels, may excite an attack of sciatica. 
It is often connected with a rheumatic or gouty constitution. 
In general the nerve of one side only is affected. The pain which 
is felt at first a little behind the hip-joint steadily increases in 
severity and extends along the course of the nerve and its branches 
in many instances as far as the toes. The specially painful 
points are about the knee, and ankle joints; besides which a 
feeling of numbness is experienced throughout the whole limb. 
In severe cases all movement of the limb aggravates the pain, 
and the patient is obliged to remain in bed. In prolonged attacks 
the limb may waste and be drawn up and fixed in one position. 
Attacks of sciatica are often attended with great suffering, and 
are apt to be very intractable to treatment. 

In the treatment of all forms of neuralgia it is of first im- 
portance to ascertain if possible whether any constitutional 
morbid condition is associated with the malady. When the 
attack is periodic the administration of a large dose of quinine 
two or three hours previous to the usual time of the seizure 
will often mitigate, and may even prevent the paroxysm. Many 
topical applications are of great efficacy. Liniments containing 
opium, belladonna or aconite rubbed into the affected part 
will often soothe the most severe local pain. And antipyrin, 
phenacetin, aspirin and similar analgetics are commonly taken. 
The plan at one time resorted to of dividing or excising a portion 
of the affected nerve is now seldom employed, but the operation 
of nerve-stretching in some forms of neuralgia, notably sciatica, 
is sometimes successful. It consists in cutting down upon and 
exposing the nerve, and in seizing hold and drawing upon it 
so as to stretch it. Such an operation is obviously justifiable 
only in cases where other less severe measures have failed to 
give relief. The employment of electricity, in long continued 
and intractable forms of neuralgia, proves in many instances 
eminently serviceable. In the severest forms of tic doloureux 
complete relief has followed the extirpation of the Gasserian 
ganglion. (F. W. Mo.) 


NEURASTHENIA (Gr. vtvpov, nerve, and bvdheta, weakness), 
the general medical term for a condition of weakness of the 
nervous system. The symptoms may present themselves as 
follows: (i) general feeling of malaise, combined with a mixed 
state of excitement and depression; (2) headache, sometimes 
with the addition of vertigo, deafness and a transitory clouding 
of consciousness simulating petit mal or migraine; (3) disturbed 
and restless, unrefreshing sleep, often troubled with dreams; 
(4) weakness of memory, especially for recent events; (5) 
blurring of sight, noises or ringing in the ears; (6) variable 
disturbances of sensibility, especially scattered analgesia (partial 
and symmetrical) affecting the backs of the hands especially, 
and in women the breasts; (7) various troubles of sympathetic 
origin, notably localized coldness, particularly in the extremities, 
morbid heats, £ ushings and sweats; (8) various phenomena of 
nervous depression associated with functional disturbances of 
organs, e.g. muscular weakness, lack of tone, and sense of fatigue 
upon effort, dyspepsia and gastric atony with dilatation of the 
stomach and gastralgia; pseudo-anginal attacks and palpitation 
of the heart; loss of sexual power with nocturnal pollutions 
and premature ejaculations leading to apprehension of oncoming 
impotence. Objective signs met with in organic disease are 
absent, but the knee-jerks are usually exaggerated. 

According to the complexity of symptoms, the neurasthenia 
is more particularly denned as cerebral, spinal, gastric and 
sexual. The cerebral form is sometimes termed psychasthenic, 
and is liable to present morbid fears or phobias, e.g. agoraphobia 
(fright in crowds), monophobia (fright of being alone), claustro- 
phobia (fright of being in a confined place), anthropophobia 
(fright of society), batophobia (fright of things falling), sidero- 
dromophobia (fright of railway travelling). There may also be 
mental ruminations, in which there is a continuous flow of 
connected ideas from which there is # no breaking away, often 
most insistent at night and leading to insomnia. Sometimes 
there is arithmomania (an imperative idea to count). Such 
cases often exhibit a marked emotionalism and readily manifest 
joy or sorrow; they may be cynical, pessimistic, introspective 
and self-centred, only able to talk about themselves or matters 
of personal interest, yet they frequently possess great intellectual 
ability, and although there may be mental depression, there is 
an absence of the insane ideas characteristic of melancholia. 

Traumatic neurasthenia is the neurasthenia following shock 
from injury; it is sometimes termed " railway spine," " railway 
brain," from the frequency with which it occurs after railway 
accidents, especially in people of a nervous temperament. The 
physical injury at the time may be slight, so that the patient 
is able to resume work, but symptoms develop later which may 
simulate serious organic disease. As in all forms of neurasthenia, 
the subjective symptoms may be numerous and varied, whereas 
the objective signs are but few and slight. Many difficulties, 
therefore, present themselves in arriving at a sound opinion 
as to the future in such cases. It is desirable not only to study 
the case carefully, but to obtain some knowledge of the previous 
history of an individual who is claiming damages on account of 
traumatic neurasthenia. (F. W. Mo.) 


NEURI, an ancient tribe placed by Herodotus (iv. 105) to 
the north-east of Scythia. He says of it that it is not Scythian, 
but has Scythian customs. Every member of it, being a wizard, 
becomes a wolf once a year. The position assigned to their 
district appears to be about the head waters of the Dniester 
and Bug (Bugh) and the central course of the Dnieper just the 
region which, on general grounds, place-names, recorded migra- 
tions and modern distribution, appears to be the original location 
of the Slavs (q..v.). The wolf story again recalls the tales of 
werewolves so common among Slavonic peoples, and there is' 
much probability in Schafarik's conjecture that the Neuri are* 
nothing but the ancestors of the Slavs. (E. H. M.) 


NEURITIS (Gr. vevpov, nerve), a term applied to the in- 
flammation of one or more bundles of nerve fibres. Two varieties 
are known, the localized and the multiple. The localized form 
frequently follows on exposure to cold and may attack a single 
nerve. Facial paralysis (Bell's palsy) is commonly seen following 
a neuritis of the facial nerve. Neuritis may follow blows and 
wounds of a nerve, injuries involving stretching of a nerve or 
long continued pressure such as may occur in a dislocation of 
the elbow joint, or the nerve may share in the extension of a 
neighbouring inflammation. The first symptom of a localized 
neuritis is pain of a boring character along the course of a nerve 
and its distribution, the part being sensitive to pressure. There 
may be slight redness and oedema along the course of the nerve, 
movement becomes painful in the muscles to which the nerve 
is distributed, numbness may follow and the tactile sense be 
impaired, finally the muscles atrophy, and degenerative changes 
may take place in the nerve or nerve sheath. Slight cases follow- 
ing cold or injury may pass off in a few days, while severe cases 
such as those following the pressure of an unreduced dislocation 
may last for months. 

Multiple neuritis or polyneuritis is a disease which may affect 
many of the peripheral nerves symmetrically and at the same 
time. For the pathological changes see Neuropathology. The 
difference in these changes is due mostly to the difference in the 
aetiology of the neuritis. The causes may be divided as follows: 

(1) The toxins of acute infective diseases, such as diphtheria, 
influenza, typhoid fever, malaria, scarlet fever and septicaemia. 

(2) Acute or chronic poisoning by lead, arsenic, mercury, copper 
and phosphorus. (3) General disorders: gout, rheumatism, 
tubercle, carcinoma. (4) The local action of leprosy and syphilis. 
(5) Endemic disease: beri-beri. (6) Alcohol, the most common. 

Alcoholic neuritis occurs as a result of constant steady drinking, 
particularly in those who drink beer rather than spirit. The earliest 
symptom is numbness of the feet andjater of the hands, then painful 
crampsin the legs appear and there is pain on moving the limbs, or 
the patient complains of deadness, tingling and burning in the hands 
and feet, and superficial tenderness is occasionally present. In 
other varieties of the disease the earliest symptoms are weakness of 
the legs and extreme fatigue, leading to a characteristic " steppage 
gait," or marked inco-ordination of movement may occur and the 
gait become ataxic. Trophic changes soon appear, in some cases 
early and rapid muscular wasting occurs, the skin becomes dry and 
glossy, the nails brittle and the hair thin. In time actual con- 
tractures takes place, the hip and knee-joints become flexed and the 
foot dropped at the ankle. In cases that recover there may be 
permanent deformity. Should the case progress the patient may 
become bedridden and powerless, and degenerative mental changes 
may take place, loss of memory, irritability of temper and emotional 
instability. Various complications such as bronchitis, fatty changes 
in the heart, albuminuria and a liability to pulmonary tuberculosis, 
tend to carry off the victim of chronic alcoholic neuritis. Cases seen 
early in the progress of the disease, who can be placed under 
supervision, may recover under treat men t, but those in whom the 
attacks ^have recurred several times and in whom there is much 
mental impairment rarely make a complete recovery. The treat- 
ment consists in putting the patient to bed, with the administration 
of strychnine hypodermically, and attention should be paid to the 
position of the limbs so as to avoid the development of contractures, 
cradles being used, the limbs kept in the correct positions by sand- 
bags, and gentle massage being employed as soon as possible. Should 
contractures have already formed some mechanical device adapted 
to stretch the contracted muscle must be resorted to. Biers' hyper- 
aemic suction apparatus is very useful in the painless stretching of 
contracted joints, or old-standing adhesions may have to be broken 
down under an anaesthetic, extension apparatus being afterwards 
worn. In the later treatment the galvanic and faradaic currents 
combined with massage are useful in helping to restore the wasted 
muscles^ and hot-air baths and warm applications are appreciated. 

Arsenical neuritis mostly affects the lower extremities, as con- 
trasted with lead, which mainly paralyses the fingers and wrists; 
recovery is even slower than in alcoholic neuritis, the treatment 
being on the same lines, with the removal of the cause of the disease. 
In the neuritis of chronic lead poisoning a fine tremor of the hands is 
an early symptom and sensory symptoms are usually absent; the 
muscles affected are the extensors of the wrists, thumb and fingers 
(see Lead Poisoning). The course of the disease is long, and an 
attempt should be made to eliminate the lead from the system by 
purgatives and the administration of potassium iodide. 

The diabetic neuritis paraesthesia is slight, and the legs are chiefly 
affected; weakness and ataxia may be present. Trophic sores on 
the feet are of frequent occurrence in this variety. The treatment is 
that of the disease. 

Post-diphtheritic neuritis occurs in about 10% of all cases of 
diphtheria. In this form paralysis of the soft palate is the earliest 
symptom, and this may be the only one, or the pharynx may be 
affected. The limbs are affected much later, usually about the 5th 
or 6th week. Atrophy of the muscles is frequently rapid. If the 
respiratory muscles are unaffected the prognosis is good, but the/ 
paralysis of the limbs may last for several months. The treatment^ 
is complete rest, good food and the administration of strychnine. 

Acute polyneuritis with numbness and mo^or weakness has been 
noted after influenza, together with slight muscular wasting and 
electrical degeneration. Later, loss of sensation in the peripheral 
portion of the limbs is complained of, and the motor weakness may 
affect the muscles of the trunk and face. Such cases tend towards 
complete recovery. 


NEUROPATHOLOGY, the general name for the science con- 
cerned with diseases of the nervous system. As regards the 
anatomy and physiology, see the articles Nerve, Nervous 
System, Brain, Spinal Cord, and Sympathetic System. 
The morbid processes affecting the nervous system are numerous 
and varied, but usually they are clinically divided into two great 
groups of (1) organic disease, (2) functional disturbance. Such 
a classification depends upon whether or not symptoms observed 
during life can be associated with recognizable changes of the 
nervous system, gross or microscopical, after death. Sometimes 
this is the morbid process itself, sometimes only the ultimate 
result of the process. It must be remarked, however, that many 
diseases which we now look upon as functional may be found 
due to recognizable changes when suitable methods of investiga- 
tion shall have been discovered. The paroxysmal neuroses and 
psychoses may be considered a priori to be due to temporary 
morbid functional conditions. Our knowledge of the first group 
is naturally much more advanced than of the latter, for, given 
certain symptoms during life, we are able, as a rule, to predict 
not only the nature of the morbid process, but its particular 
locality. 

The histological elements which make up the nervous system 
may also be divided into two groups: (1) the nervous units or 
neurones, (2) the supporting, protecting and nutrient tissues. 
Organic diseases may start primarily in the nervous units or 
neurones and cause their degeneration; such are true diseases 
of the nervous system. But the nervous units may be affected 
secondarily by diseases starting in the supporting, protecting 
and nutrient tissues of the nervous system; such are essentially 
diseases within the nervous system, and include diseases of the 
blood-vessels, lymphatics, membranes and the special nervous 
connective tissue, neuroglia (a residue of the embryonal structure 
from which the nervous system was developed). Tumours and 
new growths must also be included. 

The modern conception of the " neurone " as an independent 
complex cell with branching processes, in physiological rather 
than anatomical association with other neurones, has modified 
our ideas of the morbid processes affecting the nervous system, 
especially as regards degenerations of systems, communities or 
collections of neurones subserving special functions. It was 
formerly believed, and generally taught, that the primary 
systemic degenerations were due to a sclerosis; thus locomotor 
ataxy was believed to be caused by an Overgrowth of the sup- 
porting glia tissue of the posterior columns of the spinal cord, 
which caused a secondary atrophy of the nervous tissue. We 
now know that this overgrowth of glia tissue is secondary to the 
atrophy of the nervous elements, and the only true primary 
overgrowth of glia tissue is really of the nature of J the new 
growth (gliosis). But even in this case it is doubtful if the mere 
proliferation of the glia tissue elements could destroy the nervous 
elements, if it were not for the fact that it leads to changes in 
the vessel walls and to haemorrhages. 

The symptoms manifested during life depend upon the nature 
of the morbid process and the portion of the nervous system 
affected. A correct understanding of neuropathology involves 
the study of (1) the causes which give rise to morbid conditions, 
which are often complex and due to various combinations of 
factors arising from without and within the body, and (2) the 
changes in the structure and functions of the nervous system 
brought about by intrinsic and extrinsic causes. 

The causes of pathological processes occurring in the nervous 
units (neurones) may be divided into internal and external, and 
it may be remarked that in all cases except direct injury the 
two groups are generally more or less combined. 

A. Internal Causes.— Of all the causes of nervous disease 
hereditary predisposition stands pre-eminently first; it may be 
convergent, paternal, maternal; from grandparents or even 
more remote ancestors. Moreover, no study of heredity is com- 
plete that does not take into consideration collaterals. Especially 
does this statement apply to functional neuroses, e.g. epilepsy, 
migraine, hysteria and neurasthenia; and to psychoses, e.g. 
delusional insanity, mama and melancholia, manic-depressive, 
recurrent orperiodic insanity and dementia-praecox or adolescent 
insanity. 

In 70% of 150 cases of idiocy or imbecility in the London county 
asylums, Dr Tredgold found a family history of insanity in some form 
or another. Strictly speaking, it is the tendency to nervous disease . 
rather than the disease itself that is inherited, and this is frequently 
spoken of as a neuropathic or psychopathic taint. There are, 
besides, a number of inherited diseases, which, although somewhat 
rare, are of interest inasmuch as they affect members of a family, 
the same disease frequently commencing in each individual at about 
the same age. These are termed family diseases, and include 
hereditary ataxia (Friedreich's disease), myotonia (Thomsen's 
disease), hereditary (Huntingdon's) chorea, amaurotic idiocy and 
various forms of idiopathic muscular atrophy. Alcoholism, tubercu- 
losis and syphilis in the parenfeTespeeially if one or both come from 
a neuropathic or psychopathic stock, frequently engender idiocy, 
imbecility, epilepsy. and general paralysis in the offspring, by the 
production of defects in the vitality of the germinal plasm, causing 
arrest, imperfect development or premature decay of groups, com- 
munities or systems of neurones, especially those which are latest 
developed — the symptoms manifested depending upon the portions 
of the nervous system affected. To explain the hereditary neuro- 
pathic tendency morphologically, we may suppose that there is an 
inherited defect in the germinal plasm which is concerned in the 
formation of the neurones. We may regard the neurone as a complex 
cell, and the nervous system as a community of neurones arranged in 
systems and groups having special functions. Like all cells, the 
neurone nourishes itself and is not nourished; certainly it depends 
for its development, life and functional activity upon a suitable 
environment, but it must also possess an inherent vital energy by 
which it can assimilate and store up nutrient material which may be 
regarded as potential (latent nerve energy), to be converted into 
nerve force as required. A constant constructive and destructive 
bio-chemical process occurs in the neurones of a healthy nervous 
system, latent nervous energy is high and the sense of fatigue is the 
natural indication for sleep and repose, whereby itis constantly 
recuperated. In the neuropathic or psychopathic individual it may 
be conceived that in some portion of the nervous system, especially 
the brain, there may exist communities, systems or groups of neu- 
rones with inherited low potential, readily becoming exhausted, and, 
under the influence of altered blood states or stress, especially liable 
to functional depression, from which arise function-paralysis and 
melancholia. Again, the bio-chemical substance which represents 
potential in the nervous system may be in a chemically unstable 
condition, so as readily to fulminate when excited by abnormal 
conditions (e.g. toxic conditions of the blood), thus acting as a centre 
of discharge of nervous energy, which may be manifested by mental 
or bodily symptoms. * We know that in strychnia and tetanus 
poisoning the most localized peripheral excitation will cause general 
muscular spasm; in both toxic conditions the spread is probably 
due to a bio-chemical "change in the protoplasm of the spinal neurones, 
whereby the excitability is greatly increased and a slight stimulus is 
sufficient to fulminate the whole system of motor neurones. _ In 
epilepsy and other paroxysmal neuroses and psychoses it is possible 
that some altered condition of the blood, when associated with an 
inherited bio-chemical instability of certain groups, systems or 
communities of neurones, may act as a fulminating agent. In 
neuralgia and local hyperesthesia the slightest general or distant 
local irritation suffices to produce pain; thus coughing, the vibration 
of a passing train or the slamming of a door may produce r>ain by 
the stimulation of the hyper-excitable neurones. Moreover, it must 
be borne in mind that the symptoms of nervous disease are due as 
much to normal physiological functional activity improperly applied, 
as to actual loss of function occasioned by disease. Thus squint, 
caused by paralysis of one of the muscles of the eyeball, causes less 
trouble to the patient than the double vision occasioned by the physio- 
logical activity of the two retinae, upon the corresponding points 
of which the images are prevented by the paralysis from falling. 

B. The external causes producing morbid changes in the 
nervous elements are: I. Abnormal conditions of the blood and 
lymph, by which the neurones are poisoned and their metabolism 
morbidly affected. II. Excess ( or deficiency of normal stimula- 
tion, or existence of abnormal stimulation. III. Injury or 
diseases of supporting, enclosing or vascular tissues. 

I. Abnormal Conditions of the Blood and Lymph, — The im- 
mediate environment of all the cellular elements of the body is 
lymph, and in the central nervous system there is a special form 
of lymph, the cerebro-spinal fluid, which is secreted by the choroid 
plexus in the venticles of the brain. The neurones, like other 
cellular elements, are bathed in the lymph, and extract from it 
the materials necessary for their growth and vital activities, 
casting out the waste products incidental to the bio-chemical 
changes which are continually taking place. The lymph, there- 
fore, serves as a medium of exchange between the blood and the 
tissues, consequently the essential causes of change" in environ- 
ment of the nervous elements (neurones) are: (i) Deficiency or 
absence of blood-supply to the nervous system in general (as 
after severe haemorrhage), or to some particular portion, owing 
to local vascular disturbance or occlusion. (2) Alterations in 
the normal condition of the blood, due to (a) deficiency or 
absence of certain essential constituents, (b) excess of certain 
normal constituents, (c) the presence of certain abnormal 
constituents produced within the body, or entering it from 
without. 

(1) Quantity of Blood Suppty. — Syncope or fainting occurs when the 
blood supply suddenly fails to reach the higher centres of the brain ; 
this usually arises from sudden reflex arrest of the heart's action. 
If a portion of the central nervous system is cut off from its arterial 
blood supply by embolic plugging or by clotting of the blood in a 
vessel with diseased walls, the portion of the brain substance thus 
deprived of blood undergoes softening, the nervous elements are 
destroyed, and the systems of nerve fibres, which have had their 
trophic and genetic centres in the area destroyed, undergo secondary 
degeneration. Clotting of the blood in the veins may also give rise 
to destructive softening of the brain, and similar secondary 
degeneration. 

(2) Quality of Blood Supply, — (a) Insufficiency of oxygen, due to 
poverty of the colouring matter or of the number of the red corpuscles, 
which constitutes the various forms of anaemia, leads to functional 
depression, lassitude and mental fatigue. Impoverishment of the 
blood in women by frequent pregnancies and excessive lactation 
causes neuralgia, nervous exhaustion and, in the neuropath, hysteria, 
neurasthenia, melancholia and mania. The mental depression, and 
the tendency that the various neuroses and psychoses have to occur 
and recur at the time of the menstrual and climacteric periods in 
women, suggests the possibility of an alteration in the composition 
ofthe blood, either in the nature of an auto-intoxication or " sub- 
minimal deficiency," as the probable contributory factor of the 
mental disturbance. It may be remarked that eclampsia, puerperal 
and lactational mania are relatively^ common forms of insanity in 
women ; although sometimes of septic origin, they more frequently 
are occasioned by some morbid metabolism as yet little understood. 
The most striking examples we have, however, of the effect of 
absence or " sub-minimal " deficiency of a normal constituent of the 
blood upon the development and functions of the nervous system 
are afforded by cretinous idiots, who are born without thyroid glands, 
and whose brains never develop in consequence; and by those 

People who suffer from the disease known as myxoedema, occasioned 
y the absence of iodothyrin, a product of the internal secretion of 
the thyroid gland. The proof of this is shown by the disappearance 
of the nervous phenomena, slowness of thought, slowness of speech, 
&c.,_ after a preparation of the gland has been continuously ad- 
ministered by the^ mouth. Even cretinous idiots when subjected in 
early life to thyroid treatment improve considerably- The removal 
of the testicles in the male may produce a profound effect upon the 
nervous temperament; for probably there is an internal secretion 
of this gland in the male, as of the ovary in the female, which has 
some subtle influence upon the functional activity of the nervous 
system. The seminal fluid contains a large amount of complex 
phosphorus-containing substances, which, lost to the body by 
sexual excess or onanism, have to be replaced by the blood; the 
nervous system, which also needs these complex organic phosphorus 
compounds, is thereby robbed, and neurasthenia ensues. Brown- 
Sequard s testicular injection treatment for many nervous com- 
plaints, based upon this idea, has not, however, met with much 
success. 

(6) Excess of certain Normal Constituents in the Blood,— Excess of 
carbonic acid causes drowsiness, and probably in asphyxia is one of 
the causes of the convulsions. All the series of the nitrogenous 
waste products— the most highly oxidized, most soluble and least 
harmful of which is urea— are normal constituents of the blood ; but 
should the oxidation process be incomplete, owing to functional or 
organic disease of the liver, or should these substances accumulate in 
the blood, owing to inadequate function of the kidneys, a toxic 
condition, called uraemia, may supervene, the nervous manifestations 
of which are headache, drowsiness, unconseiousness or coma, epilepti- 
form convulsions and sometimes symptoms of polyneuritis. Again, 
in Graves's disease,nervous phenomena, in the form of exophthalmos, 
fine tremors, palpitation and mental excitement, have by some 
authorities been explained by the excess of thyroid internal secretion, 
due to the enlargement and increased functional activity of the 
gland. The successful treatment of Graves's disease by the ad- 
ministration of the blood serum and milk of animals (goats), which 
had the thyroid glands removed, supports this theory. 

(c) The presence of abnormal constituents in the blood is a most 
important cause of disease of the ^ nervous elements. We may 
consider the subject under the following headings: Poisons produced 
within the body (a) by perverted function of organs or tissues, auto- 
intoxication; OS) by the action of micro-organisms, protozoa and 
bacteria, upon the living fluids and tissues of the body;* (7) poisons 
introduced into the body from without, in the food and drink, or 
by inhalation. 

(a) Poisons resulting from perverted Function of Ike Organs. — In 
the process of digestion a number of poisonous substances, e.g. 
albumoses, &c, are produced, which, although absorbed in the ali- 
mentary canal, are prevented by the living epithelium, and possibly 
by the liver, from entering the systemic circulation. Fatigue pro- 
ducts, e.g. sarcolactic acid in prolonged muscular spasms, may lead 
to auto-intoxication. Excess of uric acid in the blood is associated 
with high arterial pressure, deposits of Hthates in the urine, headache 
and nervous irritability; it is an indication of imperfect metabolism 
and auto-intoxication, as shown by the fact that marked improve- 
ment occurs by suitable diet and treatment. Phosphoruria, oxaluria 
and glycosuria, tokens of deranged metabolism, may be associated 
with various nervous phenomena. Bile in the blood, cholaemia, 
resulting from obstructive jaundice, may be attended by stupor and 
psychical depression; and the term melancholia, signifying " black 
bile," indicates the importance which has long been attached to the 
liver as an organ the derangement of which causes nervous depression . 
The rapidly fatal results attending acute yellow atrophy of the liver, 
namely, the profound changes in the urine, the jaundice and the 
nervous phenomena of delirium, motor irritation, delusions, stupor 
and coma, demonstrate the important part this organ plays in pre- 
serving the normal quality of the blood. The delirium and coma 
which sometimes supervene in diabetes, heralded by acetonaemia, 
is another instance of auto-intoxication. The coma is very possibly 
due to the saturation of the sodium salts of the blood by aceto-acetic 
and oxybutyric acids, products of imperfect proteid metabolism. 
The effect of this would be an interference with the elimination of 
carbonic acid in the processes of tissue and pulmonary respiration. 
Again, in pernicious and certain grave anaemias, the degenerative 
changes in the^ spinal cord found in some cases is due, not so much 
to the defect in the red corpuscles, as to some neuro-toxin.which 
probably arises from imperfect metabolism or absorption from the 
alimentary canal. In this question of auto-intoxication, it must be 
remarked that all the tissues of the body are mutually interde- 
pendent. If one suffers, all suffer, and a disease cf one organ or tissue 
is thereby apt to establish a vicious circle which is constantly en- 
larging; therefore nervous symptoms manifesting themselves in the 
course of a disease add much to the gravity of the complaint. 

(0) Poisons produced by Infective Micro-organisms. — Some of these 
poisons have a general devitalizing influence, by an alteration of the 
lood and the production of fever. In the course of the acute 
infectious diseases, typhoid, typhus, smallpox, scarlet fever, measles, 
influenza, also tuberculosis and septicaemia, delirium is a frequent 
complication; it may be the result of high fever or prolonged fever, 
or directly due to the poison, or the two combined. In severe cases 
stupor and coma may occur, and it has been shown that in this 
extreme stage the nerve cells undergo an acute morbid bio-chemical 
change. These particular poisons have no selective toxic action upon 
a particular part of the nervous system, and symptoms not only 
during, but after, the acute illness are liable to supervene, especially 
in a neuropathic individual. Thus many^ cases of neurasthenia, 
insanity, neurosis, also neuritis, date their origin from an acute 
specific fever. In cerebro-spinal meningitis, tubercular meningitis, 
acute delirious mania and leprous neuritis, the inflammation of the 
membranes of the brain and spinal cord is due to the growth of the 
specific organism in the lymph and interstitial tissue elements. 

Poisons may have a selective influence upon some part of the nervous 
system. The syphilitic poison is the most important factor in the 
production of two progressive degenerations of the nervous system — 
one affecting especially the afferent conducting tracts of the spinal 
cord, namely, locomotor ataxy, and the other affecting espe nally 
the frontal and central convolutions of the cerebral hemispl.eres, 
namely, general paralysis of the insane. A striking instance of the 
selective action of the syphilitic poison is shown in the fact that only 
in persons affected with acquired or inherited syphilis is a syuptom 
known as Argyll-Robertson pupil found ; this is the absence of the 
pupil reflex contraction to light, while that for accommodation 
persists. Seeing that this is the most common objective phenomenon 
in the two diseases mentioned, it strengthens the presumption, 

	Plate L 

	Fig. I. Left hemisphere, case of delusional 
	insanity; this in all respects might pass for a 
	normal brain. 

	Fig. 2. Brain of a micro-cephalic idiot, 
	which weighed only eight ounces although 
	its possessor was an adult woman. The 
	striking lack of development of the 
	hemispheres is shown in their small 
	size, whereby the cerebellum is 
	almost entirely uncovered ; more- 
	^k over the convolutional pattern 
	* is simpler than that of an an- 
	thropoid ape's brain. 


	Fig. 3. Left hemisphere, case of abscess 
	of the frontal lobe: the convolutions and 
	sulci are obliterated and the membranes 
	thickened, so that the fore part of the 
	brain presents the appearance of a mem- 
	branous bag; this contained a large amount 
	of pus. 




	Fig. 5. Left hemisphere of a woman who for II years fibres proceeding from the 
	suffered with Motor aphasia paralysis of the lower half of the m ° tor j***ea of the brain, 
	right side of the face, deviation of the tongue to the right situated between the basal 
	and some weakness in the right leg and arm. ganglia. 

	Fig. 6. Brain from a case 
	of apoplexy: the tops of 
	the hemispheres have been 
	sliced off to show the hae- 
	morrhage (dark patch) in 
	the right centrum ovale, 
	which has ruptured the 

	Fig. 7. Left hemisphere: a case of ad- 
	vanced dementia, showing atrophy of the 
	convolutions, with deep and wide sulci in- 
	tervening. 

	Fig. 8. The brain of an adult congenital imbecile. 
	There is a very simple convolutional pattern in com- 
	parison with the other brains shown in the figures. 
	The convolutions are small, the secondary gyri are 
	deficient in numbers. The sylvian fissure turns 
	obliquely upwards and there is an obvious deficiency 
	in the superior and inferior parietal lobes. 

	Fig. 9. Right hemisphere of a woman who for many years was the 
	subject of sensory aphasia. The left hemisphere showed a similar 
	lesion to the right but rather more extensive. 

	Fig. 10. Left hemisphere and cerebellum of a case of porencephaly. 
	A local atrophy of the convolutions, owing to a vascular lesion 
	before birth, is seen in the parietal lobe. 

	XECa*> 

	PHOTOGRAPHS OF THE BRAIN (about £ their Natural Size) ILLUSTRATING VARIOUS 
	PATHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS. 

	Plate II. 

	S^S^t^ 

	Fig. i. — Trypanosoma gambiense in the 
	blood from a case of sleeping sickness in 
	a European. The undulatory membrane 
	is clearly seen ; the head of the organism 
	with its micronucleus is in contact with 
	a red blood corpuscle. Magnification 
	2000 diameters. 

	Fig. 2. — A. and B. The sj^irochaete 
	pallidum. A shows the organisms seen 
	in a section of mucous tubercle stained 
	by Levaditi's silver method; the lowest 
	with 8 equal spirals and a pointed end is 
	the most typical. Magnification 1200. 
	B. Spirochetes in a smear preparation 
	stained by Leishman. Magnification 2260. 

	Fig. 3. — Section of the brain of a 
	European who died of sleeping sickness, 
	showing an enormous increase of large 
	branching neuroglia cells around a small 
	vessel of the cortex. Magnification 450. 

	Fig. 4. — Very marked syphilitic arter- 
	itis, showing great diminution of the 
	lumen, mainly caused by an inflammatory 
	thickening of the inner coat. Magnifica- 
	tion 5. 

	Fig. 5. — Section of the base of the 
	brain of a monkey that died of experi- 
	mental sleeping sickness caused by in- 
	oculation of the Trypanosoma gambiense. 
	Magnification 250. 

	Fig. 6. — Longitudinal section of a 
	perivascular sheath of the cortex of a 
	monkey that died of experimental 
	sleeping sickness. The large branching 
	neuroglia cells are seen undergoing pro- 
	liferation. Magnification 600. 

	K% * 
	!f.rJ 
	It'**"' 

	Fig. 7. — Longitudinal section of a 
	small vessel of the cortex from a case of 
	well-marked general paralysis of the 
	insane. Magnification 250. 

	Fig. 8. — Transverse section of a small 
	vessel of the cortex from a case of sleep- 
	ing sickness, showing the perivascular 
	cell infiltration of lymphocytes and 
	plasma cells. Magnification 250. 

	Fig. 9. — Transverse section of a small 
	vessel of the cerebral cortex from a case 
	of syphilitic gummatous meningitis, show- 
	ing the same perivascular cell infiltration 
	of lymphocytes and plasma cells as seen 
	in figs. 7 and 8. Magnification 250. 

Protozoa and diseases of the nervous system. 

based on experience, that the syphilitic poison is the cause of these 
diseases in the majority of instances. Again, syphilis,, when it 
attacks the supporting, enclosing and nutrient vascular tissues, 
shows a predilection to affect structures about the base of the brain, 
and paralyses of the third nerve are almost pathognomonic of this 
disease. In rabies, although the whole nervous system is charged 
with the poison, the medulla oblongata (as shown by the symptoms) 
is especially affected. Again, in' tetanus the bacilli are only found in 
the wound; they" must.therefore be comparatively few in number, 
but they elaborate a virulent poison, which affects particular groups 
of neurones. The fact that lockjaw nearly always occurs first, shows 
that the poison selects the motor nucleus of the fifth nerve; but it is 
remarkable that experiment has shown that the tetanus _toxin, if 
mixed with an emulsioiTof nervous niatter before injection into an 
animal, loses its toxicity. This fact indicates its affinity for nervous 
matter, and also a power of absorption of the poison by some chemical 
substance in the nfiffvous matter. Another example is offered by 
diphtheria. A neuro-toxin is produced by the local action of the 
bacilli, for they do not become freely generalized in the blood and 
tissues. Whether the poison is a direct production of the bacilli 
themselves, or is an auto-toxin created in the body itself, by an 
influence exerted on the living fluids and tissues by a ferment-like 
product of the bacilli, is net determined. But whatever may be the 
source of the toxin, its effects upon the neurones are constant, as 
shown by the^sufferings of the patients — paralysis of the soft palate, 
with nasal speech ana regurgitation of fluids through tlie nose when 
swallowing is attempted; inability to readrpwing to the paralysis 
of the muscle of accommodation; weakness "and inco-ordination of 
the limbs, which may amount to paralysis; absence of the knee- 
jerks; and often skin anaesthesia 

The relation of protozoa to the existence of widespread diseases 
affecting men and journals is becoming yearly of 
greater importance and interestr^-Certain hitherto ob- 
scure diseases in which the nervous system is pr ofoundly 
affected are now explained by the invasion ol the tissues 
of the body by these lowly organisms, >for example, 
Sleeping Sickness, the cause of which has been definitely 
proved to be the Trypanosoma gambiense (see Plate 11. 
fig. 1). 

The discovery by Schaudinn of the presence of the Spirochaete 
Pallida (see Plate II. fig. 2) in the primary and secondary lesions of 
seventy successive cases of syphilis, and the general acceptance of 
this organism as the causeof .the disease, taken together with the 
fact that in many respects it simulates the trypanosome in its mode 
of division and other characters, tend to prove that syphilis is also a 
protozoal disease. v 

The bacterial invasion of tissues is generally characterized by a 
migration of polymorpho-nuclear leucocytes, but protozoal invasion 
is characterized by a formative hyperplasia of the fixed cell tissues, 
endothelial, epithelial and conjunctival, and there is a close similarity 
in the defensive reaction of the tissues to all forms of protozoal 
invasion (see Plate II. with explanatory text). 

If the cause of rabies be regarded as proved since the discovery of 
Negri bodies, we may assume that just as in malaria the Hoematozoon 
mcuariae undergoes its 'endocellular development in the red blood 
corpuscle, the protozoon of rabies undergoes its endocellular de- 
velopment in the nerve cell. 

Only a short time has elapsed since Negri showed that in cases of 
rabies, whether experimental or otherwise, curious bodies measuring 
from 1 fi to 20 m could be constantly found in the nerve cells, and that 
these bodies are^not found in the nerve cells in any other disease; 
so that even if the theory advanced that they are endocellular forms 
of protozoa prove not true, yet the discovery affords a valuable and 
expeditious means of determining whether a suspected animal 
suffered with rabies or not. It is known that the salivary glands and 
saliva contain the virus, even before the animal shows symptoms. 
It is known too that the central nervous system contains the virus 
and that it multiplies there. Experimental inoculation can be made 
either from the saliva or an emulsion of the central nervous system 
of an animal suffering with rabies. Moreover, the virus can pass 
through a Berkfeldt filter; and if the filtrable product be injected 
into an animal, the animal thus inoculated will die of rabies and 
exhibit the Negri bodies. There are only two conclusions to be drawn 
from these observations : (1 ) If it be a protozoal disease, the organism 
at one period of its developmental cycle must be so small as to be able 
to pass through the pores of the Berkfeldt filter. (2) Negri bodies 
are the result of intra-cellular degenerative changes caused by an 
elective affinity of the virus for the protoplasm of the nerve cell. 
The virus, whatever it may be, does not exist in the blood and other 
organs and tissues. Seeing that the Negri bodies cannot be found in 
the saliva, although the saliva contains the virus, nor can they be 
found in the peripheral nerves, although the virus passes by the 
lymphatics of the nerves to the nerve cells of the spinal ganglia and 
central nervous system, it must be concluded that the filtrable virus 
travels to the central nervous system and there increases. 

It is a remarkable fact that before the discovery of the Negrju 
bodies, the diagnosis of rabies was made by microscopic examination 
of the spinal and sympathetic ganglia, particularly the ganglia of the 
vagus and fifth nerves. Changes were found similar to those met 
with in other protozoal diseases, namely, sleeping sickness, dourine 
and syphilis. These changes were proliferation of the interstitial 
connective tissue cells forming the supporting structure of the 
ganglion and hyperplasia of the lymphatic endothelial cells forming 
the capsule containing the nerve cells. 

The diagram here given (fig. 1) after Volpino explains the supposed 
developmental cycle of the protozoon which is presumed to be the 
cause of rabies. The weak link in the chain is the assumed sporozoit 
which is so small as to be capable of passing through a Berkfeldt 
filter. It has taken twenty years to lead to the complete knowledge 
of the life history of the malarial parasite and its relation to the 
disease, and all we can say is that there is now a certain amount of 
evidence forthcoming which tends to show that rabies is due to a 
protozoon, which Calkins, who discovered a similar body in the 
epithelial cells of variola, places among the rhizopods. 

There are certain chronic trypanosome infections in which the 
nervous symptoms form a special feature of the disease, 
notably sleeping sickness (see Plate II. fig. 1) and a 
disease affecting horses, termed mal de coit or dourine. 

The chronic^ trypanosome affections resemble in many 
respects syphilis; they are characterized by local infection, 
enlargement of the nearest lymphatic glands, a general 
polyadenitis and successive eruptions, accompanied by 
fever The tissue changes are the same whether we syst€E 
examine the primary seat of infection, papular eruptions 
on the mucous membrane or the skin, or the lymphatic glands. 

When the nervous system is affected a local or general chronic 
meningoencephalitis is set up, characterized by a meningeal and 

	I 
	8 
	SUdlo del virus fittrabtk 
	/ 
	/ 
	Trypano- 
	some diseases 
	and affections 
	of the nervous 

	From a coloured plate in CetUraHloU f&r Bakteriotogie, by permission of Gustav 
	Fischer. 

	Fig. 1. 

perivascular infiltration with lymphocytes and plasma cells, occa- 
sioned by a chronic irritative process, presumably caused in the 
case of sleeping sickness by the presence of trypanosomes in the 
cerebrospinal fluid (see fig. 8, Plate II.). The same perivascular 
and meningeal infiltration with plasma cells and lymphocytes is 
found in syphilitic and parasyphihtic diseases of the nervous system 
(see Plate II., figs. 7 and 9). 

The significance of pathological changes in the cerebro-spinal fluid 
has recently becomeof great importance in the diagnosisof nervous 
diseases, and a short account of the subject in this article p a f no j 0jry 
will therefore not be out of place. The cerebro-spinal 
fluid is clear like water; it has a specific gravity of 1006 
and resembles in its composition the blood minus its 
corpuscular and albuminous constituents. It is secreted 
by the choroid plexus, and if any cause, such as tumour or 
meningitis, should interfere with its escape from the ventricles it 
gives rise by pressure to internal hydrocephalus and cerebral anaemia 
which may occasion epileptic convulsions and various degrees of 
drowsy stupor, lethargy, unconsciousness and even coma. With- 
drawal of the fluid by lumbar puncture and by tapping the ventricles 
of the brain has been employed in treatment, but without very 
satisfactory results. If, however, lumbar puncture has proved of but 
,Kttle use in treatment, it has proved of inestimable service in the 
diagnosis of various diseases of the central nervous system. The 
fluid withdrawn may be examined in various ways which are comple- 
mentary to one another. 

It should be centrifuged and the deposit examined microscopically 
if necessary after staining by suitable methods; the existence of cells 

	of the 
	cerebro* 
	spinal 
	fluid. 

in a fluid which normally contains no cellular elements indicates 
disease of the central nervous system. In general paralysis, syphilis 
of the nervous system and tabes dorsalis even in early stages of these 
diseases, the deposit is seen to consist almost entirely of lymphocytes. 
Some evidence of the progress of the disease and the effect of treat- 
ment may be obtained by counting the number of cells at different 
periods. In tubercular meningitis there are also lymphocytes in 
abundance although usually tubercle bacilli cannot readily be found, 
yet bacilli are present, for injection of the^fluid into a guinea pig is a 
certain means of determining whether it is tubercular meningitis or 
not; for if it is, the animal is sure to develop tubercle. In epidemic 
cerebro-spinal meningitis the cells in the deposit are polymorpho- 
nuclear leucocytes, and in the leucocytes can be seen the specific 
organism Diplococcus intracellularis with its characteristic staining 
and cultural characters. Septic, pneumonic and pyogenic organisms 
may also invade the central nervous system giving rise to meningitis, 
and in these cases the deposit will be polymorphonuclear leucocytes, 
and perhaps the specific organisms may be seen in stained prepara- 
tions; but if not, they can Be obtained by cultural methods. In all 
operations of this kind antiseptic precautions must be adopted both 
for the safety of the patient and the reliability of the findings, other- 
wise organisms in the skin may contaminate the fluid withdrawn. 

Other formed elements which may be found are large cells, macro- 
phages containing blood pigment; these cells indicate that some 
haemorrhage has occurred. One of the most important uses of 
lumbar puncture has been the discovery of the cause of sleeping 
sickness. The fluid withdrawn and centrifuged contains, as one 
would expect from the lesions in the brain and spinal cord, large 
numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells (see Plate II. fig. 10), but 
besides, the actively moving organisms {Trypanosoma gambiense) 
(see Plate II. fig. i) which are the essential cause of the disease. It 
has been remarked that the normal cerebro-spinal fluid is devoid of 
proteins, but in the various forms of disease above described as con- 
taining cells in the centrifuged deposit, there is also in the fluid an 
appreciable amount of proteins. If pathological cerebro-spinal fluid 
be added to an equal quantity of saturated solution of sodium 
sulphate there will be a distinct turbidity indicating the presence of 
proteins in appreciable quantity. This appreciable quantity of 
proteins is especially significant in the case of fluid withdrawn from 
cases of general paralysis or tabes, for it goes pari passu in amount 
with a reaction which is known as the Wassermann sero-diagnostic 
reaction for syphilis ; a reaction, however, which is too complicated 
to explain here, but which is of the greatest importance for the 
diagnosis of general paralysis and tabes dorsalis. The finding of the 
Trypanosoma gambiense in the cerebro-spinal fluid in sleeping sickness 
lea to the belief that the specific organism of syphilis, Spirochoete 
pallidum might be found in the cerebro-spinaf fluid in syphilitic 
diseases of the nervous system, but although in a few instances 
successful inoculation of animals with syphilis by injection of the 
cerebro-spinal fluid has been effected, yet the organism has only once 
been found in the fluid withdrawn by lumbar puncture. It has long 
been a puzzle why only certain individuals, about 5 %-8 % of those 
infected with syphilis, should subsequently suffer with diseases of the 
nervous system. The skin and mucous orifices are the most common 
sites of secondary and tertiary lesions and after this the nervous 
system, but no tissue or structure in the body is exempt. It is 
probable that the virus attacks tissues when in a low state of re- 
sistance in a random metastatic manner. It is necessary to dis- 
tinguish between these true syphilitic lesions which are the result of 
the reaction of the tissues to the living virus and the parasyphilitic 
affections, which own a different cause. The former may be most 
successfully treated with mercury, which has the power of devitaliz- 
ing the specific virus and preventing its multiplication, the same as 
atoxyl prevents the multiplication of the trypanosomes. Iodide of 
potassium favours the absorption of the degenerative products of the 
cells, and syphilitic tumours may rapidly resolve and disappear under 
the influence of these drugs. Nervous symptoms even so severe as to 
threaten a rapidly fatal termination may disappear with energetic 
treatment when they are due to the syphilitic virus producing an 
inflammatory reaction of the tissues; not so, however, when the 
symptoms are slow, insidious and progressive, due to a primary 
decay of the neurones, e.g. the parasyphilitic affections tabes dorsalis 
and general paralysis of the insane, which are really one and the same 
disease owning the same cause. We can understand that it may be 
a chance whether a man suffers with true brain or spinal cord 
syphilis, because it may be a chance whether the virus is carried 
there by the blood-vessels and lymphatics, and if carried there finds a 
suitable nidus to develop. But the parasyphilitic affections appear to 
be due toa premature primary decay of the neural elements owing to 
bio-chemical changes in the body induced by reaction to the syphilitic 
virus. There are a good many facts now forthcoming which show 
, that the subjects of parasyphihs present mild symptoms of syphilis, 
and upon an average it is not until ten years later that they develop 
nervous symptoms, which are aggravated rather than benefited by 
mercury. Such subjects are immune to a second attack of syphilis, 
and the examination of the blood and cerebro-spinal fluid by the 
Wassermann reaction of the deviation of the Complement reveals the 
fact that there is a bio-chemical change; the presence of this reaction 
may be correlated with the fact that these fluids contain lipoid sub- 
stances and a globulin in excess. The cerebro-spinal fluid contains 
these lipoid substances and globulin in proportion to the degree of 
decay of the neural structure; they arise from the destructive . 
metabolism of the neural elements. But the same lipoid substances 
and globulin are found only in the blood of syphilitic individuals, 
consequently it must be supposed that in general paralysis and tabes 
certain groups and systems of neurones undergo decay from ex- 
cessive metabolic activity which is brought about by two factors 
(i) a bio-chemical stimulus, the syphilitic poison, (2) excessive 
physiological stress, which in w^n-sypnilitic individuals would only 
lead to cerebral or spinal neurasthenia. 

Sleeping Sickness is characterized by a progressive lethargy ; 
paresis, tremors and the signs and symptoms of neural exhaustion 
without neural destruction; it comes on slowly ^ and insidiously 
often years after infection and eventually terminates fatally by 
intercurrent disease or paralysis of the bulbar centres. Examination 
of the central nervous system explains the fatal lethargy; the 
perivascular and meningeal lymphatics are filled with lymphocytes 
and plasma cells (Plate II. fig. 6.); moreover, the neuroglia support- 
ing cells have undergone a rapid formative proliferation (Plate II. figs. 
3 and 5). The effect of this morbid process is to deprive the neural 
elements of oxygen and nutrition; the neurones in consequence, 
although not destroyed, are nevertheless unable to function for more 
than a brief period. 

(7) Poisons introduced into the Body, — The most widespread and 
potent cause of nervous and mental disease is the abuse of alcoholic 
stimulants. At least 20% of the inmates of the asylums of London 
are admitted with a history of alcoholism. In notmorc than 10% is 
alcohol the efficient cause of the mental disease; in many it is only 
a contributory factor, and in not a few the lapse from moderation to 
intemperance is the first sign of the mental breakdown. Most of 
the patients admitted inherit the neuropathic tendency, and it is a 
rare thing, among such, to find cirrhosis of the liver with ascites, a 
condition which indicates long persistent spirit-drinking. The 
writer, from a very large experience as pathologist to the asylums of 
London, only remembers one such case, and that was in a notorious 
woman who was convicted nearly four hundred times for drunken- 
ness before she could be certified as of unsound mind, a fact which 
indicates that she inherited a very stable nervous constitution. To 
people with unstable nervous systems a relatively spall quantity 
of alcohol may act as a poison. Thus epileptics, imbeciles, criminals, 
potential lunatics, hysterics, neurasthenics and the subjects of head 
injury are liable to become anti-social and dangerous to themselves 
and others by indulgence in quantities of alcohol which would have 
no harmful effect upon the mentally stable and sound individual. 
Alcohol may produce acute delirium, with fine tremors, and, gener- 
ally, visual hallucinations of a horrible nature, indicating acute toxic 
influence upon the brain. This^ apparently acute form of alcohol 
poisoning is met with in chronic inebriates especially; it is much 
commoner in men than in women, and it is remarkable how a severe 
injury or illness, such as pneumonia, will bring out delirium tremens 
in a drunkard. Chronic alcoholism manifests itself in a variety of 
ways according to the inborn temperament of the individual. The 
well-fed man with an inborn stable well-balanced mental organization 
is able to consume daily large quantities of alcohol with no other 
obvious effect than the lowered moral sense of indulgence in a vicious 
habit. However, chronic alcoholics form a large proportion of those 
convicted for crimes of violence, homicide, suicide and sexual 
offences. Alcohol acts especially upon the higher centres of the 
brain, and a drunken man may exhibit " the abstract and brief 
chronicle of insanity, going through its successive phases in a short 
period of time " (Maudsley). The effect on the nervous system of 
chronic tippling may be dementia, a very characteristic manifesta- 
tion of the mental degradation being absence of knowledge of time 
and place, personal illusions and loss of memory of recent events, 
indicating a failure of receptivity and of the formation of memory- 
pictures in the higher centres, mental confusion, delusions of persecu- 
tion, and especially a morbid jealousy with suspicions of fidelity of 
the husband by the wife or of the wife by the husband. # A certain 
amount of improvement may occur when total abstinence is enforced, 
which shows the poison has damaged but not destroyed the nervous 
elements. There is also a form of mental disease characterized 
especially by hallucinations of hearing and vision, associated with 
delusions usually of a persecuting nature, unaccompanied by other 
marked mental disorder. Abstinence and proper control^ generally 
ends in recovery, but such cases so frequently relapse that it is fairly 
certain that alcohol is an exciting factor to a morbid or insane 
temperament. Besides mental symptoms ^ of chronic alcoholic 
poisoning, there is frequently paralysis, affecting especially the lower 
limbs (structures suffer most where vitality is least), although the 
upper limbs, and even the respiratory muscles, may be affected in 
severe cases. The patient, usually of the female sex, becomes help- 
less and bedridden, and death frequently occurs from heart failure. 
Characteristic features of this affection are great tenderness on 
pressure of the muscles, especially of the calves, absence of reflexes, 
a variable degree of skin anaesthesia, wasting of muscles and altera- 
tion of the normal electrical reactions, and frequently pyrexia. There 
is no loss of control over the bladder and bowels, unless there is very 
marked dementia. This " complex of symptoms " points m to a 
peripheral polyneuritis, although frequently changes occur also in the 
ganglion cells, from which the axis cylinders of the nerves have their 
origin (vide figs. 2, 3, 4, and 5). Alcoholic polyneuritic psychosis 
affecting women in many ways resembles delirium tremens; the 
fact that neuritis occurs much more frequently in women is probably 
associated with a greater liability to the influence of microbial 
toxins by absorption from the organs of reproduction. Many other 
poisons, notably lead and arsenic, the specific fevers 
before mentioned, syphilis and alterations of the blood 
due to imperfect metabolism, such as occur in 
diabetes and gout, may produce, or become impor- 
tant factors in producing, peripheral neuritis. The 
outbreak of arsenical neuritis from beer contain- 
ing this poison in Manchester in 1900 is of in- 
terest, from the fact that the symptoms closely re- 
sembled acute alcoholic neuritis. A distinctive 
feature, however, was the pigmentation of the skin 
and the severity of the nervous symptoms. A 
disease which is common in the East, termed Beri- 
beri, is a form of neuritis, the cause of which is not 
exactly known (see Beriberi). Anaesthetic leprosy 
is an interstitial inflammation of the nerves due to 
the Lepra bacillus. Among the nervous diseases due to 
occupation ^ may be cited lead-poisoning. This is 
peculiar in selecting the nerve which supplies the 
extensor muscles of the wrist and fingers, so that 
dropped wrist is almost characteristic of this form 
of toxic neuritis. Lead also produces a chronic in- 
flammation of the cerebral cortex, Encephalitis satur- 
nina, causing a complex of symptoms, namely, de- 
mentia, loss of memory, weakened intellect, paresis 
and epileptiform seizures, hallucinations of sight and 
hearing, and mental exaltation or depression. 
Mirror-makers suffer with characteristic fine tremors, 
jjf <&^HT 1 ^ rom *^ e s ^ ow absorption f 
r ^* i *^-'* , *n t 5\^^!3 IS B mercury into the system. 
Workmen at india rubber factories may suffer from 
severe mental symptoms, owing to the inhalation of 
the fumes of bisulphide of carbon. Serious nervous 
symptoms have followed carbon monoxide poison- 
ing. Cases which have recovered from the immedi- 
_ ate effects have suffered 
with dementia and symptoms of disseminated sclerosis, the result of 
multiple haemorrhage softenings. 

There are a certain number of poisons, besides alcohol, which act 
upon the nervous system when continually entering the body as the 
result of a habit, namely, absinthe, ether, cocaine, opium, morphia, 
hashish and tobacco. Each of these poisons produces a train of 
symptoms denoting a selective influence upon certain parts of the 
nervous system. In illustration thereof may be mentioned impair- 
ment of central vision in tobacco amblyopia. 

The disease pellagra, an affection of the skin associated with de- 
generative changes in the brain and spinal cord and characterized by 
melancholy with suicidal impulses, sometimes mania associated with 
paresis, was long considered to be due to the eating of bad maize. 
But in 1910 the recent research on this disease, still in progress, 
seemed to negative this theory (see Pellagra). Another disease, 
ergotism, in an epidemic form, has affected poor people in Russia and 
North Germany when obliged to subsist upon bread made of rye 
which has been attacked by the ergot fungus. The poison thus intro- 

	Fig. 5. 

	Figs. 2, 3, 4 ands- — Spinal motor cells 
	in various stages of destruction, from a 
	case of acute alcoholic poly-vacuolation. 
	Compare with the appearances of a nor- 
	mal cell, fig. 12. 

duced into the system produces progressive degenerative changes im 
the brain and spinal cord, which are manifested by psychical dis- 
turbances, such as slowness of thought, weakness of memory, dulness. 
of perception, sometimes delirium and incoherence;
other symptoms are blunted sensibility, dilated pupils, 
muscular spasms, perhaps even epileptiform seizures 
and ataxy, and, lastly, stupor deepening into coma. 
Sausage disease, due to eating decayed meat and fish 
infected with Bacillus botulinus, is associated with 
symptoms which frequently terminate fatally, and it 
has been shown that the symptoms ^ are due to a 
poison which has a very destructive effect upon the 
nerve cells (fig. 6). 

II. Normal and Abnormal Stimulalion. — The 
nervous system, in order to develop and manifest 
functional activity, re-  
quires suitable stimula-  
tion from without. Struc- 

	Fig. 6. — Cell illustrating swelling of
	nucleus and chromatolysis in acute tox-
	**?? produ ^ ed by ^-T.u bacillus 
	, . . botuhnus. 
	Compare with the appear-
	ances presented by a normal cell, fig. 12. 	

ture and function are 
mutually reciprocal and 

interdependent; for a structure which is not used will 
gradually lose its function, while its nutrition will also 
suffer, and in time atrophy may occur. Consciously and 
unconsciously, a continuous stream of impulses is pouring into 
the nervous system from without by the sensory channels, 
which are the avenues of experience and intelligence, and our 
somatic and psychical life depends upon the existence of such 
stimuli. The nervous system in the form of systems, groups and 
communities of neurones, each with special functions, yet aU 
woven together in one harmonious whole, develops in a particular 
way in consequence of the awakening influence of these stimuli 
from without. Consequently nervous structures which are not 
used are liable to undergo regressive metamorphosis and atrophy; 
thus amputation of a limb in early life causes atrophy of the 
nervous structures which presided over the sensation and 
movement of the part. This is seen both in the grey and white 
matter of the spinal cord; there is also an atrophy of the psycho- 
motor neurones of the brain presiding over the movements of 
the limb. 

A healthy physical, intellectual and moral environment of the 
individual is an essential factor in "the prevention and cure of psy- 
choses and neuroses, because it tends to develop and strengthen body 
and mind, deliberation, judgment and the higher controlling functions 
of the brain. A function not used will gradually disappear, and 
become more and more difficult to evoke. This fact is of importance 
in functional neuroses and psychoses, e.g. hysterical paralysis, 
melancholia and delusional insanity, because the longer mental or 
bodily function is left in abeyance, the more likely is the defect to 
become permanently installed. The converse is also true; the 
longer a perverted function exists, the more unlikely it is to disappear. 
Thus auditory hallucinations, a very^ important and frequent 
symptom in the insane, commence with indistinct noises: these are 
followed by " voices," which eventually become so distinct and real 
that the greater part of the patient's psychical existence is con- 
centrated upon, and determined by, this abnormal stimulus from 
within, indicating progressive strengthening and fixation _ of the 
perverted functions of the mind, and progressive weakening and 
dissolution of the normal functions. 

Mental pain in the form of grief, worry, anxiety, fright, shock, 
violent emotions (pleasurable or painful), disappointed love, sexual 
excesses or perversions, and excessive brain work, frequently precede 
and determine, in persons with the insane or neuropathic taint, 
various forms (a) of psychoses, e.g. mania, melancholia, delusional 
insanity; (b) of neuroses, e.g. chorea, hysteria, epilepsy, hystero- 
epilepsy; (c) or organic brain disease, e.g. apoplexy, thrombosis, 
general paralysis. 

Visceral reflex irritation affords many examples of neuroses and 
psychoses, the symptoms of which are set up by irritation of the 
viscera, e.g. intestinal worms. Teething and indigestible food are 
often the exciting cause in infants and young children of convulsions, 
spasms of the glottis and tetany. Various functional and organic 
diseases of the female reproductive organs act as exciting causes in 
the production of hysteria, hystero-epilepsy, melancholia and 
mania; moreover, paroxysmal attacks in these diseases are more 
liable to occur at the menstrual period or menopause. The irritation 
of a carious tooth may produce spasmodic tic and trigeminal neuralgia. 
Wax in the car may occasion vertigo and tinnitus; and errors of 
refraction in the eyes may be the cause of attacks of migraine, and 
even tend to excite epileptic fits in a person suffering from epilepsy. 
Numerous other examples of peripheral disturbance could be 
mentioned as exciting causes of nervous affection in neurotic indi- 
viduals. Irritation of the terminals of the vagus in almost any part 
of its widespread visceral distribution may lead to vomiting. The 
characteristic pain of angina pectoris, which radiates down the inner 
side of the left arm, is explained by the fact that the cardiac branches 
of the sympathetic arise from the same segments of the spinal cord 
as the sensory branches of the ulnar nerve; consequently the pain is 
referred to the corresponding slaii area supplied by this nerve. This 
is one example of a great number of referred pains, 

III. Injury or disease of enclosing or supporting structures 
may lead to paralytic or irritative lesions of the nervous system, 
or the two may be combined. Blows or wounds of the head and 
spine may damage or destroy the nervous structures by shock 
or direct injury. Concussion of the brain or spinal cord may 
occur, as a result of injury, without any recognizable serious 
damage of the enclosing structures or even the central nervous 
system. Shock, due to concussion, can only be explained by a 
molecular or bio-chemical change in the nervous structures. 

Direct injury or a fall fracturing the skull, driving the frag- 
ments into the brain, will cause direct destruction of the nervous 
tissue; but wounds and diseases of the enclosing and supporting 
structures, if producing simple non-infective inflammation, give 
rise only to such symptoms as accord with the nerve structure 
irritated or destroyed. Should, however, the wound or diseased 
structure become infected with micro-organisms, the disease 
spreads and becomes generalized likewise the symptoms. Of 
all the causes of infective inflammation, middle-ear disease, on 
account of its frequency and insidious onset, is the most im- 
portant. It is very liable, when neglected, to be followed by a 
septic meningitis, encephalitis and brain abscess, the most 
frequent seat of which is in the adjacent temporal lobe, but it 
may be in other parts of the brain, e.g. the cerebellum and frontal 
lobe (Plate I. fig. 3). The peripheral nerves may be destroyed 
or irritated by direct injury, disease or new growth in adjacent 
tissues, or they may be involved in the callus thrown out round 
the seat of a fracture. 

Diseases of the blood-vessels are among the most frequent 
causes of organic brain disease. Arteries or veins — more fre- 
quently the former — may become blocked or ruptured from 
various causes. The immediate effect is a disturbance or loss of 
consciousness, and the individual may be " struck down " (see 
Apoplexy) and never regain consciousness (see Coma). Should 
the individual recover consciousness more or less permanent loss 
or disturbance of function will be the result. Paralysis of some 
form, especially hemiplegia, is the commonest result, but the 
loss or disturbance of function will depend upon the seat of the 
injury. 

The cerebral arteries may be occluded by embolism; a portion of 
a clot or vegetation from a diseased valve of the left side of the heart 
may be detached, and escape into the circulation ; and this is carried 
into one of the arteries of the brain, usually the middle cerebral, more 
often of the left side than the right. The area of brain tissue supplied 
by that artery is deprived of blood, and undergoes softening in 
consequence, resulting m paralysis of the opposite half of the body 
(hemiplegia) associated with aphasia when the paralysis affects the 
right side in a right-handed person (Plate I. figs. 5 and 9). When 
the embolus is infective, as it frequently is in ulcerative endocarditis, 
its lodgmentin an artery of the brain, not only blocks the vessel but 
leads to an infective inflammation and softening of its coats, with 
the formation of an aneurism. The aneurism may suddenly rupture 
into the substance of the brain and produce apoplexy. In fact the 
majority of cases of apoplexy from cerebral haemorrhage recurring 
in young people are due to this cause. Softening may also arise from 
coagulation of the blood (thrombosis) in the arteries or veins. There 
are many causes which generally combine or conspire together to 
produce thrombosis, viz. a weak acting heart and altered conditions 
of the blood, and sometimes independently of vascular disease 
spontaneous coagulation in a vessel of the brain may occur. It is 
sometimes met with in the cachexia of certain grave diseases, viz. in 
phthisis and cancer, in typhus and pneumonia, after parturition and 
in marasmus at all periods of life, but especially in the very young 
and very old. But thickening, roughening and a degenerated con- 
dition of the cerebral arteries known as atheroma when associated 
with a weak acting heart is especially liable to' give rise to thrombosis 
and softening, and this is a very common cause of apoplexy, paralysis 
and dementia in people who have passed middle life. General 
disease of the arteries of the body, associated especially with chronic 
Bright's disease and high arterial^ pressure, js frequently attended 
with the formation of minute miliary aneurisms upon the cerebral 
arteries, which may rupture and cause apoplexy. Haemorrhage into 
the brain from this cause is especially liable to occur in certain 
situations; one vessel in particular, supplying the basal ganglia, 
most frequently gives way, the effused blood tearing through the 
motor efferent fibres, which, proceeding from the cerebral cortex in 
the shape of a funnel, become aggregated together to form the neck 
between the two masses of grey matter — the optic thalamus and the 
corpus striatum (Plate II. fig. 6). The result is hemiplegia of the 
opposite side of the body. Disease of the arteries of the central 
nervous system, occurring in a person under forty, is generally due to 
syphilis, the virus of which produces an inflammation of the coats of 
the vessel, especially the inner (see Plate II. figs. 4, 9, 10). The 
thickening and narrowing of the lumen with loss of elasticity of the 
arteries of the brain generally, may suddenly or gradually set up 
conditions of cerebral anaemia and give rise to semi-comatose and 
comatose or even apoplectic states. Occlusion by the inflammatory 
proliferation or by the sudden clotting ofblood in the diseased vessel 
may occur, the immediate effect of which may be an epileptic or 
apoplectic fit; the result is softening; and seeing that any or all 
the arteries of the brain may be affected successively, simultaneously, 
or at random, the symptoms may be manifold. They may be general 
or local, and not uncommonly are associated with inflammation of 
the membranes. The disease, under treatment, may abate, and the 
paralytic or mental phenomena partially or completely disappear, 
indicating the restoration, or partial restoration, of the circulation in 
the diseased arteries; sometimes with the lapse of treatment and 
sometimes without, new symptoms, such as paralysis of a fresh 
group of muscles or of the opposite side of the body, may manifest 
themselves, showing that the disease has attacked a fresh set of 
arteries. Disseminated scterosis (insular) is another random morbid 
process, affecting especially the white matter, with certain character- 
istic symptoms of a progressive character, the pathology of which is 
not understood fully, but is probably due to some toxic cause. 
Islands of nervous tissue undergo a morbid change, commencing in 

	Fool & Toes 
	Written Speech 
	Index 
	Thumb ^ a 
	Upper Face ,_ 
	Lower Paw — \^* 
	Motor Speech 
	Tongue 
	Larynx 
	Movements of 
	f Eye (probable)- T ^f 
	* SmcM' 
	^Hip Knee 
	.Shoulder * v 
	Elbow 
	Great Toe 
	Tactile & Muscular sensation 
	/ 
	Hearing, 
	Auditory word 
	Memory 
	v Half Vision centre 

	Fig. 7. — Diagram of left cerebral hemisphere, showing localization 
	of function. The motor region is situated in front of the central 
	sulcus, and is arranged in a series from " toe to larynx " downwards, 
	corresponding in an inverse manner to the spinal series. Irritation 
	of any part of this area will cause localized convulsive spasms, which 
	may spread in a definite march to the whole motor area, as in 
	Jacksonian epilepsy. Destructive lesions will cause paralysis. The 
	centre for " taste and smell " is represented at the tip of the uncinate 
	convolution.- The centre for " half- vision " is only in small part 
	represented, for the larger part is on the mesial surface. " Hearing " 
	is represented occupying the posterior half of the first temporal 
	convojution, but only a small part of the centre is seen, for the greater 
	part lies above within the fissure of Sylvius. Included in this area, 
	but in the left hemisphere only, is the centre for " auditory word 
	memory " ; destruction of this causes inability to understand the 
	meaning of words uttered, although the patient is able to read aloud. 
	Behind this, in the^ angular gyrus, is the centre for "visual word 
	memory " ; destruction of this causes loss of power of understanding 
	of written or printed words — therefore inability to read. In front of 
	the motor area is Broca's convolution, the centre of " motor speech " ; 
	destruction of this produces motor aphasia, or inability to articulate 
	words. Above this is a centre which is connected with written speech. 
	These four centres concerned with verbal and written languageare 
	connected by commissural fibres, and destruction of these connexions 
	leads to various defects in verbal and written language. It will be 
	understood from this diagram that diseases of the leftTiemisphere in 
	right-handed persons are associated with results of more significance 
	than similar affections of the right hemisphere. 

the myelin sheath and ending in an increase of the supporting 
neuroglia tissue at the expense of the true nervous tissue. 

Tumours and new growths in the central and peripheral nervous 
systems may be primary or secondary: the former arise in the 
supporting, enclosing or nutrient tissue elements; the latter are 
metastatic deposits from tumours originating elsewhere. Tumours 
may be single or multiple, the special symptoms occasioned depending 

	Fig. 8. — Diagram of section of the spinal cord in the upper cervical 
	region, showing recent degeneration of the crossed pyramidal tract of 
	the right side and direct pyramidal tract of the left side. The black 
	dots indicate the degenerated fibres stained by the Marchi method. 
	This degeneration is secondary to haemorrhage into the internal 
	capsule of the left hemisphere, and it will be observed by the number 
	•of degenerated fibres that the greater bulk have crossed over to the 
	right side of the spinal cord, thus agreeing with the fact that the 
	paralysis is of the right half of the body. 

	/fi>>5 V V * — Association Neuron* 
	/JJxW' S K . oj Cerebral Cortex 
	CerebeLLdr 
	Neuron of •"' 
	Ant Horn. 
	Mocor 
	End 
	Peace 

	Fig. 9. — A diagram to indicate afferent, efferent and association 
	systemsof neurones. It will be observed that there are three nervous 
	circles indicated by the arrows — spinal, cerebellar and cerebral. 
	In every perfect co-ordinate movement impulses properly adjusted 
	are flowing along these three systems of neurones. In systemic 
	degenerations one or more of these systems may be affected, and the 
	symptoms will depend partly upon the function which is lost or dis- 
	turbed, and partly upon the disturbance of equilibrium of the three 
	co-ordinated systems. 

upon the seat of the tumour and whether it destroys or only irritates 
the adjacent nervous tissue. Tumours situated within the cranial 
cavity cause general symptoms, namely, optic neuritis, severe head- 
ache and vomiting; these symptoms, which are caused by increased 
intracranial pressure, are more severe in rapidly-growing vascular 
tumours, even though small, than in large slow-growing tumours. 

	Fig. 10. — Diagram of spinal cord, fifth lumbar segment, from a 
	case of advanced tabes dorsalis. The posterior column is shrunken, 
	and but faintly stained, except in the anterior part; the shrinkage 
	and the loss 0! stainability are due to the absence of fibres of the 
	posterior roots, which normally form the greater part of this region 
	of the cord. The fibres which are seen in the anterior part of the 
	posterior column are derived from cells within the spinal cord, and 
	belong to spinal association neurones. 

	Fig. 11. — Diagram illustrating the relative number and wealth 01 
	cells and fibres in the cerebral cortex in the normal brain, in amentia 
	and dementia. The horizontal systems of fibres are association 
	systems, and it will be observed that these are especially diminished 
	in amentia, and still more in dementia, whereas the radial fibres are 
	less affected. In the normal, there are five layers of cells arranged in 
	columns (Meynert's) ; in the pathological conditions it will be ob- 
	served that the pyramidal-shaped cells no longer have their apical 
	processes pointing vertically upwards. The processes are broken off, 
	the cells are distorted in shape and diminished in numbers, and the 
	degree of dementia in a wasted brain is proportional to the atrophy 
	and destruction of the small and medium-sized pyramids of the whole 
	cerebral cortex, and^ the disappearance of the superficial layers of 
	fibres. This is specially manifested in paralytic dementia and the 
	dementia of chronic insanity. 

Some tumours are highly vascular and a large thin-walled vessel may 
suddenly rupture and cause an apoplectic fit. If the growth is 
situated in a portion of the cortex having some special localizing 
function, e.g. the motor area (vide fig. 7), it may give rise to epilepti- 
form convulsions, starting in a limb or definite group of muscles; 
but the irritation usually spreads to the whole motor area of the same 
side, and even extends to the opposite hemisphere, by an overflow 
of the discharge through the corpus callosum. In such case there is 
loss of consciousness. If, however, the tumour destroys the cerebral 
cortex of a particular region, it may give rise to a paralytic lesion, 
e.g. paralysis of the arm (vide Plate I., fig. 4). 

Organic diseases of the blood-vessels, or of supporting and 
enclosing tissues, produce secondary degenerations of the nervous 
system. The symptoms, like the lesion, are obvious, coarse and 
obtrusive ; frequently arising suddenly, they may in a 
short time terminate fatally, or tend towards partial 
or complete recovery. Various forms of motor and 
sensory loss and disturbance of function may arise, 
indicating destruction or disturbance of particular 
regions of the central nervous system ; and degenera- 
tions in certain tracts and systems of fibres arise, cor- 
responding in histological character with those ob- 
served when a nerve fibre is separated from its cell of 
origin by section (secondary degeneration of Waller 
and Tiirck) (vide fig. 8, with explanation). This form 
of degeneration must be distinguished from primary 
degeneration, which is due to an inherent nutritional 
defect of the nerve cell and all its processes (the 
neurone), in which a regressive metamorphosis occurs; 
it starts in the structures of the neurones latest 
developed (namely, the myelin sheath and the fine 
terminal twigs of the axis cylinder and dendrons), 
and proceeds back to the main branches and trunk, 
eventually destroying the trophic and genetic centre 
itself, the nerve cell. These primary degeneration pro- 
cesses are insidious in origin, progressive in character, 
and nearly always fatal in termination; they affect 
definite systems, groups and communities of neurones 
in a progressive manner, and, therefore, are associated 
with a progressive evolution of symptoms, related to 
the structures affected (vide figs. 9 and 10). 

To cite some examples: (1) Locomotor ataxy, on the one 
hand, is a primary degeneration affecting the afferent 
system of neurones; it is characterized by muscular inco- 
ordination without wasting, inability to stand with the 
eyes shut, lightning pains in the limbs, absent knee-jerks, 
Argyll-Robertson pupils, and other symptoms pointing to 
a morbid process affecting especially the afferent sensory 
system of neurones. (2) Progressive muscular atrophy, on 
the other hand, is a disease of the efferent motor system 
of neurones of the brain and spinal cord, characterized by 
progressive wasting of groups of muscles innervated by 
groups of neurones which are undergoing degeneration. A 
fatal termination to this disease frequently arises from 
affection of the medulla oblongata, causing what is known 
as bulbar paralysis. Infantile paralysis is an acute 
inflammation of the anterior horns of the spinal cord, 
causing destruction of the spinal motor neurones of the 
anterior horn. It differs from the above chronic disease 

of structures connected with the higher functions of the mind, 
namely, the association neurones in the superficial layers of the 
cerebral cortex (fig. 11). Conditions of dementia, primary or 
secondary, are associated with progressive decay and atrophy of 
the superficial layers of the grey matter of the cortex, and naked- 
eye evidence thereof is afforded by partial or general wasting 
of the cerebral hemispheres, accompanied with thickening of' 
the pia-arachnoid membrane, atrophy of the convolutions, and 
with deepening and widening of the intervening sulci (Plate I., 
fig. 7). 

The cerebro-spinal fluid fills up the space in the cranial cavity 
caused by the atrophy of the brain; consequently there is a great 

	Fig. 13. 

	Fig. 12. 

	Fig. 14. 

	Fig. 16. Motor Cells, drawn from Microphotographs of Preparations
	stained by NissI 
	method to show Microchemical Changes produced by various diseases. 

in its sudden onset and non-progressive character; it 

	Fig. 12. — Normal motor cell from cerebral cortex, showing a mosaic pattern 
	of the cytoplasm due to a substance stainable by basic aniline dyes; this stain- 
	able substance exists also on the dendrons. By comparing the appearances of 
	this cell with the other figures a just idea can be obtained of the morbid 
	changes which result in various pathological conditions. 

	Fig. 13. — Cell from a case of hyper-pyrexia — disappearance of the mosaic 

resembles it in producing paralysis of muscles without pattern, substance uniformly stained;
absence of the chromatic elements on 
sensory disturbance. (3) General paralysis of the insane 
is a degeneration which begins in the association system 
of neurones of the cerebri cortex, but which may be, 
and frequently is, associated with degeneration of the 
afferent or efferent systems (fig. 9). 

Neuroses and psychoses have not hitherto been 
satisfactorily explained by definite morphological 
changes in the brain (Plate I., fig. 1). We know little 
or nothing accurately about the morbid histology 
of insanity, except as regards the morphological 
changes met with in cases of amentia and dementia. The 
conditions of amentia, namely, idiocy and imbecility, are 
associated with arrest of development of the brain, as a whole 
or in part, the naked-eye evidence of which may be afforded 
by small size and simplicity of convolutions of the brain as a 
whole or in part (Plate I., figs. 2, 8 and 10) ; and the microscopical 
evidence by arrest of development, or imperfect development, 
the dendrons, due to a precipitation of cell-globulin by the heat. 

	Fig. 14. — Cell in an advanced stage of coagulation necrosis, complete absence 
	of mosaic pattern; diffuse fine dust-like stain; breaking off of the processes; 
	all caused by softening of the brain from vascular obstruction. 

	Fig. 15. — Another specimen from the same brain in a still more advanced 
	stage of destruction, and showing a phagocyte attached to the cell and devouring 
	the decayed structure. 

	Fig. 16. — A cell with enormously swollen nucleus, the result of hydration 
	due to absorption of fluid after ligature of cerebral vessels. Such a cell will 
	probably recover. 

excess of this fluid. Before general paralysis was recognized as a 
disease some of the cases which died suddenly in a fit were doubtless 
tcrmedserous apoplexy. This wasting so characteristic of general 
paralysis is especially due to atrophy of the cells and fibres of the 
superficial grey matter of the cortex, sections of which, examined 
microscopically, after suitable methods of staining have been 
employed, show great poverty, or complete loss, of three sets of 
delicate myelinated fibres, namely, tangential, super-radial and the 
inter-radial corresponding to the line of Baillarger. This degeneration 
of the superficial association fibres of the cerebral cortex affects 
especially the frontal and central convolutions, and is the earliest 
and most constant microscopical change in progressive paralytic 
dementia; it is accompanied usually by meningeal and vascular 
changes, atrophy of the nerve cells, and proliferation of the neuroglia 
(fig. n); especially characteristic is the perivascular infiltration 
with lymphocytes and plasma cells (see Plate II., fig. 7). It was 
indeed thought that this condition of the vessels was pathognomonic 
of general paralysis; it certainly is not, for it is found throughout 
the central nervous system in sleeping sickness and cerebro-spjnal 
syphilis (Plate II., figs. 8 and 9). It sometimes occurs in the neigh- 
bourhood of cerebral tumours but it is not found in uraemia or lead 
encephalitis. Possibly new methods may enable us to show changes 
of structure in diseases such as epilepsy and delusional insanity, in 
which hitherto no naked eye or microscopical structural defects 
accounting for the symptoms have been certainly demonstrated. 

In conditions of acute mania there is usually considerable vascular 
engorgement. We should, however, probably be more correct in 
assuming that insanity (especially those forms^ in which there_ is 
neither amentia or dementia) is due to alterations in the quality 

	Fig. 17. — Diagram to illustrate various stages in degeneration and 
	regeneration of medullated nerve fibres. 

	1, Normal medullated nerve with node of Ranvier. 

	2, Degenerated nerve, ten days after section, showing de- 
	generated myelin stained black; disappearance of axis- 
	cylinder. 

	3, Central end of cut nerve, showing at the top an axis-cylinder 
	budding out, proliferated neurilemmal cells, and still 
	some degenerated myelin in sheath. 

	4, Peripheral cut end of same, showing proliferated neuri- 
	lemmal cells, still some degenerated myelin. 

	5, Complete absorption of degenerated myelin, proto-plas- 
	mic basis of new fibre formed out of neurilemmal cells. 

	6, A new fibre, with axis-cylinder. 

	7, Central end of cut nerve at junction, showing an axis- 
	cylinder sprouting and forming a number of axis-cylinder 
	processes, which grow into the peripheral end to form new 
	channels of conduction. 

	8, Is a new regenerated fibre resembling a sympathetic fibre 
	in having as yet no myelin sheath; as the nerve becomes 
	excitable and stimulus passes, a myelin sheath is formed. 

rather than the quantity of blood in the brain. The primary de- 
mentia of adolescence, which in 80% of the cases occurs before the 
age of 25, jn which hereditary taint is most common, and which 
frequently is accompanied by, or terminates in, tuberculosis, can be 
explained by the effect of toxaemic conditions of the blood on 
cerebral neurones with an inborn low specific energy and metabolic 
activity. The histological changes found in the brain do not serve to 
explain the symptoms, and we must look to bio-chemical changes in 
the body acting upon an innately unstable brain to explain the 
problems of the disordered mind in this disease. 

Microscopical Changes in Degeneration of the Neurone. — 
About 1850, Waller demonstrated that a nerve fibre underwent 
degeneration to its termination when separated from its cell 
of origin; hence the term "Wallerian degeneration." Embryo- 
logical researches by Professor His showed that the axis-cylinder 
process (the essential conducting portion of the nerve fibre) 
is an outgrowth of the nerve cell. The cell, therefore, is the 
trophic and genetic centre of the nerve fibre. Acute alterations 
and death of the nerve cells may occur from toxic conditions of 
the blood; from high fever (io7°-iio° F.); arrest of the blood 
supply, as in thrombosis and embolism; or actual destruction 
by injury, haemorrhage or inflammation. These morbid pro- 
cesses produce, as a rule, bio-chemical as well as morphological 
changes in the nerve cell and its processes. Space will not allow 
of a full description, but some of these changes are indicated 
in figs. 18-22, with explanatory text. When a nerve cell dies, 
the nerve fibre undergoes secondary degeneration and death; 
that is to say, the whole neurone dies, and regeneration, at any 
rate in the higher vertebrates, does not take place. Restoration, 
or partial restoration, of function is due to other structures taking 
on the function, and the more specialized that function is, the less 
likely is restoration to take place. If, however, 
a peripheral nerve is divided, its component 
fibres are merely severed from their cells of origin. 
All that portion of the nerve which is in con- 
nexion with the nerve cells of origin practically 
undergoes no change. The peripheral portion un- 
dergoes degeneration, but from the central end of 
the nerve new axis cylinders again grow out and 
a new nerve is formed. With this regeneration 
comes restoration of function, which may be 
hastened by suturing the ends of the cut nerve. 
A similar regeneration, however, does not occur 

	Fig. ^ 18. — Diagram drawn from 
	photomicrograph to show different 
	forms of neuroglia cells in a patch of 
	sclerosis secondary to degeneration and 
	disappearance of the neurones. Ob- 
	serve the large branched cells of Deiters. 

after section of fibres of the white matter of the central ner- 
vous system, and this may be due to the fact that the nerve 
fibres of the white matter of the cerebro-spinal axis possess 
no nucleated sheath of Schwann, which, by the .light of recent 
investigations, is shown to play an important part in regenera- 
tion; in the writer's opinion, the neurilemmal sheath of the old 
fibre forms a new protoplasmic basis, into which the axis- 
cylinder from above grows, the passage of stimulus deterniining 
its function. Fig. 17, Nos. 1-8, with explanatory text, shows 
the changes which occur in degeneration and regeneration of a 
peripheral nerve after section, with loss of function; and sub- 
sequent union, with restoration of function. The writer, in 
conjunction with Professor Halliburton, has shown that the 
characteristic microscopical changes in the myelin sheath which 
occur in the process of degeneration are due to a splitting up 
of the complex phosphoretted substance " protagon " into 
glycero-phosphoric acid, choline and oleic acid by a process of 
hydration. The Marchi reaction, which has been found so useful 
for demonstrating degeneration of the central and peripheral 
nervous systems, is dependent upon the fact that the myelin 
sheath, after hardening in a solution of bichromate of potash, does " 
not turn black when acted upon by osmic acid, whereas the simpler 
non-phosphoretted fatty product of degeneration is stained black. 
When the Marchi reaction of degeneration is fully developed, 
it has been ascertained that the nerve yields no phosphorus. 
The degeneration resulting from section of a nerve is termed 
secondary, to distinguish it from another, primary, due to slow 
and progressive decay of the whole neurone, beginning usually 
at the terminal twigs and proceeding back towards the cell body 
with its contained nucleus. These primary degenerations 
involve systems of neurones, correlated by function rather than 
by anatomical situation. Examples are afforded by locomotor 
ataxy and progressive muscular atrophy, the former being a 
degeneration of the afferent sensory system of neurones, the 
latter of the motor efferent system. The cause of primary 
degenerations is probably a defect inherited or acquired in the 
" vita propria " of the neurones affected. They slowly atrophy 
and disappear, and their place is filled up by an overgrowth 
of the supporting neuroglia tissue (figs. 10 and 18). This over- 
growth of dense tissue is termed sclerosis, and was erroneously 
considered to be the cause, instead of the effect, of the atrophy 
of the nervous tissue. 

For further information the reader may consult the Croonian 
Lectures on the Degeneration of the Neurone, by F. W. Mott, 
published in the Lancet (1900); and the same writer's " Introduc- 
tion to Neuropathology," in Albutt's System of Medicine. Also 
Gower's Handbook of the Nervous System, von Monakow's Gehirn 
Pathologie, Ford-Robertson's Pathology of Mental Diseases and 
Mott's Archives of Neurology, vols. 1, 2, 3 and 4. (F. W. Mo.) 


NEUROPTERA (Gr. vevpov, a nerve, and irrepov, a wing), 
a term used in zoological classification for an order of the class 
Hexapoda (q.v.). No ordinal name used in the class has had so 
many varying meanings given to it by different authors. As 
first used by Linnaeus (1735) it included all insects with mandi- 
bulate jaws and two pairs of net-veined wings — dragon-flies, 
May-flies, stone-flies, lacewing-flies and caddis-flies — and it has 
been employed in the same wide sense by D. Sharp (Cambridge 
Nat. Hist. vol. v., 1895). But detailed study of these various 
groups of insects shows that beneath their common superficial 
resemblances lie important distinctions in structure, and essential 
differences in the course of the life-history. Some of the families 
— the stone-flies, for example — have the young insect much like 
the adult, growing its wings visibly outside the thoracic segments, 
and active at all stages of its life. The dragon-flies and May-flies 
are also active throughout their lives and possess external wing- 
rudiments, though the young insects differ rather strikingly 
from their parents. All such families — falling into the group 
Exopterygota as defined in the classification of the Hexapoda — 
were separated from the Neuroptera by W. E. Erichson (1839) 
and united with the Orthoptera, with which order some ento- 
mologists still associate them under the name of " Pseudo- 
neuroptera." The other groups of the old Linnean order (such 
as lacewing-flies and caddis-flies) — which are hatched as larvae 
markedly unlike the parent, develop wing-rudiments hidden 
under the larval cuticle, and only show the wings externally 
in a resting pupal stage, passing thus through a " complete " 
metamorphosis and falling into the sub-class Endopterygota — 
were retained in the order Neuroptera, which thus became much 
restricted in its extent. More recently the subdivision of the 
Linnean Neuroptera has been carried still further by the separa- 
tion of the caddis-flies and scorpion-flies as distinct orders 
(Trichoptera and Mecaptera respectively), and by the withdrawal 
of the " Pseudo-neuroptera " from the Orthoptera — with whose 
typical families they have little in common — and their division 
into a number of small orders. Altogether, eight orders are 
recognized in the classification adopted here, the first five of 
these belonging to the sub-class Exopterygota and the last three 
to the Endopterygota (see Hexapoda). 

The multiplication of orders is attended with practical diffi- 
culties, *and the distinctions between the various groups of the 
Linnean Neuroptera are without doubt less obvious than those 
between the Coleoptera (beetles) and the Diptera (two-winged 
flies) for example. But if classification is to express relationship, 
it is impossible to associate in the same order families whose 
kinship to insects of other orders is nearer than their kinship to 
each other. And no student can doubt that the stone-flies are 
akin to Orthoptera and the caddis-flies to the Lepidoptera, 
while dragon-flies and May-flies stand in an isolated position 
with regard to all other insects. In the present article, for 
the sake of convenience, all the insects which have been regarded 
by Linnaeus and others as "Neuroptera" are included, but they 
are distributed into the orders agreed upon by the majority 
of modern observers, and short characters of these orders and 
their principal families are given. For further details the reader 
should consult the special articles on these groups, to which 
cross-references will be found. 

Sub-class Exopterygota 
Order Plecoptera. 

This order was founded (1869) by F. Brauer — the name having 
been long previously suggested by H. Burmeister (1832) — to include 
the single family of the Perlidae or stone-flies. They resemble the 
Orthoptera more nearly than do any other group of the Linnean 
Neuroptera, having the anal area of the hind-wings folding fanwise 
beneath the costal area and the whole hind- wing covered by the fore- 
wing when the insect is at rest f> though the forewing is not firmer in 
texture than the hind-wing, as is the case in the Orthoptera. In the 
opinion of J. H. Comstock and J. G. Needham the wing-neuration 
in this order is the most primitive to be found in the Hexapoda. 
The tenth abdominal segment carries a pair of jointed cerci which are 
often elongate, and the feelers are always long, while the jaws are 
usually feeble and membranous, though the typical parts of a 
mandibulate mouth are present — mandibles, maxillae with inner and 
outer lobes and palps, and second maxillae (labium) whose lacinae 
are not fused to form a ligula. Both head and trunk are somewhat 
flattened dorso-ventrally, giving the insects a very distinct and 
characteristic aspect. The stone-flies further resemble the Orthoptera 
in their numerous Malpighian excretory tubes, which vary in number 
from twenty to sixty. The reproductive organs, both ovaries and 
testes, become fused together in the middle of the body. A re- 
markable point in the Plecoptera is the presence in some forms 
(Pteronarcys) of small branching gills on the three thoracic and the 
front abdominal segments. These organs appear, however, from the 
observations of H. A. Hagen not to be functional in the adult insect — 
they aremerely survivals from the aquatic nymphal stage. 

Life-history and Habits. — The nymphs of the Perlidae are closely 
like their parents and breathe dissolved air by means of tracheal gills 
on the thoracic segments, for they all live in the water of streams. 
They feed upon weaker aquatic creatures, such as the larvae of May- 
flies. 

The perfect insects, whose flight is feeble, are never found far from 
the water. A_ curious feature among them is the frequent reduction 
of the wings in the males of certain species, contrary to the usual 
condition among the Hexapoda, where if the sexes differ in the de- 
velopment of their wings it is the female which has them reduced. 
The Plecoptera are world-wide in their range and fossils referable to 
them have been described from rocks of Eocene, Miocene and Jurassic 
age, while C. Brongniart states that allied forms lived in the 
Carboniferous Period. 

Order Isoptera. 

The two families included in this order agree with the Plecoptera 
in the young insect resembling the parent, but they are all terrestrial 

	After C. L. Marlatt, Enl. Bull. 4 (NS.), U.S. Dept. Agric. 

	Fig. 1. — Termes flavipes, N. America, 
	a, Male from above. Mag- b and c, Hind segments of male and 
	nified 6 times. female abdomens, showing short 
	d, Male from side, cerci ; magnified 24 times. 
	e, Abdomen of female from /, End of shin and foot-segments magni- 
	side. Magnified 4 times. fied 40 times. 

throughout life. The hind-wings have no folding anal area and the 
wings of both pairs, when present, are closely alike (see fig. 1) whence 
the name Isoptera (=equal winged) lately applied to the group by 
G. Enderlein. The eleventh abdominal segment which carries the 
short jointed cerci (fig. i , &, c) may remain in a reduced condition 
distinct from the tenth. There are only six or eight Malpighian 
tubes — contrasting with the large number of these excretory organs 
found in the Orthoptera and Plecoptera. 

The Embiidae are feeble, somewhat soft-skinned insects with the 
prothorax small and the mesothorax and metathorax elongate. 
The feelers are long and simple, and the wings are very narrow, each 
with a sub-costal, a radial, a median and a cubital nervure; the 
branches of the median and the cubital, however, as well as the anal 
nervures, are vestigial, and there are a few short cross-bars between 

	After Marlatt, Ent. Butt. 4 (NS.), US. Dept. Attic. 

	Fig. 2. — Head of termite, a, Front view. 6, Hind view, showing 
	jaws (note the distinct inner and outer lobes of the second maxillae). 
	Magnified. 

the radial and the median. Some Embiidae are entirely wingless in 
the adult state, and it has been suggested that this is always the 
condition in the female sex. According to the recent investigations 
of K. VV. Verhoeff, the family contains only thirteen known species. 

The Embiidae live in warm countries, and are very retiring \n 
their habits, hiding under stones where they spin webs formed of silk 
produced by glands in the basal segments of the fore-feet. 

The Termitidae (so-called " white ants ") are the other family of 
lsoptera. They are relatively shorter and broader insects than the 
Embiidae with large prothorax and long wings, which have a trans- 
verse line of weakness at the base and are usually shed after the 
nuptial flight. The Termitidae are numerous in species in warm 
countries. The vast majority of individuals in a community consist 
of wingless forms — "workers" and "soldiers," which are^ unde- 
veloped members of either sex. Their economy is fully described in 
a special article on Termites. 

Order Corrodenlia. 

The insects included in this order differ from those of the two 
preceding orders in their more condensed abdomens which bear no 
cerci, while the number of Malpighian tubes is reduced to four. 
In the absence of cerci the Corrodentia are more specialized than the 
lsoptera and Plecoptera, but some of them show a more primitive 
character in the retention of vestigial maxillulae — the minute pair of 
jaws that are found behind the mandibles in the Aptera (g.r.). A 
large proportion of the Corrodentia are wingless. When wings are 
present the front pair are much larger than the hind pair, and the 
neuration is remarkable for the concresence of the median with the 

	After Mariatt, Bull. 4 {NS.), Div. Ent. US. Dept. Attic. 
	Fig. 3. — Book-louse (Atropos divinatoria, Fab.), Europe. 
	a, From below. 
	&, From above, magnified-* 30 
	times (eyes, feeler, feet and 
	claws more highly magni- 
	fied). 
	c, Second maxillae. 
	d, Mandible. 
	c, Lacinia or " pick " of first 
	maxilla. 
	/, Its palp. Highly magnified. 

cubital trunk, and the zigzag course of many of the branches. All 
the insects of this order are of small size and the cuticle is im- 
perfectly chitinized, so that the body as a whole is soft. The name 
Corrodentia was first used by H. Burmeister (1832) and has reference 
to the biting habits of the insects. Originally, however, the Corro- 
dentia included the order which Enderlein has recently separated as 
lsoptera (see above). As at present restricted, the Corrodentia 
include two distinct sub-orders. 

Copeognatha. — This sub-ordinal name has been applied by 
Enderlein to the " book-lice." These frail insects, the majority of 
which have wings of the tyj>e described above, are further character- 
ized by the presence of minute but distinct maxillulae, while the 
inner lobe (lacinia) of the first maxilla is an elongate, hard structure 
(the " pick," fig. 3, e) and the outer lobe is convex and soft. The 
labial (second maxillary) palps are reduced to small, rounded 
prominences external to the still smaller prominences that represent 
the lobes (fig. 3, c). The feelers of these insects are elongate and 
thread-like, consisting of from a dozen to nearly thirty segments. 
The prothorax is very small. 

The book-lice are familiar wingless insects, often found in houses 
running about among old papersand neglected biological collections. 
They belong to the family^ Psocidae which has a few score species — 
most of them winged — living out of doors on the bark of trees and 
among vegetable refuse. In some Psocidae the wings are in a 
vestigial state, and the fully winged species rarely if ever fly. H. A. 
Hagen observed that some genera possess wing-like outgrowths on 
the prothorax, comparable to those seen in certain insects of the 
Carboniferous Period. The Psocidae themselves have not been 
traced back beyond the Oligocene, in the amber of which period their 
remains are fairly numerous. 

Mallophaga. — This term was_ first applied by C. L. Nitzsch (1818) 
to the degraded wingless parasites (fig. 4) commonly known as bird- 
lice or biting-lice, differing from the true lice (see Hemiptera, 
LousE)by their jaws adapted for biting (not for piercing or sucking). 
By their structure they are evidently allied to the Copeognatha. 
They are abundantly distinct, however, through the short feelers 
with only three to five segments and the conspicuous prothorax. 
The head is relatively very large, but the 
eyes are degraded and often absent. A 
remarkable feature is the frequent con- 
crescence of mesothorax and metathorax 
and in some cases, even, their fusion with 
the anterior abdominal segments. The legs 
are stout and spiny, and well adapted for 
clinging to the hair or feathers of the host 
animal. It is usual to divide the Mal- 
lophaga into two families — the Liotheidae, 
possessing labial palps and two foot-claws, 
being fairly active insects, which are 
capable, on the death of their host, of 
seeking another, and the Philopteridae, 
without labial palps and with a single foot- 
claw modified for clasping (fig. 4) which 
never leave the host and perish themselves 
soon after its death. 

Order EphetneropUra. 

This order includes the single family of 
the Ephemeridae or May-flies. The name, 
although quite recently proposed by A. 
E. Shipley, should be used rather than 
A. S. Packard's older terin Plectoptera on 
account of the great liability of confusion 
between the latter and Plecoptera. The May-flies are remarkably 
primitive in certain of their characters, notably the elongate cerci, 
the paired, entirely mesodermal genital ducts, and the occurrence 
of an ecdysis after the acquisition of functional wings. ^ On the 
other hand, the reduced feelers, the numerous Malpighian tubes 
(40), the large complex eyes, the vestigial condition of the jaws, 
the excessive size of the fore-wings as compared with the hind- wings 
and their complex neuration with an enormous number of eross- 
nervules are all specializations. So in some respects is the life- 
history, with a true larval preparatory stage, unlike^ the parent 
form, and living an aquatic life, breathing dissolved air by means 
of a paired series of abdominal tracheal gills. Except for its 
aquatic adaptations, however, the ephemerid larva is wonderfully 
thysanuran in character, and possesses conspicuous and distinct 
maxillulae. See special article on May-flies. 
Order Odonala. 

The distinctness of the dragon-flies from other insects included in 
Linnaeus' s Neuroptera was long ago recognized by J. C. Fabricius, 
who proposed for them the ordinal name of Odonata (i775)- 
They resemble the May-flies in their " hemimetabolous " lite- 
history; the young insects are markedly unlike their parents, in- 
habiting fresh water and breathing dissolved air, either through 
tracheal gills at the tip of the abdomen, or by a branching system of 
air-tubes on the walls of the rectum into which water is periodically 
admitted. The winged insects resemble the May-flies in their short 
feelers and in the large number (50 to 60) of their Malpighian tubes, 
but differ most strikingly from those insects in their strong well- 
armoured bodies, their powerful jaws adapted for a predaceous 
manner of life, and the close similarity of the nind- wings to the fore- 
wings. All the wings are of firm, glassy texture, and very complex in 
their neuration; a remarkable and unique feature is that a branch 
of the radius (the radial sector) crosses the median nervure, while, 
by the development of multitudinous eross-nervules, the wing-area 
becomes divided into an immense number of small areolets. The 
tenth abdominal segment carries strong, unjointed cerci, while the 
presence of reproductive armature on the second abdominal segment 

	After Osborn, Ent. Bull. 7 
	(OS.), US. Dept. Attic. 

	Fig. a. — Biting-louse 
	(Trichoaectes scalaris) of 
	cattle. Magnified 30 
	times. 

of the male is a character found in no other order of the Hexapoda. 
See special Dragon-fly. 

Sub-class Endoptervgota 
Order Neuroptera. 

The insects retained in the order Neuroptera as restricted by 
modern systematists arc distinguished from the preceding orders by 
the presence of a resting pupal stage in the life-history, so that a 
" complete metamorphosis " is undergone. Structurally the Neuro- 
ptera are distinguished by elongate feelers, a large, free prothorax, a 
labium with the inner lobes of the second maxillae fused togetherto 
form a median ligula, membranous, net-veined wings without hairy 
covering, those of the two pairs being usually alike, the absence of 
abdominal cerci, and the presence of six or eight Malpighian tubes. 
The larvae are active and well-armoured, upon the whole of the 
" campodeiform " type, but destitute of cerci; they are predaceous 
in habit, usually with slender, sickle-shaped mandibles, wherewith 
they pierce various insects so as to suck their juices. The order 
contains nine families, most of which are wide in their geographical 
distribution. Fossil Neuroptera occur in the Lias and even in the 
Trias if the relationships of certain larvae have been correctly 
surmised. 

The Sialidae or alder-flies (q.v.) differ from other Neuroptera in the 
jaws of the larva — which is aquatic, breathing by paired, jointed 
abdominal gills — resembling those of the imago, and being adapted 
for the mastication of solid food. Some American genera (Corydalis) 
which belong to this family are gigantic among insects and their 
males possess enormous mandibles. The Raphidiidae or snake-flies 
(q.v.) are remarkable for the long, narrow, tapering prothorax which 
gives the appearance of a constricted neck, while the female has a long 
ovipositor. Both these families are very sparingly represented in 
our fauna. 

The Myrmeleonidae are large insects with short clubbed feelers on 
their prominent heads, and two pairs of closely similar net-veined 
wings, with regular oblong areolets at the tips. Their predaceous, 
suctorial larvae are the well-known ant-lions (q.v .). No members of 
this family inhabit our islands, though a few species occur in neigh- 
bouring parts of the continent. _ The same is the case with the 
allied AscaJaphidae, which are distinguished from the Myrmeleonidae 
by their elongate feelers — as long as the body — and by the irregular 
apical areolets of the wings. The curious Nemopteridae have slender 
feelers and very long strap-shaped hind-wings. The Mantispidae 
are remarkable among the Neuroptera for their elongate prothorax, 
raptorial fore-legs and hypermetamorphic life-history, the young 
campodeiform larva becoming transformed into a fat eruciform grub 
parasitic on young spiders or wasp-larvae (see Mantis- fly). The 
last-named two_ families are confined to warm regions of the earth. 
The lacewing-flies (q.v.), however, of which there are two families, 
the Hemerobtidae and Chrysopidae, whose larvae feed on Aphids, 
sucking their juices, are represented in our fauna. So are the tiny 
Coniopterygidae, which are covered with a white powdery secretion, 
and have very small hind-wings. Their larvae resemble those of the 
lacewings, attacking scale-insects and sucking their juices. 

Order Mecaptera. 
This small order was founded (1869) by F. Brauer — under the 
name of Panorpata — for the small family of the Panorpidae or 
scorpion-flies (q.v.). The name Mecaptera is due to Packard. They 
may be distinguished from the Neuroptera by the elongation of the 
head into a beak, the small prothorax, the narrow, elongate wings 
with predominantly longitudinal neuration, the presence of abdominal 
cerci and the eruciform larva. They are generally but sparingly 
distributed over the earth's surface and can be traced back in time 
to the early Jurassic epoch. 

Order Trichoptera. 

The caddis-flies (q.v.) constitute this order, the name of which 
(suggested by H. Burmeistcr) indicates the hairy covering of the 
wings. They are abundantly distinct from the Neuroptera and 
Mecaptera, through the absence of mandibles in the imago, the 
maxillae — both pairs of which possess the typical inner and outer 
lobes and jointed palps — forming a suctorial apparatus. The feelers 
are long, slender and many-jointed. While the fore-wings are 
elongate and narrow, the hind-wings arc broad, with a folding anal 
area. At the base ofeach wing projects a dorsal lobe — the jugum — 
and the neuration is predominantly longitudinal, resembling so 
closely that of the lower Lepidoptera (q.v.) that a nearer relationship 
of the Trichoptera to that order than to any group of the old Linnean 
Neuroptera is certain. Fossil Trichoptera occur in rocks of Liassic 
age. 

Frequently the whole of the Trichoptera are included in a single 
family, but most special students of the order recognize seven families. 
In all Trichoptera the maxillary palps of the female are five- 
segmented. The family Phryganeidae have males with four- 
segmented hairy palps; the larvae inhabit stagnant water and make 
cases of vegetable fragments. In the Limnephilidae the maxillary 
palp is three-segmented in the male, the larvae are variable in habit, 
many forming cases of snail-shells. The males of the Sericostomatidae 
have two or three segmented palps; their larvae inhabit running 
water and make cases of grains of sand, or of small stones. In the 
Leptoceridae, Hydropsychidae, Rhyacophilidae and Hydroptilidae the 
palps of the males have five segments like those of the females. 
The stone-built cases of the carnivorous Hydropsychid larvae are 
familiar objects in the water of swift streams. 

Bibliography. — For a general account of the various orders 
mentioned in the present article see D. Sharp, Cambridge Natural 
History, v. (London, 1895); L. C. Miall, Nat. Hist. Aquatic Insects 
(London, 1895); J. G. Needham, &c, Aquatic Insects in New 
York State (Albany, N.Y., IQ03); F. Brauer, Die Neuropteren 
Europas (Wicn, 1876); J. A. Paimen, Zur Morphologie des Tracheen- 
systems (Leipzig, 1877). Noteworthy writings on the special orders 
arc: Plecoptera: F. J. Pictct, Histoire naturelle des insectes 
Neuropieres-Perlides (G6neve, 1 871-1872); A. Imhof, Beitrage zur 
Anatomie von Perla maxima (Aarau, 1881); K. J. Morton, Trans. 
Ent. Soc. Lond. (1094-1896). Isoptera: For Embiidae see H. A. 
Ha^en, Canadian Entotn. xvii. (1885); G. Enderlein, Zool.Anz. 
xxvu (1903); K. W. Verhoeff, Abhandl. K. Leopold. Carotin. Akad. 
lxxxii. (1904). For Termitidae see Termites. Corrodentia: For 
Copeognatha see G. Enderlein, Ann. Hist. Nat. Mus. Nat. Hungar f i. 
(1903), and Zool. Jahrb. Syst. xviii. (1903); R. McLachlan, " British 
Species " in Ent. Mo. Mag. iii. (1867). For Mallophaga see E. Piaget, 
Les Pediculines (Leiden, 1 880-1 885); F. Grosse, Zeits. wiss. Zoolog. 
xlii. (1885). For Ephemeroptera and Odonata, see May-Fly and 
Dragon-Fly. Neuroptera (sens, str.): H. A. Hagen, Proc. 
Boston, Nat. Hist. Soc. xv. (1873); F. Brauer, Verh. Zool. bot. Gesells. 
Wien, xix. (1869) ; R. McLachlan, "British Neuroptera Planipennia" 
in Trans. Entotn. Soc. (1868). Mecaptera: F. Brauer (loc. cit.). 
Trichoptera: R. McLachlan, Trichoptera of the European Fauna 
(London, 1 874-1 880), and " British Trichoptera " in 2>a«s. Entom. 
Soc. (1865 and 1882); R. Lucas, Arch. f. Naturg. lix. (1893); G. 
Ulmer, Abhandl. naturhist. Verein Hamburg, xviii. (1903); A. 
Thienemann, Zoolog. Jahrb. System, xxii. (1905). (G. H. C.) 


NEUSALZ, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Silesia, on the Oder, 20 m. by rail N.W. of Glogau. Pop. (1905) 
13,002. It has three Evangelical churches, one of which belongs 
to the Herrnhut brotherhood, a Roman Catholic church and an 
orphanage. Its largest industry is, perhaps, the manufacture 
of thread; there are also in the town ironworks, breweries, 
shipbuilding yards and electrical works. Neusalz became a town 
in 1743. 

See Broniseh, Geschichte von Neusalz an der Oder (Neusalz, 1 893). 


NEUSS, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine province, 
lies 4 m. to the W. of Diisseldorf and i| m, from the W. bank 
of the Rhine, with which it is connected by the Erft canal. 
It lies at the junction of lines to Cologne, Viersen, Zevenaar 
(Holland), Diisseldorf, Diiren and Rheydt. Pop. (1005) 30,494, 
of whom 95% were Catholics. The chief building in the town 
is the church of St Quirinus, a remarkably fine example of the 
transition from the Round to the Pointed style; and there are 
six other Roman Catholic churches, two Protestant churches 
and a gymnasium, which contains a collection of Roman 
antiquities. The town hall was built in the 17th and altered 
in the 18th-century. The old fortifications are now laid out as a 
promenade encircling the town. Neuss produces oil and meal, 
and also manufactures woollen stuffs, chemicals and paper, 
bricks and iron-ware. Its markets for cereals are among the 
most important in Prussia, and it is also the centre of a brisk 
trade in cattle, coals, building materials and the products of its 
various manufactories. 

Neuss, the Novaesium of the Romans, frequently mentioned 
by Tacitus, formerly lay close to the Rhine, and was the natural 
centre of the district of which Diisseldorf has become the chief 
town. Drusus, brother of the emperor Tiberius, threw a bridge 
across the Rhine here, and his name is preserved in the Drusustor, 
the lower half of which is of Roman masonry. In 1474-1475 
Charles the Bold of Burgundy besieged the town in vain for 
eleven months, during which he lost 10,000 men; but it was 
taken and sacked by Alexander Farnese in 1586. Since 1887 
extensive excavations have been made of the foundations of a 
huge Roman camp, and many valuable Roman treasures have 
been unearthed. 

See C. Tucking, Geschichte der Stadt Neuss (Diisseldorf, 1891); 
F. Schmitz, Der Neusser Krieg, 1474-147$ (Bonn, 1896); W. 
Effmann, Die St Quirinus Kirche zu Neuss (Diisseldorf, 1890); and 
Band xx. of the Chroniken der deutschen Stadte. 

NEUSTADT (Polish, Prttdnik), a town of Germany, in the 
Prussian province of Silesia, on the river Prudnik, 60 m. by rail 
S.E. of Breslau. It has four Roman Catholic churches and one 
Evangelical. Pop. (1905) 20,187, the greater part of whom are 
Roman Catholics. The chief industries are tanning, dyeing 
and the manufacture of damask, linen, woollen stuffs, leather 
and beer. 

In 1745, 1760 and 1779 engagements between the Austrians 
and Prussians took place near Neustadt, which on the last 
occasion was bombarded and set on fire. 

See Weltzel, Geschichte der Siadt Neustadt (Neustadt, 1870). 


NEUSTADT-AN-DER-HAARDT, a town of Germany, in the 
Bavarian Palatinate, picturesquely situated under the eastern 
slope of the Haardt Mountains and at the mouth of the valley 
of the Speyerbach, 14 m. \V. of Spires, and at the junction of 
railway lines to Worms, Weissenburg and Monsheim. Pop. 
(1905) 18,576. It has four churches, two Evangelical and two 
Roman Catholic. The Protestant abbey church, a fine Gothic 
edifice dating from the 14th century, contains the tombs of several 
of the counts palatine of the Rhine. The Roman Catholic 
Ludwigskirche is a modern Gothic structure. The chief indus- 
tries of the town are cloth, paper, furniture, soap, starch and 
hats. It has also breweries and distilleries. A brisk trade is 
carried on in wood, grain, fruit and wine, all of which are 
extensively produced in the vicinity. Neustadt, which became a 
town in 1275, is one of the centres of the Rhenish "grape-cure," 
and thus attracts numerous visitors. 


NEU-STETTIN, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province 
of Pomerania, on the small Streitzig lake, 90 m. by rail 
N.E: of Stettin, at the junction of railways to Belgard, Posen 
and Stolpmiinde. Pop. (1905) 10,785. Its industries are iron- 
founding, dyeing, brewing and the manufacture of machinery, 
soap and matches. There is a considerable trade in cattle, 
grain and other agricultural produce, and in timber and spirits. 
Neu-Stettin was founded in 13 13 by Wratislaus, duke of 
Pomerania; on the model of Stettin. 

See Wilcke, Chronik der Stadt Neu-Stettin (Neu-Stettin, 1862); 
and F. W. Kasiski, Beschreibung der vaterlandischen Alterlhumer in 
Neu-Stettin (Danzig, 1881). 


NEU-STRELITZ, a town of Germany, ' capital of the grand- 
duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, situated between two small lakes, 
the Zierker See and the Glambecker See, 60 m. N. of Berlin, on 
the railway to Stralsund, at the junction of lines to Warnemunde 
and Buschhof. Pop. (1905) 11,656. It is built in the form of a 
star, the eight rays converging on a market-place adorned with 
a statue of the grand-duke George (d. i860). The ducal residence 
is a handsome edifice in a pseudo-classical style, with a library 
of 75,000 volumes, and collections of coins and antiquities. 
Other buildings arc the churches (two Evangelical and one 
Roman Catholic), the Carolinum (a large hospital), the town hall, 
the barracks, the gymnasium and the theatre. Its manufactures 
are iron-ware, machinery, pottery, beer and mineral waters. 
Its trade, chiefly in corn, meal and timber, is facilitated by the 
Zierker See and by a canal connecting the town with the Havel 
and the Elde. 

About i\ m. to the south lies Alt-Strelitz, the former capital 
of the duchy, a small town the inhabitants of which are employed 
in the manufacture of tobacco, leather and wax candles. Neu- 
Strelitz was not founded till 1726. In the vicinity is the chateau 
of Hohen-Zieritz, where Queen Louise of Prussia died in 1810. 


NEUSTRIA, the old name given to the western kingdom of 
the Franks, as opposed to the eastern kingdom, Austrasia 
(q.v.). The most ancient form of the word is Niuster, from niust, 
which would make the word signify the " most recent " con- 
quests of the Franks. The word Neustria does not appear as 
early as the Hisloria Francorum of Gregory of Tours, but is 
found for the first time in Fredegarius. The kingdom of Chilperic 
was retrospectively given this name, and in contemporary usage 
it was given to the kingdom of Clovis II., as opposed to that of 
Sigebert III., the two sons of Dagobert; and after that, the 
princes reigning in the West were called kings of Neustria, and 
those reigning in the East, kings of Austrasia. Under the new 
Carolingian dynasty, Pippin and Charlemagne restored the unity 
of the Frankish realm, and then the word Neustria was restricted 
to the district between the Loire and the Seine, together with 
part of the diocese of Rouen north of the Seine; while Austrasia 
comprised only the Frankish dominions beyond the Rhine, 
perhaps with the addition of the three cities of Mainz, Worms 
and Spires on the left bank. The districts between Neustria 
and Austrasia were called Media Francia or simply Francia. 
In 843 Brittany took from Neustria the countships of Rennes 
and Nantes; and gradually the term Neustria came to be 
restricted to the district which was later called Normandy. 
Dudo of Saint Quentin, who flourished about the year 1000, 
gives the name Neustria to the lands ceded to Rollo and his 
followers during the 10th century. In the year 1663, the Pere 
de Moustier gave to his work on the churches and abbeys of 
Normandy the title of Neustria pia. 

At the time of Charlemagne, Lombardy was divided into five 
provinces: Neustria, Austrasia, Aemilia, Littoraria maris and 
Tuscia. Austrasia was the name given to eastern Lombardy, 
and Neustria that given to western Lombardy, the part last 
occupied by the Lombards. 

See F. Bourquelet, " Sens des mots France et Neustrie sous le 
regime merovingien," in the Bibliotkeque de Vlcole des chartes, 
xxvi. 566-574; Longnon, Atlas historique de la France, both atlas 
and text. -(C. Pf.) 


NEUTITSCHEIN (Czech Novy JiMn), a town of Austria, in 
Moravia, 75 m. N.E. of Briinn by rail. Pop. (1900) 11,891, 
chiefly German. It is situated on a spur of the Carpathians, and 
on the banks of the Titsch, an affluent of the Oder. It is the chief 
place in the Kuhlandchen, a fertile valley peopled by German 
settlers, who rear cattle and cultivate flax. At Neutitschein 
manufactures of woollen cloth, flannel, hats, carriages and 
tobacco are carried on; and it is also the centre of a brisk trade. 
The town was founded in 1311. Neutitschein was in 1790 the 
headquarters of the Austrian field-marshal Loudon, who died 
here in the same year and is buried in the parish church. 


NEUTRALITY, the state or condition of being neutral (Lat. 
neuter, neither of two), of not being on or inclined to one side or 
another, particularly, in international law, the condition of a 
state which abstains from taking part in a dispute between other 
states. Neutrality is the most progressive branch of modern 
International Law. It is also that branch of International 
Law in which the practice of self-restraint takes the place 
of the direct sanctions of domestic law most effectively. The 
rapid changes it is undergoing are in fact bringing the state- 
system of the modern world nearer to the realization of the dream 
of many great writers and thinkers, of a community of nations 
just as much governed by legal methods as any community of 
civilized men. While the right of war was simply the right of 
the stronger, there was no room for neutral rights, for, without 
going back to the time of the ancients, the so-called rights of war 
and conquest are nothing but survivals of the right of brute 
strength. No nation or community down to comparatively recent 
times was treated as having a right to what it could not keep. 
It is the growth of a law of neutrality, through the modern 
possibility of concerted action among neutral states, which is 
bringing about improvement, and, though the signs of our times 
are not always reassuring, we have taken a long stride forward 
since Molloy, in his De Jure maritimo el navali (1680), wrote: 
" As a neuter neither purchases friends nor frees himself from 
enemies, so commonly he proves a prey to the victor; hence it 
is held more advantage to hazard in a conquest with a companion 
than to remain in a state wherein he is in all probability of being 
ruined by the one or the other." 

It was the great commercial communities, the Hansa in the 
north and Venice and the Mediterranean maritime republics in 
the south, which were first able to insist on some sort of regulation 
of the usages of war for their own protection. With the growth of 
intercourse among nations a further advance was made, by treaty 
stipulations entered into in time of peace, to provide rules for 
their guidance in the event of war, but it is only in our own 
time that the idea of a substantive neutral right has obtained 
recognition. To our own time belongs the final acceptance of the 
principle that the neutral flag protects an enemy's goods except 
contraband, the conception of neutralization of territory, the 
abolition of fictitious blockades, the practice of declarations of 
neutrality, the detachment from the high sea and neutralization 
of the zone called territorial waters, and the Areopagus of nations 
called the European Concert, in which the right of neutrals is 
asserted as a brake upon the operation of the still venerated 
right of conquest. The rights of neutrals have received their 
most recent affirmation in several of the decisions of the Hague 
Peace Conferences. 

International trade and intercourse have become so intricate 
that war can no longer be waged without causing the most serious 
loss to neutral nations, which, moreover, suffer from it without 
any of the possible contingent benefits it may procure for the 
immediate parties. So much is it so, that most great powers have 
found it necessary for their self-protection to enter into defensive 
alliances with others, the direct object of which is the preservation 
of European peace by the threat of making war so gigantic a 
venture that no state will again embark on it " with a light 
heart." The next step will probably be alliances between 
states which, by their nature or by their having reached the 
limit of their expansion, have nothing further to gain by war 
with each other, for the purpose of securing perpetual peace as 
between themselves. 

Different attempts have been made to define neutrality, 
but the word defines itself, so far as a succinct definition serves 
any purpose. The subject covers too wide and varied 
and n Jcopc. an area °* matter to be condensed into a short state- 
ment of any kind. Neutrality entails rights and duties 
on both the belligerent and the neutral sides. Theoretically, 
neutrality, to be complete, would require the neutral to abstain 
from everything which could even remotely be of assistance 
to either belligerent./ To this obligation would theoretically 
correspond that the belligerent should carry on the war without 
doing anything which could even remotely disturb or interfere 
with the neutral state or the free activity of its citizens. Neither 
the one nor the other is found to be practicable. It is not even 
easy for the belligerent to observe absolutely the duty of doing 
no direct injury to neutral territory. A battle may be fought to 
the very edge of the neutral frontier, and shells may explode in 
any neutral town within the firing range of modern artillery. 
The present respect paid by belligerents to territorial waters 
is a palliative in the case of a seaboard frontier; but even the 
three-mile limit acknowledged by most countries would permit 
belligerent vessels with present range of artillery to fire land- 
wards far into neutral territory. Compensation — it is true, would 
be due for any damage done, but this does not alter the fact that 
acts of war can produce direct consequences on neutral territory 
which have the character of carrying war into a neutral state. 
The neutral state, moreover, is obliged to incur heavy ex- 
penditure to protect its frontier from being traversed by either 
belligerent, and thus avoid itself being exposed to claims for 
compensation for an act which it would otherwise be powerless 
to prevent. In the case of a maritime war, the neutral state 
is also bound to exercise strict supervision to prevent its ports 
from being used by either belligerent for the purpose of increasing 
its military strength. "In short, war cannot be carried on without 
heavy expense and inconvenience to neighbouring neutral states. 
The inconvenience to the intercourse of neutral citizens is still 
greater. Their ships are liable to be taken out of their course, 
and their cargoes to be discharged to the bottom of the hold in 
search of articles which are contraband according to circum- 
stances over which they have no control, and they may be 
confiscated without recourse by judges appointed by one of the 
interested parties. Even their whole trade with specific ports 
of the one belligerent may be stopped by the ships of the other 
belligerent without indemnity. On the other hand, a great deal 
of vital assistance can be given by neutral^ citizens to the one 
or the other belligerent in money, or by supplies of arms, ammuni- 
tion, food and other commodities, which it is not at present the 
duty of neutral states to interfere with. 

The respective rights and duties of belligerent neutrals 1 in 
current practice may be subdivided as follows: — 

i. Belligerent duty to respect neutral territory and neutral 
territorial waters. 

2. Neutral right of official representation and mediation- 
of intercourse of neutral citizens with citizensof either belligerent 
of convoy, &c. 

3. Belligerent right of blockade, angary, visit and search, 
capture and confiscation of contraband of war. 

4. Neutral duties: (absolute) of abstention from any direct 
corporate assistance to either belligerent, of enforcement of 
respect by both belligerents for neutral territory; (relative) 
of prevention of any recruiting for either belligerent, or arming 
or equipping of vessels for their service; and (contingent) of 
allowing commercial access to the one or other belligerent without 
distinction, and of granting impartially to one or the other 
belligerent any rights, advantages or privileges, which, according 
to the usages recognized among nations, are not considered as an 
intervention in the struggle. 

This subdivision, we believe, covers the whole ground of 
neutrality. We shall follow it in this article. 

Belligerent Duty. — It is now Universally recognized among 
European states that a belligerent army must make no use 
of its strength in the field to .carry its operations into Duty to 
neutral territory or into neutral waters. Belligerent respect 
forces entering neutral territory are by the practice **"*"* 
of nations bound to surrender their arms to the neutral 
state, and remain hors de combat till the close of the war. (Com- 
pare arts. 11 and 12 of the Hague Convention relating to the 
" Rights and Duties of Neutral Powers and persons in case of 
war on land " 18th of October 1907.) 

Through territorial waters belligerent vessels are allowed to 
pass freely as in time of peace. Nor does the usage of nations 
forbid a belligerent vessel from entering a neutral port. Acces8 to 
Motives of humanity have sanctioned this distinction an a duty 
between territorial and maritime warfare. The Ad- to respect 
miralty Instructions (1893) set out the rights of bel- JJJJjJnJ 1 ^ 
ligerents as Great Britain views them as follows: ports. 
" Subject to any limit which the neutral authorities 
may place upon the number of belligerent cruisers to be admitted 
into any one of their ports at the same time, the captain, by 
the comity of nations, may enter a neutral port with his ship for 
the purpose of taking shelter from the enemy or from the weather, 
or of obtaining provisions or repairs that may be pressingly 
necessary (I. section 592). * He is bound to submit to any regula- 
tions which the local authorities may make respecting the place 
of anchorage, the limitation of the length of stay in the port, the 
interval to elapse after a hostile cruiser has left the port before 
his ship may leave in pursuit, &c. (I. section 593). He must 
abstain from any acts of hostility towards the subjects, cruisers, 
vessels or other property of the enemy which he may find in 
the neutral port (section 594). He must also abstain from 
increasing the number of his guns, from procuring military stores, 
and from augmenting his crew even by the enrolment of British 
subjects " (section 595). 

Nor may the commander of a British warship take a capture 
into a neutral port against the will of the locals-authorities 
(Holland, Manual of Naval Prize Law, 1888, section 299). This 
subject was one of those dealt with at the Hague Conference of 
1907. (See art. 18 of the " Convention relating to the rights and 
duties of neutral powers in naval war.") 

Neutral Rights. — Neutral powers have the right to remain, 
as far as possible, unaffected by the war operations, and, therefore, 
continue their diplomatic relations with the belligerent 
states. The immunities and exterritoriality of their !egatio°o. 
diplomatic agents attach to them as in time of peace, 
subject only to necessity of war, which may entitle a beltigerent to 
place restrictions on this intercourse. Thus, during the Franco- 
German War, on the surrounding of Paris, foreign diplomatists 
in the besieged city were refused by the German authorities all 
possibility of corresponding with their governments, except by 
letters left open for their inspection. Neutral legations may also 
undertake the representation of private interests of subjects of the 
one belligerent on the territory of the other. Thus in the Franco- 
German War of 187 1 the Germans in France were placed under the 
protection of the United States legation, and the French in 
Germany under that of the British legation; in the war of 1898 
between the United States and Spain, American interests in 
Spain were committed to the care of the British legation, and 
those of Spaniards in the United States to that of the Austro- 

» Hungarian legation. By legations are understood both diplo- 
matic and consular authorities. The protection granted is in 
the nature of mere mediation. It confers no rights on the belli- 
gerent subjects in question, nor does it give the neutral legation 
any right to protect a beUigerent subject or his property against 
any ordinary rights of war. 

Good offices, properly speaking, are a mild form of mediation 
or tentative mediation, ix. mediation before it has been accepted 
Right of k v the. parties. Article 3 of the Hague Convention 
offering for/'the pacific settlement of international disputes 
good of October 18, 1907, however, provides that " powers, 
a^atfn stran S ers to the dispute, have the right to offer 
good offices or mediation, even during the course of 
hostilities," and that " the exercise of this right can never be 
regarded by one or other of the parties in conflict as an un- 
friendly act." The Hague Convention puts an end to the doubt 
whether a neutral power can mediate without involving itself 
in some way with the one or the other side in the dispute. Media- 
tion had already been provided for in several existing treaties, 
such as the Treaty of Paris (30th March 1856), which provides 
that " if any dissension should arise between the Sublime Porte 
and one or more of the other signatory powers and threaten the 
maintenance of their good relations, the Sublime Porte and each 
of these powers before resorting to force shall give an opportunity 
to the other contracting parties in order to prevent such extreme 
measures " (article 8) ; the Treaty of Yedo between the United 
States and Japan (29th July 1858) stipulating that in the case of 
difference between Japan or any other state, " the president of 
the United States, at the request of the Japanese government, 
will act as a friendly mediator in such matters of difference as 
may arise between the government of Japan and any other 
European power" (article 2); and the General Act of Berlin 
relating to West Africa (1885), which provides that "in the 
case of a serious dissension having arisen on the subject of, or 
within the territories" in question, between the signatory 
powers, they undertake, before taking up arms, to have 
recourse to the mediation of one or more of the friendly powers 
(article 12). 

In the Venezuela-Guiana boundary question, the mediation 
of the United States government was declined by Great Britain, 
but its good offices were accepted. In the difficulty which arose 
between Germany, and Spain in connexion with the hoisting of 
the German flag on one of the Caroline Islands, Spain did not 
consider arbitration consistent with the sovereign power she 
claimed to exercise over the island in question, but she accepted 
the mediation of the pope, and the matter was settled by pro- 
tocols, signed at Rome (17th December 1885). These incidents 
show the uses of variety and gradation in the methods of 
diplomacy. 

Neutral subjects have the right to carry on trade and inter- 
course with belligerent subjects in so far as they do not interfere 
Rights of w * tn ^ e operations or necessities of war, and it is no 
neutral violation of the neutral character that this trade or 
subjects on intercourse is of benefit to either side. This is subject 
b s e JIJ gerent always to the belligerent right to capture and confiscate 
contraband of war (see below). On the other hand, the 
property of subjects and citizens of neutral states follows the 
fortune of the belligerent state within whose territorial juris- 
diction it is situated. It is liable to the same charges as that of 
native subjects and citizens, and in case of military contributions 
neutral subjects on belligerent soil can claim no protection or 
exemption (see below, Angary). They have also the same rights 
to all indemnities for loss as are granted to native subjects and 
citizens. 

The position of neutral pubb'c ships and the relative assimila- 
tion to them of mail steamers has been the subject of some 
controversy. A public ship is a ship having an official character. 
It includes not only warships, but also any ships affected to 
any specific and exclusive government purpose. Public ships in 
this sense are invested with an extra-territorial character, and 
the state to which they belong is directly responsible 
for their acts. They are therefore not liable to visit and of neutral 
search for contraband of war, and are exempt from terri- pabik; 
torial jurisdiction even in belligerent waters. As regards ships and 
vessels which are engaged partly in private traffic and ™fJ merSt 
partly on public service, such as mail steamers and 
government packets, the position is necessarily different. Under 
the Japanese Prize Law, adopted in view of the Chino-Japanese 
campaign, any vessel carrying contraband of war, whose destina- 
tion is hostile, may be detained, without exception being made 
for mail steamers. The United States proclamation of April 
1898 in connexion with the Spanish War stated that mail steamers 
would only be stopped in case of grave suspicion of their carrying 
contraband or of their violating a blockade. 

On the arrest of the German mail steamers " Bundesrath " and 
" General " during the South African War, the German govern- 
ment represented to the British government that "it was highly 
desirable " that steamers flying the German mail-flag should not 
be stopped, and the British government thereupon issued orders 
not to stop them on suspicion only (Parliamentary Papers , 
Africa, No. 1, 1900). This was a precedent of the greatest 
importance. It would have practically assimilated mail steamers 
to public ships. Yet the mere circumstance of carrying the mails 
does not manifestly per se change the character cf the ship. 
Both this subject and the position of packets under state owner- 
ship, which may carry on trade and may consequently transport 
contraband, require deliberate adjustment by treaty. The 
convention between Great Britain and France respecting postal 
communications (30th August 1890) provides that " in the case 
of war between the two nations the packets of the two adminis- 
trations shall continue their navigation, without impediment or 
molestation until a notification is made on the part of either 
of the two governments of the discontinuance of postal com- 
munications, in which case they shall be permitted to return 
freely to their respective ports " (article 9). The position of 
either as neutral is not dealt with. The tendency seems to be 
towards exemption, but in this case there should be official 
certification that the ships in question carry nothing in the 
nature of contraband. 

Meanwhile the Hague Conference of 1907 has adopted rules 
under which postal correspondence of neutrals or belligerents 
is inviolable, whether it be official or private, or the 
carrying vessel be neutral or an enemy vessel, but in ayoy ' 
so far as mail ships are concerned they are not otherwise exempt 
from the application of the rules of war affecting merchant ships 
generally (see Convention on restrictions on the exercise of the 
right of capture in maritime war, October, 1007). Connected 
with the position of public ships is the question of the right of 
convoy. Neutral merchant ships travelling under the escort of 
a warship or warships of their own flag are held by some 
authorities to be exempt from visit and search. The Japanese 
Prize Law, which is largely based on English practice, following 
on this point the recommendations of the Institute of Inter- 
national Law (see Reglement des prises maritimes, Annuaire 1888, 
p. 221), provides that "when the commander of a neutral convoy 
declares that there is no contraband of war on board the vessels 
under convoy, and that all the papers are in order in these vessels, 
the vessels shall not be visited " (article 23). 1 The United States, 

	1 At the outset of the Chino-Japanese War, Vice-Admiral Sir E. R. 
	Fremantle sent a note to the Japanese admiral requesting him to 
	" give orders to the ships under his command not to board, visit or 
	interfere in any way with British merchant vessels, observing that the 
	British admiral had directed all British ships under his orders to 
	afford protection to such merchant vessels, and not to allow them to 
	be molested in any way." Professor Takahashi, in his International 
	Law of the Chino-Japanese War, relates that the Japanese admiral 
	replied that " as the matters demanded by the British admiral 
	belonged to the sphere of international diplomacy, and consequently 
	were outside his official responsibility, they should be communicated 
	directly to the Japanese Department of Foreign Affairs.** " The idea 
	of the British admiral," observes Professor Takahashi, " seemed to be 
	not only to claim a right of convoy, which has never been recognized 
	in treaties with Mexico(sth April 1831), Venezuela (20th January 
	1836), Peru (6th Sept. 1870), Salvador (6th Decemher 1870) and 
	Italy (26th February 1 87 1) , have agreed to accept the commander's 
	declaration as provided in the Japanese Prize Law. Wharton 
	quotes in his International Law Digest a passage from a despatch 
	of Mr Secretary Forsyth (18th May 1837) in which he states that 
	" it is an ordinary duty of the naval force of a neutral during 
	either civil or foreign wars to convoy merchant vessels of the 
	nation to which it belongs to the ports of the belligerents. This, 
	however, should not be done in contravention of belligerent 
	rights as denned by the law of nations or by treaty." The 
	Spanish Naval Instructions (24th April 1898) in the war with 
	the United States granted unconditional exemption to convoyed 
	neutral ships (article 11). The subject has now been dealt with 
	by the Declaration of London (1 908-1 909), which requires the 
	commander of a convoy to give a statement in writing as to the 
	character of the vessels and cargoes (see Convoy). A neutral 
	merchant ship, travelling under enemy's convoy, places itself, 
	with the assistance of the belligerent force, beyond the application 
	of the belligerent right of visit and search, and thus commits a 
	breach of neutrality. 

Belligerent Rights. — Since the declaration of Paris providing 
that blockades in order to he binding must be effective, that is 
Blockade to say > must ^ e maintained by a force sufficient really 
to prevent access to the enemy's coast, the tendency 
has heen to give a precise form to all the obligations of the 
blockading belligerent. Thus it is now generally agreed that 
notification to the neutral should be sufficiently detailed to 
enable neutral vessels to estimate, with practical accuracy, the 
extent of their risks. French writers consider a general notifica- 
tion, though desirable, as insufficient, and hold an individual 
notification to each neutral ship which presents itself at the line 
of blockade as requisite. This theory was applied by France in 
the Franco-German War, and earlier by the Northern States in 
the American Civil War. The new Japanese Prize Law (1894) 
does not attempt to prescribe any such notification to each ship, 
but sets out that notice of blockade to each ship is either actual 
or constructive. " Actual " it describes as being when the 
master is shown to have had knowledge of the blockade, in 
whatever way he may have acquired such knowledge, whether 
by direct warning from a Japanese warship or from any other 
source; " constructive," when a notification of its existence has 
been made to the proper authorities of the state to which the 
vessel belongs, and sufficient time has elapsed for such authorities 
to communicate the notification to the subjects of that nation, 
whether or not they have in fact communicated it. No blockade, 
however, was attempted by the Japanese government, and the 
application of the rules was not put to the test. 

In the war with Spain the United States proclamation of the 
investment of Cuba stated that an efficient force would be 
posted, so as to prevent the entrance and exit of vessels from 
the blockaded ports, and that any neutral vessel approaching 
or attempting to leave any of them, " without notice or know- 
ledge" of the establishment of the blockade, would be duly 
warned by the commander of the blockading forces, who would 
endorse on her register the fact and date of such warning, and 
where such endorsement was made. The words " without notice 
or knowledge " were explained fully in the instructions to 
blockading vessels (20th June 1898). "Neutral vessels," said 
these instructions, " are entitled to notification of a blockade 
before they can be made prize for its attempted violation." 
" The character of this notification is not material. It may 
be actual, as by a vessel of the blockading force, or con- 
structive, as by a proclamation of the government maintaining 
the blockade, or by common notoriety. If a neutral vessel 
'can be shown to have notice of the blockade in any way, 

	by British prize courts, but also to extend it over all waters of the 
	Far East, where British warships were not actually engaging in 
	convoy. Soon afterwards the matter was settled without any diffi- 
	culty. On 11th August the under-Secretary of the Japanese Foreign 
	Office received a letter from the British Minister in T6ky6 stating 
	that there must be some misunderstanding, and that the British 
	government would never try to interfere with belligerent right." 

	Angary* 

she is good prize and should be sent in for adjudication; 
but should the formal notice not have been given, the rule 
of constructive knowledge arising from notoriety should be 
construed in a manner liberal to the neutral." Thus the United 
States government abandoned the system of individual notifica- 
tion inserted in the proclamation of 19th April 1861, which was 
only found practicable in the case of vessels which had presumably 
sailed without knowledge. In such cases it was provided by 
the more recent instructions that they should be boarded by 
an officer, who should enter the notice in the ship's log, such 
entry to include the name of the blockading vessel giving notice, 
the extent of the blockade, and the date and place, verified 
by his official signature. The vessel was then to be set free, 
with a warning that, should she again attempt to enter the same 
or any other blockaded port, she would be good prize. The 
Declaration of London (1908-1909) exhaustively treats of this 
subject and has regulated it with a leaning towards continental 
views (see Blockade). 

Angary, or Droit d'Angarie, is a contingent belligerent right, 
arising out of necessity of war, to dispose over, use and destroy, 
if need be, property belonging to neutral states. 1 
During the Franco-German War imminent necessity 
was pleaded by the German government,' as the justification 
of using force to seize and sink six British coal-ships in the Seine 
to prevent French gun-boats from running up the river and 
interfering with the tactics of the German army operating on 
its banks. The captains of the Vessels refused to enter into any 
agreement with the commanding German general, and the vessels 
were then sunk by being fired upon. The British government 
raised no objection to the exercise of the right, and confined itself 
to demanding compensation for the owners, which the German 
government declared itself ready to pay. Count Bismarck 
evidently felt the use which might be made against Germany, 
as a neutral power, of such an extreme measure, and took care 
in the correspondence with the British government to emphasize 
the pressing character of the danger, which could not he other- 
wise parried. 

A case given in the text-books as another one of angary 
during the same war was the temporary seizure and conversion 
to war purposes of Swiss and Austrian rolling-stock in Alsace, 
without any apparent military necessity. Ordinary private 
neutral property on belligerent soil, it must be remembered, 
follows the fate of private property generally. The only 
distinction between the right of angary and the right of 
assimilating private neutral property- to private property 
generally on helligerent soil which seems based on reason is 
that, whereas private property of neutrals generally which has 
remained on belligerent soil is sedentary, or, so to speak, domi- 
ciled there, neutral vessels are mere visitors with a distinct 
external domicile. The writer thinks the assimilation of neutral 
railway carriages to neutral vessels in this respect not unreason- 
able. 11 < 

A neutral state in its corporate capacity, we have seen, must 
abstain from acts which can be of assistance to either belligerent, 
and it is bound to exercise reasonable diligence to 
prevent its territory being used as a base for belligerent fond.*' 
operations. The duties of a neutral state as a state 
go no further. Commercial acts of its citizens, even the export 
of arms and munitions of war to a helligerent country, do not, 
in the present state of international usage, so long as both 
helligerents are free to profit by such acts alike, involve liability 
on the part of the neutral state. But relief from the obligation 
of repressing breaches of neutrality by contraband traffic of 
subjects has its counterpart in the right granted to belligerent 
warships of visit and search of neutral merchant vessels, and 
in the possible condemnation, according to circumstances, of 
the ship and confiscation of goods held to be contraband. 

	1 Angaria (from Hyyapos, a messenger), a post station. The French 
	word- Jiangar or shed is probably of the same origin. 

	1 Treaties between the Zollverein and Spain (30th March 1868) and 
	between Germany and Portugal (2nd March 1872) contain special 
	provisions for the fixing of indemnities in case of any forced utiliza- 
	tion by either state of private property of the citizens of the other. 

Contraband is of two kinds — absolute contraband, such as 
arms of all kinds, machinery for manufacturing arms, ammuni- 
tion, and any materials which are of direct application in naval 
or military armaments; and conditional contraband, consisting 
of articles which are fit for, but not necessarily of direct, applica- 
tion to hostile uses. The British Admiralty Manual of Prize 
Law (1888), following this distinction, enumerates as absolutely 
contraband: arms of all kinds and machinery for manufacturing 
arms; ammunition and materials, for ammunition, including 
lead, sulphate of potash, muriate of potash, chlorate of potash 
and nitrate of soda; gunpowder and its materials, saltpetre 
and brimstone; also guncotton; military equipments and 
clothing; military stores, naval stores, such as masts, spars, 
rudders, and ship-timber, hemp and cordage, sailcloth, pitch 
and tar, copper fit for sheathing vessels, marine engines and 
the component parts thereof, including screw propellers, paddle 
wheels, cylinders, cranks, shafts, boilers, tubes for boilers, 
boiler plates and fire-bars, marine-cement and the material 
used in the manufacture thereof, blue lias and Portland cements; 
iron in any of the following forms — anchors, rivet iron, angle 
iron, round bars of iron of from f to f of an inch diameter, rivets, 
strips of iron, sheets, plate iron exceeding i of an inch, and 
Low Moor and Bowling plates; — and as conditionally contraband: 
provisions and liquors fit for the consumption of army or 
navy, money, telegraphic materials, such as wire, porous cups, 
platina, sulphuric acid, materials for the construction of a 
railway, such as iron bars, sleepers and so forth, coal, hay, 
horses, rosin, tallow, timber. 1 

The classing of coal as conditional contraband has given 
rise to much controversy. Great Britain has consistently held 
-. it to be so. During the war of 1870 the French and 
German warships were only allowed to take at English 
ports enough to return to a French or German port respectively. 
In 1885, during the Franco-Chinese campaign, after protest 
by the Chinese government, Great Britain applied the same 
rule at Hong-Kong and Singapore. During the Spanish-American 
War neither belligerent seems to have treated coal as contraband. 
In the case of the coal-ships which were prevented from landing 
their cargoes at Cuba, the prevention seems to have been con- 
nected with the blockade only. At the West African conference 
of 1884 Russia declared that she would " categorically refuse 
her consent to any articles in any treaty, convention or instru- 
ment whatever which would imply " the recognition of coal 
as contraband of war (Parliamentary Papers , Africa, No. 4, 
1885). Coal, however, is so essential to the prosecution of war 
that it is impossible to avoid classing it as conditional contra- 
band, so long as such contraband is recognized. The alternative, 
of course, would be to allow both belligerents freely to supply 
themselves at neutral ports, and neutral vessels freely to supply 
belligerent coaling stations. 

During the Franco-Chinese campaign of 1885 and the South 
African War there was controversy as to the legality of treating 
food-stuffs as conditional contraband. During the 
stuffs. former the subject-matter was rice, and the circum- 
stances were exceptional. The hostilities being at 
the outset reprisals, and not actual war, France at first exercised 
no right of search over British merchant ships. Great Britain, 
on her side, for the same reason did not object to French war 
vessels coaling, victualling and repairing at British ports. 
On China protesting against this indulgence to France, Great 

	1 The Japanese Prize Law (21st August 1894) makes the following 
	distinction: (1) Arms of all kinds, brimstone, dynamite, nitrate of 
	potash, and all goods fit for the purpose of war exclusively: the 
	above-mentioned goods are contraband when they are on board a 
	vessel which either has a hostile destination or calls at any port of the 
	enemy. (2) Provisions and liquors, money, telegraphic materials, 
	such as wire, platinum, sulphuric acid and zinc, porous cups, materials 
	for the construction of a railway, as iron bars, sleepers, &c, coal, 
	timber and so forth: the above-mentioned goods are contraband 
	goods when the destination "of the vessel is either the enemy's fleet at 
	sea pr a hostile port, used exclusively or mainly for naval or military 
	equipment. When it is clearly known that, though goods detailed in 
	the above sections 1 and 2 are found on board a vessel, they are 
	merely for her own use, they cannot be deemed contraband goods. 

Britain, as above stated, put in force her practice of treating 
coal as contraband, and thereupon France exercised her corre- 
sponding belligerent right of searching British vessels. The 
closing of British coaling stations to French warships was a 
serious inconvenience to France, and she proclaimed " that in 
the circumstances in which war was being carried on " the 
cargoes of rice which were being shipped to the northern Chinese 
ports were contraband. By depriving the Chinese government 
of part of the annual tribute sent from the southern provinces 
in the form of rice she hoped to bring pressure on the Peking 
government. This was a manifest stretching of the sense 
of conditional contraband. Besides, no distinction was made 
as to destination. The British government protested, but no 
cases were brought into the French prize courts, and the 
legality of the measure has never been judicially examined. 

The controversy during the South African War was confined 
to theory. In practice no stoppage of food-stuffs seems to have 
taken place, though the fact that the whole able-bodied popula- 
tion of the enemy states formed the fighting force opposed to 
Great Britain made it clear that the free import of food supplies 
from abroad helped the farmer-soldiers to carry on warfare 
without the immediate care of raising food crops. 

The two cases cited show the great difficulty of fixing the 
character of conditional contraband in a way to prevent arbitrary 
seizures. During the Russo-Japanese War (1904-1905) there was 
a warm controversy between the British and Russian govern- 
ments on the scope of the belligerent right to declare 
certain articles contraband. The Conference of London (1908-9), 
by enumerating the articles which are absolute contraband, 
limiting those which may be declared contraband, and fixing 
certain articles which can in no case be declared contraband, 
has endeavoured to meet the difficulties which arise in practice 
(see Contraband). 

Trade between neutrals has a prima facie right to go on, in 
spite of war, without molestation. But if the ultimate destina- 
tion of goods, though shipped first to a, neutral port, 
is enemy's territory, then, according to the " doctrine Jj° n " 
of continuous voyages," the goods may be treated as if voyages* 
they had been shipped to the enemy's territory direct. 
This doctrine, though Anglo-Saxon in its origin and develop- 
ment, has been put in force by an Italian court in the case of the 
Doelwijk, a Dutch vessel which was adjudged good prize on the 
ground that, although bound for Jibouti, a French colonial port, 
it was laden with a provision of arms of a model which had 
gone out of use, and which could only be intended for use by 
the Abyssinians, with whom Italy was at war. The subject has 
been fully discussed by the Institute of International Law, by 
whom the following rule has been adopted: "Destination to 
the enemy is presumed where the shipment is to one of the 
enemy's ports, or to a neutral port, if it is unquestionably proved 
by the facts that the neutral port was only a stage (Hape) towards 
the enemy as the final destination of a single commercial 
operation." 2 

The question of the legality of the doctrine was raised by 
Chancellor von Btilow during the South African War in connexion 
with the stopping of German ships bound for Delagoa Bay, a 
neutral port. He contended that such vessels were quite, 

	2 The only person^ in that eminent assemblage who raised an 
	objection to the principle of the doctrine was the distinguished French 
	writer on maritime law, M. Desjardins, who declined to acknowledge 
	that any theory of continuous voyages was, or could be, consistently 
	with the existing law of neutrality, juridically known to International 
	Law. He admitted, at the same time, that penalties of contraband 
	would be incurred if the shipping to a neutral port were effected 
	merely in order " to deceive the belligerent as to the real destination 
	of the cargo." This was the French ruling in the Fran Houwina case 
	(26th May 1855). He proposed to restrict the operation of the 
	doctrine to this condition, but was opposed by three Italian pro- 
	fessors of international law, Professors Fusinato, Catellani and 
	Buzzati, on the ground that it would exclude, as it obviously would 
	do, the contingency of goods shipped to a neutral port, not for the 
	purpose of defrauding the belligerent, but for that of being ultimately 
	delivered to a belligerent not in possession of a seaport. The article 
	as quoted in the text was also supported by the greatest German 
	authority on International Maritime Law, Director Perels of the 
	German admiralty. 

at all times, outside belligerent jurisdiction, and that only the 
authorities of the neutral port were entitled to stop contraband 
on its way to a belligerent force. He did not, however, press the 
point, and only reserved the right of raising it at a future date. 1 
It was fully discussed at the London Conference of 1 908-1 909. 
In order to effect a compromise between conflicting theories 
and practice, a distinction was made in the declaration between 
absolute and conditional contraband, the doctrine of continuous 
voyages not being applicable to conditional contraband when 
documented to be discharged at a neutral port, except where the 
enemy country has no seaboard (Declaration of London, arts. 
30 to 36). 

Unneutral Service. — Under this heading the London Conference 
of 1908-1909, concerning the laws of naval war, dealt with 
analogues of contraband, and neutral vessels assisting or in the 
service of the enemy. The articles adopted are as follows: — 

A neutral vessel will be condemned and will, in a general way, 
receive the same treatment as a neutral vessel liable to condemnation 
for carriage of contraband: (1) If she is on a voyage specially under- 
taken with a view to the transport of individual passengers who are 
embodied in the armed forces of the enemy, or with a view to the 
transmission of intelligence in the interest of the enemy. (2) If, to 
the knowledge of either the owner, the charterer, or the master, she 
is transporting a military detachment of the enemy, or one or more 
persons who, in the course of the voyage, directly assist the operations 
of the enemy. 

In the cases specified under the above heads, goods belonging to 
the owner of the vessel are likewise liable to condemnation. 

The provisions of the present article do not apply if the vessel is 
encountered at sea while unaware of the outbreak of hostilities, or if 
the master, after becoming aware of the outbreak of hostilities, has 
had no opportunity of disembarking the passengers. The vessel is 
deemed to be aware of the existence of a state of war if she left an 
enemy port subsequently to the outbreak of hostilities, or a neutral 
port subsequently to the notification of the outbreak of hostilities 
to the power to which such port belongs, provided that such notifica- 
tion was made in sufficient time. (Art. 45.) 

A neutral vessel will be condemned and, in a general way, receive 
the same treatment as would be applicable to her if she were an enemy 
merchant vessel: (1) If she takes a direct part in the hostilities; 
(2) If she is under the orders or control of an agent placed on board 
by the enemy government ; (3) If she is in the exclusive employment 
of the enemy government; (4) If she is exclusively engaged at the 
time either in the transport of enemy troops or in the transmission of 
intelligence in the interest of the enemy. 

In the cases covered by the present article, goods belonging to the 
owner of the vessel are likewise liable to condemnation. (Art. 46.) 

Any individual embodied in the armed forces of the enemy who is 
found on board a neutral merchant vessel may be made a prisoner 
of war, even though there be no ground for the capture of the 
vessel. (Art. 47.) 

The procedure employed to ascertain whether a neutral 
vessel carries contraband or not is called Visit and Search (see 

Search), a belligerent right universally recognized 
search anc * J ust ifi e d by the considerations that merchant 

ships of the enemy might evade capture by hoisting 
a neutral flag, if the belligerent had not the right of ascertaining 
the real character of the ship, and that private neutral vessels 
might carry contraband goods and generally help the enemy, 
if the belligerent had not the right of examining their cargo. 
All neutral private vessels in time of war are liable to visit by 
belligerent warships on the high seas and in the territorial waters 
of the belligerents, but not in the territorial waters of neutral 
states. Neutral public ships are not liable to visit (see above as 
to neutral public ships, mail ships, and convoy). Visit and 
search must be effected at every stage with " as much considera- 
tion as possible " (Herr'von Biilow, in Reichstag, 19th January 
1900). The visiting officer first examines the ship's papers. 
If satisfied that the vessel is not liable to detention, he immedi- 
ately quits her. If not so satisfied, he proceeds to search her. 
If in the course of the search he is satisfied that the vessel is 
not liable to detention, the search is immediately discontinued. 
The visiting officer has the right to inspect any lockers, stores or 
boxes, and in case of refusal to open them he is justified in using 
such coercive measure as the case warrants. If after the visit 
and search the commander has reason to entertain suspicion 
he gives the master an opportunity of explanation, and if the 

	1 Pari. Papers, Africa, No. 1 (1900), pp. 14, 25. 

explanation is unsatisfactory he detains the vessel. If the 
seizure turns out after all not to have been justified, the ship and 
cargo are immediately released and compensation is due for the 
loss through the detention. In the case of the stoppage and 
search of German vessels during the South African War, the 
German government proposed the appointment of arbitrators 
to decide upon the claims for compensation but this was an 
innovation to which the British government did not assent. 

Resistance to search entails consequences which Art. 63 
of the Declaration of London (1908-1909) has expressed as 
follows: — 

Forcible resistance to the_ legitimate exercise of the right of 
stoppage, search and capture involves in all cases the condemnation 
of the vessel. The cargo is liable to the same treatment as the cargo 
of an enemy vessel. Goods belonging to the master or owner of the 
vessel are treated as enemy goods. 

The consequence of carrying contraband are capture, trial 
by a belligerent prize court, and possible confiscation of the 
ship and cargo, or of the cargo alone or of a part of 
the cargo, according to the facts of the case. All are ^£f"*' m 
agreed as to articles which are absolute contraband tloai'prize. 
being liable to capture. As regards conditional con- 
traband', British law, 2 in so far, at least, as concerns "naval 
and victualling stores," is less severe, the Lords of the Admiralty 
being entitled to purchase such stores without condemnation 
in a prize court. In practice such purchases are made at the 
market value of the goods, with an additional 10% for loss 
of profit. This proceeding is known in International Law as 
the right of pre-emption. It is not, however, as yet officially 
recognized on the continent of Europe, though the need of 
some palliative for confiscation, in certain cases, is felt, and 
some continental jurists, moved by the same desire to distinguish 
unmistakable from so to speak constructive contraband, -and 
protect trade against the vexation of uncertainty, have tried 
to argue conditional contraband away altogether. 

The tendency, however, among the majority of continental 
authorities is seen in the rule drawn up in 1895, after several 
years of discussion, by the Institute of International Law, a 
body composed exclusively of international jurists of acknow- 
ledged standing. The majority which adopted it represents 
authoritative opinion in Germany, Denmark, Italy, Holland and 
France, showing that the old antagonism between the British 
and continental views on conditional contraband has ceased 
to exist. To prevent confusion the Institute declares con- 
ditional contraband abolished, and then adds that " neverthe- 
less, the belligerent has, at his option and on condition of paying 
an equitable indemnity, a right of sequestration or pre-emption 
as to articles (objets) which, on their way to a pert of the enemy, 
may serve equally for use in war or in peace." The proposed 
rule goes beyond the directions of the British Prize Act, and it 
could only come into operation under a verbal alteration of the 
Declaration of Paris, under which " contraband " alone is J 
excepted from the protection of the neutral flag, a fact which 
seems to have escaped the notice of the Institute. British 
prize law is at present governed by the Prize Act of 1864. 
This act must be overhauled to meet the requirements of 
the new international law of the subject; the creation of an 
International Court of Appeal and the new rules adopted by the 
conferences of the Hague and London will make many changes 
necessary. 

Absolute Duties of Neutrals. — The very sense of neutrality 
obviously implies abstention from direct corporate assistance. 
The duty of neutral states to enforce respect for their Enforce- 
territory has become a very serious one. A belligerent ment of 
cannot be allowed to cross the neutral frontier or carry respect for 
on war operations in neutral waters, without the same JJJJJjL 
right being granted to the other belligerent. Pursuit of 
one force by the other would amount to waging war on the 
neutral territory. It is agreed among nations that the 
avoidance of such a contingency is in the interest of them all. 
During the Franco-German War both France and Germany, 

	* The Naval Prize Act 1864, sect. 38. 

as belligerents, and Belgium and England, as neutrals, rigorously 
observed their duties and enforced their rights, and no difficulty 
occurred. It is, nevertheless, conceivable that, under pressure 
of military necessity, or on account of an overwhelming interest, 
a powerful belligerent state would cross the territory of a weak 
neutral state and leave the consequences to diplomacy. The 
South African War was exceptional, in that the Portuguese 
government exposed itself to no international difficulty through 
allowing a belligerent, whose final victory was certain, and of 
necessity entailed total suppression of the conquered belligerent, 
to cross its colonial territory. At the same time it is an unfor- 
tunate precedent of taking advantage of the practical power- 
less ness of neighbouring neutral states to commit a violation 
of the law of nations, respect for which it is a primary duty of 
every self-respecting state to encourage. 1 

If, by inadvertence or otherwise, belligerent soldiers pass 
the frontier, they have to be turned back. If they claim the 
Refaxees. ^roit d' asile, they are arrested, disarmed, and kept in 
such a manner as to render it impossible for them to 
take any further part in the hostilities. In the case of territorial 
waters, as has already been pointed out, the neutral state is not 
in the same position as on land, all ships without distinction 
having a right of innocent passage through, them. Belligerent 
ships also have the right to enter neutral ports, but the neutral 
authority is bound to take precautions to prevent any favour 
being shown to the one party or the other. 2 

	l The right of way claimed and acceded to under the Anglo- 
	Portuguese Treaty of nth June 1891 was a mere right of transit for 
	merchandise, and could not in any way be construed as diminishing 
	the neutral obligation to a belligerent who was no party to the treaty. 

	* The rules laid down on this subject by the British authorities 
	during the Spanish-American War were as follows: — 

Rule 1. — During the continuance of the present state of war all 
ships of war of either belligerent are prohibited from making use of 
any port or roadstead in the United Kingdom, the Isle of Man or the 
Channel Islands, or of any of Her Majesty's colonies or foreign 
possessions or dependencies, or of any waters subject to the territorial 
jurisdiction of the British crown, as a station or place of resort for 
any warlike purpose, or for the purpose of obtaining any t facilities for 
warlike equipment; and no ship of war of either belligerent shall 
hereafter be permitted to leave such port, roadstead or waters from 
which any vessel of the other belligerent (whether the same shall be 
a ship of waror a merchant ship) shall have previously departed until 
after the expiration of at least twenty-four hours from the departure 
of such last-mentioned vessel beyond the territorial jurisdiction of 
Her Majesty. 

Rule 2. — If there is now in any such port, roadstead or waters 
subject to the territorial jurisdiction of the British crown any ship 
of war of either belligerent, such ship shall leave such port, roadstead, 
or waters within such time, not less than twenty-four hours, as shall 
be reasonable, having regard to all the circumstances and the con- 
dition of such ship as to repairs, provisions or things necessary for the 
subsistence of her crew; and if after the date hereof any ship of war 
of either belligerent shall enter any such port, roadstead or waters 
subject to the territorial jurisdiction of the British crown, such ship 
shall depart and put to sea within twenty-four hours after her entrance 
into any such port, roadstead or waters, except in case of stress of 
weather, or of her requiring provisions or things necessary for the 
subsistence of her crew, or repairs; in either of such cases the 
authorities of the port, or the nearest port (as the case may t be), shall 
require her to put to sea as soon as possible after the expiration of 
such period of twenty-four hours, 'without permitting her to take in 
any supplies beyond what may be necessary for her immediate use; 
and no such vessel which may have been allowed to remain within 
British waters for the purpose of repair shall continue in any such 
port, roadstead or waters for a longer period than twenty-four hours 
after her necessary repairs shajl have been completed. Provided, 
nevertheless, that in all cases in which there shall be any vessels 
(whether ships of war or merchant ships) of both the said belligerent 
parties in the same port, roadstead or waters within the territorial 
jurisdiction of Her Majesty, there shall be an interval of not less than 
twenty-four hours between the departure therefrom of any such 
vessel (whether a ship of war or merchant ship) of the one belligerent 
and the subsequent departure therefrom of any ship of war of the 
other belligerent ; and the time hereby limited for the departure of 
such ships of war respectively shall always, in case of necessity, be 
extended so far as may be requisite for giving effect to this proviso, 
but no further or otherwise. 

Rule 3. — No ship of war of either belligerent shall hereafter be per- 
mitted, while in any such port, roadstead or waters subject to the 
territorial jurisdiction of Her Majesty, to take in any supplies, except 
provisions and such other things as may be requisite for the sub- 

Relative Duties of Neutrals. — Relative duties embrace those 
duties which citizens are bound to observe and for which states 
incur a relative responsibility. It was the non-observ- 
ance of these relative duties that led to difficulties ^mt" 
between Great Britain and the United States at the meat, Ac 
close of the American Civil War and which brought 
the two countries themselves to the verge of conflict. The 
Treaty of Washington (8th May 1871) referring these difficulties 
to arbitration defined the scope of the duties in question for 
all future purposes between the two peoples (see below, " Pro- 
clamations of Neutrality "). Under this treaty the parties bind 
themselves to use " due diligence," where they have " reasonable 
ground " to believe that any acts have a belligerent character, 
in " preventing " them. They are bound to prevent — 

(1) Fitting out, arming, or equipping any vessel; 

(2) The departure from their jurisdiction of any vessel, having 
been specially adapted in whole or in part within such jurisdiction 
to warlike uses; 

(3) The making use by a belligerent of their ports or waters 
as a base of naval operations against the other; 

(4) The making use thereof for the purpose of the renewal 
or augmenting of military supplies or arms; 

(5) The making use thereof for the recruitment of men. 
The contracting states undertook to bring the rules they 

adopted on this subject to the knowledge of other maritime 
powers, and to invite them to adopt them also, but nothing 
was ever done to get them accepted among other states. Pro- 
vision had already been made to enable the government to 
carry them out in the Foreign Enlistment Act( 9th August 1870). 
This act, which repealed the previous one of 1819 on the 
same subject, is minute in its provisions to prevent enlisting 
or recruiting men, or the building or the equipping of vessels, 
for the military service " of a foreign state at war with a friendly 
state." Other states, except the United States (which 
adopted a similar act), have not followed the example of Great 
Britain, but leave it to their governments to deal with the cases, 
when they may arise, as matters of public safety. 3 

There was evident reluctance among foreign states to commit 
themselves to the obligation of exercising " due diligence." It is 
clear that the duty of a state to forbear from committing any act 
which may be of assistance to either belligerent can never be formu- 
lated as an absolute one in regard to the acts of private persons, 
merely within the neutral jurisdiction. In recent times it has 
certainly become possible for states to exercise a more effective 
control than formerly over these acts; but at the present moment, 
though a much greater latitude is left to neutral subjects and citizens 
than is consistent with the idea of strict neutrality, there is no move- 
ment to alter the usages to the disadvantage of neutral interests. 
That the Geneva Arbitral Tribunal found in favour of the United 
States in the "Alabama" case in no way implied that International 
Law had undergone any change. The tribunal was bound by the ante- 
cedent fixation of the Washington rules, and laid down no new prin- 
ciple. On the other hand, the magnitude of the Geneva award was not 
likely to promote change in the direction of increasing neutral duties, 
except as part of a general regulation of neutral and belligerent rights. 
The whole subject was laid before the Hague Conference of 1907, 
which adopted the main principles of the rules enunciated in the 
Treaty of Washington (see Art. 8 of the Convention relating to the 
rights and duties of neutral states in maritime war). 

sistence of her crew, and except so much coal only as may be sufficient 
to carry such vessel to the nearest port of her own country or to some 
nearer destination; and no coal shall again be supplied to any such 
ship of war in the same or any other port, roadstead or waters 
subject to the territorial jurisdiction of Her. Majesty, without special 
permission, until after the expiration of three months from the time 
when such coal may have been last supplied to her within British 
waters as aforesaid. 

Rule 4. — Armed ships of either belligerent are interdicted from 
carrying prizes made by them into the ports, harbours, roadsteads or 
waters ofthe United Kingdom, the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands, 
or any of Her Majesty's colonies or possessions abroad. 

	8 The French Penal Code, however, contains the following clauses 
	covering the government's powers in this respect : — 

Art. 84. — Whoever shall by hostile acts, not approved by the 
Government, expose the State to a declaration of war, shall be 
punished by banishment, and should war follow, by deportation. 

Art. 85. — Whoever shall, by acts not approved by the Government, 
expose Frenchmen to the risk of reprisals, shall be punished by 
banishment. 

To some extent the difficulty of determining the extent of 
relative neutral duty is overcome by the issue of proclamations 
of neutrality; but neutrality and its rights and duties 
Prvciama* are j n no respect dependent on their being proclaimed 
Neutrality, by the neutral power. Germany issues no proclama- 
tion; at least the German empire has issued none in 
connexion with the different wars which have taken place since 
1870. The Austro-Hungarian government during the same 
period only in the case of the war of 1870 itself, and in 1877, issued 
proclamations, and these probably had objects outside the 
-ordinary purposes of proclamations of neutrality, and its usual 
practice is the same as that of Germany. France usually issues 
a short general proclamation, and Great Britain a more detailed 
one, which must be as old as the " ancient custom " of its being 
publicly read from the steps of the Royal Exchange by the 
.sergeant-at-arms and common crier of the City of London. 1 
The British proclamation practically recites the Foreign Enlist- 
ment Act 1870 (an act to regulate the conduct of His Majesty's 
subjects during the existence of hostilities between foreign states 
with which His Majesty is at peace), admonishes all persons 
•entitled to British protection to observe and respect the exercise 
of those belligerent rights which " We and Our Royal Predecessors 
have always claimed to exercise," and warns them that any such 
persons " breaking, or endeavouring to break, any blockade 
lawfully and actually established " by either belligerent, " or 
•carrying officers, soldiers, despatches, arms, ammunition, military 
stores, or materials, or article or articles, considered and deemed 
to be contraband of war, according to the law or modern usages 
•of nations, for the use or service " of either belligerent, " rightfully 
incur, and are justly liable to, hostile capture and to the penalties 
•denounced by the law of nations in that behalf." During the 
South African War no proclamation of neutrality was issued by 
.any country. 

Proclamations of neutrality may be made to serve the twofold 
purpose of warning the belligerent of the length to which the neutral 
government considers neutral duty to extend, and neutral subjects 
of the exceptional measures to which a foreign war exposes them. 
They may also be used to give effect to any modification of neutral 
right or duty which the neutral state may consider warranted by 
'.special or altered circumstances. 

No purely mercantile transactions are considered a violation 
of neutrality. Six years before the American Civil War, President 
Sate of Pierce, in his message to the Thirty-fourth Congress, 
arms and first session, made the following statement: — "The 
ammunt- laws of the United States do not forbid their citizens 

aeutrais. to sel1 to eitner °* the belligerent powers articles of 
contraband of war, or to take munitions of war or 
soldiers on board their private ships for transportation; and 
although in so doing the individual exposes his person or property 
to some of the hazards of war, his acts do not involve a breach 
of the national neutrality, nor of themselves implicate the 
government." This statement of international practice has been 
confirmed by art. 7 of the Hague Convention of October 18, 
1907, on the Rights and Duties of Neutral States and Persons 
-on Land (see below). 

During the Franco- German War there was correspondence 
-between the Prussian diplomatic representatives in London and 
at Washington and the British and United States foreign 
secretaries concerning shipments of arms and ammunition to the 
French armies, in which the Prussian government contended 
that it was incompatible with strict neutrality that French 
agents should be permitted to buy up in the neutral country, 
under the eyes and with the cognizance of the neutral govern- 
ment, " many thousands of breech-loaders, revolvers, and 
pistols, with the requisite ammunition, in order to arm there- 
•with the French people, and make the formation of fresh 
army corps possible after the regular armies of France had 
.been defeated and surrounded." Nothing, however, was done 
to prevent the departure of these supplies. Both the British 
and United States governments claimed entire liberty for 
the traffic in question. 

	1 The Times, 28th April 1898. 

In the case of loans publicly issued or raised on neutral territory 
the position is a little different, inasmuch as the neutral state 
is necessarily cognizant of the fact. No restriction, Q a j s j a ~ f 
however, is imposed by international usage, and loans on 
provided the same rights are granted to both belli- neutral 
gerents, either or both can raise money ad libitum in terrlior y* 
neutral countries. Thus neutral states did not prevent the issue 
on their territory of the Russian war loan of 1876-1877. Nor in 
the war of 1894 between China and Japan was any opposition 
made by Japan to the raising of the Chinese loan in London. 
Art. 18 of the Hague Convention on the Rights and Duties of 
Neutral States and Persons on Land (see below) confirms the 
existing practice. 

Neutrality Reforms, — At the Hague Peace Conference 1899 
a suggestion was agreed to, without discussion, that a further 
state conference should be held for the purpose 
of dealing specially with neutrality. At the Con- General 
ference of 1907 this was done, with the result that neutrality 
two fairly exhaustive conventions were adopted. co f n 1 v ££ tIon 
The general provisions relating to neutrality are 
as follow: — . 

Art. 1. — Neutral territory is inviolable. 

Art. 2. — Belligerents are forbidden to send troops or convoys 
either of munitions of war or of provisions through the territory of a 
neutral state. 

Art. 3. — Belligerents are also forbidden: — 

(a) To instal, on the territory of a neutral state, a radio-telegraphic 
station or any apparatus intended to serve as a means of communica- 
tion with the belligerent forces on land or sea; 

(6) To make use of any installation of like nature, erected by them 
before the war, on the territory of the neutral state, for an ex- 
clusively military purpose, and which has not been opened to the 
service of public correspondence. 

Art. 4. — Bodies of combatants shall not be formed or recruiting 
offices opened on territory of a neutral power for the benefit of the 
belligerents. 

Art. 5. — A neutral state shall not allow on its territory any of the 
acts mentioned in arts. 2 to a. It is only bound to repress acts 
contrary to neutrality in case tney have been committed on its own 
territory. 

Art. 6. — A neutral state is not responsible where individuals 
separately pass the frontier to place themselves at the disposal of 
either belligerent. 

Art. 7. — A neutral state is not bound to prevent exportation or 
transit for the account of either belligerent, of arms, munitions of 
war, and, in general, of anything which may be useful for an army 
or a fleet. 

Art. 8. — A neutral state is not bound to prohibit or restrict the 
use, for belligerents, of telegraphic or telephonic cables, or of wireless 
telegraphy apparatus, which are its property or that of companies 
or private individuals. 

Art. 9, — Any prohibitive or restrictive measures adopted by a 
neutral state relative to the matters mentioned in arts. 7 and 8 shall 
be applied uniformly by it to both belligerents. The neutral state 
shall see that this obligation is observed by companies or private 
individuals owning telegraphic or telephonic cables or wireless tele- 
graphic apparatus. 

Art. 10. — The act by a neutral state of resisting any violation of 
its neutrality, even by force of arms, cannot be regarded as an act of 
hostility. 

Art. 11. — A neutral state receiving, on its territory, troops 
belonging to the belligerent armies, shall, as far as possible, keep 
them distant from the area of hostilities. 

It may keep them in camps, and even shut them upin fortified 
places, or in places suitable for this purpose. It shall decide whether 
officers may be left at liberty or parole not to leave the neutral 
territory without authorization. 

Art. 12.— When there is no special convention a neutral state 
shall supply internal prisoners with food, clothing, and the aid which 
humanity calls for. When peace is established, the cost of keeping 
the prisoners shall be reimbursed. 

Art. 13. — A neutral state receiving escaped prisoners of war shall 
leave them at liberty. If it allows them to stay on its territory, it 
may appoint a place of residence for them. The same rule is appli- 
cable to prisoners of war brought by troops taking refuge on neutral 
territory. 

Art. 14. — A neutral state may authorize the passage on its 
territory of wounded or sick belonging to the belligerent armies, on 
condition that the trains which carry them shall transport none of 
the fighting force and no materials of war. In such a case, the 
neutral state is bound to take the necessary steps to ensure safety 
and control. 

The wounded or sick brought in these circumstances into neutral 
territory by one of the belligerents, and belonging to the enemy, 
shall be detained by the neutral state in such a way that they cannot 

again take part in the hostilities. This neutral state shall discharge 
the same duties if it be entrusted with the wounded or sick of the 
other army. 

Art. 15. — The Geneva Convention applies to sick and wounded 
interned on neutral territory (see Geneva Convention). 

Art. 16. — The natives of a state not taking part in the hostilities 
are considered as neutrals. 

Art, 17. — A neutral person cannot take advantage of his neu- 
trality : — 

(a) If he commits hostile acts against a. belligerent; 

(b) If he commits acts in favour of a belligerent, for instance, if he 
voluntarily takes service in the ranks of the army of one of the 
parties. 

In such a case the neutral shall not be treated with more severity 
by the belligerent against whom he has acted in contravention of 
his neutrality than a native of the other belligerent state would be 
for the same act. 

Art. 18. — The following shall not be considered as acts committed 
in favour of one of the belligerents, in the sense of Art. 17 (b): — 

(a) Supplies or loans made to one of the belligerents provided the 
purveyor or the lender inhabits neither the territory of the other 
party nor territory occupied by it, and provided the supplies do not 
come from these territories ; 

(6) Services rendered in matters of police or civil administration. 

Art. 19. — Railway property coming from the territory of neutral 
states, whether it belongs to these states or to companies or to 
private persons, and recognizable as such, cannot be requisitioned or 
utilized oy a belligerent, except in such cases and in such a manner 
as dictated by absolute necessity. Such property shall be returned 
to its country of origin as soon as possible. 

The neutral state can even, in case of necessity, keep and utilize to 
that extent property coming from the territory of a belligerent state. 

An indemnity shall be paid, proportionate to the amount of the 
property utilized and the duration of utilization. 

The clauses of the Convention relating exclusively to neutrality 
in naval war, which are still fuller, are: — 
Conven* Art. i . — Belligerents are bound to respect the sovereign 

Hon of rights of neutral powers and to abstain, either on the terri- 
1907 on tory or in neutral waters, from all acts which might con- 
neutrallty stitute in the part of the powers permitting them a non- 
ln naval observance of their neutrality. 

wan

Art. 2. — All acts of hostility, including capture and the 
exercise of the right of visit and search, by belligerent ships of war 
in the territorial waters of a neutral power, constitute a breach 
of neutrality and are strictly forbidden. 

Art. 3. — When a vessel has been captured in the territorial waters 
of a neutral power, this power shall, if the prize is still within its 
jurisdiction, use all means in its power to effect the release of 
the prize and its officers and crew, and that the crew placed on 
board by the captor shall be interned. If the prize is out of the 
jurisdiction of the neutral power, the capturing government shall, on 
the request of the former, release the prize with its officers and crew. 

Art. 4. — No prize court can be constituted by a belligerent on 
neutral territory or on a vessel in neutral waters. 

Art, 5. — Belligerents are forbidden to make neutral ports and 
waters the base of naval operations against their adversaries, 
especially by installing radio-telegraphic stations or any apparatus 
which may serve as means of communication with belligerent forces 
on sea or on land. 

Art. 6. — The supply, under any ground whatever, either directly 
or indirectly, by a neutral power to a belligerent power, of ships of 
war, or of munitions or of material of war of any kind, is forbidden. 

Art. 7. — A neutral power is not bound to prevent the exportation 
or transit, for the account of either belligerent, of arms, munitions of 
war, or, in general, of anything which may be useful to an army or a 
fleet. 

Art. 8. — A neutral government is bound to use the^ means at its 
disposal to prevent, within its jurisdiction, the equipping or arming 
of any vessel, which it has any reasonable suspicion of being destined 
to act as a cruiser or to join in hostile operations against a power with 
which it is at peace. 

It is also bound to exercise the same surveillance to prevent the 
departure out of its Jurisdiction of any vessel intending to act asa 
cruiser or take part in hostile operations, and which, within the said 
jurisdiction, may have been adapted either wholly or in part for 
warlike purposes. 

Art. 9. — A neutral power must apply equally to the two belligerents 
the restrictions, conditions and interdictions specified by it relating 
to admission to its ports, roadsteads, or territorial waters, with respect 
to ships of war or their prizes. 

A neutral power may, however, forbid access to its ports and road- 
steads, to any belligerent vessel which may have neglected to comply 
with the orders and directions issued by it or may have committed a 
breach of neutrality. 

Art. 10. — The neutrality of a power is not compromised by the 
simple passage through its territorial waters of belligerent ships of 
war and of their prizes. 

Art. 11. — A neutral power may allow ships of war of belligerents 
to make use of its licensed pilots. 

	Xix. 15 

Art. 12. — In default of other special provisions in the laws of a 
neutral power, ships of war of belligerents are forbidden to remain 
in the ports or roadsteads or in the territorial waters of the said 
power for more than twenty-four hours, except in the cases provided 
for by the present Convention. 

Art. 13. — If a power which has received notice of the commence- 
ment of hostilities learns that a ship of war of a belligerent is in one 
of its ports and roadsteads or in its territorial waters, it shall notify 
the said ship that it must leave within twenty-four hours or within 
the time prescribed by the local law. 

Art. 14, — A belligerent ship of war may not prolong its stay in a 
neutral port beyond the legal period, except for the purpose of re- 
pairing damage or by reason of the state of the sea. It must leave as 
soon as the cause of the delay has ceased. 

The rules relating to the limitation of stay in ports, roadsteads, and 
neutral waters do not apply to ships of war exclusively employed on 
religious, scientific or philanthropic missions. 

Art. 15. — Indefaultof other special provisions in the laws of the 
neutral power, the maximum number of ships of war of a belligerent 
which may be at the same time in one of its ports or roadsteads shall 
be three. 

Art. 16. — When ships of war of two belligerents are at the same 
time in a neutral port or roadstead, twenty-four hours at least must 
elapse between the departure of the ship of either belligerent before 
that of the other. 

The order of departure shall be regulated by the order of arrival, 
unless the vessel arriving first is entitled to a prolongation of the 
legal period of its stay. 

A belligerent ship of war may not leave a neutral port or road- 
stead until at least twenty-four hours after the departure of a 
merchant vessel carrying the flag of its adversary. 

Art, 17. — In neutral ports and roadsteads, belligerent ships of 
war may only repair damage to the extent indispensable for their 
seaworthiness, and may not, in any way, increase their military 
strength. The neutral authority will ascertain the nature of the 
repairs to be executed, which shall be carried out as rapidly as 
possible. 

Art. 18. — Belligerent ships of war may not make use of neutral 
ports, roadsteads and territorial waters for the purpose of renewing 
or increasing their military equipment or armament or for com- 
pleting their crews. 

Art. 19. — Belligerent ships may not revictual in neutral ports or 
roadsteads, except to complete their normal supplies as in time of 
peace. These ships may also only take on board the fuel necessary 
for the purpose 01 reaching the nearest port of their own country. 
They may also take in fuel sufficient to fill up their bunkers properly 
so called if they are in a neutral country which has adopted this 
method of fixing the amount of fuel to be supplied. 

If, according to the law of the neutral power, ships may^ only 
receive coal twenty-four hours after their arrival, the legal period of 
their stay is prolonged for twenty-four hours. 

Art. 20. — Belligerent ships of war which have taken in fuel in the 
port of a neutral power cannot renew their supply in a port of the 
same power within three months. 

Art. 21. — A prize may not be brought into a neutral port except 
by reason of its unseaworthiness, or of the stress of weather or of 
insufficiency of fuel or provisions. It must leave again as soon as the 
cause of its entry has ceased. If it does not do so, the neutral power 
shall give it notice to leave immediately, and in the event of its not 
complying therewith, the neutral power shall use the means at its 
disposal to release it with its officers and crew and intern the crew 
placed on board by the captor. 

Art. 22. — The neutral power shall also release any prize which has 
been brought in not in accordance with the conditions laid down in 
Art. 21. 

Art, 23. — A neutral power may allow access to its ports and road- 
steads to prizes, whether escorted or not, when they have been 
brought there to be left in sequestration pending the decision of a 
prize court. It may have the prize conducted to any other of its ports. 

If the prize is escorted by a ship of war, the officers and men 
placed on board by the captor are allowed to go on board the escorting 
ship. 

If the prize is navigating alone, the personnel placed on board is set 
at liberty. 

Art. 24. — If, in spite of notice from the neutral authority, a 
belligerent ship of war does not leave a port in which it has no right 
to remain, the neutral power has the right to take such steps as it 
may think proper to render the ship incapable of going to sea during 
the continuance of the war, and the commander of the ship must 
facilitate the taking of such steps. When a belligerent ship is detained 
by a neutral power, the officers and crew are also detained. 

The officers and crew thus detained may be left on board the ship 
or lodged on board another vessel or on shore, and they may be 
subjected to such restrictive measures as may be considered necessary 
to be imposed on them. In any event, sufficient men must be left 
on board the ship to keep it in order. 

The officers may be released on giving their parole not to leave the 
neutral territory without permission. 

Art. 25. — A neutral power is bound to exercise the surveillance 
of which the means in its power admit, to prevent within its 
ports or roadsteads and in its waters any violation of the preceding 
provisions. 

Art. 26. — The exercise by a neutral power of the rights defined by 
the present Convention can never be considered as an unfriendly act 
by either belligerent who has accepted the articles relating thereto. 

Art. 27. — The contracting powers will communicate to each other, 
as soon as feasible, all the laws, ordinances and other provisions 
which within their jurisdiction govern belligerent ships of war in 
their ports and waters, by means of a notification addressed to the 
government of the Netherlands and immediately transmitted by 
the latter to the other contracting powers. 

Art. 28. — The provisions of the present Convention are only 
applicable as between contracting powers, and only if the belligerents 
are all parties thereto. 

Other reforms may be expected from the Conference of 1015. 
Germany in the course of the South African War and Great 
Britain in that of the Russo-Japanese War showed great irrita- 
tion at the stoppage of certain of their merchant vessels, and 
Great Britain in the one case had to consent to and in the other 
to demand a modification of belligerent right under International 
Law — a modification which, be it said, is a perfectly justifiable 
one, viz. that the right of search for contraband of war be 
restricted to a specified area. It is probable that, in future 
wars, powerful neutral states will show, in similar cases, quite as 
much irritation as did Germany and Great Britain. (T. Ba.) 


NEUVILLE, ALPHONSE MARIE DE (1836-1885), French 
painter, was born, the son of wealthy parents, at Saint-Omer, 
France, on the 31st of May 1836. From school he went to 
college, where he took his degree of bachelier ts lettres. In spite 
of the opposition of his family he entered the naval school at 
Lorient, and it was here, in 1856, that his artistic instincts first 
declared themselves. After being discouraged by several 
painters of repute, he was admitted to work in Picot's studio. 
He did not remain there long, and he was painting by himself 
when he produced his first picture, " The Fifth Battalion of 
Chasseurs at the Gervais Battery (Malakoff)." In i860 de 
Neuville painted an " Episode of the taking of Naples by Gari- 
baldi " for the Artists' Club in the Rue de Provence, and sent to 
the Salon in 1861 " The Light Horse Guards in the Trenches 
of the Mamelon Vert." He also illustrated Le Tour du tnonde 
and Guizot's History of France. At the same time he painted 
a number of remarkable pictures: " The Attack in the Streets 
of Magenta by Zouaves and the Light Horse " (1864), " A 
Zouave Sentinel " (1865), " The Battle of San Lorenzo " (1867), 
and " Dismounted Cavalry crossing the Tchernaia " (1869). 
In these he showed peculiar insight into military life, but his full 
power was not reached till after the war of 1870. He then aimed 
at depicting in his works the episodes of that war, and began by 
representing the " Bivouac before Le Bourget " (1872). His 
fame spread rapidly, and was increased by " The Last Cartridges " 
( J 873), in which it is easy to discern the vast difference between 
the conventional treatment of military subjects, as practised by 
Horace Vernet, and that of a man who had lived through the 
life he painted. In 1874 the " Fight on a Railroad " was not 
less successful, and was followed by the " Attack on a House at 
Villersexel " (1875) and the " Railway Bridge at Styring " 
(1877). In 1878 the painter exhibited (not at the Great Exhibi- 
tion) " Le Bourget," the " Surprise at Daybreak," " The Inter- 
cepted Despatch-bearer," and a considerable number of drawings. 
He also exhibited in London some episodes of the Zulu War. 
In 1 88 1 he was made an officer of the Legion of Honour for 
" The Cemetery of Saint-Privat " and " The Despatch-bearer." 
During these years de Neuville was at work with Detaille on an 
important though less artistic work, " The Panorama of R6zon- 
ville." De Neuville died in Paris on the 18th of May 1885. 
At the sale of his works the state purchased for the Luxembourg 
the " Bourget " and the " Attack on a Barricaded House," with 
a water-colour " The Parley," and a drawing of a " Turco in 
Fighting Trim." 

See Montrosier, Les Peintres militaires (Paris, 1881), "De Neuville," 
in Gazette des beaux arts (Paris, 1885). 


NEUWEILER, a town of Germany, in the imperial province 
of Alsace-Lorraine, situated under the Vosges Mountains, 6 m. 
N. from Zabern by the railway to Rastatt. Pop. (1905) 1906. 

It is an interesting medieval town, still surrounded by walls. 
The Romanesque Evangelical church dates from the 12th 
century; there are also a Romanesque Roman Catholic church, 
which was restored in 1852, a synagogue, and an old town-hall. 
The town has a considerable trade in hops and wine. Above 
it rise the ruins of the fortress of Herrenstein, and of the castle 
of Hiineburg. 

See Fischer, Geschichte der A btei und Stadt Neuweiler (Zabern, 1 876). 


NEUWIED, a town of Germany, in the Prussian Rhine 
province, the capital of the mediatized countship of Wied, is 
situated on the right bank of the Rhine, 8 m. below Coblenz, on 
the railway from Frankfort-on-Main to Cologne. Pop. (1005) 
18,177. The principal edifice is the chateau of the princes of 
Wied. This is situated in a fine park, and contains a collection 
of Roman antiquities. The town has an Evangelical and a" 
Roman Catholic church. Its chief products are starch, sugar, 
tobacco, cigars, chicory, buttons and enamelled goods. There 
are large rolling-mills, and in the vicinity are several large iron- 
foundries. The schools of Neuwied enjoy a high reputation. 

Neuwied was founded by Count Frederick of Wied in 1662, 
on the site of the village of Langendorf, which was destroyed 
during the Thirty Years' War, and it rapidly increased owing 
to the toleration accorded to all religious sects. Among those 
who sought refuge here was a colony of Moravian Brethren; 
they still occupy a separate quarter of the town, where they carry 
on manufactures of porcelain stoves and deerskin gloves. Near 
Neuwied one of the largest Roman castra on the Rhine has been 
excavated. In April 1797 the French, under General Hoche, 
defeated the Austrians near Neuwied, this being their first decisive 
success in the revolutionary wars. Legenhaus, in the neighbour- 
hood, is one of the residences of the princes of Weid. 

See Wirtgen and Blenke, Neuwied und seine Umgebung (Neuwied, 
1901). 


NEVA, a river of Russia, which carries off into the Gulf of 
Finland the waters of Lakes Ladoga, Onega, Ilmen and many 
smaller basins. It issues from the south-west corner of Lake 
Ladoga in two channels, which are obstructed by sandstone reefs, 
so that the better of the two has a depth of only 7 to 16 ft. A 
little farther t down it becomes completely navigable, and attains 
a breadth of 4200 ft.; but between the village of Ostrovki and 
that of Ust-Tosna it passes over a limestone bed, which produces 
a series of rapids, and reduces the width of the river from 1050 
to 840 and that of the navigable passage from 350 to 175 ft. 
Nine or ten miles before reaching its outfall the river enters St 
Petersburg, and 5 or 6 m. lower down breaks up into the Great 
Neva (850 to 1700 ft. wide), the Little Neva (945 to 1365), and 
the Great Nevka (280 to 1205), this last, 2 m. farther on, sending 
off the Little Nevka (37c to 1130 ft.). Its total length is only 
40 m. In front of the delta are sandbanks and rocks which pre- 
vent the passage of vessels except by a canal, 18 m. long, 124 
to 226 ft. wide, and admitting vessels with a draught of 18J ft., 
from Kronstadt to St Petersburg. Most of its alluvial burden 
being deposited in the lakes, the Neva takes a long time to alter 
its channels or extend its delta. The ordinary rise and fall of 
the river is comparatively slight, but when the west wind blows 
steadily for a long time, or when Lake Ladoga sends down its 
vast accumulations of block-ice, inundations of a dangerous 
kind occur, as in 1777, 1824, 1879 and 1903. 

According to observations extending from 1706 to 1899, the mean 
day of the freezing of the Neva is November 25th, the earliest 
October 28th, the latest January 9th, and the next latest December 
26th. The mean day of opening is April 21st, the earliest March 
18th, and the latest May 12th. The mean number of days open is 
218, the least 172, the greatest 279. 


NEVADA (a Spanish word meaning " snow-clad " or " snowy 
land," originally applied to a snow-capped mountain range on 
the Pacific slope), one of the far western states of the American 
Union, lying between 35 and 42 N. and 114 i' 34* and 120 
1' 34* W. (37 and 43 W. of Washington). It is bounded N. 
by Oregon and Idaho, E. by Utah and Arizona, the Colorado 
River separating it in part from the latter state, and S. and W. 
by California. Nevada ranks sixth in size among the states of 
the Union. Of its total area of 110,690 sq. m., 869 sq. m. are 
water surface. Its extreme length, N. and S., is 484 m., and its 
extreme width, E. and W., is 321 m. (For map, see California.) 

Physiography. — With the exception of its N.E. and S.E. 
corners, the state lies wholly within the Great Basin, the floor 
of which is really a vast table-land between 4000 and 5000 ft. 
above the sea. This plateau, however, is not a plain, but con- 
tains many buttes and mesas and isolated mountain ranges 
rising from 1000 to 8000 ft. above its surface. In the N.E. an 
unnamed range of highlands, with an E. and \V. trend, forms 
the water-parting between the streams tributary to the Hum- 
boldt river in Nevada and those that flow into the Snake river 
through Idaho and Oregon and thence to the Pacific Ocean. 
This range is very broken and ill-defined, with peaks often reaching 
altitudes of from 0000 to 12,000 ft., and with numerous spurs 
diverging N. and S. from the main divide. Between this ridge 
and the valley of the Colorado river lies all that portion of the 
Great Basin included within the state. The surface of this 
table-land is very rugged, and frequently broken by mountain 
ranges running N. and S. and from 5 to 20 m. wide at their 
bases. Intersecting the mountains are numerous ravines and 
passes. Between the ranges lie valleys of about the same width 
as the bases of the mountains. These valleys are generally level- 
floored, but at their borders gradually slope upward, and are 
filled, often to a depth of several thousand feet, with the detritus 
of gravel, sand and silt from the neighbouring hills. This is a 
region of innumerable faulted crust blocks, the elevated ones 
creating the N. and S. mountain ranges, and the depressed ones 
the valleys that lie between. It is for this reason that the 
mountain slopes are generally more abrupt on one side than on 
the other. Several valleys often unite into a large elevated 
plain, broken only by scattered buttes and spurs. The combined 
areas of the valleys and the area occupied by the mountains are 
about equal. 

The mean elevation of the state is 5500 ft. There are 5400 
sq. m. between 2000 and 3000 ft. above the sea; 11,100 sq. m. 
between 3000 and 4000 ft.; 23,700 sq. m. between 4000 and 
5000 ft.; 29,800 sq. m. between 5000 and 6000 ft.; 30,100 sq. m. 
between 6000 and 7000 ft.; 7800 sq. m. between 7000 and 
8000 ft.; and 2800 sq. m. between 8000 and 9000 ft. The highest 
point within the state is Wheeler Peak, near the centre of the 
eastern boundary, with an elevation of 13,058 ft.; the lowest 
points are along the Colorado river, where the altitudes range 
from 700 to 800 ft. With the exception of this dip in the S.E. 
corner, the entire state lies above the 2000 ft. line. 

The Sierra Nevada range, which forms the western rim of the 
Basin, sends into the state a single lofty spur, the Washoe Mountains. 
At the foot of this range there is, relatively speaking, a depression, 
with an altitude of about 3850 ft. above the sea, which receives the 
drainage of the eastern slopes of the Sierra and what little drainage 
there is in the northern half of Nevada. From this depression east- 
ward the general level of the plateau gradually rises to an elevation 
of 6000 ft. near the eastern borders of the state. The mountains also 
increase in height and importance as far as the East Humboldt 
range, a lofty mass about 60 m. W. of the Utah boundary. This 
range is the water-parting for nearly all the westward-flowing 
streams of the state, and is by far the steepest and _ most rugged 
within Nevada, a number of its peaks attaining a height of 11,000 
or 12,000 ft. On its eastern slope the waters soon disappear within 
the bed of narrow canyons, but break out again at the foot in ice- 
cold springs that form the source of the Ruby and Franklin lakes; 
on its western side the descent is more gentle, and the waters form 
the South Fork of the Humboldt river. Somewhat S. of the centre 
of the state lie the Toyabe Mountains, with several peaks from 
10,000 to 12,000 ft. in height. The waters on the eastern slopes 
flow into the Smoky Valley; those on the other side assist the 
neighbouring Shoshone Mountains in feeding the Reese river, 
which flows N. toward the Humboldt, but seldom has sufficient 
volume to enable it to reach that stream. About 100 m. E. of the 
California boundary lies a third important range, the Humboldt 
Mountains, whose highest point (Star Peak) is 9925 ft. above the 
sea. Owing to their great height these three ranges receive heavier 
rainfall than the surrounding country and are feeders to the northern 
valleys, which constitute the chief agricultural region of the state. 
Many of the block mountains of the Great Basin are of complicated 
internal structure, showing rocks of all ages — slate, limestone, 
quartzites, granite, multi-coloured volcanic rocks, and large areas 
of lava overflow. 

From the valley of the Humboldt river southward the plateau 
gradually rises until the divide between this stream and the Colorado 
river, in the vicinity of the White Pine Mountains, is reached. 
From this point there is a fall, which is gradual as far S. as the 38th 
parallel, and then more abrupt. Thus at Pioche the altitude is 
6100 ft., at Hiko 3881 ft., at St Thomas 1600 ft., and at the Eldorado 
Canyon 828 ft. The region of the Colorado river is largely desert, 
with occasional buttes and spurs. 

Rivers and Lakes. — There are three drainage systems within the 
state. ^ North of the Humboldt Valley an area of about 5000 sq. m. 
is drained^ by the Owyhee, the Little Owyhee, the Salmon and 
Bruneau rivers, whose waters eventually reach the Pacific Ocean. 
Below this region flow the streamsof the Great Basin, none of 
which reach the sea, but either terminate in lakes having no outlet 
or else vanish in sloughs or " sinks." Small streams often sink 
from sight in their beds of gravel, and after flowing some distance 
underground, reappear farther on. Of the basin streams the Hum- 
boldt is the most important. Rising in the N.E., it flows in a 
tortuous channel in a jgeneral S.W. direction for 300 m. and drains 
7000 or 8000 sq. m. This stream empties into the, Humboldt lake, 
the overflow from which goes into the so-called Carson Sink. At 
no part of its_ course is it a large river, and near its mouth its waters 
are sub-alkaline. The Truckee river flows with more vigour, having 
its source in Lake Tahoe, in California, at an altitude of 6225 ft., 
and entering the Carson river through an irrigation canal com- 

Eleted in 1905; before this date it flowed into Pyramid Lake and 
ake Winnemucca in the depression at the foot of the Sierra Nevada. 
A short distance to the S. two other streams, the Carson and the 
Walker rivers, receive their waters from the eastern slope of this 
range and empty into lakes bearing their names. Of this group 
of lakes in the western depression, Pyramid Lake is the largest, 
being 33 m. long and 14 m. wide. Fed by the same stream is its 
western neighbour, Lake Winnemucca, a much smaller body. The 
waters of these two lakes are only moderately saline and may be 
used for live-stock but not for human beings. Next # in importance 
is Walker lake, 33 m. long and 6 or 7 m. wide, whose waters are 
strongly saline. On the western boundary, and partly included 
within the limits of Nevada, is Lake Tahoe, 20 m. long and 10 m. 
wide, which is 1645 ft. deep at its centre and whose waters havft 
never been known to freeze, notwithstanding the lake's elevation. 
The topography and the climate of Nevada have led to the formation 
of two kinds of lakes, the ephemeral and the perennial. The perennial 
lakes, such as those just described, hold their waters for years and 
perhaps centuries; but the ephemeral lakes usually evaporate in 
the course of the summer. The latter class is formed by waters 
that fall on the barren mountain-sides and rush down in torrents, 
forming in the valleys shallow bodies of water yellow with the mud 
held in suspension. The largest of these occurs in the Black Rock 
Desert, in the N.W., and at times is from 450 to 500 m. in length 
and only a few inches deep. Such bodies often become nothing but 
vast sheets of liquid mud, and are called " mud lakes," a term most 
frequently applied to the sloughs fed by Quinn's river. When the 
waters evaporate in the summer they leave a clay bed of remarkable 
hardness, which is sometimes encrusted with saline matter of a 
snowy whiteness and dazzles the eyes of the traveller. When such 
is the case the beds are called " alkali flats." During the glacial 
period many of the Nevada lakes attained a great size, several of 
them uniting to form the ancient " Lake Lahontan," in north- 
western Nevada. As these lakes shrank after the return of an arid 
climate, they left elevated beaches and deposits of various minerals, 
which mark their former extent. Both hot and cold springs are 
numerous, with temperatures ranging from 50 to 204 F. 

In the S.E. corner of the state is the third drainage system. 
Here the Virgin river enters the state after crossing the N.W. corner 
of Arizona and flows S.W. for 60 m. until it join? the Colorado 
river. The latter stream flows for 150 m. along the S.E. boundary 
towards the Gulf of California. 

Fauna and Flora.-^Oi native animals the varieties are few and 
the numbers of individuals small. In the arid valleys coyotes 
(prairie wolves), rabbits and # badgers are found. Large animals, 
such* as the black and the grizzly bear, and deer are found on the 
slopes of the Sierra Mountains, and antelope, deer and elk visit the 
northernmost valleys in the winter. At rare intervals antelope appear 
in the southern deserts. Here also are found the sage thrasher, 
Le Conte's^ thrasher, the Texas nighthawk, Baird's woodpecker, and 
the mourning dove. Certain species of grouse are common high in 
the timbered mountains. Several varieties of water-fowl, especially 
curlews, pelicans, gulls, ducks, terns, geese and snipe, are found 
in the vicinity of the lakes. The Truckee river and the western 
lakes abound in trout and black bass. Of the reptiles the leopard 
lizard and gridiron-tailed lizard, the " chuck- walla " (Sauromalus 
ater), the rattle-snake, and the horned toad are the most numerous. 
The " black mouse " or Carson field mouse (Microtus tnontanus) 
is found throughout Nevada, as well as in Utah, north-eastern 
California, and eastern Oregon; it multiplies rapidly under favour- 
able conditions, and at times causes serious injury to crops. 

The flora of Nevada, although scanty, varies greatly according 
to its location. With the exception of the alkali flats, no portion 
of the desert is devoid of vegetation, even in the driest seasons. 
In the Washoe Mountains, as in the rest of the Sierra Nevada range, 
there is a heavy growth of conifers, extending down to the very 
valleys; but in many places these mountains have been almost 
deforested to provide timbers for the mines. In very limited spaces 
on other mountains there are scattered trees — the pinon (nut 
pine) and the juniper at an altitude between 5000 and 7000 ft. 
on all but the lowest ranges, the trees rarely reaching a height of 
over 15 ft.; and the stunted mountain mahogany on the principal 
ranges at an altitude of 6800 ft. Several varieties of poplar are 
found in the upper canyons, and trees of the willow-leaved species in 
the Humboldt Mountains often attain a height of 60 ft. But except 
for these infrequent wooded strips, the mountains are even more 
bare than the valleys, because their shrubs are dwarfed from ex- 
posure. The trees, except in the Washoe Mountains^ are of very 
slow growth and therefore knotty and ill-adapted for timber. As a 
rule, the elevation of the timber line on the mountains increases as 
the latitude decreases. On the foothills are found phlox and lupine, 
and in the N. much bunch grass, which is valuable for grazing pur- 
poses. The valleys are covered with typical desert shrubs; grease- 
wood (sarcobatus vermiculatus) , creosote bushes (larrea tridentata) , and 
sage-brush (artemisia tridentata); the first-named plant is abundant, 
chiefly in the N. This vegetation, covering^ plains, mesas, and even 
extending up the sides of the mountains, gives the entire landscape 
the greyish or dull olive colour characteristic of the Great Basin. 
To the southward, as the valleys become increasingly sandy and 
saline, even the sage-brush disappears, and little vegetation besides 
the cactus and the yucca is to be seen. The valleys are treeless, 
except in the vicinity of the Truckee river, where considerable 
quantities of the cotton wood and a small amount of willow, birch, 
and wild cherry are found. The mesquite grows some distance 
from water, and is especially common near the Colorado river. In 
January 1910 there were seven national forests in the state, created 
since July 1908 and chiefly in 1909, containing 7983-76 sq. m. 

Climate. — As the lofty range of mountains on the W\ deprives the 
winds from the Pacific of nearly all their moisture before they reach 
the Great Basin, the climate of Nevada is characterized by an ex- 
cessive dryness. The skies are clear nearly every day in the year. 
The mean annual precipitation varies from 3 in. in the S.W. (Esmer- 
alda county) to 12 in. in the E. (White Pine county). In t the 
central, north-eastern and north-western sections, embracing' the 
counties of Nye. Elko and Humboldt, the average annual rainfall 
varies from 7 to 8 in.; in the west-central section, at the foot of the 
Sierra, the average is about 10 in. A so-called' ** rainy season " 
lasts from October to April, but the precipitation is chiefly in the 
form of snow on the mountains. Except at great altitudes snow lies 
on the ground only a few days each year. The melting of the 
mountain snow-caps in the spring causes severe freshets, which in 
turn are followed by long seasons of drought at a time when water 
is most needed for agricultural purposes. Fogs and hail are rare, 
but, as in all treeless countries, the rain comes in unequal quantities, 
and cloudbursts are not unknown. The mean annual temperature 
for the statc^ is 49 F., but varies from 54 in the S.W. to 46 in the 
N. The daily and annual variation is very great, and is intensified 
toward the E., where the altitudes are greater. At Elko, Elko 
county, in the N.E., the mean temperature for the year is 46 F.; 
for the winter (December, January and February) it is 26 , with 
extremes reported of 73 ° and -42 rf ; the mean temperature for the 
summer (June, July and August) is 69 , with extremes of 108 and 
20°. At Hawthorne, Esmeralda county, in the S.W., the mean 
temperature for the year is 54 ; for the winter it is 36 , with ex- 
tremes of 69 and -6°; the mean temperature for the summer is 
72 , with extremes of 102 and 32 . At the head of the Humboldt 
river frosts are of almost nightly occurrence, and in the Carson 
Valley damaging frosts often occur in June. In the extreme S. the 
isothermal linfcs run almost due E. and W. ; but farther northward 
they take a N.W. and S.E. direction. The annual range of tempera- 
ture is about 124 ; the highest temperature ever recorded being 
119 , and the lowest -42 . Inspite of the high temperatures of 
summer, however, the low humidity prevents the heat from being 
oppressive, and cases of sunstroke are unknown. While the western 
mountains keep out the moisture, they do not ward off the winds 
which pour down, the steep slopes in the winter and spring and 
raise clouds of dust. Early-sown grain is often injured by flying 
sand and gravel. In the summer and autumn the winds are light. 

Agriculture, — Because of this extreme aridity, t agriculture in 
Nevada is dependent on irrigation. • The three principal areas in 
which irrigation is practicable are along the Humboldt river, in the 
plains watered by the Carson, Truckee and Walker rivers, and at 
the foot of the mountains along the western edge of the state. 
There are various places also near the mouths of desert canyons, 
where small amounts of water are obtainable for irrigation purposes 
from intermittent streams. The total number of acres irrigated in 
1899 was 504,168, an increase of 124-7% in the decade. In 1902 
the total irrigated acreage was 570,001, an increase of 13-1% in 
three years. In 1902 Congress provided lor the beginning of ex- 
tensive irrigation works in the arid West, and Nevada (where pre- 
liminary reconnaissances had been made in 1 889-1 890) was the 
first state to profit from this undertaking. The survey for the 
Truckee-Carson system was begun in 1902, with the object of 
utilizing the waters flowing to waste in western Nevada for the 
irrigation and reclamation of the adjacent arid regions in Churchill, 
Lyon and Storey counties. A canal 31 m. long, diverting the waters 
of the Truckee river into the Carson river, was completed in 1905 
at a cost of $1,250,000. A system of reservoirs (the main reservoir 
is Lake Tahoe with an area of 193 sq. m.), distributing canals, and 
drain ditches was also projected, making it possible to reclaim 
231,300 acres of the desert. It was^ estimated that the works would 
require nine years for their completion, at a total cost of $9,000,000, 
although the first 200,000 acres could be reclaimed at a cost of 
$2,700,000. The works were to be operated by the government for 
ten years, and the cost assessed against the holders of the land. 1 
At the conclusion of this period the system was to pass into the control 
of the landholders, with no^ further charge by the government. 

The soil when reclaimed is well adapted for forage crops, cereals, 
vegetables and deciduous fruits. Nevada is a great ranching state, 
and stock-raising has shown a rapid extension. In 1900, 88-9% 
of its farm acreage was devoted to hay and forage crops, being 
more than doubled in the decade. Fifty-one per cent, of the im- 
proved lands in 1899 were devoted to the cultivation of these crops. 
With the growing of grasses as the chief agricultural product, 
farming in Nevada is necessarily extensive rather than intensive. 
In 1899 the average size of the farms was 11 74 acres.* The value 
of the different kinds of agricultural products for 1 899 was as follows : 
live stock, $4,373,973; hay and grain, $i,535.9U; dairy produce, 
$385,220; vegetables, $216,600; fruits, $20,900. It thus appears 
that the live stock industry is one of the most important in the 
state; the value of its product in 1899 excee d e d its output of gold 
and silver, which had then reached its lowest point, by over one 
million dollars.* About 64% of the value of the live stock was 
represented by neat cattle; 19% by sheep; 10% by horses, and 
the remainder by mules, swine, asses, burros and goats. 

In spite of the predominating interest in stock-raising, intensive 
cultivation of the soil is practicable where the water supply is 
sufficient. Nevada, for example, ranked third in 1909 in the amount 
of wheat produced to the acre (28*7 bushels), 4 but in the total amount 
produced (1,033,000 bushels) ranked only thirty-eighth, and fur- 
nished only 0-145% of the crop of the United States. In 1909 in 
the amount of barley per acre (38 bushels) Nevada ranked third, 
and in the average farm price per bushel ($0*75) ranked first among 
the barley-producing states of the country, but in the total amount 
produced (304,000 bushels) held only the twenty-second place; and 
in the same year the average yield of potatoes per acre m Nevada 
was 180 bushels, exceeded in two states — the average for the 
entire country was 106*8 bushels per acre — but the total crop in 
Nevada (540,000 bushels) was smaller than in any state or Territory 
of the Union, except New Mexico. 

The prevailing soils are sandand gravel loams, but other varieties 
are numerous, ranging from rich alluvial beds of extinct lakes, as 
in parts of Lyon and Esmeralda counties, to the strongly alkaline 
plains of the southern deserts. The most productive part of the 
state is the Humboldt Valley and the region near Pyramid Lake, 
including the counties of Humboldt, Elko and Washoe. 

A singular menace to agriculture in Nevada was the plague in 
1907-1908 of Carson field mice. These first appeared in large 
numbers in the lower part of the Humboldt Valley in the summer of 
1906, and in October and November 1907 it was estimated that 
they numbered on certain ranches from 8000 to 12,000 on every 
acre. The alfalfa crop suffered particularly, the total loss being 
about $300,000. After unsuccessful attempts to rid themselves 
of the mice, the farmers appealed to the United States Biological 
Survey, and alfalfa hay poisoned with strychnia sulphate was used 
successfully in the Humboldt Valley in January 1908 and in the 
Carson Valley, where a similar plague threatened, in April 1908.* 

Minerals. — To its mineral wealth Nevada owes its existence as a 
state; but for the richness of its veins of gold and silver ore it would 
be still little more than an arid waste. Extending from central 
California S.E. along the dividing line between that state and 

	[l] The public lands are open to entry free of charge, but the 
	government withholds the title until all the payments for water 
	have been made. The yearly payments amount to $2*60 per acre 
	under the present system; this amount covers the cost of mainten- 
	ance and operation and also of a^ thorough drainage system, which 
	is as important to the settler as irrigation. Lands already held in 
	private ownership are supplied with water at the same price as 
	public lands. 

	[2] Compare this figure with that for the neighbouring state of Cali- 
	fornia, where the average size of the farms was 397-4 acres. 

	[3] That conditions are favourable to the animal industry is shown 
	by the fact that in 1897 the valleys of northern Nevada were so 
	overrun with wild horses, to the detriment of the grazing grounds 
	for cattle, that the legislature authorized the killing of such animals. 
	For a time this was a profitable pursuit, as the horse hides brought 
	good prices. 

	[4] This is the yield reported by the United States Department of 
	Agriculture. Between its reports and those of the Census Bureau 
	in census years there are sometimes great discrepancies. According 
	to the Year Book of the Department of Agriculture in 1909 a crop 
	of 165,000 bushels of oats was grown in Nevada on 7000 acres; 
	there was no crop reported of Indian corn or of rye. 

	5 See Stanley E. Piper, The Nevada Mouse Plague of 1Q07-IQ08 
	(Washington, 1909), Farmers' Bulletin 352, U.S. Department of 
	Agriculture. 

Nevada, and thence past the Colorado river into Arizona, is one of 
the richest mineral belts in the world. Gold was found in Gold 
Canyon near Dayton, Nevada, as early as July 1849. In 1859 the 
discovery of the famous Comstock Lode in Western Nevada led 
to the building of Virginia City, a prosperous community on the 
side of a mountain where human beings under ordinary conditions 
would not have lived, and eventually brought a new state into 
existence. The mines of this one district had produced, up to 1902, 
$371,248,288, of which $148,145,385 was in gold, $204,653,040 in 
silver, and the remainder in unclassified tailings. For the years 
1 862-1 868 inclusive, the average annual production was over 
$11,000,000; in the second period of great productivity (1873-1878), 
after the opening (by John W. Mackay and his partners, Flood, 
Fair and O'Brien) in the Comstock Lode of the Great Bonanza 
mine, the average annual yield was over $26,000,000. In 1877 
the maximum annual output for the mines was attained, being 
$36,301,537. For the three years 1 875-1 877 the production of gold 
and silver in Nevada was more than_ the combined product of all 
the other American states and Territories. After this last year 
the output of the Comstock mines declined on account of the ex- 
haustion of the ore supply, the increased expense of mining at great 
depths, and the decrease in the price of silver. The yield reached its 
lowest point in 1899, but subsequently increased through the 
application of improved machinery, while the tailings of the old 
diggings were treated by the cyanide process with profitable results. 
In 1859 the mines were worked only for their gold; the ignorant 
miners threw away the " black stuff " which was really valuable 
silver ore with an assay value four times as great as that of their 
ores of gold ; and when this was discovered there came a period of 
unprecedented silver production. But the fall in the price of silver 
led to a reaction, and from 1893 the gold output predominated. The 
gold production of 1907 was valued at $12,099,455; the silver pro- 
duction at $4,675,178. 

In connexion with the operation of the Comstock mines was 
built (in 1869-1879) the Sutro Tunnel, named in honour of its 
engineer, Adolph Sutro (1830-1898), piercing the mountain hori- 
zontally far below the mouth of the mines, and at a distance of 
nearly 4 m. striking the shafts of the Comstock Lode, securing ventila- 
tion and cool air for the miners, draining the mines above its level, 
and obviating much pumping and hoisting. 1 Two lateral tunnels 
were also constructed, making the total length 6J m. 

Another mining region^ that attained importance in the early 
period was the Eureka District, in Eureka county, about 00 m. S. 
of the Southern Pacific railway. Ore was^ first discovered here in 
1864, but it was five years before the mines became productive. 
By 1882 they had produced $60,000,000 of precious metals ; 

With the working out of the deposits in the Comstock region, the 
mining industry declined, and between 1877 and 1900 there was a 
period of great depression, in which Nevada fell from^ first to sixth 
place among the silver-producing states and Territories. In May 
iooo, however, very rich deposits of gold and silver were discovered 
in Nye county, near the summit of the San Antonio Mountains, 
and a new era be^an in Nevada's mining industry. The village of 
Tonopah sprang into existence as soon as the rush of^ newcomers 
to this region began, and in 1903 it contained 4000 inhabitants. 
In two years $7,000,000 worth of gold and silver had been taken 
from the Tonopah mines and it was asserted that they would prove 
as rich as the mines of the Comstock Lode. The Tonopah ores were 
richer in silver than in gold, the respective values in 1904 and_ 1905 
being approximately in the proportion of three to one. This dis- 
covery gave a new impetus to prospecting in south-western Nevada, 
and it was soon discovered that the district was not an isolated 
mining region but was in the heart of a great mineral belt. Tonopah 
is at the outcropping of a number of ledges which continue for 
several hundred feet below the surface for an unknown distance. 
In 1902, in Esmeralda county, 24 m. S. of Tonopah, rich ores were 
found in the Goldfield District, and within three years there were 
8000 people in this region. During 1905 the town of Goldfield had 
a period of mushroom growth, then quieted, and finally revived to 
a healthy development. The value of the production of the Goldfield 
District in 1904 amounted to $2,341,979. This discovery was 
followed in 1904 by that of the Bullfrog District, in Nye county, 
60 m. S.E. of Groldneld, and within ninety days after its birth the 
village of Bullfrog, although 100 m. from a railway, had an electric- 
lighting plant, an ice plant and a hotel. In 1905 gold was dis- 
covered in Nye county, 29 m. N.E. of Tonopah, in what became 
known as the Manhattan District, and by March 1906 the village 
of Manhattan was a mile in length and contained 3000 inhabitants. 

After 1902 the production of gold and silver steadily increased, 
being $4,980,786 in that year, $9,184,096 in 1905, and $16,774,633 
in 1907. By far the greater portion of these metals came from the 
southern part of the state. In production of gold in 1907 Esmeralda 
county ranked first with $8,533,617 (nearly 70% of the total); 
Nye county's output was $1,547,408, Lincoln county's $929775* 

	1 Apart from their commercial uses, the Sutro Tunnel and the 
	shafts of the Comstock Lode have been employed for scientific 
	investigations, with the object of classifying igneous rocks, deter- 
	mining the^ variations of temperature, and the character of electrical 
	manifestations beneath the earth's surface, and the relation between 
	the structure of rocks and their rate of cooling. 

and Storey county's a little more than $250,000. In the production 
of silver Nye county ranked first in 1907 ($3,667,973, of which 
$3i544;788 was from Tonopah), Churchill county second ($432,617, 
from Fairview, Wonder and Stillwater), and Eureka county (with 
lead silver ores) and Storey county were third and fourth respectively. 
Copper, leadand zinc are produced in small quantities, being found 
in fissure veins with gold and silver. In 1907 the production of 
copper was 1,782,571 lb, valued at $356,514. The output of lead 
in 1907 was 6,271,341 lb (valued at $322,381). The output of zinc 
was 2,168,783 lb (valued at $127,958). 

Other minerals exist in great variety. Salt deposits are extensive 
and commercially important in Washoe and Churchill counties. 
After 1900 the production of salt rapidly increased up to 1906, when 
it was 11,249 bbls.; in 1907 it was only 6457 bbls., all graded 
as* 1 common coarse " and all obtained by solar evaporation from 
brine. Borax marshes are numerous in the west and south-west, 
but they are no longer commercially productive. Large beds of 
mica are found in the east. Gypsum occurs in a number of places, 
the best^ known being in the north-west. Veins of antimony are 
worked in the Battle Mountain District and in Bullion Canyon, 
15 m. south of Mill City. There are veins of bismuth near Sodaville. 
A little graphite is produced in Humboldt county. Asub-bituminous 
lignite is mined in Esmeralda county (800 tons in 1906; 330 tons in 
1907). Considerable quantities of the following minerals have been 
found: barytes (heavy spar), magnetite (magnetic iron ore), and 
pyrolusite (manganese dioxide) in Humboldt county; roofing slate 
in Esmeralda county; cinnabar (ore containing quicksilver) in 
Washoe county; haematite in Elko and Churchill counties; cerussite 
and galena (lead ores) in Eureka county; and wolframite (a source 
of tungsten) at Round Mountain, White Pine county. In 1903 and 
1907 Nevada ranked second among the American states in the 
production of sulphur, but its output is very small in comparison 
with that of Louisiana. 

Manufactures. — The manufacturing interests of Nevada are un- 
important. Of the manufacturing establishments in the state in 
I9°°.» . I0 9» or 47*8%, were situated in Reno, Carson City and 
Virginia City, named in the order of their importance. These places 
employed 3?"9% of the labour engaged in manufacturing, and the 
value of their products was 38-8 % of the total for the state. Manu- 
factures based on the products of mines and quarries (chemicals, 
glass, clay, stone and metal works)^ constituted about one-fifth of 
the whole product. Car construction and general shop work of 
steam railways was the leading manufacturing industry in 1905; 
next in importance were the flour and grist milling industry and the 
printing and publishing of newspapers and periodicals. Such 
statistics of the special census of manufactures (under the factory 
system) of 1905 as are comparable with those of 1900 show 99 
factories in 1900 and 115 in 1905, an increase of 16-2%. Their 
capital in 1900 was $1,251,208 and in 1905 $2,891,997, an increase 
of 131*1%. The value of their products in 1900 was $1,261,005, 
and in 1905, $3,096,274, an increase of 145-5%. 

Transportation. — In its industrial development Nevada has 
always been hampered by lack of transportation facilities. There 
are no navigable waterways, and the railway mileage is small. 
Until the completion of the trans-continental railway in 1869, 
wagon trains were the only means of transporting the products of 
the mines across the desert. An unsuccessful attempt was made, 
beginning in 1861, to domesticate the camel for this purpose. 2 The 
railway mileage in 1880 was 739 m. ; in 1890, 923 m. ; in the following 
decade railway building was at a standstill. Since 1900, however, 
there has been considerable development, and the total mileage on 
the 1st of January 1909, was 1,866-02 m. The state is crossed 
from east and west by three main lines of railway, parts of the 
freat transcontinental systems, the Southern Pacific and the Western 
Pacific in the northern part of the state and the San Pedro, Los 
Angeles & Salt Lake in the southern. The oldest of these trunk 
lines, the Southern Pacific (formerly the Central Pacific), follows 
the course of the Humboldt and Truckee rivers. It is met at several 
points by lines which serve the rich mining districts to the south ; at 
Cobre by the Nevada Northern from Ely in White Pine county in 
the^ Robinson copper mining district; at Palisade by the Eureka & 
Palisade, a narrow-gauge railway, connecting with the lead and 
silver mines ol the Eureka District; at Battle Mountain by the 
Nevada Central, also of narrow gauge, from Austin; at Hazen by 
the Nevada & California (controlled by the Southern Pacific) which 
runs to the California line, connecting in that state with other parts 
of the Southern Pacific system, and at Mina, Nevada, with the 
Tonopah & Goldfield, which runs to Tonopah and thence to Goldfield, 
thus giving these mining regions access to the Southern Pacific's 
transcontinental service; and at Reno, close to the western boundary, 
by the Virginia & Truckee, connecting with Carson City, Minden, 
in the Carson Valley, and Virginia City, in the Comstock District, 
and by the Nevada-California-Oregon, projected to run through 
north-eastern California into Oregon, in 1910, in operation to Alturas, 
California. The Western Pacific railway, completed in i9io,extend- 
ing from Salt Lake City to San Francisco, and running entirely 

	J It is interesting to note that in 1875 the Nevada legislature 
	passed an act forbidding camels or dromedaries to run at large. 
	This law remained on the statute books until 1898, when it was 
	formally repealed. 

across the state of Nevada, is parallel with the Southern Pacific for 
some distance in the eastern part of the state, and crosses the 
mountains at Beckwith Pass 20 m. north of Reno. The San Pedro, 
Los Angeles & Salt Lake railway, also an important factor in east 
and west transcontinental traffic, opened in May 1905, has been of 
special value in the development of the southern part of the state. 
It crosses a section that is mostly desert, but is connected with the 
Bullfrog District by the Las Vegas & Tonopah, which runs from 
Goldfield through Beatty and Rhyolite, and meets the San Pedro, 
Los Angeles & Salt Lake at Las Vegas. The Goldfield and Bull- 
frog districts have a further outlet to the south through a second 
railway, the Nevada Short Line (Bullfrog-Goldfield and Tonopah 
& Tidewater railways) which connects with the Atchison, Topeka 
8c Santa Fe* at Ludlow in California. 

Population. — Nevada is the most sparsely settled state of 
the Union. Its population in i860 was 6857; in 1870, 42,491; 
in 1880, 62,266; in 1890, 45,761; in 1900, 42,335; and in 1910, 
81,875 (0-7 per sq. m.). ^ n I 9°° 10,093 were foreign-born (mostly 
English, Irish, Germans, Italians and Chinese in almost equal pro- 
portions); and there were 35,405 white persons, 5216 Indians, 1352 
Chinese, 228 Japanese and 134 negroes. There were then only 
three towns of importance: Reno, Virginia City and Carson 
City, the capital. 

The Indian population consists of Paiute, Shoshoni and the 
remnants of a few other tribes of Shoshonean stock. On the 
Duck Valley reservation (488 sq. m.), established in 1877, in Elko 
county, between the forks of the Owyhee river and lying partly 
in Nevada and partly in Idaho, and under the western Shoshoni 
(boarding) school (55 pupils in 1908), there were 252 Paiute, 
238 Shoshoni and 1 Hopi in 1908; on the Pyramid Lake reser- 
vation (503 sq. m.), established in 1874, in Washoe county, on 
the borders of the lake from which it is named, 486 Paiute; 
on the Walker river reservation (79-37 sq. m.), established in 
1874 (partly opened to settlement in 1906) along Walker river 
and Walker Lake, 466 Paiute; on the Moapa river reserve 
(15-6 sq. m.), in the south-eastern part of the state, 117 
Paiute. 

In 1906, of the 14,944 members of religious denominations 
9,970 were Roman Catholics, 1,210 Protestant Episcopalians, 
1,105 Latter-Day Saints (Mormons), 618 Methodists and 520 
Presbyterians. 

Administration. — Nevada is governed under the original 
constitution of 1864, with the amendments adopted in 1880, 
1889, 1904 and 1906. The constitution as adopted limited the 
suffrage to adult white males, but this provision was annulled 
by the fifteenth amendment to the Federal constitution; and 
in 1880 amendments to the state constitution were adopted 
striking out the word " white " from the suffrage clause and 
adding a new article granting rights of suffrage and office holding 
without regard to race, colour or previous condition of servitude. 
A residence in the state of six months and in the district or county 
of thirty days preceding the election is required of all voters. 
Persons guilty of treason or felony in any state or Territory and 
not restored to civil rights, idiots and insane persons, are excluded 
from the suffrage. An unusual provision in the constitution, 
a result of its adoption in the midst of the Civil War, gives soldiers 
and sailors in the service of the United States the right to vote; 
their votes to be applied to the township and county in which 
they were bona fide residents at the time of enlistment. 1 The 
legislature has the right to make the payment of the poll 
tax a requirement for voting, but no such provision is in 
force. 2 A law passed in 1887, requiring all voters to take an oath 
against polygamy, with the object of disfranchising Mormons, 
was declared unconstitutional by the State Supreme Court. 

A governor, lieutenant-governor, secretary of state, attorney- 
general, controller, treasurer, superintendent of public instruc- 

	1 An interesting application of this provision was made in 1898, 
	when Nevada soldiers on their way to Manila were allowed to vote 
	at sea. It was discovered, however, that no statute had ever 
	been passed to carry this provision into effect, and the votes were 
	rejected. 

	2 In 1897 a law was passed making the right of suffrage dependent 
	on the payment of poll taxes for the preceding two years; but 
	in the following year the State Supreme Court declared this act 
	unconstitutional because the title was not descriptive of the 
	matter. 

tion and surveyor-general are chosen by popular vote every four 
years. Their functions are similar to those of the administrative 
officials in other states, with the exception that the governor 
does not possess the usual pardoning power but is ex officio a 
member of the pardoning board. The governor and lieutenant- 
governor must each be at least twenty-five years old at the time 
of election to office. The legislative department consists of a 
Senate, with members chosen every four years, about half of 
whom retire every two years; and an Assembly, whose members 
are chosen biennially. The constitution requires that the number 
of senators shall be not less than one-third nor more than one- 
half the number of members of the Assembly, and that the total 
membership of both houses shall not exceed seventy-five. Bills 
of any character may originate in either house. The legislative 
sessions are biennial and are limited to fifty days; special 
sessions are limited to twenty days. The judicial department 
consists of a supreme court with a chief justice and two associate 
justices, chosen for six years, and district courts, with judges 
chosen for four years. 

The state is divided into fifteen counties, each of which is governed 
in local matters by a board of county commissioners, and is divided 
for administrative purposes into townships. The constitution re- 
quires that township and county governments shall be uniform 
throughout the state. For each township there is a justice of the 
peace, chosen biennially by its voters. The homestead exemption 
extends to a dwelling-house, with its land and appurtenances, with 
a value not exceeding $5000; but no exemption is granted against 
a process to enforce the payment of purchase-money, or for improve- 
ments, or for legal taxes, or of a mortgage to which both the husband 
and wife have consented. The exemption can be claimed by the 
husband, wife, or other head of the family, by a written declaration 
duly acknowledged and recorded in the manner prescribed for 
conveyances ; and the homestead can then be mortgaged or alienated 
by a husband only with the wife's consent, if the wife is at the rime 
a resident of the state. The exemption is not affected by the death 
of the husband or wife, but inures to the benefit of the surviving 
members of the family. For divorce a residence in the state of six 
months is necessary; the grounds for divorce are desertion or 
neglect to provide for one year, conviction of felony, habitual 
drunkenness, cruelty or physical incapacity. 

There are a number of unusual provisions in the constitution of 
Nevada. The assertion in the " Declaration of Rights " that 
11 no power exists in the people of this or any other state of the 
Federal Union to dissolve their connexion therewith or perform 
any act tending to impair, subvert, or resist the supreme authority 
of the government of the United States/' is a result of the drafting 
of the instrument during the Civil War. There is also a provision 
that only three-fourths of the jurors may be required to agree to a 
verdict in civil cases, although the legislature has the power to 
require by statute a unanimous agreement. Amendments to the 
constitution must be passed by a majority of each house of the 
legislature at two consecutive sessions and submitted to a vote of 
the people at the next regular election. Under this provision an 
amendment cannot be adopted until nearly four years after it is 
first proposed. At the election of 1004 an amendment was adopted 
which provides that whenever 10% of the voters of the state, as 
shown by the votes of the last preceding election, express a wish 
that any law or resolution of the legislature shall be submitted 
to the people, the Act or Resolve shall be voted on at the next 
election of the state or county officers, and if a majority of the 
voters approve the measure it shall stand; otherwise, it shall become 
void. Nevada thus became the fourth American state to adopt the 
referendum. 

Institutions. — The state maintains a penitentiary at Carson City 
and an insane asylum at Reno. The deaf, dumb and blind are cared 
for at its expense in the California institution for these defectives. 
The State University, established at Elko in 1874 and removed to 
Reno in 1887, is supported by the income from a Federal grant of 
two townships (72 sq. m.) of public land and an additional grant, 
under the Morrill Act of 1862, of 90,000 acres for the support of a 
college for agriculture and mechanic arts. An agricultural experi- 
ment station and a normal school are conducted in connexion with 
the university. The control of this institution is vested in a board 
of regents, chosen by popular vote. At Virginia City is a school of 
mines, established by the state in 1903. _ The Federal government 
maintains three boarding schools for Indians in the state. 

The public schools are supported by the income from a Federal 
grant of 2,000,000 acres of public land (given in lieu of the usual 
sixteenth and thirty-sixth sections) supplemented by state and 
local taxation. The constitution provides that a special state tax, 
at a rate of not over two mills on the dollar, may be levied for 
school purposes. All fines collected under the penal laws, all escheats 
and 2 % of the receipts of toll roads and bridges go into the school 
fund, which is invested in state and Federal securities and the 
interest apportioned among the counties according to their school 
population. The administration of the school system is in the 
hands of a superintendent of public instruction. 

Finance. — The bonded debt of the state on the 31st of December 
1908 amounted to $550,000, of which the state held an irredeem- 
able bond for $380,000; the actual redeemable bonded debt of 
$170,000 was due to the investment of the school and university 
funds in the bonds of the state. The actual borrowing capacity of 
the state is limited by its constitution to $300,000, except for the 
extraordinary purpose of repelling invasion or suppressing insur- 
rection. Practically all the revenue is derived from the taxation 
of real and personal property. Mines and mining claims are exempt 
from taxation, but a quarterly tax is levied on the net proceeds of 
mines, and is not to be paid a second time so long as the products 
remain in the hands of the original producer. The rate of taxation 
for state purposes is fixed by the legislature, and for county pur- 
poses by the board of county commissioners. A poll tax is required 
of all males between the ages of 2 1 and 60 years, one half of which 
goes to the county in which it is collected and the rest to the state. 
At the close of 1908 the state receipts for the year amounted to 
$1,004,041, and expenditures to $875,941. 

History. — The first recorded person of European descent to 
enter the limits of Nevada was Francisco Garces (1 738-1 781), 
of the Order of St Francis, who set out from Sonora in 1775 and 
passed through what is now the extreme southern corner of the 
state on his way to California. Half a century later a party of 
trappers of the Hudson's Bay Company entered Nevada and plied 
their trade along the Humboldt river. American trappers came 
about the same time. Emigrants to California followed the 
trappers, and many crossed Nevada in the early 'forties of the 
19th century. During 1843-1845 John C. Fremont made a 
series of explorations in this region. By the treaty of Guadalupe 
Hidalgo, negotiated in 1848, at the close of the war with Mexico, 
Nevada became United States territory. It was then a part of 
California known as the Washoe Country, and remained so until 
the 9th of September 1850, when most of the present state was 
included in the newly organized Territory of Utah. In the 
meantime the discovery of gold in California had swelled the. 
stream of westward migration across the Washoe Country, 
and had resulted in the settlement of traders, mostly Mormons, 
along the routes to the gold fields. The first settlement in what 
is now the state of Nevada was planted in the valley of the 
Carson river in 1849. The earliest recorded public meeting was 
held at Mormon Station (now Genoa) on the 12th of November 
1851. The object of this gathering was to frame a government 
for the settlers, as the seat of the Territorial government of Utah 
was too remote to afford protection for life and property. Con- 
gress was petitioned to organize a separate Territory. An inde- 
pendent local government was formed a week later, and this 
lasted for several months, until the Utah authorities intervened. 
In ^1854 the Utah legislature created the county of Carson, 
which included all the settlements in western Utah; but the 
inhabitants sought to rid themselves of all connexion with the 
people of the Salt Lake region, and petitioned Congress to annex 
them to California. In 1858 Carson City was laid out, and in the 
following year the people of Carson county held a mass meeting 
and chose delegates to a constitutional convention, which met at 
Genoa on the 18th of July 1859, and in ten days drafted a con- 
stitution. The instrument was submitted to a vote of the people 
and was adopted, and a full set of state officers was chosen. 
This attempt to create a new state proved abortive, however, 
and it was not till the mineral wealth of the Washoe Country 
became generally known that Congress took any action. On 
the 2nd of March 1861 the Territory of Utah was divided at 
39° W. (of Washington) and the western portion was called 
Nevada, As then constituted, the northern boundary of Nevada 
was the 42nd parallel, its southern the 37th, and its western 
boundary was made to conform to the eastern limits of the state 
of California. James W. Nye (1814-1876) of New York was 
appointed Territorial governor. In December 1862 the Territorial 
legislature passed an act " to frame a constitution and state 
government for the state of Washoe." This was submitted to the 
people and adopted at the polls. Delegates to a constitutional 
convention accordingly drafted a frame of government, which 
on the 19th of January 1864 was submitted to a popular vote 
and overwhelmingly defeated. The instrument contained a 
very unpopular clause taxing all mining property, unproduc- 
tive as well as productive. Moreover, as state officers were 
to be chosen at the same time that the constitution was 
voted on, disappointed candidates for party nominations 
fought against ratification. As a result, the constitution was 
rejected while officers to act under it were at the same time 
duly elected. 

Early in 1864, when it became evident that two more Republican 
votes might be needed in the United States Senate for reconstruc- 
tion purposes, party leaders at Washington urged the people of 
Nevada to adopt a constitution and enter the Union as a patriotic 
duty, and on the 21st of March 1864 Congress passed an act to 
enable the people of the Territory to form a state government. 
The third constitutional convention in its history now met at 
Carson City and drew up a constitution which was duly ratified. 
On the 31st of October President Lincoln issued a proclamation 
declaring Nevada a state. By the Enabling Act Congress had 
extended the eastern boundary to the 38th meridian (W. of 
Washington), and in 1866 still farther extended it to the 37th 
and fixed the southern boundary as it exists at present. The 
additions eastward were made from Utah and those to the south 
from Arizona. 

Being "battle-born," Nevada was loyal to the Union 
throughout the Civil War, and in spite of its scanty populati6n 
furnished a company of troops in 1861, which were joined 
to a California regiment. In 1863 the Territory raised six com- 
panies of infantry and six of cavalry (about 1000 men), which 
saw no actual service against the Confederates but were 
useful in subduing hostile Indians. 

The history of the state since its organization has been largely 
a history of its mines. The period from i860 to 1864 was one 
of rapid development accompanied by the wildest speculation. 
This was followed by a reaction and a general collapse of inflated 
values until 1873, when the discovery of the Great Bonanza 
mine brought about a revival of industry and of speculation. 
A second period of decline followed the working out of this 
mine and lasted until 1900, when the discovery of a new mineral 
v belt in southern Nevada brought renewed prosperity. Until 
1870 the state was regularly Republican, but in this year the 
Democrats gained most of the offices, including the seat in the 
national House of Representatives. The Republicans, however, 
secured the electoral votes of Nevada in 1872 and in 1876, and 
in 1878 were again in full control, only to suffer defeat in 1880, 
Not until the silver currency question became a political issue 
did Nevada take a prominent part in national politics. In- 
1 88 5. the Nevada Silver Association was formed for the purpose 
of advocating the free and unlimited coinage of silver. Both 
parties in the state in 1S88 declared in favour of free coinage, 
and in 1892 instructed their delegates to the national conven- 
tions, to oppose any candidate who did not favour this policy. 
As "a means^of asserting their views effectively, the citizens, 
irrespective of party, organized local silver clubs, and these 
eventually led to the formation of the Silver party of Nevada, 
which drafted a " platform " and nominated a state ticket 
and presidential electors who were instructed to "support the 
Populist national ticket. The Republicans in the state divided, 
and the majority of them went over to the Silver party. At 
the national election in this year the Silver ticket received in 
Nevada 7264 votes; the Republican 2811; the Democrat 
714; and the Prohibitionist 86. In the state election of 1894 
the Silver party was again victorious, and not a Democrat 
was returned to the legislature. In the election of 1896 all the 
parties in the state declared in favour of the free and unlimited 
coinage of silver at the ratio of 16 to 1. The Democratic and 
Silver parties united, with the result that the state's electoral 
vote went to Bryan and Sewall, the Democratic nominees, 
while the Silver party retained most of the state offices. In the 
presidential election of 1900 the Nevada Republicans pursued 
a non-committal policy with regard to the silver question, 
declaring in favour of " the largest use of silver as a money 
metal in all matters compatible with the best interests of our 
government.". The Democratic and the Silver parties again 
united, and subsequently dominated the politics of the 
state. 

	Territorial Governor .—James W. Nye, 1861-1864. 
	State Governors. 
	H. G. Blasdel, Rep., 1865-1870. 
	L. R. Bradley, Dem., 1871-1878. 
	J. H. Kinkhead, Rep., 1879-1882. 
	Jewett W. Adams, Dem., 1883-1886. 
	Christopher C. Stephenson, Rep., 1887-1889. 1 
	Frank Bell, Rep., 1890. 
	R. K. Colcord, Rep., 1 891-1894. 
	John E. Jones, Silver, 1895.* 
	Reinhold Sadler, Silver, 1895-1902. 
	John Sparks, Dem. (Silver), 1903- 1906. 
	D. S. Dickerson, Dem., 1907-1910. 
	T. L. Oddie, Rep., 1911- 

Bibliography. — Clarence King, Report of the Geological Explora- 
tion of the Fortieth Parallel (Professional Papers of the Engineer 
Department, U.S. Army); George M. Wheeler, Report upon United 
States Geographical Surveys West of the One Hundredth Meridian 
(Engineer Department, U.S. Army) ; Israel C. Russell, Present and 
Extinct Lakes of Nevada, in National Geographic Monographs, 
vol. i. No. 4 (June 1895); idem., The Geological History of Lake 
Lahontan, a Quaternary Lake of North-western Nevada (Washington, 
1885), U.S. Geological Survey Monograph, No. 11; Idah M. Stro- 
bridge, In Miners Mirage Land (Los Angeles, 1904); H. Hoffman, 
Calif ornien, Nevada una Mexico (Basel, 1879); -Nevada and her 
Resources , compiled under the direction of the State Bureau of 
Immigration (Carson City, 1894); U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
North America Fauna, No. 7, pt. 2 (1893); William Wright, History 
of the Big Bonanza (Hartford, Conn., 1876); C. H. Shinn, The Story 
of the Mine as Illustrated by the Great Comstock Lode of Nevada, in 
''The Story of the West r ' series (New York, 1806); The Silver 
Mines of Nevada (New York, 1864); M. Angel (ed.), History of 
Nevada (Oakland, Cal., 1881); H. H. Bancroft, History of Nevada, 
Colorado and Wyoming, in vol. xxv. of his Works (San Francisco, 
1890); Elliot Coues, On the Trail of a Spanish Cavalier, Francisco 
Cards (New York, 1900). 


NEVADA, a city and the county-seat of Vernon county, 
Missouri, U.S.A., in the south-western part of the state, about 
90 m. S..by E. of Kansas City. Pop. (1900) 7461, of whom 235 
were foreign-born and 168 negroes; (1910) 7176. It is 
served by the Missouri Pacific and the Missouri, Kansas & Texas 
railway systems. The principal public buildings are the county 
court house, the federal building and the- high school. Nevada 
is the seat of Cottey College for girls (Methodist-Episcopal, 
South, 1884) and of a state hospital for the insane, and there is 
a state camp ground for the National Guard of Missouri. There 
are three parks, one of which, Lake Park, is a pleasure and health 
resort, with a lake and chalybeate and sulphur springs. The 
smelting of lead and zinc and the manufacture of paper, lumber, 
sheet metal and bricks are among the city's industries. Nevada 
is a trading centre for the surrounding country, and a fine farming 
and stock-raising region, in which Indian corn, oats, wheat, 
clover, timothy and blue-grass are grown; coal is mined in 
the vicinity. The city's water-supply is drawn from artesian 
wells. Nevada (" Nevada City " until 1869) was platted in 
1855, was burned down in 1863 during the occupancy by the 
state militia in war time, was incorporated as a town in 1869, 
was entered by the first railway in 1870, and was chartered as 
a city in 1880. 


NEVADA CITY, a township and the county-seat of Nevada 
county, California, U.S.A., about 130 m. N.E. of San Francisco. 
Pop. (1890) 2524; (1900) 3250 (764 foreign- born); (1910) 2689. 
It is the terminus of the Nevada County Narrow Gauge railway, 
which connects with the Southern Pacific railway at Colfax, 
23 m. S. An electric line extends to Grass Valley (pop. in 1900, 
4719), 4 m. S.W. Situated in a hilly and picturesque region, 
2580 ft. above the sea, Nevada City is frequented as a health 
and summer resort (annual mean temperature, about 53*5° F.; 
mean summer temperature, about 66°). Gold-mining and 
quartz-mining are its principal industries, and in 1907 Nevada 
county's output of gold (104,590-76 oz., worth $2,162,083) was 
second only to that of Butte county (134,813*39 oz., worth 
$2,786,840) in California; the county is the leading producer 

	1 Died the 21st of September, 1890, and Frank Bell became 
	governor by virtue of his office as lieutenant-governor. 

	8 Died the 10th of April 1895, and R. Sadler became governor by 
	virtue of his office as lieutenant-governor. 

from quartz mines. Among the manufactures of the township 
are carriages and products of planing mills, foundries and 
machine shops; and grapes and fruits are raised in the surround- 
ing country. Gold was first discovered within what is now 
Nevada City, on Deer Creek, in the summer of 1848, by James 
W. Marshall, who, in January of the same year, had found the 
metal near what is now Coloma, Eldorado county. The first 
settlement was made here in 1849; rich deposits of gold were 
soon afterwards found on or near the surface, and the settlement 
had the characteristic growth of a western mining town; its 
output of gold reached its maximum in 1850-1851. Nevada 
City was first incorporated in 1851 under a special act of the 
legislature (repealed in 1852); it was reincorporated in 1856 
and again in 1878. 


N6v6 T or Firn, the name given to the partly consolidated 
masses of snow and ice which form in the hollows on the sides 
of mountains below the belt of freshly fallen snow and just above 
the compact glacier-ice. The neve, which generally consists 
of broad sheets of great beauty, is formed from the freshly 
fallen snow during a series of alternate thaws and frosts. These 
processes are accompanied by a gradual descent down the 
mountain side, during which the neve suffers consolidation, 
until it becomes compact glacier-ice. The neve is thus the 
feeding ground of the glacier (q.v.). The word nevi (Lat. nix, 
nivis, snow) is adopted from the French dialect of the French 
Alps; firn is German, meaning " last year's (snow)." 


NEVERS, a town of central France, capital of the department 
of Nievre, 159 m. S.S.E. of Paris by the Paris-Lyons-Mediter- 
ranee railway to Nimes. Pop. (1906) 23,561. Nevers is situated 
on the slope of a hill on the right bank of the Loire at its con- 
fluence with the Nievre. Narrow winding streets lead from the 
quay through the town where there are numerous old houses 
of the 14th to the 17th centuries. Among the ecclesiastical 
buildings the most important is the cathedral of St Cyr, which 
is a combination of two buildings, and possesses two apses. 
The apse and transept at the west end are the remains of a 
Romanesque church, while the nave and eastern apse are in 
the Gothic style and belong to the 14th century. There is no 
transept at the eastern end. The lateral portal on the south 
side belongs to the late 15th century; the massive and elaborately 
decorated tower which rises beside it to the early 16th century. 
The church of St fitienne is a specimen of the Romanesque 
style of Auvergne of which the disposition of the apse with its 
three radiating chapels is characteristic. It was consecrated 
at the close of the nth century, and belonged to a priory 
affiliated to Cluny. The ducal palace at Nevers (now occupied 
by the courts of justice and an important ceramic museum) was 
built in the 15th and 16th centuries and is one of the principal 
feudal edifices in central France. The facade is flanked at each 
end by a turret and a round tower. A middle tower containing 
the great staircase has its windows adorned by sculptures 
relating to the history of the house of Cleves by the members 
of which the greater part of the palace was built. In front of 
the palace lies a wide open space with a fine view over the valley 
of the Loire. The Porte du Croux, a square tower, with corner 
turrets, dating from the end of the 14th century, is among 
the remnants of the old fortifications; it now contains a collection 
of sculptures and Roman antiquities. A triumphal arch of the 
1 8th century, commemorating the victory of Fontenoy and the 
h6tel de ville, a modern building which contains the library, 
are of some interest. The Loire is crossed by a modern stone 
bridge, and by an iron railway bridge. Nevers is the seat of a 
bishopric, of tribunals of first instance and of commerce and of a 
court of assizes and has a chamber of commerce and a branch 
of the Bank of France. Its educational institutions include 
a lycie, a training college for female teachers, ecclesiastical 
seminaries and a school of art. The town manufactures porcelain, 
agricultural implements, chemical manures, glue, boilers and 
iron goods, boots and shoes and fur garments, and has distilleries, 
tanneries and dye-works. Its trade is in iron and steel, wood, 
wine, grain, live-stock, &c. Hydraulic lime, kaolin and clay 
for the manufacture of faience are worked in the vicinity. 

Noviodunum, the early name of Nevers was in later times 
altered to Nebirnum. The quantities of medals and other 
Roman antiquities found on the site indicate the importance 
of the place at the time when Caesar chose it as a military dep6t 
for corn, money and hostages. In 52 B.C. it was the first place 
seized by the revolting Aedui. It became the seat of a bishopric 
at the end of the 5th century. The countship (see below) dates 
at least from the beginning of the 10th century. The citizens 
of Nevers obtained charters in 11 94 and in 1231. For a short 
time in the 14th century the town was the seat of a university, 
transferred from Orleans, to which it was restored. 

Counts and Dukes of Nevers. Having formed part of 
the duchy of Burgundy, the county of Nevers (Nivernais) was 
given by Duke Henry I. in 987 to his stepson, Otto William, 
afterwards count of Macon, who five years later handed it over 
to his son-in-law Landri. The first house of the hereditary 
counts of Nevers originated in this Landri, and was brought to an 
end in 1192 by the death of Agnes, countess of Nevers, wife 
of Pierre de Courtenay (d. 1217). The county subsequently 
passed by successive marriages into the houses of Donzy, 
Chatillon and Bourbon. Mahaut de Bourbon brought the 
county of Nevers, together with those of Auxerre and Tonnerre, 
to her husband Odo (Eudes), son of Hugh IV., duke of Burgundy, 
in 1248. Her eldest daughter, Yoland, received the county of 
Nevers as her dowry when in 1265 she married Jean Tristan, 
son of King Louis IX. She became a widow in 1270, and in 
1272 married Robert de Dampierre, who became count of 
Flanders. Her descendant by her second marriage, Marguerite, 
daughter and heiress of Louis II. de Male, count of Flanders, 
married successively two dukes of Burgundy, Philip I. de Rouvre 
and Philip II. the Bold. Philip (d. 1415), the third son of Philip 
the Bold, received the counties of Nevers and of Rethel and the 
barony of Donzy; his last male descendant, John, died in 1491. 
The house of Cleves then inherited the Nivernais, which was 
erected into a duchy by King Francis I. for Francis of Cleves in 
.1539. In 1565 Louis de Gonzaga (d. 1595), son of Frederick II., 
duke of Mantua, married Henrietta of Cleves, duchess of 
Nevers, and one of his descendants, Charles (d. 1665), sold the 
Nivernais to Cardinal Mazarin in 1659. The cardinal devised 
it to his nephew Philippe Jules Mancini, whose descendants 
possessed it until the French Revolution. The last duke of 
Nivernais, Louis Jules Barbon Mancini Mazarini, died in 1798. 


NEVILLE, or Nevill, the family name of a famous English 
noble house, descended from Dolfin son of Uchtred, who had 
a grant from the prior of Durham in 1131 of " Staindropshire," 
co. Durham, a territory which remained in the hands of his 
descendants for over four centuries, and in which stood Raby 
castle, their chief seat. His grandson, Robert, son of Meldred, 
married the heiress of Geoffrey de Neville (d. 1192-1193), who 
inherited from her mother the Bulmer lordship of Brancepeth 
near Durham. Henceforth Brancepeth castle became the 
other seat of the house, of which the bull's head crest com- 
memorates the Bulmers; but it adopted the Norman surname 
of Neville (Neuville). Robert's grandson, another Robert, 
(d. 1282) held high position in Northumbria, and sided with 
Henry III. in the Barons' War, as did his younger brother Geoffrey 
(d. 1285), ancestor of the Nevills of Hornby. This Robert's 
son Robert (d. 1271) extended the great possessions of the 
family into Yorkshire by his marriage with the heiress of Middle- 
ham, of which the powerful Norman castle still stands. The 
summons of their son Ranulf (d. 1331) to parliament as a baron 
(1294) did but recognize the position of the Nevills as mighty 
in the north country. Ralph (d. 1367) the second baron — whose 
elder brother " the Peacock of the North " was slain by the 
Douglas in 1318 — was employed by Edward III. as a commander 
against the Scots and had a leading part in the victory of NevilTs 
Cross (1346), where David Bruce was captured, and by which 
Durham was saved. His active career as head of his house 
(i33 r -i3 6 7) did much to advance its fortunes and to make the 
name of Nevill a power on the Scottish march. Of his younger 
sons, Alexander became archbishop of York (1374-1388) and 
was a prominent supporter of Richard II., attending him closely 
and encouraging his absolutist policy; in consequence of which 
he was one of those " appealed of treason " by the opposition in 
1388 and being found guilty was outlawed, and died abroad 
in 1392. His younger brother William, a naval commander, 
took the opposite side, was a leading Lollard and a friend of 
Wiclif, and in 1 388-1 389 acted with the lords appellant. 

John, the 3rd baron (d. 1388), a warden of the Scottish marches 
and lieutenant of Aquitaine, a follower of John of Gaunt 
and a famous soldier in the French wars of Edward III., con- 
tinued the policy of strengthening the family's position by 
marriage; his sisters and daughters became the wives of great 
northern lords; his first wife was a Percy, and his second 
Lord Latimer's heiress; and his younger son, Thomas, became 
Lord Furnival in right of his wife, while his son by his second 
wife became Lord Latimer. His eldest son Ralph (1364-1425), 
1 st earl of Westmorland (see Westmorland, earls of), carried 
the policy further, marrying for his second wife a daughter 
of John of Gaunt and securing heiresses for five of his sons, 
four of the younger ones becoming peers, while a fifth, Robert, 
was made bishop of Durham (1438-1457). Among his daughters 
were the duchesses of Norfolk, Buckingham and York (mother 
of Edward IV. and Richard III.) and an abbess of Barking. 
The Nevills were thus closely connected with the houses of 
Lancaster and York, and had themselves become the most im- 
portant family in the realm. Of the earl's sons by his second 
marriage, Richard, earl of Salisbury (and three of his sons) and 
William, earl of Kent, are the subjects of separate notices. 

The greatness of the Nevills centred in the " kingmaker " 
(Richard's son) and the heads of his house, after the 1st earl, 
were of small account in history, till Charles, the 6th earl, at 
the instigation of his wife, Surrey's daughter, joined Northumber- 
land in the fatal northern rising of 1569 to the ruin of his house. 
His estates, with the noble castles of Brancepeth and Raby, were 
forfeited; Middleham, with the Yorkshire lands, had been 
settled by the 1st earl on the heirs of his second marriage. 

Although the senior line became extinct on the earl's death 
abroad (1601), there were male descendants of the 1st earl 
remaining, sprung from George and Edward, sons of his second 
marriage. George, who was Lord Latimer, was father of Sir 
Henry, slain at Edgcote fight, and grandfather of Richard, 
2nd lord (1469-1530), a soldier who distinguished himself in the 
north, especially at Flodden Field. His grandson (d. 1577) 
was the last lord, but there were male descendants of his younger 
sons, one of whom, Edmund, claimed the barony, and after 
1601 the earldom of Westmorland, but vainly, owing to its 
attainder. In this line may still exist a male heir of this mighty 
house. 

The heirs male of Edward, Lord " Bergavenny " (now " Aber- 
gavenny " co. Monmouth), who died in 1476, have retained 
their place in the peerage under that style to the present day 
by a special and anomalous devolution. His wife, the only child 
of Richard (Beauchamp), earl of Worcester (d. 1422), brought 
him the great estates which had come to her line with Fitz Alan 
and' Despencer heiresses, and in 1450 he was summoned as 
Lord Bergavenny, though not seized of that castle. Their 
grandson, George (c. 1471-1535) the 3rd lord, was in favour with 
Henry VII. and Henry VIII., and recovered from the latter in 
1 512 the casUe and lands of Abergavenny. He was prominent 
in the French campaigns of 1513-14 and 1523. On the death 
of his son, Henry, the 4th lord, in 1587, a long-famous contest 
ensued between his daughter, Lady Fane, and his heir-male, 
Edward Nevill, which was eventually ended by James I., in 
1604, assigning the barony of Abergavenny to Edward's son 
and that of Despencer to Lady Fane. The former subsequently 
descended (on uncertain grounds) to the heirs-male with the 
old Beauchamp estates under special entails. In 1784 the then 
Lord Abergavenny received an earldom, and the next lord 
erected at Eridge, Sussex, the present seat of the family, on 
which the marquisate of Abergavenny and earldom of Lewes were 
conferred in 1876. Its Sussex estates are mainly derived through 
the Beauchamps, from the Fitz Alans, heirs of the Warennes. 

The Nevills of Billingbear, Berks, were a junior line, of whom 
was Sir Henry Nevill (d. 1615), courtier and diplomatist, who 
became a leading figure in parliament under James I. His 
grandson, another Sir Henry (d. 1694), was an author of some note 
and a Republican opponent of Cromwell, by whom he was 
banished from London in 1654. The family became extinct in 
1740, and in 1762 Richard Aldworth (1717-1793), on inheriting 
Billingbear, took the name of Nevill. From him descend the 
Lords Braybrooke. 

Neuville is a common French name, and it is not clear whether 
all the Nevills who occur in the 12th and 13th centuries were of 
the same stock as the lords of Raby. The baronial line of Nevill 
of " Essex " was founded by the marriage, temp. Richard L, of a 
Hugh de Nevill to the heiress of Henry de Cornhill, a wealthy 
Londoner. He went on crusade with Richard I. and was after- 
wards an active supporter of John, who names him in the Great 
Charter (1215). His descendant, Hugh de Nevill, was summoned 
as a baron in 13 n, as was his son John, who served in the French 
and Flemish campaigns, and died, the last of his line, in 1358. 

See Rowland's Historical and Genealogical Account of the Family of 
Nevill (1830); Drummond's Noble British Families (1846); Swallow's 
De Nova Villa (1885); and Barron's sketch in The Ancestor, No. 6 
(1903). Also Dugdale's Baronage; G. E. C[okayne]'s Complete 
Peerage; J. H. Round's Feudal England; and for the Nevill castles 
Mackenzie's Castles of England. For the Kingmaker, see Oman's 
monograph (1891). Q. H. R.) 


NEVILLE, GEORGE (c. 143 2-1476), archbishop of York and 
chancellor of England, was the youngest son of Richard Neville, 
earl of Salisbury, and brother of Richard Neville, earl of Warwick, 
known as the " Kingmaker." He was educated at Ballicl 
College, Oxford, and was from his childhood destined for the 
clerical profession, in which through the great influence of his 
family he obtained rapid advancement, becoming bishop of 
Exeter in 1458. From this time forward Neville took a prominent 
part in the troubled politics of the period. He was present with 
his brother Warwick at the battle of Northampton in July 1460, 
immediately after which the great seal was committed to his 
keeping. He took part in the proclamation of Edward of York 
as king, who confirmed his appointment as chancellor. In 1463 
he was employed on a diplomatic mission in France; and in 
1464, after taking part in negotiation with the Scots, Neville 
became archbishop of York. During the next few years he as 
well as his brothers fell into disfavour with Edward IV.; and in 
1469, after a successful rising in Yorkshire secretly fermented by 
Warwick, the king fell into the hands of the archbishop, by 
whom, after a short imprisonment, he was permitted to escape. 
When Warwick was in turn defeated by the king's forces at 
Stamford in 1470, Archbishop Neville took the oath of allegiance 
to Edward, but during the short Lancastrian restoration which 
compelled Edward to cross to Holland, Neville acted as chan- 
cellor to Henry VI. ; and when the tide once more turned he again 
trimmed his sails to the favouring breeze, making his peace with 
Edward, now again triumphant, by surrendering Henry' into 
his hands. The archbishop for a short time shared Henry's 
captivity in the Tower. Having been pardoned in April 1471, he 
was re-arrested a year later on a charge of treason and secretly 
conveyed to France, where he remained a prisoner till 1475, 
when he returned to England; he died in the following year, 
on the 8th of June 1476. Archbishop Neville was a respectable 
scholar; and he was a considerable benefactor of the university 
of Oxford and especially of Balliol College. 

See Thomas Rymer, Foedera, &c. (London, 1704); John Wark- 
worth, Chronicle of the first Thirteen Years of the Reign of Edward IV., 
ed. J. O. Halliwell (Camden Soc, London, 1839J; Paston Letters, 
ed. J. Gairdner (London, 1872-1875); The Historical Collections of 
a Citizen of London in the i$th century, ed. J. Gairdner (Camden Soc., 
London, 1876); Sir James H. Ramsay, Lancaster and York 13QQ- 
1485 (Oxford, 1892). 


NEVILLE, RALPH (d. 1244), bishop of Chichester and chan- 
cellor of England, was a member of the great Neville family, 
but of illegitimate birth. In 12 14 he became dean of Lichfield, 
and obtained several rich livings; and in 1224 he was consecrated 
bishop of Chichester. In 1226 he was appointed chancellor 
by the council governing during the minority of Henry III.; and 
when the king in 1236 demanded the return of the great seal, 



Neville refused to surrender it, on the ground that only the 
authority that had appointed him to the office had power to 
deprive him of it. In 1231 he was chosen archbishop by the 
monks of Canterbury, but the election was not ratified by the 
pope. He died in 1244. 

Neville's residence in London was a palace in the street opposite 
the Temple, which from this association obtained the name of 
Chancery Lane, by which it is still known; while the palace itself, 
after passing into the hands of Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, was 
called Lincoln's Inn after that nobleman when it became the abode 
of students of law. Neville bequeathed this property to the see of 
Chichester, and the memory 01 his connexion with the locality is 
further preserved in the name of a passage leading from Chancery 
Lane to Lincoln's Inn which still Dears the name of Chichester 
Rents. 


NEVIN, JOHN WILLIAMSON (1803-1886), American theo- 
logian and educationalist, was born on Herron's Branch, near 
Shippensburg, Franklin county, Pennsylvania, on the 20th of 
February 1803. He was a descendant of Hugh Williamson of 
North Carolina, and was of Scotch blood and Presbyterian 
training. He graduated at Union College in 182 1; studied 
theology at Princeton Theological Seminary in 1823-1828, 
being in 1826-1828 in charge of the classes of Charles Hodge; 
was licensed to preach by the Carlisle Presbytery in 1828; and 
in 1830-1840 was professor of Biblical literature in the newly 
founded Western Theological Seminary of Allegheny, Penn- 
sylvania. But under the influence of Neander he was gradually 
breaking away from " Puritanic Presbyterianism," and in 
1840, having resigned his chair in Allegheny, he was appointed 
professor of theology in the (German Reformed) Theological 
Seminary at Mercersburg, Pa., and thus passed from the 
Presbyterian Church into the German Reformed. He soon 
became prominent; first by his contributions to its organ the 
Messenger*, then by The Anxious Bench — A Tract for the Times 
(1843), attacking the vicious excesses of revivalistic methods; 
and by his defence of the inauguration address, The Principle 
of Protestantism , delivered by his colleague Philip Schaff, 
which aroused a storm of protest by its suggestion that Pauline- 
Protestantism was not the last word in the development of the 
church but that a Johannean Christianity was to be its out- 
growth, and by its recognition of Petrine Romanism as a stage 
in ecclesiastical development. To Dr ScharFs 122 theses of 
The Principle of Protestantism Nevin added his own theory of 
the mystical union between Christ and believers, and both 
Schaff and Nevin were accused of a " Romanizing tendency." 
Nevin characterized his critics as pseudo-Protestants, urged 
(with Dr Charles Hodge, and against the Presbyterian General 
Assembly) the validity of Roman Catholic baptism, and defended 
the doctrine of the "spiritual real presence" of Christ in the^ 
Lord's Supper, notably in The Mystical Presence: a Vindication 
of the Reformed or Calvanistic Doctrine of the Holy Eucharist 
(1846); to this the reply from the point of view of rationalistic . 
Puritanism was made by Charles Hodge in the Princeton Review 
of 1848. In 1849 the Mercersburg Review was founded as the 
organ of Nevin and the " Mercersburg Theology "; and to it 
he contributed from 1849 to 1883. In 1851 he resigned from the 
Mercersburg .Seminary in order that its running expenses might 
be lightened; and from 1841 to 1853 he was president of Marshall 
College at Mercersburg. With Dr Schaff and others he was on 
the committee which prepared the liturgy of the German Re- 
formed Church, which appeared in provisional form in 1857 and 
as An Order of Worship in 1866. In 1861-1866 he was instructor 
of history at Franklin and Marshall College (in which Marshall 
College had been merged), of which he was president in 1 866-1 876. 
He died at Lancaster, Penn., on the 6th of June 1886. 

See Theodore Appel, The Life and Work of John Williamson Nevin 
(Philadelphia, 1889), containing Nevin 's more important articles. 


NEVIS, an island in the British West Indies, forming with St 
Kitts one of the five presidencies in the colony of the Leeward 
Islands. Pop. (1901) 12,774. It lies in 17 14' N. and 62 33' W., 
and is separated from St Kitts by a shallow channel 2 m. wide 
at its narrowest point. In form it is almost round, and from the 
sea has the appearance of a perfect cone, rising gradually to 
the height of 3200 ft. Its total area is 50 sq. m. Although the 
island is subject to severe storms, the climate is healthy, the 
average temperature being 8 2° F. Sugar, rum and molasses are 
exported, and corn, yams, coffee and fruit are grown. There are 
medicinal springs and large deposits of sulphur. The chief town, 
Charlestown, lies on a wide bay on the S.\V\ The legislative 
council of St Kitts-Nevis meets at Basseterre, the capital of St 
Kitts. Nevis was discovered by Columbus in 1498 and first 
colonized in 1 628 by the English from St Kitts. During the period 
of the slave trade it was a leading mart for slaves in the West 
Indies. 


NEVYANSK, Newanskiy or Neyvinskiy Zavod, a town of 
Russia, in the government of Perm, 57 m. by rail N.N.W. of 
Ekaterinburg, on the eastern slope of the Ural mountians, in the 
populous mountain valley of the Neyva, in a district very rich 
in iron and auriferous sands. Pop. (1881) 13,980; (1897) about 
16,000, all Great-Russians and mostly Nonconformists, who are 
employed, partlyj at the iron-works, partly in various small 
industries, such as the manufacture of boxes, widely sold in 
Siberia, iron wares and boots, and partly in agriculture. The 
iron-works at Nevyansk are the oldest in the Urals, having been 
founded in 1699. In 1702 Peter the Great presented them to 
Demidov, with 3,900,000 acres of land. Several other iron- 
works are situated within a short distance, the chief being 
Verkhne-Neyvinsk, 18 m. S.; Neyvo-Rudyansk, 8 m. S.; 
Petrokamensk, 32 m. N.E.; Neyvo-Shaitansk, 20 m. lower down 
the Neyva; and Neyvo-Alapayevsk, 64 m. N.E. of Nevyansk. 


NEW ABBEY, a parish and village of Kirkcudbrightshire, 
Scotland. Pop. of parish (1901) 957. The hill* of Criffel and 
Loch Kinder are situated within the parish boundaries. The 
lake contains two islets, of which one was a crannog and the other 
the site of an ancient kirk. The village, which lies 6| m. S. of 
Maxwelltown, is famous for the ruin of Sweetheart Abbey, a 
Cistercian house built in 1275 by Devorguila in memory of her 
husband John de Baliol, who had died at Barnard Castle in 1269. 
His heart, embalmed and enshrined in a coffin of ebony and 
silver, which she always kept beside her, was, at her death in 
1290, buried with her in the precincts of the abbey, which thus 
acquired its name (Abbacia Dulcis Cordis, or Douxquer). The 
building afterwards became known as the New Abbey, to dis- 
tinguish it from the older foundation at Dundrennan, which had 
been erected in 1142 by Fergus of Galloway. The remains of the 
abbey chiefly consist of the shell of the beautiful Cruciform 
church, with a central saddleback tower rising from the transepts 
to a height of over 90 ft., and a graceful rose window at the 
west end of the nave. Most of the work is Early English with 
Decorated additions. The abbot's tower, a stately relic, stands 
about \ m. N.E. of the abbey. 


NEW ALBANY, a city and the county-seat of Floyd county, 
Indiana, U.S.A., on the N. bank of the Ohio river, at the head of 
low water navigation, nearly opposite Louisville, Kentucky, 
with which it is connected by three railway bridges, and 156 m. 
below Cincinnati, Ohio. Pop. (1890) 21.059; (1900) 20,628, of 
whom 1363 were foreign-born and 1905 negroes; (1910) 20,629. 
It is served by the Baltimore & Ohio South-western, the 
Chicago, Indianapolis & Louisville, the Pittsburg, Cincinnati, 
Chicago & St Louis and the Southern railways, by electric 
railways to Louisville, Indianapolis, &c, and by steamboats 
on the Ohio; it is connected by a belt line with the Louisville & 
Nashville, the Chesapeake & Ohio, the Illinois Central and other 
railways. The city is situated on an elevated plateau above the 
river, in an amphitheatre of wooded hills. It has a good public 
library, a well organized public school system and several private 
schools and academies. Within the city limits is a national 
cemetery. The manufactures include leather, iron, foundry 
and machine shop products, furniture and veneer, lumber, 
cotton goods and hosiery, distilled liquors and stoves. The value 
of the factory products in 1905 was $4,110,709, 13% more than 
in 1900. Originally settled about the beginning of the 19th 
century, New Albany was platted in 1813 and was chartered 
as a city in 1839. The city owed much of its early industrial 
importance to the plate-glass works successfully established 
here by Washington Charles de Pauw (1822-1887), who endowed 
the De Pauw College for Young Women (opened as the Indiana 
Asbury Female College in 1852). The glass works left the city 
because of the superior and cheaper fuel supplied by natural 
gas in central Indiana. The De Pauw College for Young Women 
was relatively unimportant after the endowment of Indiana 
Asbury University (now De Pauw University) by W. C. de 
Pauw in 1883, but it continued to give instruction until 1903. 


NEW AMSTERDAM, a town of British Guiana, situated in 
6° 20' N. and 59 1 5' W. on the east bank of the Berbice river, 
about 4 m. from the mouth. Formerly the capital of the colony 
of Berbice, it is now the capital of the county of that name. 
It is a picturesque little town composed almost entirely of wooden 
houses, having a population estimated in 1904 at 7459. The 
Colony House, standing in handsome grounds beside the small 
but pretty botanical gardens, was formerly the residence of the 
governor and the seat of the legislature, and now contains the 
treasury and supreme courts. The town is lighted by municipally 
owned electric woiks, and contains various government in- 
stitutions, a town hall and market. The local government is 
vested in a mayor and town council, the revenue (a little over 
£12,000 annually) being mainly raised by a direct rate on house 
property. The expenditure is principally on streets, street 
lighting, fire brigade, water supply and drainage. New Amster- 
dam is connected by ferry and rail with Georgetown, to which 
there is also a bi-weekly steamer service. 


NEWARK, DAVID LESLIE, Lord (1601-1682), Scottish 
general, was born in 1601, the fifth son of Sir Patrick Leslie of 
Pitcairly, Fifeshire, commendator of Lindores, and Lady Jean 
Stuart, daughter of the 1st earl of Orkney. In his early life he 
served in the army of Gustavus Adolphus, where he rose to the 
rank of colonel of cavalry. In 1640 he returned to his native 
country to take part in the impending war for the Covenant. 
In 1643, when a Scottish army was formed to intervene in the 
English Civil War (see Great Rebellion) and placed under the 
command of Alexander Leslie, earl of Leven, the foremost living 
Scottish soldier, Leslie was selected as Leven's major-general. 
This army engaged the Royalists under Prince Rupert at Marston 
Moor, and Leslie bore a particularly distinguished part in the 
battle. He was then sent into the north-western counties, and 
besieged and took Carlisle. When, after the battle of Kilsyth, 
Scotland was at the mercy of Montrose and his army, Leslie 
was recalled from England in 1645, and made lieutenant-general 
of horse. In September he surprised and routed Montrose at 
Philiphaugh near Selkirk, and was rewarded by the committee 
of estates with a present of 50,000 merks and a gold chain; 
but his victory was marred by the butchery of the captured Irish 
— men, women and children — to whom quarter had been given. 
He was then declared lieutenant-general of the forces, and, in 
addition to his pay as colonel, had a pension settled on him. 
Leslie returned to England and was present at the siege of 
Newark. On his return to Scotland he reduced several of the 
Highland clans that supported the cause of the king. In 1648 
he refused to take part in the English expedition of the " en- 
gagers," the enterprise not having the sanction of the Kirk. 
In 1649 ne purchased the lands of Abercrombie and St Monance, 
Fifeshire. In 1650 he was sent against Montrose, who was 
defeated and captured by Major Strachan, Leslie's advanced 
guard commander; and later in the year, all parties having for 
the moment combined to support Charles II., Leslie was appointed 
to the chief command of the new army levied for the purpose on 
behalf of Charles II. The result, though disastrous, abundantly 
demonstrated Leslie's capacity as a soldier, and it might be 
claimed for him that Cromwell and the English regulars proved 
no match for him until his movements were interfered with and 
his army reduced to indiscipline by the representatives of the 
Kirk party that accompanied his headquarters. After Dunbar 
Leslie fought a stubborn defensive campaign up to the crossing 
of the Forth by Cromwell, and then accompanied Charles to 
Worcester, where he was lieutenant-general under the king, 
who commanded in person. On the defeat of the royal army 
Leslie, intercepted in his retreat through Yorkshire, was com- 
mitted to the Tower, where he remained till the Restoration 
in 1660. He was fined £4000 by Cromwell's " Act of Grace " in 
1654. In 1 66 1 he was created Lord Newark, and received a 
pension of £500 per annum. He died in 1682. The title became 
extinct in 1790. 


NEWARK (Newark-upon-Trent), a market town and 
municipal borough in the Newark parliamentary division of 
Nottinghamshire, England. Pop. (1001) 14,992. It lies in a 
flat, fertile lowland near the junction of the river Devon with 
the Trent, but actually on the Devon. By means of a canal 
1 J m. in length it is connected with the Trent navigation. It is 
120 m. N.N.W. from London by the Great Northern railway, 
and is on the Melton Mowbray joint branch of that company 
and the London & North-Western, and on the Nottingham & 
Lincoln branch of the Midland railway. The church of St Mary 
Magdalene, one of the largest and finest parish churches of 
England, is specially notable for the beauty of the tower and of 
the octagonal spire (223 ft. high) by which it is surmounted. 
The central piers of the old church, dating from the nth or 12th 
century, remain, and the lower part of the tower is a fine example 
of Early English when at its best. The upper parts of the tower 
and spire are Decorated, completed about 1350; the nave dates 
from between 1384 and 1393, and the chancel from 1489. The 
sanctuary is bounded on the south and north by two chantry 
chapels, the former of which has on one of its panels a remarkable 
painting from the " Dance of Death." There are a few old monu- 
ments, and an exceedingly fine brass of the 14th century. The 
castle, supposed to have been founded by Egbert, king of the 
West Saxons, was partly rebuilt and greatly extended by 
Alexander, consecrated bishop of Lincoln in n 23, who estab- 
lished at it a mint. It rises picturesquely from the river, and 
from its position and great strength was for a long time known as 
the " key of the North." Of the original Norman stronghold 
the most important remains are the gate-house, a crypt and the 
lofty rectangular tower at the south-west angle. The building 
seems to have been reconstructed in the early part of the 13th 
century. In the reign of Edward III. it was used as a state 
prison. During the Great Rebellion it was garrisoned for Charles 
I., and endured three sieges. Its dismantling was begun in 1646, 
immediately after the surrender of the king. There is a very 
beautiful and interesting cross (the " Beaumond " cross) of the 
latter part of the 15th century in good preservation in the town. 
A grammar and song school was founded in the reign of Henry 
VIII., and endowed by Archdeacon Magnus, and there are other 
considerable charities. The other principal public buildings are 
the town-hall in the Grecian style (erected in 1774), the corn 
exchange (1848), the Stock library and Middleton newsroom 
(1828), the mechanics' institution (1836), a free library and a fine 
hospital (1881). There is a large trade in malt, coal, corn and 
cattle. There are iron and brass foundries, boiler-works, agri- 
cultural implement manufactories and breweries. Gypsum and 
limestone are obtained in the neighbourhood, and plaster of 
Paris is extensively manufactured. The town is governed by 
a mayor, 6 aldermen and 18 councillors. Area 1931 acres. 

Newark {Newerca, Nouwerk) owed its origin, possibly in Roman 
times, to its position on the great road called the Fosse Way, 
in the valley of the Trent. In a document which purports to 
be a charter of 664 Newark is mentioned as having been granted 
to the abbey of Peterborough by Wulfhere. In the reign of 
Edward the Confessor it belonged to Godiva, who granted it to 
the monastery of Stow, and it remained in the hands of the 
hishops of Lincoln until the reign of Edward VI. The castle 
was erected by Bishop Alexander in n 23, and the bridge about 
the same time. Under Stephen a mint was established. There 
were burgesses in Newark at the time of the Domesday Survey, 
and in the reign of Edward III. there is evidence that it had long 
' been a borough by prescription. It was incorporated under an 
alderman and twelve assistants in 1549, and the charter was 
confirmed and extended by Elizabeth. Charles I., owing to the 
increasing commercial prosperity of the town, reincorporated 
it under a mayor and aldermen, and this charter, except for a 
temporary surrender under James II., has continued the govern- 
ing charter of the corporation. Newark returned two repre- 
sentatives to parliament from 1673 until 1885. A weekly market 
on Wednesdays, and a fair on the eve, day and morrow of the 
Invention of the Holy Cross, granted to the bishop of Lincoln 
by John, are still held; another fair at St Mary Magdalene and 
the four preceding days was granted by Henry III., and is 
probably represented by the fair now held on the 14th of May. 
A market for corn and cattle is still held on Wednesdays, and 
another on Tuesdays for fat stock has been added. 


NEWARK, the largest city of New Jersey, U.S.A., a port of 
entry, and the county-seat of Essex county, on the Passaic 
river and Newark Bay, about 8 m. W. of New York City. Pop. 
(1890) 181,830; (1900) 246,070, of whom 71,363 we're foreign- 
born, and 6694 were negroes; (1910 census), 347,469. Of 
the total foreign-born population in 1900 (48,329 of whom had 
been in the United States at least ten years), 25,139 were from 
Germany, 12,792 from Ireland, 8537 from Italy, 5874 from 
England, 551 1 from Russia and 4074 from Austria. Of the 
total population, 143,306 were of foreign parentage on both sides, 
56,404 German, 30,261 Irish, 13,068 Italian, 8951 English and 
8531 Russian. Newark is served by the Pennsylvania, the 
Lehigh Valley, the Erie, the Delaware, Lackawanna & Western 
and the Central of New Jersey railways, and by steamboats 
engaged in coastwise and river commerce. By electric lines it 
is connected with most of the cities and towns within a radius 
of 20 m., including Jersey City, Paterson and the residential 
suburbs, among which are the Oranges, Montclair, Bloomfield, 
Glen Ridge, Belleville and Nutley. It has a frontage on the 
river and bay 1 of io§ m., and a total area of 23-4 sq. m. 
The site is generally level, but the ground rises toward the 
western part. Broad Street, 120 ft., and Market Street, 90 ft. 
wide, the principal thoroughfares, intersect. The most prominent 
public buildings are the City Hall, completed in 1906; County 
Court-House, designed by Cass Gilbert (b. 1859), with sculpture 
by Andrew O'Connor and decorations by Howard Pyle, Will H. 
Low, Kenyon Cox, H. O. Walker, C. Y. Turner, F. D. Millet, 
George W. Maynard and Edwin H. Blashfield; United States 
Government Building; Public Library, finished in 1901, and 
City Hospital. There is a Roman Catholic Cathedral, and the 
city is the see of a Roman Catholic and of a Protestant Episcopal 
bishop. The Prudential Life Insurance Company and the 
Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company have fine office buildings. 
Many of the older buildings are of a brown sandstone, quarried 
in or near the city. In Military Park is a monument to Major- 
General Philip Kearny (1815-1862), and in Washington Park 
is a monument to Seth Boyden (1785-1870), a Newark inventor 
of malleable iron, of machinery for making nails, and of improve- 
ments in the steam-locomotive. Newark has also a monument 
to Frederick Theodore Frelinghuysen (1817-1885), secretary of 
state in the cabinet of President Chester A. Arthur, and to 
Abraham Coles (1813-1891), a poet and physician, both of whom 
lived here. On the banks of the Passaic is a house having as a 
part of its walls the old walls of Cockloft Hall, in which Washing- 
ton Irving frequently sojourned, and of which he gave a charming 
description in Salmagundi. In the vicinity are the remains of 
Peterborough, the home of Colonel Peter Schuyler (1710-1762), 
who served against the French in 1 746-48 and in the French 
and Indian War. At the corner of Broad and William streets 
stood until 1835 the parsonage in which Aaron Burr was born. 

In 1910 Newark had 658 acres in public parks, of which 637 
acres were under the administration of the Essex County Park 
Commission. To Washington, Military and Lincoln parks, the 
older ones near the heart of the city, there have been added 
Branch Brook (277 acres), Weequahic (265*8 acres), West Side 
(23 acres), and East Side (12-5 acres) parks. The principal ceme- 
teries are Mount Pleasant, overlooking the Passaic in the northern 
part of the city, and Fairmount in the western part; about 1894 
the remains of the early settlers were removed from the Old 

	1 The river channel before improvement had a navigable depth 
	of 7 ft. at mean low water; the depth was increased to about 10 ft. 
	by the Federal government before 1902; in 1907 further improve- 
	ment was authorized by Congress, the channel to be made 300 ft. 
	wide and 16 ft. deep. 

Burying Ground to Fairmount Cemetery and placed in a large 
vault marked by a monument. 

As parts of its public school system the city maintains twelve 
summer or vacation schools, evening schools, a normal and 
training school for the education of teachers, a school of drawing, 
and a technical school, the last for evening classes. The Newark 
Academy, founded in 1792, is the leading private school; and 
there are various Roman Catholic academies. In the township 
of Verona (pop. in 1905, 2576), about 7 m. N. by W. of Newark, 
is the City Home for boys, in which farming, printing and other 
trades are taught. The Public Library (opened in 1889) con- 
tained about 160,000 volumes in 1910, and the library of the 
New Jersey Historical Society about 26,000 books, about 
27,000 pamphlets and many manuscripts; the Prudential 
Insurance Company has a law library of about 20,000 volumes; 
and the Essex County Lawyers' Club has one of 5000 volumes 
or more. Among the charitable institutions are the City Hospital, 
Saint Michael's Hospital, Saint Barnabas Hospital, Saint James 
Hospital, the German Hospital, a Babies' Hospital, an Eye and 
Ear Infirmary, a City Dispensary, the Newark Orphan Asylum, 
a Home for Crippled Children, a Home for Aged Women and 
three day nurseries. The municipality owns and operates the 
water-works, and the water is brought from reservoirs in the 
Pequanac Valley 20-30 m. N. W. of the city. 

The city charter (1857) provides for government by a mayor, 
elected biennially, and a unicameral council, elected by popular 
vote. By popular vote, also, the board of. street and water 
commissioners is chosen. The council chooses the city clerk » 
treasurer and tax receiver, and the mayor appoints the city 
attorney, police justices, the board of education, the trustees of 
the public library, and the excise and assessment commissioners, 
and, subject to the ratification of his choice by the council, the 
comptroller, auditor and the tax, police, health and fire com- 
missioners. 

Newark has long been one of the leading manufacturing cities 
of the country. The manufacture of shoes and other leather 
products, particularly patent leather, became an important in- 
dustry early in the 19th century; in 1770 there was one tannery 
here; in 1792 there were three; a large one, still in operation, 
was built in 1827; in 1837 there were 155 curriers and patent 
leather makers in the city, which then had an annual product 
of leather valued at $899,200; in 1905 the value of the leather, 
tanned, curried and finished was $13,577,719. The manufacture 
of felt hats (product, 1905, $4,586,040, Newark ranking third 
in this industry among the cities of the United States), carriages, 
chairs and jewelry (an industry established about 1830; product, 
i 9°5j $9j 2 58,095), developed rapidly early in the 19th century, 
and there are extensive manufactories of malt liquors (product, 
1905, $10,917,003), and of clothing (product, 1905, $3,937, i3 8 )> 
foundries and machine shops (product, 1905, $6,254,153), 
and large establishments for smelting and refining lead and 
copper, the product of the lead smelters and refining establish- 
ments heing in 1905 the most valuable in the city. Among the 
other important manufactures in 1905 were: chemicals, valued 
at $3,964,726; slaughtering and meat packing, $2,933,877; 
varnish, $2,893,305; stamped ware, $2,689,766; enamelled 
goods, $2,361,350; boots and shoes, $2,382,051; reduction of 
gold and silver, not from ore, $2,361,350; corsets, $2,081,761; 
paints, $1,812,463; silverware and silver-smithing, $1,780,906; 
tobacco, cigars and cigarettes, $1 ,742,862 ; hardware, 
$1,616,755; buttons, $1,281,528, and saddlery hardware, 
$1,151,789. In 1905 an art pottery was established for making 
"'crystal patina " and " robin's egg blue " wares, in imitation, 
to a certain extent, of old oriental pottery, and Clifton India 
ware, in imitation of pottery made by the American Indians. 
The total value of Newark's factory products increased from 
$112,728,045 in 1900 to $150,055,227 in 1005, or $yi%. In 
1905 the value of the city's factory product was almost one- 
fifth of that for the whole state, and Newark ranked tenth among 
the manufacturing cities of the entire country. In the same year 
Newark manufactured more than one-half (by value) of all the 
jewelry, leather and malt liquors produced in the state. 

Insurance is another important business, for here are the 
headquarters of the Prudential, the Mutual Benefit Life and the 
American Fire, the Firemen's and the Newark Fire Insurance 
companies. The city's foreign trade is light (the value of its 
imports was $859,442 in 1007; of its exports $664,525), but its 
river traffic is heavy, amounting to about 3,000,000 tons annually, 
and being chiefly in general merchandise (including food-stuffs, 
machinery and manufactured products), ores and metals, 
chemicals and colours, stone and sand and brick. 

Newark was settled in 1666 by about thirty Puritans from 
Milford, Connecticut, who were followed in the next year by 
about the same number of their sect from Branford and Guilford. 
Because of the union of the towns of the New Haven Jurisdiction 
with Connecticut, in 1664, and the consequent admission of others 
than church members to civil rights, these Puritans resolved 
to remove and found a new town, in which, as originally in the 
New Haven towns, only church members should have a voice in 
the government. They bought practically all of what is now 
Essex county from the Indians for " fifty double hands of powder, 
one hundred bars of lead, twenty axes, twenty coats, ten guns, 
twenty pistols, ten kettles, ten swords, four blankets, four barrels 
of beer, ten pairs of breeches, fifty knives, twenty horses, eighteen 
hundred and fifty fathoms of wampum, six ankers of liquor (or 
something equivalent), and three troopers' coats." Their first 
church was in Broad Street, nearly opposite the present First 
Presbyterian Church, with cupola and flankers from which 
" watchers " and " wards " might discover the approach of 
hostile Indians, and as an honour to their pastor, Rev. Abraham 
Pierson (1608-16 78), who came from Newark-on-Trent, they gave 
the town its present name, having called it Milford upon their 
first settlement. The town was governed largely after the 
Mosaic law and continued essentially Puritan for fifty years or 
more; about 1730 Presbyterianism superseded Congregational- 
ism, and in 1 734 Colonel Josiah Ogden, having caused a schism 
in the preceding year, by saving his wheat one dry Sunday in a 
wet season, founded with several followers the first Episcopal or 
Church of England Society in Newark — Trinity Church. Partly 
because of its Puritanic genesis and partly because of its in- 
dependent manufacturing interests, Newark has kept, in spite 
of its nearness to New York City, a distinct character of its own. 
The College of New Jersey, now Princeton University, was 
situated here from 1747 to 1756, for all but the first few months 
under the presidency of the Rev. Aaron Burr, who published in 
1752 the well-known Newark Grammar , long used in Princeton 
and originally prepared for Burr's very successful boys' school 
in Newark. The city received large additions to its foreign-born 
population immediately after the revolution of 1848, when many 
Germans settled here — a German daily newspaper was estab- 
lished in 1857. Newark was incorporated as a township in 1693, 
was chartered as a city in 1836 and received another charter 
in 1857; from it the township of Orange was formed in 1806 and 
the township of Bloomfield in 181 2. 

See H. L. Thowless, Historical Sketch of the City of Newark, New 
Jersey (Newark, 1902); F. J. Urquhart, Newark, The Story of its 
Early Days (Newark, 1904); and J. Atkinson, The History of 
Newark t New Jersey (Newark, 1878). 


NEWARK, a city and the county-seat of Licking county, Ohio, 
U.S.A., at the confluence of three forks of the Licking river, 
on the Ohio Canal, and ^ m. E. by N. of Columbus. Pop. 
(1800) 14,270; (1900) 18,157, of whom 1342 were foreign-born 
and 300 were negroes; (1910 census) 25,404. Newark is 
served by the Baltimore & Ohio, and the Pittsburg, Cincinnati, 
Chicago & St Louis railways, and by inter-urban electric lines. 
It lies on a level plain, but is surrounded by hills. Along two 
of the forks of the Licking are some of the most extensive 
earthworks of the " mound builders "; they occupy about 
3 sq. m., and have a great variety of forms: parallel walls, 
circles, semicircles, a parallelogram, an octagon, &c. About 
10 m. S.W. and connected with Newark by electric line is Buckeye 
Lake, an artificial body of water about 8 m. long and 1 m. wide, 
frequented as a summer resort. Among the city's attractive 
features are Idlewilde Park and a beautiful auditorium, built 
as a memorial to the soldiers and sailors of the Civil War. Newark 
is the trade centre of an agricultural region, which also abounds 
in natural gas and coal; natural gas is piped as far as Cincinnati. 
The city has electric car and steam car shops and various manu- 
factures, including stoves and furnaces (the most important), 
bottles, table glass-ware, cigars, rope halters, machine furniture 
and bent wood. The total factory product in 1905 was valued 
at $5,612,587, an increase of 94-9% over that in 1900. Newark 
was laid out about 1801 and was incorporated in 1813. 

For an account of the earthworks see Gerard Fowke, Archaeological 
History of Ohio (Columbus, 1902). 


NEW BEDFORD, a city and port of entry, and one of the 
county-seats of Bristol county, Massachusetts, U.S.A., 56 m. 
S. of Boston, at the mouth of the Acushnet river, and at the head 
of New Bedford Harbor, an arm of Buzzard's Bay. Pop. (1890) 
4°j733» ( i ooo) 62,442, of whom 25,529 were foreign-born, 
including 8559 French Canadians, 5389 English, 4802 Portuguese 
and 3020 Irish; (19 10 census) 96,652. New Bedford is the 
terminus of two divisions of the New York, New Haven & 
Hartford railroad, and is connected with Taunton (the other 
county-seat), Fall River, Brockton and other cities by interurban 
electric railways. Passenger steamboat lines connect with 
Martha's Vineyard, Nantucket and Buzzard's Bay points; a 
freight line and, in summer, daily passenger service to New York 
are maintained; the Insular Navigation Co. (Empreza Insulana 
de Navegacao) runs passenger and freight steamers from New 
Bedford to Lisbon, and to the Azores; and there is a regular 
sailing packet service between New Bedford and the Cape Verde 
Islands. Two bridges connect New Bedford with the township 
of Fairhaven, on the E. side of the harbour; one, a steel bridge, 
is almost 1 m. in length and cost $1,500,000. New Bedford is 
attractively situated, and, commercially, occupies a particularly 
favourable position. It covers about 20 sq. m., and extends along 
the W. side of the river and harbour for several miles. Unusual 
dockage facilities are thus provided. The harbour was improved 
by the Federal government, between 1840 and 1906, the channel 
from Buzzard's Bay through the harbour being 18 ft. deep and 
200 ft. wide; under a project of 1007 it was contemplated to 
increase the depth of the channel to 25 ft. and the width to 
300 ft. There is a broad driveway along the shore of the harbour 
to Clark's Point at the entrance, where during the Civil War the 
United States government erected a stone fort, Fort Rodman, 
in which a garrison of artillery is still maintained; New Bedford 
was one of the 26 places reported by the U.S. Chief of Engineers 
in 1909 as having " permanent seacoast defences." Among the 
principal buildings and institutions are the post office and 
custom house, the city hall, the county court house, the 
registry of deeds building, the masonic building, the merchants' 
national bank, the institution for savings, St Joseph's and St 
Luke's hospitals, the Swain free school, St Mary's (Roman 
Catholic) school, the Friends' academy, a state textile school, 
a state armory and St Mary's home. The public library, 
established as a private society library in 1802, taken over by the 
city in 1853, and housed in the refitted old city hall building, was 
one of the first free public b'braries in the United States; it 
contains about 100,000 volumes, and has notable collections 
relating to the whaling industry and to the Quakers. The 
Sailors' Bethel, built in 1831, and containing memorial tablets 
reminiscent of the whaling days, is of interest. The Old Dart- 
mouth Historical Society was organized in 1903. A fine park 
system, aggregating 255 acres, includes the Common, and Brook- 
lawn, Button wood, Hazelwood, Grove and Triangle Parks. 
The city owns and operates a fine water-supply system. 

When whale-oil was a widely used illuminant, New Bedford 
was long the principal port of the world's whaling industry; 
and in point of tonnage owned it is perhaps still so, as many New 
Bedford vessels now sail from San Francisco. As early as the 
middle of the 18th century, vessels sailed on whaling voyages 
from the mouth of the Acushnet river, but it was not until 1765, 
when Joseph Rotch, a Nantucket merchant, bought a tract of 
land on the W. side of the river and constructed wharve9 
and warehouses, that the industry became established here. At 
first the whales were obtained principally off the Virginia and 
Carolina coasts, but by the outbreak of the War of Independence, 
the New Bedford whalers sought their prey as far as West Indian 
and even South American waters. The War of Independence 
temporarily ruined the industry, but it was soon re-established, 
and the field of operations was much extended, after 1791 many 
ships regularly rounding Cape Horn into the Pacific Ocean. By 
1804 there were 59 whaling vessels registered from New Bedford. 
The unsettled commercial conditions of the early years of the 19th 
century and the Embargo combined to ruin the business once 
more, but the close of the War of 181 2 ushered in the greatest era 
of prosperity for the industry. By 1845 on ly New York, Boston 
and New Orleans of American ports exceeded New Bedford in 
tonnage. The production was greatest in that year, New Bedford 
whalers importing 158,000 bbls. of sperm oil, 272,000 bbls. of 
whale oil and 3,000,000 lb of whalebone. The beginning of 
Arctic whaling in 1848 marked a new step in the industry, and 
the tonnage was much increased. The highest point in capital, 
tonnage and vessels was reached in 1857, when New Bedford 
possessed 329 registered whaling ships, representing an invest- 
ment of $12,000,000 and employing afloat and ashore 10,000 
hands. From a succession of causes, of which the introduction of 
petroleum into general use as an illuminant was the chief, the 
industry began to decline from this time. The Civil War was a 
great blow to the whalers; 25 vessels were sunk by Confederate 
cruisers, entailing a loss of $1,650,000, and many more were 
bought by the government to be sunk at the entrances of southern 
harbours, or to be used as colliers or store ships. 1 In 1871 and 
1876 many vessels were lost in the Arctic ice, involving losses 
of several millions. Still the industry survives on a compara- 
tively small scale; in January 1909 there were 13 steamers and 
barks, 1 brig and 4 schooners, with an aggregate tonnage of 4710, 
employed, chiefly in sperm whaling, and the oil and whalebone 
product of 1 908 was valued at about $350,000. 

The prosperity that New Bedford lost with the decline of the 
whaling industry has been more than made up by the growth of 
the cotton spinning industry. In 1905 New Bedford ranked 
second among the cities of the United States in the manufacture 
of cotton goods (including cotton small wares), producing 5% 
of the total for the country; \he speciality of the mills is the 
finer cotton goods. The first cotton mill, a five-storey stone 
structure, was built by Joseph Grinnell (1 780-1885) and his 
associates in 1847, an d began operations in the following year 
with 15,000 spindles and 200 looms. This was the beginning of 
the Wamsutta Mills, in 1907 comprising 8 buildings, 228,000 
spindles and 4300 looms. In 1909 the city had some 50 mills, 
with a total of over 2,137,000 spindles. The value of cotton 
goods manufactured in 1905 was $22,411,936, or 76-1% of 
all manufactured products of New Bedford (in 1800 the product 
was $8,185,286; in 1900 $16,748,783). Among the city's other 
manufactures are tools, cordage and twine, boots and shoes, 
glass, oils, lubricants (notably black-fish oil, a lubricant for 
watches and clocks, of which almost the entire supply is manu- 
factured here), mechanical toys, beer, ale, woollen and silk 
goods, and paints. The total value of all factory products was 
$ 2 3j397j49i in 1900 and $29,469,349 in 1905. There is an 
extensive commerce in coal, raw cotton, lumber and fish; the 
direct foreign trade is comparatively small — in 1909 the imports 
were valued at $542,995, and the exports at $34,473. 

The site of New Bedford was visited in 1602 by the English 
navigator, Bartholomew Gosnold, who traded with the Indians 
at the mouth of the Acushnet or Acoosnet. It was originally part 
of the town of Dartmouth, which was occupied by settlers from 
Plymouth, who in 1652 purchased the land from Massasoit, 
Sachem of the Narragansets, and his son Wamsutta (called 
Alexander by the whites). About 1665 there was a considerable 
influx of Quakers, and members of this sect have always formed 

	1 From New Bedford in November and December 1861 sailed 
	the " Stone Fleet/' a flotilla of 45 whaling vessels collected by the 
	Federal government and loaded with stone,. most of which were 
	sunk off Charleston and other harbours on the South Atlantic coast 
	for the purpose of stopping blockade running. 

in important and influential element in the population. There 
cvere few settlers on the site of New Bedford until the middle of 
the 1 8th century, and there was no village, properly speaking, 
in til 1760. The town was first called Bedford after Joseph 
iussell, one of the founders, whose family name was the same 
is that of the dukes of Bedford; and it was later called New 
Bedford to distinguish it from Bedford in Middlesex county. 
During the War of Independence the harbour became a rendez- 
vous for American privateers; this led to an attack, on the 5th 
of September 1778, by a fleet and armed force under Earl Grey, 
which burned seventy ships and almost destroyed the town. 
In 1787 New Bedford was set off from Dartmouth and separately 
Incorporated as a township; in 181 2 the township of Fairhaven 
was separated from it. New Bedford was chartered as a city 
in 1847. Its first newspaper, the Marine Journal, was established 
in 1792. The Mercury, founded in 1807, now one of the oldest 
newspapers in continuous publication in the country, was for 
some time edited by William Ellery Channing (1818-1901). 
There are Portuguese and French weekly newspapers. 

See Daniel Ricketson, History of New Bedford (New Bedford, 
1858); Z. W. Pease and G. W. Hough, New Bedford (New Bedford, 
1889); D. H. Hurd, History of Bristol County (Philadelphia, 1883); 
L. B. Ellis, History of New Bedford and its Vicinity 1602-1892 
(Syracuse, N.Y., 1852); W. S. Tower, A History of the American 
Whale Fishery (Philadelphia, 1907); and The Old Dartmouth 
Historical Sketches (1903 seq.), published by the Old Dartmouth 
Historical Society. 


NEWBERN, a city, port of entry and the county-seat of 
Craven county, North Carolina, U.S.A., near the head of the 
estuary of the Neuse river and at the mouth of the Trent river, 
about 90 m. N.E. of Wilmington. Pop. (1800) 7843; (1900) 
9090, of whom 5878 were negroes; (1910 census) 9961. 
Newhern is served by the Atlantic Coast Line and the Norfolk 
& Southern railways. The Federal government has improved 
both the Neuse and the Trent rivers for navigation; the Neuse 
has a channel of 8 ft. at low water to Newbern and one of 4 ft. 
from Newbern to Kinston, and the Trent a channel of 3 ft. 
from Newbern to Trenton. The Trent and the Neuse are both 
spanned here by railway and county bridges. The " Waterway 
between Newbern and Beaufort," projected in 1884, had in 
1908 a controlling depth at mean low water of only 2 to 2\ ft.; 
it was decided to abandon this waterway on the completion of 
an inland waterway about 18 m. long with a channel 10 ft. 
deep at low water and 90-250 ft. wide, projected in 1907, which 
would give Newbern an outlet to the ocean at Beaufort. The 
remains of Tryon Palace, the residence of the royal governor 
and the meeting-place of the legislature, which was built by 
William Tryon (q.v.) in 1765-1770, and was said to be the finest 
building of its time in the colonies, are of historic interest, and 
among the principal buildings are the United States govern- 
ment building, the county court house, the county jail and 
the county home. At Newbern is one of the national cemeteries 
of the Federal government, containing many fine monuments. 
The most important industries are the manufacture of lumber 
(especially pine) and trucking. The total value of factory 
products in 1905 was $1,343,384. In 1907 about 1000 men, 
mostly negroes, were employed in the saw-mills, whose annual 
product averages about 170,000,000 ft. Among the manufactures 
are fertilizers, cotton seed oil and carriages; repair shops of 
the Norfolk & Southern railway are here; the fisheries are of 
considerable importance; and the city ships quantities of fish, 
cotton and market-garden produce — much of the last being 
forced under canvas with steam heat. It is the port of entry 
of the Pamlico customs district; in 1908 its imports were 
valued at $71,421. Newbern was settled in 17 10 by a company 
of Swiss and Germans under the leadership of Baron Emanuel 
de Graffenried (d. 1735) and was named for Bern, Switzerland. 
It was incorporated as a city in 1723, but its present charter 
dates from 1899. with amendments adopted in 1907. For several 
years it was the capital of the province and for a long time was 
the chief seaport of the state. Although strongly fortified 
early in the Civil War, Newbern was captured by a Union force 
under General A. E. Burnside on the 14th of March 1862 after 
an engagement near the city in which the loss to the Confederates, 
who were under the command of General Lawrence O'Brien 
Branch, was about 578 in killed, wounded, captured and missing, 
and the loss of the Union force was 90 killed and 380 wounded. 
Unsuccessful attempts to recapture the city were made by the 
Confederates on the 14th of March 1863, and on the 1st of 
February and the 5th of May 1864. 


NEWBERRY, JOHN STRONG (1822-1892), American geologist, 
was born at Windsor, Connecticut, on the 22nd of December 
1822, and received a medical education at Cleveland, Ohio, 
taking the degree of M.D. in 1848. He completed his medical 
studies in Paris. His attention was early attracted to geology 
by collecting coal-measure plants from mines that had been 
opened by his father, and an acquaintance with Professor James 
Hall established his interest in the science. Hence while in 
Paris he studied botany under A. T. Brongniart. In 1851 he 
settled in practice at Cleveland, but in 1855 he was appointed 
surgeon and geologist to an exploring party in northern California 
and Oregon, and in 1857 his reports on the geology, botany 
and zoology were published. Between then and 1861 he was 
employed on similar work in the region of the Colorado river 
under Lieutenant J. C. Ives, and his researches were extended over 
a large area of previously unknown country in Utah, Arizona 
and New Mexico, the further results being published in 1876. 
During the Civil War he did important work as a member of 
the U.S. Sanitary Commission, his organizing capacity being 
specially marked during the operations in the Mississippi Valley. 
In 1866 he was appointed professor of geology and palaeontology 
at the Columbia School of Mines, New York, where he commenced 
the formation of a magnificent collection of specimens; in 1869 
he was made state geologist of Ohio and director of the (second) 
Geological Survey there, and in 1884 palaeontologist to the U.S. 
Geological Survey. Four volumes on the geology of Ohio were 
published while he was director of the survey, his own reports 
being confined to the surface geology and to the coal-measures 
and their fossil plants. He devoted much labour to the study 
of Triassic, Cretaceous and Tertiary plants, and in particular to 
those of the Laramie stage. He also carried on researches among 
the Palaeozoic and Triassic fishes of North America. Among his 
other publications may be mentioned The Origin and Classifica- 
tion of Ore Deposits (1880). His work throughout was char- 
acterized by great care and conscientious study, and it was 
recognized by his inclusion in most of the learned societies of 
America and the Old World. He received the Murchison 
medal of the Geological Society of London in 1888, and was 
president of the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science (1867), of the New York Academy of Sciences (1867- 
1891), and of the International Congress of Geologists (1891). 
He died at New Haven, Conn., on the 7th of December 1892. 

Memoir (with portrait) by J. J. Stevenson, American Geologist 
(July 1893). 


NEWBOLT, HENRY JOHN (1862- ), English author, was 
born on the 6th of June 1862, the son of H. F. Newbolt, vicar 
of St Mary's, Bilston. He was educated at Clifton College, 
where he was head of the school in 188 1 and edited the school 
magazine, and at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. He was 
called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1887 and practised until 
1899. His first book was a story, Taken from the Enemy (1892), 
and in 1895 he published a tragedy, Mordred; but it was the 
publication of his ballads, Admirals All (1897), that created 
his literary reputation. These were followed by other volumes 
of stirring verse, The Island Race (1898), The Sailing of the 
Long-ships (1902), Songs of the Sea (1904). From 1900 to 1905 
he was the editor of the Monthly Review. Among his later 
books his novels The Old Country (1906) and The New June 
(1909) attracted considerable attention. 


NEW BRIGHTON, formerly a village (coextensive with the 
town of Castleton) of Richmond county, New York, U.S.A., 
but since the 1st of January 1898 the first ward of the borough 
of Richmond, New York City. It is at the north-eastern end 
of Staten Island, about 6 m. S.W. of the borough of Manhattan, 
with which it is connected by ferry. Pop. (1890) 16,423; (1900) 
21,441, of whom 6575 were foreign-born and 259 negroes; (1905 
state census) 23,659. At New Brighton is the Sailors' Snug 
Harbor, founded under the will of Robert Richard Randall 
(c. 1740-1801), who in 1771 became a member of the Marine 
Society of New York (an organization for the relief of indigent 
masters of vessels and their families), and in 1790 bought from 
Baron Poelnitz the " Minto farm," about 21 acres of land in 
what is now the Fifteenth Ward of the Borough of Manhattan. 
This tract, with four lots in what is now the First Ward of 
Manhattan, and cash and stocks to the value of about $10,000 
Randall (who. himself seems to have followed the sea for a time, 
and was called " Captain ") bequeathed to a board of trustees, 
directing that the income should be used " for the purpose of 
maintaining and supporting aged, decrepit and worn-out sailors," 
who had served at least five years under the American flag, 
and that the institution established for this purpose should be 
called " the Sailors' Snug Harbor." The will was bitterly con- 
tested by relatives, but finally was fully upheld in 1830 by the 
United States Supreme Court. The Sailors' Snug Harbor was 
incorporated in 1S06, and its charter was amended in 1828 
to permit the building of the institution on Staten Island rather 
than on the Randall estate, which had already greatly increased 
in value. In 1833 the institution, with lands covering 160 acres, 
was opened in New Brighton with about 50 inmates. Randall's 
body was removed to the grounds in 1834, and buried under a 
marble monument, and in 1884 a life-size bronze statue of him, 
by Augustus Saint Gaudens, was placed in front of the main 
building. In 1909 the institution comprised the main building, 
a hospital, a chapel, a parsonage, residences for the officials, 
and several other buildings. The inmates (about 1000 in 1909) 
employ themselves at simple trades, or at work about the grounds; 
the use of intoxicating liquors is strictly prohibited, but the men 
are furnished with plenty of tobacco, and are well cared for. 
The present immense value of the land bequeathed by Randall 
makes Snug Harbor one of the most liberally endowed charitable 
institutions in New York City. At New Brighton are also a 
Home for Destitute Children of Seamen, founded in 1846 at 
Stapleton, Staten Island, removed to a new building on the Snug 
Harbor property in 1852, and maintained by contributions and 
gifts; and the Samuel R. Smith Infirmary, founded in 1861 
by the Medical Society of Richmond county, aud named in 
honour of a Staten Island physician. At New Brighton there 
are dry docks, paper and plaster mills, and silk-dyeing and 
printing works. The village as incorporated in 1866 included 
the northern half of the township of Castleton, and as reincor- 
porated in 1872 included all of that township. 


NEW BRIGHTON, a borough of Beaver county, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., on Beaver river, 2 m. from its confluence with the Ohio 
and 28 m. N.W. of Pittsburg. Pop. (1890) 5616, (1900) 6820 
(487 foreign-born and 179 negroes); (1910)8329. It is served 
by the Pennsylvania railway, and is connected by bridge with 
Beaver Falls. The borough has a public art gallery, a public 
park and a general hospital. Coal and fireclay abound in the 
vicinity, the Beaver river furnishes good water power, and the 
borough has various manufactures. New Brighton was laid out 
as a town in 181 5 and was incorporated as a borough in 1838. 


NEW BRITAIN, a city of Hartford county, Connecticut, U.S.A., 
near the centre of the state, about 9 m. S.W. of the city of 
Hartford; land area 13*09 sq. m. in 1906. Pop. (1890) of 
the township, including the city, 19,007; of the city, 16,519; 
(1900) of the township, including the city, 28,202; of the city, 
25,998, of whom 9293 were foreign-born, including 1869 Irish 
and 181 1 Swedes, who have a weekly published here; (1910 
census) 43)9/6. It is served by the New York, New Haven & 
Hartford railway, and by several inter-urban electric railways. 
The city is the seat of a state normal school, and has a free 
public library, formerly the New Britain Institute, and a public 
park of about 100 acres. New Britain is an important manu- 
facturing centre; its principal products are hardware, cutlery 
and edge tools, hosiery, and foundry and machine shop products. 
In 1905 the capital invested in manufacturing was $19,979,712 
(an increase of 45- 1% since 1900) and the value of the factory 
products was $i4>959j543 (an increase of 34-8%). * More than 
one-half of the product-value was in hardware ($7,537,625). 

New Britain, which was settled in 1687, was originally a part 
of the township of Farmington. On account of ecclesiastical 
difficulties the " New Britain Society " — a parish — was organized 
in 1754. New Britain became a part of Berlin when that town- 
ship was established in 1785. In 1850 the township of Nev 
Britain was incorporated, and in 1871 the city was chartered. 
By act of the state legislature in 1905 the township of New 
Britain and the city of New Britain were consolidated; the first 
election under the new charter was in April 1906. The city was 
one of the first in the country to build a municipal subway for 
electric light, telephone and telegraph wires. 

See D. N. Camp's History of New Britain (New Britain, 1889). 


NEW BRUNSWICK, a province of the Dominion of Canada, 
lying between 45 2' and 48 3' N. and 63 46' and 69 3' W. 
Its length from N. to S. is 230 m., its greatest breadth 190 m., 
and it has a seaboard of about 550 m. 

Physical Features. — The surface is generally undulating, but 
in the north and north-west of the province are many ranges of 
hills from 1000 to 2000 ft. in height, rising in Bald Mountain to 
2400 ft. These elevations are an extension of the Appalachian 
Mountains and traverse the province from the state of Maine. 
This whole section of the province is densely wooded. The 
southern region embraces the district along the Bay of Fundy. 
Its coast is rocky and bold and interrupted by ravines. Inland 
the numerous rivers, flowing through the soft sandstone and 
conglomerate rocks, have cut broad valleys, the soil of which is 
extremely rich and fertile. Along the shores on the east coast, 
and for some miles inland, the country is flat and composed of 
mosses and marshes, but beyond that distance it rises into gently 
sloping hills, which extend as far as St John. 

New Brunswick is a network of rivers, bays and lakes, several 
of which are navigable for vessels of large tonnage. The principal 
rivers are the St John, Miramichi, Restigouche, Saint Croix, 
Petitcodiac, Richibucto and Nipisiguit. The St John, which is 
famous for its scenery, rises in the state of Maine and is over 
450 m. in length. It is navigable for vessels of moderate tonnage 
from St John on the Bay of Fundy to Fredericton, a distance of 
about 88 m., but steamers of light draught ply as far as Wood- 
stock, 65 m. farther, and during the rainy season boats go as 
far as Grand Falls, a cataract 70 or 80 ft. high, 225 m. from the 
sea. Among the many lakes which it drains is Grand Lake, 20 m. 
long, and varying from 3 to 9 m. in breadth. The Miramichi 
flows N.E. into a bay of the same name. It is 225 m. long, 7 m. 
wide at its mouth, and navigable as far as Nelson (46 m.). In 
the spring and autumn small steamers and barges go much 
farther up. With its branches it drains a fourth of the province. 
A large lumber trade is done in this district, and many saw-mills 
are driven by the river. The Restigouche forms the north-east 
boundary of the province, is 100 m. in length and flows into the 
Bay of Chaleur. It is composed of five main branches, its name 
signifying in Indian " the river which divides like the hand." 
Large vessels may safely navigate it 18 m. from the bay. With 
its tributaries it drains over 4000 sq. m. of fertile and well- 
wooded country. The St Croix separates New Brunswick from 
the state of Maine at its south-west angle. Its source is a chain 
of lakes called the Chiputneticook. The Petitcodiac is navigable 
for 25 m. for ships, and schooners of 80 tons burden may proceed 
to the head of the tide, 12 m. farther; it empties into Shepody 
Bay. The Richibucto discharges into the Gulf of St Lawrence. 
The Nipisiguit and Tobique (a tributary of the St John) in the N. 
are in much repute among anglers. 

The coast-line of New Brunswick is indented with numerous 
fine bays and harbours. The Bay of Fundy is an arm of the sea 
separating New Brunswick from Nova Scotia and terminating 
in two smaller bays, Chignecto Bay and the Basin of Minas. 
Its length up to Chignecto Bay is 140 m. and its extreme breadth 
45 m. It is noted for its high tides, which rise about 30 ft. at 
St John and over 50 ft. at the head of Chignecto Bay. At Bay 
Verte, 14 m. distant, on the opposite side of the Isthmus of 
Chignecto, the tide rises little more than 4 or 5 ft. The Bay of 
Chaleur, which has several excellent harbours, is over 00 m. in 
length and from 20 to 25 m. in breadth. The other inlets of 
Consequence on the east coast are Miramichi, Richibucto, 
Buctouche, Cocagne and Shediac Bays; on the south coast are 
Passamaquoddy Bay, St John Harbour and Chignecto Bay. 

severe, and snow falls to a great depth, but the harbour of St John 
is open throughout the year. During the period 1875-1905 the 
average yearly snowfall was 97-5 in., 20 in. more than 

in Nova Scotia. 
Indian 
Th 

At the mouths of the rivers are in nearly every case excellent 
harbours. To the province belong the islands of Campobello 
and Grand Manan, at the entrance of the Bay of Fundy, from 
both of which important fisheries are. carried on. 

Geology. — Along the Bay of Fundy, for about 30 m. inland, is a 
band of hard Cambrian and Cambro-Silurian rocks, with smaller 
areas of Devonian, Huronian and Laurentian. The city of St 
John is built upon very hard Cambrian slates, in which interesting 
fossils are found. North of this belt grey sandstones and con- 
glomerates of Carboniferous age occupy a triangular area, the apex 
of which is near Oromocto Lake, the south side extending to Nova 
Scotia and the north-west side to Bathurst. Along the western 
border this area is 400 to 600 ft. high, but near the coast it is low 
and flat. " The Carboniferous area of New Brunswick is continuous 
across the isthmus [of Chignecto] with that of Nova Scotia, so that 
from Miscou on the Bay of Chaleur to Sydney on the Atlantic coast 
of Cape Breton, the whole coast of the Gulf of St Lawrence is 
bordered by coal-bearing rocks " (S. E. Dawson, North America, 
London^ 1897). North-west of the Carboniferous a belt of 40 to 
50 m. wide is occupied by Ordovician and pre-Cambrian formations, 
with large masses of intrusive granite. The Ordovician is composed 
of schistose, micaceous, and foliated slates and cjuartzites, in places 
highly altered and disturbed. The pre-Cambrian rocks consist of 
very hard crystalline reddish felsite, chloritic quartzites, and fels- 
patnic and micaceous schists. The whole of this region is rugged 
and broken into numerous ranges of hills. The remainder of the 
province to the north-western boundary is occupied by Silurian 
rocks, mostly calcareous slates and shales associated with beds of 
limestone. The whole province has been mantled with ice in the 
Pleistocene period, and boulder-clay and later modified deposits 
occupy the surface. Marine clay and sand containing fossil shells 
are found along the coast. 

Climate. — The climate, though subject to extremes, is healthy. 
The average mean temperature in summer is 6o° F., and in winter 
19 F. The average rainfall for thirty years (1875 to 1905 in- 
clusive) was 32-6 in., whereas in the neighbouring province of 
Nova Scotia, with its larger coast-line, it was 39-6. The winters are 
the autumn is delightful, especially during the 
summer," after the first frost, but before the weather has broken. 

Area and Population. — Not including the territorial sea, the area 
of the province is 27,985 sq. m., of which 74 are 
water. It thus occupies an area rather larger 
than that of the mainland of Scotland. The 
population in 1901 was 331,120, and is practically 
stationary, there being little or no immigration, 
and a steady exodus to the United States and 
to the western provinces of the Dominion. The 
number of males slightly exceeds that of females. 
The bulk of the people are of English descent, 
the remainder^ Irish and French. The Scots, 
so prominent in nearly all the other provinces 
of the Dominion, are here less conspicuous. Of 
the original Indian inhabitants of the province, 
who were of Algonquian stock and divided into 
two tribes, B the Micmacs and the Malicites, about 
1700 remain, many of whom have a greater or 
less proportion of white blood. 

The capital is Fredericton, on the St John 
(pop. in 1901, 71 17). The chief shipping and 
commercial centreis St John (pop. in 1901, 
4.0,71 1). Moncton is a large railway centre (pop. 
in 1901, 9026). None of the other towns exceeds 
5000 inhabitants. Owing to the large Irish and 
French element over one-third of the population 
belongs to the Roman Catholic Church. 
Campbellton (pop. 5000), a northern port on 
Chaleur Bay, with an important lumber trade, 
was destroyed by fire in July, 19 10. 

Administration. — The province sends ten 
senators and fourteen members of the House of 
Commons to the federal parliament. Since the 
abolition of the legislative council in 1892 the 
provincial legislature has consisted of a lieutenant- 
governor and a legislative assembly. Though in 
this the members are nominally divided on party 
lines , the smallness of the population renders the 
division rather one of persons than of principles. 
Both city and county districts have an elective 
municipal system. 

Education. — There is a good system of primary 
and secondary schools under provincial control. 
When in 1871 the system of free undenomi na- 
tional primary schools supported by the pro- 
64° vince was introduced, feeling rose so high among 
BmcrywdiurMg the Roman Catholics that noting broke out and 
life was lost. In view of the provisions in the 
British North America Act for protecting the rights of religious 
minorities, the Roman Catholics sought to have the new system 
declared unconstitutional, but thecase, after being carried to the 
judicial committee of the imperial privy council, was decided 
against them. In 1875 a compromise was arranged, by which 
practical though not theoretic satisfaction is given to that church. 
Renewed rioting broke out among the French Roman Catholics in 
1890, but after some years the compromise of 1875 was confirmed. 
At Fredericton an efficient normal school for the trainjng-of teachers 
is maintained, and a school for the deaf and dumb. The lazaretto 
for lepers at Tracadie and the marine hospital at St John are sup- 
ported by the Dominion. At Fredericton is a small provincial 
university, founded in 1800 and re-established in 1859; at Sackville 
is the university of Mount Allison College under Methodist control, 
and at Memramcook one, working chiefly among the French, is 
owned by the Roman Catholics. In all these an adequate training 
is given in law, theology and the literary subjects, but for science, 
whether pure or applied, most of the provincial students go either 
to the United States or to the universities of Upper Canada. 

Either owing to the beauty of its scenery or to the excellence of 
its education New Brunswick t has produced a school of poetry, 
headed by Charles Roberts, which is unique in the Dominion. 

Agriculture. — The great predominance of the lumber industry 
has tended to keep agriculture in the background. There is also 
a steady flow of the most active young men to the greater oppor- 
tunities offered by the Canadian and American west. Thus the 
area under crop tends slowly to decrease. Rather more than 
6000 sq. m. is now occupied, of which about 1500 is under crop and 
about 700 used for pasture, the rest being for the most part still 
covered with forest. In all the river valleys, and especially on the 
fertile diked lands along the head of the Bay of Fundy, many rich 
and prosperous farms are found varying in size from 100 to 240 
acres, and good crops of wheat, oats, buckwheat and all the staple 
grains and roots are grown. The raising of sheep and cattle, and 
the production of^ cheese and butter, are becoming industries of 
importance. A dairy school is maintained by the provincial govern- 
ment at Sussex (King's county). Though no great development of 
agriculture is possible, a quiet, equable prosperity is attained by 
hundreds of farmers. Much crown land still remains unoccupied, 
and is sold by the provincial government on easy terms to bona fide 
settlers. 

Forests. — Its great forests, through which flow numerous rivers 
with excellent harbours at or near their mouths, have long made 
New Brunswick a centre of lumbering. This industry has affected 
the whole development of the province, and the wilder and more 
unsettled life of its woodsmen contrasts with that of the farmer of 
Ontario or of the west. The most valuable and most widely-spread 
tree is the black spruce (Abies nigra), from which is made a yearly 
increasing quantity of wood-pulp for paper-making. The hemlock 
(Abies Canadensis), the cedar, birch, beech, oak, ash and many 
other valuable trees, are also widely spread. The chief ports for 
shipping are St John, at the mouth of the St John river, and Chatham, 
at the mouth of the Miramichi. 

Though much remains, much has been destroyed by forest fires. 
To this day traces may be seen of the fire which in 1825 utterly 
destroyed hundreds of square miles of timber along the river 
Miramichi. 

The same forests are alsoa paradise for sportsmen. The game 
laws are being made increasingly strict, and the province draws a 
large revenue from the sale of licences, extra fees being imposed on 
sportsmen from other countries. Moose (Cervus alecs), caribou and 
deer may only be shot during about two months in the autumn, 
and the number allowed to each gun is strictly limited. In 1902 
the provincial government set aside a large area of the highlands at 
the sources of the Tobique, Nipisiquit and Miramichi rivers for a 
national park and game preserve. _ 

Mines and Fisheries. — The mineral wealth of the province is 
small, though gold, iron, copper, lead, zinc and plumbago have 
been worked on a small scale at various times. Coal seams are 
numerous, but are worked solely for local consumption. Albertite, 
a species of coal found in Albert county and giving a very hot 
flame, is now exhausted. Limestone and gypsum are extensively 
quarried near St John and in Albert county. 

The fisheries, on the other hand, are extensive, though less so 
than those of Nova Scotia. This industry centres in the counties 
of Charlotte and Gloucester, herring, salmon, lobsters, sardines and 
cod forming the chief catch. The Restigouche and other rivers near 
the northern border are much frequented by anglers in search of 
trout and salmon. 

Manufactures. — The chief manufactures, apart from the shipping 
of St John, are connected with lumbering and with agriculture. 
The making of paper pulp and of furniture is growing steadily in 
importance. Co-operation in the manufacture of butter and cheese 
has produced excellent results, and numerous cheese and butter 
factories are scattered through the province. In no sense, however, 
does New Brunswick play an important part in the manufactures 
of the Dominion. 

Communications. — The rivers are still the main arteries of the 
province. The roads, though improving, are as a rule bad. The 
main railway system has since 1876 been that of the Intercolonial, 
owned and operated by the federal government, by which the 
province is linked to Nova Scotia on the E. and to the rest of Canada 
on the W. The Canadian Pacific and the Grand Trunk Pacific also 
run through the province, and by the Canadian Pacific and the 
Maine Central it has communication with the United States. Various 
lines of steamers run, chiefly from St John, to American and 
other Canadian ports. 

History, — Until 1784 New Brunswick formed part, first of the 
French province of Acadia, later of the British province of Nova 
Scotia. The first settlement within its borders was made in 
1604 by Pierre de Guast, sieur de Monts, with whom was Samuel 
de Champlain. Their colony at the mouth of the St Croix river 
was soon abandoned, but throughout the French r6gime the 
district was frequented by bands of fur-traders. In 1762 the 
first English settlement was made at Maugerville on the St John 
river, and in 1764 a body of Scottish farmers and labourers 
took up land along the Miramichi. On the 18th of May 1783 
a band of American loyalists settled at the mouth of the St 
John.- Thousands more followed, and in 1784 New Brunswick 
was declared a separate province. At first governed by a repre- 
sentative assembly and an irresponsible council, it obtained 
responsible government in 1 847-1 848, after a constitutional 
struggle in which no little abUity was shown. In 1867 it entered 
without^ reluctance but without enthusiasm into the Canadian 
•Federation. Its economic and educational history, both more 
important than its political, have been indicated in earlier parts 
of this article. (For the boundary dispute, see Maine.) 

Bibliography.— Sir J. W. Dawson, Acadian Geology (edition of 
1891), is the most easily accessible work on the geology of the pro- 
vince. Numerous studies have been published, chiefly by the 
•Geological Survey of Canada, by L. W. Bailey, R. W. Ells, A. P. 
„Low, and G. F. Matthew. Valuable papers on various provincial 
subjects have been published in the Transactions of the Royal 
Society of Canada by W. F. Ganong. The provincial government 
issues a yearly volume of sessional papers; Acadiensis f a magazine 
published in St John, should also be consulted. The earliest account 
of New Brunswick is given by Nicholas Denys, Description gfo- 
graphique (published Paris, 1672; republished by W. F. Ganong 
with notes and introduction, 1908); there is no good modern 
history; R. Montgomery Martin, History of New Brunswick (1837); 
G. E. Fenety, Political Notes (1867); James Hannay, History 
of Acadia (1879), and Lives of Wilmot and Tilley (1907) may be 
consulted. (W.L.G.) 


NEW BRUNSWICK, a city and the county-seat of Middlesex 
county, New Jersey, U.S.A., on the Raritan river, at the terminus 
of the Delaware & Raritan canal, about 23 m. S.W. of Newark. 
Pop. (1890) 18,603, (1900), 20,006, of whom 3526 were foreign- 
born and 755 were negroes; (1910 census) 23,388. It is 
served by the Pennsylvania and the Raritan River railways, 
and by daily steamboats to New York. There is a fine stone 
bridge across the Raritan. In the city are the Wells Memorial 
Hospital, St Peter's General Hospital, a Carnegie library, a 
Federal building and a Soldiers' Monument. New Brunswick 
is the seat of the Theological Seminary of the Reformed Church 
in America, the oldest theological school in the United States, 
founded in 1784 in New York City, situated at Flatbush, Long 
Island, in 1796-1810, and removed to New Brunswick in 1810, 
and of Rutgers College (originally Dutch Reformed, now non- 
sectarian), which was founded in 1766 as Queen's College, was 
rechartered in 1770 as a college for " the education of youth in 
the learned languages, liberal and useful arts and sciences and 
especially in divinity," was first opened for instruction in 1770, 
was closed during 1 795-1807 and 1 816-1825, an d was renamed 
in 1825 in honour of Colonel Henry Rutgers (1 745-1830), of 
New York City, a liberal benefactor. The college embraces two 
schools: the classical school and the scientific school, which in 
1864, in pursuance of the Morrill Act of 1862, was constituted 
by the state legislature as the state college for the benefit of 
agriculture and the mechanic arts; a preparatory school is also 
controlled by its trustees. An agricultural experiment station 
is maintained in connexion with the college. In 1908-1909 
there were 306 students. In 1908 the library of Rutgers College 
contained 57,000 volumes, and that of the Theological Seminary 
48,000 volumes. The city has a variety of manufactures, and 
the total value of factory products in 1905 was $8,916,983, 54% 
more than in 1900. 

A settlement was made here in 1681, and for a time the,place 
was known as Prigmore's Swamp; later, after John Inian had 
established a ferry across the river, it was called Inian 's Ferry; 
the present name was adopted in honour of the house of Bruns- 
wick. New Brunswick received a city charter from the royal 
governor in 1730, and was chartered as a city by the state legis- 
lature in 1784. During the War of Independence, General 
Washington and his army entered New Brunswick on the 28th 
of November 1776, but on the approach of the enemy evacuated 
it, and from the 3rd of December 1776 to the 13th of April 1777 
it was occupied by the British under Lord Howe. Cornelius 
Vanderbilt was for several years the proprietor of the Bellona 
Hotel of New Brunswick, now a tenement house. 


NEWBURGH, or Newburg, a city of Orange county, New 
York, U.S.A., on the W. bank of the Hudson river, about 57 m. 
N. of New York City. Pop. (1890) 23,087, (1900) 24,943, of 
whom 4346 were foreign-born and 558 negroes; (1910, census) 
27,805. It is served by the Erie, the West Shore, and — by 
ferries across the Hudson — the Central New England and 
the New York Central & Hudson River railways. Across New- 
burgh Bay, as the expansion of the Hudson at this point is 
called, is the village of Fishkill, and an electric line connects 
with the village of Walden (pop. in 1910, 4004), about 12 m. 
N.W., which has various manufactures, the most important being 
pocket-knives. The city occupies a commanding position on 
terraces rising abruptly from the river, and on the flat plateau 
above, whence a view may be obtained of the Catskill Mountains 
to the N.W., of the Highlands of the Hudson to the S. and of 
the Hudson river for many miles in both directions. Orange 
Lake, between Newburgh and Walden, is known for its ice 
j-achting and skating races. Washington Park is in the central 
part of the city. Downing Park, named in honour of the horti- 
culturist and landscape gardener Andrew Jackson Downing, 
(1 81 5-1852), a native of Newburgh, lies on a high plateau 
overlooking the city and the surrounding country. Among 
Newburgh's institutions are a public library, St Luke's Hospital, 
a Children's Home, Mount St Mary's Academy (Roman Catholic) 
and a business college. In Colden Square there is a statue of 
Governor George Clinton. Cotton, woollen and silk goods, 
laces, paper, plaster, plush, felt and felt hats, carpets, engines 
and boilers, and mill and farm machinery are manufactured, and 
there are ship and brick yards. In 1905 factory products were 
valued at $7,142,327, an increase of 33*3% over their value for 
1000. Newburgh was first settled in 1 709 by a colony of Germans 
from the Rhenish Palatinate under their minister, Joshua 
Rockethal (d. 1719), and was known as "the Palatine Parish of 
Quassaic." Toward the middle of the century many of the 
Germans removed to Pennsylvania, and Scottish and English 
settlers took up their abandoned lands. In 1752 the place was 
renamed Newburgh, after the town of that name in Scotland, 
whence many of the new settlers had come. From the spring of 
1782 until August 1783 Washington made his headquarters here, 
occupying the Hasbrouck House (built by Jonathan Hasbrouck 
between 1750 and 1770), which is still standing in Washington 
Park, and was bought by the state in 1849. It long contained 
a collection of historical relics, for which the state has erected a 
brick building in Washington Park. It was here on the 27th of 
May 1 782 that he wrote his famous ietter of rebuke to Colonel 
Lewis Nicola (1717-c. 1807), who had written to him on behalf 
of a coterie of army officers, it is said, suggesting that he assume 
the title of king. Here, also, Washington made his reply to the 
so-called " Newburgh Addresses," written by John Armstrong, 
and calling for action on the part of the army to force Congress 
to redress its grievances. Here the arrangements were completed 
for the disbandment of the Continental Army, and the centenary 
of the disbandment was celebrated here on the 18th of October 
1883. In commemoration of the disbandment also a monu- 
ment, known as the " Tower of Victory " (53 ft. high, with 
a life-sized statue of Washington), was erected in Washing- 
ton Park by Federal and state authorities. Newburgh was 
incorporated as a village in 1800 and chartered as a city in 
1865. The U.S. Geographic Board spells the name Newburg, 
but the spelling Newburgh is adopted locally and by the 
U.S. Post Office. 

See E. M. Ruttenber, History of the Town of Newburgh (Newburgh, 
1859) and History of Orange County (Newburgh, 1872). 


NEWBURGH, a royal and police burgh of Fifeshire, Scotland. 
Pop. (1901) 1904. It is situated on the Firth of Tay, 7 m. N.W. 
of Ladybank Junction by the North British Railway. Its 
industries chiefly consist of the making of linen and floorcloth, 
malting and quarrying, and there are fisheries, especially of 
salmon. The harbour is used for the transhipment of the cargoes 
of Perth-bound vessels of over 200 tons. On high ground, about 
1 m. S.W., stand the remains (only the pedestal) of Macduff's 
Cross, which marks the spot where the clan Macduff — in return 
for the chief's services against Macbeth — was granted rights 
of sanctuary and composition for murder done in hot blood. 
Denmyln castle, about i\ m. S.E. of Newburgh, was the home 
for more than 250 years of the Balfour family, of which the two 
brothers, Sir James (1 600-1 657), the annalist and Lyon King, 
and Sir Andrew (1 630-1 694), founder of the Botanic Garden in 
Edinburgh, were the most distinguished members. Lindores 
abbey, the gem of the district, is situated on the Tay, close to 
Newburgh, and ij m. N. of the village of Lindores. Of the 
Benedictine abbey, founded in n 78 by David, earl of Hunting- 
don, brother of William the Lion, there only remain the groined 
arch of the principal entrance, a portion of the west tower and 
other Early English fragments, but the ground plan of the whole 
structure can still be traced. The monks were noted agriculturists 
and their orchards famous. At Blackearnside, a forest of alders, 
to the east of the village, Wallace defeated the earl of Pembroke 
in 1298. 


NEWBURN, an urban district in the Tyneside parliamentary 
division of Northumberland, England, on the Tyne, si m. *W. 
of Newcastle by a branch of the North Eastern railway. Pop. 
(r9oi) 12,500. It has collieries, and iron, steel, engineering, 
tool and fire-clay works, and there is a large industrial population. 
Newburn is of considerable antiquity. Roman remains have been 
discovered in proximity to Hadrian's Wall. A church here was 
destroyed by fire in 1072 in the course of a dispute between two 
claimants of the earldom of Northumberland. Here in 1640 the 
Scottish Covenanters planted guns to protect them while fording 
the river, after which they defeated the English on the Durham 
side at Stcllaheugh, and subsequently occupied Newcastle. The 
name of Scotswood, one of the manufacturing villages between 
Newburn and the city, commemorates one of their positions. 
The district has many associations with the famous engineer 
George Stephenson, born at Wylam, 3 m. W. 


NEWBURY, a market town and municipal borough in the 
Newbury parliamentary division of Berkshire, England, 53 m. 
W. by S. of Reading by the Great Western railway. Pop. (icor) 
11,061. It is beautifully situated in the narrow well-wooded 
valley of the Kennet, which is followed by the Rennet and Avon 
canal. The town has north and south communications by the 
Didcot, Newbury & Southampton railway (worked by the 
Great Western company), and is the terminus of the Lambourn 
Valley light railway. The church of St. Nicholas is a large 
Perpendicular building of the beginning of the 16th century. 
It is said to have been built mainly at the charge of John 
Winchcombe or Smalwoode (Jack of Newbury), an eminent 
clothier, who, according to the brass to his memory, died in 
February i5r9. A few picturesque old buildings remain in the 
town, including part of Winchcombe's house and the Jacobean 
cloth hall, now a public museum. The almshouses called King 
John's Court are supported by a foundation known as St 
Bartholomew's Hospital, to which in 121 5 King John granted 
by charter (renewed in 1596 to the corporation) the profits 
of a fair on St Bartholomew's day (24th of August). Shaw 
House, on the outskirts of the town to the north-east, is an 
Elizabethan mansion of brick, dating from 1581; to the north 
is Donnington castle, retaining a Perpendicular gateway and 
other fragments. The suburb of Speenhamland was formerly 
an important posting station on the Bath road. At Sandleford 
Priory, to the south of Newbury, the site and part of the buildings 
of an Augustinian priory (c. 1 200) were utilized in the erection 
of a mansion, in 1781, for Mrs Elizabeth Montague. The house- 
holders of Newbury have the right to elect boys and girls to the 
educational foundation of Christ's Hospital. The cloth industry 
is long extinct in Newbury, but large wool fairs are held annually; 
there is considerable agricultural trade, and there are breweries 
and flour mills. A racecourse was opened in the vicinity of 
the town in 1905, and six meetings are held annually. The 
borough is under a mayor, 6 aldermen and 18 councillors. 
Area, 1828 acres. 

Newbury (Neubiri, Neubiry) possibly owes its origin to the 
village of Speen on the other side of the Kennet, which probably 
marks the site of the Roman station Spinae. The name Newbury 
(new town or borough) is first mentioned by Odericus Vitalis; 
it is probable, however, that the manor of Uluritone, entered in 
Domesday as held by Ernulph de Hesdain and containing fifty- 
one houses, covered a large part of the site of the town. The 
manor was subsequently held by the Marshalls, and later by 
the Mortimers, through whom it passed to the house of York 
and the crown. It formed part of the dowry of several queens- 
consort, and was held by Elizabeth before her accession. In 
1627 it was granted by Charles I. at a fee-farm to the corporation. 
Newbury was a borough by prescription; in 1 187 its inhabitants 
are called." burgesses " and a document of the time of Edward I. 
speaks of it as " burgus" It was incorporated by a charter 
of Elizabeth (1596) which was confirmed by Charles I. and 
Charles II.; a doubtfully valid charter of James II. (1685). 
Newbury sent two representatives to the parliament of 1302 
and delegates to a council held in the reign of Edward III. 

Newbury early became a centre of the woollen industry, 
but at the beginning of the 17th century this was declining. 
John Kendrick (d. 1624) left a sum of money to benefit the 
clothing trade and to " set the poor on work," but the result 
was not what was expected. Elias Ashmole (d. 1629) says: 
" Newbury had lost most of its clothing trade, which the naviga- 
tion of the river Kennet hither, now begun, will probably 
recover"; the trade, however, was already irrevocably lost. 
The Weavers' Company, which still exists, was incorporated 
in 1601, In the 18th century a considerable trade was done 
in corn and malt. Newbury castle, of which traces remained 
until the 17th century, is said to have been besieged by Stephen 
in 1 1 52. Newbury was the scene of two battles during the Civil 
War, in the first of which (1643) Lord Falkland was killed. An 
important woollen market, established in 1862, is held annually 
on the first Wednesday in July. 

See W. Money, History of Newbury (1887); Victoria County 
History, Berks, 


NEWBURYPORT, a city and port of entry and one of the 
county-seats of Essex counjy, Massachusetts, U.S.A., on the 
S. bank of the Merrimac river, about 3 m. above its mouth, and 
about 38 m. N.N.E. of Boston. Pop. (1890) 13,947; (1900) 
14,478, of whom 2863 were foreign-born; (1910 census) 
14,949. Area, about 12-85 S Q- m - Tne city is served by two 
divisions of the Boston & Maine railroad, and by coast and 
river freight steamers. There are many houses dating back 
to the 17th century; of these the stone "garrison" house 
(in Newbury), with walls 4 ft. thick and built in the form of 
a cross, is an interesting example. Other private houses 
worthy of mention are the former homes of " Lord " Timothy 
Dexter and Caleb Cushing, the birthplace of William Lloyd 
Garrison, and (31 m. from Newburyport in the township of 
West Newbury) Indian Hill Farm, the birthplace of the 
journalist Ben Perley Poore (1820-1887), author of Perley's 
Reminiscences of Sixty Years in the National Metropolis (1886). 
Among the public buildings and institutions are the Marine 
Museum, the Public Library (founded in 1854 by Josiah Little 
and containing about 45,000 volumes), the old Tracy mansion 
(built in 1 77 1 or 1772), which forms part of the Public Library 
building, the Anna Jacques and Homoeopathic hospitals, homes 
for aged women and men, a Home for Destitute Children, Old 
South Church, in which is the tomb of George Whitefield, and 
the Young Men's Christian Association building, which is a 
memorial to George Henry Corliss (1817-1888), the inventor, 
erected by his widow, a native of Newburyport. The General 
Charity Society is a benevolent association. The city has a 
good public school system. The Female High School was opened 
in 1843 and is said to be the first high school for girls to be 
established in the United States. The Putnam Free School, 
now part of the public school system, was endowed early in the 
19th century by Oliver Putnam of Newburyport and afterwards 
of Hampstead, New Hampshire. Three parks, Washington, 
Cushing and Atkinson, are maintained by the city; and there 
are a statue of George Washington (1879), by J.Q. A. Ward, one 
of William Lloyd Garrison by D. C. French, and a memorial to 
the soldiers and sailors of the Civil War — a bronze statue, " The 
Volunteer " — by Mrs Theo (Ruggles) Kitson. A curious chain 
suspension bridge across the Merrimac, connecting Newburyport 
with Amesbury, was built in 1827, replacing a similar bridge 
built in 1 810, which was one of the first suspension bridges 
in America. 

Newburyport in the early part of the 18th century 
was one of the most prosperous commercial centres in New 
England. At that time fishing, whaling and shipbuilding were 
its .principal industries, the clipper ships built here being among 
the fastest and best known on the seas. After the Civil War 
manufacturing became Newburyport's chief interest. In 1905 
its factory product was valued at $6,809,979, an increase of 
32-5% since 1900; 57-6% was in boots and shoes, and the 
manufactures of combs and silverware, silversmithing products, 
cotton goeds and electrical supplies are also important. 

Newbury, including the site of the present Newburyport, 
was settled in 1635 by a company under the leadership of the 

Rev. Thomas Parker (1595-167 7), who had taught in Newbury, 
England, in his youth. In 1639 a portion of the territory was 
set off to form the town of Rowley, and in 1764 about 647 acres 
were set off and incorporated as the town of Newburyport. 
In 181 9 the town of Parsons (now West Newbury) was formed 
from Newbury. Newburyport, with its area considerably en- 
larged, became a city in 1851. During the War of Independence 
and the War of 181 2 it sent out many privateers. In 18 n a 
fire destroyed 250 buildings, including the greater part of the 
business portion of the town. 

See Caleb Cushing, History and Present State of the Town of New- 
buryport (Newburyport, 1826); Joshua Coffin, History of Newbury, 
Newburyport, and West Newbury, 1635-184$ (Boston, 1845); Mrs 
E. V. Smith, History of Newburyport (Boston, 1854); D. H. Hurd, 
History of Essex County (Philadelphia, 1888); J. J. Currier, History 
of Newbury from the First Settlement of the Town to the Beginning of 
the Twentieth Century (Boston, 1902), History of Newburyport, 1764- 
1Q05 (Newburyport, 1906), and Oidd Newbury, Historical and 
Biographical Sketches (Boston, 1898). 


NEW CALEDONIA (Fr. Nouvelle-Calidonie), an island in the 
western Pacific Ocean, belonging to France. (For map, see 
Pacific Ocean.) It is about 250 m. long, and has an extreme 
breadth of 35 m. and an area including adjacent islets of 6450 
sq. m.; is situated at the southern extremity of Melanesia, 
between 20 5' and 22 16' S., and between 164 and 167 30' E., 
and, like all the chief islands of that chain and the chain itself, 
lies north-west and south-east. An almost unbroken barrier 
reef skirts the west shore at about 5 m. distance, enclosing a 
navigable channel;, on the east, which is more abrupt and 
precipitous, it is much interrupted. To the north the reefs 
continue, marking the former extension of the land, for about 
160 m., ending with the Huon Islands. The Isle of Pines,- so 
called from its araucarias (its native name is Kunie), geologically 
a continuation of New Caledonia, lies 30 m. from its south- 
east extremity. It formerly abounded in sandalwood, and 
consists of a central plateau surrounded by a belt of cultivation. 
At the two extremities of New Caledonia, parallel longitudinal 
ranges of mountains enclose valleys; for the rest the island 
consists essentially of confused masses and ranges of mountains, 
rising to an extreme elevation of 5387 ft., the plains being 
chiefly the deltas of rivers. The landscape is rich and beautiful, 
varied with grand rock scenery, the coast-line being broken 
by numerous small bays, into which flow streams rarely navigable 
even for short distances, but often skilfully utilized by ihe 
natives for irrigation; and sometimes flowing in subterranean 
channels. The larger rivers in the wet season form impassable 
morasses, especially in the S.E., where the mountains rise in 
isolated masses from flat plains. 

Geology} — Speaking generally, New Caledonia may be described 
as a band of Palaeozoic and probably Lower Palaeozoic rocks, 
associated doubtless with some Archean beds; this band runs 
from north-west to south-east, through the whole length of the 
island. The second element in the composition of the island consists 
of Mesozoic beds, which occur in a broken band along most of the 
south-western coast. Most of the island is occupied by the band of 
the old rocks, which include mica, glaucophane and sericite-schists 
and slates; there are small intrusions of granite, and numerous 
dikes and masses of basic eruptive rocks. The slates are inter- 
bedded with limestones containing fossil brachiopods, which have 
led to their determination as Silurian or Devonian; but L. Peletan 
classes all these limestones as Triassic. Triassic beds of the Pacific 
coastal type occur in a band^ along the south-western coast. They 
are covered by marine Jurassic beds and they in turn by Cretaceous 
coal-bearing, terrestrial deposits, resembling those of New Zealand. 
According to E. Glasser, the basic igneous rocks which are associated 
with the mineral deposits of New Caledonia were intrusive in Cainozoic 
times, at the severing of the connexion between New Caledonia and 
New Zealand. New Caledonia is part of the Australasian Festoon, 
and in its general characters resembles the geology of New Zealand. 
The main mineral deposits are the nickel ores, occurring as veins of 
garnierite, associated with peridotite dikes, in the ancient rocks 
of the eastern slope of the island. 

1 The basis of knowledge of the geology of New Caledonia was laid 
by Gamier, Ann. des Mines, scr. 6, vol. xii. (1867). Later accounts 
are by E. Glasser, " Les Richesses minerales de la Nouvelle Caledonic," 
Ann. des Mines, ser. 10, vol. iv. mem. pp. 299-392, pi. xi., and vol. v. 
mem. pp. 29-54, 5°3-7 OI > pi- "• an d xii. (1904); and by L. Peletan, 
Les Richesses minerales dies colonies franchises (Paris, 1902). 

Climate, Flora, Fauna. — The hottest and wettest months are 
from December to March, but there is usually a fresh trade- wind 
blowing and the climate is healthy. There is much less moisture, 
and the flora is of a less tropical character than farther north ; it has 
some Polynesian and New Zealand affinities, and on the west coast 
a partially Australian character; on the higher hills it is stunted; 
on the lower, however, there are fine grass lands, and a scattered 
growth of niautis {Melaleuca viridiflora), useful for its timber, bark 
and cajeput oil. There is a great variety of fine timber trees. The 
bread-fruit, sago, banana, vanilla, ginger, arrowroot and curcuma 
grow wild. The cocoa nut, maize, sugar-cane, coffee, cotton, rice 
and tobacco (which last does not suffer like other crops from the 
locusts) do well. The orange, indigo, lucerne and European vege- 
tables are grown. Mammals are very few; they include the rat and 
Pteropus and other bats. The commonest birds are pigeons (the 
large notou and other varieties), doves, parrots, kingfishers and ducks. 
The kagu (Rkinochetus jubatus), a peculiar " wingless " bird, is found 
here only. Turtle abound on the coast, and fish, of which some kinds, 
as the tetrodons (globe-fish), are poisonous, especially at certain 
seasons. Land and marine molluscs are numerous, and include 
various edible kinds. 

-Population. — At the census of 190 1 the population of New 
Caledonia numbered 51,415, consisting of 12,253 free Europeans 
(colonists, soldiers, officials), 29,106 natives, 10,056 convicts. 
In 1898, however, the introduction of convicts into the island 
ceased. The centres of population are Noumda (Numea), the 
capital, on a fine harbour of the west coast near the southern 
extremity of the island, with 7000 inhabitants; Bourail, an 
agricultural penitentiary (1800); La Foa, in the centre of the 
coffee plantations; Moindu, St Louis and St Vincent. 

The natives, whom the French call Kanakas (Canaques, a 
word meaning " man," applied indiscriminately to many Pacific 
peoples), live on reservations. They are Melanesians of mixed 
blood, of- two fairly distinct types, one sub-Papuan and the 
other Polynesian. Of the first the physical characteristics 
are a small, thin-limbed body, hair black, short and woolly, 
projecting jaws, rounded, narrow, retreating forehead, long 
and narrow head, enormous eyebrow ridges, flat nose and dark 
skin. The second type is characterized by a lighter skin, some- 
times of a reddish-yellow, longer, less woolly hair, body taller 
with better-proportioned limbs, and head broader. This is 
the prevailing type in the east and south of the island. There 
is nowhere a real defining line between the two (many New 
Caledonians having black skins and woolly hair with Polynesian 
superiority of limb), but the Polynesian type is generally found 
among the chiefs and their kindred. 

Both sexes among the natives pierce the lobes of the ear for orna- 
ments. Tattooing is almost entirely confined to the women. Both 
sexes go naked, or with the scantiest loin-cloth. Their huts are 
usually beehive-shaped, with a single apartment, low narrow door, 
and no chimney. There are various degrees of hereditary chiefships, 
and a supreme chief recognized by all. As in some other Pacific 
islands, when a son is born the chiefship passes to him, but the father 
continues to govern as regent. All property descends to the eldest 
son by birth or adoption, though custom demands that the younger 
members of the family should have a share. The people have to 
work on the chief's plantations and fisheries, and also work in parties 
for each other, breaking up new land, &c. This often ends in 
feasting and in dances Qnlu pilu), which include allegorical repre- 
sentations of events or ideas. The supreme chief's authority is 
limited by the advice of a council of elders, whom he is obliged to 
summon in certain emergencies. The standard of morality is low; 
women are practically slaves, and infanticide was formerly common. 

The Kanakas are excellent agriculturists, being accounted superior 
in this matter to every other race of the Pacific. About the middle 
of the 19th century the indigenous population was 60,000. Returns 
for 1904 showed that this had fallen to rather less than half. 

The languages of the different tribes are mutually unintelligible. 
They express abstract ideas imperfectly. Thus there are several 
words for eating, each applied to a particular article of food. Their 
reckoning shows the same peculiarity. The numbers go up to five, 
and for living objects the word bird is added, for inanimate yam, 
for large objects ship. 1 There are other terms for bundles of sugar- 
canes, rows (planted) of yams, &c. ; and sometimes things are counted 
by threes. Ten is two fives, 15 three fives, 20 is a " man " (ten 
fingers and ten toes), 100 is " five men," and so on. 

Administration and Industries. — The colony is administered 
by a governor, who exercises military power through a marine 
infantry colonel, and civil power with the assistance of a privy 

	1 A similar usage exists in Malay; see paper by Yule in Jour. 
	Antkrop. Inst. ix. 290. * - 

council, a director of the interior, a judicial head, and a director 
of the penitentiary" administration. There is also an elective 
general council. Noumea is the seat of a superior tribunal, 
a tribunal of first instance, and a tribunal of commerce. The 
island and its dependencies are divided into five arrondissements. 
Noumea alone has (since 1879) a municipality, other localities 
being administered by commissions. There are about 1600 
sq. m. of cultivable lands in the alluvial valleys, where coffee, 
maize, tobacco, sugar-cane, the vine, vegetables, potatoes, 
and some of the cereals are grown with success. Coffee was 
introduced about 1870, and has prospered well. Cheap agri- 
cultural labour is supplied by the convicts, by the liberated 
convicts, the Kanakas, and' (to some extent) labourers from 
the New Hebrides. The soil is in three domains: that of the 
state, for the working of which concessions may be granted; 
that of the penitentiary administration; and that of the native 
reserve. Many horses, cattle and sheep have been imported, and 
the meat-preserving industry is prosecuted. Gold is found in 
the valley of the Diahot, as well as lead and copper at Balade. 
Iron is found everywhere. The yearly output of nickel and 
chrome is considerable, and these minerals, with cobalt, constitute 
the characteristic wealth of the island. Coal has been worked 
near Noum6a, and kaolin is found in places. Gypsum and 
marble also deserve mention. The chief industrial establish- 
ments are smelting furnaces for cobalt, meat-preserving works 
at Ouaco, sugar-works and distilleries at Noum6a and La Foa, 
tobacco, oil and soap factories at Noum6a. The commerce in 
1888 amounted to £480,000, of which £200,000 represented 
the trade with France.- In 1900 the total had risen to £820,000, 
of which £480,000 was for imports and £340,000 for exports, 
the share of France in that year having been 45% of imports 
and 47 % of exports. The island imports wines, spirits, tissues, 
clothing and ironmongery; and exports ores, nickel, cobalt and 
chrome (which represent over three-quarters of the total exports 
in value),- preserved meats and hides, coffee, copra and other 
colonial produce. There are about 150 m. of carriage roads, 
and in the mountainous regions there are many footpaths. 
A railway running north-westward from Noum6a to Dumb6a, 
&c, is designed to connect the capital with Bourail. The 
islands annexed to the colony of New Caledonia are the Isle 
of Pines, used as a place of detention for habitual criminals: 
the Loyalty Islands (q.v.) } E. of New Caledonia; the Huon 
Islands, a practically barren group; the Wallis Archipelago 
(q.v.); and Futuna and Alofa, S. of the Wallis group. 

History. — New Caledonia was discovered by Captain Cook 
in 1774. He touched at the haven of Balade (the original name 
of the island) near the north-western extremity, as did d'Entre- 
casteaux in 1793, who closely explored the coast and surrounding 
seas. They subsequently became known to sealers and traders 
in sandalwood, who, however, established no friendly relations 
with the natives. In 1843 French missionaries arrived at the 
island, and it was claimed for France, but on British representa- 
tions the claim was renounced. In 1851 a landing party from 
a French vessel lying at Balade was attacked by the natives, 
and massacred with the exception of a single member. France 
was now determined on the annexation, and the flag was raised 
at the same spot in 1853, but simultaneously the commander 
of a British vessel was in negotiation with the native chief of 
the Isle of Pines, and the British flag was hoisted there. The 
chief, however, subsequently sided with the French, and the 
British claim was finally withdrawn. The capital, Noumea, 
was founded in 1854 (it was then called Port de France); in 
i860 New Caledonia became a colony distinct from the French 
possessions in the Pacific at large; in 1864 the first penal settle- 
ment was made on Nou Island, off Noumea. In 1878 there was 
a serious native insurrection, and another in 1881 was only put 
down after much bloodshed. 

See H. Riviere, Souvenirs de la Nouvelle-Calidonie: Vinsurrection 
canaque (Paris, 188 1); Gallet, La Nouvelle-Calidonie (Noumea, 
1884) ; Cordeil, Origines et prozres de la Nouvelle-Calidonie (Noumea, 
1885); C. Lemire, La Colonisation . . . en Nouvelle-Calidonie 
(Paris, 1878); Ibid. (Noumea, 1893); Voyage d pied en Nouvelle- 
Calidonie (Paris, 1884); M. A. Legrand, Au pays des Canaques 
(Paris, 1893); Moncelon, Le Bagne et la colonisation finale a la 
Nouvell€'CalSdonie (Paris, 1886); A. Bernard, VArchipel de la 
NouveUe-Calidonie (Paris, 1895); Nouvelle-Caledonie, ses richesses, 
son avenir (Paris Exhibition, 1900); G. Griffith, In an unknown 
Prison Land (London, 1901); Carol, La Nouvelle-Caledonie miniere 
et agricole (Paris, 1900) ; Vallet, La Colonisation franchise en Nouvelle- 
Caledonie (Paris, 1905). 


NEWCASTLE, DUKES OF. Within the space of a century 
there were no less than four successive creations of dukes of 
Newcastle in the British peerage. William Cavendish (see 
below), nephew of the 1st earl of Devonshire, was raised to the 
dignity of duke of Newcastle-upon-Tyne in 1665. His son and 
successor Henry (1 630-1691) died leaving daughters only, and 
one of these married John Holies (1662-1711), earl of Clare, who 
was created duke in 1694. This duke died also without male 
issue, leaving his estates to his sister's son, Thomas Pelham 
(see below), who, with other dignities, had the title of duke of 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne conferred on him in 171$, and a second 
and similar ducal title (that of Newcastle-under-Lyme) in 1756. 
The first dukedom became extinct at his death, but the second 
title was granted him with remainder to Henry Fiennes Clinton, 
earl of Lincoln, at once his nephew and nephew-in-law. From 
his heir, who ranks as the 2nd duke, Henry Fiennes Clinton 
(17 20-1 794), the dukedom passed through father and son from 
Thomas Pelham Clinton (d. 1795), Henry Pelham Fiennes Pelham 
Clinton (17857-1851), Henry Pelham Fiennes Pelham Clinton 
(1811-1864), Henry Pelham Alexander (1 834-1 879), to the 
7 th duke, Henry Pelham Archibald Douglas Pelham Clinton 
(b. 1864). The three principal dukes are more fully noticed 
below. 

1. William Cavendish, duke of Newcastle (1592-1676), 
eldest surviving son of Sir Charles Cavendish and of Catherine, 
daughter of Cuthbert, Lord Ogle, and grandson of Sir William 
Cavendish and "Bess of Hardwick," was born in 1592 and 
educated at St John's College, Cambridge. On the occasion of 
the creation of Prince Henry as prince of Wales in 1610 he was 
made a knight of the Bath, subsequently travelled with Sir 
Henry Wotton, then ambassador to the duke of Savoy, and on 
his return married his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William 
Basset of Blore, Staffordshire, and widow of Henry Howard, 
3rd son of the earl of Suffolk. His fortune was immense, and he 
several times entertained James I. and Charles I. with great 
magnificence at Welbeck and Bolsover. On the 3rd of November 
1620 he was created Viscount Mansfield, on the 7th of March 
1628 earl of Newcastle, and in 1629 the barony of Ogle was 
restored to his mother, this title, together with an estate of 
£3000 per annum, descending to him. In 1638 he was made 
governor of the prince of Wales, and in 1639 a privy councillor. 
When the Scottish war broke out he assisted the king with a 
loan of £10,000 and a troop of volunteer horse, consisting of 
120 knights and gentlemen. In 1641 he was implicated in the 
Army Plot, and in consequence withdrew for a time from the 
court. He was sent by Charles on the nth of January 1642 
to seize Hull, but was refused admittance. When the king 
declared open war, Newcastle was given the command of the 
four northern counties, and had the power conferred on him 
of making knights. He maintained troops at his own expense, 
and having occupied Newcastle kept open communications with 
the queen, and despatched to the king his foreign supplies. 
In November 1642 he advanced into Yorkshire, raised the siege 
of York, and compelled Fairfax to retire after attacking him at 
Tadcaster. Subsequently his plans were checked by the latter's 
recapture of Leeds in January 1643, an d he retired to York. 
He escorted the queen, who returned from abroad in February, 
to York, and subsequently captured Wakefield, Rotherham and 
Sheffield, though failing at Leeds, but his successes were once 
more ravished from him by Fairfax. In June he advanced again, 
defeated the Fairfaxes to Adwalton Moor on the 30th of June, 
and obtained possession of all Yorkshire except Hull and Wressel 
Castle. He might now have joined the king against Essex, but 
continued his campaign in the north, advancing into Lincolnshire 
to attack the eastern association, and taking Gainsborough and 
Lincoln. Thence he returned to besiege Hull, and in his absence 
the force which he had left in Lincolnshire was defeated at 
Winceby by Cromwell on the nth of October 1643, which caused 
the loss of the whole county. On the 27th of October 1643 
he was created a marquis. Next year his position was further 
threatened by the advance of the Scots. Against prevailing 
numbers he could do little but harass and cut off supplies. He 
retreated to York, where the three armies of the Scots, Fairfax 
and Manchester surrounded him. On the 1st of July Rupert 
raised the siege, but on the next day threw away his success by 
engaging the three armies in battle, contrary to Newcastle's 
desire, at Marston Moor. After this disaster, notwithstanding 
the entreaties of the king and the remonstrances of Rupert, 
Newcastle immediately announced his intention of abandoning 
the cause and of quitting England. He sailed from Scarborough 
accompanied by a considerable following, including his two sons 
and his brother, resided at Hamburg from July 1644 to February 
1645, and removed in April to Paris, where he lived for three 
years. There he married as his second wife Margaret (see below), 
daughter of Sir Thomas Lucas of St John's, Colchester. He left 
in 1648 for Rotterdam with the intention of joining the prince 
of Wales in command of the revolted navy, and finally took up 
his abode at Antwerp, where he remained till the Restoration. 
In April 1650 he was appointed a member of Charles II.'s privy 
council, and in opposition to Hyde advocated the agreement with 
the Scots. In Antwerp he established his famous riding-school, 
exercised " the art of manage," and published his first work on 
horsemanship, Mithode et invention nouvelle de dresser les chevaux 
(1658, 2nd ed., 1747; translated as A General System of Horse- 
manship, 1743). 

At the Restoration Newcastle returned to England, and 
succeeded in regaining the greater part of his estates, though 
burdened with debts, his wife estimating his total losses in the 
war at the enormous sum of £941,303. He was reinstated in the 
offices he had filled under Charles I.; was invested in 1661 with 
the Garter which had been bestowed upon him in 1650, and was 
advanced to a dukedom on the 16th of March 1665. He retired, 
however, from public life and occupied himself with his estate and 
with his favourite pursuit of training horses. He established a 
racecourse near Welbeck, and published another work on horse- 
manshipj A New Method and Extraordinary Invention lo Dress 
Horses and Work Ihem according lo Nature ... (1667). He 
wrote also several comedies, The Counlry Caplain and The Varietie 
(1649), The Humorous Lovers and The Triumphant Widow (1677). 
With Dryden's assistance he translated Moliere's Vtiourdi as 
Sir Martin Mar-All (1688). He contributed scenes to his wife's 
plays, and poems of his composition are to be found among her 
works; and he was the patron of Jonson, Shirley, Davenant, 
Dryden, Shad well and Flecknoe, and of Hobbes, Gassendi and 
Descartes. He died on the 25th of December 1676, and was 
buried in Westminster Abbey. By his first wife he had ten 
children, of whom one son, Henry, survived him and became 
2nd duke of Newcastle, dying in 1691 without male issue; the 
title then became extinct and the estates passed to his third 
daughter Margaret, wife of John Holies, earl of Clare, created 
duke of Newcastle in 1694. 

As a commander in the field Clarendon spoke contemptuously 
of Newcastle as " a very lamentable man, and as fit to be a 
general as a bishop."[1] It can hardly be denied, however, that 
his achievements in the north were of great military value to 
the king's cause. For politics he had no taste, and adhered to 
the king's cause merely from motives of personal loyalty, from 
hatred of " whatsoever was like to disturb the public peace," 
and because the monarchy "was the foundation and support of 
his own greatness." Even Clarendon concedes that he was 
"a very fine gentleman," which is perhaps the best summary 
of his character. 

His second wife, Margaret, duchess of Newcastle (c. 1625- 
1673), had been maid of honour to Henrietta Maria, and after 
she married the duke in 1645 they continued to cherish a mutual 
admiration of a very exaggerated character, each regarding the 
other as endowed with transcendent merits both of person 

	1 Calendar of Clarendon Papers, ii. 63. 

and mind. The duchess cultivated literary composition with 
exuberant fervour, and kept a bevy of maids of honour obliged 
to be ready at all hours " to register her Grace's conceptions." 
Walpole speaks of her as a " fertile pedant " with an " unbounded 
passion for scribbling "; and, although giving evidence of 
learning, ingenuity and imagination, her writings are fatally 
marred by a deficiency in judgment and self-restraint. She is 
best known by the Life she wrote of her husband, originally 
printed by A. Maxwell at London in 1667. She also published 
Philosophical Fancies (1653); Poems and Fancies (1653); The 
World's Olio (1655) ; Nature's Picture drawn by Fancies Pencil to 
the Life, which includes an autobiography (1656); Philosophical 
and Physical Opinions (1655); Orations (1662); Plays (1662); 
Sociable Letters (1664); Observations upon Experimental Philo- 
sophy (1666); Letters and Poems (1676). 

The Life of William Cavendish, Duke of Newcastle, by Margaret, 
duchess of Newcastle, has been edited by C. H. Firth (1886) ; it was 
criticized t>y Pepys as " the ridiculous history of my Lord Newcastle 
writ by his wife, which shows her to be a mad, conceited, ridiculous 
woman, and he an ass to suffer her to write what she writes to him 
and of him," but on the other hand eulogized by Charles Lamb 
as a work for which " no casket is rich enough, no case sufficiently 
durable to honour and keep soft such a jewel. See also La Duckesse 
et le Due de Newcastle, by £mile Montegut (1895). The duchess's 
Select Poems were edited by Brydges in 1813, and her Autobiography 
in 1814. The latter, edited by Lower, was published along with 
her Life of the Duke of Newcastle in 1872. 

2. Thomas Pelham Holles, duke of Newcastle (1693-1768), 
whose official life extended throughout the Whig supremacy 
of the 1 8th century, was the elder son of Thomas, first Lord 
Pelham, by his second wife Lady Grace Holies, younger sister 
of John Holles, duke of Newcastle-on-Tyne, who died in 171 1, 
and left the whole of his vast estates to him. In 1712 he also 
succeeded his father in his peerage and estates, and in 1714, 
when he came of age, was one of the greatest landowners in the 
kingdom. He vigorously sustained the Whig party at Queen 
Anne's death, and had much influence in making the Londoners 
accept King George. His services were too great to be neglected, 
and in 1714 he was created earl of Clare, and in 1715 duke of 
Newcastle-on-Tyne. He also became lord-lieutenant of the 
counties of Middlesex and Nottingham and a knight of the Garter 
in 1 718, in which year he increased his Whig connexion by marry- 
ing Lady Henrietta Godolphin, granddaughter of the great duke 
of Marlborough. In 17 17 he first held political office as lord 
chamberlain of the household, and in 1724 was chosen by Sir 
Robert Walpole to be secretary of state in place of Lord Carteret. 
This office he held continuously for thirty years (1724-1754), 
and only changed it for the premiership on his brother's death. 
His long tenure of office has been attributed to his great Whig 
connexions and his wealth, but some praise must be given to 
his inexhaustible activity and great powers of debate. He was a 
peculiarly muddle-headed man, and unhappy if he had not more 
to do than he could possibly manage, but at the same time he 
was a consummate master of parliamentary tactics, and knew 
how to manage the Houses of Lords and Commons alike. Lord 
Hervey (Memoirs) compares him with Walpole in 1735, and 
says: " We have one minister that does everything with the 
same seeming ease and tranquillity as if he were doing nothing; 
we have another that does nothing in the same hurry and agita- 
tion as if he did everything." He continued in office on Walpole's 
fall in 1742, and became more powerful on his younger brother 
Henry becoming prime minister in 1743. On Henry Pelham's 
death in March 1754, Newcastle succeeded him as premier; but 
people who had been accustomed to him as secretary of state 
would not stand him as premier, and in November 1756 he gave 
place to the duke of Devonshire. For his long services he was 
created duke of Newcastle-under-Lyme, with remainder to 
Henry Fiennes Clinton, 9th earl of Lincoln, who had married his 
niece Catherine Pelham. In July 1757 he again became prime 
minister — for Pitt, though a great statesman, was a bad party 
leader — on the understanding, according to Horace Walpole, 
that " Mr Pitt does everything, the duke gives everything." 
Under this ministry England became famous abroad, but it 
. gradually fell before the young king's affection for Lord Bute, 
who, after supplanting Pitt, became prime minister in the 
room of Newcastle in May 1762. The duke went into strong 
opposition, and lost his two lord-lieutenancies for opposing the 
peace of 1763. In 1765 he became lord privy seal for a few 
months, but his health was fast giving way, and he died in 
November 1768. The duke was certainly not a great man, but 
he was industrious and energetic, and to his credit be it said 
that the statesman who almost monopolized the patronage of 
office for half a century twice refused a pension, and finally left 
office £300,000 poorer than he entered it. 

See Memoirs of the Administration of the Right Hon. H. Pelham, 
by W. Coxe (1829). 

3. Henry Pelham Fiennes Pelham Clinton, 5th duke of 
Newcastle (1811-1864), the eldest son of Henry, the 4th duke, 
was educated at Eton and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he 
graduated in 1832. He was member of parliament for South 
Nottinghamshire from 1832 to 1846, when he became member 
for the Falkirk Burghs, retaining this seat until he became duke 
of Newcastle in January 1851. As earl of Lincoln he was first 
commissioner of woods and forests from 1841 to February 1846, 
when he was appointed chief secretary to the lord-lieutenant 
of Ireland, but the ministry fell in June of the same year. In 
1852 Newcastle became secretary for war and the colonies under 
the earl of Aberdeen, and when, after the outbreak of the Crimean 
War, a separate war department was constituted, he was placed 
in charge of it. As secretary for war he was regarded as being 
largely responsible for the terrible hardships which befell the 
British troops in the Crimea in the winter of 1854, and as the 
result of a vote of censure he left office with his colleagues in 
January 1855. He was secretary for the colonies from 1859 to 
1864, and died on the 18th of October 1864, being succeeded as 
6th duke by his eldest son, Henry Pelham Alexander. 

See J. Martineau, The Life of Henry Pelham, $th Duke of Newcastle 
(1908). 


NEWCASTLE, a seaport of Northumberland county, New 
South Wales, Australia, at the mouth of the Hunter river, 
102 m. by rail and 62 m. by sea N. by E. of Sydney, in 32 55' S., 
151 49' E. Newcastle is the second city in New South Wales, 
the fourth port of Australia, and the seat of an Anglican bishop. 
The city rises steeply from the sea, and possesses numerous 
fine buildings, among which may be mentioned the railway 
station, post office, custom-house, the cathedral of Christ Church, 
the school of art with its large library, and the Victoria Theatre. 
There are also two state-subsidized hospitals, a college, a school 
of mines, a technological museum, several large and handsome 
churches, and numerous subsidized charitable institutions. 
Communication between the different parts is maintained by 
tramways, and steam ferry-boats ply between the city and its 
suburbs on the shores of the harbour. The industries include 
brewing, shipbuilding, copper and iron-founding, carriage- 
building and fellmongery; there are boot factories, engineering 
works, biscuit factories and smelting works at Cockle Creek. 
There is also a large trade in frozen meat. There are numerous 
coal mines in the vicinity, yielding coal of the finest quality. 
Newcastle has a fine harbour, with an area of 540 acres, protected 
by two breakwaters; the breadth of the channel at its entrance 
is 1 200 ft., and the depth at the bar is 25^ ft. Vessels of the largest 
tonnage can enter and He alongside of the wharves, which are 
5 m. in extent, equipped with travelling cranes, hydraulic and 
steam cranes, lighted by electric light and connected with the 
Great Northern railway by a branch line. There is a floating 
dock to lift 2dbo tons, and at Stockton there is a patent slip to 
take large vessels for repair. The facilities for the shipment of 
coal are excellent, and Newcastle is the chief coaling port in the 
southern hemisphere. The harbour is protected by two forts, 
Fort Scratchley, the strongest in Australia, and Shepherd's Hill 
Fort. The city exports coal, wool, coke, horses, cattle, frozen 
meat, silver, lead, copper, tallow, hides and country produce. 
Newcastle returns three members to the legislative council and 
six members to the legislative assembly. Most of the suburbs 
are separate municipalities, namely, Stockton, Carrington, 
Wickham, Hamilton, Merewether, Adamstown, Waratah, New 
Lambton, Lambton, Wallsend and Plattsburg. The population 
of the municipality of Newcastle is 14*250; of the town and 
suburbs about 70,000. 

The mouth of the Hunter river (named after Governor John 
Hunter), now known as Newcastle Harbour, was discovered 
in 1797 by Lieutenant John Shortland, who accompanied Hunter 
to New South Wales. For many years after its discovery it was 
used as a convict station. It became a free settlement in 1821, 
and in 1859 was erected into a municipality. The centenary of 
the landing of Shortland was celebrated in 1897, when a monu- 
ment commemorating the event was erected. 


NEW CASTLE, a city of New Castle county, Delaware, U.S.A., 
in the northern part of the state, at the head of Delaware Bay, 
on a high point of land extending into the Delaware river, 6 m. 
south of Wilmington. Pop. (1890) 4010; (1900) 3380 (315 foreign- 
born); (1910) 3351. It is served by the Philadelphia, Baltimore 
& Washington (Pennsylvania System), and (vid Wilmington) the 
Baltimore & Ohio railways, and by steamship lines connecting with 
Baltimore, Philadelphia and river ports. The " old " county 
court house, possibly built by the Swedes, is in New Castle ; and 
there are a public library, the Immanuel Protestant Episcopal 
Church (partly built in 1689), and several residences of Dutch 
and colonial types. The city has a good harbour and an excel- 
lent river front for manufacturing sites and for shipping; it is 
included in the customs district of Wilmington. Its industrial 
establishments include shipyards, rolling mills and steel works, 
flour-mills, and manufactories of cotton and woollen goods. 
The shad fisheries are of some importance. In 1651 Governor 
Peter Stuyvesant of New Netherland established near the place 
Fort Casimir, as the first determined move in his aggressive policy 
against the Swedes, who had settled in this vicinity about 1640. 
The Swedes captured the fort in 1654, but this precipitated 
the crisis in which New Sweden (Delaware) was lost to the 
Dutch in 1655. Fort Casimir (renamed Fort Amstel) was made 
the seat of government of the local Dutch possessions, and in 
1657 was placed under the jurisdiction of the City of Amsterdam, 
under which it remained, though prospering little — disease, 
famine and fears of English attack causing most of the inhabit- 
ants to leave in 1658 and 1659 — until just before the English 
seized the settlements in Delaware in 1664. Under the English 
the name was changed to New Castle, and trade and commerce 
prospered; and an arc with a radius of 12 m., having the New 
Castle court house as a centre, became the northern boundary 
of the " counties on the Delaware." New Castle was frequently 
the meeting place of the colonial legislature, and after the 
legislative separation of Delaware from Pennsylvania in 1704 
it was the seat of administration of the colony until 1777. It 
was chartered as a city in 1875. 


NEWCASTLE, a seaside resort of Co. Down, Ireland, finely 
situated on the western shore of Dundrum Bay, at the foot of 
Slieve Donard, the highest eminence of the Mourne Mountains. 
Pop. (1901) 1553. It is the terminus of the Belfast and County 
Down railway, being 36 m. S. of Belfast; and is also served by 
a branch of the Great Northern railway. A fort guarded the 
passage of the river Shimna here in early times, but the town is 
entirely modern. The sandy shore affords good bathing, there is 
a small spa, and the scenery of the Mournes is fine. The demesnes 
of Donard Lodge and Bryansford are of great beauty. The golf 
links of the County Down Club here are well known. 


NEWCASTLE, a city and the county-seat of Lawrence county, 
Pennsylvania, U.S.A., on the Shenango river, at the mouth of 
Neshannock Creek, about 50 m. N.N.W. of Pittsburg. Pop. 
(1890) 11,600; (1900) 28,339, 5324 being foreign-born and 463 
negroes; (19 10) 36,280. It is served by the Pennsylvania, the Erie, 
the Baltimore & Ohio, the Buffalo, Rochester & Pittsburgh, and 
the Pittsburgh & Lake Erie railways. Cascade Park, in the 
neighbourhood, is a pleasure resort. The surrounding country, 
with which the city has an extensive trade, is well adapted to 
agriculture, and abounds in bituminous coal, iron ore, limestone, 
sandstone and fire-clay. In 1905 the city ranked fifth among 
the cities of the state in the value of its factory product, and 
of its products (valued at $29,433,635, an increase of 47*1% 
since 1900) iron and steel, and tin and terne-plates were the most 
important. Newcastle was founded in 1802, became a borough 
in 1869, and was first chartered as a city in 1875, its charter being 
revised in 1887. 


NEWCASTLE-UNDER-LYME, a market town and municipal 
and parliamentary borough of Staffordshire, England, 2 m. W. 
of Stoke-upon-Trent by the North Staffordshire railway. Pop. 
(1901) 19,914. The parish church of St Giles was rebuilt in 
1 873-1876 by Sir Gilbert Scott, with the exception of the tower, 
which dates from the 12th century. The free grammar school, 
originally founded in 1602, possesses large endowments, increased 
by the amalgamation of various subsequent bequests for educa- 
tional purposes, and now consists of high and middle schools 
for boys and Orme's school for girls. There is also a school of 
art included with a free library in handsome municipal buildings. 
The manufacture of hats was once the staple trade, but it has 
declined. There are cotton and paper mills; and tanning, 
brewing, malting and the manufacture of army clothing % are 
carried on. In the neighbourhood there are large collieries', as at 
Silverdale and elsewhere. Partly included in the parliamentary 
borough is the populous parish of Wolstanton, of which the 
fine church, well placed on high ground, has good details of the 
13th century, with a massive tower and spire. The mining town 
of Audley lies 4. m. N.W., with a fine early Decorated church. 
Newcastle-under-Lyme is governed by a mayor, 6 aldermen and 
18 councillors. Area, 671 acres. 

Newcastle-under-Lyme (Neofchastell-sur-Lyme, Newcastle- 
under-Lyme) is not mentioned in Domesday, but it must early 
have become a place of importance, for a charter, known only 
through a reference in a charter to Preston, was given to the 
town by Henry II. The town owes its name to a castle built 
here in the 1 2th century to supersede an older fortress at Chester- 
ton about 2 m. to the north, of which the ruins were to be seen 
in the 16th century, and to the fact that it was situated under the 
forest of Lyme. Henry III. (1235) constituted it a free borough, 
granting a gild merchant and other privileges; in 1251 he leased 
it at fee-farm to the burgesses; the governing charter in 1835 
was that of 1590 enlarged by that of 1664, under which the title 
of the corporation was the " mayor, bailiffs and burgesses of 
Newcastle-under-Lyme." Newcastle, which was originally held 
by the crown, was granted (1265) to Simon de Montfort, and 
subsequently to Edmund Crouchback, through whom it passed 
to Henry IV. In Leland's time the castle had disappeared 
"save one great Toure"; in the 17th and 18th centuries the 
town was flourishing and had a manufacture of hats. The 
market was originally held on Sunday; in the reign of John it 
was changed to Saturday; by the charter of Elizabeth it was 
fixed on Monday. Markets are now held on Monday, Wednes- 
day and Saturday. Grants of fairs were given by Edward I., 
Edward III. and Henry VI. Up to the time of the passing of the 
Municipal Reform Act the farce of electing a mock mayor was 
.gone through annually after the election of the real mayor. 
Newcastle sent two members to parliament from 1355 to 1885, 
when it lost one representative. 

See Victoria County History, Stafford; T. Ingamells, Historical 
Records and Directory of Newcastle-under-Lyme. 

NEWCASTLE-UPON-TYNE, a city and county of a city, 
municipal, county and parliamentary borough, and port of 
Northumberland, England, 272 m. N. by.W. of London, on 
the North-Eastern railway. Pop . (1891) 1 86,300; (1901) 
215,328. It stands on the N. bank of the Tyne, which is here 
high and steeply inclined above the river. The mouth of the 
river into the North Sea is 8 m. below Newcastle and its banks 
are lined with docks and industrial towns, while its narrow waters 
are crowded with traffic. 

Though Newcastle owes its origin to a Roman station at a 
bridge over the river, its modern growth has largely destroyed 
traces of antiquity. Of the old walls which, according to Leland, 
" for strength and magnificence far surpassed all the walls of the 
cities of England and of most of the towns of Europe," and the 
circuit of which was 2 m. 239 yds., there are slight remains, 
although the fortifications were allowed to go into disrepair 
after the union of Scotland and England. The castle, from 
which the town takes its name, stood on a slight elevation rising 
abruptly from the river, and was erected by Henry II. between 
1172 and 1 1 77 on the site of an older structure built in 1080 by 
Robert, eldest son of the Conqueror. It was originally the 
strongest fortress in the north of England, and its keep is now 
one of the finest specimens of the Norman stronghold remaining 
in the country. While it was still incomplete, William the Lion 
was led within its walls after his capture at Alnwick; and 
within its great hall Baliol, on the 26th of December 1292, did 
homage for the crown of Scotland to Edward I. The area of the 
castle within its outer walls and fosse was 3 acres. Fragments of 
these walls, with the principal entrance or Black Gate (portions 
of which are, however, of later construction) and the Watergate 
or southern postern remain, but the inner wall surrounding the 
keep has been entirely removed. The massive keep, with walls 
14 ft. thick, is in a state of good preservation, as is also the 
chapel, a beautiful specimen of late Norman style. The castle 
was purchased by the corporation in 1809, and is under the 
charge of the Newcastle Society of Antiquaries, which uses a 
portion of it as an antiquarian museum. Near the castle is St 
Nicholas church, forming the cathedral of the diocese of New- 
castle, instituted in 1882. The diocese covers practically the 
whole of Northumberland, with a very small portion of Cumber- 
land. The church, which is principally Decorated, consists of 
nave, aisles, chancel and transepts, the total length of the interior 
from east to west being 245 ft., and the width at the transepts 
128 ft. The principal feature of the church is the lantern tower, 
a later addition and a very fine specimen of early Perpendicular. 
Among other interesting old churches is St Andrew's church, 
erectedinthenth century, and retaining Norman characteristics, 
with a low square tower and a peal of six bells. During the 
siege by the Parliamentary army in 1644 it was greatly damaged. 
St John's church is a building of the 14th century with an ancient 
front. Of the nine conventual buildings at one time existing 
in Newcastle or its immediate neighbourhood, a few fragments 
of the monastery of the Black Friars remain, and the chapel of 
the hospital of St Mary at Jesmond forms a picturesque ruin. 
There are a number of quaint Elizabethan houses in the 
steep street called the Side, and in the Sandhill at its foot. 

Some of the modern streets of Newcastle are spacious and 
handsome. The most noteworthy are Grey Street, in which 
a complete scheme of Grecian architecture is followed, and 
Grainger Street. This thoroughfare is named after Richard 
Grainger (1 798-1861), a wealthy local architect who devoted 
himself to the beautifying of his city with remarkable energy. 
Of numerous modern churches may be noted that of St George, 
Jesmond, a landmark fot a great distance and finely decorated 
within, and the Roman Catholic cathedral of the diocese of Hex- 
ham and Newcastle. The most important public buildings are 
the corporation buildings, including a large public hall, and a corn 
exchange; the guildhall, originally a hospital called the Maison 
de Dieu, and afterwards used as " the stately court of merchant 
adventurers," re-erected in 1658; the moot-hall (1810) for the 
meetings of assizes and sessions and the transaction of county 
business; the exchange (i860); the central newsroom and art 
gallery (1838); the Wood memorial hall (1870), "used for the 
meetings of the North of England Institute of Engineers; and 
the custom-house. The Grey monument in Grey Street, an Ionic 
column surmounted by a statue of Earl Grey, was erected in 1836 
to commemorate the passing of the Reform Bill; the Stephenson 
monument near the railway station was erected in 1862; a 
marble statue of Queen Victoria in front of the Royal Victoria 
Infirmary was unveiled in 1906, and a bronze statue of the queen 
in 1903 in the cathedral square. 

Among educational establishments the chief are the colleges 
of medicine and of physical science of the university of Durham; 
the first granting degrees in medicine and surgery; the second, 
with which the school of art is incorporated, degrees in science 
and literature. The college of science, or Armstrong College 
as it is called in commemoration of the first Lord Armstrong, 
was founded in 1871; the north-east wing was opened in 1888; 
further parts of the building in 1894, and the west wing by King 
Edward in 1906. The royal free grammar school, founded in 
1525, occupies modern buildings in Jesmond. There should be 
mentioned also Allan's endowed schools, founded in 1705, and 
reorganized by the charity commissioners in 1877; and Ruther- 
ford College and the Commercial Institute, providing technical 
and commercial education. The Laing Art Gallery was erected 
and presented to the city by Alexander Laing, and opened in 
1904. Among clubs and similar institutions are the Literary 
and Philosophical Society, founded in 1793, the Society of Anti- 
quaries, founded in 1813, with a museum in the castle; the 
Natural History Society and museum ; the Tyneside Geographical 
Society; the Tyneside Naturalists' Club, established in 1846; 
the Mechanics 1 Institution, 1824; the North of England Institute 
of Mining Engineers, 1852; the Fine Arts Society; the Farmers' 
Club; the Northern Counties' Club; the Union Club; and the 
University Club. Several clubs for working men form a note- 
worthy social feature. There is a public library and newsroom. 
The Royal Victoria Infirmary on the Castle Leazes is a memorial 
of the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria, and was opened in 
1906. The benevolent institutions also include the dispensary 
(1777), fever house (1803), lying-in hospital (1760), eye infirmary 
(1822), children's hospital, Trinity almshouses (1492), hospital 
of the Holy Jesus (1682), hospital (1701) for keelmen, i.e. 
coal-bargemen; and institutions for the blind, dumb and 
orphans. 

Newcastle is well supplied with public parks and recreation 
grounds. To the N. of the city is the Castle Leazes ornamental 
park of 35 acres, and beyond this the Town Moor and racecourse, 
an extensive common, the survival of the pasture land of the 
township. Eastward from Town Moor is Brandling Park, and 
westward Nun's Moor. The picturesque grounds of Armstrong 
Park N.E. of the city extend to about 50 acres, the larger half 
of which was presented by Sir W. G. Armstrong, who also 
presented the beautifully wooded grounds of Jesmond Dene. 
Elswick Park in the south-west of the city, extending to 8 J 
acres, includes Elswick Hall. There are several others. Jesmond, 
N.E. of the city, is the chief residential suburb. It takes name 
from " Jesus Mount," and was formerly a place of pilgrimage, 
possessing a hospital dedicated to St Mary the Virgin. 

Both the Northumberland and Durham banks of the river 
are lined with manufacturing towns or suburbs. Of these the 
most important is Gateshead (q.v.) immediately opposite New- 
castle; while those adjacent to Newcastle on the same bank 
are Benwell and Fenham (pop. in 1901, 18,316) on the west, 
and Walker (13,336) on the east. The last-named two (formerly 
urban districts), together with part of Kenton, were incorporated 
with Newcastle in 1904. Newcastle is connected with the south 
bank of the Tyne by four bridges — two high-level bridges, an 
hydraulic swing bridge and a suspension bridge. The old high- 
level bridge carries the North-Eastern railway, with a road and 
footway beneath it. It was opened by Queen Victoria in 1849. 
The new high-level bridge, carrying the railway only, was opened 
by King Edward VII. in 1906; it consists of four steel spans 
on granite piers. The hydraulic swing bridge, on the low level, 
was built to replace a stone- structure erected in 1781 on the 
site of a bridge dating from 1250, and destroyed by a flood in 
1771. The Roman bridge, the Pons Aelii, is said to have spanned 
the river at the same point. The hydraulic bridge (1876) 
consists of one large centre pier, two midstream piers and two 
abutments; and its foundations are iron cylinders resting on 
the solid rock, 60 ft. below the bed of the river. Two spans, 
which open simultaneously by machines impelled by steam, 
allow 103 ft. of waterway for vessels going up and down the river. 
About half a mile farther up the stream is the Redheugh bridge 
(187 1). The central station of the North-Eastern railway is 
an extensive and handsome structure built on a sharp curve. 
An underground line connects it with the Blyth and Tyne 
station. The suburban line of the North-Eastern company 
from the central station to Jesmond, Gosforth and Benton 
was the first standard line to carry passengers by electric traction 
(1004). 

Newcastle owes its prosperity to its convenient situation on 
a tidal river, and to the immense stores of coal in the neighbour- 
hood, which, besides being largely exported, stimulate a great 
variety of industries which are dependent on their use. It began 
to export coal about the end of the 13th century, but the trade 
received a severe check by the act of Edward I. which made 
the burning of coal in London a capital offence. In the reign of 
Edward III. licence was granted to the inhabitants " to dig coals 
and stones in the common soil of the town without the walls 
thereof in the place called the Castle Field and the Forth." The 
quay in front of the town, extending from the hydraulic bridge to 
the Ouseburn, forms a fine thoroughfare of about a mile in length; 
and by means of dredging a depth of water has been obtained 
at the shore permitting vessels of large tonnage to approach, 
although the berths of the ocean steamers are a little farther 
down the river. The quay is supplied with the most improved 
mechanical appliances, and has direct communication with the 
North-Eastern railway. There is a large grain warehouse at 
the E. end of the quay. Exports include coal, chemicals, pig- 
iron, iron-work, steel, iron bars, plates and castings, machinery, 
fire-clay goods and copper. The chief imports are fruits, wheat, 
maize, oats, barley, iron and steel, petroleum, sulphur ore, 
timber and wood hoops, iron ore and potatoes. Steamers 
carrying passengers serve the principal English ports, Cardiff, 
Leith, &c; also Baltic ports and New York; while Newcastle 
is one of the chief ports for the extensive Norwegian tourist 
traffic, the ships of the combined Bergenske and Nordenfjeldske 
companies regularly serving Stavanger, Bergen, Trondhjem 
and intermediate ports. To the industries of Newcastle indicated 
by the exports may be added glass, lead and shot, brick and tile, 
earthenware, tool, rope and ships '-fitting manufactures, and most 
important of all, shipbuilding. The celebrated Elswick works, 
founded by Messrs Armstrong in 1847, and amalgamated with 
those of Mitchell & Co., are among the most important in 
the world. The construction of ships of all sorts, including 
the largest ironclads with all their armour and guns, is carried 
on. Elswick is the name of the western part of the borough 
of Newcastle. The borough returns two members to parliament. 
It is the largest undivided parliamentary constituency in the 
United Kingdom. The city is governed by a lord mayor (the 
title was conferred in 1006), ro. aldermen and 57 councillors. 
Area, 8453 acres. 

History. — Newcastle owes its origin to its position on the great 
Roman wall and on the estuary of the river Tyne. Its Roman 
occupation is proved by existing remains, most important 
among which are the foundations of a bridge, attributed to the 
emperor Hadrian. Before the Conquest little is known of the 
town except that it was called Monkchester, and that it was 
destroyed in the 9th century by the Danes. After the defeat 
of Edgar ^Etheling and Earl Waltheof on Gateshead Fell, it 
was again destroyed by William the Conqueror, but Robert of 
Normandy is said to have raised a castle there in 1080 on his 
return from an expedition against Malcolm, king of Scotland, 
and from that time the town was called Newcastle. Shortly 
afterwards it was fortified by Robert de Mowbray in his rebellion 
against William Rufus, but it was taken by the king in 1095. 
In the reign of Stephen it was seized by David, king of Scotland, 
and after its restoration to the English in n 57 Henry II. rebuilt 
the castle and established a mint. The walls surrounding the 
town are attributed to Edward I. During the 14th century 
Newcastle was three times defended successfully against the 
Scots, but in 1640 it was occupied for a year by the Scottish 
Covenanters under Leslie. It was then garrisoned by royalists, 
but again surrendered to the Scots in 1644 after a siege of about 
six weeks, and Charles I. was taken there in 1646 when he had 
yielded himself to the Scottish army. The burgesses are said 
to have held the borough at a fee-farm rent under a. grant from 
William Rufus. The title of mayor was conferred by Henry III., 
while Henry IV. in 1400 made the town a county of itself with 
a sheriff, and granted the burgesses power to elect 6 aldermen. 
Queen Elizabeth incorporated the town in 1589 under the title 
of mayor and burgesses, and Philip and Mary in 1556 granted 4 
additional aldermen, while the charter of James I. in 1604 
appointed 24 common councilmen. Newcastle has been repre- 
sented in parliament by two members since 1295. The coal 
trade, to which the town owes its prosperity, began in the 13th 
century, but, partly owing to the act of parliament passed in 
the reign of Edward I. forbidding the use of coal in London, 
did not become important until the 17th century. Glassmaking 
was a considerable trade in the 17th century, and in 1823 George 
Stephenson established iron works at Newcastle, where the first 
engines used on the Stockton and Darlington, and Manchester 
and Liverpool lines were made. 

See Victoria County History, Northumberland; John Brand, The 
History and Antiquities of the Town and County of the Town af New- 
castle-upon-Tyne (1789); Chirographia r or a Survey of Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne (1818). 


NEWCOMB, SIMON (1835-1909), American astronomer, was 
born in Wallace, Nova Scotia, on the 12th of March 1835. He 
became a resident of the United States in 1853, and graduated 
at the Lawrence Scientific School of Harvard University in 1858, 
having paid special attention to mathematics and astronomy. 
He assisted in the preparation of the American Nautical Almanac 
for 1857. In 1 86 1 he became professor of mathematics in the 
United States navy, and was put in charge of the great 26-in. 
equatorial erected at Washington Observatory in 1873. In 1877 
he was appointed director of the American Nautical Almanac 
office, a post which he held until March 1897. In 1884 he 
became professor of mathematics and astronomy at the Johns 
Hopkins University, continuing, however, to reside at Washing- 
ton. He was also editor of the American Journal of Mathematics 
for many years. In view of the wide extent and importance 
of his labours, the variety of subjects of which he treats, and 
the unity of purpose which guided him throughout, Simon 
Newcomb must be considered as one of the most distinguished 
astronomers of his time. A study of his works reveals an unusual 
combination of skill and originality in the mathematical treat- 
ment of many of the most difficult problems of astronomy, 
an unfailing patience and sagacity in dealing with immense 
masses of numerical results, and a talent for observation of the 
highest order. On assuming the directorship of the Nautical 
Almanac he became very strongly impressed with the diversity 
existing in the values of the elements and constants of astronomy 
adopted by different astronomers, and the injurious effect which 
it exercised on the precision and symmetry of much astronomical 
work. Accordingly he resolved to " devote all the force which 
he could spare to the work of deriving improved values of the 
fundamental elements and embodying them in new tables of 
the celestial motions." The formation of the tables of a planet 
has been described by Cayley as " the culminating achievement 
of astronomy." but the gigantic task which Newcomb laid out 
for himself, and which he carried on for more than twenty years, 
was the building up, on an absolutely homogeneous basis, of the 
theory and tables of the whole planetary system. The results 
of these investigations have, for the most part, appeared in the 
Astronomical Papers of the American Ephemeris, and have been 
more or less completely adopted for use in the nautical almanacs 
of all countries. A valuable summary of a considerable part of 
this work, containing an account of the methods adopted, the 
materials employed, and the resulting values of the various 
quantities involved, was published in 1895, as a supplement 
to the American Ephemeris for 1897, entitled The Elements 
of the Four Inner Planets and the Fundamental Constants of 
Astronomy. In 1866 Newcomb had published 1 an important 
memoir on the orbit of Neptune, which was followed in 1873 by 
a similar investigation of the orbit of Uranus. 2 About twenty- 
five years later the tables of these planets were revised by him 
in view of all the observations which had accumulated in the 
meanwhile at Washington, Greenwich, Paris and Cambridge. 
In the meantime tbe theory of Jupiter and Saturn had been 
thoroughly worked out by G. W. Hill, Newcomb's distinguished 
collaborator in the Nautical Almanac office, and thus was 

	1 Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge, vol. xv. 
	2 Ibid. vol. xix. 

completed one important section of the work projected by 
Newcomb in 1877. 

Among Newcomb's most notable achievements are his re- 
searches in connexion with the theory of the moon's motion. 
His first work on this abstruse subject, entitled ThSorie des 
perturbations de la lune y qui sont dues a V action des planetes, 1 
is remarkable for the boldness of its conception, and constitutes 
an important addition to celestial dynamics. For some years 
after the publication of Hansen's tables of the moon in 1857 it 
was generally believed that the theory of that body was at last 
complete, and that its motion could be predicted as accurately 
as that of the other heavenly bodies. Newcomb showed that 
this belief was unfounded, and that as a matter of fact the moon 
was falling rapidly behind the tabular positions. With the view 
of examining this question, he undertook the reduction of every 
observation made before 1750 which appeared to be worthy 
of confidence. In an elaborate memoir 2 he showed that the 
ancient solar eclipses described by Herodotus, Thucydides, 
and others, which seemed to require an increased value of the 
secular acceleration of the moon's mean motion to bring them 
into line with modern results, might safely be neglected, the 
ambiguity of the accounts in each case rendering uncertain 
either the totality of the eclipse or the place from which it was 
visible. In his investigation he employed the eclipses of the 
moon recorded in the Almagest, the Arabian eclipses between 
a.d. 800 and 1004, extracted from Caussin's translation of Ibn 
Junis, the eclipses and occultations of Bullialdus, Gassendi, 
and Hevelius, of the French astronomers at Paris and St Peters- 
burg, and of Flamsteed at Greenwich, and deduced a secular 
acceleration of 8-8*, agreeing well with the theoretical value. 

On taking charge of the 26-in. equatorial at the United States 
Naval Observatory, Newcomb devoted it almost exclusively 
for the first two years to observations of the satellites of Uranus 
and Neptune,' being of opinion that it was better to do one thing 
well than many things indifferently. The results of these skil- 
fully conducted observations were published in a memoir on 
The Uranian and Neptunian Systems} From this research it 
appears that the orbits of all four satellites of Uranus are sensibly 
circular, and although no special search was made, he concludes 
that none of Sir William Herschel's supposed outer satellites 
can have any real existence. From the motion of the satellites 
he finds that the mass of Uranus is aa&tm th of that of the sun, 
while for the planet Neptune he finds a mass equal to orjs-ffth 
of the sun, agreeing with the value previously found by him 
from the perturbations of Uranus within -g^th of its amount. 
As early as i860 Newcomb communicated an important memoir 
to the American Academy, 4 On the Secular Variations and 
Mutual Relation of the Orbits of the Asteroids, in which he dis- 
cussed the two principal hypotheses to account for the origin 
of these bodies — one, that they are the shattered fragments of 
a single planet (Olbers' hypothesis), the other, that they have 
been formed by the breaking up of a revolving ring of nebulous 
matter. 

In the Astronomical Papers of the American Ephemeris will 
be found a large number of contributions from Newcomb's 
pen on some fundamental and most important questions of 
astronomy. Among these are papers on The Recurrence of 
Solar Eclipses, A Transformation of Hansen y s Lunar Theory, 
Development of the Perturbaiive Function and its Derivatives. 
His memoir On the Motion of Hyperion, a New Case in Celestial 
Mechanics, is in some respects one of his most original researches. 
He discussed the transits of Venus of 1761 and 1769, and those 
of Mercury from 1677 to 188 1. At the international conference, 
which met at Paris in 1896 for the purpose of elaborating a 
common system of constants and fundamental stars to be 
employed in the various national ephemerides, Newcomb took 
a leading part, and at its suggestion undertook the task of deter- 
mining a definite value of the constant of precession, and of 

	1 Liouville, t. xvi. (1871), pp. 1-45. 

	2 Washington Observations, 1875, Appendix II. 

	3 Ibid., 1873, Appendix I. 

	4 Memoirs Amer. Acad, of Arts and Sciences, v. 124-152. 

compiling a new catalogue of standard stars. The results of 
these investigations were published in 1899,* and have been 
in use since the beginning of 1001. In the intervals of these 
immense labours, on which his reputation as an astronomer 
rests, he found leisure for works of a lighter character, e.g. his 
Popular Astronomy (1878) which has been translated into German, 
Russian, Norwegian, Czech,, Dutch and Japanese, his Astronomy 
for Schools and Colleges (1880), written in conjunction with 
Professor E. S. Holden, and Astronomy for Everybody (1003). 
After his retirement from official life he published an excellent 
popular treatise on The Stars (1901). A more recondite work 
is his Compendium of Spherical Astronomy (1906). He also 
wrote on questions of finance and economics. 

He received the honorary degrees of D.C.L. Oxford, and Sc. D. 
Cambridge and Dublin. In 1872 he was elected an associate 
of the Royal Astronomical Society, receiving its gold medal 
in 1874. In 1877 he was elected a foreign member of the Royal 
Society, which in 1890 awarded him the Copley medal. He 
also received the first Bruce medal of the Astronomical Society 
of the Pacific, awarded by the directors of the Berlin, Greenwich, 
Harvard, Lick, Paris and Yerkes observatories. Except 
Benjamin Franklin he was the only American to become an 
Associate of the French Institute. He died at Washington 
on the nth of July 1909, and was given a military funeral, 
having been made a rear-admiral by Act of Congress in 1906. 

An autobiography, Reminiscences of an Astronomer, appeared in 
1903; and a bibliography of his writings is given by Mr Archibald 
in the Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, XI. iii. 79. See also the obituary 
notice by H. H. Turner in the Mon. Not. R.A.S. (Feb. 1910), p. 305. 


NEWCOMEN, MATTHEW {c. 1610-1669), English non- 
conformist divine, was born about 1610 and educated at St 
John's College, Cambridge (M.A. 1633). In 1636 he became 
lecturer at Dedham in Essex, and was the leader of the church 
reform party in that county. He assisted the elder Calamy in 
writing Smectymnuus (1641), and preached before parliament in 
1643. He was a man of many, gifts, excelling alike in preaching, 
in debate and in friendship, and declined many offers of more 
remunerative service. He protested against the extreme demo- 
cratic proposals called " The Agreement of the People " (1647), 
and was one of the commissioners at the Savoy Synod of 1658. 
On the passing of the Act of Uniformity in 1662, Newcomen lost 
his living, but was soon invited to the pastorate at Leiden, 
where he was held in high esteem not only by his own people 
but by the university professors. He died of the plague in 1669. 

NEWCOMEN, THOMAS (1663-1729), English engineer, one of 
the inventors of the steam-engine, was born at Dartmouth in 
1663. While employed as an ironmonger in his native town, he 
corresponded with Robert Hooke about the previous investiga- 
tions of Denis Papin and the marquis of Worcester as to the 
applicability of steam-power for the purpose of driving machinery, 
and in conjunction with John Calley (or Cawley), said to have 
been a grazier or glazier in Dartmouth, and Captain Thomas 
Savery (1650 ?-i7i5), a military engineer, he constructed in 1705 
a " fire-engine," now known as the " atmospheric steam-engine." 
He died in 1729, probably in London. (See Steam-Engine.) 


NEWDIGATE, SIR ROGER (1710-1806), English antiquary, 
was born on the 30th of May 1719. He was the 5th baronet 
of Harefield (in Middlesex) and Arbury (in Warwickshire), and 
grandson of Sir Richard Newdigate, an English chief justice 
during the time of Richard Cromwell's protectorate. He was 
educated at University College, Oxford. From 1741 to 1747 
he was M.P. for Middlesex, and from 1750 to 1780 M.P. for the 
university of Oxford. In 1753 he spoke in parliament on behalf 
of the repeal of the Plantation Act, and during the debates on 
the land tax in 1767 he opposed the duke of Grafton's administra- 
tion and the proposed grant to the royal princes. Being the 
owner of extensive collieries near Bed worth in Warwickshire, 
he actively promoted the Coventry, Oxford and Grand Junction 
canal, cutting also a canal from his collieries to Coventry, and 
interesting himself in the construction of the turnpike road from 

	5 Astronomical Papers of the American Ephemeris, vol. viii. 
	pts. i. and ii. 

Coventry to Leicester, But it is as an antiquary and the founder 
of a prize at the Oxford university that he is chiefly remembered. 
His interest in old architecture dated from a tour in France and 
Italy which was undertaken while he was a young man. He 
filled two folio volumes with sketches of ancient buildings. His 
collection of antiquities included marbles, casts of statues and 
vases. Two marble candelabra foun,d in Hadrian's villa at Rome 
he purchased for £1800 and presented them to the Radcliffe 
Library at Oxford. Among his other generosities to the university 
were a chimney piece, for the hall of University College, and the 
sum of £2000 for the removal by Flaxman of the Arundel collec- 
tion of marbles to the Radcliffe Library. The " Newdigate " 
prize of twenty-one guineas for English verse, which is open for 
competition each year to the undergraduates of Oxford Uni- 
versity, was founded by him and was first awarded in the year 
of his death. He died at Arbury on the 23rd of November 1806. 
His portrait was painted by Kirkby for University College, 
Oxford, and at the age of sixty-three he also sat to Romney. 


NEWEL (O. Fr. nouel or noel, modern noyau, properly a 
kernel, from Lat. nux, nut; other foreign equivalents are Ital. 
albcro, Ger. Spindel), the term given in architecture to the central 
shaft of a semicircular or winding staircase, which is built up or 
consists of the narrow ends of the steps standing one over the 
other. When in stone, both newel and steps are cut out of the 
same hlock; when in wood, the newel becomes a vertical post 
into which the steps are housed. The term is also given to the 
vertical post at the foot or the angles of a square staircase, into 
which the carriage or beam carrying the steps is tenoned. 


NEW ENGLAND, a general name for the north-east section of 
the United States of America, embracing the states of Maine, 
New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and 
Connecticut. It has an area of 66,424 sq. m. (4448 sq. m. being 
water) ; and in 1910 its population was 6,552,681, more than one- 
half of which was in Massachusetts, although that state contains 
less than one-eighth of the total area. The region is traversed 
by the broken mountain ranges which form the N.E. continuation 
of the Appalachian system; the soil is rather sterile, except in 
the river valleys; and the climate of the long winters is often 
severe. But the picturesque scenery and delightful summer 
climate have made New England a favourite resort. When the 
commerce of New England was interrupted as a consequence 
of the Napoleonic wars, the abundance of water power afforded 
by the rivers encouraged manufacturing, and the region rapidly 
acquired prominence in this industry, especially in the manu- 
facture of textiles, of boots and shoes, and of paper and wood 
pulp; in 1905 the value of the textile products of New England 
(excluding flax, hemp and jute) alone was $522,821,440 (more 
than 45% of that of the entire country), the value of boots and 
shoes was $181,023,946 (more than 5$% of the total for the 
entire country), the value of paper and wood pulp was $40,813,133 
(more than one-quarter of that of the entire country), and the 
value of all factory products amounted to $2,025,998,437 (nearly 
one-seventh of the total for the entire country). 

Northmen very probably visited this region at the beginning 
of the nth century. (See Vinland). To Europeans who visited 
it in the 16th century it was included in " Norumbega," and some 
of the early explorers searched here for the mythical city of that 
name. Title to the territory was claimed by the English on the 
basis of its alleged exploration by the Cabots in 1498, and by the 
French on the basis of its exploration by Giovanni da Verrazano 
in 1524. It was made favourably known to the English by the 
explorations of Bartholomew Gosnold in 1602, of Martin Pring in 
1603 and of George Weymouth in 1605, and was at this time 
called North Virginia. In 1606 King James I. granted it to the 
Plymouth Company with a view to encouraging settlement, 
and in the next year a colony was planted at the mouth of the 
Sagadahoc (now Kennebec) river, but this was abandoned in 
1608; the efforts of the French to establish settlements along 
the Maine coast were likewise unsuccessful. In 1614-1616 
Captain John Smith traversed the coast as far east as the mouth 
of the Penobscot river and as far south as Cape Cod, gathered 
much information from the Indians, wrote an attractive descrip- 
tion of the country, prepared a map of it, suggested its present 
name, New England, and made another unsuccessful attempt to 
found a settlement. A new charter of 1620 conveyed to the New 
England Council, the successor of the Plymouth Company, all 
the territory in North America between latitudes 40 and 48 N. 
under the name of New England, and in the same year a 
permanent settlement was established at Plymouth by a band 
of Separatists, who, although they had expected to settle in 
Virginia, were prevailed upon by the captain of their vessel to 
land in New England. During its existence of fifteen years the 
New England Council made numerous grants of territory, and 
from three of these grew three of the present states : Massa- 
chusetts, from a grant to the Massachusetts Bay Company in 
1628; Maine, from the grant to Sir Ferdinando Gorges and John 
Mason (the two most influential members of the council) in 1622; 
and New Hampshire, from the grant to John Mason in 1629. 
The Council attempted to establish a general government over 
its entire domain, but the scheme of some of its members for 
supporting such a government with contributions from each 
member in return for an allotment of land was a failure, and 
although Robert Gorges, the second son of Sir Ferdinando- 
Gorges, was sent over as governor-general in 1623, he accom- 
plished nothing and returned in the next year in disgust. In 
1635, when the Dutch were hemming in its domain on the west 
and the French on the north, the Council made a final allotment 
of its remaining territory among its members and surrendered 
its charter. Connecticut was founded in the same year by emi- 
grants from Massachusetts without any other authority than 
that given by the mother colony. A separate colony was founded 
at New Haven in 1638 by emigrants from England who had 
stayed for a time in Boston and other Massachusetts towns, 
but this was annexed to Connecticut in 1664 under the Con- 
necticut charter of 1662. Rhode Island was founded in 1636 by 
exiles from Massachusetts who had no authority whatever 
from a superior government. Plymouth was a separate colony 
until its union with Massachusetts under the charter of 1691. 
New Hampshire was a part of Massachusetts from 1 641-1643 to 
1679. Maine, having passed under the jurisdiction of Massa- 
chusetts in 1652, did not regain its independence until 1820. 
Vermont was settled largely by emigrants from New Hampshire, 
but New York claimed the territory and the dispute was not 
settled until the new state was erected in 1791. 

Massachusetts, Plymouth, Connecticut and New Haven 
constituted in their early years a group of neighbouring colonies, 
substantially independent of the mother country, and possessing 
a unity of purpose and similar institutions but in need of mutual 
protection from the Indians, the Dutch and the French, and 
also needing an arbiter to whom they might refer their own 
disputes, especially those relating to boundaries and trade. 
To meet these needs they organized, under Articles of Confedera- 
tion signed in 1643, the first form of colonial union in America; 
they called it The United Colonies of New England, but it is 
more commonly known as the New England Confederacy. The 
confederate authority was vested in a hoard of eight com- 
missioners, two from each colony chosen annually by its General 
Court. 

This board was to meet annually in September, two years of every 
five at Boston, one year of every five at Hartford^ one at New 
Haven, and one at Plymouth ; special meetings also might be called 
by three magistrates of any of the four colonies. The commissioners 
cnose their president at each meeting, but this officer had only the 
powers of a moderator. An agreement of six commissioners was 
necessary to pass any measure, but if there was an agreement of 
less than six the measure might be referred to the General Courts 
and become a law of the Confederacy if all of those courts approved. 
The most important powers of the Confederacy were those relating 
to defence, and in case of an invasion its entire force, consisting of 
100 men from Massachusetts and 45 men from each of the other 
colonies (or some other proportion which the commissioners might 
name), was to march out if so requested by three magistrates of any 
of the contracting colonies. The expenses of every defensive war 
which the commissioners declared to be just were to be defrayed by 
the several colonies in proportion to their number of men and boys 
between the ages of sixteen and sixty. Other matters within the 
jurisdiction of the commissioners were such as related to disputes 
between two or more colonies and the return of escaped servants, 
prisoners and fugitives from justice. As the commissioners had no 
means of enforcing their orders, their function was chiefly advisory, 
but it was nevertheless of considerable importance on several 
occasions. Although the number of commissioners from each of 
the colonies was the same, those from Massachusetts exerted the 
dominant influence. 

The commissioners met regularly until 1684 — annually until 
New Haven submitted to Connecticut in 1664, and triennially 
from 1664 to 1684, when Massachusetts lost its first charter. 
Upon the downfall of the Puritan Commonwealth in the mother 
country (1660) numerous grievances were presented to King 
Charles II. against the Puritan governments of New England, 
among them Massachusetts' extension of its jurisdiction over 
the towns of Maine and New Hampshire, the persecution of the 
Quakers, and the denial of the right of appeal to the crown, 
and in 1664 a royal commission, consisting of Richard Nicolls, 
Samuel Maverick, Robert Carr and George Cartwright, was 
sent over to settle disputes and secure some measure of imperial 
control, but Massachusetts, the chief offender, successfully 
bafHed all attempts at interference, and the mission was almost 
a complete failure. The grievances of English merchants arising 
from the violation of the navigation laws by the colonies continued, 
however, to receive the attention of the home government. 

In 1676 the Lords of Trade and Plantations sent over Edward 
Randolph to investigate and gather information which would 
show the justice and expediency of imposing imperial control, 
and two years later Randolph was appointed Collector and 
Surveyor of Customs in New England. Randolph sent back 
many charges, especially against Massachusetts, with the effect 
that, in 1684, the charter of that colony was annulled by a 
decree in Chancery on a writ of quo warranto. This done, the 
home government set to work to organize the royal domain which 
should be known as New England, or the Dominion of New 
England, and its plan for this provided for the annulment of 
the charters of Rhode Island and Connecticut, and the inclusion 
in the Dominion of these colonies, and New Hampshire, Maine, 
New York and the Jerseys, thereby restoring to New England 
all the territory, with the exception of Pennsylvania, that was 
included in the grant to the New England Council in 1620. A 
temporary government was established at Boston in May 1686, 
with Joseph Dudley as president, and in December of the same 
year Edmund Andros arrived with a commission and instructions 
which were a copy of those to the governor of New York and 
made him governor of all New England except Rhode Island and 
Connecticut. Rhode Island offered no resistance to the writ 
against its charter and Andros extended his authority over it 
immediately after his arrival. Connecticut successfully baffled 
the royal servants for a time, but when threatened with a division 
of its territory agreed not to resist the royal purpose, and on 
the last day of October 1687 it passed under the general govern- 
ment of New England. Finally, a new commission to Andros, 
issued in April 1688, extended his jurisdiction over New York 
and the Jerseys, and the whole region over which he was made 
governor by this instrument was named " Our Territory and 
Dominion of New England in America." But the English 
Revolution of 1688 inspired a revolt in New England by which 
Andros was deposed in April 1689. Under William and Mary 
no attempt was made to preserve the Dominion of New England, 
but Rhode Island and Connecticut were permitted to resume 
government under their old charters, Massachusetts received 
a new one, and New Hampshire again became a separate royal 
province. 

New England is prominent in American colonial history as 
the " Land of the Puritans " and the home of the corporate 
colony. The chief motive of its founders in coming to the 
New World was the establishment of a new Christian common- 
wealth, but subordinate to this there was from the first an 
economic motive. So long as the religious motive remained 
dominant, " blue laws " were a prominent feature of the adminis- 
tration, but by a slow transition the economic motive became 
the dominant one, and, as a consequence of this transition and 
of the corporate form of government, European institutions 

were transformed into American institutions and new political 
ideas were generated more rapidly in New England than in either 
the Middle or the Southern colonies. Owing to its geographical 
position, nearer to Canada than any other group of colonies, 
New England had to stand the brunt of the fighting during the 
wars between the English and the French (aided by their Indian 
allies) in America, terminating with the conquest of Canada 
by the English in 1750-1760, and a sense of common danger 
helped to create a certain solidarity, which made easier the union 
of the colonies for common action against the mother country 
at the time of the War of American Independence. After that 
war, New England was long the most essentially commercial 
and industrial group of states, and was a stronghold of 
Federalism; and in the period immediately before and during 
the War of 1812, when its commercial interests suffered terribly, 
first from the restrictive measures of the general government 
and then from warfare, New England was a centre of that 
opposition to the policy of the National Administration (then 
Democratic), which culminated in the famous Hartford Conven- 
tion of 1814-1815 (see Hartford). 

See the" articles on the separate New England states and the 
authorities there given ; among good general works are J. G. Palfrey, 
History of New England (5 vols., Boston, 1858-1890); J. A. Doyle, 
The Puritan Colonies (2 vols., New York, 1889); B. B. Tames, The 
Colonization of New England (Philadelphia, 1904); H. L. Osgood, 
The American Colonies in the Seventeenth Century (3 vols., New York, 
1904-1907); John Fiske, The Beginnings of New England, or the 
Puritan Theocracy in its Relation to Civil and Religious Liberty 
(Boston, 1896); S. A. Drake, The Making of New England (New 
York, 1896); W. B. Weeden, Economic and Social History of New 
England (2 vols., Boston, 1890); and Edward Channine, History of 
the United States , vols. i. and ii. (New York, 1905, 1908). 


NEW FOREST, one of the few woodland regions left in England 
covering about 93,000 acres in the south-west of Hampshire, 
between the Solent, Southampton Water and the river Avon. 
About two-thirds of it is crown property, and is preserved more 
or less in its natural condition as open woodland interspersed 
with bogs and heaths. The trees principally represented are 
oak and beech, with some newer plantations of Scotch fir. The 
trees were formerly felled for building the ships of the navy and 
for feeding the iron furnaces of Sussex and Hampshire. Pigs 
and a hardy breed of ponies find a good living in the forest; 
and in spite of an act in 1851 providing for their extermination 
or removal, a few red deer still survive. Foxes, squirrels, otters, 
snakes (smooth snake, grass snake and adder), butterflies (some 
of them peculiar to the district), and an occasional badger range 
the forest freely. The tract derives its name from the extensive 
afforestation carried through in this region by William the 
Conqueror in 1079; and the deaths of two of his sons within 
its confines — Richard killed by a stag, and William Rufus by an 
arrow — were regarded in their generation as a judgment of Heaven 
for the cruelty and injustice perpetrated by their father when 
appropriating the forest. Rufus's stone, near Lyndhurst, 
marks the supposed spot where that monarch fell. About one- 
fourth of the area is under cultivation by private owners and 
tenants. The principal village within the forest is Lyndhurst 
(pop. 2167 in 1901); its church contains a fresco by Lord 
Leighton, and here is held the verderers' court, which since 
1887 has had charge of the crown portion of the forest. On the 
western outskirts lies the town of Ringwood (q.v .). Brockenhurst 
and Beaulieu are the villages next in importance. Beaulieu, 
at the head of the picturesque estuary of the Beaulieu river, 
which debouches into the Solent, is famous for the ruins of 
Beaulieu Abbey, founded by King John for Cistercians. The 
gatehouse is restored as a residence, and the Early English 
refectory as a church. There are considerable remains of the 
cloisters, chapter house and domestic buildings. The New 
Forest gives name to a parliamentary division of the county. 

The New Forest is one of the five forests mentioned in 
Domesday. It was a bunting-ground of the West Saxon kings, 
but, as already stated, was afforested by the Conqueror, whose 
cruelty in the matter is probably exaggerated by the traditional 
account. One of the chief sources of the wealth of the forest 
in early times was the herds of pigs fed there. The New Forest, 
being under the forest laws, was affected by the forest clauses 
of Magna Carta and by the Forest Charter (i 2 17), which mitigated 
their severity. The chief officer of this, as of other forests, was 
the justice in eyre who held the justice seat, the highest forest 
court and the only court of record capable of entering and 
executing judgments on offenders; the lower courts were the 
Swainmote and Wodemote, the former of which is still held, 
in a modified form, in the Verderers' Hall of the King's House 
at Lyndhurst. The circuit of the justices in eyre, or their 
deputies, continued down to 1635; they were virtually ended by 
the Act for the Limitation of Forests (1640), though Charles II. 
attempted to revive them, and they were not legally abolished 
until 181 7. The lower officers of the forest, who held merely 
local appointments, were the verderers, the regarders (one of 
whose duties was that of seeing to the expeditation of " great 
dogs ")> the foresters, the woodwards and the agisters. There 
was abo a lord warden, who was usually a nobleman and performed 
no judicial functions. The Deer Removal Act (1851) resulted 
in the almost total extinction of the forest deer. Under the act 
of 1877 the forest is administered rather as a national park 
than for the growing of timber on commercial principles. 

See J. R. Wise, The New Forest (4th ed. f 1883), with over sixty 
engravings by W. J. Linton and a dozen etchings by H. Sumner; 
and R. D. Blackmore, Cradock Nowell (1866). 


NEWFOUNDLAND, a large island, forming a British colony, 
and occupying an important and commanding position off the 
eastern coast of the North American continent, not dissimilar 
to that occupied by Great Britain towards Europe. It stretches 
directly across the entrance of the Gulf of St Lawrence, to which 
access is afforded at both the northern and the southern 
extremities of the island. In the south-west its distance from 
Cape Breton is less than 60 m., while only 1640 m. separate its 
most easterly point from the coast of Ireland. It is situated 
between 46 36' 50* and 51 39' N., and between 52 37' and 
59 24' 50* W. The total area of the island is about 40,200 sq. m. 
or one-sixth larger than Ireland: its maximum length from Cape 
Ray to Cape Norman is 317 m., its maximum breadth from 
Cape Spear to Cape Anguilie, 316 m. In shape it is roughly 
triangular, three extensive peninsulas, which project from the 
north (Petit Nord) and south-east (Avalon), assisting the con- 
formation, although the latter, the most populous region of the 
island, is joined by a very slender isthmus, at one place only 
3 m. wide. A further division of the Avalon peninsula is wrought 
by the two bays of St Mary's and Conception. St John's, the 
capital, is situated on the eastern side of Avalon. 

Physical Features. — Viewed from the ocean the coasts of 
Newfoundland appear bleak, rocky and barren. The brown wall 
of rock, 200 to 300 ft. in height, is, however, broken at frequent 
intervals by deep fjords and large bays running in some instances 
80 to 90 m. inland , and throwing out smaller arms in all directions. 
For this reason the circumference of the island, which, measured 
from headland to headland, is about 1000 m., is actually doubled. 
The fjords resemble those of Norway; islands are numerous, 
some of them clad with vegetation; and picturesque scenery is 
not uncommon. 

Near the coasts the surface of the country is of a hilly, rugged 
character. In the interior the elevated undulating plateau is 
diversified by ranges of low hills, valleys, woods, lakes, ponds and 
marshes. Much of this is a savanna country, giving sustenance to 
large herds of caribou. All the principal hill ranges have a N.N.E. 
and S.S.W. trend, as have also all the other great physical features 
of the island, such as the bays, larger lakes, rivers and valleys, a 
conformation doubtless shaped by glacial action during the Ice 
period. The most important range of mountains is the Long Range, 
beginning at Cape Ray and extending along the western side of the 
island for some 200 m., and having peaks more than 2000 ft. high. 
Parallel to this but nearer the west coast is the Anguilie Range, 
running from Cape Anguilie to the highlands of Bay St George. 
Some of the summits of the Blomidon Range, extending along the 
south shore of the Humber and Bay of Islands, attain a height of 
2084 ft., being the highest on the island. Avalon peninsula is 
also very hilly, but the greatest altitude is only 1200 ft.— North-East 
Mountain, from which sixty- seven lakes are visible on a clear day. 
Over the interior are spread a number of detached sharply-pointed 
summits, springing abruptly from the great central plateau, bearing 
the local name of " tolts," and serviceable as landmarks. 

In comparison with the island's size large rivers are few, owing 
to the broken, uneven character of most of the country, and the 
fact that the ponds and lakes find a convenient vent in the numerous 
lengthy inlets and arms of the sea. There are, however, three 
considerable streams, the Exploits, the Humber and the Gander. 
The first-named rises in the extreme S.W. angle of the island, close 
to the southern extremity of the Long Range, and after a course 
of 200 m. falls into the Bay of Exploits, Notre Dame Bay. It is a 
mile wide at its mouth; its channel is studded with islands, the 
largest being Thwart Island, 9 m. in length. Fourteen miles from 
the mouth is a succession of cascades known as Bishop's Falls, and 
farther inland are the picturesque Grand Falls. The Exploits 
drains an area of between 3000 and 4000 m. t much of it fertile land, 
and densely wooded with pine, spruce, birch and poplar. The 
width of this fertile belt varies at different parts of the river, but it 
is estimated that some 200,000 acres might be available for agri- 
culture. The Humber rises 20 m. inland from Bonne Bay, and, 
after emptying itself by a circuitous course into Deer Lake, falls 
into the Bay of Islands. It drains an area of 2000 sq. m. Rising 
near the southern coast, the Gander flows through Gander Lake 
into Hamilton Sound, draining an area of nearly 4000 sq. m. Be- 
sides these three there is the Codroy, rising in the Long Range and 
emptying into the Gulf of St Lawrence. 

The immense number of lakes and ponds constitutes perhaps the 
most striking physical feature of the island. More than a third of 
the whole area is occupied by water. These bodies of water, large 
and small, are found in the most various positions: in the mountain 
gorges; in the depressions between the low hills; in the valleys 
and even in the hollows on the tops of the highest eminences. The 
largest is Grand Lake, 56 m. long, 5 in breadth, with an area of 
192 sq. m. Its surface is but 50 ft. above sea-level, the bottom at 
its deepest portion being 300 ft. below sea-level. It contains an 
island 22 m. long. The next, Red Indian Lake, is 37 m. long, with 
an area of 64 sq. m. Gander Lake is 33 m. in length, and Deer 
Lake, through which the Humber flows, is 15 m. After these 
Michel Sandy Lake, Victoria, Hind's, Terra Nova and George IV. 
lakes rank next in size. Save where the railway and lumbering 
camps have invaded them the shores of these lakes are still primitive 
wilderness. 

The coasts of the island, intersected by many great bays, have 
been familiar to fishermen from an early period, but the interior 
remained almost completely unknown until the geological survey, 
still in process, was begun in 186^. Chief amongst the inlets are 
Placentia Bay, 55 m. in width at its mouth and 90 m. long; Notre 
Dame Bay, 50 m. wide and 70 m. long; Fortune Bay, 25 m. wide 
and 70 long; and St Mary's Bay, 25 m. wide by 35 m. in length. 
Opposite Fortune Bay, which has several important arms, are the 
two islands of St Pierre and Miquelon, ceded by treaty in 1713 to 
France, as shelter for her fishermen, and now all that remains of 
French sovereignty in North America. In the neighbourhood of 
Bay St George, on the west coast (40 m. wide at the mouth and 
boasting a good harbour) are situated some of the most fertile lands 
in the island, well-timbered and containing large deposits of coal 
and other minerals. Three extensive arms run 20 m. inland from 
Bay of Islands, the seat of a profitable herring fishery. Conception 
Bay is one of the largest and most important in the island, having 
in 1901 a population scattered through the settlements on its shores 
of over 40,000 inhabitants. Another principal inlet is Bonavista 
Bay, which contains numerous groups of islands. 

Geology. — All the great ancient rock systems, between the Lower 
Laurentian and the Coal-measures, are more or less represented at 
one part or another of Newfoundland. 

The Laurentian system has an immense spread in the island. It 
constitutes the principal mountain ranges, coming to the surface 
through the more recent deposits, on the axes of anticlinal lines, or 
brought up by great dislocations, most of which trend nearly parallel 
with each other in a general bearing of about north-north-east and 
south-south-west. The Laurentian gneiss of the Long Range, on 
the western side, extends in a nearly straight course from Cape 
Ray to the headwaters of theCastor in the great northern peninsula. 
On the south-western extremity of the island these rocks occupy the 
coast from Cape Ray to La Poile. They are largely exhibited on 
Grand Lake, running in a spur from the Long Range between it 
and Red Indian Lake, and bearing for the south-eastern shores. of 
Hall's Bay. The central portion of the^ northern peninsula is 
Laurentian, which also spreads over a wide expanse of country 
between Grand Lake and the Humber and Exploits rivers, and 
shows itself on the coast between Canada Bay and White Bay. 
Another ran^e of Laurentian comes up in the district of Ferry land, 
and shows itself occasionally on the coast of Conception Bay. 
Thus more than half the island is Laurentian. 

Three-fourths of the peninsula of Avalon are Huronian, a forma- 
tion which does not extend west of Fortune Bay. The town of St 
John's and, in fact, nearly all the settlements between Fortune Bay 
and Bonavista Bay are built upon it. Signal Hill, overlooking the 
harbour of St John's, is capped with the sandstone of this formation. 
The whole Huronian system is not less than 10,000 ft. thick, and 
has been cut through by denudation to the Laurentian floor. The 
rocks of the Primordial Silurian age are spread unconformably over 
the area thus ground down. These evidences of denudation and 
reconstruction are very clear in Conception Bay, where the rocks 

	NEWFOUNDLAND 

	Scale, i:,3,6oo,ooo 
	80 
	English Mile* 
	10 ao 40 bo 
	fekHtoM 
	r<vrWf 
	t Johns 
	~Sp*mr 
	Mat** Mmmd 
	#£ FerryUng>, rr ,/, B «. ««<* 
	48' 
	3 
	B Longitude West 56° of Greenwich Q 

of the intermediary system have been ground down to the Laurentian 
gneiss, and, subsequently, the submarine valley thus formed has 
been filled up with a new set of sediments, the remains of^ which 
are stilly to be found skirting the shores of the bay and forming the 
islands in it. 

Rocks of the Silurian age are most extensive on the peninsula 
of Cape St: Mary, and around the head of Trinity Bay. These belong 
to the Primordial Silurian group. The Lower Silurian rocks have a 
large development, and in them the metallic ores occur which" seem 
destined to render the island a great mining centre.^ The Lauzon 
division of the Quebec group, which is the true metalliferous zone of 
North America, has an immense spread in the island. It consists 
of serpentine rocks associated with dolomites, diorites,' &c, and is 
well known throughout North America to be usually more or less 
metalliferous. The Newfoundland rocks are no exception, but give 
evidence of being rich in metallic ores. The Middle Silurian division 
of rocks is also widely spread; and the most fertile belts of land 
and the most valuable forests are nearly all situated on the country 
occupied by this formation. The great valley of the Exploits and 
Victoria rivers, the valley of the Gander and several smaller tracts 
belong to it. 

The Carboniferous series occupies a large area on the western 
side of the island, in the neighbourhood of Bay St George and Grand 

	Emery Ir'Alkcr *c 

Lake. There is also a wider spread of the same series along the 
valley of the Humber and round the shores of Deer Lake and the 
eastern half of Grand Lake, and as far as Sandy Lake. " Coal," 
says Mr J. P. Howley, F.R.G.S., head of the survey, " is known to 
exist at several places in this series; and seams, apparently of 
workable thickness, judging from their^ out-crops, occur on the 
Middle Barachois and Robinson's Brook, in St George's Bay.*' 

It will thus # be seen that the Carboniferous series is confined to 
the western side, while the middle, eastern and southern portions 
are occupied by Silurian, Huronian and JLaurentian formations. 
From the extent to which the Lauzon division of the Quebec group, 
the true metalliferous zone of North America, prevails in the island, 
its yet undeveloped mineral wealth must be very great. 

Climate. — The climate is more temperate than that of most portions 
of the neighbouring continent. It is but rarely, and then only for 
a few hours, that the thermometer sinks below zero in winter, 
while the summer ranee rarely exceeds 8o° F., and for the most part 
does not rise above 70 . The Arctic current exerts a chilling influence 
along the eastern coast, but as a compensation it brings with it the 
enormous wealth of commercial fishes and seals which has rendered 
the fisheries the most productive in the world. The Gulf Stream, 
while it creates fogs, modifies the cold. The salubrity of the climate 
is evidenced by the robust healthy appearance of the inhabitants. 

Open fireplaces are sufficient to warm the houses, and free exercise 
in the open air is attainable at all seasons. The average mean 
temperature at St John's is 41*2° F. f the maximum being 83 ° and 
the minimum 7 ; the average height of the barometer is 29-37 in. 
The average rainfall is 58-30 in. Winter sets in, as a rule, in the 
beginning of December and lasts until the middle of April. Generally 
the snow lies during this period, and the frost rarely penetrates the 
ground to a greater depth than a few inches. Spring is sometimes 
late in arriving, but once vegetation sets in it advances with mar- 
vellous rapidity. The autumn is usually very fine, and is often pro- 
longed till November. There is nothing in the climate to interfere 
with agriculture. Tornadoes are unknown, and thunderstorms are 
very rare. Fogs, of which so much is said in connexion with the 
country, are confined to the shores and bays of the south-eastern 
and southern coasts. 

Fauna. — Among the well-known wild animals indigenous to the 
country the caribou or reindeer hold a conspicuous place. They 
migrate regularly between the south-eastern and north-western 
portions of the island. The winter months are passed in the south, 
where " browse " is plentiful, and the snow is not too deep to prevent 
them from reaching the lichens on the lower grounds. In March 
they begin their spring migration to the barrens and mountains of 
the north-west. In May or June they bring forth their young. 
As soon as the frosts of October begin to nip the vegetation they 
turn south. September and October are the best months for stalk- 
ing. In addition to the caribou, the wolf and black bear are found 
in the interior; the fox (black, silver, grey and red), beaver, otter, 
arctic hare, North-American hare, weasel, bat, rat, mouse and 
musquash or musk-rat are numerous. The famous Newfoundland 
dog is still to be met with, but good specimens are rare, and he 
appears to thrive better elsewhere. The common dogs are a degene- 
rate mongrel race. It is estimated that there are three hundred 
species of oirds in the island, most of them being migratory. Among 
them may be enumerated the eagle, hawk, owl, woodpecker, swallow, 
kingfisher, six species of fly-catchers and the same number of thrushes, 
warblers and swallows in great variety, finches, ravens, jays. The 

Etarmigan or willow grouse is very abundant, and is the finest game- 
ird in the island. The rock ptarmigan is found in the highest and 
barest mountain ridges. The American golden plover, various 
species of sandpipers and curlews, the brent goose, ducks, petrels, 
gulls and the great northern diver are met with everywhere. The 
^reat auk, now extinct, was once found in myriads around the 
island. The little auk, guillemot and the razor-billed auk are 
abundant. No venomous reptiles occur. Frogs have been intro- 
duced and thrive well. Of molluscous animals the common squid, 
a cephalopod about 6 or 7 in. in length, visits the coasts in immense 
shoals in August and September, and supplies a valuable bait % A 
gigantic species of cephalopod was discovered in 1873, which excited 
much interest among naturalists: the body varies from 7 to 15 ft. 
in length, with a circumference of 5 or 6 ft. ; from the head ten 
arms radiate, the two longest (tentacles) being from 24 to 40 ft. 
in length, and covered with suckers at their extremities; the other 
eight arms vary from 6 to 11 ft., and on one side are entirely covered 
with suckers. Professor Verrill, of Yale College, distinguished two 
species — one he named Architeuthis Harveyi, after the discoverer, 
and the other Architeuthis monachus. 

Flora. — The pine, spruce, birch, juniper and larch of the forests 
of the interior^ furnish ample materials for a large timber trade as 
well as for shipbuilding purposes. The white pine grows to the 
height of 70 or 80 ft. in some places, and is 3 or 4 ft. in diameter. 
There is an abundance of wood suitable for making pulp for paper; 
and in 1 906-1 907 a London company, with Lord Northcliffe (of the 
Daily Mail) at its head, acquired large tracts for this purpose, and 
operations were begun in 1910. The mountain ash, balsam poplar 
and aspen thrive well. Evergreens are in great variety. The berry- 
bearing plants cover large areas of the island. The maidenhair or 
ca pillaire yields a saccharine matter which is lusciously sweet. 
Flowering plants and ferns are in vast varieties, and wild grasses and 
clover grow luxuriantly. Garden vegetables of all kinds, and straw- 
berries, raspberries, gooseberries, currants, &c, thrive well. 

Population. — By the earliest computation made in 1654 the 
number of permanent inhabitants in the island was 1750. 
Twenty-six years later the resident population was stated to 
be 2280; in 1763, 7000; in 1804, 20,000. In 1832 the population 
had risen to 60,000; in 1836 to 75,094; in 1857, 124,288; and 
in 1874, 161,374. By the census of 1901 the total population of 
Newfoundland was 217,037, that of Labrador being 3947. The 
capital, St John's, which contained a population of 15,000 in 1835, 
had in 1901 29,594 souls. The rate of increase for the island 
for the ten years ending in 1901 was 9*37% as compared with 
the rate of increase 1874-1884, which was 22-30%. Certain 
districts such as Carbonear, Harbour Grace and Ferryland, as 
well as Labrador, showed a steady decline, the largest increase 
being in St George's district and on the west coast, where it is 
not less than 40%. 

Of the various religious denominations the strength in 1901 
was as follows: Roman Catholics, 75,989; Chuch of England, 
73,008; Methodists, 61,388; Presbyterians, 11 68; Congrega- 
tionalists, 954; Salvationists, 6594; Moravians, Baptists and 
others, 1554. The system of public education is denominational, 
each religious body receiving grants from the revenue according 
to numerical strength. The total sum allotted to education in 
1904-1905 was $196,192. The aggregate number of pupils 
under fifteen attending the 783 elementary schools and academies 
in the island was 35,204. It is estimated that 25 % of the popula- 
tion, chiefly the older folk, are illiterate. 

Fisheries. — These constitute the great staple industry of the 
island. On the export of its products the trade of the colony 
still mainly depends. The most important fish in these waters, 
commercially, is the cod, which is here more abundant than 
anywhere else in the world. Although subject to considerable 
fluctuation the average annual export of dried cod-fish over a 
term of years is about 1,200,000 quintals. The value of the 
export varies between five and six million dollars, according to 
the market price of the dried fish. The cod are taken on the 
shores of the island, along the Labrador coast and on " the 
Banks." These Banks, which have played such an important 
part in the history of the colony, and are the chief source of 
its wealth, stretch for about 300 m. in a south-east direction 
towards the centre of the North Atlantic, and probably at one 
time formed a part of the North American continent. The depths 
range from 1 5 to 80 or 90 fathoms. The deposits consist of sand 
and gravel composed of ancient rocks, and fragments of quartz, 
mica, hornblende, felspars and magnetite; along with these are 
many calcareous fragments of echinoderms, polyzoa and many 
foraminifera. In the deeper parts there is sometimes a fine 
mud containing the above-mentioned minerals and calcareous 
fragments, and in addition numerous frustules of diatoms. The 
Banks are swept by the cold Labrador current, and icebergs are 
frequently stranded upon them. The Gulf Stream passes over 
their southern portions. These two currents bear along many 
species of pelagic algae and animals, which supply" abundant food 
to the myriads of echinoderms, molluscs, annelids, coelenterates 
and other invertebrates which live at all depths on the Banks. 
These invertebrates in turn supply food to the cod and other 
fishes which are sought for by the fishermen. Sea birds frequent 
the Banks in great numbers; and, as diving birds are not met 
with at any great distance from them, the presence of these in 
the sea gives seamen an indication of the shallower water. 

The total annual catch of cod In Newfoundland waters has been 
estimated at about 2,500,000 quintals (a quintal being one-twentieth 
of a ton), with a value of about £ 1,400,000 sterling. The cod fishery 
forms four-fifths of the entire industry, in spite of the increase in 
the herring and lobster catch. No increase in the quantities taken 
is to be noted, but the market value of dried cod fish is generally 
enhanced. In 1885 an export of 1,284,710 quintals was only worth 
$4,061,600. In 1905 1,196,814 quintals were valued at $6,108,614. 
To this may be added the value of the fish consumed by the people 
of the colony, estimated at $450,000. According to the census of 
1901 there were 41,231 males and 21,443 females engaged in the 
c?tching and curing of fish. 

The figures have greatly varied in past years: as for instance in 
1857, 31 % of the total population were engaged in catching and 
curing fish: in 1869, 25^%, in 1884, 30-6%, and in 1901, 28-4%. 
Small voyages and low prices have tended to limit fishery operations; 
and the opening up of other industries has diverted labour from the 
fisheries. The total number of vessels engaged is about 1550, with 
a tonnage of 54,500; over 11,000 fishing rooms are in actual use. 
The use of traps has followed the decrease in number of nets and 
seines, but the continued increase of fishing rooms shows that there 
is no falling off in the Newfoundland cod fishery, which has now 
been prosecuted for fully four centuries. Notwithstanding the 
enormous drafts every year, to all appearance the cod are as abundant 
as ever. They begin to appear on the coasts of the island about the 
first of June, at which time they move from the deep waters of the 
coast to the shallower and warmer waters near the shore, for spawn- 
ing purposes. Their approach is heralded by the caplin, a beautiful 
little fish about 7 in. in length, vast shoals of which arrive, filling 
every bay and harbour. The cod follow in their wake, feasting 
greedily upon the caplin, which supply the best bait. In six weeks 
the caplin disappear, and their place is taken by the squid about 
the 1st of August. These also supply a valuable bait, and are 
followed by the herring, which continue till the middle or end of 
October, when the cod fishery closes. The cod are taken by the 
hook-and-line, the seine, the cod-net or gill-net, the cod-trap and 
the bultow. Newfoundland exports cod to Brazil, Spain, Portugal, 
Italy, Great Britain, Greece, the West Indies and the United States. 
Brazil and Spain are the largest consumers. 

After the cod the seal fishery is of next importance. t The industry 
was begun about 1740, when the value of the seal oil exports was 
£1000. In 1 904-1905 sealskins and seal oil to the value of $370,261 
and $374,974 were exported, the price of a skin varying between 
$•90 to $1 -25. This shows a considerable falling off. The number of 
men employed is about 4000. Steamers were first used in 1863. 
They are from 350 to 500 tons burden, most of them carrying from 
200 to 300 men. The larger class can bring in from 30,000 to 40,000 
seals. In one instance 41,900 seals were brought in by a single 
steamer, the " Neptune, the weight being 874 tons and the value 
$103,750. In bad years the catch may not exceed 200,000 — in 
1893 it fell to 129,061. By law no steamer may leave port on a 
sealing voyage until the 12th of March, and no seal may be killed 
before the 14th of March. The young seals are born on the ice 
between the 15th and 25th of February, and mature so rapidly that 
they are in excellent condition in four weeks. 

Of more recent origin is the lobster fishery, their packing for 
export having begun in 1873. By 1888 the value of the lobster 
export had nsen to $385,077. In 1904-1905, while the catch had 
somewhat diminished as compared with 1895, the value had in- 
creased to $512,662. 

A vigorous effort has been made to establish the herring fishery 
on a scale commensurate with the abundance of the fish in these 
waters. In 1855 the total quantity exported was 32,042 barrels, 
with a value of $91,357. In 1905 there were 176,633 barrels, valued 
at $379,938. The principal seats of the herring fishery are Fortune 
Bay, Placentia, Bay St George and Bay of Islands, and the whole 
coast of Labrador, which furnishes the finest kind of herring. Besides 
the herring exported, at least $150,000 worth is sold to the French 
and Americans as bait. 

The export of preserved salmon, of which the island has an 
abundant supply, does not form a large or important item, seldom 
reaching in value $100,000. Salmon is taken for the most part in 
nets in the coves and bays and at the mouths of rivers. The season 
for taking it is brief, six or seven weeks, beginning at the end of May. 
The proper preservation of the salmon waters has been for generations 
neglected, and reckless practices bade fair wholly to exterminate the 
fish. In 1888, however, a fisheries commission was appointed, and 
river warders were charged with the stringent enforcement of the 
new laws. The best salmon fisheries are in Bona vista Bay, Gander 
and Exploits bays, and on the west coast. 

Mackerel formerly frequented the Newfoundland coasts, but 
disappeared about the middle of the 19th century; and few halibut 
or haddock are caught. Sea trout and brook trout, however, abound, 
and latterly Loch Leven and Californian rainbow trout have been 
introduced with success. 

The most extraordinary increase concerns the whaling industry. 
Before 1850 a very successful whale fishery was carried on, but it 
then suddenly ceased and has only recently been revived. The 
revival is due to the invention of a harpoon-gun which kills the 
whale effectually and with despatch. There are now fourteen whale 
factories in operation for the production of bone and oil. While in 
1895 the value of the oil reached only $7300 and the bone $1000, a 
decade later the values were $384,062 and $34,833 respectively; 
no fewer than 1275 whales being caught. A patent process manu- 
factures the carcases into a fine guano, and utilizes the by-products, 
thus adding $100,000 to the industry. . J 

On the whole the aggregate value of the Newfoundland fisheries 
for 1 906-1 907 was nearl/ £2,000,000 sterling, including the fish 
consumed in the colony. 

Agriculture, — Until recent years little attention has been paid 
to agriculture, the belief being current that the interior of the island 
was a desert. The reports of the geological survey dispelled this 
fiction, it being conclusively shown that out of the 28,000 scj. m. 
of dry land over one-sixth or 7000 sq. m. is available under suitable 
conditions for arable and for grazing purposes. The best land is 
situated in the Codroy valley, wjiich is rich in alluvial soil. That 
in the Bay St George district is very fertile, and in the Humber 
valley, Exploits valley and elsewhere many thousands of farmers 
could work to advantage. In 1874 only 36,339 acres were under 
cultivation. In 1901, 215,579 acres were occupied, of which 85,533 
acres were actually under cultivation, producing chiefly hay, oats, 
potatoes, turnips and cabbages. In the numbers of live stock there 
has been a notable increase, especially in sheep. Newfoundland 
seems especially adapted for a sheep-grazing country. 

Mining. — Not until a comparatively recent date was Newfound- 
land known to contain mineral deposits of great value. The first 
discovery of copper ore took place at a small fishing hamlet called 
Tilt Cove in 1857. Seven years later the mine was opened, and 
during the following fifteen years Tilt Cove mine yielded about 
50,000 tons of copper ore valued at $1,572,154, besides nickel worth 
$32,740. In 1875 another mine at Bett's Cove was opened. There 
are three principal mines, all in Notre Dame Bay, the copper exports 
in 1905 being 8r,49i tons, with a value of $448,400. The copper- 
bearing deposits are widely distributed. According to the geological 

	xdc. 16 

survey reports, copper-bearing rocks have a development of over 
5000 sq. m. throughout the island. Iron-mining, however, has far 
surpassed copper-mining, the chief centre being at Bell Island in 
Conception Bay. Hematite iron has been found at Exploits river, 
Fortune Harbour, New Bay and other parts in Notre Dame Bay. 
The iron exported in 1905 amounted to 635,350 tons with a value 
of $635,350. In 1895 the value of iron exports was nil. Of iron 
pyrites 68,970 tons were exported in 1905 valued at $410,514. 
Similarly in 1895 no slate was exported. It has since been worked 
at Trinity Bay, Bonavista Bay and Bay of Islands, the latter deposit 
being declared equal to the best Carnarvon slate. In 1005 14,750 
tons were shipped ^ The existence of coal in the island has been 
known since Captain Cook first reported its discovery in 1763, but 
until lately little has-been done to exploit it. The most important 
carboniferous region is at Grand Lake, St George's and the Codroy 
rejrion directly oppositethe Cape Breton coal-fields. 

Zinc has been found in many localities, as also antimony, silver 
and gold. Asbestos is frequently found, and mica of good size has 
been discovered in the Laurentian rocks in the Long Range Moun- 
tains and in Labrador. At the mouth of the Humber are large 
deposits of marble. The valuable non-metallic materials include 
talc, gypsum, graphite, lithographic stone and manganese. 

Shipping. — The total number of vessels sailing under Newfound- 
land registry on the 31st of December 1905 was 3049, with a net 
tonnage of 129,617 tons. Of these 66 were steamers. The statistics 
of foreign-going tonnage show a remarkable growth in trade. The 
bounty granted by the legislature has given a considerable impetus 
to local shipbuilding. Between 1900 and 1905 the average of 
vessels annually built in the colony was 105, with a total tonnage 
for the five years of 17,698. In 1904- 1905 the total value of exports 
was $10,669,342, of imports $10,279,293. For the period of seven 
years preceding the exports exceeded the imports by $7,174,676 or 
a balance of trade in favour of the colony of over one million 
dollars annually. 

Manufactures. — In 1874 there were only five saw-mills in the 
colony, producing 211 1 ft. of timber. The census returns of 1901 
showed 195^ saw-mills valued at $292,790, employing 2408 persons 
and producing 43,648 ft. of timber, 16,197 of shingle and 2020 of 
laths, of a total value of $480,555. # Paper-making from wood-pulp 
has been mentioned in connexion with Flora, above. Six tanneries 
in 1901 produced goods to the value of $98,200. There are boot and 
shoe, tobacco, ^ nail, soap, furniture and carriage manufactories. 
The rope-walk in St John s produces rope and line valued at $300,000 
annually. 

Government. — Newfoundland is a British colony, directly 
dependent on the crown. Representative government and a 
constitution were granted to it in 1832, and " responsible govern- 
ment "in 1855. Two legislative chambers were appointed — the 
house of assembly, to be elected, and the legislative council, to be 
nominated by the governor in council. This form of government 
has worked satisfactorily. It consists of a governor who is 
appointed by the crown, and whose term of office is usually about 
six years; an executive council chosen by the party commanding 
a majority in the house of assembly, and consisting of seven 
members; a legislative council or upper house, of fifteen members 
nominated by the governor in council and holding office for life; 
and a. house of assembly elected every four years by the votes 
of the people on a household suffrage basis. There are seventeen 
electoral districts sending thirty-six members to the house of 
assembly, all of whom are paid. The sessional allowances range 
from $194 to $291. The supreme court, instituted in 1826, is 
composed of a chief justice and two assistant judges. They 
are appointed by the crown, and hold their office for life. The 
jurisdiction of Newfoundland extends over the whole of the 
Atlantic coast of Labrador. 

Finance. — Duties levied on imports form the basis of the revenue. 
The tariff being intended for the cost of government and not for 
industrial protection, the duties are not as a rule differential, being 
partly ad valorem, partly specific. 

^ There is no direct taxation, and there are no city or town corpora- 
tions. The customs revenue grew from $840,936 in 1885 to 
$2,295,959 in 1905. The public debt increased from $2,149,597 
in 1885 to $22,043,338 in 1905, against which there was a sinking 
fund of $300,244. The debt of St John's municipal council, 
$1,187,221, on which full interest is paid to the government, must 
be credited to the gross public debt. In December 1905 a new loan 
of $636,903 was floated in England. Based on the value of the 
exports the earning capacity of the population increased from 
$29 per head in 1885 to $47 per head in 1905. The postal and 
telegraph revenue amounted in 1905 to $125,000, having more than 
doubled in a decade; The crown lands revenue, which in 1895 
was $5500, stood in 1905 at $41,357. With the United Kingdom, 
trade, which in 1888 was 38 % of the whole, steadily diminished in 
volume, until it was in 1905 only 22 % of the whole. Trade with 
America in this period showed an increase of 128-5% an ^ tnat wi tn 
Canada 76-1%. 

Roads and Railways. — Railways play a unique part in the 
modern history of the island. Not until 1825 was the first 
road made; it was 9 m. in length, from St John's 
Tbe to Portugal Cove. When representative government 
contract, was established in 1832 an annual grant was voted 
for roads and bridges, and of late years not less than 
$100,000 per annum has been expended on this head. There are 
now over 1000 m. of postal roads, and over 2000 of district 
roads. In 1880 after much agitation the legislature finally 
agreed to raise a loan of £1,000,000 for the construction of a 
railway from St John's to Hall's Bay, with branches to Brigus 
and Harbour Grace, the distance being estimated at 340 m. 
In November 1884 the line was completed for traffic as far as 
Harbour Grace. In the following year the construction of a 
line, 27 m. in length, from Whitboume to Placentia, the old 
French capital, was begun and finished in 1888. Shortly after- 
wards it was decided to resume the line northwards from St 
John's to Hall's Bay (which, owing to the failure of the con- 
tractors, had been discontinued) with a view ultimately to a 
transinsular railway. The tender of a well-known contractor, 
Mr R.G. Reid of Montreal, was accepted, and the work was begun 
in October 1890. But before the contractor had proceeded far 
with the Hall's Bay line a new survey was made and another 
route determined for the proposed transinsular railway, west- 
wards from the valley of the Exploits, which was regarded 
as much more favourable than the one originally contemplated. 
It traversed the Exploits and Humber valleys, passing through 
the most fertile territory in the island, to the Bay of Islands 
on the west coast; hence it skirted Bay St George and the 
Codroy valley and terminated at Port-aux-Basques, acommodious 
harbour 93 m. distant from Sydney, Cape Breton. The new 
route was chosen, and a contract signed on the 16th of May 
1893, whereby the contractor was to be paid $15,600 per mile 
in Newfoundland bonds, the whole line to be completed in three 
years. At the same time, in order to provide for the working 
of the line, it was agreed between the colonial government and 
Mr Reid that the latter should maintain and work it, as well as 
construct a system of telegraphs, for a period of ten years from 
the 1st of September 1893 at his own expense, in consideration 
of a " grant in fee simple to the contractor of 5000 acres of land 
for each one mile of mail line or branch railway to be operated." 
Should the line, therefore, be 500 m. in length the land grant 
would be 2,500,000 acres, to be situated on each side of the 
railway in alternate sections of 1 or 2 m. in length with 
the railway, and 8 m. in depth, the colony also retaining an 
equal amount of land with the contractor along the route. Much 
hostile criticism was subsequently directed towards this arrange- 
ment. In 1898 a new proposal was made by Mr Reid, under 
the terms of which he undertook to work all the railways in the 
island for a period of fifty years, free of cost to the government, 
provided that, at the termination of the said period, the railways 
should become his own property. He was also to receive a further 
concession of land to the extent of 2,500,000 acres on terms 
similar to those contained in the former contract. Mr Reid 
agreed to build and run seven steamers, one in each of the 
large bays, and one to ply in Labrador in summer, to provide 
an electric street railway for St John's, and also to pave a certain 
portion of the capital. The colony was to part with the telegraph 
system to the contractor, who was to acquire at a fixed price 
the government dry-dock at St John's. On the other hand, to 
complete the bargain, $1,000,000 in cash was to be paid by the 
contractor to the government within a year after the signing 
of the contract. This remarkable covenant, which was afterwards 
characterized by Mr Chamberlain, secretary of state for the 
colonies, as" a transaction " without parallel in the history of 
any country," was nevertheless ratified by the legislature, and 
submitted to the governor, Sir Herbert Murray, for his approval. 
The governor declined to append his signature to the instrument, 
but upon its being referred to the imperial secretary of state, 
it was decided that the arrangement was one relating exclusively 

	Discovery, 

to the colony, and this being the case, that it would be H an 
unwarrantable interference with the rights of a self-governing 
colony " to disallow the measure. The Reid contract was 
therefore signed by Sir Herbert Murray before relinquishing 
his post early in 1898. Meanwhile considerable feeling had 
been manifested in the colony; numerous public meetings in 
support of the governor's action were held ; and several 
petitions were despatched to England; but it was not until 
the spring of 1900 that Sir James Winter and his colleagues 
were forced to resign on account of the opposition which had 
been engendered. The general election brought a Liberal, Mr 
(afterwards Sir) Robert Bond, into power; and he had hardly 
assumed office when the contractor approached the ministry 
with, further proposals to convert his property into a limited' 
liability company with a capital of £5,000,000 sterling, for which 
proceeding the consent of the legislature was necessary, under 
the terms of 1898. Mr Bond refused unless a modification of 
the contract was agreed to. The modifications demanded 
were — that the telegraphs should revert at once to the govern- 
ment; that the land grants, which included a large amount 
of private property, should be readjusted so as to conserve 
the rights of those whose holdings had been confiscated; also, 
that it should be optional for the colony to take over the railways 
at the end of fifty years by paying back the sum of $1,000,000 
with interest, the amount paid by Mr Reid to the colony; and 
a sum to be arrived at by arbitration for all improvements 
that may have been made on the property within the fifty 
years. After considerable dispute these terms were substantially 
agreed to, and the conversion into a company took place. 

History. — Newfoundland, commonly termed the " senior 
colony " of Great Britain, antedates in discovery (though not 
in continuous settlement) any other British over-sea 
dominion. John Cabot, sailing from Bristol in 1497, 
appears to have made landfall at Bonavista and claimed 
the whole country for Henry VII. Three years later Gaspar 
Corte-Real, ranging the North American coasts, discovered 
and named Conception Bay and Portugal Cove, and was appointed 
Portuguese governor of Terra Nova. The long series of annual 
trans-Atlantic expeditions followed upon the voyages of Cabot 
and Corte-Real, and their reports in England, Portugal and 
France concerning the multitude of fish in Newfoundland. For 
a long time it was supposed that the English fishermen did not 
avail themselves to any extent of these advantages until the 
middle of the 16th century, but this is now shown to be erroneous. 
Mr Prowse states that the trade during the first half of the century 
was both " extensive and lucrative." In 1527 the little Devon- 
shire fishing ships were unable to carry home their large catch, 
so " sack ships " (large merchant vessels) were employed 
to carry the salt cod to Spain and Portugal. An act of 1541 
classes the Newfoundland trade with the Irish, Shetland and 
Iceland fisheries. Hakluyt, writing in 1578, mentions that the 
number of vessels employed in the fishery was 400, of which 
only one-quarter were English, the rest being French and Spanish 
Basque. But in the same year, according to Anthony Parkhurst, 
" the English are commonly lords of the harbours where they 
fish and use all help in fishing if need require." Shortly there- 
after England awoke to the importance of Cabot's great discovery, 
and an attempt was made to plant a colony on the shores of 
the island. Sir Humphry Gilbert, provided with 
letters patent from Queen Elizabeth, landed in St E * / r ^ r / . 
John's in August 1583, and formally took possession ' Jogt 
of the country in the queen's name. The first attempt 
at colonizing was frustrated by the loss of Gilbert soon after- 
wards at sea. In 1610 James I. granted a patent to John Guy, 
an enterprising Bristol merchant, for a " plantation " in New- 
foundland; but no marked success attended his efforts to found 
settlements. In 161 5 Captain Richard Whitboume of Exmouth 
in Devonshire was despatched to Newfoundland by the British 
admiralty to establish order and correct abuses which had 
grown up among the fishermen. On his return in 1622 he wrote 
a " Discourse and Discovery of Newfoundland Trade " which 
King James, by an order in council, caused to be distributed 
among the parishes of the kingdom " for the encouragement of 
adventures unto plantation there." A year after the departure 
of Whitbourne, Sir George Calvert, afterwards the first Lord 
Baltimore, obtained a patent conveying to him the lordship 
of the whole southern peninsula of Newfoundland, and the 
right of fishing in the surrounding waters. He planted a colony 
at Ferryland, 40 m. north of Cape Race, where he built a hand- 
some mansion and resided with his family for many years. 
The French so harassed his settlement by incessant attacks 
that he at length abandoned it. 

In 1650, or about a century and a half after its discovery, 
Newfoundland contained only 350 families, or less than 2000 

individuals, distributed in fifteen small settlements, 
polky? chiefly along the eastern shore. These constituted 

the resident population; but in addition there was a 
floating population of several thousands who frequented the 
shores during the summer for the sake of the fisheries, which 
had now attained very large dimensions. So early as 1626, 150 
vessels were annually despatched from Devonshire alone; and 
the shipowners and traders residing in the west of England 
sent out their ships and fishing crews early in summer to prose- 
cute these lucrative fisheries. The fish caught were salted and 
dried on the shore; and on the approach of winter the fishermen 
re-embarked for England, carrying with them the products of 
their labour. Hence it became the interest of these traders and 
shipowners to discourage the settlement of the country, in order 
to retain the exclusive use of the harbours and fishing coves for 
their servants, and also a monopoly of the fisheries. They were 
able to enlist the British government of the day in their project, 
and stringent laws were passed prohibiting settlement within 
6 m. of the shore, forbidding fishermen to remain behind at the 
close of the fishing season, and rendering it illegal to build or 
repair a house without a special licence. The object of this 
short-sighted policy, which was persisted in for more than a 
century, was to preserve the island as a fishing station and the 
fisheries as nurseries for British seamen. 

There was, however, another element which retarded the 
prosperity of the country. The French had early realized the 
immense value of the fisheries, and strove long and 
Utrecht desperately to obtain possession of the island. Their 
constant attacks and encroachments harassed the few 
settlers, and rendered life and property insecure during the long 
wars between England and France. When at length, in 1713, 
the treaty of Utrecht ended hostilities, it did not deliver New- 
foundland from the grasp of France, as it yielded to her the 
right of catching and drying fish on the western and northern 
sides of the island. Though no territorial rights were conferred 
on the French, and the sovereignty was secured to England, the 
practical effect was to exclude the inhabitants from the fairest 
half of the island. 

In spite of the restrictive regulations, the number of the 
resident population continued to increase. The sturdy settlers 
clung to the soil, and combated the " adventurers " 
governor. as the merchants were called, and after a lengthened 
conflict obtained freedom of settlement and relief from 
oppression. But the contest was severe and prolonged. The 
merchant-adventurers strenuously opposed the appointment of 
a governor; but at length, in 1728, the British government 
appointed Captain Henry Osborne first governor of Newfound- 
land, with a commission to establish a form of civil government. 
This constituted a new era in the liistory of the colony. In 
1763 the fixed inhabitants had increased to 8000, while 5000 
more were summer residents who returned home each winter. 
In 1763 the coast of Labrador, from Hudson's Strait to the river 
St John opposite the west end of the island of Anticosti, was 
attached to the governorship of Newfoundland. The population 
in 1785 had increased to 10,000. During the wars between 
England and France which followed the French Revolution, 
Newfoundland attained great prosperity, as all competitors in 
the fisheries were swept from the seas, and the markets of 
Europe were exclusively in the hands of the merchants of the 
country. The value of fish trebled, wages rose to a high figure. 
and in 1814 no less than 7000 emigrants arrived. The population 
now numbered 80,000. In 1832 representative government was 
granted to the colony, and provision was made for education. 
In 1846 a terrible fire destroyed three-fourths of St John's and 
with it an enormous amount of property; but the city rose from 
its ashes improved and beautified. In 1855 the system of 
responsible government was inaugurated. In 1858 the first 
Atlantic cable was landed at Bull Arm, Trinity Bay. 

Unproductive fisheries, causing a widespread destitution 
among the working classes, marked the first eight years of the 
decade between i860 and 1870. A system of able- 
bodied pauper relief was initiated to meet the neces- a^tory. 
sities of the case but was attended with the usual 
demoralizing results. The necessity of extending the cultivation 
of the soil in order to meet the wants of the growing population 
was felt more and more as the pressure arising from the failure 
of the fisheries showed their precarious nature more sensibly. 
In 1864 copper ore was discovered in the north, and mining 
operations were successfully initiated. In 1869 a series of 
successful fisheries began which enabled the government to 
terminate the injurious system of able-bodied pauper relief. 
In 1871 the revenue rose to $831,160. In 1873 direct steam 
communication with England and America was established. 

By the treaty of Utrecht of 17 13 a right was reserved to 
French subjects to catch fish and to dry them on that part of 
Newfoundland which stretches from Cape Bonavista 
to the northern part of the island and from thence claims. 
coming down by the western side reaches as far as 
Pt. Riche. By the treaty of Versailles of 1783 France renounced 
the fishery from Bonavista to Cape St John on the east coast, 
receiving in return' extended rights upon the west coast as far as 
Cape Ray. Neither treaty purported to grant exclusive right, 
but there was annexed to the treaty of Versailles a declaration 
to the effect that " His Britannic Majesty will take the most 
positive measures for preventing his subjects from interrupting 
in any manner by their competition the fishery of the French 
during the temporary exercise of it which is granted to them 
upon the coasts of the island of Newfoundland, and he will 
for this purpose cause the fixed settlements which shall be 
formed there to be removed." Upon this declaration the French 
founded a claim to exclusive fishing rights within the limits 
named. A convention was entered into with a view to defining 
these rights in 1854, but it remained inoperative, the consent of 
the Newfoundland legislature, to which it was made subject, 
having been refused. Meanwhile the French government granted 
a bounty to the French fishermen which enabled them to under- 
sell the colonists. , 

In 1884 a convention which had been arranged between the 
British and French governments was submitted to the colonial 
administration by its promoters Sir Clare Ford and 
Mr E. B. Pennell, C.M.G., but without commanding 
the support of the Newfoundland government. In the 
year following, on a change of ministry in the colony, the Ford- 
Pennell convention was again offered to the Newfoundland 
legislature in a slightly amended form, but the joint committee 
of the colonial house of assembly and the council absolutely 
refused to ratify the arrangement unless the French government 
would consent either to annul or to amend the system of bounties 
paid upon French-caught fish in Newfoundland waters. At the 
same time, to counteract the effect of these bounties, which 
pressed very hardly upon the British competition, a Bait Act 
was framed and carried in 1886, empowering the executive to 
prohibit the capture in Newfoundland waters for exportation or 
sale of bait fishes, except under special licence to be issued by 
the colonial government. The consequence of this measure, 
were its provisions properly enforced, would be to place an 
embargo upon the local supply of bait requisite to the French 
fishermen — the so-called " metropolitan fleet " — on the Grand 
Banks. Upon being apprised of this enactment, the French 
government immediately demanded that Great Britain should 
deny its sanction to this Newfoundland Bait Act, and pressed 
their objections with such persistence as to induce Lord Salisbury 

	Bait Act. 

to disallow the measure. Nevertheless, the despatch of the 
governor, Sir William des Voeux, to the colonial secretary, 
Sir H. Holland, was so entirely in favour of the principle of the 
bill that the Newfoundland authorities became imbued with a 
fixed determination to urge forward the measure for imperial 
acceptance. In 1887, therefore, a delegation, consisting of Sir 
Robert Thorburn, the premier, and Sir Ambrose Shea, visited 
England at a moment most propitious for obtaining the sym- 
pathy and support of the imperial government and the press 
and people of the mother country, it being the jubilee year of 
Queen Victoria's accession to the throne. A conference of 
colonial premiers was one of the notable events distinguishing 
that happy period, and the subject was argued before the 
conference at considerable length. The claim set up by the 
senior colony " to control and legislate for her own fisheries " 
met with general approval, the single dissentient being the 
representative of Canada, who feared that Canadian fishermen 
would suffer under the bill. When an assurance was tendered 
that Canada's fishermen would be placed upon the same footing 
with those of Newfoundland, the British government somewhat 
reluctantly sanctioned the Bait Act. The stipulation was made, 
however, that it should not be enforced until the spring following 
(1888). In the meantime the chagrin of the French Foreign Office 
at the failure of the Ford-Pennell negotiations, and the hostile 
attitude taken up by the Newfoundlanders in what they deemed 
to be the conservation of their interests, induced M. de Freycinet 
to devise retaliatory measures. Instructions were issued " to 
seize and confiscate all instruments of fishing belonging to 
foreigners resident or otherwise, who shall fish on that part of 
the coast which is reserved to our use." Lord Rosebery, then 
foreign secretary, protested to the French ambassador against 
the spirit of these instructions, which he insisted were in direct 
contravention of the treaty, inasmuch as they ignored the 
concurrent as well as those sovereign rights of Great Britain 
which France solemnly undertook by the treaties never to 
question or dispute. Nor were other opportunities soon wanting 
to the French to retort severely upon the Newfoundland 
authorities for their passage of the Bait Act, as well as to repair 
in large measure the injury which that act promised to inflict 
upon the French industry. About r874 a Nova Scotian named 
Rumkey had established the first factory for the canning of 
lobsters on the west coast. This concern proved profitable, and 
others sprang up, until, at the close of the season of 1887, Captain 
Campbell, R.N., reported that twenty-six factories were at work, 
employing about 1100 hands. It was at that time understood 
that this was an industry which, by the very nature of the 
process and the permanent shore structure it involved, the 
French were disqualified from pursuing. . So clearly was this 
recognized that in 1886, when Commander Browne of H.M.S. 
" Mallard " reported the existence of a French lobster factory at 
Port-aux-Choix, a substantially-built structure, roofed with 
corrugated iron, the French authorities conceded that the 
establishment was in violation of the treaties, and issued orders 
for its removal. But this conciliatory policy was of brief dura- 
tion. The year of the Bait Act's first successful application was 
marked by the stoppage, by order of the French government, 
of Messrs Murphy and Andrew's lobster factory, and by their 
contention that the lobster-canning industry formed a part 
of the privileges conceded under the treaties to the French, 
whose participation by the British fishermen would be forcibly 
resisted. 

An exchange of notes took place between Lord Salisbury 
and M. Waddington, the French ambassador, in which the latter 
expressed an opinion which evoked a spirited protest on the 
part of the British Foreign Office. " France," it was then 
declared, " preserved the exclusive right of fishing she always 
possessed. This right of France to the coast of Newfoundland 
reserved to her fishermen is only a part of her ancient sovereignty 
over the island which she retained in ceding the soil to England, 
and which she has never weakened or alienated." This claim 
of the French to an exclusive fishery was held to be wholly 
untenable, and their classification of the lobster catching and 
canning industry as amongst the " fishing " privileges granted 
them by the treaty was denounced as contrary to both letter 
and spirit of that instrument. Notwithstanding this, the French 
agents on the treaty shore clamoured for the removal of several 
of the British factories, which (it was declared) interfered with 
the exclusive fishing rights of the French. The French govern- 
ment also voted (r888) a special bounty for the establishment 
of lobster factories by their subjects on the treaty coast. Pending 
a settlement, the British foreign office deemed it expedient, 
in order not to give offence to France, to invest the French 
claims with a semblance of right by issuing instructions to British 
naval officers on the North American station to continue to 
interpret and enforce the treaties with regard to the Newfound- 
land lobster-canning industry on the same terms as they had 
done hitherto with regard to the cod-fishery. Acting under a 
statute passed in the reign of George III., empowering British 
naval officers to interpret and enforce the treaties, Sir Baldwin 
Walker and others proceeded to destroy or remove a number 
of British factories at the request of the French agents. In 
1890 the unexpected discovery was made that the act empower- 
ing British naval officers to enforce the provisions of the treaties 
with France had expired in 1832 and had never been renewed* 
Consequently all the proceedings of which the colonists had 
been the victims were illegal. One of them, Mr James Baird, 
immediately took proceedings against Sir Baldwin Walker 
in the supreme court, which decided in his favour, mulcting 
the admiral in £1000. 

On an appeal to the privy council the decision was upheld. 
But before this incident had taken place, the controversy 
between London and Paris culminated in the modus 
vivendi of 1800, by which the lobster factories, both M i° du t 9 
British and French, which were in existence on the i890m 
1 st of July 1889, were to continue for the present. 
Instantly the colony took alarm, and a deputation consisting 
of the island's leading men was sent to England to protest against 
both the principle and practice of such an arrangement. On 
their return they learnt that it was the intention of the imperial 
government to re-enact verbatim et literatim the act for the 
enforcement of the treaties which had expired fifty-nine years 
previously. To prevent such an occurrence, delegates from 
both parties in Newfoundland visited London in April 1891, 
and, appearing at the bar of the House of Lords, promised that 
if the measure which was then on the eve of being introduced 
into that body were withdrawn, a temporary measure would 
be passed by the Newfoundland legislature which would answer 
the same purpose of enabling Great Britain to carry out her 
treaty obligations with France. The hope then generally 
entertained was that the whole question of French rights in the 
colony would soon be the subject of definite negotiations looking 
to their total extinguishment. That hope was, however, not 
speedily realized. For a number of years the Modus Vivendi 
Act was annually passed by the legislature, each year under 
protest, the conviction gaining strength in the colony that the 
imperial government was averse from renewing negotiations 
with France. 

In 1898 the secretary of state, Mr Chamberlain, yielding to 
the urgent request of the senior colony, despatched a commission 
consisting of Sir J. Bramston and Sir James Erskine, with Lord 
Westmeath as secretary, on a tour of investigation along the 
treaty shore; and the report which the royal commissioners 
made (though not published) touched all points of the unhappy 
dispute. Again, in 1001, on a suggestion put forward by the 
colony, Mr Chamberlain summoned Sir Robert Bond, the 
Newfoundland premier, and a colleague, Sir E. P. Morris, to 
London, for a new conference on the French shore question, 
in which Lord Lansdowne, the foreign secretary, participated. 
Nothing coming of this, the Modus Vivendi Act continued to 
be passed annually. In roor a fresh attempt was made to effect 
a settlement, but the negotiations were again unsuccessful, as 
the colony declined to make concessions in regard to the sale 
of bait unless the French system of bounties on the sale of fish 
by their citizens were abandoned or at least modified in important 
particulars. Later in the same year negotiations were begun 
between the British and French governments for a general 
treaty, in which all outstanding matters of dispute between 
the two countries should be for ever settled. As regards New- 
foundland, the discussion of the French fishery question on the 
basis of arrangement in the matter of bait and bounties having 
proved unavailing, it was proposed not to persist further in it, 
but to put before the French government an arrangement which 
would terminate the rights of French fishermen to land and dry 
their fish on the shores of the island, but leave a concurrent 
right of fishery, the regulation and policing of which would be 
in the manner provided in the North Sea Fishery Convention 
of 1881 and the convention of 1887. 

On the 8th of April 1904 the Lansdowne-Cambon Convention 
was signed, which effected a final settlement of the French shore 
question. For the total abandonment of the French 
Convert- rights compensation was clearly not only due to the 
1904* individuals actually engaged in the fishing industry, 
but to the French nation at large. Territorial conces- 
sions were therefore made consisting of a modification of the 
Anglo-French boundary line in the Niger and Lake Chad district, 
and a re-arrangement of the Gambia-Senegambia frontier, giving 
Yarbatenda to Senegambia. The Los Islands opposite Konakry 
Island were likewise ceded to France. Provision was made for 
the reciprocal recognition, on the convention coming into force, 
of a British consul at St Pierre and a French consul at St John's. 
Claims for indemnity were duly submitted to an arbitral tribunal, 
composed of an officer of each nation; and at length what is 
known as the Lyttelton Award, was made as follows: — 

	General award for French rights . . . $255,750 
	Loss of occupation 226,813 
	Effects left by the French on treaty coast . . 28,936 

So far as concerned the French, an end was thus put to a 
situation on the treaty shore, which for nearly two hundred 
years had given rise to difficulties and anxieties. 

Scarcely, however, had a year elapsed from the signing of the 
convention, when another international disagreement connected 
with the fisheries assumed grave importance. There 
iiTbtaT 1 * had long been intense dissatisfaction in the colony 
rights over the attitude of the American government and 
American fishermen towards the colony. The action 
of the American Senate in rejecting the Bond-Hay treaty negoti- 
ated in 1902 stirred the colonial government to retaliatory 
measures. By virtue of the treaty of 181 8 American fishermen 
enjoyed the following rights: (1) to take fish of every kind 
on that part of the southern coast of Newfoundland which 
extends from Cape Ray to Ramea Islands; (2) to take fish of 
every kind on the western and northern coasts of Newfoundland 
from the said Cape Ray to the Quirpon Islands; and (3) to take 
fish of every kind on the coasts, bays, harbours and creeks 
from Mount Joly to the southern coast of Labrador, to and through 
the straits of Belle Isle, and thence northward indefinitely along 
the coast. Subject to these limitations American fishermen 
have a right in common with British fishermen to prosecute 
their industry within those areas. t 

The foregoing embraces the whole of their fishing privileges. 
Every other right that they ever possessed they renounced under 
the treaty in the following language: " The United States hereby 
renounce for ever any liberty heretofore enjoyed or claimed 
by the inhabitants thereof, to take, dry or cure fish on or 
within three marine miles of any of the coasts, bays, creeks 
or harbours of His Britannic Majesty's dominions in America 
not included in the above limits." This renunciation 
contained but one qualification:. " that American fishermen 
shall be permitted to enter such bays or harbours for the 
purpose of shelter and of repairing damages therein, of purchas- 
ing wood, and of obtaining water and for no other purpose 
whatever." 

Under the Newfoundland Foreign Fishing Vessels Act of 1893 
the governor in council was authorized to issue licences to 
foreign fishing vessels, enabling them to enter any port on the 
coasts of the island to purchase bait, ice, supplies and outfits 
for the fishery, and to ship crews. In 1905 this act 
was repealed and another passed by the colonial legisla- ^Jj^j/ 
ture imposing certain restrictions on American vessels, woe. 
and a further more stringent act in 1906, preventing 
Newfoundlanders from joining American vessels. These acts 
were resented by the American government, which, through 
Mr Secretary Root, called upon the British government to 
disallow such interferences on the part of the Newfoundland 
legislature. Lord Elgin's reply was to suggest a modus vivendi 
pending further discussion of the questions at issue. In spite of 
the colony's energetic protest, a modus vivendi was agreed to in 
October 1906, whereby the Foreign Fishing Vessels Act of 1906 
was held in abeyance, and the act of 1905 was held not to apply 
to American fishing vessels, and light dues were waived, while 
on the other hand American vessels were to report at the custom 
house on entry for clearance, and their fishermen were to comply 
with colonial fishery regulations. As regards Sunday fishing by 
the Americans, which was an important colonial grievance, the 
American government consented to waive it, if the use of purse 
seines by American fishermen were allowed. Lord Elgin's action 
was considered to be an interference with the internal affairs of 
the colony and great public indignation was aroused. Retaliatory 
measures were resolved upon, Newfoundland fishermen being 
declared liable to fine and imprisonment for selling bait to the" 
Americans or for joining American vessels. The legislature voted 
an address to the imperial government, protesting against the 
modus vivendi, and this was carried to England in 1907 by 
Sir Robert Bond, the premier of the colony, but without avail. 
The matter was referred to the Hague tribunal for arbitration, 
and pending this the modus vivendi (agreed to in 1908) continued 
in force. The tribunal gave its award in September 1910, the 
two main points at issue being decided as follows: (a) Great 
Britain had the right to make regulations as to the fisheries 
without the consent of the United States, subject to the pro- 
visions of the treaty of 1818. (b) The " three-mile limit " in 
bays (subject to special judgment in individual cases) was to 
be taken from a line across the bay at the point, nearest the 
entrance, where a width of ten miles is not exceeded. Among 
other provisions it was decided that American vessels might 
employ foreign hands (but these received no benefit under the 
treaty); also that they might be required to report to customs 
houses if facilities to do so existed. « 

Commerce received a shock, but derived a salutary lesson from 
bank failures which occurred in December 1894. The Union and 
Commercial banks suspended payment, followed by the suspension 
of the savings bank, a government institution. This at once lowered 
the credit of the colony abroad, and caused the utmost misfortune 
amongst all classes. There is little doubt but that a principal cause 
of the disaster was the vicious and dangerous system of credit which 
had been followed by the merchants in their dealings with the 
" planters " and commission merchants. The insolvent institutions 
were speedily replaced by branches of three prominent Canadian 
banks, and a loan of $1,000,000 procured in London by Mr Bond 
soon after the debacle served to tide the senior colony over its 
financial difficulties. A new era of prosperity has since set in. 

In politics, apart from the matters already alluded to, there 
occurred in 1893 the filing of petitions under the Corrupt Practices 
Act to unseat Sir William Whiteway and his colleagues, who had 
been successful atthe general election of that year. The charges 
created no little interest in England, and the new government 
was subjected to much unfair criticism, arising largely from a mis- 
apprehension of the political and administrative conditions in 
tne^ colony. They were examined in detail by the supreme court, 
which finally pronounced them unsustained, and the Whiteway 
government resumed office after a brief period of abdication. On 
the whole, it may be said that Newfoundland has passed the critical 
stage in her history. Between 1863 and 1900 it has been estimated 
that $12,000,000 worth of copper ore has been exported, and since 
1898, whena discovery of iron ore made at Bell Island, Conception 
Bay, led to important results, the belief in the island's mineral resour- 
ces, long entertained by geologists, received practical corroboration. 

In 1900 the British admiralty, acting upon the repeated suggestions 
of Sir Charles Dilke > and others interested in the manning of the 
navy, decided to initiate a branch of the imperial naval reserve in 
the colony. In 1901 a difficulty arose as to paying the men, 
owing to the lack of any provision for that purpose in the Imperial 
Reserves Act under which they were enlisted. The colony was asked 
to bear the cost; its refusal was followed (1902) by the enactment of 
special legislation rendering the enrolment and maintenance of the 
reserves in Newfoundland a special imperial undertaking. 
Projects Several efforts had been and continued to be made to 
for union j nc | uce Newfoundland to confederate with the Dominion 
wlth of Canada, but the project never met with any degree of 

Canada. favour with the electorate. Much of the disfavour 
with which confederation was regarded in the colony was said to 
be due to Sir John Macdonald's opposition on behalf of Canada 
to the Bond-Blaine commercial treaty, which was negotiated 
between an emissary from the government of Newfoundland and 
Mr Blaine, then secretary of state of the United States of America, 
in 1890, but was subsequently disallowed at his request by the 
imperial government. It is, however, probable that^ the treaty 
would never have received the sanction of the American Senate. 
After the insolvency of the colony in 1894-1895, a delegation was 
sent to Ottawa to ascertain if it were possible to arrange terms of 
confederation; but Sir Mackenzie BowelFs government objected 
to the assumption by the Dominion of the entire amount of New- 
foundland's debt ($16,000,000), and the negotiations were abandoned. 

Bibliography. — C. Pedley, History of Newfoundland (London, 
1863); J. Hatton and M. Harvey, Newfoundland: its History and 
Present Condition (London, 1883); M. Harvey, Newfoundland, 
England's Oldest Colony (London, 1897); Newfoundland in j8q7 
(London, 1897); Newfoundland in iqoo (London, 1900); D. W. 
Prowse, History of Newfoundland (2nd ed., London, 1897); New- 
foundland Guide-book (London, 1905); F. E. Smith, The Story of. 
Newfoundland (London, 1901); B. Willson, The Truth about New- 
foundland; the Tenth Island (2nd ed., London, 1901); A. Bellet, 
La Grande Piche de la morue & la Terre-Neuve (Paris, 1902); J. G. 
Miilais, Newfoundland and its Untrodden Ways (London, 1908); 
Colonial and Foreign Office Reports. (B. W.*) 


NEW GLARUS, a town and a village of Green county, Wis- 
consin, U.S.A., about 22 m. S.W. of Madison, on the Little Sugar 
river, a branch of the Rock river. Pop. of the town (1890) 
1180; (1900) 1245; (1905) 685; (1910) 627; of the village, 
which was separated from the town in 1901 (1905) 665; (1910) 
708. New Glarus is served by a branch of the Chicago, Mil- 
waukee & St Paul railway. It has agricultural and dairying 
industries, but little or no manufacturing interests. It had its 
origin in a colonizing experiment made by the canton of Glarus, 
Switzerland in 1845. Agents sent by the canton chose the site' 
of New Glarus largely because the rocky slopes of the valley 
suggested their Alpine home. The advance party then set about 
constructing houses and sent for the colonists; and some two 
hundred men, women and children started from Glarus in April 
1845 under two leaders chosen by popular vote; misreading 
their directions the party got by mistake to St Louis, whence 
they proceeded up the Mississippi to Galena and thence overland 
to their new home. To all intents and purposes they were an 
independent people. They expected to be and were self- 
sustaining, and for a generation or more retained their exclusive- 
ness to a remarkable degree. They brought with them a " form 
of government " drawn up by the Cantonal Council of Glarus and 
providing in great detail for a system of schools, for what was 
practically a state church (Reformed Lutheran) supported by 
tithes, for a system of poor relief, for a system of courts, and for 
a set of town officers elected on a limited property franchise. 
This " form " was to be amended and new laws were to be added, 
as circumstances should require, in a town-meeting in which 
the essential features of the referendum were observed. The 
original plan provided also for an equitable distribution of land 
so as to give to each head of a family pasture, timber and farm 
lands. With such adjustments as were found necessary for co- 
ordination with the town and county governments of Wisconsin, 
it remains practically the same to this day. The village and 
town still have an Old t World aspect, and the architecture, 
customs, style of dress and language of the pioneers still persist 
to a great degree. A famous organization is the New Glarus 
William Tell Club of sharpshooters. The village owns its water- 
works and its electric lighting plant. 


NEW GLASGOW, a manufacturing and mining town of Pictou 
county, Nova Scotia, Canada, on the East river, near its entrance 
into Pictou Harbour, and the Intercolonial railway, 104 m. N.E. 
of Halifax. Pop. (1901) 4447. Extensive coal mines are in 
the vicinity, and there are manufactures of iron and steel, mill 
machinery, door and sash factories, &c, as well as several ship- 
building yards. 


NEW GRANADA (Span. Nueva Granada), the title under 
Spanish colonial administration of that part of South America 
now known as the republic of Colombia, which at one time was 
extended to include Venezuela and Ecuador. It also was for 
a time the title of the united territories of Panama and Colombia 
under republican auspices. The Bogota plateau, then inhabited 
by a partly civilized Indian nation known to the Spaniards as 
Chibchas, or Muyscas (the second name seems to have been 
applied to them through a misunderstanding, the word meaning 
" men "), was invaded from the Caribbean coast and conquered 
in 1537 by Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada, who, in honour of his 
native province, called it the " Nuevo Reino de Granada. " 
The title at first applied only to the plateau regions of Colombia, 
as the coast provinces had been previously occupied and named. 
In 1550 an audiencia real under the viceroyalty of Peru was 
established at Santa Fe (Bogota), but in 1564 this isolated group 
of Spanish settlements was transformed into a presidency. In 
1 7 18, owing to the unmanageable size of the viceroyalty of 
Peru, it was divided and a new viceroyalty was created from 
the various provinces lying in the north-western angle of the 
continent, extending from Tumbez northward to the northern 
limits of Panama, and eastward to the Orinoco, to which 
the name of Nueva Granada was given. The first viceroy was 
Pedroza y Guerrero, but his successor, Jorge Villalonga, resumed 
the title of president, and it was not until 1739 that the title 
of viceroy was definitely established. The new viceroyalty 
included the provinces of Tierra Firma (now the republic of 
Panama); Maracaibo, Caracas, Cumana and Guyana (now 
included in Venezuela); Cartagena, Santa Marta, Rio Hacha, 
Antioquia, Pamplona, Socorro, Tunja, Santa Fe, Neiva, Mari- 
quita, Popayan and Pasto (now included in Colombia); and 
Quito, Cuenca and Guayaquil (now included in Ecuador). In 
1777 the provinces of Maracaibo, Caracas, Cumana and Guyana 
were detached from the viceroyalty to form the captaincy- 
general of Caracas; otherwise it remained as above until the 
termination of Spanish rule in South America. 

For the republic of Colombia (1819-1830), the republic of New 
Granada (1831-1861), the United States of Colombia (1861-1886), 
and the republic of Colombia (1886 to date), see Colombia. 


NEW GUINEA, the largest island (excluding Australia) in the 
world, lying between the equator and 12 S. and 130 50' and 
151 30' E., separated from Australia by Torres Strait and 
having the Arafura Sea on the south-west. It is divided politic- 
ally between Britain (south-east), Germany (north-east) and 
Holland (west), the Dutch territory occupying about 48-6% of 
the whole area, the German 28-3% and the British Territory 
of Papua 23-1%. The total area is estimated to be 312,329 
sq. m. 

New Guinea was probably in Miocene times, if not later, united 
to the northern part of Queensland. The deeply indented shore 
of the Gulf of Papua forms the boundary of the subsided area 
between the two countries, and from it the land stretches out 
for 200 to 300 m. north and west on both sides of the Fly river 
in vast plains, little elevated above sea-level. From Cape Buru 
westwards precipitous limestone cliffs, several hundred feet high, 
face the sea and rise into forest-clad mountains behind. The 
northern extremity of New Guinea is all but severed. from the 
mainland by the deep MacCluer Inlet, running eastwards towards 
Geclvink Bay which deeply indents the northern coast. South- 
wards from Geelvink Bay the north-east coast is more regular 
than the south-western. Off its coast-line, on the parallel of 
6° S., lies the vast Bismarck Archipelago, of which New Pomerania 
(Neu Pommern) is the most important member; and, on the 
parallel of io°, the d'Entrecasteaux Islands, with the Marshall 
Bennett group to their north-east; while stretching out from the 
south-east promontory of the mainland is the Louisiade Archi- 
pelago. The Great Barrier Reef of Australia can be traced more 
or less continuously round the Gulf of Papua and along the 
south-east coast to the extremity of the Louisiades. In a general 
way it may be said that on the west coast of New Guinea, from 
Cape Buru to the Louisiades, the sea is shallow, while on its 
steeper eastern side the water close in-shore is often too deep 

	NEW GUINEA 
	487 
	'44 
	«5^ 
	MncCtutri 
	£ajr 
	mmtga(V£cMqu 
	Aflttowt. 
	Onrmrl.* 
	D U T C H 
	*i*. 
	E W 
	W* 
	4NEA 
	155^ 
	Frtd*rick 
	Hetidritkf 
	Betfl 
	jr«t»cnpirK «^i *«»«« 
	Admiralty Islands
	SF—fte* 
	L&l 
	H 
	arch 
	<* 
	Ne 
	Archipelago 
	,tll_|_ ..m Mecfften 
	KS^ 
	«%&•• 
	-£&. 
	Abemrrit % * 
	inuufen 
	: s&& 
	NEW GUINEA 
	Scale, 1:15,000,000 
	EnghsJ. MUcs 
	o 50 too igo aoo ay> 300 
	^i**^ev 
	t< 
	ass 
	OH gulf • * %. 
	14 **** % 
	"» QOntfif*. 
	[Gulf 0/. 
	oc«** Torres* Strait J* -^i* 
	'^f|r,u^- *- 
	^«r-'"-> 
	•^0 
	&*&%%£ 
	V*" 
	*>* 
	** 3 
	A*3'° 
	B 
	,36" 
	33 Longitude East 144. of Greenwich g 

for safe anchorage. The islands on the southern margin of the 
Louisiade Archipelago are raised coral reefs, but the majority are 
mountainous, rarely, however, exceeding 3000 ft.; all of them 
are richly forested, but of little agricultural value. The volcanic 
d'Entrecasteaux Islands are mostly larger, more elevated (the 
highest being 8000 ft.), and stand in deeper water than the 
Louisiade group. To the east of Kiriwina (Trobriand) lies a 
small group of uniquely formed islets, each of which is com- 
pletely surrounded by a steep forest-clad marginal rampart of 
coral 300 to 400 ft. high, concealing a depressed inhabited 
central plateau. 

Starting in the southern extremity of New Guinea from an 
abrupt face some 3000 ft. high, and traversing its centre nearly 
parallel to both coasts, run high ranges of mountains, which, if 
not continuous, merge into each other in the same general direc- 
tion. The Owen Stanley range-its highest summit, named 
by Huxley in 1850 Mount Owen Stanley, 13,120 ft. — the Albert 
Victor Mountains, the Sir Arthur Gordon range, and the Bis- 
marck Mountains form a backbone united probably with the 
Sneeuw (Snowy) Mts., where perpetual snow was found by Dr. 
Lorentz in 1909 at ^,635 ft., and the height of Mt. Wilhelmina 
was fixed at 15,580 ft. This height may be exceeded by Mt. 
Carstcnsz. Other ranges, mostly of lower altitude, run parallel 
mainly to the east and west coasts. The most important and 
best-known rivers are the Amberno, in the north, discharging by 
a wide delta at Point d'Urville; the Kaiserin Augusta, which, 
rising in the Charles Louis range, and entering the Pacific near 
Cape della Torre, is navigable by ocean steamers for 180 m.; 
the Ottilien, a river of great lengtn, which discharges into the 
sea a short distance south of the last named; and the Mambare, 
navigable by steam-launch for 50 m. which drains the eastern 
aspect of Wasigororo Mountains and enters the sea near the 
Anglo-German boundary. Below 8° S. the narrowness of the 
country precludes the existence of any very important rivers on 
either coast. The Purari, however, whose delta is 20 m. long 
by 20 broad, is navigable for 120 m. by steam-launch, while the 
Fly has been traversed by the same means for 500 and by a 
whale-boat for over 600 m. The latter drains an enormous tract 
of country, which is so little elevated above the sea-level that it 
can never be of any agricultural or commercial value. West of 
141° E. the geographical features of the coast, except in the 
region of MacCluer Inlet and Geclvink Bay, are very little 
known, and those of the interior even less. 

	Emery Wi'kcr « 

Geology. — The geology of British New Guinea is best known from 
the report of A. Gibb Maitland (Ann. Rep., British New Guinea, 
1891-1892; Pari. Papers, Queensland, 1893, C.A. 1. 53-85, 
with 3 maps and 3 plates; bibliography, p. 85), which shows that 
the^ axis of the territory is a high range, composed of slates and 
schists of undetermined age, with intrusive plutonic rocks. In the 
district around Port ^ Glasgow, on the south coast of the eastern 
peninsula, are the Boioro limestones, also of unknown age; they are 
lead-coloured, brecciated limestones with interbedded dolerites. 
Some Cretaceous or Upper Jurassic rocks occur in the basin of the 
Fly river. The Port Moresby beds are Cainozoic. They are highly 
inclined, and occupy a large range of country along the south coast, 
and include the Macgillivray Range, to the north-east of Beagle Bay. 
They are marine and probably Miocene; and range up to the height 
of 800 ft. above the sea, approximately the same limit as in Victoria. 
The Kevori grits, and the raised coral reefs are upper Cainozoic, 
and perhaps Pleistocene; but the reefs occur inland up to a height 
of 2000 ft. and their range back in time has not been fixed. t The 
volcanic series include the rhyolite of Nell Island, some obsidian, 
and the sheets of basalts which form the Cloudy Mountains, Mount 
Dayman and Mount Trafalgar (an active volcano), and also cover 
wide areas to the south and west of the Owen Stanley Range. 
Most of western British New Guinea consists of recent superficial 
deposits, in the basin of the Fly river. The Louisiade and the 
d'Entrecasteaux Islands consist of the same slates and schists as 
form the main axis of the eastern peninsula, and they are auriferous. 
The geology of the rest of New Guinea is imperfectly known. It 
appears to consist in the main of a continuation of an axis of old 
schists and slates, with granite intrusions, and flanked^ by coastal 
plains with Cretaceous or Jurassic, and Miocene beds, with Pleisto- 
cene sands and reefs and volcanic rocks. In the north-west coal 
deposits occur. Fergusson Island clearly shows remains of extinct 
craters, and possesses numerous hot springs, saline lakes and 
solfataras depositing sulphur and alum. In Murua (Woodlark I.) 
are quarries of the banded quartzite from which the best stone adzes 
found throughout south-east New Guinea are made. In Rossel 
Island (Roua or Arova) occur crystalline schistose and volcanic 
rocks, and in Misima (St Aignan) limestones and lavas in addition. 
Nearly all the rivers in New Guinea yield " colours " of gold, but 
only in the Louisiade Archipelago has enough been discovered to 
constitute the district a goldfield. No auriferous reefs have been 
found. Black magnetic iron sand .covers the shore in Milne Bay. 
Coal has been observed in the Purari sandstones. In the Gira river 
the valuable alloy osmiridium has been discovered. Earthquakes 
are rare on the mainland, but not infrequent in Bismarck and 
d'Entrecasteaux archipelagos. ^ 

Climate. — Since the mountains as a rule traverse the island parallel 
to its coasts, the eastern shores have far less rain than the western. 
The amount which falls, chiefly at night, varies from 30 in. on some 
parts of the coast to 130 at others, and to a far greater but unknown 
amount in the mountains. Throughout the dry or cool season the 
wind blows steadily and almost uninterruptedly (except for an hour 
or so forenoon and afternoon) from the south-east. The temperature 
has an extreme range of from 72 to 95 F., with a mean of about 
8o°. At an elevation of 3000 ft. the climate is pleasantly cool; at 
13,000 ft. ice forms in the night, but disappears with the heat of the 
sun. No snow is known certainly to fall, though it is alleged to have 
been seen from the sea lying on the summits of the Charles^ Louis 
range. Fever is very prevalent on the coasts, and even in the 
interior at 2000 ft. above the sea. Though generally of a mild 
character, it is persistently recurrent, and slowlysaps and wears out 
the constitution; too often it is virulent and rapidly fatal. 

Fauna. — New Guinea shares in the poverty^ in mammals of the 
Australian sub-region. Monotremes (2 species) and marsupials 
(4 families and 44 species) predominate, but are not abundant. 
Among the latter two genera, Disiaechurus and Dorcopsis, are 
peculiar. A pig (Sus papuensis), a dingo, several species of mice 
(of which Chtruromys is a peculiar genus), a few squirrels, and a 
considerable number of Chiroptera (bats) inhabit the, country. 
The island is specially remarkable for the number and beauty 
of its birds. The most recent lists record over 500 species as found 
in the Papuan area, and of these between 50 and 60 genera are 
peculiar to it. The birds of paradise, which are confined to the 
sub-region, give special celebnty to its fauna. Between 70 and 
80 species have already been described, many of them the most 
gorgeously adorned, and others, such as the Pteridophora alberiisi, the 
most wonderful of feathered creatures. They are absent from the 
Louisiades, but species occur in the d'Entrecasteaux Islands which 
have not ]>een seen on the mainland opposite. The zoology of the 
Bismarck Archipelago is little known. The species of birds so far 
described from it number 178 (referable to 38 families), of which 
74 are peculiar to it, though closely allied to Papuan forms. It 
contains, however, no Paradiseidae. The Amphibia, to which the 
sea is a barrier, are almost exclusively of Australian affinities. 
Turtles and tortoises are plentiful on the coast. Ceratockelys insculpta 
of the Fly river, a chelonian peculiar to New Guinea, is remarkable 
in having its nearest affinities (as have the Papuan tortoises) with 
South American species. Of the lizards, 3 of the 6 species of Varani- 
dae, 16 of the 30 Scincidae, 8 Geckonidae, and 8 out of the 1 1 Agamidae 
are peculiar. Salamanders, toads and frogs are numerous, and 
crocodiles abound. Only 4 genera and 5 species of snakes are 
peculiar to New Guinea, many of them poisonous. Butterflies, 
moths and bees are very abundant, the former being remarkable 
for their size and splendid coloration; but these groups have not 
been investigated exhaustively enough to afford a correct idea of 
their number or their true affinities. Although the list of Coleoptera 
already known is long, it represents only a fraction of the species 
remaining to be discovered. The land molluscs show relationship 
with the Indian and the Malayan sub-regions; but many forms 
have here their centre, and have spread hence into Australia and the 
Pacific islands. 

Flora. — Most of the foreshores of New Guinea are eucalyptus- 
dotted grass lands; in the interior dense forests prevail to a height 
of many thousand feet. Vast tracts of the country have been, how- 
ever, deforested by fire, and these are covered by the tall ineradicable 
grass, Imperata arundinacea. So far the highest altitudes yet 
botanically investigated are those of the Owen Stanley range and 
the mountains in Kaiser Wilhelms Land, but of the flora of the 
highest range of all — the Charles Louis mountains — nothing is known. 
The vascular plants already described number about 1500 species. 
In the low and sub-mountainous lands the flora is a mixture of 
Malayan, Australian and Polynesian forms. There are, according 
to Muller, twice as many palms known from New Guinea as from 
Australia^ The alpine flora, beginning at 6000 ft., is specially 
characterized by its rhododendrons, pines (Araucaria and Libocedrus), 
and palms, by numerous superb species of Agapetes (Ericaceae), and 
on the summits by an extraordinary association of species charac- 
teristically European (Rubus, Ranunculus, Leontodon, Aspidium), 
Himalayan, New Zealandian {Veronica), Antarctic and South 
American (Drymus, Libocedrus). Good pasture grasses are numerous, 
but pasture lands are limited. The usual tropical food-plants are 
cultivated. Tobacco has-been found growing in the interior, and 
may be indigenous, as is in some districts the Kava pepper (Piper 
methysticum). At Dorey a cotton plant (G. vitifolium) grows wild, 
and is also cultivated. 

Natives.— So large an area of New Guinea remains unexplored 
that it is impossible, except approximately, to state the number of 
its inhabitants, but probably 600,000 is under rather than over the 
mark. The people are broken up into numerous isolated tribes 
differing greatly in feature, colour and language. Ethnically they 
belong as a whole to the Melanesian division of the Indo-Pacific 
races. The # predominant tribe are the Papuans (q.v.), who are 
found here^ in their greatest racial purity and occupy practically 
the^ whole island except its eastern extremity. The New Guinea 
native is usually of a negroid type with fine physique, but in the 
Arfak mountains in the north-west, and at points on the west and 
north coasts and adjacent islands, the very degraded and stunted 
Karons are found, with hardly the elements of social organization 
(possibly the aboriginal race unmixed with foreign elements), and 
resembling the Aetas or Negritos of the Philippines, and other 
kindred tribes in the Malay Archipelago. On the banks of the Fly 
river d'Albertis observed at least two widely differing types, those 
on its upper course bearing some resemblance to the tribes of the 
eastern coast. Here, wedged in among the ruder Papuans, who 
reappear at the extremity of the peninsula, a very different-looking 
people are found, whom competent observers, arguing from appear- 
ance, language and customs, assert to be a branch of the fair Poly- 
nesian race. But they are obviously of mixed blood. On the west 
coasts there is a semi-civilization, due to intercourse with Malays 
and Bugis, who have settled at various points, and carry on the 
trade with the neighbouring islands, in some of which, while the 
coast population is Malay or mixed, that of the interior is identical 
with the people of the mainland of New Guinea. On the west coasts 
Mahommedan teaching has also some civilizing effect. Many of 
the tribes at the west end of New Guinea are, at all events in war 
time, head-hunters, and in the mountains cannibals. Cannibalism, 
in fact, is practised here and there throughout New Guinea. The 
frequent hostility and mistrust of strangers are partly due to slave- 
hunting raids and ill-treatment by traders, but the different tribes 
vary much in character. Thus in the mountains of the north-west 
the Karons live by plunder, or by. disposal of slaves or bird skins; 
while their neighbours the Kebars are a peaceful agricultural people. 
The mountain tribes are usually despised by their coast neighbours, 
but in the south of west New Guinea the coast people live in per- 
petual terror of their inland neighbours. 

At Humboldt Bay the people are ready to trade, as are the tribes 
at Astrolabe Bay; here the Russian Miklucho Maclay lived for 
some time, and was favourably impressed by the natives. Still 
farther east, the plateaus of the Finisterre ranges are highly culti- 
vated and artificially irrigated by a comparatively fair people. 
Many tribes in the south-west seem to be migratory. At Princess 
Marianne Straits tribes much wilder than those farther west, naked 
and painted, swarm like monkeys in the trees, the stems of which are 
submerged at high tide. But the Torres Straits islanders are em- 
ployed by Europeans in the pearl shell fishery, and are good labourers ; 
and in some of the Kei and Am Islands the Papuan inhabitants 
form orderly Christian communities. The people of the south-east 
peninsula are generally far from ferocious. Englishmen, wandering 
inland and losing their way, have been found and brought back by 
them. Their manners are more courteous, their women better 
treated, than is usual with Papuans, but they show perhaps less 
ingenuity and artistic taste. Their children, in the mission schools, 
show much intelligence. 

Exploration and Annexation. — Though probably sighted by 
Antonio d'Abreu, 151 1, New Guinea was apparently first visited 
either by the Portuguese Don Jorge de Mencses, driven on his 
way from Goa to Ternate in 1526 to take shelter at " Isla Versija " 
(which has been identified with Warsia, a place on the N.W. 
coast, but may possibly be the island of Waigeu), or by the 
Spaniard Alvaro de Saavedra two years later. The name of 
" New Guinea " was probably given by Ortiz de Retez, or Roda, 
who in 1 546 first laid down several points along the north coast. 
In the same and the two following centuries, though the coasts 
were visited by many illustrious navigators, as Willem Schouten 
and Jacob Lemaire, Abel Tasman, William Dampier, L. V. de 
Torres, L. A. de Bougainville and James Cook, little additional 
knowledge was gained. This was due first to the difficulties of 
the navigation, next to the exclusiveness of the Dutch, who, 
holding the Spice Islands, prevented all access to places east of 
them, and lastly to the stream of enterprise being latterly 
diverted to the more temperate regions farther south. The 
Dutch barrier was broken down by the arrival of Dampier and 
other " interlopers " from the east, and of emissaries from the 
(English) East India Company in search of spice-bearing lands. 
The voyage of Thomas Forrest (1774) in the " Tartar galley " of 
10 tons, and his account of New Guinea (Voyage lo New Guinea 
and the Moluccas, London, 1780), are still full of interest. New 
Guinea was actually annexed in 1793 by two commanders in the 
East India Company's service, and the island of Manasvari in 
Geelvink Bay was held for some months by their troops. After 
the peace of 1815 Dutch surveying expeditions to the west coasts 
became numerous, and in later times scientific explorers penetrated 
many of the unknown parts of Dutch New Guinea, such as 
A. R. Wallace (1856-1863), Odoardo Beccari (1871, 1875 and 
1876), and Maria d'Albertis (1871-1878). Important expeditions 
were those of P. van der Crab, J. E. Teysmann, J. G. Coorengel, 
A. J. Langeveldt van Hemert and P. Swaan, undertaken for the 
Netherlands Indian government 1871-1872, 1875-1876 (reports 
published at The Hague in 1879); and of C. B. H. von Rosenberg 
in the Geelvink Bay districts in 1869-1870 (report published at 
The Hague in 1875). Subsequently to the visits of J. A. 
d'Entrecasteaux (1793) and Dumont d'Urville (1827-1840), the 
eastern coasts were surveyed by Captains F.P. Blackwood (1835)^ 

Owen Stanley (1848), Charles B. Yule (1864), and other British 
officers, including J. Moresby (1874).' Among other explorers 
in this period the following may be mentioned: Nicholas von 
Miklucho Maclay in 1870, 1877 and 1879-1881, in the Astrolabe 
Bay district, &c; the missionary, Rev. S. Macfarlane (1875, 
Fly river, &c); about 1876-1880 the north-east coasts and 
adjacent islands were explored by the Rev. G. Brown and by 
Wilfred Powell, and in 1882 Dr Otto Finsch, whose name is»well 
known in connexion with scientific work in New Guinea, made 
valuable explorations in the neighbourhood of Port Moresby and 
the Loluki river. 

The surveys and reports of Captain Moresby in 1874 brought 
home to Queensland (and Australia generally) the dangers 
possible to her commerce were the coasts opposite to Torres 
Strait and the entrance to the splendid waterway inside the 
Barrier Reef to fall into the possession of a foreign power. By 
authority, therefore, of Queensland, the mainland of New Guinea, 
opposite her shores east of the 141st meridian, was annexed to 
that colony* in 1883^ But this action was disallowed by the 
British government as Yule's and Moresby's had been. Finally, 
however, in 1884 a British protectorate was authoritatively 
proclaimed by Commodore Erskine over the region "lying 
between the 141st meridian eastward as far as East Cape, with 
the adjacent islands as far as Kosman Island." German New 
Guinea was annexed on the 16th of November 1884, when the 
German flag was raised in Friedrich Wilhelmshafen and a 
trading company was established on the north-east coast, and in 
1885 the two countries agreed to fix their boundaries through 
the then neutral areas of the country. The result of this was the 
assignation to Great Britain of the portion now known as the 
Territory of Papua (British New Guinea), lying between the 
extreme limits of 5 and 12 S. and 141 and 155 E. To Germany 
were assigned all the territory and islands to the north of the 
British boundary under the name of Kaiser Wilhelms Land, 
while all to the west of the 141st meridian remained under its 
old flag as Dutch New Guinea. 

Since this period explorers and investigators have been almost 
constantly at work. There may be mentioned the work of the Rev. 
J. Chalmers on the coast of the Gulf of Papua (1893), and of officers 
of the German New Guinea Company in the ship Ysabel " on the 
coasts and among the islands of the German territory; the ex- 
pedition which crossed the south-eastern peninsula from Huon Gulf 
of which both the leaders, O. Ehlers and M. Piering, lost their lives 
(1895), the important German expedition under C. Lauterbach 
(1896), and the various explorations carried out by or at the instiga- 
tion of Sir William MacGregor, including a crossing of the island 
from the mouth of the Mambare river to that of the Vanapa, and a 
second crossing in the reverse direction (1897). Ethnographical 
researches have been prosecuted by Messrs C. G. Seligmann and W. 
Mersh Strong, and others. The reports of travellers and of various 
missionary societies have thrown a great deal of light on the natural 
history of the island, on its resources, and the islanders. 

	British New Guinea 

The British Territory of Papua has an area of about 90,540 
sq. m. and a population estimated at 400,000, of whom about 600 
are Europeans. The Protectorate, as declared in 1884, with its 
seat of government at Port Moresby, was subsidized by the three 
Australian colonies of Queensland, New South Wales and 
Victoria, and lasted, under the administration of two successive 
special commissioners (Major- General Sir Peter Scratchley and 
the Hon. John Douglas), till the 4th of September 1888, when it 
was proclaimed by the first Administrator — afterwards Lieu- 
tenant-Governor — Sir William MacGregor, a possession of Queen 
Victoria. Its constitution was that of a crown colony in associa- 
tion with Queensland; but in 1901 the federal government took 
control of the territory and in 1906 a proclamation by the 
governor-general of the commonwealth gave it the name of the 
Territory of Papua. The lieutenant-governor is aided by an 
executive and a legislative council, and advised by a native 
regulation board. Justice is administered by petty sessions in the 
six magisterial districts into which the possession is divided, with a 
central court at Port Moresby (which, however, sits elsewhere as 
necessary) having the jurisdiction of a supreme court, from which 
in certain cases an appeal lies to the supreme court of Queensland. 

Order is maintained by an armed constabulary force, under a 
European officer, of about 180, almost all natives from different 
districts, whose members are found to be very efficient and 
trustworthy. The expenditure is about £38,000 annually, and 
the revenue, mainly derived from customs duties, is rapidly 
increasing. Only £5110 in 1895, it was £11,683 * n 1899 and 
£19,197 in 1905. 

Commerce and Trade. — The making of mats, fishing-nets, shell 
ornaments, decorated gourds, and stone implements, and the 
manufacture of pottery, canoes and sago, constitute the chief 
native industries, which are the subject of barter between different 
regions. European industries include gold mining, in which 500 
miners, besides natives, are engaged (chiefly in the Louisiade Archi- 
pelago), and the beche de mer and pearl-shell fisheries, which were 
formerly more productive than at present. Copra is naturally 
largely^ prepared, as coco-nut palms are very numerous, and are 
extensively planted every year. A small amount of tortoise-shell 
is collected. The rubber industry is ; according to Sir W. MacGregor, 
" important and promising." Species of Palaquium, the genus from 
which, in the Indian Archipelago, the best gutta-percha is obtained, 
occur on the hills, and from their cultivation there might in time be 
obtained a large revenue independently of European labour. Timber 
of economic value is scarce. Red cedar (Ccdrilla) abounds in the 
riverine flats, but the quality is poor and commercially valueless; 
and oaks are plentiful, but the wood is coarse. Small quantities 
of ebony and sandal- wood are exported. " There can be no reason- 
able doubt that the sugar-cane, which is native and present in a 
great many varieties, sago, cotton, probably also indigenous and of 
exceptionally fine auality, will eventually be valuable " (MacGregor). 
The trade of British New Guinea is exclusively with the Australian 
colonies. Imports were valued at £72,286 in 1899-1900 (an increase 
of over £20,110 in the year), and exports (including the gold mines) 
at £56,167, while in 1905 the figures were £67,188 for imports and 
£73> 66 9 for exports, and in 1906 £79,671 and £80,290 respectively. 

	German New Guinea 

The German protectorate of New Guinea, so called after the 
island which contributes the greatest area, comprehends, besides 
Kaiser Wilhelms Land, the islands which are now commonly 
called the Bismarck Archipelago — viz. New Pomerania, New 
Mecklenburg, with New Hanover and the Admiralty Islands 
and the Solomon Islands (Bougainville and Buka). There are 
besides nearly 200 smaller islands and islets scattered among 
their greater neighbours. In 1884 New Guinea was absolutely 
wild, not a single white man living on what is now the German 
part. On the islands New Pomerania and Mioko only two 
trading firms had their establishments; and on New Lauenburg 
the Wesleyans had a mission station. After the annexation 
commercial enterprise set in at once, hand in hand with political 
administration. Now on the mainland and in the islands 
plantations have been established and tobacco and cotton have 
been successfully grown. Three German mission societies formed 
settlements on New Guinea, with a branch one on the Gazelle 
peninsula. The protectorate is included in the Universal Postal 
Union; each harbour has its post office, also a leading official 
with a number of assistants to control the natives and the 
revenue. It is divided into two districts with separate adminis- 
trations, New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago; over both 
presides an imperial governor, the seat of government being 
Herbertshohe in New Pomerania. A small police force of natives 
has been formed. In each district there is a registry of deeds and 
a court of law, and in New Guinea a court of appeal, of which the 
governor is president. A line of steamers plies between New 
Guinea, the Bismarck Archipelago and Singapore. A special 
silver coin of rupee value has been introduced. The area of 
Kaiser Wilhelms Land is approximately 70,000 sq. m. It is 
impossible to speak with any precision of the number of the 
native population, but the white population in 1906 was 
149. 

The revenue of German New Guinea is derived from taxes, dues 
and licences, and amounted on the 31st of March 1892 to about 
£3000; on the same rate, 1901, to £3750. The annual revenue is 
averaged at £5000, and the expenditure at £4200. The New Guinea 
Company was to receive £20,000 for transferring proprietorship to 
government, which took over the administration in 1809. In 1905 
imports into Kaiser Wilhelms Land were valued at £33,316, and 
exports at £7702, and the estimated expenditure for 1907- 1908 
of £76,000 included an imperial subvention of £57,696. The chief 
harbours are Friedrich Wilhelmshafen and Konstantinhafen. 

	Dutch New Guinea 

Dutch New Guinea comprises all the western portion of the 
island. The boundary on the east, separating it from British 
New Guinea and German New Guinea, was finally settled in 1 895. 
Starting from the south coast, it follows 141 1' 48' E. up to the 
Fly river, which is mounts until 141 1' is reached, when it 
once more follows the meridian up to the north coast. The 
area of the territory is 151,789 sq. m., and the inhabitants have 
been conjectured to number some 200,000. A few missionaries 
have established themselves, but otherwise the Dutch have 
scarcely occupied their possession, which at present merely 
forms part of the residency of Ternate in the Moluccas. Dutch 
New Guinea, however, has better natural advantages than either 
the British or German possessions in the island, and should 
eventually prove of real value to the Netherlands. The claims 
to superiority over New Guinea on the part of the rulers of some 
of the small neighbouring islands date at least from the spread 
of Islam to the Moluccas at the beginning of the 15th century, 
and were maintained by the Malay rulers both of Bachian and 
of Gebeh and afterwards by the sultan of Tidore. When *the 
Dutch first came to these seas it was their policy to ally themselves 
with certain chiefs, and support their claims over various islands, 
so as to extend their own commercial monopoly; and they 
therefore supported the claims (admitted by Great Britain in 
1814) of the sultan of Tidore over both the Raja Ampat (i.e. 
the four Papuan kingships, Waigeu, Salawatti, Misol and 
Waigamma on Misol Island) and certain islands or points on the 
north-west coast of New Guinea. Nominally the sultan of 
Tidore is still the suzerain of western New Guinea, but his 
authority is scarcely recognized, except on some few shores and 
adjacent islands, and practically Dutch New Guinea used to be 
administered partly from Ternate and partly from Timor, upon 
more peaceful lines than was the case when the rule of the Dutch 
in New Guinea largely consisted of the sending of a warship now 
and again to some distant island or bay to burn a kampong, to 
punish rebellious villagers, and thus assert or reassert Dutch 
authority, or that of the sultan, who is their vassal. In 1901, 
however, a more serious effort was made to establish some kind 
of government in the southern province of Dutch New Guinea, 
at Merawkay, where a small Dutch-Indian garrison was stationed 
with the professed object of preventing raids by bands of savages 
into the British territory near by. Such raids had been rather 
frequent, the invaders attacking the natives who live under 
British protection, burning their huts, murdering the men, 
carrying off the women and children as slaves, and returning 
to their own haunts laden with booty. There is an assistant 
Resident at Merawkay, whose immediate chief is the Dutch 
Resident at Ternate, and who is the civil administrator of the 
province of southern Dutch New Guinea. Assistant Residencies 
have also been established at Manokvary in northern Dutch 
New Guinea, which has been formed into a province, under 
Ternate, and at Fakfak, in western Dutch New Guinea, likewise 
erected into a province, also under Ternate. By 1902, therefore, 
Dutch New Guinea formed a government, with its headquarters 
at Ternate, divided into the three provinces named. At regular 
intervals the steamers of the Dutch Royal Steam Packet Company 
call at Dorey and other points, while administrative posts have 
been established elsewhere in lieu of others previously attempted 
but abandoned. 

A curious discussion arose in the Dutch states-general when 
the government was seeking legislative sanction for the above 
measures, with a provisional credit to cover the first establish- 
ment expenses. It was seriously contended in one part of the 
house that, as eminent men of geographical and ethnographical 
science had settled the question whether New Guinea belongs to 
' Asia or Polynesia in favour of the latter, a New Guinea coloniza- 
tion scheme could not properly be proposed and decided upon 
in a section of the Dutch-Indian budget. This budget concerned 
only the Asiatic possessions of Holland, not the Polynesian 
ones, and Dutch New Guinea must, consequently, have its own 
budget. Finally, the majority of the states-general, backed by 
government, decided that New Guinea must still be reckoned to 
belong to Asia. 

Authorities. — Narratives of the various explorers mentioned: 

E. C. Rye, " Bibliography of New Guinea " (complete in 1883), in 
Supplementary Papers, R.G.S. (1884); H. Haga, Nederlandsch 
Nieuw Guinea en de Papoesche Eilanden. Historische Bijdrage, i$oo- 
1883 (Batavia, 1884); H. H. Romilly, The Western Pacific and New 
Guinea (London, 1886); R. Parkinson, Im Bismarck Archipel 
(Leipzig, 1887); C. Kinloch Cooke, Australian Defences and New 
Guinea (London, 1887); J. Strachan, Explorations and Adventures 
in New Guinea (London,. 1888); H. O. Forbes, "British New 
Guinea as a Colony," in Blachwood f s Magazine (July 1892); J. P. 
Thompson, British New Guinea (London, 1892); L. Karnbach, 
Die btsherige Erforschungvon Kaiser Wilhelmstand (Berlin, 1893); 
F. S. A. de Clercq and J. D. E. Schmcltz, Ethnographische beschrijvtng 
van de West- en Noordkust van Nederlandsch Nieuw-Guinea (Leiden, 
1 893); A. C. Haddon, Decorative Art of British New Guinea, Royal 
Irish Academy (Dublin, 1894); "Studies in Anthropogeography of 
Br. New Guinea," in Geograph. Journ. vols, xvi., xvii.j Geo- 
graphische Untersuchungen in der Westhalfte von New Guinea," in 
Report of Sixth International Geographical Congress (London, 1895); 
J. Chalmers, Pioneer Life and Work in New Guinea (London, 1895); 
Sir W. MacGregor, British New Guinea (London, 1897); H. Cayley- 
Webster, Through New Guinea (London, 1898); R. Semon, Im 
Australischen Busch und an den Kusten des Korallen Meeres (Leipzig, 
1899); Nachrichten vber Kaiser Wilhelmsland (Berlin, 1887-1899); 
Joachim Graf von Pfeil, Studien und Beobachtungen aus der Svidsee 
(Brunswick, 1899); M. Krieger, New Guinea (Berlin, 1899); K. Blum, 
New Guinea und der Bismarck Archipel (Berlin); Stanford's Com- 
pendium of Geography and Travel; Malaysia and Pacific Archipela- 
goes (new issue, edited by Dr F. H. H. Guillemard, London); The 
Cruise of the " Marchesa " (1894), by the same (second volume); 
British kmpire Series : " Australasia " (London, 1900) ;'E. Tappenbeck, 
Deutsch Neuguinea (Berlin, 1901); J. Schmeltz, Beitrage zur 
Ethnographie von Neuguinea (Leiden, 1905), sqq.; A. E. Pratt, 
Two Years among New Guinea Cannibals (London, 1906); Annual 
Reports on British New Guinea. 